world development report

2012

GENDER EQUALITY

ANDDEVELOPMENT

2012

world development report
Gender Equality 
and Development

2012

world development report
Gender Equality 
and Development

© 2011 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

All rights reserved

1 2 3 4  14 13 12 11 

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment / The World Bank. The ﬁ ndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this 
volume do not necessarily reﬂ ect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or 
the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The 
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work 
do not imply any judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any 
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all 
of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work 
and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with 
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Dan-
vers, MA 01923, USA; telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright
.com.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed 
to the Ofﬁ ce of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, 
USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Softcover
ISSN: 0163-5085
ISBN: 978-0-8213-8810-5
eISBN: 978-0-8213-8812-9
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-8810-5

Hardcover
ISSN: 0163-5085
ISBN: 978-0-8213-8825-9
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-8825-9

Cover photo: Arne Hoel, World Bank
Photo credits: Overview/World Bank, Part I/National Geographic, Part II/Kiet Vo, 
Part III/National Geographic
Cover design: Critical Stages
Figures design and infographics: Design Symphony, Cymetrics, Harkness Design, 
and Naylor Design
For the ﬁ rts time, the World Development Report is published with a companino mobile 
app for the iPad. Key features include: access content from the WDR 2012 in multiple ways; 
browse by key messages; browse and search the report by topic, region, and keyboard; access 
the report overview and key messages document, both available in 7 languages; share and 
save features; and view tabular data from the report. For more information, visit bit.ly/
wdr2012app.

Contents

Foreword 
  xiii
Acknowledgments 
Abbreviations and data notes 
Main messages 

  xx

  xv

  xvii

Overview 

  2

  6

  2

Why does gender equality matter for development? 
What does this Report do? 
Where has there been the most progress in gender equality? 
Where have gender inequalities persisted and why? 
What is to be done? 
The political economy of reforms for gender equality 
A global agenda for greater gender equality 
Notes 
References 

  38

  13

  22

  36

  40

  35

Introduction: A guide to the Report 

  46

Gender equality and development: Why do the links matter? 
What does this Report do? 
Navigating this Report: A roadmap 
Notes 
References 

  50

  51

  51

  48

  8

  46

Part I  Taking stock of gender equality 

  54

1  A wave of progress 
  56

  56

Times are changing? 
Rising global consensus for women’s rights 
Better outcomes for women in many domains 
Change begets change 
Notes 
References 

  69

  66

  69

  57

  59

v

vi 

C O N T E N T S

2  The persistence of gender inequality 

  72

  73

Severely disadvantaged populations 
“Sticky” domains, despite economic progress 
Reversals 
“Sticky” gets “stickier” 
Notes 
References 

  88

  89

  87

  85

  76

Spread 1  Women’s pathways to empowerment: Do all roads lead to Rome? 

  94

  97

Notes 
References 

  97

Part II   What has driven progress? What 

impedes it? 

Explaining the framework 
Applying the framework 
Notes 
References 

  102

  102

  98
  99
  101

3  Education and health: Where do gender differences 

  104
  105

really matter? 
Endowments matter 
Education 
Health 
Technical Annex 3.1   Computing the ﬂ ow of missing girls at birth and excess 

  117

  106

female mortality after birth 

  139

Chapter summary:  In reducing gender gaps in education and health, 
tremendous progress has been made where lifting a single barrier—in 
households, markets, or institutions—is sufﬁ cient to improve outcomes. 
Progress has been slower either where multiple barriers need to be lifted 
at the same time or where a single point of entry produces bottlenecks 
Notes 
References 

  142

  143

  141

4  Promoting women’s agency 

  150

  157

  151 

Women’s agency matters 
Economic growth can promote women’s agency but has limited impact 
Rights and their effective implementation shape women’s choices and 
voices 
Social norms prevent—or promote—gains in women’s agency 
  168
Women’s collective agency can shape institutions, markets, and social 
norms 
Chapter summary: Women continue to have less capacity than men to 
exercise agency 

  176

  181

  152

 

Contents 

vii

  182

Notes 
References 

  184

Spread 2  The decline of the breadwinner: Men in the 21st century 

  194

Note 

  196

5 

6 

  198

  201
  210

 Gender differences in employment and 
why they matter 
Understanding gender differences in productivity and earnings 
What explains employment segregation by gender? A ﬁ rst look 
Gender, time use, and employment segregation 
Gender differences in access to productive inputs and 
employment segregation 
Gender impacts of “aggregate” market and institutional failures 
Breaking out of the productivity trap: How and why to do it 
Chapter summary: Persistent employment segregation by gender traps women 
in low-productivity, low-paying jobs 
Notes 
References 

  240 

  224

  236

  239

  215

  230

  242

  255

  254

 Globalization’s impact on gender equality: 
What’s happened and what’s needed 
The world is becoming more integrated—Recent trends and facts 
Trade openness and ICTs have increased women’s access to economic 
opportunities 
  255
Adapt or miss the boat 
Globalization could also promote more egalitarian gender roles and norms 
Old problems, emerging risks 
Is the glass half full or half empty? The need for public action 
Chapter summary: Globalization has the potential to contribute to greater 
gender equality 
Notes 
References 

  264

  271

  272

  269

  271

  273

  267

Spread 3   Changing ages, changing bodies, changing times—Adolescent boys 

and girls 
  283

Note 

  280

Part III  The role of and potential for public action 

  284

Choosing the right policies 
Enabling policy implementation 
The global agenda for action 

  285

  286

  285

7  Public action for gender equality 

Policies to reduce gaps in health and education 
Policies to improve economic opportunities 

  296

  288
  289

viii 

C O N T E N T S

  305

Policies to improve women’s agency 
Avoiding the reproduction of gender inequalities across generations for 
adolescents and young adults 
Making gender-smart policies: Focusing “gender mainstreaming” 
Wanted: Better evidence 
Notes 
References 

  320

  321

  314

  323

  317

8  The political economy of gender reform 

  330

  332

  340

Informal institutions—Social networks as agents of change 
Inclusive markets 
Bringing gender into formal institutions and policies 
Seizing windows of opportunities 
Pathways to change 
Notes 
References 

  354

  350

  348

  355

  345

9  A global agenda for greater gender equality 

  360

Rationale for and focus of a global agenda 
What to do and how to do it 
Notes 
References 

  371 

  370

  362

  360

Bibliographical Note 
  373
Background Papers and Notes 
Selected Indicators 
Selected World Development Indicators 
Index 

  381

  377

  411

  389 

Boxes

 
 

 

 

 

 

1  What do we mean by gender equality? 
2  The Millennium Development Goals recognize the intrinsic 

  4

and instrumental value of gender equality 

  4
3  How women and men deﬁ ne gender in the 21st 

century 

  7

4  What do we mean by markets, formal institutions, and 

informal social institutions? 

  8

5  Reducing maternal mortality—What works? Look at 

Malaysia and Sri Lanka 

  25

6  Catalyzing female employment in Jordan 

  29

 

7  Intervening early to overcome future labor market failures—

The Adolescent Girls Initiative 

  34

  0.1  Problems with estimating the effect of gender equality on 

growth 

  49

  1.1  Gender and the Millennium Development Goals 

  58

  2.1  The many faces of climate change 

  86

  3.1  Adult mortality risks: Who are the outliers? 
  3.2  Four Africas 

  135

  119

 

Contents 

ix

  4.1  Pensions—Coverage, amounts, and survivor beneﬁ ts are 

  6.3  Occupational tasks and skill requirements—Getting the 

important for women’s autonomy 
  4.2  Property in marriage (and divorce) 
  4.3  Widows risk losing their assets but might gain some 

  156
  162

freedom 

  163

  4.4  Legal pluralism and its prevalence 
  4.5  What does it mean to be a “good wife” and a “good 

  165

husband”?  

  172

  4.6  Masculinity and its impact on roles, preferences, and 

behaviors 

  173

  4.7  Why do social norms persist? 
  4.8  How stereotypes inﬂ uence performance 

  174

  175

  5.1  Closing the access gap—Recent advances in female labor 

force participation 

  199
  5.2  Women in the boardroom 
  5.3  Gender discrimination in hiring? Evidence from employment 

  204

audit studies  

  205

  5.4  What do we mean by employment segregation by 

gender?  

  206

  5.5  Good jobs and bad jobs: What are they and who does 

them? 

  211

  5.6  The seeds of segregation are planted early—How gender 
differences in education trajectories shape employment 
segregation 

  216

  5.7  Overview of data used in analyzing gender differences in time 

use patterns 

  218

  5.8  What did you do all day? Perceptions on time use patterns of 

the opposite sex 

  221

  5.9  Gender of the household head versus household 

composition: What matters most for policy? 

  225
  5.10  Family formation and public sector employment in 

Egypt 

  232

terms right 

  259

  6.4  Leveraging mobile and ICT technology to improve access to 

services 

  264

  6.5  Globalization and working conditions—Some progress, but 

more needs to be done  267

  7.1  Improving water supply: Dakar and Phnom Penh 
  7.2  Reducing maternal mortality: What Malaysia and Sri Lanka 

  291

have done 

  295

  7.3  Protecting men and women and boys and girls from income 

shocks 

  296

  7.4  Catalyzing female employment in Jordan 
  7.5  Innovative approaches to expanding access to ﬁ nance for 

  301

women and entrepreneurs 

  303

  7.6  Including women’s voice in peace and postconﬂ ict 

reconstruction processes 

  308

  8.1  Georgia—Evolving gender roles in a new society 
  8.2  Feminism in perspective 
  8.3  Competing interests—Caste, ethnic, and religious politics 

  334

  332

and gender 

  335

  8.4  More women in public ofﬁ ce—The Namibian Women’s 

Manifesto Network  

  335

  8.5  Differences among women about their right to vote—

The case of Switzerland 

  336

  8.6  Domestic workers in Brazil 
  8.7  How popular culture can change social attitudes  
  8.8  Four good practices for greater gender diversity 
  342
  8.9  Land titling in Peru—Using a gender lens for a gender-

  337

  339

neutral program 

  346

  8.10  Gender machineries in practice 
  8.11  Courts and constitutional challenges in Uganda’s divorce 

  347

  5.11  The business case for gender equality 

  238

law 

  348

  6.1  A job today or a better job tomorrow—The impact of 

increased access to economic opportunities on women’s 
human capital  

  258

  6.2  The impact of globalization on men (and women) in 

developed countries 

  259

Figures

  8.12  Fiji: International norms as a driver of gender equality in 

family law 

  349

  8.13  Changing social norms from the bottom up 
  8.14  Tunisia—Women’s voice and women’s rights 
  8.15  Sweden—Encouraging an involved fatherhood 

  352
  353

  353

 

 

 

 

1  Gender outcomes result from interactions between 

households, markets, and institutions 

  9

2  Across the world, women are having fewer children 

  9

3  Gender parity in enrollments at lower levels has been 

achieved in much of the world, but tertiary enrollments are 
very low and favor women  

  10

4  Using the framework to explain progress in 

education 

  11

 

 

 

 
 

5  Female labor force participation has increased over time at 

all income levels 

  12

6  Low-income countries lag behind in realizing progress in 

female school enrollment 

  13

7  Female disadvantage within countries is more marked at 

low incomes 

  14

8  Women and men work in different sectors 
9  Explaining persistent segregation and earnings gaps 

  16

  18

x 

C O N T E N T S

  10  Across the world, women spend more hours per day on care 

  3.1  Gender parity in enrollments at lower levels has been 

and housework than men 

  19

  11  Gender differences in agricultural productivity disappear 
when access to and use of productive inputs are taken into 
account 

  20

 B0.1  GDP per capita and gender equality are positively 

correlated 

  49

achieved in much of the world, but tertiary enrollments are 
very low and favor women 

  107

  3.2  In most countries with moderate or high total inequality in 

educational outcomes, less than one-ﬁ fth of inequality stems 
from gender 

  108

  3.3  What explains progress in school enrollments? 
  3.4  Free primary education reduced gender gaps in 

  109

  1.1  Gender parity in enrollments at lower levels has been 

enrollments 

  110

achieved in much of the world, and tertiary enrollments 
now favor women 

  61

  3.5  Cross-country differences in mean scores on the 2009 PISA 

dwarf gender differences within countries 

  114

  1.2  Gender explains little of the inequality in education 

participation for children 12–15 years old 
  64

  1.3  Women are living longer than men 
  1.4  What took the United States 100 years took India 40 and 

  63

the Islamic Republic of Iran 10  

  64

  1.5  Gender explains little of the inequality in use of preventive 

health services 

  65

  1.6  The gender gap in labor force participation narrowed 

between 1980 and 2008 

  66

  1.7  Across countries, at every income level, female labor force 

participation increased  between 1980 and 2008 

  66

  3.6  Adult and child mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa 
  3.7  Adult mortality: Over time and by sex 
  3.8  Income growth did not reduce excess female mortality during 

  118

  119

1990–2008 in low- and middle-income countries 

  123

  3.9  Why are so many girls missing at birth? 
  3.10  There is little or no gender disadvantage in vaccination rates, 

  124

nutrition outcomes, or use of health services when a child 
falls sick 

  126

 

  Small differences do not explain the variation in the fraction 

of excess deaths across countries 

  126

  3.11  Men and women, boys and girls, are treated the same when 

  1.8   Who agrees that a university education is more important for 

they visit health facilities 

  127

a boy than for a girl? 

  68

  1.9  Who agrees that when jobs are scarce, men should have more 

right to a job than women? 

  68

  2.1  Female enrollments remain strikingly low in some 

countries 

  73

  2.2  In some countries, female disadvantage augments at lower 

incomes . . . 

  74

  2.3  . . . yet in others, at low levels of wealth girls stay longer in 

school than boys 

  75

  2.4  At low incomes, fertility rates remain high—And the poorer 
  76
  2.5  Maternal mortality in many developing countries is similar to 

the country, the larger the gap between rich and poor  

that in Sweden before 1900 

  78

  2.6  Women are more likely than men to work in the informal 

sector  

  79

  2.7  Women and men work in different sectors (and different 

occupations) 

  80

  2.8  Across the world, women spend more hours each day on 

housework and care than men . . . and men spend more time 
in market activities 

  81

  2.9  Who controls women’s own income? 
  2.10  Perceptions in many nations are that wife-beating is 

  82

justiﬁ able 

  83

  2.11  There is great heterogeneity in rates of domestic violence 

reported across nations 

  84

  2.12  Men are perceived as better political leaders than 

women 

  85

  3.12  Levels of excess female childhood mortality in high-income 
countries in the early 1900s were similar to those of low- and 
middle-income countries today . . .  

  128

 

  . . . and the excess female mortality declined with reduction in 

overall childhood mortality 

  128

  3.13  Maternal mortality ratios declined steeply in selected 

countries during 1930–60 

  129

  3.14  High income countries today had excess female mortality 

at the reproductive ages during the ﬁ rst half of the 
20th century . . . 

  130

 

  . . . and the excess mortality at all income levels declines with 

reductions in maternal mortality 

  130

  3.15  What explains excess mortality among girls and women in 

the reproductive ages? 

  131

  3.16  Excess female mortality by age in four countries with high 

HIV prevalence 

  132

  3.17  In some countries, there is excess male mortality 
 3A.1  Sex ratio and age-speciﬁ c mortality, 2008 
  139
 3A.2  Excess female mortality globally at each age in 2008 using 

  133

various reference groups 

  140

  4.1  Witnessing violence as a child is associated with perpetrating 

violence as an adult  

  152

  4.2  Limited progress in women’s agency is explained by mutually 

reinforcing constraints in markets, formal institutions, and 
informal institutions 

  153

  4.3  Richer women marry later  
  4.4  Women’s control is greater in wealthier households 

  154

  155

 

 

 

 

 

Contents 

xi

4.5 Form of acquisition of land by gender in six Latin American 

 

5.9 Women bear the brunt of housework and care while men are 

countries 

  155

mostly responsible for market work 

  219

4.6 Working outside the home broadens men’s and women’s 

networks (almost) equally 

  157

  5.10 Convergence in gender time use patterns is stronger for 
  220

market work than for housework and care work 

4.7 In most countries, access to contraceptives is a less signiﬁ cant 

  5.11 In Mexico and Thailand, married women are more likely to 

constraint than lack of knowledge and opposition to 
contraception 

  158

move between inactivity and informal self-employment than 
men and single women 

  222

4.8 Progress on inheritance is faster for daughters than for 

  5.12 Female-headed households are less likely to own and operate 

widows 

  160

4.9 Few women seek services in case of domestic violence 
 
  4.10 Education dampens normative constraints more than 

  168

income 

  169

land than male-headed households 

  226

  5.13 Female-headed households in rural areas are less likely 

than male-headed households to have received credit in the 
last 12 months 

  227

  4.11 Despite differences in the age of marriage, many girls still 

  5.14 Access to productive inputs and markets is lower among 

marry before the age of 18  

  170

  4.12 Reasons why victims of violence do not seek help 
  4.13 Even in 2010, women ministers were twice as likely to hold a 

  171

social portfolio than an economic one 

  177

  4.14 Women’s voice in society is limited by social norms 

on women’s roles and abilities and by formal 
institutions 

  178

  4.15 Perceptions on leadership skills are still very prevalent, and 

less educated cohorts are more biased 

  179

  4.16 Women are much less likely to belong to a political party 

than men 

  179

 B4.1.1  Sources of income for China’s elderly, 2005 
 B4.3.1 Elderly women are more likely to live alone and elderly men 

  156

with their spouses 

  163

 B4.3.2 Husband’s family receives the majority of his assets in most 

countries 

  163

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.1 There are systematic gender differences in earnings 
  202
5.2 Women are overrepresented among wage and unpaid family 

workers  

  207

5.3 Gender differences in agricultural productivity diminish 

considerably when access to and use of productive inputs are 
taken into account 

  208

5.4 Differences in productivity between female and male 

entrepreneurs are dwarfed by differences in productivity 
between formal and informal entrepreneurs  

  208

5.5 Economic development is positively correlated with the 

share of female workers in wage employment and negatively 
correlated with the share of women in unpaid work, self-
employment, and entrepreneurship 

  212

5.6 Tanzania and Brazil illustrate how employment patterns by 

gender change with economic growth 

  213

5.7 Industry and occupational segregation patterns are common 

across countries with very different levels of economic 
development and aggregate sectoral distributions of 
employment 

  214

5.8 Access to economic opportunities and the resulting 

segregation in employment are the product of households, 
markets, and institutions, and their interactions 

  217

female-headed households than among male-headed 
households 

  228

  5.15 Mutually reinforcing market and institutional constraints are 

the main reason why women appear to be in a productivity 
trap 

  237

 B5.1.1  Participation rates—Converging 
 B5.8.1 Understanding the amounts of time the opposite sex spends 
  221

on nontraditional male/female activities and leisure 

  200

 
 

6.1 Global trade has grown rapidly since 1990 
6.2 Cell phone and Internet access has increased signiﬁ cantly in 

  255

both developed and developing countries 

  256

6.3 Economic opportunities have changed 

 
  6.3a Female (and male) employment in the manufacturing and 

  257

service sectors has grown faster in developing countries, 
reﬂ ecting the broader changes in the global distribution of 
production and labor 

  257

  6.3b . . . and increases in female employment levels (but not male) 

between 1995 and 2005 were correlated with increases in 
international trade 

  257

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.4 The United States experienced a dramatic increase in brain 
requirements and a decline in brawn requirements between 
1950 and 2005 

  260

6.5 Men and especially women in Brazil, India, Mexico, and 

Thailand have experienced an increase in brain requirements 
and a decline in brawn requirements over the past 15 
years 

  261

6.6 In Africa, women are less likely than men to own or use a 

cell phone 

  262

6.7 Differences in Internet access and use between developed 

and developing countries are still very large, and gender 
gaps are signiﬁ cant in some developed and developing 
countries 

  263

6.8 Telework has grown rapidly in recent years, particularly 

among female workers 

  265

6.9 The share of female employment varies signiﬁ cantly across 

industries 

  266

  6.10 The number of countries that have ratiﬁ ed CEDAW has risen 

in all regions to reach 187, of 193, in 2011 

  266

xii 

C O N T E N T S

  7.1  Reducing gaps in endowments 
  7.2  Improving economic opportunities 
  306
  7.3  Improving women’s agency 

  290

  296

  8.1  Social actors and their interactions shape the role of markets, 

formal and informal institutions in advancing gender 
equality 

  331

  8.2  Social networks can engage public opinion, mobilize support, 

and inspire change 

  333

  8.3  Men around the world support women’s rights and 

policies 

  338

  8.4  Economic and political economy considerations 
have prodded ﬁ rms to promote gender equality 
policies 

  341

  8.5  State action is central for the design and adoption of 

gender-progressive policies 

  345

Maps

  8.6  Progress toward increasing women’s rights is 

clustered around major international human rights 
conferences 

  350

  S1.1  Main factors in moving up the ladder 
  S1.2  Ladder shares now and 10 years ago in Bukoba, 

  94

Tanzania (urban) 

  96

  S1.3  Ladder shares now and 10 years ago in Dhamar, Republic of 

Yemen (rural) 

  96

  S2.1  Factors that explain gains in power 
  S2.2  Factors that explain losses of power 

  195
  196

  S3.1  Characteristics of good girls/boys and bad girls/boys 
  S3.2  Adolescents opinions on women’s roles 

  283

  281

 P2.1  Gender outcomes result from interactions between 

households, markets, and institutions 

  101

 

1  Earnings gaps between women and men 

  17

 B4.2.1  Women in different parts of the world have different 

  0.1  Economies where qualitative assessments were 

conducted 

  50

  3.1  In China and India, the number of girls missing at birth 

remains high, and parts of Africa experienced large increases 
in excess female mortality during 1990–2008 

  122

  4.1  In Sub-Saharan Africa, customary laws are formally 

recognized in most countries, and at times are 
discriminatory 

  166

control over assets—Which matters in case of divorce or 
the husband’s death 

  162

 

5.1 Gender differences in occupation and industry of 

employment account for a large fraction of the gender gap 
after accounting for individual characteristics 

  209

 B5.1.1  Female labor force participation  —Some high rates and 

some low 

  199

Tables

 
 

1  Almost 4 million missing women each year 
2  The agenda for global action at a glance 

  38

  2.1  Missing girls at birth increased between 1990 and 2008 in 

India and China, as did excess female mortality in adulthood 
in Sub-Saharan Africa 

  77

  3.1  Gender segregation in ﬁ eld of study: In most countries, 
women dominate health and education studies and men 
dominate engineering and sciences 

  115

  15

  3.2  Skewed sex ratios at birth and excess female mortality 

persist across the world, leading to females missing at birth 
and excess female mortality during childhood and the 
reproductive years 

  121

  5.1  Female farmers have lower average productivity than male 

farmers 

  202

  9.1  The agenda for global action at a glance 

  361

Foreword

The lives of girls and women have changed dramatically over the past quarter century. Today, 
more girls and women are literate than ever before, and in a third of developing countries, 
there are more girls in school than boys. Women now make up over 40 percent of the global 
labor force. Moreover, women live longer than men in all regions of the world. The pace of 
change has been astonishing—indeed, in many developing countries, they have been faster 
than the equivalent changes in developed countries: What took the United States 40 years to 
achieve in increasing girls’ school enrollment has taken Morocco just a decade.

In some areas, however, progress toward gender equality has been limited—even in devel-
oped countries. Girls and women who are poor, live in remote areas, are disabled, or belong 
to minority groups continue to lag behind. Too many girls and women are still dying in child-
hood and in the reproductive ages. Women still fall behind in earnings and productivity, and 
in the strength of their voices in society. In some areas, such as education, there is now a gen-
der gap to the disadvantage of men and boys. 

The main message of this year’s World Development Report: Gender Equality and Develop-
ment  is  that  these  patterns  of  progress  and  persistence  in  gender  equality  matter,  both  for 
development  outcomes  and  policy  making.  They  matter  because  gender  equality  is  a  core 
development objective in its own right. But greater gender equality is also smart economics, 
enhancing productivity and improving other development outcomes, including prospects for 
the next generation and for the quality of societal policies and institutions. Economic develop-
ment is not enough to shrink all gender disparities—corrective policies that focus on persist-
ing gender gaps are essential. 

This Report points to four priority areas for policy going forward. First, reducing gender 
gaps in human capital—speciﬁ cally those that address female mortality and education. Sec-
ond,  closing  gender  gaps  in  access  to  economic  opportunities,  earnings,  and  productivity. 
Third, shrinking gender differences in voice and agency within society. Fourth, limiting the 
reproduction of gender inequality across generations. These are all areas where higher incomes 
by themselves do little to reduce gender gaps, but focused policies can have a real impact.

Public  actions  need  to  address  the  underlying  determinants  of  gender  gaps  in  each  pri-
ority area—in some cases, improving service delivery (especially for clean water, sanitation, 
and  maternal  care),  for  others,  tackling  constraints  that  originate  in  the  workings  of  mar-
kets and institutions to limit progress (for example, in reducing gender gaps in earnings and 
productivity).

Development partners can complement public action. In each of the four priority areas, 
efforts  need  more  funding  (particularly  to  support  the  poorest  countries  as  they  address 
female  mortality  and  gender  gaps  in  education);  better  gender-disaggregated  data;  more 
experimentation and systematic evaluation; and broader partnerships that include the private 
sector, development agencies, and civil society organizations.

xiii

xiv 

F O R E WO R D

Gender equality is at the heart of development. It’s the right development objective, and 
it’s smart economic policy. The World Development Report 2012 can help both countries and 
international partners think through and integrate a focus on gender equality into develop-
ment policy making and programming. 

 
 
 

Robert B. Zoellick
President
The World Bank Group

Acknowledgments

This Report has been prepared by a core team led by Ana Revenga and Sudhir Shetty, and 
comprising  Luis  Benveniste,  Aline  Coudouel,  Jishnu  Das,  Markus  Goldstein,  Ana  María 
Muñoz  Boudet,  and  Carolina  Sánchez-Páramo.  Research  assistance  was  provided  by 
Rabia Ali, María Inés Berniell, Rita Costa, Nina Rosas, and Lucía Solbes Castro. The multi-
country qualitative assessment was coordinated by Patti L. Petesch and Carolyn Turk. Extensive 
and valuable contributions were made by Andre Croppenstedt, Malcolm Ehrenpreis, Rebekka 
Grun, Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Tazeen Hasan, Karla Hoff, Ghazala Mansuri, Claudio E. 
Montenegro, and Bob Rijkers. 

The  World  Development  Report  2012  is  co-sponsored  by  the  Development  Econom-
ics Vice-Presidency (DEC) and the Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Vice-
Presidency (PREM). The work was conducted under the joint guidance of Justin Yifu Lin in 
DEC and Otaviano Canuto dos Santos Filho in PREM. Ann E. Harrison and the DEC team 
and Mayra Buvinic and the PREM Gender (PRMGE) team provided valuable guidance and 
contributions at various stages of the production of this report. 

A panel of advisers comprising Bina Agarwal, Ragui Assad, Anne Case, Alison Evans, Raquel 
Fernández, Naila Kabeer, Ravi Kanbur, Santiago Levy, and Germano Mwabu provided excel-
lent advice. Valuable comments and contributions were provided by Kathleen Beegle, Laura 
Chioda, Louise Cord, Maria Correia, Monica Das Gupta, Shantayanan Devarajan, Marianne 
Fay, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, Ariel Fiszbein, Indermit Gill, Alejandro Hoyos, Emmanuel Jime-
nez, Elizabeth King, Andrew Mason, William Maloney, Ambar Narayan, Pierella Paci, Tara 
Vishwanath, and Michael Walton. Many others inside and outside the World Bank contrib-
uted with valuable comments and input (their names are listed in the Bibliographical Note).
World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick and Managing Directors Sri Mulyani Indrawati, 

Mahmoud Mohieldin, and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala provided invaluable guidance and advice.

The team beneﬁ ted greatly from many consultations, meetings, and regional workshops 
held locally and in-country. These discussions included policy makers, civil society represen-
tatives, academics, and development partners from Benin, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the 
Caribbean nations, the Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Repub-
lic, Georgia, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mali, Mexico, 
Morocco, Panama, Paraguay, Rwanda, Senegal, the Slovak Republic, South Africa, Sudan, 
Tanzania,  Thailand,  Togo,  Turkey,  Uganda,  Uruguay,  Vietnam,  Zambia,  and  Zimbabwe. 
Consultations were also held at different stages of report preparation with representatives 
from multilateral and bilateral partners, including the Australian Agency for International 
Development  (AUSAID),  the  Canadian  International  Development  Agency  (CIDA),  the 
Inter-American Commission of Women-Organization of American States (CIM-OAS), the 
Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA), the U.K. Department for International 
Development (DFID), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Ministry for 
Foreign Affairs of Finland, MCC, NORAD, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 

xv

xvi 

AC K N OW L E D G M E N T S

and Development-Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC) Gendernet, the Swiss 
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), the Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency (SIDA), UN Women, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and the United Nations 
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) 55th Commission on the Status of Women. 

The team would like to acknowledge the generous support of the Government of Nor-
way through its Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs, SDC, AUSAID, CIDA, the Government of 
Sweden through its Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the multi-donor Knowledge for Change 
Program (KCP), the Nike Foundation, the World Bank Nordic Trust Fund, and Fast Track 
Initiative Education Program Development Fund; as well as the in-kind support from JICA, 
DFID, and OECD.

The team wishes to acknowledge the excellent support of the WDR production team com-
prising Rebecca Sugui, Cecile Wodon, and Mihaela Stangu, and of the resource management 
team of Sonia Joseph and Evangeline Santo Domingo. We thank also Ivar Cederholm, Vivian 
Hon, Jimmy Olazo, and Irina Sergeyeva for their constant support. Other valuable assistance 
was provided by Gytis Kanchas and Nacer Mohamed Megherbi. Vamsee Krishna Kanchi, 
Swati P. Mishra, Merrell Tuck-Primdahl, and Roula Yazigi assisted the team with the website 
and communications.

Bruce Ross-Larson was the principal editor. The Development Data Group contributed 
to the data appendix and was responsible for the Selected World Development Indicators. 
Design Symphony contributed to the design. The Ofﬁ ce of the Publisher and GSDTR pro-
vided excellent publishing, translation, and dissemination services, with special thanks to 
Mary Fisk, Stephen McGroarty, Nancy Lammers, Santiago Pombo-Bejarano, Denise Bergeron, 
Rick Ludwick, Cecile Jannotin, Hector Hernaez, and Bouchra Belfqih for their contributions.

Abbreviations and data notes

ABBREVIATIONS
AIDS 
ALMPs 
ANC 
APEC  
ART  
ASEAN 
ATM  
AUSAID  
BPO 
CARICOM  
CCT 
CEDAW 

CGAP 
CIDA 
CIM-OAS 

CWDI 
DANIDA 
DFCU 
DFID 
EAP 
ECA 
ECD 
ECOSOC 
EdAttain 

EFM 
EU 
EU-SILC 
FAO 
FDI 
FENATRAD 

FGC 
FHHH 
FINCA 
FLFPR 
FPE 

acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syndrome
active labor market policies
African National Congress
Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation
antiretroviral therapy
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
automated teller machine
Australian Agency for International Development
business process outsourcing
Caribbean Community
conditional cash transfer
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
Canadian International Development Agency
Inter-American Commission of Women (Organization of   
American States)
Corporate Women Directors International 
Danish International Development Agency
Development Finance Company of Uganda
United Kingdom Department for International Development 
East Asia and Paciﬁ c Region
Europe and Central Asia Region
early child development 
Economic and social council (United Nations)
Education Attainment and Enrollment around the World 
database
excess female mortality
European Union
European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions
Food and Agriculture Organization 
foreign direct investment
Federação Nacional dos Trabalhadores Domésticos (National 
Federation of Domestic Workers)
female genital cutting 
female-headed households
Foundation for International Community Assistance
female labor force participation rate
free primary education

xvii

xviii 

A B B R E V I AT I O N S   A N D   DATA   N O T E S

GBA 
GDP 
GEME 
HDI 
HIV 
I2D2 
ICRW 
ICT 
IFC 
ILO 
ITES 
ITU 
JICA 
KCP 
LABORSTA 
LAC 
LFPRs 
MCC 
MDGs 
MNA 
MHHH 
MMR 
MTUS 
NAALC 
NAFTA 
NGO 
NHO 

Global Banking Alliance for Women
gross domestic product
Gender Equity Model Egypt
Human Development Index
human immunodeﬁ ciency virus
International Income Distribution Database 
International Center for the Research on Women
information and communications technology
International Finance Corporation
International Labor Organization
information technology enabled service
International Telecommunications Union
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Knowledge for Change Program
International Labour Organization Bureau of Statistics database
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
labor force participation rates 
Millennium Challenge Corporation
Millennium Development Goals
Middle East and North Africa Region
male-headed households
maternal mortality rate
Multinational Time Use Study 
North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation 
North American Free Trade Agreement
nongovernmental organization 
Næringslivets Hovedorganisasjon (Confederation of Norwegian 
Enterprises)
Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation
national statistical systems
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

NORAD 
NSS 
OECD 
OECD-DAC Gendernet   Development Assistance Committee’s Network on Gender 

PEKKA  

PETT  

PISA 
PROBECAT 

REFLEX 
RIGA 
ROSCAs  
SADC  
SAR 
SDC 
SERNAM 
SEWA 
SIDA 
SMEs  

Equality of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development
Pemberdayaan Perempuan Kepala Keluarga (Female-Headed 
Households Empowerment Program)
Proyecto Especial de Titulación de Tierras (Special Land Titling 
Project)
Program for International Student Assessment 
Programa de Becas de Capacitación para Trabajadores (Labor 
Retraining Scholarship Program)
Research into Employment and Professional Flexibility database
Rural Income Generating Activities database
rotating savings and credit associations
Southern African Development Community
South Asia Region
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
Servicio Nacional de la Mujer (National Women’s Service)
Self-employed Women’s Association
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
small and medium enterprises

 

SSA 
UIS 
UNAIDS  
UNDP 
UNESCO 

UN-HABITAT 
UNICEF 
UNIFEM 
UNRISD 
UN WOMEN 

USAID 
WHO 
WINGOs 

Abbreviations and data notes 

xix

Sub-Saharan Africa Region
UNESCO Institute for Statistics
Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural 
Organization  
United Nations Human Settlements Program 
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Development Fund for Women
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the 
Empowerment of Women
United States Agency for International Development
World Health Organization
women’s international nongovernmental organizations

DATA NOTES
The countries included in regional and income groupings in this Report are listed in the 
Classiﬁ cation of Economies table at the end of the Selected World Development Indicators. 
Income classiﬁ cations are based on GNP per capita; thresholds for income classiﬁ cations in 
this edition may be found in the Introduction to Selected World Development Indicators. 
Group averages reported in the ﬁ gures and tables are unweighted averages of the countries in 
the group, unless noted to the contrary.

The use of the word countries to refer to economies implies no judgment by the World 
Bank about the legal or other status of a territory. The term developing countries includes low- 
and middle-income economies and thus may include economies in transition from central 
planning, as a matter of convenience. The term advanced countries may be used as a matter of 
convenience to denote high-income economies. 

Note: Dollar ﬁ gures are current U.S. dollars, unless otherwise speciﬁ ed. Billion means 1,000 
million; trillion means 1,000 billion.

Main Messages of the 
World Development Report 2012

GENDER EQUALITY MATTERS 
FOR DEVELOPMENT

Gender equality is a core development objec-
tive in its own right. It is also smart economics. 
Greater gender equality can enhance produc-
tivity, improve development outcomes for the 
next  generation,  and  make  institutions  more 
representative.
•  Productivity  gains.  Women  now  represent 
40 percent of the global labor force, 43 per-
cent  of  the  world’s  agricultural  labor  force, 
and  more  than  half  the  world’s  university 
students. Productivity will be raised if their 
skills and talents are used more fully. For ex-
ample,  if  women  farmers  were  to  have  the 
same  access  as  men  to  fertilizers  and  other 
inputs, maize yields would increase by almost 
one-sixth in Malawi and Ghana. And elimi-
nating  barriers  that  discriminate  against 
women working in certain sectors or occupa-
tions could increase labor productivity by as 
much as 25 percent in some countries.

•  Improved outcomes for the next generation. 
Greater control over household resources by 
women can enhance countries’ growth pros-
pects by changing spending patterns in ways 
that beneﬁ t children. And improvements in 
women’s  education  and  health  have  been 
linked to better outcomes for their children 
in countries as varied as Brazil, Nepal, Paki-
stan, and Senegal.

•  More representative decision making. Gen-
der equality matters for society more broadly. 

Empowering women as economic, political, 
and  social  actors  can  change  policy  choices 
and make institutions more representative of 
a range of voices. In India, giving power to 
women  at  the  local  level  led  to  increases  in 
the provision of public goods, such as water 
and  sanitation,  which  mattered  more  to 
women.

DEVELOPMENT HAS CLOSED SOME 
GENDER GAPS . . .

The  disadvantages  faced  by  women  and  girls 
that  have  shrunk  most  rapidly  over  the  past 
quarter century include: 
•  Educational enrollment. Gender gaps in pri-
mary  education  have  closed  in  almost  all 
countries. In secondary education, these gaps 
are closing rapidly and have reversed in many 
countries,  especially  in  Latin  America,  the 
Caribbean,  and  East  Asia—but  it  is  now 
boys and young men who are disadvantaged. 
Among developing countries, girls now out-
number  boys  in  secondary  schools  in  45 
countries and there are more young women 
than men in universities in 60 countries.

•  Life expectancy. Since 1980, women are liv-
ing longer than men in all parts of the world. 
And, in low-income countries, women now 
live 20 years longer on average than they did 
in 1960. 

•  Labor force participation. Over half a billion 
women  have  joined  the  world’s  labor  force 

 

Main Messages of the World Development Report 2012 

xxi

over the last 30 years as women’s partici-
pation in paid work has risen in most of 
the developing world. An important rea-
son  has  been  the  unprecedented  reduc-
tion  in  fertility  in  developing  countries 
as  diverse  as  Bangladesh,  Colombia,  and 
the Islamic Republic of Iran. 

. . . BUT OTHER GAPS PERSIST

Gender disparities still remain in many areas, 
and even in rich countries. The most persis-
tent and egregious gaps include: 
•  Excess  deaths  of  girls  and  women.  Fe-
males  are  more  likely  to  die,  relative  to 
males, in many low- and middle-income 
countries than their counterparts in rich 
countries.  These  deaths  are  estimated  at 
about 3.9 million women and girls under 
the age of 60 each year. About two-ﬁ fths 
of them are never born, one-sixth die in 
early childhood, and over one-third die in 
their reproductive years. And this number 
is  growing  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  espe-
cially  in  childhood  and  the  reproductive 
years and in the countries hardest hit by 
the HIV/AIDS epidemic.

•  Disparities  in  girls’  schooling.  Despite 
the overall progress, primary and second-
ary  school  enrollments  for  girls  remain 
much  lower  than  for  boys  for  disadvan-
taged  populations  in  many  Sub-Saharan 
countries and some parts of South Asia.
•  Unequal  access  to  economic  opportuni-
ties. Women are more likely than men to 
work as unpaid family laborers or in the 
informal  sector. Women  farmers  tend  to 
farm  smaller  plots  and  less  proﬁ table 
crops  than  men.  Women  entrepreneurs 
operate  in  smaller  ﬁ rms  and  less  proﬁ t-
able  sectors.  As  a  result,  women  every-
where tend to earn less than men.

•  Differences  in  voice  in  households  and 
in society.  In  many  countries,  women—
especially  poor  women—have  less  say 
over  decisions  and  less  control  over  re-
sources in their households. And in most 
countries, women participate less in for-
mal  politics  than  men  and  are  under- 
represented in its upper echelons.

UNDERSTANDING PROGRESS 
AND PERSISTENCE

Income  growth  by  itself  does  not  deliver 
greater gender equality on all fronts. Indeed, 
where gender gaps have closed quickly, it is 
because of how  markets and institutions—
formal and informal—have functioned and 
evolved,  how  growth  has  played  out,  and 
how all these factors have interacted through 
household decisions. For example, in educa-
tion,  income  growth  (by  loosening  bud-
get constraints), markets (by opening new 
employment opportunities for women), and 
formal  institutions  (by  expanding  schools 
and lowering costs) have all come together 
to inﬂ uence household decisions in favor of 
educating girls and young women across a 
broad range of countries. 

Gender gaps persist where girls and women 
face other disadvantages. For poor women in 
poor places, sizable gender gaps remain. And 
these disparities are even larger when pov-
erty combines with other forms of exclusion, 
such as remoteness, ethnicity, and disability. 
For ethnic minority women in Vietnam, for 
instance, more than 60 percent of childbirths 
occur without prenatal care—twice as many 
as for the majority Kinh women. 

Markets, institutions, and households can 
also combine to limit progress. Gender gaps 
in  productivity  and  earnings,  for  exam-
ple,  are  pervasive.  And  they  are  driven  by 
deep-seated gender differences in time use 
(reﬂ ecting  social  norms  about  house  and 
care work), in rights of ownership and con-
trol over land and assets, and in the workings 
of  markets  and  formal  institutions,  which 
work in ways that disadvantage women. 

Globalization can help. In today’s globalized 
world, forces such as trade openness and the 
spread  of  cheaper  information  and  com-
munication technologies have the potential 
to reduce gender disparities by connecting 
women to markets and economic opportu-
nities, reshaping attitudes and norms among 
women  and  men  about  gender  relations, 
and encouraging countries to promote gen-
der equality. But their impact will be muted 
without effective domestic public action.

xxii 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

PRIORITIES FOR DOMESTIC 
POLICY ACTION 

Policy makers in developing countries will 
need to focus on those gender gaps where 
the payoffs for development are potentially 
the largest, higher incomes by themselves do 
little to reduce these gaps, and a reorienta-
tion of policies would yield the greatest ben-
eﬁ t. These priorities are:
•  Addressing  excess  deaths  of  girls  and 
women and eliminating gender disadvan-
tage  in  education  where  these  remain 
entrenched.

•  Closing differences in access to economic 
opportunities  and  the  ensuing  earnings 
and  productivity  gaps  between  women 
and men. 

•  Shrinking  gender  differences  in  voice 

within households and societies.

•  Limiting  the  reproduction  of  gender  in-

equality across generations.

Focused  and  sustained  domestic  pub-
lic action is essential to bring about gender 
equality. And to be effective, these policies will 
need to target the root causes of gender gaps. 
In some areas, as with maternal mortality, 
governments will need to address the single 
binding constraint to progress (weak service 
delivery institutions). In others, as with dif-
ferential access to economic opportunities, 
policies will be needed that tackle the multi-
ple constraints that come from the workings 
of markets and institutions to limit progress. 
In these cases, policy makers will need to pri-
oritize  these  constraints  and  address  them 
simultaneously or sequentially.
•  To  reduce  excess  deaths  of  girls  and 
women  in  infancy,  early  childhood,  and 
the  reproductive  years,  policy  action  to 
improve the delivery of services (especially 
of  clean  water,  sanitation,  and  maternal 
care) is of primary importance. Vietnam 
has  been  able  to  reduce  excess  mortality 
among young girls by expanding access to 
clean  water  and  sanitation.  And  Turkey 
has  reduced  maternal  mortality  through 
improved health care delivery and a focus 
on expectant mothers. 

•  To  shrink  persisting  educational  gaps, 
policies  need  to  improve  access  for  girls 

and young women when poverty, ethnic-
ity,  or  geography  excludes  them,  and  to 
reach  boys  where  gender  disadvantages 
have reversed. Cash transfers conditioned 
on school attendance are often effective in 
reaching these groups. Pakistan has used 
such transfers to get girls from poor fami-
lies to school, while Jamaica has relied on 
them to keep at-risk boys in school.

•  To  narrow  disparities  between  women 
and  men  in  earnings  and  productivity, 
a  combination  of  policies  is  needed  to 
 address  the  various  constraints  that  dis-
proportionately  affect  women’s  access  to 
economic  opportunities.  Depending  on 
context, these include measures to:

  䡩   Lift women’s time constraints, by pro-
viding  child  care  as  with  Colombia’s 
subsidized day-care programs for work-
ing mothers, and improving infrastruc-
ture as with South Africa’s rural electri-
ﬁ cation program.

  䡩   Improve women’s access to productive 
resources, especially to land as was done 
in Ethiopia by granting joint land titles 
to wives and husbands, and to credit as 
in Bangladesh. 

  䡩   Tackle  information  problems  and  in-
stitutional  biases  that  work  against 
women. These include the use of quo-
tas or job placement programs as is be-
ing done in Jordan, or reforming gen-
der biases in service delivery institutions 
as was done for agricultural extension 
through  women’s  self-help  groups  in 
the Indian state of Orissa. 

•  To diminish gender differences in house-
hold and societal voice,  policies  need  to 
address the combined inﬂ uence of social 
norms and beliefs, women’s access to eco-
nomic opportunities, the legal framework, 
and women’s education and skills:

  䡩   To  equalize  voice  within  households, 
measures that increase women’s control 
over household resources and laws that 
enhance the ability of women to accu-
mulate assets, especially by strengthen-
ing their property rights, are of particu-
lar  importance.  Recent  reforms  of 
family  law  in  Morocco  that  equalized 
the ownership rights of husbands and 
wives  over  property  acquired  during 
marriage are an example. 

 

Main Messages of the World Development Report 2012 

xxiii

  䡩   To  increase  women’s  voice  in  society, 
policies include quotas on political rep-
resentation, as has been done by many 
countries  across  the  world,  and  mea-
sures to foster and train future women 
leaders  and  involve  women  more  in 
groups such as trade unions and pro-
fessional associations. 

•  To  limit  the  reproduction  of  gender  in-
equality  across  generations,  it  is  impor-
tant to reach adolescents and young adults 
because this is the age when they make de-
cisions that determine their acquisition of 
skills, future health, economic prospects, 
and  aspirations.  Interventions,  therefore, 
need to focus on: 

  䡩   Building  human  and  social  capital 
as  cash  transfer  programs  have  done 
in  Malawi,  and  improving  informa-
tion  about  returns  to  education  and 
health education programs, which has 
kept boys in school in the Dominican 
Republic; 

  䡩   Facilitating the transition from school 
to work with job and life skills training 
programs as in Uganda; and

  䡩   Shifting aspirations as with exposure to 
role  models  such  as  woman  political 
leaders in India who challenge prevail-
ing social norms.

THE ROLE OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY

While domestic policy action is crucial, the 
international community can play a role in 

complementing these efforts in each of these 
four  priority  areas  and,  more  generally,  in 
supporting  evidence-based  public  action 
through better data, impact evaluation, and 
learning. 
•  In some areas, as with educational gender 
gaps,  this  will  require  adjusting  current 
support, such as ensuring that the Educa-
tion  for  All  Fast  Track  Initiative  reaches 
disadvantaged girls and boys, or sustain-
ing  existing  efforts,  as  with  partnerships 
focused on adolescent girls. 

•  In  other  areas,  it  will  demand  new  or 
 additional  action  on  multiple  fronts—
some combination of more funding, co-
ordinated efforts to foster innovation and 
learning, and more effective partnerships. 
  䡩   The funding should be directed partic-
ularly to supporting the poorest coun-
tries in reducing excess deaths of girls 
and  women  (through  investments  in 
clean water and sanitation and mater-
nal health services) and removing per-
sistent gender gaps in education. 

  䡩   More  support  is  needed  especially  to 
improve  the  availability  of  gender-
disaggregated  data  and  to  foster  more 
experimentation and systematic evalu-
ation of mechanisms to improve wom-
en’s  access  to  markets,  services,  and 
justice. 

  䡩   The  partnerships  should  extend  be-
yond  governments  and  development 
agencies  to  include  the  private  sector, 
civil  society  organizations,  and  aca-
demic  institutions  in  developing  and 
rich countries.

World Development Report 2012: 
Gender Equality and Development

Overview

Baruani  is  reﬂ ecting  on  how  women’s  and  men’s  lives  have  changed  over  the  past  decade  in 
Ijuhanyondo—a village in Tanzania. “Ten years back was terrible,” she recalls. “Women were very be-
hind. They used to be only at home doing housework. But now, they are in businesses, they are in poli-
tics.” Others hold similar views. “We do not depend a lot on men as it used to be,” says Agnetha. “We 
have some cash for ourselves, and this assists us in being free from men and to some extent controlling 
our lives.” In addition to managing their businesses, the women now make up half the members of the 
street committee that runs the village.

Despite these positive changes, many challenges continue to weigh on women’s daily lives. Fewer than 
half the homes in the village have piped water. Even more difﬁ cult, Tungise and other women of the 
 village still fear violence by their partners: “When they are drunk, they can begin beating up women and 
children in the house. The worst bit of it is forcing sex with you.” Although legally women can inherit 
land or a house, tradition prevails. “Yes, women can inherit property,” says Flora, the executive secretary 
of the street committee. “In fact, in the will the father is supposed to give each son and daughter some-
thing, and nowadays the law is strict, equally. But still, men give to their sons and argue that women 
have the property of where they are married.”

Dodoma  Rural  Community  Report,  from “Deﬁ ning  Gender  in  the 
21st   Century:  Talking  with  Women  and  Men  around  the  World: 
A Multi-Country Qualitative Study of Gender and Economic Choice” 
(World Bank 2011)

WHY DOES GENDER EQUALITY 
MATTER FOR DEVELOPMENT?

The  story  of  Ijuhanyondo  village  in  Tanzania 
mirrors the evolution of gender equality across 
the world over the past quarter century.  Although 
many women continue to struggle with gender-
based  disadvantages  in  their  daily  lives,  things 
have changed for the better—and at a pace that 
would have been unthinkable even two decades 
ago. Women have made unprecedented gains in 
rights, in education and health, and in access to 
jobs and livelihoods. More countries than ever 
guarantee women and men equal rights under 

the  law  in  such  areas  as  property  ownership, 
inheritance, and marriage. In all, 136 countries 
now have explicit guarantees for the equality of 
all citizens and nondiscrimination between men 
and women in their constitutions.

Progress has not come easily. And it has not 
come evenly to all countries or to all women—or 
across  all  dimensions  of  gender  equality.  The 
likelihood  of  women  dying  during  childbirth 
in Sub-Saharan Africa and parts of South Asia 
is still comparable to that in Northern Europe 
in  the  19th  century.  A  wealthy  urban  child  in 
Nigeria—boy or girl—averages around 10 years 
of schooling, while poor rural Hausa girls aver-

 
 

Overview 
Overview 

3
3

age  fewer  than  six  months.  The  rate  at  which 
women die relative to men is higher in low- and 
middle-income  countries  compared  with  their 
high-income counterparts, especially in the crit-
ical  years  of  infancy  and  early  childhood  and 
in the reproductive period. Divorce or widow-
hood  causes  many  women  to  become  landless 
and lose their assets. Women continue to clus-
ter in sectors and occupations characterized as 
“female”—many of them lower paying. Women 
are also more likely to be the victims of violence 
at  home  and  suffer  more  severe  injuries.  And 
almost  everywhere  women’s  representation  in 
politics  and  in  senior  managerial  positions  in 
business remains far lower than men’s.

Do  these  patterns  of  gender  inequality–
in  human  and  physical  capital  endowments, 
in  economic  opportunities,  and  in  the  ability 
to  make  choices  to  achieve  desired  outcomes 
(agency)—matter,  particularly  those  that  per-
sist  even  as  the  development  process  unfolds? 
This  World  Development  Report  (WDR)  ar-
gues that they do for two reasons. First, gender 
equality matters intrinsically, because the abil-
ity  to  live  the  life  of  one’s  own  choosing  and 
be spared from absolute deprivation is a basic 
human right and should be equal for everyone, 
independent of whether one is male or female. 
Second, gender equality matters instrumentally, 
because greater gender equality contributes to 
economic  efﬁ ciency  and  the  achievement  of 
other key development outcomes.

Gender equality matters in its own right
Following  Amartya  Sen,  we  see  development 
as a process of expanding freedoms equally for 
all  people.1  In  this  view  of  development,  gen-
der  equality  is  a  core  objective  in  itself  (box 
1). So, just as development means less income 
poverty or better access to justice, it should also 
mean  fewer  gaps  in  well-being  between  males 
and  females.  This  viewpoint  is  also  evident  in 
the  international  development  community’s 
recognition  that  women’s  empowerment  and 
gender  equality  are  development  objectives  in 
their  own  right,  as  embodied  in  Millennium 
Development Goals 3 and 5 (box 2). It is seen 
as well in the adoption and widespread ratiﬁ ca-
tion  of  the  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of 
All  Forms  of  Discrimination  against  Women 
(CEDAW).  Adopted  by  the  United  Nations 
General  Assembly  in  1979,  the  convention  es-
tablished  a  comprehensive  framework  for  the 

advancement of women and has been ratiﬁ ed to 
date by 187 countries.

Gender equality matters for 
development—It is smart economics
Gender equality matters also as an instrument 
for development. As this Report shows, gender 
equality is smart economics: it can enhance eco-
nomic  efﬁ ciency  and  improve  other  develop-
ment  outcomes  in  three  ways.  First,  removing 
barriers  that  prevent  women  from  having  the 
same access as men to education, economic op-
portunities, and productive inputs can generate 
broad  productivity  gains—gains  all  the  more 
important in a more competitive and globalized 
world. Second, improving women’s absolute and 
relative  status  feeds  many  other  development 
outcomes,  including  those  for  their  children. 
Third, leveling the playing ﬁ eld—where women 
and men have equal chances to become socially 
and politically active, make decisions, and shape 
policies—is likely to lead over time to more rep-
resentative, and more inclusive, institutions and 
policy choices and thus to a better development 
path. Consider each in turn.

Misallocating women’s skills and talent 
comes at a high (and rising) economic cost
Gender equality can have large impacts on pro-
ductivity. Women now represent more than 40 
percent of the global labor force, 43 percent of 
the agricultural workforce, and more than half 
of the world’s university students. For an econ-
omy to be functioning at its potential, women’s 
skills and talents should be engaged in activities 
that  make  the  best  use  of  those  abilities.  But, 
as  the  stories  of  many  women  illustrate,  this 
is not always the case. When women’s labor is 
underused or misallocated—because they face 
discrimination  in  markets  or  societal  institu-
tions that prevents them from completing their 
education,  entering  certain  occupations,  and 
earning the same incomes as men—economic 
losses  are  the  result.  When  women  farmers 
lack security of land tenure, as they do in many 
countries, especially in Africa, the result is lower 
 access  to  credit  and  inputs  and  to  inefﬁ cient 
land  use,  reducing  yields.  Discrimination  in 
credit markets and other gender inequalities in 
access to productive inputs also make it more 
difﬁ cult for female-headed ﬁ rms to be as pro-
ductive  and  proﬁ table  as  male-headed  ones. 
And, when women are excluded from manage-

4 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 1  What do we mean by gender equality? 

Gender  refers  to  the  social,  behavioral,  and  cultural  attributes, 
expectations, and norms associated with being a woman or a man. 
Gender equality refers to how these aspects determine how women 
and  men  relate  to  each  other  and  to  the  resulting  diff erences  in 
power between them. 

This Report focuses on three key dimensions of gender equality 
identifi ed by men and women from Afghanistan to Poland to South 
Africa,  as well as by researchers: the accumulation of endowments 
(education,  health,  and  physical  assets);  the  use  of  those  endow-
ments  to  take  up  economic  opportunities  and  generate  incomes; 
and the application of those endowments to take actions, or agency, 
aff ecting individual and household well-being. These are aspects of 
equality where shortfalls of choice are refl ected in shortfalls of wel-
fare.  They  matter  in  and  of  themselves.  But  they  are  also  closely 
interlinked. 

Gender inequality is both similar to and diff erent from inequal-
ity based on other attributes such as race or ethnicity. Three diff er-
ences are of particular relevance to the analysis of gender equality. 
First, the welfare of women and men living in the same household 
is diffi  cult to measure separately, a problem that is compounded by 
the paucity of data on outcomes in the household. Second, prefer-
ences,  needs,  and  constraints  can  diff er  systematically  between 
men and women, refl ecting both biological factors and “learned” 
social behaviors. Third, gender cuts across distinctions of income 
and class. These characteristics raise the question whether gender 
equality should be measured as equality of outcomes or equality of 
opportunity.  The  economic  and  philosophical  literature  on  this 
issue is divided. 

Those who defend framing gender equality as equality of oppor-
tunity  argue  that  it  allows  one  to  distinguish  between  inequalities 

that arise from circumstances beyond the control of individuals and 
those that stem from diff erences in preferences and choices. A sub-
stantial body of research documents such male-female diff erences in 
risk aversion, social preferences, and attitudes about competition. It 
 follows that if men and women diff er, on average, in attitudes, prefer-
ences,  and  choices,  then  not  all  observed  diff erences  in  outcomes 
can be attributed to diff erences in opportunities. 

Those  who  argue  for  equality  of  outcomes  argue  that  diff er-
ences  in  preferences  and  attitudes  are  largely  “learned”  and  not 
inherent—that is, they are the result of culture and environment 
that lead men and women to internalize social norms and expec-
tations.  Persistent  diff erences  in  power  and  status  between  men 
and women can become internalized in aspirations, behaviors, and 
preferences  that   perpetuate  the  inequalities.  So,  it  is  diffi  cult  to 
defi ne equality of opportunity without also considering how actual 
outcomes  are  distributed.  Only  by  attempting  to  equalize  out-
comes can one break the vicious circle of low aspirations and low 
opportunity. 

Despite this debate, it is diffi  cult in practice to measure oppor-
tunities separately from outcomes. Indeed, equality of opportuni-
ties and equality of outcomes are tightly linked both in theory and 
in  measurement.  For  this  reason,  the  Report  takes  a  pragmatic 
approach, focusing on both outcomes and opportunities in relation 
to endowments, agency, and access to economic activities. Follow-
ing Sen, we also believe that while people may  disagree in what is 
just or fair, they will agree on eliminating what are “outrageously 
unjust  arrangements.”  In  other  words,  while  it  may  be  diffi  cult 
to defi ne whether gender equality is about outcomes or opportuni-
ties, most will agree that gross manifestations of gender inequality 
should be eliminated.

Sources: Booth and Nolen 2009; Croson and Gneezy 2009; Gneezy, Leonard, and List 2009; Kabeer 1996; Sen 1999; World Bank 2011.

BOX 2   The Millennium Development Goals recognize the intrinsic and 

instrumental value of gender equality

The 2010 Millennium Development Goal (MDG) Sum-
mit concluded with the adoption of a global action 
plan to achieve the eight goals by 2015. The summit 
also adopted a resolution calling for action to ensure 
gender  parity  in  education  and  health,  economic 
opportunities, and decision making through gender 
mainstreaming in development policy making. The 
resolution and the action plan refl ect the belief of the 
international development community that gender 

equality and women’s empowerment are develop-
ment objectives in their own right (MDG 3 and 5), as 
well as serving as critical channels for achieving the 
other MDGs and reducing income and non-income 
poverty.  Gender  equality  and  women’s  empower-
ment help to promote universal primary education 
(MDG  2),  reduce  under-fi ve  mortality  (MDG  4), 
improve  maternal  health  (MDG  5),  and  reduce  the 
likelihood of contracting HIV/AIDS (MDG 6). 

Source: WDR 2012 team.

ment  positions,  managers  are  less  skilled  on 
average,  reducing  the  pace  of  innovation  and 
technology adoption.2 

The direct payoff to correcting these failures, 
many  rooted  in  how  markets  and  institutions 

function, is large: ensuring that women farmers 
have the same access as men to fertilizer and other 
agricultural inputs would increase maize yields 
by 11 to 16 percent in Malawi and by 17 percent 
in Ghana.3 Improving women’s property rights 

 

Overview 

5

in Burkina Faso would increase total household 
agricultural production by about 6 percent, with 
no  additional  resources—simply  by  reallocat-
ing resources (fertilizer and labor) from men to 
women.4  The  Food  and Agriculture  Organiza-
tion  (FAO)  estimates  that  equalizing  access  to 
productive resources between female and male 
farmers  could  increase  agricultural  output  in 
developing countries by as much as 2.5 to 4 per-
cent.5 Eliminating barriers that prevent women 
from working in certain occupations or sectors 
would  have  similar  positive  effects,  reducing 
the productivity gap between male and female 
workers by one-third to one-half (chapter 5) and 
increasing output per worker by 3 to 25 percent 
across a range of countries.6 But achieving these 
gains will not occur automatically as countries 
get richer: multiple and sometimes reinforcing 
barriers to gender equality can get in the way. 

These productivity gains are likely to be even 
larger in a more integrated world where efﬁ ciency 
in the use of resources is essential to a country’s 
competitiveness  and  growth.  Indeed,  recent 
work shows that gender inequality has become 
more costly for most countries in a world of open 
trade.7 Gender inequality diminishes a country’s 
ability to compete internationally—particularly 
if the country specializes in exporting goods and 
services for which men and women workers are 
equally well suited. Industries that rely more on 
female  labor  expand  more  in  countries  where 
women  are  more  equal.8  The  relationship  also 
goes the other way: countries with an advantage 
in making products that rely more on women’s 
labor  also  have  become  more  gender  equal.9 
And in countries and regions with rapidly aging 
populations, like China and Europe and Central 
Asia, encouraging women to enter and remain 
in the labor force can help dampen the adverse 
impact  of  shrinking  working-age  populations. 
So, in a globalized world, countries that reduce 
gender-based inequalities, especially in second-
ary and tertiary education and in economic par-
ticipation, will have a clear advantage over those 
that delay action (chapter 6).

Women’s endowments, agency, and 
opportunities shape those of the next 
generation
Greater  control  over  household  resources  by 
women  leads  to  more  investment  in  children’s 
human  capital,  with  dynamic  positive  effects 
on  economic  growth.  Evidence  from  a  range 

of  countries  (such  as  Bangladesh,  Brazil,  Côte 
d’Ivoire,  Mexico,  South Africa,  and  the  United 
Kingdom)  shows  that  increasing  the  share  of 
household income controlled by women, either 
through  their  own  earnings  or  cash  transfers, 
changes  spending  in  ways  that  beneﬁ t  chil-
dren.10  In  Ghana,  the  share  of  assets  and  the 
share  of  land  owned  by  women  are  positively 
associated  with  higher  food  expenditures.11  In 
Brazil,  women’s  own  nonlabor  income  has  a 
positive  impact  on  the  height  of  their  daugh-
ters.12 In China, increasing adult female income 
by 10 percent of the average household income 
increased the fraction of surviving girls by 1 per-
centage point and increased years of schooling 
for  both  boys  and  girls.  In  contrast,  a  compa-
rable increase in male income reduced survival 
rates and educational attainment for girls, with 
no impact on boys.13 In India, a woman’s higher 
earned income increases her children’s years of 
schooling.14

Improvements  in  women’s  own  education 
and health also have positive impacts on these 
and  other  outcomes  for  their  children.  Better 
nutritional status of mothers has been associ-
ated  with  better  child  health  and  survival.15 
And  women’s  education  has  been  positively 
linked  to  a  range  of  health  beneﬁ ts  for  chil-
dren—from higher immunization rates to bet-
ter nutrition to lower child mortality. Mothers’ 
(and  fathers’)  schooling  has  been  positively 
linked  to  children’s  educational  attainment 
across  a  broad  set  of  countries;  in  Pakistan, 
children whose mothers have even a single year 
of education spend one extra hour studying at 
home every day and report higher test scores.16 
Women’s  lack  of  agency—as  seen  in  domes-
tic violence—has consequences for their chil-
dren’s cognitive behaviors and health as adults. 
Medical research from developed countries has 
established a link between exposure to domes-
tic violence as a child and health problems as 
an  adult—men  and  women  who  experienced 
violence  in  the  home  as  children  are  two  to 
three  times  more  likely  to  suffer  from  cancer, 
a stroke, or cardiovascular problems, and ﬁ ve 
to ten times more likely to use alcohol or ille-
gal drugs than those who did not.17 Numerous 
studies  also  document  how  experiencing  vio-
lence between parents as a child is a risk factor 
for  women  experiencing  violence  from  their 
own partners as adults, and for men perpetrat-
ing violence against their partners.18

6 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Increasing women’s individual and collective 
agency leads to better outcomes, institutions, 
and policy choices
Agency is about one’s ability to make choices—
and to transform them into desired actions and 
outcomes.  Across  all  countries  and  cultures, 
there are differences between men’s and women’s 
ability to make these choices, usually to women’s 
disadvantage.  These  gendered  differences  mat-
ter for women’s well-being but also for a whole 
set of outcomes for their families and for soci-
ety in general. Women’s agency inﬂ uences their 
ability to build their human capital and take up 
economic opportunities. In Bangladesh, women 
with greater control over health care and house-
hold  purchases  have  higher  nutritional  status. 
Women’s agency also matters for the welfare of 
their  children.  In  Mexico,  the  daughters  (but 
not  the  sons)  of  women  with  more  control 
over household decisions work fewer hours on 
household tasks.

Women’s  collective  agency  can  be  transfor-
mative for society. It can shape the institutions, 
markets, and social norms that limit their indi-
vidual  agency  and  opportunities.  Empowering 
women as political and social actors can change 
policy choices and make institutions more rep-
resentative of a range of voices. Female suffrage 
in  the  United  States  led  policy  makers  to  turn 
their attention to child and maternal health and 
helped  lower  infant  mortality  by  8  to  15  per-
cent.19 In India, giving power to women at the 
local level (through political quotas) led to in-
creases  in  the  provision  of  public  goods  (both 
female-preferred  ones  such  as  water  and  sani-
tation  and  male-preferred  goods  such  as  irri-
gation and schools) and reduced corruption.20 
Bribes paid by men and women in villages with 
a female leader were 2.7 to 3.2 percentage points 
less than in villages with a male leader.21 In India 
and Nepal, giving women a bigger say in man-
aging  forests  signiﬁ cantly  improved  conserva-
tion outcomes.22 Women’s greater public voice 
not only beneﬁ ts women and children but can 
also beneﬁ t men. In many rich countries, greater 
female  participation  in  economic  activity  has 
combined  with  their  increased  representation 
in political leadership to reshape social views on 
balancing work and family life in general and to 
pass more family-friendly labor legislation. 

Conversely,  when  women  and  men  do  not 
have equal chances to be socially and politically 
active and to inﬂ uence laws, politics, and policy 
making, institutions and policies are more likely 

to systematically favor the interests of those with 
more  inﬂ uence.  Institutional  constraints  and 
market failures that feed gender inequalities are 
less likely to be addressed and corrected, leading 
to their persistence. As highlighted in the World 
Development  Report  2006:  Equity  and  Develop-
ment,  an  “inequality  trap”  may  thus  emerge, 
preventing generations of women from getting 
educated  and  taking  up  economic  opportuni-
ties on a par with men, reducing their ability to 
make informed choices and to realize their po-
tential as individuals.23

WHAT DOES THIS REPORT DO?

This Report focuses on the economics of gender 
equality and development. It uses economic the-
ory to understand what drives differences in key 
aspects of welfare between men and women—
education  and  health,  access  to  economic  op-
portunities  and  productive  resources,  and  the 
ability  to  make  effective  choices  and  take  ac-
tion.  And  it  uses  the  same  economic  lens  to 
explore  what  policy  interventions  and  broader 
societal  action  can  be  taken  to  reduce  these 
gender  differences  and  improve  development 
outcomes generally. The Report does not limit 
itself to economic outcomes—indeed, it devotes 
roughly equal attention to human endowments, 
economic  opportunities,  and  women’s  agency, 
signaling the importance of all three interrelated 
aspects in human welfare. Nor does it ignore the 
central  role  of  social  and  political  institutions, 
whether  formal  or  informal,  in  determining 
gender outcomes. But in its framing of the issues 
and in the evidence it brings to the case for gen-
der  equality,  it  draws  heavily  on  the  economic 
literature on gender. 

We adopt this approach for four reasons. First, 
it provides valuable insights into how key gender 
outcomes emerge and evolve as the development 
process unfolds, as well as how the role and ef-
fectiveness  of  policy  inﬂ uence  these  outcomes. 
Second, it builds on a tradition of World Bank 
work on the economics of gender (most notably, 
the  Engendering  Development  report24)  and  on 
the institution’s strongest areas of expertise and 
specialization.  Third,  there  are  signiﬁ cant  data 
and knowledge gaps that we can help ﬁ ll in this 
area. Fourth, while the Report often arrives at di-
agnoses similar to those of other approaches, it 
provides different insights into the policy levers 
that can be used in support of gender equality.

 

Overview 

7

The  Report  focuses  largely  on  inequalities 
affecting women, dwelling on ones likely to be 
reproduced and passed on to the next genera-
tion. But it also focuses on inequalities affecting 
men, while recognizing that most of these male 
inequalities affect fewer realms of welfare.

We  adopt  an  empirical  approach,  prefer-
ring  rigorous  and  evidence-based  analysis  and 
highlighting  causality  where  feasible.  For  this, 
we draw on a large and growing body of quan-
titative gender research, complemented by new 
analysis,  particularly  on  time  use,  domestic 
violence,  mortality  risks,  and  inputs  into  agri-
culture and entrepreneurship. We also draw on 
new  qualitative  ﬁ eld  research  with  more  than 
4,000 men and women in 98 communities from 
19 developing countries, exploring how gender 
affects their everyday lives and their aspirations, 
education,  job  choices,  decision  making,  and 
other aspects of well-being (box 3).25

A global report like this one cannot provide 
in-depth  analysis  of  speciﬁ c  country  circum-
stances. Nor can it cover all relevant dimensions 
of  gender  equality.  Instead,  it  proposes  a  con-
ceptual  framework  to  explain  gender  inequal-
ity  and  recommend  public  action,  which  can 
be  adapted  as  necessary  to  speciﬁ c  countries, 
issues, and sectors. It then illustrates the use of 
this framework by focusing on aspects of gen-
der equality where there has been most progress 
worldwide  (education,  fertility,  life  expectancy, 
labor  force  participation,  and  the  extension  of 
legal rights) and where there has been little or 
very slow change (excess female mortality, seg-
regation in economic activity, gaps in earnings, 
responsibility  for  house  and  care  work,  asset 
ownership, and women’s agency in private and 
public spheres). 

BOX 3   How women and men define gender in the

 21st century

To inform this Report the World Bank conducted new fi eld research in 19 coun-
tries in all regions to gain a fi rst-hand look at how men and women experience 
gender in their everyday lives. 

Women and men from all age groups, incomes, and locations see educa-
tion,  the  ownership  of  assets,  access  to  economic  opportunities,  and 
opportunities to earn an income as the keys to improving their well-being and 
that of their families. In 500 focus groups, researchers identifi ed women’s and 
men’s roles and responsibilities in private and public spheres—with women’s 
tasks  being  largely  associated  with  family  care  and  home  production,  and 
men’s  with  income  generation  and  decision  making.  But  diff erences  across 
generations clearly show that these roles are being redefi ned in a world that 
off ers new opportunities and demands for both men and women.

The fi ndings also show that old problems persist in new settings even as 
new challenges are emerging. Many groups face pervasive disadvantages—for 
them, change remains an aspiration for future generations but not a reality in 
their everyday lives.

Source:  World Bank 2011.
Note:  The exercise was conducted with men and women of diﬀ erent age groups in 98 communities (about 
4,000 individuals) in Latin America (Dominican Republic and Peru), Europe and Central Asia (Moldova, Po-
land, and Serbia), Africa (Burkina Faso, Liberia, Sudan, South Africa, and Tanzania), South Asia (Afghanistan, 
Bhutan, and India), the Middle East (West Bank and Gaza and the Republic of Yemen), East Asia (Indonesia 
and Vietnam), and the Paciﬁ c Islands (Fiji and Papua New Guinea).

Drawing on past and recent work on gender 
and development within the World Bank26 and 
elsewhere,  the  Report  posits  that  gender  out-
comes can be understood through the responses 
of households to the functioning and structure 
of markets and institutions, both formal and in-
formal.  Families  decide  how  many  children  to 
have and when, how much to spend on educa-
tion and health for daughters and sons, how to 
allocate  different  tasks  (inside  and  outside  the 
household),  and  other  matters  that  inﬂ uence 
gender outcomes. 

“

I believe that a woman must be educated and must work in order to prove herself in 
society and to be a better mother.

Young woman in Rafah city, West Bank and Gaza

Women should work. Why should I stay at home if I can work outside? I should 
also earn income and my people and myself should enjoy the money I can make. 
Those days where our mothers were to ask for money from our fathers, even for 
simple things like underwear are gone: we need our own money and this means 
that we should work.

Young woman in Bukoba municipality, Tanzania

”

8 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 4   What do we mean by markets, formal institutions, 

and informal social institutions?

Markets—a variety of arrangements that allow buyers and sellers to exchange 
(the rights over) any type of goods and services subject to a set of rules. Markets 
allow for any item that is exchanged to be evaluated and priced. Markets can be 
infl uenced and shaped by formal and informal institutions.

Formal  institutions—all  aspects  that  pertain  to  the  functioning  of  the  state, 
including laws, regulatory frameworks, and mechanisms for the delivery of ser-
vices that the state provides (such as judicial services, police services, basic infra-
structure, health, and education).

Informal social institutions—the  mechanisms,  rules,  and  procedures  that  shape 
social  interactions  but  do  not  pertain  to  the  functioning  of  the  state.  In  this 
Report, the focus is on gender roles, beliefs, social norms, and social networks. 
Gender roles provide guides to normative behaviors for each sex within certain 
social contexts. Roles gain power as they are learned through socialization, elab-
orated in cultural products, and enacted in daily life. The repeated experience of 
performing gender roles aff ects widely shared beliefs about men’s and women’s 
attributes  and  one’s  own  sense  of  identity.  Social  norms  refer  to  patterns  of 
behavior that fl ow from socially shared beliefs and are enforced by informal social 
sanctions. These can aff ect household bargaining in many ways: they set limits 
on what can be bargained about; they can be a determinant of or constraint to 
bargaining power; they can aff ect how bargaining is conducted; and they them-
selves can be subject to bargaining and can change. Social networks refer to the 
system of social relationships and bonds of cooperation for mutual benefi t that 
shape one’s opportunities, information, social norms, and perceptions.

Sources: Agarwal 1994, 1997; Fehr, Fischbacher, and Gätcher 2002; Kabeer 1999; Sen 1990. 

They make these choices on the basis of the 
preferences,  incentives,  and  constraints  of  dif-
ferent family members, and in relation to their 
relative voice and bargaining power. Preferences 
are  shaped  by  gender  roles,  social  norms,  and 
social networks (which we group under the label 
informal institutions). Incentives are largely in-
ﬂ uenced by markets (including the markets for 
labor, credit, land, and goods), which determine 
the returns to household decisions and invest-
ments.  Constraints  arise  from  the  interplay  of 
formal  institutions  (comprising  all  that  pertain 
to the functioning of the state) and markets but 
also reﬂ ect the inﬂ uence of informal institutions 

“

I think women should go out as well to look 
for a job because men are failing to get jobs; 
for women it is easier because they have more 
options.

”

Young man in rural Ngonyameni,
South Africa

(box 4). Voice and bargaining power of house-
hold members are deﬁ ned by a range of factors, 
including  their  ownership  of  and  control  over 
resources,  their  ability  to  leave  the  household 
(exit  options),  and  social  norms.  In  this  way, 
household  decision  making,  markets,  formal 
institutions, and informal institutions combine 
and  interact  to  determine  gender-related  out-
comes (ﬁ gure 1). 

The beneﬁ ts of economic development (the 
combination of higher incomes and better ser-
vice delivery institutions) on gender outcomes 
can  be  seen  clearly  through  this  framework  as 
emerging  from  the  workings  of  households, 
markets, and institutions and their interactions. 
These impacts are illustrated in ﬁ gure 1 by the 
“growth”  arrow  that  turns  the  gears  in  the  di-
rection of greater gender equality. The impact of 
more gender equality on growth is in turn cap-
tured by the “gender equality” arrow that ﬂ ows 
back into higher growth.

WHERE HAS THERE BEEN THE MOST 
PROGRESS IN GENDER EQUALITY? 

For  women  and  girls  in  developing  countries, 
much  has  changed  for  the  better  in  the  past 
quarter century. Take female life expectancy at 
birth.  It  increased  dramatically  in  developing 
countries (by 20 to 25 years in most regions in 
the past 50 years) to reach 71 years globally in 
2007 (compared with 67 for men), and women 
now outlive men in every region of the world. 
The  changes  were  much  faster  than  when  to-
day’s  rich  countries  were  poorer.  It  took  more 
than 100 years for the number of children born 
to a woman in the United States to decline from 
6 to 3; the same decline took just over 35 years 
in India and less than 20 in Iran (ﬁ gure 2). The 
same patterns can be seen in primary education. 
It  took  the  United  States  40  years  (from  1870 
until 1910) to increase enrollments among girls 
aged 6 to 12 years from 57 percent to 88 percent; 
Morocco achieved a similar increase for this age 
group in just over a decade (from 58 percent in 
1997 to 88 percent in 2008).

Girls’ education
Progress in closing gender gaps in education has 
been steady and sustained at all levels—primary, 
secondary, and tertiary. In many countries, and 
especially  for  higher  education,  these  gaps  are 

 

Overview 

9

FIGURE 1  Gender outcomes result from interactions between households, markets, and institutions

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

N D E R  EQUALITY

E

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

G

R

O
WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

FIGURE 2   Across the world, women 
are having fewer children

How fast can fertility decline?

Iran, 
Islamic Rep.
Bangladesh

Morocco

Zimbabwe

Colombia

India

United
States

20

80

60

40

0
100
number of years for the total fertility
rate to fall from more than 6 children

to less than 3

Source: www.gapminder.org

now  reversing,  with  boys  and  young  men  at  a 
relative  disadvantage.  Two-thirds  of  all  coun-
tries  have  reached  gender  parity  in  primary 
education enrollments, while in over one-third, 
girls signiﬁ cantly outnumber boys in secondary 
education  (ﬁ gure  3).  Even  in  regions  with  the 
largest remaining gender gaps—South Asia and 
Sub-Saharan Africa (particularly West Africa)—
there  have  been  considerable  gains.  And  in  a 
striking  reversal  of  historical  patterns,  more 
women than men now attend universities, with 
women’s  tertiary  enrollment  across  the  globe 
having  risen  more  than  sevenfold  since  1970 
(fourfold for men). Yet while boy disadvantage 
is slowly emerging in some places, girl disadvan-
tage where it exists tends to emerge earlier in life 
and is deeper.

Women’s market work
Women’s  labor  force  participation  has  grown 
in the past 30 years as expanding economic op-
portunities  have  drawn  many  female  workers 

10 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3   Gender parity in enrollments at lower levels has been achieved in much of the world, but tertiary 

enrollments are very low and favor women

Primary education

Secondary education

Tertiary education

%

 
,
t
e
n

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

Some African
countries lag behind

girls
disadvantaged

%

 
,
t
e
n

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

80

60

40

20

0

Enrollment gaps dwarf
gender gaps

girls
disadvantaged

%

 
,
s
s
o
r
g

 
,

n
e
m
o
w

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

men
disadvantaged

80

60

40

20

0

 

Women are
more likely 
to participate
than men

 

20

40

80
school enrollment, boys, net %

60

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

school enrollment, boys, net %

school enrollment, men, gross %

East Asia and Pacific
South Asia

 

   Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

   Middle East and North Africa

   Sub-Saharan Africa

High-income countries

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Development Indicators.

Note: The 45° line in each ﬁ gure above shows gender parity in enrollments. Any point above the 45° line implies that more women are enrolled relative to men.

into  the  market.  Between  1980  and  2008,  the 
gender gap in participation narrowed from 32 
percentage  points  to  26  percentage  points.  By 
2008, women represented more than 40 percent 
of the global labor force. Large increases in par-
ticipation in countries that started with very low 
rates (mainly in Latin America and the Carib-
bean  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  the  Middle  East 
and North Africa) combined with small declines 
in  countries  that  started  with  very  high  rates 
(mainly  in  Eastern  Europe  and  Central  Asia) 
mean that rates have converged across regions, 
although signiﬁ cant differences remain. Female 
labor  force  participation  is  lowest  in  the  Mid-
dle East and Northern Africa (26 percent) and 
South Asia (35 percent) and highest in East Asia 
and  the  Paciﬁ c  (64  percent)  and  Sub-Saharan 
Africa (61 percent).

What explains progress?
Where gaps have closed quickly, it has been a 
result  of  how  markets  and  institutions  have 
functioned and evolved, how growth has played 
out,  and  how  all  these  factors  have  interacted 
through  household  decisions.  For  education, 
consider  each  in  turn.  Higher  incomes  allow 
families that had previously only sent their sons 
to school to now send their daughters as well. 
As  countries  get  richer,  their  economic  struc-

tures  change  so  that  activities  in  which  men 
no  longer  have  an  advantage  become  more 
prominent. This shift opens new opportunities 
for women’s employment, and households re-
spond to these signals by educating daughters. 
Richer  countries  can  also  invest  in  more  ac-
cessible education systems by building schools 
and hiring teachers. When combined with bet-
ter incentive and accountability systems, these 
inputs help deliver better and cheaper services, 
lowering the costs of access to households and 
increasing  their  use.  Where  all  these  factors 
have worked together, the gaps have closed rap-
idly, as in Morocco. 

But  even  if  bottlenecks  appear  in  any  one 
of these channels—pro-boy preferences within 
households or inadequacies in the provision of 
education or slow growth or limits on women’s 
employment opportunities—the other channels 
still have allowed progress in educating girls. Pol-
icies targeted to getting children to school, such 
as  the  conditional  cash  transfers  used  in  more 
than  30  countries  worldwide  (many  explicitly 
targeting girls, as in Bangladesh and Cambodia), 
have also helped. These forces are illustrated in 
ﬁ gure 4 by the (green) gears representing house-
holds, formal institutions, and markets all mov-
ing in ways that narrow educational gender gaps 
(“oiled” by supportive policies).

 

Overview 

11

FIGURE 4  Using the framework to explain progress in education

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

N D E R  EQUALITY

E

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

e

T
E
g  r
c

u

a

s

n

r

n

u
t
ti o

K
R
M A
s i n
a
e
d
o   e
t

r

c

I n

HOUSEHOLDS
More stable

incomes

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS
Lower direct, indirect,
and opportunity

costs

G

R

O
WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

The  interactions  between  households,  mar-
kets and institutions can also explain the pattern 
and pace of female labor force participation. A 
woman’s decision to work outside the home re-
sponds both to changes in her own wages and 
to  changes  in  her  household  income.  As  low-
income  countries  grow  richer,  women  partici-
pate less in market work because their household 
incomes also rise. Over time, their education lev-
els also increase as formal institutions respond. 
Rising incomes also lead to later marriage and 
childbearing  and  lower  fertility.  These  factors 
all bring women back into the labor force. In 10 
Latin American countries, almost two-thirds of 
the  increase  in  women’s  labor  force  participa-
tion  in  the  past  two  decades  can  be  attributed 
to  more  education  and  to  changes  in  family 
formation (later marriage and lower fertility).27 
These different impacts of income growth and 
rising  women’s  wages  lead  to  a  U-shaped  pat-
tern  of  female  labor  force  participation  across 
countries (ﬁ gure 5). But notably, since 1980, the 
female participation rate at each level of income 

has increased sharply over time. So, at every level 
of per capita income, more women are now en-
gaged  in  economic  activity  outside  the  home 
than ever before.

There  are  two  main  reasons  why  gains  in 
some domains of gender equality in many de-
veloping countries came faster than they did for 
today’s rich countries when they were at com-
parable  incomes.  First,  the  incomes  of  many 
developing  countries  have  grown  faster.  Since 
1950,  13  developing  countries  have  grown  at 
an average of 7 percent a year for more than 25 
years  or  longer—a  pace  unprecedented  before 
the latter half of the 20th century.28 Second, the 
various domains of gender outcomes are inter-
related. So, improvements in one have spurred 
advances in others. The decline in fertility that 
has come with higher incomes has helped lower 
the number of deaths associated with maternal 
mortality. And bearing fewer children has given 
women  more  time  to  invest  in  acquiring  hu-
man capital and to participate in the economy. 
Forward-looking parents have responded to the 

12 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5     Female labor force participation has increased over 

time at all income levels

80

70

60

50

 

%

 
,

e
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
e
c
r
o
f
 
r
o
b
a

 

l
 

l

e
a
m
e
40f

2008

1980

4

6

10
log, GDP per capita (constant 2000 US$)

8

(cid:129) 

12

from educating girls and from women working 
become evident. Consider the notable advances 
in  gender  equality  in  two  very  different  coun-
tries: Bangladesh and Colombia. 
•  In the four decades since Bangladesh gained 
independence,  the  average  number  of  chil-
dren a woman will have during her lifetime 
fell from almost 7 to just over 2. School en-
rollment  among  girls  rose  from  a  third  in 
1991 to 56 percent in 2005. And just in the 
latter part of the 1990s, labor force participa-
tion for young women more than doubled. 

In Colombia, the average number of children 
a woman will bear dropped from 3.2 to 2.4 
between  the  mid-1980s  and  2005.  Women 
also  reversed  the  education  gap  and  now 
have  higher  completion  rates  than  men  for 
primary, secondary, and even tertiary educa-
tion.  And  the  country  has  the  steepest  in-
crease  in  women’s  labor  force  participation 
in the region, giving it one of the highest par-
ticipation  rates  in  Latin  America.  Women 
there are well represented in managerial po-
sitions and in ﬁ nance—the glass ceilings no-
toriously hard to break through even in many 
rich countries.

The problem of severely disadvantaged 
populations
The combined forces of markets, service deliv-
ery institutions, and income growth that have 
contributed to closing gender gaps in education, 
fertility, and labor force participation for many 
women have not worked for everyone. For poor 
women  and  for  women  in  very  poor  places, 
sizable gender gaps remain. And these gaps are 
even worse where poverty combines with other 
factors  of  exclusion—such  as  ethnicity,  caste, 
remoteness, race, disability, or sexual orienta-
tion. Even in education, where gaps have nar-
rowed  in  most  countries,  girls’  enrollment  in 
primary  and  secondary  school  has  improved 
little  in  many  Sub-Saharan  countries  and 
some parts of South Asia. School enrollments 
for  girls  in  Mali  are  comparable  to  those  in 
the  United  States  in  1810,  and  the  situation 
in  Ethiopia  and  Pakistan  is  not  much  better 
(ﬁ gure 6). And in many countries, gender dis-
parities  remain  large  only  for  those  who  are 
poor.  In  both  India  and  Pakistan,  while  boys 
and girls from the top income quantile (ﬁ fth) 
participate in school at similar rates, there is a 

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations based on International Labor Organization 2010 (130 countries).

expanded  employment  opportunities  by  in-
creasing  their  educational  investments  in  their 
daughters. These better educated girls are more 
likely  to  work  when  they  become  older,  have 
fewer children, and exercise more voice in their 
households—feeding  the  cycle  of  change.  So, 
the progress in fertility, the gains in education, 
the  gains  in  women’s  agency,  and  the  shifts  of 
women to market work are not only related but 
also  mutually  reinforcing.  Public  policies  have 
themselves played a role, because the big push 
for  universal  education  of  the  past  decade  has 
helped get all children to school.

The  main  lesson:  when  market  signals,  for-
mal  institutions,  and  income  growth  all  come 
together to support investments in women, gen-
der equality can and does improve very quickly. 
And these improvements can occur even when 
informal  institutions,  such  as  social  norms 
about  what  is “appropriate”  for  girls  and  boys 
or women and men, may themselves take time 
to  adapt.  This  is  not  to  say  that  social  norms 
have not been important in determining these 
outcomes. The differences across countries and 
among  regions  within  countries  both  in  clos-
ing gender gaps in educational attainment and 
levels of women’s labor force participation high-
light their inﬂ uence. But the fast pace of change 
in education and even in labor force participa-
tion almost everywhere shows how these norms 
adapt  quite  quickly  as  the  economic  returns 

 

Overview 

13

gender gap of almost ﬁ ve years in the bottom 
income quantile (ﬁ gure 7).

Beyond  the  poor,  gender  gaps  remain  par-
ticularly  large  for  groups  for  whom  ethnicity, 
geographical distance, and other factors (such 
as  disability  or  sexual  orientation)  compound 
gender inequality. Almost two-thirds of out-of-
school girls globally belong to ethnic minority 
groups in their own countries.29 The illiteracy 
rate  among  indigenous  women  in  Guatemala 
stands  at  60  percent,  20  points  above  indige-
nous men and twice the rate of nonindigenous 
women.30

For  these  severely  disadvantaged  groups—
which  can  be  pockets  of  disadvantage  or  en-
tire  swaths  of  countries  or  regions—none  of 
the forces that favor educating girls and young 
women are working. So, the growth in aggregate 
income may not be broad-based enough to ben-
eﬁ t poor households. Market signals are muted 
because economic opportunities for women do 
not  expand  much  or  because  other  barriers—
such  as  exclusion  caused  by  ethnicity,  race,  or 
caste—get in the way of accessing those oppor-
tunities.  And  service  delivery  is  often  riddled 
with  problems  because  poverty,  distance,  and 
discrimination  mean  that  these  groups  do  not 
see an expansion of schools and teachers. This 
does  not  mean  that  the  channels  that  have  fa-
vored  girls’  education  elsewhere  will  not  work 
for  these  groups.  It  means  that  efforts  need  to 
be redoubled to ensure that the essential build-
ing  blocks  for  progress  (broad-based  income 
growth,  expanding  employment  opportunities 
for  women,  and  effective  service  delivery)  are 
in place. And these efforts may need to be com-
bined  with  complementary  interventions  that 
address  speciﬁ c  disadvantages  that  compound 
gender inequality (chapter 7).

WHERE HAVE GENDER INEQUALITIES 
PERSISTED AND WHY?

By contrast to areas that have seen good prog-
ress,  change  has  come  slowly  or  not  at  all  for 
many  women  and  girls  in  many  other  dimen-
sions  of  gender  equality.  Health  disadvantages 
that show up in the excess relative mortality of 
girls  and  women  fall  into  this  category.  So  do 
other  persistent  gender  disparities,  including 
segregation in economic activity, gender gaps in 
earnings, male-female differences in responsibil-

FIGURE 6     Low-income countries lag behind in realizing 

progress in female school enrollment

)

%

(
 
,

9
1
–
5
 
s
e
g
a

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s
 
e
a
m
e
f

l

.

 

p
e
R
b
a
r
A

 
,
t
p
y
g
E

h
s
e
d
a
g
n
a
B

l

i

e
u
q
b
m
a
z
o
M

n
a
t
s
i

k
i
j
a
r T
e
g
N

i

a
i
r
e
g
N

i

e
r
i
o
v

I
’

 

d
e
t
ô
C

i

a
p
o
h
t
E

i

i
l

a
M

 

n
a
t
s
i
k
a
P

United States
in 1900

 

o
s
a
F
a
n
k
r
u
B

i

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1770

1780

1790

1800

1820

1830

1840

1850

1860

1870

1880

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2005

1900
1890
year

United States
trend line (United States, 1850–2000)

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on U.S. Census and the International Income Distribution 
Database (I2D2).

Note:  Values between 1760 and 1840 are based on female school enrollment trending between 1850 
and 2000.

ity for house and care work, gaps in asset owner-
ship, and constraints to women’s agency in both 
the private and public spheres. Progress in these 
domains is difﬁ cult to see, despite greater pros-
perity in many parts of the world. Indeed, many 
of  these  gender  disparities  remain  salient  even 
among the richest countries.

Gender  disparities  persist  in  these “sticky” 
domains  for  three  main  reasons.  First,  there 
may  only  be  a  single  institutional  or  policy 
“ﬁ x,” which can be difﬁ cult and easily blocked. 
We  illustrate  this  problem  with  excess  female 
mortality. Second, disparities persist when mul-
tiple reinforcing constraints combine to block 
progress.  We  use  disparities  in  the  economic 
sphere (the persistence of gender earnings gaps 
and gender segregation in employment) and in 
agency (differences in societal voice and house-
hold decision making) to illustrate this prob-
lem. Third, gender differences are particularly 
persistent  when  rooted  in  deeply  entrenched 
gender roles and social norms—such as those 

14 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 7  Female disadvantage within countries is more marked at low incomes

Benin

Congo, Dem. Rep.

The Gambia

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

5

0

10

5

0

1

3

2
income quintile

4

5

India

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

5

0

10

5

0

1

2

3

4
income quintile

5

Pakistan

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

5

0

10

5

0

1

2

3

4
income quintile

5

Togo

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

income quintile

income quintile

girls

boys

income quintile

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on EdAttain.

about  who  is  responsible  for  care  and  house-
work in the home, and what is “acceptable” for 
women  and  men  to  study,  do,  and  aspire  to. 
And  these  gaps  tend  to  be  reproduced  across 
generations. Consider each in turn.

Higher mortality of girls and women
The rate at which girls and women die relative to 
men is higher in low- and middle-income coun-
tries than in high-income countries. To quantify 
this excess female mortality (“missing” girls and 
women) and identify the ages at which it occurs, 
this Report estimated the number of excess fe-
male deaths at every age and for every country 
in 1990, 2000, and 2008.31 Excess female deaths 
in a given year represent women who would not 
have died in the previous year if they had lived 
in a high-income country, after accounting for 
the  overall  health  environment  of  the  country 
they  live  in.  Globally,  excess  female  mortality 
after birth and “missing” girls at birth account 
every year for an estimated 3.9 million women 

below  the  age  of  60. About  two-ﬁ fths  of  them 
are never born, one-ﬁ fth goes missing in infancy 
and childhood, and the remaining two-ﬁ fths do 
so between the ages of 15 and 59 (table 1).

Growth  does  not  make  the  problem  disap-
pear.  Between  1990  and  2008,  the  number  of 
missing girls at birth and excess female mortal-
ity after birth did not change much; declines in 
infancy and childhood were offset by dramatic 
increases  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  in  the  repro-
ductive  ages.  Part  of  the  increase  is  because 
populations  increased.  But,  unlike Asia,  where 
the  population-adjusted  missing  women  fell 
in  every  country  (dramatically  in  Bangladesh, 
Indonesia,  and  Vietnam),  most  Sub-Saharan 
countries  saw  little  change  in  the  new  millen-
nium. And  in  the  countries  hardest  hit  by  the 
HIV/AIDS epidemic, things got much worse.

The  Report’s  analysis  helps  explain  these 
patterns.  Depending  on  the  period  in  the  life 
cycle,  girls  and  women  are  missing  for  dif-
ferent  reasons.  Missing  girls  at  birth  reﬂ ect 

 

Overview 

15

TABLE 1  Almost 4 million missing women each year
 
 

Excess female deaths in the world, by age and region, 1990 and 2008
(thousands)

China

India

Sub-Saharan Africa

High HIV-prevalence countries

Low HIV-prevalence countries

South Asia (excluding India)

East Asia and Pacific (excluding China)

Middle East and North Africa

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

girls at birth

girls under 5

girls 5–14

women 15–49

women 50–59

   1990 2008
1,092 

  890 

1990
259 

2008
71 

1990
21 

2008
5 

 1990
208 

2008
56 

 1990
92 

 2008
30 

  265 

  42 

 

0 

  42 

 

 

 

 

 

0 

3 

5 

7 

0 

257 

53 

0 

53 

1 

4 

6 

14 

0 

428 

183 

6 

177 

99 

14 

13 

3 

11 

251 

203 

39 

163 

72 

7 

7 

1 

5 

94 

61 

5 

57 

32 

14 

4 

0 

3 

45 

77 

18 

59 

20 

9 

1 

0 

1 

388 

302 

38 

264 

176 

137 

43 

12 

20 

228 

751 

328 

423 

161 

113 

24 

4 

10 

81 

50 

4 

46 

37 

48 

15 

4 

17 

75 

99 

31 

68 

51 

46 

15 

3 

17 

Total
women
under 60

 1990
1,470 

1,255 

639 

53 

586 

346 

216 

80 

27 

51 

2008
1,254

856

1,182

416

766

305

179

52

23

33

Total

 1,212 

1,427 

1,010 

617 

230 

158 

1,286 

1,347 

343 

334 

4,082 

3,882

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from the World Health Organization 2010 and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs 2009.

Note: Totals do not necessarily add up due to rounding.

overt  discrimination  in  the  household,  result-
ing from the combination of strong preferences 
for sons combined with declining fertility and 
the spread of technologies that allow parents to 
know the sex before birth.32 This is a particular 
issue in China and North India (although now 
spreading to other parts of India), but it is also 
visible in parts of the Caucasus and the Western 
Balkans.

Missing girls during infancy and early child-
hood  cannot  be  explained  by  a  preference  for 
sons alone, although discrimination against girls 
may contribute to it. It is a result not so much of 
discrimination as of poor institutions that force 
households to choose among many bad options, 
particularly  regarding  water  and  sanitation. 
Markets and households cannot compensate for 
these poor services.

Missing  women  in  the  reproductive  ages  re-
ﬂ ect  two  main  factors.  First,  stubbornly  high 
rates of maternal mortality persist, especially in 
much of Sub-Saharan Africa and some parts of 

South Asia. High maternal mortality is the main 
contributor to excess female mortality in the re-
productive years. In Afghanistan, Chad, Guinea-
Bissau,  Liberia,  Mali,  Niger,  Sierra  Leone,  and 
Somalia, at least 1 of every 25 women will die 
from complications of childbirth or pregnancy. 
And a much larger fraction will suffer long-term 
health consequences from giving birth.33

Progress in reducing maternal mortality has 
not  been  commensurate  with  income  growth. 
In India, despite stellar economic growth in re-
cent years, maternal mortality is almost six times 
the  rate  in  Sri  Lanka.  In  the  past  two  decades, 
only  90  countries  experienced  a  decline  of  40 
percent  or  more  in  the  maternal  mortality  ra-
tio, while 23 countries showed an increase. The 
main problem is, again, that households are be-
ing asked to make many decisions in the face of 
bad options—a result of multiple service deliv-
ery failures. In many parts of the world, this sit-
uation is reinforced by social norms that inﬂ u-
ence  household  behavior  and  make  it  difﬁ cult 

16 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

for women to get maternal health care quickly 
enough even where it is available. And high fer-
tility, partly reﬂ ecting low incomes, compounds 
the problem in parts of Sub-Saharan Africa.

Second, the impacts of the HIV/AIDS pan-
demic on the mortality of women in many East-
ern and Southern African countries have been 
dramatic. The reason for the greater prevalence 
of HIV/AIDS among women relative to men is 
their greater susceptibility and the greater like-
lihood that their sexual partners are older and 
thus more likely than younger men to have HIV. 
In addition, countries that have had a low-lying 
civil  conﬂ ict  (such  as  Democratic  Republic  of 
Congo) have also seen an increase in the num-
ber of “missing” women. This is in contrast to 
other  countries  that  have  had  outright  wars—
like Eritrea, where men who went “missing” in 
the years of war increased. 

An examination of the historical experience 
of  northern  and  western  European  countries 
and  the  United  States  reveals  that  similar  pat-
terns of excess female mortality in infancy and 
the reproductive years existed there but disap-
peared between 1900 and 1950. These reductions 
occurred  primarily  because  of  improvements 

FIGURE 8     Women and men work in different sectors

distribution of female / male employment across sectors

31%

21%

13%

4%

0.5

%

0.5

%

2%

27%

1%

100%

Communication Services

Retail, Hotels, and Restaurants

Manufacturing

Finance and Business

Electricity, Gas and Steam, and Water

Mining

Transport and Telecommunications

Agriculture, Hunting, etc.

Construction

All Sectors / All Occupations

16%

17%

12%

4%

1%

2%

7%

29%

11%

100%

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on International Labour Organization 2010 (77 countries).
Note: Totals do not necessarily add due to rounding.

in  the  quality  of  institutions—in  the  provi-
sion  of  clean  water,  sanitation,  and  maternal 
health care. Because there is only a single point 
of  entry—through  better  institutions—for  ad-
dressing female mortality, solving the problem is 
hard—much harder than getting girls to school. 
But for any basic notions of human justice, the 
global development community must make ad-
dressing this problem a priority. 

Gender segregation in economic activity 
and earnings gaps
Although  women  have  entered  the  labor  force 
in large numbers across much of the developing 
world in the past quarter century, this increased 
participation has not translated into equal em-
ployment  opportunities  or  equal  earnings  for 
men  and  women.  Women  and  men  tend  to 
work  in  very  different  parts  of  the “economic 
space,”  with  little  change  over  time,  even  in 
high-income countries. In almost all countries, 
women are more likely than men to engage in 
low-productivity activities. They are also more 
likely  to  be  in  wage  or  unpaid  family  employ-
ment  or  work  in  the  informal  wage  sector.  In 
agriculture, especially in Africa, women operate 
smaller plots of land and farm less remunerative 
crops.  As  entrepreneurs,  they  tend  to  manage 
smaller ﬁ rms and concentrate in less-proﬁ table 
sectors. And in formal employment, they con-
centrate  in  “female”  occupations  and  sectors 
(ﬁ gure 8). These patterns of gender segregation 
in economic activity change with economic de-
velopment but do not disappear.

As  a  result  of  these  differences  in  where 
women  and  men  work,  gender  gaps  in  earn-
ings and productivity persist across all forms of 
economic activity—in agriculture, in wage em-
ployment, and in entrepreneurship (map 1). In 
almost all countries, women in manufacturing 
earn less than men. In agriculture, farms oper-
ated  by  women  on  average  have  lower  yields 
than those operated by men, even for men and 
women  in  the  same  households  and  for  men 
and  women  cultivating  the  same  crops.34  Fe-
male entrepreneurs are also less productive than 
male entrepreneurs.35 In urban areas in Eastern 
Europe  and  Central  Asia,  Latin  America,  and 
Sub-Saharan Africa, the value added per worker 
is  lower  in  ﬁ rms  managed  by  women  than  in 
those managed by men.36 For ﬁ rms operating in 
rural  Bangladesh,  Ethiopia,  Indonesia,  and  Sri 

 

Overview 

17

MAP 1  Earnings gaps between women and men (female earnings relative to $1 of male earnings)

Mexico 80¢

Germany 62¢

Iceland 69¢

Georgia 60¢

A.R. of Egypt 82¢

Benin 80¢

Nigeria 60¢

Malawi 90¢

India 64¢

Bangladesh 12¢

Ethiopia 34¢

Sri Lanka 50¢

Salaried Workers

Farmers

Entrepreneurs

Sources: Data for Benin come from Kinkingninhoun-Mêdagbé and others 2010; for Malawi from Gilbert, Sakala, and Benson 2002; for Nigeria from Oladeebo and Fajuyigbe 2007; for 
Bangladesh, Ethiopia, and Sri Lanka from Costa and Rijkers 2011; and for Egypt, Georgia, Germany, Iceland, India, and Mexico from LABORSTA, International Labour Organization.

Lanka, the differences in proﬁ tability are signiﬁ -
cant  between  female-owned  and  male-owned 
businesses.37 

So, what explains this persistent gender seg-
regation in economic activity and the resulting 
gaps in earnings? The Report argues that gender 
differences  in  time  use,  in  access  to  assets  and 
credit, and in treatment by markets and formal 
institutions  (including  the  legal  and  regula-
tory framework) all play a role in constraining 
women’s  opportunities.  These  constraints  are 
shown in ﬁ gure 9 as wedges blocking progress 
toward greater gender equality. Income growth 
has some inﬂ uence in shifting these patterns but 
does not eliminate them. The mutually reinforc-
ing interactions between these different factors 
make the problem particularly difﬁ cult to break. 
Consider each in turn.

The differing amounts of time that men and 
women allocate to care and related household 
work  are  one  factor  driving  segregation  and 
the  consequent  earnings  gaps.  In  most  coun-
tries,  irrespective  of  income,  women  bear  a 

disproportionate responsibility for housework 
and care, while men are responsible mostly for 
market work (ﬁ gure 10). When all activities are 
added  up,  women  typically  work  more  hours 
than men, with consequences for their leisure 
and  well-being.  And  everywhere  they  devote 
more  time  each  day  to  care  and  housework 
than  their  male  partners:  differences  range 
from one to three hours more for housework, 
two to ten times the time for care (of children, 
elderly,  and  the  sick),  and  one  to  four  hours 
less for market activities. Even as women take 
up a bigger share of market work, they remain 
largely  responsible  for  care  and  housework. 
And  these  patterns  are  only  accentuated  after 
marriage and childbearing. 

A  second  factor  driving  segregation  in  em-
ployment  and  earnings  gaps  is  differences  in 
human  and  physical  endowments  (including 
access to assets and credit). Despite increases in 
women’s education, there are still differences in 
human capital between women and men. These 
include a gap in years of schooling among older 

18 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 9  Explaining persistent segregation and earnings gaps

n

R

S
T
E
K
s
e
c
c
ti a l  a
d it /l a
e
r
r / c
t s ,  a
o
e
r
m a
r
o
t w
n

k

e

o

s t
n

d

d

s

n

k

I N S T I T U T I O N S
  n o r m s   o n
  w o r k

I N F O R M A L  
S o c i a l
c a r e / m a r k e t

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS
Biased laws/regulations,
and limited
infrastructure

 

HOUSEHOLDS

Differential
allocation of
time/resources

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

M A
e
r
b

e
D i ff
l a

G

R

O

W

T

H

Source: WDR 2012 team.

cohorts  as  well  as  differences  in  what  women 
and men choose to study in younger cohorts—
differences that affect employment segregation, 
especially in countries where most young people 
go to college. In agriculture and entrepreneur-
ship, large and signiﬁ cant gender disparities in 
access to inputs (including land and credit) and 
in asset ownership are at the root of the gender 
productivity  gap.  Indeed,  yield  differences  for 
female  and  male  farmers  disappear  altogether 
when access to productive inputs is taken into 
account (ﬁ gure 11). Differences in access to in-
puts may be further compounded by differences 
in  the  availability  of  “market  time,”  as  noted 
above,  which  can  make  the  same  investment 
less productive for women than for men. Jointly, 
these  constraints  mean  that  women  entrepre-
neurs and farmers are often restricted to busi-
nesses and activities that are less proﬁ table and 
less likely to expand.

How big are gender differences in access to 
assets  (especially  land),  credit,  and  other  in-
puts? A variety of data sources suggests they are 

large. Data for 16 countries in ﬁ ve developing 
regions indicate female-headed households are 
less likely to own and less likely to farm land.38 
More  generally,  where  evidence  is  available 
for  all  farmers,  women  seldom  own  the  land 
they farm. For example, in Brazil, women own 
as little as 11 percent of land. And their land-
holdings are systematically smaller than those 
owned by men. In Kenya, women account for 5 
percent  of  registered  landholders  nationally.39 
And in Ghana, the mean value of men’s land-
holdings is three times that of women’s land-
holdings.40 Similarly large gaps are observed in 
use of fertilizers and improved seed varieties in 
agriculture, and in access to and use of credit 
among entrepreneurs. 

Third, market failures and institutional con-
straints also play a role. Labor markets often do 
not work well for women, especially if their pres-
ence is limited in some sectors or occupations. 
When few women are employed, employers may 
hold discriminatory beliefs about women’s pro-
ductivity or suitability as workers—these beliefs 

 

Overview 

19

FIGURE 10   Across the world, women spend more hours per day on care and 

housework than men

FOR SALE

Market activities

Housework

Child care

Pakistan

Cambodia

South Africa

Bulgaria

Sweden

Italy

0.6

4.7

5.5

2.5

1.2

0.2

2.7

3.8

4.4

3.3

0.9

0.1

2.1

3.8

4.2

1.8

0.5

0.0

2.9

3.9

4.7

2.6

0.4

0.1

3.2

4.6

3.2

2.3

0.6

0.3

2.1

4.8

4.9

1.4

0.6

0.2

women
men

= 12 hours

Source: Berniell and Sanchez-Páramo 2011.

can persist if there are no mechanisms in place 
to  correct  them.  Access  to  information  about 
jobs, and support for promotions and advance-
ment, often occur in gendered networks, hurt-
ing  women  trying  to  enter  a  male-dominated 
ﬁ eld (or equally hurting men trying to enter a 
female-dominated  one,  such  as  nursing).  And 
sometimes,  legal  barriers,  framed  as  protective 

measures, prevent women from entering some 
sectors or occupations. 

In  sum,  whether  women  are  farmers,  en-
trepreneurs,  or  workers,  many  are  caught  in  a 
productivity trap: working hard on an uneven 
playing ﬁ eld with unequal access to productive 
inputs.  This  trap  imposes  signiﬁ cant  costs  on 
women’s  welfare  and  economic  opportunities 

20 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 11     Gender differences in agricultural productivity 
 disappear when access to and use of productive 
inputs are taken into account

In Malawi, women’s agricultural 

productivity is 13.5% lower than men’s 

Malawi  (National) 

–13.5% 

Nigeria (Osun State) 

–40% 

Benin (Central) 

Ghana (National)

Ethiopia (Central Highlands) 

Kenya (Subnational) 

Kenya (Western), 2008

Kenya (Western), 1976

0.6% 

0% 

0% 

0% 

 

 

a
n
d
m
e
n
h
a
v
e
e
q
u
a

 

l
 

 

 

i

t
h
i
s
d
ff
e
r
e
n
c
e
d
i
s
a
p
p
e
a
r
s
w
h
e
n
w
o
m
e
n

 

 

a
c
c
e
s
s
 
t
o

 
i

n
p
u
t
s

–21% 

–17% 

–26% 
–25% 

–7.7% 

12.5% 

–19% 

0% 

–4% 

6.6% 

–60  –50 

–40  –30 

–20 

–10 

0 

10 

20 

percent

average gender gap
gender gap with equal access to inputs

Source: Alene and others 2008; Gilbert, Sakala, and Benson 2002; Kinkingninhoun-Mêdagbé and others 
2010; Moock 1976; Oladeebo and Fajuyigbe 2007; Saito, Mekonnen, and Spurling 1994; Vargas Hill and 
Vigneri 2009.

today—and serious disincentives to invest in the 
women of tomorrow. 

Less voice in societal and household 
decision making
In  much  of  the  world,  women  have  less  input 
than  men  in  decision  making  in  their  house-
holds, in their communities, and in their soci-
eties. Consider women’s underrepresentation in 
formal  politics,  especially  in  its  upper  reaches. 
Fewer than one-ﬁ fth of all cabinet positions is 
held by women. And women’s lack of represen-
tation extends to the judiciary and labor unions. 
These patterns do not change much as countries 
get richer. The share of women parliamentari-
ans increased only from 10 percent to 17 percent 
between 1995 and 2009. 

Whether and how much voice a woman has 
in household decision making over patterns of 
spending,  including  spending  on  children,  are 
important markers of her agency. As many as a 
third of married women in Malawi and a ﬁ fth 

of married women in India are not involved in 
spending  decisions,  even  about  their  own  in-
comes. Even in an upper-middle-income coun-
try like Turkey, more than a quarter of married 
women in the lowest income quantile lack con-
trol over their earned income.41 Women’s ability 
to own, control, and dispose of property still dif-
fers from that of men—sometimes legally, often 
in  practice.  And  again,  these  patterns  change 
only slowly as countries grow richer.

A  clear  manifestation  of  the  lack  of  agency 
is  domestic  violence.  Violence  is  the  opposite 
of freedom—an extreme form of coercion that 
by deﬁ nition negates agency. Women are at far 
greater risk of violence by an intimate partner or 
someone they know than from violence by other 
people. And women are more likely than men to 
be killed, seriously injured, or victims of sexual 
violence by intimate partners.42 The prevalence 
of domestic violence varies greatly across coun-
tries,  with  no  clear  relationship  to  incomes; 
while incidence tends to rise with socioeconomic 
deprivation, violence knows no boundaries. In 
some  middle-income  nations,  such  as  Brazil 
(Sao Paolo and Pernambuco region) and Serbia 
(Belgrade),  women  report  that  the  incidence 
of  physical  violence  by  intimate  partners  is  as 
high as 25 percent.43 In Peru (Cusco), almost 50 
percent of women are victims of severe physical 
violence  during  their  lifetime,  and  in  Ethiopia 
(Butajira), 54 percent of women reported being 
subject  to  physical  or  sexual  abuse  by  an  inti-
mate partner in the past 12 months. 44

Multiple  factors  are  at  work  behind  these 
large  gaps  in  women’s  voice.  In  society,  low 
representation  can  be  self-perpetuating,  with 
women  unable  to  convey  their  ability  to  lead. 
So,  in  politics,  voters  will  not  be  able  to  judge 
accurately the capacity of a woman leader. And 
women’s entry may be limited by societal beliefs 
that  being  engaged  in  politics  is  a  masculine 
activity or that women are less effective leaders 
than men—beliefs that are hard to break until 
a critical mass of women rises to political lead-
ership.  Different  responsibilities  for  care  work 
also mean that women lack the ﬂ exibility or the 
time to invest as heavily as men in participating 
in political institutions. The lack of networks for 
women also makes it more difﬁ cult for them to 
ascend to positions of authority in political par-
ties or labor unions. 

In  the  household,  two  important  determi-
nants  of  a  woman’s  voice  are  her  income  and 

 

Overview 

21

her  control  over  household  assets.  Economic 
growth can improve the material conditions for 
exercising agency, with women generally having 
more voice in wealthier households. But higher 
household  incomes  alone  are  not  enough  to 
eliminate  the  lower  capacity  of  women  to  ex-
ercise agency. What matters are a woman’s own 
income and assets as well as her ability to leave 
the household, all of which increase her bargain-
ing  power  and  ability  to  inﬂ uence  household 
choices. In India, owning property substantially 
enhances  women’s  voice  in  the  household  on 
various matters and reduces her risk of domes-
tic  violence.45  Similarly,  as  women’s  shares  in 
household  earnings  increase  in  Colombia  and 
South  Africa,  so  does  their  control  over  key 
household decisions. There is also evidence of a 
relationship between women’s assets, earnings, 
and shares of household income, and the inci-
dence of domestic violence.46 

But if women’s earnings are limited by mal-
functioning markets or other gender-differenti-
ated barriers to economic opportunities and as-
set ownership, women’s voice in the household 
will  remain  muted.  Reinforcing  these  market 
and legal inﬂ uences are social norms dictating 
that men, not women, make the major decisions 
in households.

Reproducing gender inequality across 
generations
Perhaps  the  “stickiest”  aspect  of  gender  out-
comes  is  the  way  patterns  of  gender  inequal-
ity  are  reproduced  over  time.  Part  of  this 
persistence  is  rooted  in  slow-moving  social 
norms  and  how  they  affect  what  happens  in 
the  household.  Women  and  men  internalize 
social norms and expectations in ways that af-
fect not only their own aspirations, behaviors, 
and  preferences  but  also  those  of  their  chil-
dren. The Young Lives study looked at educa-
tional  aspirations  and  noncognitive  skills  of 
boys and girls at ages 8, 12, and 15 for 12,000 
children in Ethiopia, Andhra Pradesh in India, 
Peru,  and  Vietnam.47  Parental  aspirations  for 
the education of their children were biased to-
ward boys in Ethiopia and India by the age of 
12  and  toward  girls  in  Peru  and Vietnam.  By 
the age of 15, these biases had been transmit-
ted to children, with clearly higher educational 
aspirations among boys in Ethiopia and India, 
and  among  girls  in  Vietnam.  And  by  age  15, 
measures of agency or efﬁ cacy showed a strong 

pro-male bias in India and Ethiopia but not in 
Peru and Vietnam. 

A growing body of research also suggests that 
attitudes  about  women  in  the  family  and  the 
workplace  are  transmitted  across  generations. 
When  women  do  not  work  outside  the  home, 
their  daughters  are  also  less  likely  to  do  so  as 
adults,  and  their  sons  are  less  likely  to  marry 
women  who  work  outside  the  home.48  Young 
men  and  young  women  also  tend  to  study  in 
very  different  ﬁ elds—with  women  favoring 
education  and  the  humanities,  while  men  fa-
vor  engineering,  agriculture,  and  sciences—in 
ways  that  are  unrelated  to  abilities  (chapter  3) 
yet  repeat  themselves  over  generations  and  do 
not go away as incomes rise. Evidence also sug-
gests that domestic violence witnessed as a child 
is repeated in adulthood.49 Women in Haiti who 
had  witnessed  domestic  violence  were  more 
likely to report being the victims of physical or 
sexual violence.50 The pattern is similar in Cam-
bodia and Mexico. 51 And men in South Africa 
who reported witnessing violence between their 
parents were signiﬁ cantly more likely to report 
perpetrating physical violence themselves.52

Norms may be learned in the household, but 
they are often reinforced by market signals and 
institutions,  which  are  gender  biased  in  many 
aspects.  For  example,  gender  differences  in  the 
responsibility  for  house  and  care  work,  as  just 
discussed, are rooted in gender roles but strength-
ened by discrimination in labor markets and by 
a lack of child-care services. At the root of gen-
dered patterns of what men and women study is 
a combination of factors that feed into household 
decisions (norms about what is appropriate for 
girls and boys), institutions (gendered education 
systems),  and  markets  (gendered  networks  and 
occupational segregation). For domestic violence, 
empirical  work  ﬁ nds  signiﬁ cant  explanatory 
power at the individual, household, and commu-
nity  levels,  reinforced  by  social  perceptions  and 
institutional failures (including a lack of protec-
tive laws and services or their poor enforcement 
and delivery).53 

What can we learn from the persistence 
of all these gender gaps?
Markets and institutions (formal and informal) 
can  work  against  greater  gender  equality—
in  ways  that  are  often  mutually  reinforcing. 
Sometimes  service  delivery  institutions  fail,  as 
for  young  girls  and  women  during  childbirth. 

22 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Other  times  markets  do  not  work  well,  with 
results that are worse for women, as illustrated 
by evidence of discrimination in both labor and 
credit  markets.  Often  reinforcing  these  mar-
ket  failures,  however,  are  formal  institutions 
that  treat  women  and  men  differently.  Laws 
and regulations can constrain women’s agency 
and opportunities more than those of men, as 
when  women  and  men  have  different  owner-
ship  rights,  or  when  restrictions  are  placed  on 
hours and sectors of work for women but not 
for men. Where credit and labor markets already 
discriminate, such unequal laws and regulations 
can accentuate the problem. Unequal treatment 
may also manifest itself more indirectly through 
biased service delivery, as is the case for agricul-
ture extension services. Here, institutional bias 
and market structure (with women underrepre-
sented in nonfood crops that are often the target 
of extension services) reinforce and even deepen 
inequalities. 

All  institutions  (formal  and  informal)  have 
considerable inertia. They tend to reﬂ ect the in-
terests of those who wield more power and in-
ﬂ uence, and they are difﬁ cult to change without 
some form of collective agency or voice.54 Social 
norms can be especially slow to change: norms 
that may have served a purpose at one point in 
time, but are no longer useful, may endure sim-
ply because of custom or because a social pen-
alty is associated with being the ﬁ rst to break the 
norm, or because the norm beneﬁ ts a dominant 
group in society (in this case, men). The norm’s 
persistence  can  perpetuate  gender  inequalities 
long after its original rationale has disappeared. 
In  sum,  gender-differentiated  market  fail-
ures,  institutional  constraints,  and  persistent 
social norms often combine to reinforce gender 
inequalities and make improving gender equal-
ity much more complex. When there are multi-
ple constraints, they all need to be addressed. 

WHAT IS TO BE DONE? 

Nothing  is  automatic  about  the  growth  and 
development  process  that  delivers  greater  gen-
der equality on all fronts. Part of the reason is 
that higher incomes and better delivery of ser-
vices by the state help reduce gender gaps only 
in some domains. And even in these domains, 
the improvements do not reach all women. In 

other domains of gender equality, such as occu-
pational  segregation  and  many  manifestations 
of  women’s  agency,  income  growth  and  better 
service delivery are far less effective in unlocking 
the  often  multiple  and  reinforcing  constraints 
that underlie persistent gender gaps. 

The new forces of globalization can reduce 
many  of  these  gaps.  First,  trade  openness  and 
the  diffusion  of  new  information  and  com-
munication  technologies  have  translated  into 
more jobs and stronger connections to markets 
for women, increasing their access to economic 
opportunities  and  contributing  to  their  eco-
nomic  empowerment.  Second,  urbanization 
and greater access to information have allowed 
many in developing countries to learn about life 
and mores in other parts of the world, including 
the role of women, possibly affecting attitudes 
and behaviors. Third, the incentives for public 
action for gender equality are stronger than ever 
because the rising global consensus on the in-
trinsic importance of women’s economic, social, 
and  political  empowerment  means  that  gen-
der  inequality  hurts  a  country’s  international 
standing.  But  this  potential  of  globalization 
will not be realized without effective domestic 
public action to close remaining gender gaps in 
endowments,  agency,  and  access  to  economic 
opportunities.

So, what should governments in developing 
countries  do  to  foster  greater  gender  equality? 
What  areas  of  gender  inequality  should  they 
focus on? Should they start with interventions 
in  education  and  health,  or  should  they  focus 
on access to economic opportunities or agency? 
What combination of policies should they im-
plement, and in what sequence? At ﬁ rst blush, 
these  questions  can  appear  overwhelming  be-
cause  of  the  multiplicity  of  priority  areas  and 
the  number  of  available  policy  instruments. 
This Report shows how better analysis can help 
reduce the complexity of policy choice and de-
sign in several ways. 

The starting point is to determine which as-
pects of gender inequality should be of highest 
priority for policy going forward. Three criteria 
matter in this regard: 
•  First, which gender gaps are most signiﬁ cant 
for enhancing welfare and sustaining devel-
opment? So, where are the likely payoffs for 
development  from  addressing  gender  dis-
parities likely to be the largest? 

 

Overview 

23

•  Second, which of these gaps persist even as 
countries  get  richer?  So,  where  do  higher 
 incomes  by  themselves  do  little  to  reduce 
 disparities? 

•  Third,  for  which  of  these  priority  areas  has 
there  been  insufﬁ cient  or  misplaced  atten-
tion? So, where would a reorientation of pol-
icies yield the greatest beneﬁ ts?

Applying these criteria, we conclude that four 
areas should be of the highest priority for policy 
makers: 
•  Reducing  gender  gaps  in  human  capital  en-
dowments (addressing excess female mortal-
ity and eliminating pockets of gender disad-
vantage in education where they persist)

•  Closing  earnings  and  productivity  gaps  be-

tween women and men

•  Shrinking gender differences in voice 
•  Limiting the reproduction of gender inequality 
over time, whether it is through endowments, 
economic opportunities, or agency 

Obviously, not all these priorities apply to all 
countries.  And  speciﬁ c  country  characteristics 
will dictate how corrective policies will need to 
be customized. 

Our analysis also emphasizes that, in choos-
ing and designing policies, it is necessary to tar-
get the determinants of the gender gaps of con-
cern, not the outcomes. The framework in Part 
2 of the Report helps highlight these underlying 
causes,  and  shows  how  they  emerge  from  the 
workings of markets and institutions and their 
interactions  with  each  other  and  with  house-
holds. In other words, the framework identiﬁ es 
what problem needs to be solved and whether 
interventions should target markets, formal in-
stitutions, informal institutions, or some com-
bination of the three. 

Having  identiﬁ ed  the  underlying  causes  of 
the gender gap of concern, the Report draws on 
the experience with policy interventions across 
a  broad  range  of  countries  to  provide  guid-
ance on speciﬁ c interventions that could work 
in different settings. It also looks at the political 
economy of reforms and emphasizes that policy 
design  and  implementation  must  be  attuned 
to  countries’  institutional,  social,  political,  and 
cultural environments and to the societal actors 
involved.

Policies to reduce gender gaps in 
human capital endowments 
(health and education)
Addressing  gender  gaps  in  human  capital  en-
dowments—excess  female  mortality  at  speciﬁ c 
periods  of  the  life  cycle  and  pockets  of  gender 
disadvantage  in  education—requires  ﬁ xing  the 
institutions that deliver public services. Providing 
basic  services  in  a  timely  manner  to  expectant 
mothers and improving the availability of clean 
water and sanitation to households will go a long 
way to closing the gender gaps in excess mortal-
ity. Education services need to focus on improv-
ing access for the signiﬁ cant population groups 
that are currently disadvantaged by poverty, eth-
nicity, caste, race, or geography. Such a focus will 
help  address  the “gender  inequality  traps”  that 
affect the poor and excluded in society. 

These  solutions  can  come  from  either  the 
demand or the supply side, but they cannot be 
gender blind. On the contrary, they must factor 
in  explicitly,  both  for  design  and  implementa-
tion, the drivers of gender inequality that cause 
the  gender  gaps  in  health  and  education  out-
comes to persist. And they must bring into the 
process  of  policy  design  and  implementation 
the  voices  of  those  that  the  policy  is  trying  to 
reach—excluded women and girls, and the men 
and boys who live with them. 

Reducing excess female mortality
The  main  determinants  of  excess  female  mor-
tality in different periods of the life cycle have 
little  to  do  with  how  quickly  countries  grow. 
They  result  from  household  preferences  and 
from failures in the ways that markets and in-
stitutions function. The entry points for policy 
are dictated by which of these inﬂ uences is most 
binding in each period.

Skewed sex ratios at birth is a problem in a 
few parts of the world, including China, parts of 
India, and parts of the Caucasus and the Western 
Balkans. The underlying cause is son preference 
among households, which has been exacerbated 
in some of these places by rapid income growth. 
Higher incomes have increased access to ultra-
sound technologies that assist in sex selection at 
birth. So, policies need to work on two fronts. 

First, laws need to be enacted and enforced to 
deal with the abuse of sex selection technologies, as 
has been done in China and India. But experi-
ence shows that enforcement is difﬁ cult, if not 

24 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

impossible,  to  achieve  without  imposing  dra-
conian restrictions that are not feasible in most 
societies  and  that  raise  other  ethical  concerns. 
And the difﬁ culty in enforcing such restrictions 
is exacerbated because these problems are worse 
among the wealthy in these societies. 

A second, and more promising, approach is 
to enhance household perceptions of the value of 
daughters.  Expanding  economic  opportunities 
for young women, including those in the labor 
market, is one way of doing this, and it can work 
in  conjunction  with  the  process  of  develop-
ment to reverse son preference. Just look at the 
Republic of Korea, one of the few cases where 
excess female mortality at birth was reversed in 
a short period.55 And the process can be comple-
mented by providing ﬁ nancial incentives to par-
ents to have daughters (such as the “Apni Beti 
Apni Dhan” program in some Indian states) and 
supporting media campaigns to change societal 
ideas about gender equality.

In  infancy  and  early  childhood,  excess 
mortality  of  girls  is  not  rooted  in  households 
or  markets—although  both  can  worsen  it.  It 
is  rooted  in  the  failure  of  institutions  to  pro-
vide clean water, sanitation, waste disposal, and 
drainage. Countries with high female mortality 
in infancy are those where the burden of infec-
tious diseases remains high. Today’s rich coun-
tries eliminated their excess female mortality of 
young girls by improving access to clean water 
and sanitation in the early part of the 20th cen-
tury.  And  developing  countries  that  have  ex-
perienced  large  drops  in  excess  girl  mortality 
during  the  past  two  decades,  like  Bangladesh, 
China,  and Vietnam,  have  done  the  same.  So, 
for  the  “missing”  girls  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa 
to “reappear,” countries must invest in similar 
systems  and  provide  adequate  water,  sanita-
tion, and waste disposal services to their whole 
population and not just to the better-off. While 
these  services  will  beneﬁ t  all  young  children, 
young girls will beneﬁ t more due to the reduc-
tion in infectious diseases. 

How exactly should countries do this? If the 
experience of today’s rich countries is a guide, 
part of the solution is to provide clean water at 
the point of use through piped delivery. Other so-
lutions,  like  water  treatment  at  the  source,  are 
less  effective  in  reducing  diarrhea  morbidity 
because of the potential for recontamination.56 
The problem is then to design an institutional 
framework  that  expands  access  to  clean  water 

efﬁ ciently  while  ensuring  that  services  remain 
accessible and affordable for poor people. 

The solution will depend on the setting, but a 

few elements are critical. 
•  Appropriate  regulations  that  recognize  the 

rationale for government intervention.

•  An adequate structure of incentives for pro-
viders  to  make  them  more  accountable  to 
policy makers. 

•  Measures  to  strengthen  accountability  of 
both providers and policy makers to service 
users. 

In  urban  areas,  providing  clean  water  will 
require  an  emphasis  on  improving  the  struc-
ture  of  contracts  and,  in  some  circumstances, 
greater  involvement  of  the  private  sector.  In 
Manila, such reforms yielded large impacts: wa-
ter supply coverage expanded from 67 percent 
in 1997 to 99 percent in 2009 and brought ef-
ﬁ ciency  gains  through  lower  water  losses  and 
operating  costs.  In  low-income  settings,  where 
ﬁ nancing options and the capacity of public in-
stitutions may be more limited, charging small 
amounts  for  services,  relying  on  independent 
providers, and ﬁ nding ways of making provid-
ers more accountable to users can help, even in 
smaller urban areas—this was the path followed 
by Cambodia. In rural areas, local governments 
can improve community systems, as Uganda has 
done by collecting an additional small tax and 
placing it in a fund administered by the district 
council to pay for major water repairs.

For  sanitation  in  urban  settings,  there  usu-
ally  is  enough  demand  for  improvements  so 
long  as  individuals  and  communities  can  cap-
ture the beneﬁ ts of investing in the facilities. So, 
the solution is to strengthen property rights and 
recognize informal settlements, thus stimulating 
demand while ensuring that communities have 
access to independent providers. In rural areas 
and  less  dense  urban  settings,  the  priority  for 
improving sanitation is to change behavior, raise 
awareness, and boost demand, through commu-
nity peer pressure and information campaigns 
as in some communities in Cambodia, Indone-
sia, and Vietnam by appealing to people’s sense 
of community responsibility.

Increasing  the  coverage  of  piped  water  and 
sanitation is expensive, so signiﬁ cant funding—
likely  external—will  be  needed  in  poor  coun-
tries. A recent analysis of infrastructure funding 

 

Overview 

25

needs  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa  concluded  that 
additional  spending  on  clean  water  and  sani-
tation  would  need  to  be  about  one  and  a  half 
times  current  levels—over  $11  billion  annu-
ally—to  improve  access  signiﬁ cantly.57  How-
ever, as documented in chapter 3, the return to 
these  investments  taking  account  of  mortality 
declines is very large.

In the reproductive years, maternal mortal-
ity remains especially high in Sub-Saharan Af-
rica and parts of Asia. The main reason is a fail-
ure of the institutions that deliver medical care 
and services to expectant mothers. While norms 
that  delay  women  from  getting  prompt  medi-
cal help during childbirth and high fertility may 
be contributing factors in some places, solving 
the problem, as with providing clean water and 
sanitation,  requires  ﬁ xing  the  institutions  that 
deliver these services. 

This ﬁ x will require providing more resources 
to frontline service providers and ensuring that the 
entire system of maternal care works:

First,  the  quality  of  the  people  in  deliver-
ing the chain of services needs to be upgraded. 
While  additional  health  workers,  especially 
skilled  birth  attendants,  will  be  a  continuing 
need, coverage can be increased in underserved 
areas by drawing in community-level providers 
and the private sector. 

Second, those providing maternal health ser-
vices  have  to  be  more  responsive  to  expectant 
mothers. One way is to make service providers 
more accountable to them. Getting information 
to  users—for  example,  on  service  standards, 
quality  of  services  and  policies  to  improve 
them—can help but needs to be combined with 
some way for users to act on that information. 
In  Uganda,  community-based  monitoring  im-
proved both the quality and quantity of primary 
health care services.58 Another route to account-
ability is to ensure that citizens are able to hold 
their political representatives responsible for the 
failures; the politicians, in turn, need to exercise 
more effective control over the service provid-
ers. The power of this mechanism is evident in 
Peru, where improving maternal health required 
extending  coverage,  giving  the  right  incentives 
to service providers, and having citizens’ voices 
loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  policy  makers.59 
Professional attention for deliveries rose from 58 
percent of births in 2000 to 71 percent in 2004. 
Third,  the  ﬁ nancial  constraints  that  poor 
women  face  in  accessing  maternal  health  ser-

vices need special attention. One way to help is 
to provide poor women with cash transfers con-
ditional on their seeking maternal care. An ex-
ample is India’s Janani Suraksha Yojana, where 
such  transfers  increased  the  uptake  of  assisted 
deliveries in the presence of a skilled attendant 
by around 36 percent.60 

Fourth, efforts to reduce maternal mortality 
need  to  go  beyond  improving  health  systems 
and services and work across sectors. The suc-
cesses of Malaysia and Sri Lanka in addressing 
maternal  mortality  early  in  their  development 
illustrate this point (box 5). Fairly small invest-
ments  in  infrastructure  (rural  roads)  and  in 
women’s  education,  combined  with  training 
maternal  health  providers  and  building  hospi-
tals dramatically reduced maternal mortality.61

Fifth, it is essential that the political proﬁ le of 
the problem be raised. Turkey illustrates what is 
possible in this regard. Turkey’s maternal mor-
tality rate in 2000 was 70 per 100,000 live births. 
A  new  government  capitalized  on  the  political 

BOX 5   Reducing maternal mortality—What works? 

Look at Malaysia and Sri Lanka

Improving the delivery of maternal care is hard, but it can be done—even at 
relatively low incomes, as Sri Lanka and Malaysia show. From more than 2,000 
per 100,000 births in the 1930s, the maternal mortality ratio in Sri Lanka fell to 
about 1,000 by 1947, and then halved to less than 500 in the next three years. By 
1996, it had fallen to 24. In Malaysia, it halved from 534 over the seven years from 
1950 to 1957. Then, with a halving every decade or so, it came down to 19 by 
1997.

To overcome the range of institutional obstacles that hampers the eff ective 
workings  of  health  systems,  Sri  Lanka  and  Malaysia  adopted  integrated  and 
phased approaches. And they did this with modest total public expenditures 
on health—1.8 percent of gross domestic product, on average, since the 1950s. 
Health programs in both countries exploited synergistic interactions of health 
care with basic education, water and sanitation, malaria control, and integrated 
rural  development—including  building  rural  roads,  which  helped  deal  with 
obstetric emergencies. Financial, geographic, and cultural barriers to maternal 
care were addressed by ensuring a front line of competent, professional mid-
wives widely available in rural areas, providing them with a steady supply of 
drugs and equipment, linking them to back-up services, and improving com-
munication and transportation. Simultaneously, facilities were strengthened to 
provide obstetric care and deal with complications. Better organizational man-
agement  improved  the  supervision  and  accountability  of  providers.  Area-
specifi c  mortality  data  were  provided  through  monitoring  systems  so  that 
empowered  communities  could  hold  political  leaders  accountable,  and 
national and subnational actors were forced to recognize the unacceptability 
of  every  maternal  death.  Finally,  both  countries  were  strongly  committed  to 
improving the status of women: women gained voting rights before or soon 
after national independence, and female education received special attention. 

Source:  Pathmanathan and others 2003.

26 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

support that brought it to power and, in 2003, 
undertook  a  Health  Transformation  Program, 
emphasizing institutional reform, client respon-
siveness, and a focus on underserved areas. The 
budget allocated to primary health care and pre-
vention in underserved areas rose by 58 percent, 
air  ambulances  were  put  in  service  for  remote 
populations,  the  health  workforce  was  redis-
tributed for better coverage in poor areas, and 
conditional cash transfers encouraged pregnant 
mothers  to  use  prebirth  hostels  and  deliver  in 
public hospitals. By 2009, the maternal mortal-
ity rate had fallen to 19.8.62

Providing education to severely 
disadvantaged populations
Even  as  gender  gaps  in  educational  enroll-
ment  shrink  nationally,  they  remain  for  poor 
people  and  for  those  disadvantaged  by  other 
circumstances—remoteness,  ethnicity,  caste, 
race,  or  disability.  To  reach  these  groups,  pol-
icy  makers  can  build  on  experience  and  evi-
dence  from  Cambodia,  Colombia,  Honduras, 
Mexico,  Nicaragua,  Pakistan,  and  Turkey.  A 
range of options includes remedies for both sup-
ply (such as building more schools in remote ar-
eas  and  recruiting  local  teachers)  and  demand 
(such as cash transfers conditioned on girls’ school 
attendance).  A  key  to  designing  cost-effective 
interventions is the availability and the cost of 
collecting  information  about  local  character-
istics  and  conditions.  Where  relatively  little  is 
known, less locally customized policies, such as 
cash  transfers  conditioned  on  sending  daugh-
ters to school, may be more effective in reducing 
gender disparities. The transfers have had posi-
tive  impacts  on  enrollments  in  both  middle-
income  and  lower-income  settings,  especially 
for increasing enrollments among groups with 
low  enrollments  to  start  (such  as  pockets  of 
severely  disadvantaged  populations).63  Having 
gained wide political acceptance because of their 
efﬁ cacy, such policies are being implemented in 
more than 30 countries.

Policies to improve women’s economic 
opportunities
Across the world, women and men access eco-
nomic  opportunities—whether  in  wage  em-
ployment, agriculture, or in entrepreneurship—
in  fundamentally  different  ways.  Women  tend 
to occupy very different parts of the economic 
space  from  men  and  are  disproportionately 

concentrated  in  lower  productivity  activities, 
self-employment, and the informal sector. Even 
in the formal wage sector, they cluster in certain 
occupations  and  industries,  usually  lower  pay-
ing. These differences remain even as countries 
get richer. 

Three  factors  drive  these  patterns.  First, 
women  and  men  have  very  different  responsi-
bilities for care and housework, and as a result 
very  different  patterns  of  time  use,  which  im-
pinge  directly  on  choices  of  employment  and 
economic  activity.  Second,  women  and  men 
face differential access to productive inputs and 
often differential treatment by markets and in-
stitutions.  Third,  these  mutually  reinforcing 
constraints can generate a “female productivity 
trap.” Policies thus need to target these underly-
ing factors. Because multiple factors may be at 
play more often than not, effective policy inter-
ventions may need to target several of them—
either simultaneously or sequentially.

Releasing women’s time
Gender  differences  in  access  to  economic  op-
portunities  are  driven  in  part  by  differences  in 
time use that result from deep-rooted norms for 
the  distribution  of  responsibility  for  care  and 
housework.  Addressing  these  binding  norms 
and releasing women’s time means paying more 
attention to three types of policies: child care and 
parental  leave  policies;  improvements  in  infra-
structure services; and policies that reduce trans-
action costs associated with accessing markets. 

Policies  such  as  subsidies  to  or  public  provi-
sion  of  child  care  can  compensate  women  for 
the  costs  they  incur  within  the  home  from 
engaging  in  market  work.  Child  care  can  be 
provided either directly by the state (including 
local governments) or through the private sec-
tor,  possibly  with  public  subsidies  and  regula-
tion.  Among  developing  countries,  child-care 
policies have been used in some middle-income 
Latin  American  countries.  Examples  include 
publicly  provided  or  subsidized  day  care  such 
as  Estancias  Infantiles  in  Mexico,  Hogares  Co-
munitarios in Colombia, and similar programs 
in  Argentina  and  Brazil.  The  evidence  from 
these  countries  as  well  as  from  rich  countries 
(mainly in northern and western Europe) that 
have  similar  schemes  is  that  they  increase  the 
number of hours worked by women as well as 
lead them to work more in formal employment. 
In lower-income countries, child-care solutions 

 

Overview 

27

are  particularly  needed  for  women  employed 
in the informal sector and rural women. In In-
dia, the nongovernmental organization (NGO) 
Mobile  Creches  is  experimenting  with  differ-
ent models for providing child-care services for 
women employed in the rural informal sector 
and on public works programs. Similar efforts 
have  been  undertaken  in  the  Indian  state  of 
 Gujarat  by  the  Self  Employed  Women’s  Asso-
ciation,  which  has  set  up  day-care  centers  for 
the 0–6-year-old children of its members. Other 
options  for  publicly  provided  day  care  are  ei-
ther  to  lengthen  the  school  day  (particularly 
at grades where attendance is only for half of a 
day) or to lower the age at which children enter 
the school system.

Parental leave policies have been tried mainly 
in rich countries—and these typically take the 
form  of  maternity  leave.  While  these  policies 
have  increased  women’s  labor  force  participa-
tion in these countries, their applicability in de-
veloping countries may be more limited. First, 
they can be used only in the formal sector, which 
typically  represents  only  a  fraction  of  employ-
ment in emerging and low-income economies. 
Second, they can actually make it less attractive 
for  employers  to  hire  women  of  child-bearing 
age  unless  the  maternity  leave  is  publicly  ﬁ -
nanced. Policies that provide both paternity and 
maternity leave and make the former mandatory 
(as  in  Iceland,  Norway,  and  Sweden)  have  the 
advantage  of  not  being  biased  against  women 
while also helping to shift the underlying norms 
about care. But this approach may be ﬁ nancially 
beyond  the  ﬁ scal  capacity  of  many  developing 
economies.

Improvements  in  infrastructure  services—
especially  water  and  electricity—can  help  free 
up  women’s  time  spent  on  domestic  and  care 
work.  Electriﬁ cation  in  rural  South  Africa,  for 
instance, has increased women’s labor force par-
ticipation by about 9 percent; in Bangladesh, it 
has led to more leisure time for women. In Paki-
stan, putting water sources closer to the home 
was associated with increased time allocated to 
market  work.  Other  studies  show  no  impact 
on market work but noticeable impacts on lei-
sure time, which also increase women’s welfare 
(chapter 7).

Interventions  can  also  focus  on  reducing  the 
(time) transaction costs associated with access to 
markets. Better and more effective transport op-
tions can reduce the time costs associated with 

working outside the home, making it easier to 
manage  the  multiple  burdens  of  house,  care, 
and  market  work.  And  information  and  com-
munication technologies can help reduce both 
the time and mobility constraints that women 
face  in  accessing  markets  and  participating  in 
market  work.  Mobile  banking  programs,  such 
as  M-PESA  in  Kenya,  are  allowing  women  to 
process  small  ﬁ nancial  and  banking  transac-
tions  more  effectively  and  promoting  savings, 
which  is  especially  beneﬁ cial  to  small  women 
entrepreneurs.  In  India,  a  program  run  by  an 
NGO,  the  Foundation  of  Occupational  Devel-
opment,  organized  groups  of  women  to  focus 
on  marketing,  provided  them  with  access  to 
cell phones and the Internet, thus helping them 
market their products directly and increase their 
proﬁ t margins.64

Closing gaps in access to assets and inputs
Female farmers and entrepreneurs have less ac-
cess to land than their male counterparts. Simi-
larly, both the demand for and use of credit are 
lower among female farmers and entrepreneurs 
than among their male counterparts. These dif-
ferences are rooted in failures of markets and in-
stitutions and in their interactions with house-
hold  responses.  For  example,  accessing  credit 
often requires collateral, preferably land or im-
mobile assets. Women are thus at a disadvantage 
because they have lower or less secure access to 
land and are disproportionately employed in the 
service sector where capitalization is lower and 
output is often intangible. These forces may be 
further reinforced by  gender-based preferences 
in the households that can lead to unequal re-
source allocations (of land, for example) to male 
and female members. 

Policies  need  to  focus  on  these  underlying 
determinants  of  differential  access—leveling 
the  institutional  playing  ﬁ eld  by  strengthening 
women’s ownership rights, correcting biases in 
service delivery institutions, and improving the 
functioning of credit markets.

Strengthening  women’s  land  and  ownership 
rights can help female farmers and entrepreneurs. 
The main constraint that needs to be addressed 
is the restriction on women’s ability to own and 
inherit assets and to control resources. Experi-
ence from India and Mexico shows that equal-
izing  provisions  of  inheritance  laws  between 
women  and  men  increases  asset  ownership  by 
women.  Discriminatory  land  laws,  which  lie 

28 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

at the root of agricultural productivity gaps in 
many  countries,  also  need  to  be  reformed  to 
provide, at least, for joint ownership in marriage, 
increasing women’s ability to use land in access-
ing economic opportunities. An even better way 
to  secure  married  women’s  land  rights  (espe-
cially in the case of divorce or death of a spouse) 
is  mandatory  joint  land  titling.  In  two  regions 
in Ethiopia where land certiﬁ cation involved the 
issuance of joint titles to both spouses, women’s 
names appeared on more than 80 percent of all 
titles,  four  times  the  20  percent  in  the  region 
where the certiﬁ cate was issued only in the name 
of the household head.65

Correcting  biases  in  service  delivery  institu-
tions such as the workings of government land 
distribution and registration schemes and agri-
cultural extension agencies can improve wom-
en’s  access  to  economic  opportunity  in  many 
countries.  Redressing  these  biases  requires  ac-
tions  on  several  fronts.  First,  service  providers 
need  to  target  women  explicitly  and  addition-
ally. For example, land redistribution programs 
that  target  the  head  of  the  household  will  not 
serve women well. Instead, governments can put 
in place mandatory joint titling on redistributed 
land  that  is  coupled  with  gender  sensitization 
policies and more female representation on local 
land boards. Second, women can be given some 
power within the service delivery organization, 
including  in  setting  priorities.  For  agricultural 
extension,  for  example,  women  could  be  put 
in  decision-making  positions  at  the  Ministry 
of  Agriculture.  Third,  technology  can  be  used 
to expand the reach of services, as was done in 
Kenya  for  agricultural  extension  through  the 
use of call centers. Fourth, improved monitor-
ing  can  make  the  problem  visible.  Finally,  the 
female users of the service should be provided 
information on the level of service they are due. 
This step can be aided by building the collective 
element  of  demand—for  example,  supporting 
women’s farmer organizations.

Improving the functioning of credit markets by 
addressing  the  information  problems  caused  by 
lack  of  experience  with  women  borrowers  can 
help address productivity gaps between women 
and  men  in  agriculture  and  entrepreneurship. 
Microcredit schemes have been the most com-
mon way of addressing these problems, by help-
ing women access small-scale credit and build a 
track record of borrower performance. Typically, 
these  take  the  form  of  group  lending  schemes 

such  as  Grameen  Bank  in  Bangladesh  and 
FINCA  in  Peru.  Microcredit  has  now  evolved 
beyond group lending to such schemes as Banco 
Sol in Bolivia and Bank Rakyat Indonesia that 
offer larger individual loans and rely on repay-
ment  incentives  rather  than  peer  monitoring. 
Lack of access to formal credit can also be sur-
mounted  through  ﬁ nancial  innovation  and  by 
adapting a credit model that addresses the needs 
of small businesses, as Access Bank in Nigeria, 
DFCU in Uganda, and Sero Lease and Finance 
in Tanzania have done. Recognizing that women 
are less likely to have established credit records 
than  men,  and  lower  asset  bases  on  which  to 
draw  for  collateral,  these  large  commercial 
banks partnered with the International Finance 
Corporation  to  develop  new  instruments  to 
support  and  extend  credit  services  to  female-
owned businesses and female entrepreneurs. In-
terventions  included  developing  new  products 
such as loans that are collateralized with equip-
ment or based on cash ﬂ ow as well as training 
for the staff of ﬁ nancial institutions and strate-
gic support to help banks increase their number 
of  female  clients.  Initial  experience  with  these 
interventions shows an increase in the shares of 
female clients using ﬁ nancial services and taking 
out larger loans with better-than-average repay-
ment (chapter 7).

Addressing discrimination in labor markets
In  wage  employment,  the  underrepresentation 
of women in certain sectors or occupations can 
feed  discriminatory  beliefs  among  employers 
(or reinforce preexisting beliefs) that women are 
not suitable workers or good candidates for em-
ployment.  The  importance  of  networks  (often 
gendered)  in  job  search  and  professional  pro-
motion can further reinforce women’s exclusion 
from certain jobs, positions, sectors, or occupa-
tions.  Breaking  this  information  problem  and 
expanding networks can be addressed through 
three main types of policies: active labor market 
policies; afﬁ rmative action programs; and group 
formation and mentoring interventions. 

Active labor market policies combine training, 
placement, and other support to enable women 
to  enter  or  reenter  the  workforce.  Although 
these policies are not typically motivated by the 
goal  of  narrowing  gender  wage  gaps,  evidence 
from Argentina,  Colombia,  and  Peru  indicates 
that  they  can  increase  women’s  employment 
and  earnings  in  the  formal  sector  by  allowing 

 

Overview 

29

BOX 6  Catalyzing female employment in Jordan

Despite growing education levels, labor force par-
ticipation rates for women in the Middle East and 
North  Africa  remain  very  low.  In  Jordan,  only  17
percent  of  20-  to  45-year-old  women  work,  com-
pared  with  77  percent  of  men.  This  labor  force 
 participation  gap  also  holds  among  the  more 
 educated;  among  community  college  graduates 
it  starts  immediately  on  graduation.  These  low 
employment rates make it diffi  cult for new gradu-
ates  seeking  to  enter  the  labor  market.  With  few 
women employed, young women lack role models 
to follow into employment as well as the network 
connections  to  help  them  fi nd  jobs.  Employers, 
lacking experience with working women, may be 
reluctant to hire women if they believe women are 
less committed to staying employed.

The  Jordan  New  Opportunities  for  Women 
(Jordan NOW) program is a pilot to rigorously eval-
uate the eff ectiveness of two policies: short-term 
wage subsidies, and employability skills training.

Short-term wage subsidies give fi rms an incen-
tive to take a chance on hiring young female grad-
uates and an opportunity to overcome stereotypes 
by  directly  observing  young  women  working  for 
them.  The  subsidies  can  also  give  young  women 
more  confi dence  to  search  for  work  and  to 
approach  employers.  In  the  pilot,  each  voucher 
has  a  value  equal  to  the  minimum  wage  for  six 
months.

Employability  skills  training  augments  the 
technical skills that graduates learn in community 
college  with  the  practical  skills  to  fi nd  and  suc-
ceed in employment. Many employers say recent 
graduates lack these interpersonal skills and other 
basic job skills. In the pilot, students received 45 
hours of instruction in team building, communica-
tions,  presentations,  business  writing,  customer 

service, re sume writing, interviewing, and positive 
thinking.

There  appears  to  be  strong  demand  for  these 
policies. Despite low employment rates, the major-
ity of recent female graduates want to work: 93 per-
cent say they plan to work after they graduate, and 
91 percent say they would like to work outside the 
house  after  they  are  married.  Of  those  invited  to 
attend the training courses, 62 percent completed 
them, with unmarried women more likely to attend. 
Those who began the courses gave them positive 
reviews, claiming the courses had given them much 
more confi dence to begin searching for jobs. Four 
months  into  the  wage  subsidy  program,  about  a 
third of those using vouchers had found a job.

Early results from a midline evaluation suggest 
that  job  vouchers  have  signifi cant  employment 
eff ects: employment rates among graduates who 
received vouchers alone or vouchers plus training 
are between 55 to 57 percent compared with 17 to 
19  percent  among  those  who  received  training 
alone or received neither training nor vouchers. In 
all  groups,  employment  eff ects  are  higher  for 
unmarried women. Financial empowerment (mea-
sured as the proportion of women who have their 
own  money  and  can  decide  how  to  use  it)  also 
increased signifi cantly for all who received either 
vouchers  or  training  or  both.  Follow-up  surveys 
will determine whether these employment eff ects 
of  job  vouchers  are  sustained  in  the  longer  term 
and will also focus on other measures of empower-
ment  and  changes  in  attitudes.  The  surveys  will 
also allow further investigation of the link between 
marriage  and  work,  given  the  early  fi ndings  that 
married women are less likely to attend the train-
ing, less likely to use the vouchers, and less likely to 
be employed.

Source: WDR 2012 team.

participants to better communicate their abili-
ties to employers. A similar program currently 
under implementation and evaluation in Jordan 
shows promising signs of success (box 6). 

Afﬁ rmative  action  is  another  way  to  over-
come information failures. The goal is to push 
women’s participation in wage employment to 
a “critical threshold” (often argued to be about 
30  percent),  where  information  failures  and 
networks  no  longer  bind.  Experience  (mainly 
from rich countries) shows that afﬁ rmative ac-
tion  works  best  if  it  is  mandatory. Afﬁ rmative 
action also can be implemented through public 
sector  employment  and  contracting,  but  clear 

rules, careful monitoring of impacts, and cred-
ible sanctions for noncompliance are essential.66 
Where such programs have been implemented, 
the effect has clearly been to redistribute wage 
employment  from  men  to  women. And,  while 
the economic efﬁ ciency of such policies is still de-
bated, the most comprehensive evidence (from 
long experience in the United States) points to 
little or no adverse efﬁ ciency effects.67 This ex-
perience and that in other countries also show 
that  any  potential  negative  efﬁ ciency  impacts 
can be addressed by ensuring that the afﬁ rma-
tive action programs are temporary and are re-
moved once women’s representation reaches the 

30 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

needed critical mass. In the absence of explicit 
afﬁ rmative action policies, female employment 
in the public sector in fairly large numbers can 
have  a  demonstration  effect.  In  rich  countries, 
public sector growth has been important in in-
tegrating women into the labor markets.68

Supporting  the  creation  of  women’s  networks 
can be effective where gendered networks hinder 
women workers, farmers, or entrepreneurs. Such 
interventions work best when they combine the 
building of social capital and networks with the 
provision of training, information, and mentor-
ing. One example is the Jordan NOW program 
described  in  box  6.  Another,  more  established 
example,  is  the  Self  Employed  Women’s  Asso-
ciation in India, which has evolved into an ef-
fective organization representing the interests of 
a large number of informal sector workers and 
entrepreneurs, providing extensive information, 
support, and training services to its members. 

Removing  discriminatory  treatment  in  la-
bor  laws  and  regulations  can  promote  women’s 
economic  opportunities.  Among  these  laws  and 
regulations,  the  priority  should  be  to  revisit 
the  limits  (including  outright  bans)  on  part-
time work in many countries. Because women 
provide a disproportionate share of household 
and  care  work,  such  restrictions  end  up  limit-
ing work options for women much more than 
for  men.  Relaxing  these  prohibitions  would 
give  women  more  opportunities  for  paid  em-
ployment.  In  Argentina,  removing  the  ban  on 
part-time contracts in the formal sector led to 
a signiﬁ cant shift of women with children from 
part-time work in the informal sector to part-
time contracts in the formal sector.69

Policies to shrink differences in voice

Increasing women’s societal voice 
Women  generally  have  less  voice  than  men 
both in society and in households. At the soci-
etal  level,  income  growth  does  little  to  reduce 
these gaps. Norms that dictate that politics is for 
men;  beliefs  that  women  make  worse  leaders, 
which  are  fed  in  part  by  the  low  participation 
of  women  in  politics;  norms  around  care  and 
housework,  which  limit  the  time  available  to 
women to participate in formal political institu-
tions; and the gendered networks within politics 
that work against women all matter more than 
income growth. 

Because these constraints resemble the ones 
that limit women’s prospects in labor markets, 
the  policy  solutions  are  similar.  Quotas  and 
other types of afﬁ rmative action have promoted 
women’s political representation at various lev-
els  of  politics.  Such  measures  range  from  vol-
untary commitments by political parties to in-
clude women candidates on their electoral lists 
to specifying shares of legislative seats reserved 
for women. Which option is best for a country 
depends  on  its  political  system.  For  example, 
reserving  individual  seats  for  women  will  not 
work  in  proportional  representation  systems, 
whereas voluntary party quotas may work when 
parties have strong leadership and internal dis-
cipline. Whatever the system, its design and en-
forcement are critical. In Spain, where positions 
on the ballot for the Senate were in alphabetical 
order, parties tended to choose women with last 
names that landed lower in the ballot and who 
thus were less likely to win a seat. 70

Broader  tensions  also  need  to  be  acknowl-
edged and taken into account if quotas are used 
to  increase  women’s  political  representation. 
Mandatory  quotas  involve  the  state  circum-
scribing part of the democratic process, so this 
distortion has to be balanced against the need to 
redress persistent inequalities. One option, taken 
by local governments in India, is to implement 
quotas on a rolling basis—with a different set of 
seats chosen for reservation in different elections 
over time. And as with all afﬁ rmative action, it 
helps to specify a clear goal or time period up 
front. The structure of the reservation also mat-
ters.  Designating  particular  seats  for  women 
runs the risk of creating “token” women’s seats.
Quotas  have  increased  female  representa-
tion. In Mexico, candidate quotas increased the 
share of women in parliament from 16 percent 
to more than 22 percent. Reserved seats in Mo-
rocco  increased  the  proportion  of  women  in 
parliament from less than 1 percent to almost 11 
percent.  Quotas  in  local  governments  in  India 
also showed that such measures can change un-
derlying beliefs among voters about the efﬁ cacy 
of  women  politicians,  even  in  a  short  period, 
and increase the proportion of women elected 
to these positions even after the quotas are no 
longer in place.71

Afﬁ rmative  action  in  the  political  realm 
needs  to  be  complemented  by  measures  that 
increase  women’s  voice  in  other  societal  institu-
tions, such as trade unions, corporations, the ju-

 

Overview 

31

diciary, and professional associations. This can 
be done through quotas as well as by mentoring 
schemes, women’s networks, and skills develop-
ment in these realms targeted to women. Collec-
tive action by women’s groups can be particu-
larly effective in this, as with the Self Employed 
Women’s Association  in  India.  More  generally, 
because  women  tend  to  be  better  represented 
in  less  formal  organizations,  laws  and  regula-
tions should ensure a level playing ﬁ eld for such 
 organizations.

Increasing women’s voice within households
The muted voice of women within their house-
holds  reﬂ ects  the  combined  inﬂ uence  of  their 
more limited access to economic opportunities, 
the nature of social norms, the legal framework, 
and the enforcement of laws. Key determinants 
of  control  over  household  resources  are  ac-
cess  to  economic  opportunities  and  the  legal 
framework—particularly  rights  over  property 
and  those  that  determine  access  to  assets.  For 
domestic violence, social norms and the content 
and enforcement of laws are important. And for 
fertility,  norms,  bargaining  power,  and  service 
delivery are critical. 

Increasing control over household resources
Thus, the most promising policies to increase 
women’s voice in households center on reform-
ing the legal framework so that women are not 
disadvantaged in controlling household assets 
and  expanding  their  economic  opportunities. 
For the legal framework, land laws and aspects 
of  family  law  that  govern  marriage,  divorce, 
and  disposal  of  property  are  particularly  im-
portant.  A  cross-cutting  issue  applies  to  the 
many  countries  where  multiple  legal  systems 
exist. Reconciling these systems, which may in-
clude customary and religious law, is a priority, 
especially to ensure that all laws are consistent 
with a country’s constitution. Kenya made such 
changes in its recent constitutional reforms.

Although  reforms  in  these  areas  are  po-
litically  and  socially  complex  and  depend  very 
much on country context, experience shows that 
change is possible. Ethiopia reformed its family 
law in 2000 by eliminating the husband’s ability 
to deny permission for his wife to work outside 
the home and requiring both spouses to agree in 
administering  family  property.  The  ﬁ rst  phase 
of these changes shifted women’s economic ac-
tivities toward work outside the home, full-time 

work,  and  jobs  requiring  higher  skills.72  Mo-
rocco also reformed its family laws in the 1990s, 
and  in  2004  the  new  Family  Code  completely 
eliminated references to the husband as the head 
of the household.

Greater  effort  is  also  needed  to  make  these 
rights  more  effective  and  justice  systems  more 
responsive  to  women’s  needs.  Interventions  are 
needed  on  both  the  supply  side  and  the  de-
mand side. Greater capacity of the institutions 
that apply the laws, more accountability in the 
justice system to promote predictable outcomes 
in line with the law, and procedures to promote 
women’s  access  to  justice  and  women’s  repre-
sentation in judicial institutions are critical on 
the supply side. Also important are mechanisms 
for the implementation of laws. Evidence from 
Ethiopia illustrates how the procedures around 
mandatory  joint  land  titling  helped  promote 
women’s rights over land. Women’s demand for 
enforcement of their rights can be promoted by 
broadening  literacy,  increasing  the  accessibility 
of legal aid services, and reducing costs of legal 
procedures. And data have to be collected and 
made  public  so  that  the  problems  of  women’s 
access to justice are made more visible. 

Reducing domestic violence
Reducing  domestic  violence  requires  action 
on multiple fronts. The goal is to prevent vio-
lence before it happens. The ﬁ rst step is to en-
act  laws  that  deﬁ ne  different  types  of  violence 
against women, prescribe mandates and duties 
for enforcement and investigation, raise societal 
awareness, and signal a government’s commit-
ment. These laws must be put in place in coun-
tries  that  lack  them,  especially  in  the  Middle 
East  and  North  Africa,  South  Asia,  and  Sub-
Saharan Africa. And countries with such laws on 
the books need to make them more speciﬁ c and 
actionable. 

A second step is to shift norms and behaviors 
around domestic violence to emphasize preven-
tion. Education and awareness programs, such 
as Soul City in South Africa, can change norms 
about domestic violence among both men and 
women.  Increasing  women’s  bargaining  power 
in  their  households—by  improving  women’s 
economic  opportunities  and  enhancing  their 
control over resources and their ability to leave 
marriages—also  can  change  behavior.  But  in-
creasing  women’s  bargaining  power  can  also 
risk increasing the likelihood of violence in the 

32 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

short term. So, speciﬁ c mitigation measures may 
be needed. 

Third,  when  violence  does  occur,  victims 
need  timely  and  effective  assistance  ranging 
from  the  police  and  judiciary  to  health  and 
social  services,  as  with  support  integrated  in 
Malaysia’s  one-stop  crisis  centers  at  govern-
ment hospitals. Service providers—police and 
judiciary, health, and social services—need to 
target women explicitly and additionally. Tar-
geting  women  also  requires  bringing  services 
closer to women to deal with time and mobility 
constraints—for  example,  by  providing  com-
munity paralegals and mobile legal aid clinics 
that  enable  women  to  use  the  justice  system. 
In  many  contexts,  bringing  services  closer  to 
individuals  (demand)  can  be  combined  with 
increasing the awareness of service delivery or-
ganizations,  particularly  management,  about 
gender  issues  (supply).  PEKKA  Women’s  Le-
gal  Empowerment  in  Indonesia  trains  village 
paralegals,  with  a  focus  on  domestic  violence 
and  family  law.  Another  way  of  improving 
women’s access to justice is to increase the share 
of women in the judicial and police forces re-
sponsible  for  addressing  domestic  violence. 
The  Indian  state  of  Tamil  Nadu  introduced 
188 all-women police units to cover both rural 
and urban areas and to focus on crimes against 
women.  These  units  increased  women’s  com-
fort in approaching the police, including mak-
ing reports of domestic abuse.73

Increasing control over fertility
Increasing  women’s  control  over  their  fertility 
requires actions in several areas. Availability of 
family planning services is still limited in parts 
of  the  world.  In  some  cases  the  underserved 
population  covers  entire  countries,  but  more 
often  these  women  live  in  speciﬁ c  geographic 
areas within countries —usually rural areas—or 
are poor. For these groups, improved delivery of 
family planning services is a priority.

Control  over  fertility  decisions—the  num-
ber  and  spacing  of  children—goes  beyond  is-
sues related to provision of reproductive health 
services,  so  two  other  policy  areas  need  to  be 
addressed.  The  ﬁ rst  is  to  boost  women’s  ability 
within the household to voice their preferences re-
garding number and spacing of children. As dis-
cussed earlier, access to economic opportunities, 
control over assets, and appropriate laws help. So 
does educating men on the beneﬁ ts and use of 

contraception.  Contraception  uptake  is  higher 
when husbands are included in family planning 
education, as was shown in Bangladesh74 and in 
Ethiopia. 75 

The  second  is  increasing  the  quality  of  fam-
ily  planning  services.  Improvements  in  this  re-
gard need to focus on three areas. First, a suf-
ﬁ cient range of contraceptive options needs to 
be  available.  Second,  adequate  information  on 
the available options, their side effects, and the 
advantages and limitations of different methods 
needs to be given to women so they can make 
an  informed  decision.  Third,  services  need  to 
be  provided  in  a  manner  that  protects  the  in-
dividual’s  or  the  couple’s  privacy.  This  will  re-
quire training health care providers in protocols 
designed speciﬁ cally for family planning. Recent 
experience in Zambia shows that very different 
outcomes regarding fertility and contraception 
can result depending on whether women are ap-
proached individually and in private or together 
with their partners.

Policies to prevent the reproduction of 
gender inequality across generations
The  reproduction  of  speciﬁ c  gender  inequali-
ties across generations gives rise to “gender in-
equality  traps,”  which  are  likely  to  most  affect 
the poor and excluded in society. Women’s lack 
of political voice means that the market and in-
stitutional failures feeding gender inequality are 
unlikely to be corrected. Income growth alone 
does little to address the processes that underlie 
these persistent gaps. The previous sections dealt 
with policies to address three of these gaps that 
reproduce  over  generations—reaching  pockets 
of  remaining  disadvantage  in  education,  in-
creasing women’s voice and participation in so-
cietal institutions, and increasing women’s voice 
within  households.  Here,  we  address  measures 
to  address  the  gender  inequalities  in  human 
capital,  opportunities,  and  aspirations  that  are 
set early in life. 

Decisions in adolescence can shape skill ac-
quisition, health outcomes, and economic op-
portunities. Adolescence is also a period when 
one’s lifelong aspirations are molded, and when 
social norms and perceptions start to bind for 
boys and girls. Horizons for girls often shrink, 
especially for poor girls or girls in rural areas 
where  distance  and  norms  for  mobility  can 
be  a  signiﬁ cant  constraint.  Empowering  ado-
lescents to make better choices for themselves 

 

Overview 

33

can make a big difference to their lives, to their 
families,  to  their  communities,  and,  as  future 
workers and citizens, to society more broadly. 
Interventions  need  to  build  human  and  social 
capital;  facilitate  the  transition  from  school  to 
work; and increase their aspirations and agency. 
Efforts  to  inﬂ uence  and  reduce  risky  behavior 
are also important. 

Scholarships  and  conditional  cash  trans-
fers can increase school attendance and reduce 
dropout  rates  for  adolescents,  especially  girls. 
These  positive  impacts  are  well  documented 
in  Latin America  in  countries  such  as  Colom-
bia,  Ecuador,  Mexico,  and  Nicaragua.76  More 
recently,  evidence  from  Africa  is  beginning  to 
show  similar  results.  In  Malawi,  fairly  small 
cash transfers to girls increased enrollment and 
reduced dropout rates.77 Moreover, while these 
transfers  were  aimed  at  education,  they  had 
beneﬁ ts in other realms, such as reducing HIV 
infections.  Other  tools  can  also  be  brought  to 
bear to help girls stay in school. Providing them 
with  information  on  the  returns  to  schooling 
is  one  such  tool:  for  example,  in  Madagascar, 
information  on  earnings  for  primary  school 
completers provided to boys and girls as well as 
their  parents  increased  attendance  rates  by  3.5 
percentage points.78 In the Dominican Republic, 
a similar effort to provide accurate information 
on actual returns to education to boys also had 
a positive impact.79 Other evidence suggests that 
incentives (prospects for winning a scholarship 
or direct payments for performance) can affect 
children’s own perception of their abilities and 
can improve test scores.80 

Vocational  training  targeted  speciﬁ cally  to 
youth increased both the likelihood of employ-
ment  and  the  earnings  for  young  women  in 
Colombia  and  Peru.81  In  Kenya,  providing  in-
formation  to  young  girls  about  the  relative  re-
turns to vocational training in male or female-
dominated industries increased girls’ enrollment 
in trade school courses that prepared them for 
typically  male-dominated  trades  that  yielded 
higher returns.82 The Adolescent Girls Initiative 
aims to evaluate a range of these interventions, 
including  skills  training  and  mentoring,  in  a 
number  of  low-  and  middle-income  countries 
(box 7).

Health education programs have proved to be 
effective in reducing risky behaviors. A program 
in rural Tanzania substantially improved sexual 
knowledge, attitudes, condom use in both sexes, 

and  reported  sexual  behavior  in  boys.83  For 
adolescents,  the  promotion  of  contraception, 
when  combined  with  education  interventions 
and  skill  building,  and  appropriately  targeted 
to  cultural  and  social  settings,  can  be  effective 
in  reducing  unintended  pregnancies.84  Such  a 
program for adolescent girls in Uganda resulted 
in  a  signiﬁ cant  increase  in  condom  use  and  a 
lower number of children among participants.85 
Sometimes, economic empowerment alone can 
have a marked impact. A recent evaluation of a 
youth  job  training  program  in  the  Dominican 
Republic that included life skills training plus an 
apprenticeship  showed  a  signiﬁ cant  reduction 
in pregnancies among participants.86

Exposure to female role models whose posi-
tions of leadership or power contradict stereo-
types of women’s role can reduce the intergener-
ational transmission of gender norms. A study of 
political reservation for women in India showed 
that teenage girls who have repeated exposure to 
women leaders are more likely to express aspira-
tions that challenge traditional norms, such as 
a desire to marry later, have fewer children, and 
obtain  jobs  requiring  higher  education.87  In-
creased economic opportunities for young girls 
can also change their own and their communi-
ties’ perceptions of gender roles for adolescent 
girls. A study of a program in Delhi that linked 
communities to recruiters for high-paying tele-
phone work found that these communities were 
more likely to have lower expectations of dowry 
and to ﬁ nd it acceptable for women to live alone 
before  marriage  and  to  work  before  and  after 
marriage or childbirth.88

Making other policies “gender-smart”
Understanding  how  gender  factors  into  the 
workings  of  households,  markets,  and  institu-
tions can matter for policies even when improv-
ing  gender  equality  is  not  the  main  objective. 
Why?  Because  gender-differentiated  failures  in 
markets,  gender  biases  in  institutions,  and  the 
way gender relations play out in the household 
all affect (and sometimes constrain) the behav-
ior of both men and women. These changes in 
behavior  can  affect  how  men  and  women  re-
spond to policies. Failing to take them into ac-
count can thus mean the policy will have unin-
tended consequences or simply not work.

Take  relations  within  the  household.  They 
clearly  affect  how  the  household  responds  to 
policy—sometimes  with  unintended  conse-

34 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 7   Intervening early to overcome future labor market 

failures—The Adolescent Girls Initiative

The  Adolescent  Girls  Initiative,  a  public-private 
partnership,  promotes  the  transition  of  adoles-
cent girls from school to productive employment 
through  innovative  interventions  that  are  tested 
and  then  scaled  up  or  replicated  if  successful.a 
Under  way  in  Afghanistan,  Jordan,  Lao  People’s 
Democratic  Republic,  Liberia,  Nepal,  and  South 
Sudan (and soon in Rwanda), the initiative targets 
about 20,000 adolescent girls and young women 
ages 16–24. 

Interventions  range  from  business  develop-
ment skills training and services to technical and 
vocational training, targeting skills in high demand. 
In  all  projects,  girls  receive  life-skills  training  to 
address the most important barriers to their eco-
nomic independence. Each country intervention is 
tailored to the local context and specifi c needs of 
adolescent  girls.  Because  the  evidence  on  what 
works is thin, rigorous impact evaluation is a part 
of the initiative. 

The skills training aims to equip girls with tech-
nical skills with proven demand in the local labor 
market. In all pilots, training providers are asked to 
conduct  market  assessments  before  selecting 
trades for which training is developed and off ered. 
While  the  focus  is  on  matching  skills  to  the  mar-
ket, the results in many cases challenge norms for 
 gender-appropriate occupations. 

In  Liberia,  participating  young  women  are 
off ered  six  months  of  training  for  jobs  in  house 
painting, professional driving, and security guard 
services. In Nepal, they are off ered three months 
of occupational skills training followed by a man-
datory skills test and three-month job placement. 
The  focus  is  on  identifying  nonstereotypical 

trades attractive to women, with some trained as 
electricians,  masons,  and  mobile  phone  repair 
technicians.

Lessons  from  implementation  highlight  girls’ 
distinctive  social  capital  needs,  which  must  be 
addressed  to  facilitate  the  uptake  of  economic 
opportunities  among  often  vulnerable  and  iso-
lated  young  females.  Trainers  in  the  Liberia  pilot 
formed girls into teams of three or four, who made 
public commitments to support one another, both 
inside and outside the classroom, throughout the 
training. The positive peer pressure helped keep 
attendance  rates  high,  with  almost  95  percent 
completing the training, and addressed the vari-
ety of educational levels among participants.

Another promising innovation from the Libe-
ria  pilot  was  a  formal  savings  account  at  a  local 
bank  for  all  participating  girls,  with  an  initial 
deposit  of  $5.  The  savings  accounts  not  only 
enabled the girls to practice their fi nancial literacy 
skills  beyond  the  classroom  but  built  trust  with 
formal  fi nancial  institutions,  and  girls  expressed 
satisfaction with being connected to the modern 
economy for the fi rst time. 

Job  fairs  were  organized  to  market  the  pro-
gram to potential employers interested in placing 
girls  in  internships  or  jobs.  Private  sector  human 
resource and career development specialists met 
with  trainees  individually  to  impart  their  knowl-
edge  about  the  industry,  coach  them  on  profes-
sionalism in the workplace, and give constructive 
feedback on the skills demonstrated. These one-
on-one meetings off ered girls the opportunity to 
build  networks  and  to  tap  into  industry-specifi c 
information crucial for new job entrants.

a.  Current donors to the Adolescent Girls Initiative include the Nike Foundation, a main partner of the initiative, as well as the governments of 
Australia, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. The Bank’s Gender Action Plan also supports the initiative’s country projects. 
Pledges to the initiative stand at $22 million.

quences.  For  example,  many  conditional  cash 
transfer programs initially targeted women be-
cause—cognizant of how women were likely to 
spend money differently from men—it seemed 
a way to get more of the transfer spent on chil-
dren’s endowments. But the transfers changed 
bargaining power within the household and, in 
some  cases  such  as  Mexico,  resulted  in  short-
term increases in domestic violence. While this 
effect can disappear or change in nature in the 
longer  term,  a  number  of  later  transfer  pro-
grams  included  conditions  to  discourage  do-
mestic violence (Brazil), training and awareness 

of  these  issues  for  mothers  and  families  (Co-
lombia, Peru), or even dedicated social workers 
(Chile). 

So,  how  can  considerations  of  gender  in-
equalities  and  their  underlying  determinants 
be integrated into broader policy and program 
design? The analytical framework in this Report 
provides a guide. First, what happens inside the 
household shapes the impact of policies. An ex-
ample comes from Papua New Guinea. Gender 
roles in harvesting oil palm have men climbing 
the trees and harvesting the fruits, while women 
collect  the  fruit  that  has  fallen  on  the  ground. 

 

Overview 

35

The  oil  palm  industry  came  to  the  realization 
that  60–70  percent  of  the  fruit  on  the  ground 
was  not  being  collected.  They  tried  multiple 
initiatives  designed  to  deal  with  constraints 
women faced, including giving the women spe-
cial  nets  to  use,  and  timing  the  collection  to 
deal  with  women’s  care  duties.  None  of  these 
worked. Finally, the Mama Lus Frut scheme was 
introduced whereby women received their own 
harvest record cards and were paid directly into 
their  personal  bank  accounts.  Yields  increased 
signiﬁ cantly,  as  did  female  participation  in  oil 
palm harvesting.

Second,  many  non-gender-focused  policies 
and programs can beneﬁ t from taking into ac-
count women’s underrepresentation in markets, 
sectors, or occupations, a situation that can cause 
information problems not only for women but 
also for those who seek to employ them, lend to 
them, or provide them with services. One exam-
ple of how to take women’s underrepresentation 
into  account  is  Ecuador’s  program  to  expand 
credit bureau databases to include microﬁ nance. 
This  intervention  will  help  microﬁ nance  insti-
tutions make better lending decisions, indepen-
dent of to whom they are lending. And because 
microﬁ nance clients are predominantly women, 
it will also help them access a broader range of 
ﬁ nancial services.

Third, policy design should seek to level the 
playing  ﬁ eld  for  women  and  men,  especially 
where  laws  and  regulations  treat  them  dif-
ferently  and  where  systems  enforce  laws  and 
regulations  differentially,  even  when  nomi-
nally equal. Looking for and ﬁ xing this type of 
discrimination when revising laws and regula-
tions or enforcement mechanisms can provide 
an opportunity to improve gender equality as a 
secondary beneﬁ t. Take the case of taxes, which 
can  explicitly  discriminate  against  women 
when women face different rates for the same 
income  as  men.  For  example,  in  Morocco, 
the  tax  allowance  for  children  is  allocated  to 
men, so men face a lower tax burden. Women 
receive  this  allowance  only  if  they  prove  that 
their husband and children depend ﬁ nancially 
on  them.  This  design  is  neither  efﬁ cient  not 
gender equitable.

When these considerations are factored into 
general  policy  design,  the  policies  are  more 
likely to reach their intended objectives, and it 
becomes easier for policy makers to tweak them 
to improve gender equality in the process.

THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF 
REFORMS FOR GENDER EQUALITY

Well-designed public policies to address speciﬁ c 
market  failures  and  institutional  or  normative 
constraints can support signiﬁ cant advances in 
gender equality. But the choice of policies and 
their implementation does not occur in a vac-
uum. Policies must be attuned to countries’ in-
stitutional, social, and political environment and 
to the societal actors involved. It is important to 
understand how reforms actually take place and 
what factors allow them to be sustained so that 
they produce change.

Two  characteristics  of  gender  reform  pro-
cesses are worth noting. First, as with all reforms, 
they redistribute resources and power between 
groups  in  society,  including  between  men  and 
women. Even when policies to advance gender 
equality are well chosen and enhance economic 
efﬁ ciency,  some  groups  may  lose  as  a  result. 
Second,  such  reforms  often  confront  power-
ful societal norms and beliefs regarding gender 
roles.  Each  of  these  features  means  there  will 
likely  be  opposition,  and  managing  this  push-
back is the key to successful reforms.

A  range  of  countries—rich  and  develop-
ing—show  that  several  aspects  of  the  political 
economy  of  reforms  are  especially  relevant  to 
gender equality. First, reforms are most likely to 
succeed when support for them is broad-based. 
It is essential, then, to build coalitions that mo-
bilize around the reforms. These coalitions can 
include nonstate actors such as political parties, 
trade  unions,  civic  organizations  and  associa-
tions, and the private sector. Women’s groups in 
particular have been a driving force for greater 
gender  equality  in  labor  legislation  and  family 
law. For instance, women workers in the infor-
mal sector have challenged their employers and 
sometimes  the  state  through  such  organiza-
tions as the Self Employed Women’s Association 
in  India  and  Nijera  Kori  in  Bangladesh.  These 
groups have provided voice for women and cre-
ated space for public action to counter the resis-
tance to reform.

Women and men are partners in improving 
gender equality. While most initiatives that call 
on men to support gender equality are still small, 
signs point to broader engagement in many areas 
and  growing  male  support  for  women’s  rights 
in many developing countries. For instance, the 
Rwanda  Men’s  Resource  Center  engages  men 

36 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

and  boys  in  combating  gender-based  violence. 
In  surveys  of  male  attitudes  toward  gender 
equality  in  Brazil,  Chile,  Croatia,  and  Mexico, 
adult men overwhelmingly express the view that 
“men do not lose out when women’s rights are 
promoted.”89 Even in India, where men in this 
survey  were  less  supportive  of  gender  equality 
overall, their support for some policies, such as 
quotas in universities and places in government, 
was strong.

Second, ﬁ rms—big and small—can articulate 
a compelling business case for gender equality. In 
a fast-changing global economy, the demand for 
skills has swelled, encouraging ﬁ rms to expand 
their  talent  pool.  Businesses  have  sought  not 
only to attract and recruit female talent but also 
to retain it through measures to facilitate work-
life balance. Firms know that a diversity of opin-
ions can enrich decision making and stimulate 
ingenuity. And gender equality per se has grown 
to be a desirable trait that customers and inves-
tors look for. Corporate social responsibility is 
an avenue for ﬁ rms to enhance competitiveness 
through product differentiation and capture the 
loyalty of women’s growing market power.

Third,  shocks  and  exogenous  changes  can 
present policy makers with windows of oppor-
tunity to launch reforms that can improve gen-
der  outcomes.  Such  windows  sometimes  stem 
from  unpredictable  circumstances,  such  as  a 
national  disaster.  In  1998  the  disaster  that  fol-
lowed Hurricane Mitch in Nicaragua facilitated 
a  dialogue  on  domestic  violence.  A  national 
campaign and the enactment of legislation fol-
lowed. Other windows come from shifts in the 
political or economic landscape. The changes in 
Spain  during  the  democratic  transition  in  the 
late  1970s  were  particularly  dramatic  for  fam-
ily  law  and  reproductive  rights.  And  still  oth-
ers emerge from the advocacy of transnational 
agencies and role modeling in the global agenda. 
For  example,  the  monitoring  and  advocacy  by 
Colombian  local  women’s  groups  in  CEDAW 
informed the expansion of reproductive health 
guarantees in the Colombian Constitution, ad-
opted  in  1990,  and  facilitated  greater  access  to 
contraception.

Finally,  there  are  multiple  paths  to  reform. 
Often governments follow societal cues in pacing 
and pushing reforms. When policy formulation 
and implementation follow cues from ongoing 
shifts in markets and social norms, convergence 
and alignment can fuel sustainable change. But 

such “incremental” reforms may not be enough 
to overcome the path dependence and institu-
tional rigidities that result in persistent gender 
inequality. Bold government action with “trans-
formative”  reforms  may  be  necessary  to  alter 
social dynamics and move to a more equitable 
equilibrium.  In  choosing  between  incremen-
tal  and  transformative  policies  as  part  of  gen-
der reforms, the challenge for policy makers is 
to balance the pace of change with the risks of 
reversal.  Incremental  policies  will  bring  about 
change only slowly. But transformative policies 
can risk a backlash. A way forward is to be se-
lective in implementing transformative policies 
and  ensure  that  adequate  attention  is  paid  to 
their implementation. 

A GLOBAL AGENDA FOR GREATER 
GENDER EQUALITY

Domestic action is central to reducing inequali-
ties.  Global  action—by  governments,  people 
and organizations in developed and developing 
countries,  and  by  international  institutions—
cannot  substitute  for  equitable  and  efﬁ cient 
domestic  policies  and  institutions.  But  it  can 
enhance the scope for and impact of domestic 
policies.  And  it  can  inﬂ uence  whether  global 
integration  and  the  opportunities  it  brings—
through  information,  mobility,  and  technolo-
gy—lead  to  greater  gender  equality  and  better 
lives for all women, or just for some.

Global  action  should  focus  on  areas  where 
gender gaps are most signiﬁ cant both intrinsi-
cally  and  in  terms  of  their  potential  develop-
ment payoff—and where growth alone cannot 
solve  the  issues.  In  other  words,  international 
action should focus on complementing country 
efforts along the four priority areas identiﬁ ed in 
this Report:
•  Reducing excess female mortality and closing 

education gaps where they remain 

•  Improving access to economic opportunities 

for women 

•  Increasing women’s voice and agency in the 

household and in society 

•  Limiting the reproduction of gender inequal-

ity across generations 

In  addition,  there  is  one  cross-cutting  prior-
ity:  supporting  evidence-based  public  action 

 

Overview 

37

through  better  data,  better  knowledge  genera-
tion and sharing, and better learning.

The motivation for an agenda for global ac-
tion is threefold. First, progress on some fronts 
requires  channeling  more  resources  from  rich 
to  developing  countries  (for  example,  to  cre-
ate greater equity in human endowments or to 
tackle the root causes of excess female mortal-
ity around the world). Second, effective action 
sometimes hinges on the production of a pub-
lic good, such as the generation of new (global) 
information or knowledge. And third, when the 
impact of a particular policy cuts across borders, 
coordination  among  a  large  number  of  coun-
tries and institutions can enhance its effective-
ness, not least by building momentum and pres-
sure for action at the domestic level.

Based  on  these  criteria,  initiatives  included 
in the proposed agenda for global action can be 
grouped into three types of activities:

Providing  ﬁ nancial  support.  Improvements 
in the delivery of clean water and sanitation or 
better health services, such as the ones needed 
to  bring  down  excess  female  mortality  among 
girls and mothers in the developing world, will 
require signiﬁ cant resources—often beyond the 
means  of  individual  governments,  particularly 
those of relatively poor countries. The interna-
tional development community can ﬁ nancially 
support countries willing and able to undertake 
such reforms in a coordinated manner through 
speciﬁ c initiatives or funding facilities to ensure 
maximum impact and minimize duplication.

Fostering  innovation  and  learning.  While  a 
great  deal  has  been  learned  about  what  works 
and  what  does  not  when  it  comes  to  promot-
ing  greater  gender  equality,  the  truth  remains 
that  progress  is  often  held  back  by  the  lack  of 
data or adequate solutions to the most “sticky” 
problems. That is the case, for instance, regard-
ing gender differences in time use patterns and 
the norms around care they stem from. The de-
velopment community could promote innova-
tion and learning through experimentation and 
evaluation in ways that pay attention to results 
and process, as well as to context, and thus facili-
tate a scaling-up of successful experiences.

Leveraging  effective  partnerships.  As  chapter 
8 makes clear, successful reform often requires 
coalitions  or  partnerships  that  can  act  within 

and  across  borders.  Such  partnerships  could 
be  built  among  those  in  the  international  de-
velopment  community  around  funding  issues, 
with academia and think tanks for the purpose 
of  experimentation  and  learning,  and,  more 
broadly, with the private sector to promote ac-
cess to economic opportunities. Together, these 
partnerships  could  support  countries  in  lever-
aging the resources and information needed to 
successfully promote gender equality in today’s 
globalized world.

The  relative  importance  of  these  activi-
ties  will  obviously  vary  across  countries.  Table 
2  provides  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  the  proposed 
agenda for global action (described in more de-
tail in chapter 9). Areas marked with a check are 
those where new or additional action is needed 
or where a refocus of existing initiatives is called 
for. Of course, there are also important ongoing 
efforts in the areas not marked with checks—for 
instance, innovation around the delivery models 
for the prevention of HIV/AIDS, or partnerships 
focused on adolescents. In these latter areas, the 
focus should be on sustaining ongoing efforts and 
partnerships, and meeting prior commitments.

Finally, the framework and analysis presented 
in the Report provide four general principles for 
policy and program design, which can enhance 
the  impact  and  effectiveness  of  global  action 
across all priority areas. These principles are: 
•  Comprehensive  gender  diagnostics  as  a  pre-
condition for policy and program design. Gen-
der  disparities  persist  for  multiple  reasons: 
there may be a single institutional or policy 
“ﬁ x” that is difﬁ cult and easily blocked; there 
may  be  multiple  reinforcing  constraints  in 
markets, formal institutions, and households 
that combine to block progress; or they may 
be  deeply  rooted  in  gender  roles  or  social 
norms that evolve only slowly. Effective pol-
icy design requires a good understanding of 
which of these situations prevails in a partic-
ular  context,  and  of  where  and  what  the 
binding constraints are. To be useful, this di-
agnostic must drill down into what happens 
in households, markets, and formal institu-
tions,  their  interactions,  and  how  they  are 
shaped by social norms.

•  Targeting  determinants  versus  targeting  out-
comes.  In  choosing  and  designing  policies, 
it  is  necessary  to  target  the  market  and  in-
stitutional constraints that generate existing 

38 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

TABLE 2  The agenda for global action at a glance

Priority area

New/additional initiatives 

that need support

Providing ﬁ nancial

support

Fostering innovation

and learning

Leveraging partnerships

Directions for the global development community

Increasing access to education 
among disadvantaged groups

Increasing access to 

clean water

Increasing access to 

specialized maternal services

Strengthening support for 
prevention and treatment of 

HIV/AIDS

Increasing access to child 
care and early childhood 

development

Investing in rural women

Increasing women’s access to 

the justice system

Shifting norms regarding 
violence against women

Investing in adolescent girls 

and boys

Generating new information

Facilitating knowledge sharing 

and learning

Closing gender gaps in 
human endowments

Promoting women’s access to 
economic opportunities

Closing gender gaps in voice 
and agency

Preventing intergenerational 
reproduction of gender 
inequality

Supporting evidence-based 
public action

Source: WDR 2012 team.

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

gender gaps, rather than the outcomes them-
selves. These constraints may be multiple and 
even  outside  the  immediate  domain  where 
the outcome is observed.

•  “Upstreaming”  and  strategic  mainstreaming. 
Because  gender  gaps  are  often  the  result  of 
multiple and mutually reinforcing constraints, 
effective  action  may  require  coordinated 
multisectoral interventions, or sequential in-
terventions.  And  in  many  instances,  such 
 interventions  can  take  the  form  of  general 
policies that are made “gender smart” by in-
corporating  gender-related  issues  into  their 
design  and  implementation.  To  maximize 
impact, it is thus necessary for gender issues 
to be upstreamed from speciﬁ c sector prod-
ucts and projects to country and sector pro-
grams.  That  will  allow  for  more  strategic 
gender mainstreaming.

•  No one size ﬁ ts all. The nature, structure, and 
functioning of markets and institutions vary 
widely across countries, as do norms and cul-

tures,  and  as  a  result  so  do  household  and 
individual  behaviors.  This  implies  that  the 
same  policy  can  have  very  different  results 
depending  on  the  contexts—or,  as  the  dis-
cussion in chapter 8 makes clear, that there 
are multiple paths to reform.

NOTES

  1.  Sen 1999.
  2.  Esteve-Volart and Bagues 2010.
  3.  Gilbert, Sakala, and Benson 2002; Vargas Hill and 

Vigneri 2009.

  4.  Udry 1996.
  5.  FAO, IFAD, and ILO 2010. 
  6.  Cuberes and Teignier Baqué 2011; Hurst and oth-

ers 2011.

  7.  Do, Levchenko, and Raddatz 2011.
  8.  Do, Levchenko, and Raddatz 2011.
  9.  Do, Levchenko, and Raddatz 2011.
10.  Haddad,  Hoddinott,  and  Alderman  1997;  Katz 
and Chamorro 2003; Duﬂ o 2003; Thomas 1990; 
Hoddinott  and  Haddad  1995;  Lundberg,  Pol-
lak, and Wales 1997; Quisumbing and Maluccio 

 

Overview 

39

2000;  Attanasio  and  Lechene  2002;  Rubalcava, 
Teruel, and Thomas 2009; Doss 2006; Schady and 
Rosero 2008.

11.  Doss 2006.
12.  Thomas 1990.
13.  Qian 2008.
14.  Luke and Munshi 2011.
15.  Thomas, Strauss, and Henriques 1990; Allendorf 

2007. 

16.  Andrabi,  Das,  and  Khwaja  2011;  Dumas  and 

Lambert 2011.

17.  Felitti and others 1998; McEwen 1999.
18.  Kishor and Johnson 2004; Jeyaseelan and others 
2007;  Hindin,  Kishor,  and Ansara  2008;  Koenig 
and others 2006; Martin and others 2002.

19.  Miller 2008.
20.  Beaman  and  others,  forthcoming;  Chattopad-

hyay and Duﬂ o 2004.

21.  Beaman and others, forthcoming.
22.  Agarwal 2010a; Agarwal 2010b.
23.  World Bank 2005.
24  World Bank 2001.
25.  World Bank 2011. 
26.  See  World  Bank  (2001)  and  also  World  Bank 
(2011b), from which we draw for the conceptual 
framework.

27.  Chioda, Garcia-Verdú, and Muñoz Boudet 2011.
28.  World Bank 2008.
29.  Lewis and Lockheed 2006.
30.  Chioda, Garcia-Verdú, and Muñoz Boudet 2011.
31.  For  a  detailed  description  of  the  methodology, 
which  builds  on Anderson  and  Ray  (2010),  see 
chapter 3.

32.  The problem of many missing girls was ﬁ rst doc-
umented by Sen (1992), Coale (1984), and Das 
Gupta (1987).

33.  WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, and World Bank 2010.
34.  FAO 2011.
35.  For  the  purpose  of  the  discussion  in  this  chap-
ter, the term “entrepreneur” refers to individuals 
who  are  self-employed  with  no  employees  own 
account workers and with employees employers.
36.  Sabarwal, Terrell, and Bardasi 2009; Bruhn 2009; 

Hallward-Driemeier 2011.

37.  Costa and Rijkers 2011.
38.  FAO 2011.
39.  Nyamu-Musembi 2002.
40.  Deere and Doss 2006.
41.  Team estimates based on ICF Macro 2010.
42.  Reed and others 2010.
43.  WHO 2005.
44.  United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and 

Social Affairs 2010.

45.  Agarwal and Panda 2007.
46.  Pronyk and others 2006; ICRW 2006; Swamina-

than, Walker, and Rugadya 2008.

47.  Dercon and Singh 2011.

48.  Fernández and Fogli 2009; Fogli and Veldkamp, 

forthcoming; Farré and Vella 2007.

49.  Agarwal and Panda 2007.
50.  Gage 2005.
51.  Yount  and  Carrera  2006;  Castro,  Casique,  and 

Brindis 2008.

52.  Abrahams and others 2009.
53.  Kishor and Johnson 2004.
54.  World Bank 2005.
55.  Chung and Das Gupta 2007.
56.  Waddington and others 2009.
57.  Chioda, Garcia-Verdú, and Muñoz Boudet 2011.
58.  Björkman and Svensson 2009.
59.  Cotlear 2006.
60.  Lim  and  others  2010.  Janani  Suraksha  Yojana 
also  had  signiﬁ cant  impacts  on  perinatal  and 
neonatal deaths, which declined by 3.7 deaths per 
1,000  pregnancies  and  by  2.5  deaths  per  1,000 
live births, respectively. The study was unable to 
detect an  effect on maternal mortality; however, 
perhaps  because  maternal  death  is  a  relatively 
rare event and the sample size of the study was 
big enough only to detect very large effects. 

61.  Prata and others 2010; WHO and others 2010.
62.  Baris, Mollahaliloglu, and Sabahattin 2011.
63.  Fiszbein and others 2009.
64.  FAO 2003.
65.  Deininger, Ali, and Zevenbergen 2008.
66.  Leonard 1989, Holzer and Neumark 2000.
67.  Holzer and Neumark 2000.
68.  Gornick and Jacobs 1998; OECD 1993; Schmidt 

1993.

69.  Bosch and Maloney 2010.
70.  Esteve-Volart and Bagues 2010.
71.  Quotas  are  implemented  on  a  rotating  basis 

across localities.

72.  Gajigo and Hallward-Driemeier 2011.
73.  Natarajan 2005.
74.  Barker and Ricardo 2005.
75.  Terefe and Larson 1993.
76.  See Rawlings and Rubio (2003) for Mexico and 
Nicaragua,  Barrera-Osorio  and  Linden  (2009) 
for Colombia, and Schady and Araujo (2006) for 
Ecuador.

77.  Baird and others 2009.
78.  Nguyen 2008.
79.  Jensen 2010.
80.  Angrist  and  Lavy  2009;  Kremer,  Miguel,  and 

Thornton 2009.

81.  Attanasio, Kugler, and Meghir 2008; Ñopo, Robles, 

and Saavedra 2007; Hjort and  others 2010.

82.  Hjort and others 2010.
83.  Ross and others 2007.
84.  Gilliam 2010; Bearinger and others 2007.
85.  Bandiera and others 2011. 
86.  Martinez and others 2011. 
87.  Beaman and others 2009.

40 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

88.  Jensen 2010.
89.  Barker and others 2011.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally repro-
duced works that may not be commonly avail-
able through libraries.

Abrahams, Naeemah, Rachel Jewkes, Lorna J. Martin, 
Shanaaz Mathews, Lisa Vetten, and Carl Lombard. 
2009. “Mortality of Women from Intimate Partner 
Violence in South Africa: A National Epidemiolog-
ical Study.” Violence and Victims 24 (4): 546–56.

Agarwal,  Bina.  1994.  A  Field  of  One’s  Own:  Gender 
and Land Rights in South Asia. Cambridge, U.K.: 
Cambridge University Press.

———.  1997. “ ‘Bargaining’  and  Gender  Relations: 
Within and Beyond the Household.” Feminist Eco-
nomics 3 (1): 1–51.

———.  2010a.  “Does  Women’s  Proportional 
Strength  Affect  Their  Participation?  Governing 
Local Forests in South Asia.” World Development 
38 (1): 98–112.

———.  2010b.  Gender  and  Green  Governance:  The 
Political Economy of Women’s Presence Within and 
Beyond  Community  Forestry.  New  York:  Oxford 
University Press.

Agarwal,  Bina,  and  Pradeep  Panda.  2007.  “Toward 
Freedom from Domestic Violence: The Neglected 
Obvious.” Journal of Human Development and Ca-
pabilities 8 (3): 359–88.

Alene,  Arega  D.,  Victor  M.  Manyong,  Gospel  O. 
Omanya, Hodeba D. Mignouna, Mpoko Bokanga, 
and George D. Odhiambo. 2008. “Economic Efﬁ -
ciency and Supply Response of Women as Farm 
Managers:  Comparative  Evidence  from  Western 
Kenya.” World Development 36 (7): 1247–60.

Allendorf,  Keera.  2007.  “Do  Women’s  Land  Rights 
Promote Empowerment and Child Health in Ne-
pal?” World Development 35 (11): 1975–88.

Anderson,  Siwan,  and  Debraj  Ray.  2010.  “Missing 
Women:  Age  and  Disease.”  Review  of  Economic 
Studies 77 (4): 1262–300.

Andrabi,  Tahir,  Jishnu  Das,  and  Asim  Ijaz  Khwaja. 
2011. “Students Today, Teachers Tomorrow. Iden-
tifying  Constraints  on  the  Provision  of  Educa-
tion.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 5674, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Angrist, Joshua, and Victor Lavy. 2009. “The Effects of 
High  Stakes  High  School  Achievements  Awards: 
Evidence  from  a  Randomized  Trial.”  American 
Economic Review 99 (4): 1384–414.

Attanasio, Orazio, Adriana Kugler, and Costas Meghir. 
2008.  “Training  Disadvantaged  Youth  in  Latin 
America:  Evidence  from  a  Randomized  Trial.” 

Working Paper Series 13931, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Attanasio,  Orazio,  and Valérie  Lechene.  2002. “Tests 
of Income Pooling in Household Decisions.” Re-
view of Economic Dynamics 5 (4): 720–48.

Baird, Sarah, Ephraim Chirwa, Craig McIntosh, and 
Berk  Özler.  2009. “The  Short-term  Impacts  of  a 
Schooling  Conditional  Cash  Transfer  Program 
on the Sexual Behavior of Young Women.” Policy 
Research Working Paper Series 5089, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Bandiera,  Oriana,  Niklas  Buehren,  Robin  Burguess, 
Markus  Goldstein,  Selim  Gulesci,  Imran  Rasul, 
and  Munshi  Sulaiman.  2011.  “Economic  Em-
powerment  of  Female  Adolescents:  Evidence 
from Uganda.” Presentation to the American Agri-
cultural Association, Pittsburgh, PA.

Baris, Enis, Salih Mollahaliloglu, and Aydin Sabahat-
tin.  2011. “Healthcare  in  Turkey:  From  Laggard 
to  Leader.”  British  Medical  Journal  342  (c7456): 
579–82.

Barker, Gary, Manuel Contreras, Brian Heilman, Ajay 
Singh,  Ravi  Verman,  and  Marcos  Nascimento. 
2011.  “Evolving  Men:  Initial  Results  from  the 
International  Men  and  Gender  Equality  Survey 
(IMAGES).” International Center for Research on 
Women  and  Instituto  Promundo,  Washington, 
DC.

Barker,  Gary,  and  Christine  Ricardo.  2005.  “Young 
Men and the Construction of Masculinity in Sub-
Saharan Africa: Implications for HIV/AIDS, Con-
ﬂ ict,  and  Violence.”  Social  Development  Papers, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Barrera-Osorio,  Felipe,  and  Leigh  L.  Linden.  2009. 
“The  Use  and  Misuse  of  Computers  in  Educa-
tion: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in 
Colombia.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 
4836, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Beaman,  Lori,  Raghabendra  Chattopadhyay,  Esther 
Duﬂ o,  Rohini  Pande,  and  Petia  Topalova.  2009. 
“Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias?” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1497–540.
Beaman, Lori, Esther Duﬂ o, Rohini Pande, and Petia 
Topalova. Forthcoming. “Political Reservation and 
Substantive Representation: Evidence from Indian 
Village Councils.” In India Policy Forum, 2010, ed. 
Suman Bery, Barry Bosworth, and Arvind Pana-
gariya.  Brookings  Institution  Press  and  the  Na-
tional  Council  of  Applied  Economic  Research, 
Washington, DC, and New Delhi.

Bearinger, Linda H., Renee E. Sieving, Jane Ferguson, 
and Vinit Sharma. 2007. “Global Perspectives on 
the  Sexual  and  Reproductive  Health  of  Adoles-
cents: Patterns, Prevention, and Potential.” Lancet 
369 (9568): 1220–31.

Berniell, Maria Inés, and Carolina Sánchez-Páramo. 
2011. “Overview of Time Use Data Used for the 

 

Overview 

41

Analysis of Gender Differences in Time Use Pat-
terns.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Björkman, Martina, and Jacob Svensson. 2009. “Power 
to the People: Evidence from a Randomized Field 
Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in 
Uganda.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2): 
735–69.

Booth,  Alison  L.,  and  Patrick  J.  Nolen.  2009. “Gen-
der Differences in Risk Behaviour: Does Nurture 
Matter?”  Centre  for  Economy  Policy  Research, 
London.

Bosch,  Mariano,  and  William  F.  Maloney.  2010. 
“Comparative Analysis of Labor Market Dynam-
ics  Using  Markov  Processes:  An  Application  to 
 Informality.” Labour Economics 17 (4): 621–31.

Bruhn, Miriam. 2009. “Female-Owned Firms in Latin 
America.  Characteristics,  Performance,  and  Ob-
stacles to Growth.” Policy Research Working Paper 
Series 5122, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Castro, Roberto, Irene. Casique, and Claire D. Brin-
dis.  2008. “Empowerment  and  Physical Violence 
throughout Women’s  Reproductive  Life  in  Mex-
ico.” Violence Against Women 14 (6): 655–77.

Chattopadhyay,  Raghabendra,  and  Esther  Duﬂ o. 
2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a 
Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econo-
metrica 72 (5): 1409–43.

Chioda, Laura, with Rodrigo Garcia-Verdú, and Ana 
María  Muñoz  Boudet.  2011.  Work  and  Family: 
Latin American Women in Search of a New Balance. 
Ofﬁ ce of the Chief Economist and Poverty Gender 
Group, LAC. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Chung, Woojin, and Monica Das Gupta. 2007. “The 
Decline  of  Son  Preference  in  South  Korea:  The 
Roles of Development and Public Policy.” Popula-
tion and Development Review 33 (4): 757–83.

Coale, Ansley J. 1984. “Rapid Population Change in 
China,  1952–1982.”  Report  27,  Committee  on 
Population and Demography, National Academies 
Press, Washington, DC.

Costa, Rita, and Bob Rijkers. 2011. “Gender and Rural 
Non-Farm Entrepreneurship.” Background paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Cotlear, Daniel, ed. 2006. “A New Social Contract for 
Peru: An Agenda for Improving Education, Health 
Care,  and  the  Social  Safety  Net.”  Country  Study, 
World Bank, Washington, DC. 

Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Dif-
ferences in Preferences.” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 47 (2): 448–74.

Cuberes,  David,  and  Marc  Teignier  Baqué.  2011. 
“Gender  Inequality  and  Economic  Growth.” 
Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Das Gupta, Monica. 1987. “Selective Discrimination 
against  Female  Children  in  Rural  Punjab,  In-
dia.” Population and Development Review 13 (1): 
77–100.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Cheryl  R.  Doss.  2006. 
“Gender and the Distribution of Wealth in Devel-
oping Countries.” Research Paper Series 2006/115, 
United Nations University and World Institute for 
Development Economics Research, Helsinki.

Deininger, Klaus, Daniel Ayalew Ali, Holden T. Stein, 
and Jaap Zevenbergen. 2008. “Rural Land Certi-
ﬁ cation  in  Ethiopia:  Process,  Initial  Impact,  and 
Implications for Other African Countries.” World 
Development 36 (10): 1786–812.

Dercon, Stefan, and Abhijeet Singh. 2011. “From Nu-
trition  to  Aspirations  and  Self-Efﬁ cacy:  Gender 
Bias  over  Time  among  Children  in  Four  Coun-
tries.” Oxford University, Oxford, U.K. Processed.
Do,  Quy-Toan,  Andrei  Levchenko,  and  Claudio 
Raddatz. 2011. “Engendering Trade.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Doss, Cheryl R. 2006. “The Effects of Intrahousehold 
Property  Ownership  on  Expenditure  Patterns 
in  Ghana.”  Journal  of  African  Economies  15  (1): 
149–80.

Duﬂ o,  Esther.  2003.  “Grandmothers  and  Grand-
daughters: Old-Age Pensions and Intrahousehold 
Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic 
Review 17 (1): 1–25.

Dumas, Christelle, and Sylvie Lambert. 2011. “Edu-
cational Achievement and Socio-Economic Back-
ground:  Causality  and  Mechanisms  in  Senegal.” 
Journal of African Economies 20 (1): 1–26.

Esteve-Volart, Berta, and Manuel F. Bagues. 2010. “Are 
Women  Pawns  in  the  Political  Game?  Evidence 
from  Elections  to  the  Spanish  Senate.”  Working 
Paper Series 2009–30, Fundación de Estudios de 
Economía Aplicada, Madrid.

Farré, Lídia, and Francis Vella. 2007. “The Intergen-
erational Transmission of Gender Role Attitudes 
and Its Implications for Female Labor Force Par-
ticipation.” Discussion Paper Series 2802, Institute 
for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Fehr,  Ernst,  Urs  Fischbacher,  and  Simon  Gächter. 
2002.  “Strong  Reciprocity,  Human  Cooperation 
and  the  Enforcement  of  Social  Norms.”  Human 
Nature 13 (2002): 1–25.

Felitti, Vincent D., Robert F. Anda, Dale D. Norden-
berg, David F. Williamson, Alison M. Spitz, Valerie 
Edwards, Mary P. Koss, and James S. Marks. 1998. 
“Relationship  of  Childhood  Abuse  and  House-
hold Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes 
of Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood Expe-
riences (ACE) Study.” American Journal of Preven-
tive Medicine 14 (4): 245–58.

Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. “Cul-
ture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, 
and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macro-
economics 1 (1): 146–77.

Fiszbein,  Ariel,  Norbert  Schady,  Francisco  H.  G. 
Ferreira,  Margaret  Grosch,  Nial  Kelleher,  Pedro 

42 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Olinto, and Emmanuel Skouﬁ as. 2009. World Bank 
Policy Research Report: Conditional Cash Transfers: 
Reducing Present and Future Poverty. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Fogli,  Alessandra,  and  Laura  Veldkamp.  Forth-
coming.  “Nature  or  Nurture?  Learning  and  the 
Geography of Female Labor Force Participation.” 
Econometrica.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).  2003. 
“Revisiting the ‘Magic Box.’ ” Case Studies in Lo-
cal Appropriation of Information and Communi-
cation Technologies, FAO, Rome.

———.  2011.  “The  State  of  Food  and  Agriculture 
2010–11. Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gen-
der Gap for Development.” FAO, Rome.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization),  IFAD 
(International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Develop-
ment),  and  ILO  (International  Labour  Ofﬁ ce). 
2010.  “Gender  Dimensions  of  Agricultural  and 
Rural  Employment:  Differentiated  Pathways  out 
of Poverty. Status, Trends and Gaps.” FAO, IFAD, 
and ILO, Rome.

Gage, Anastasia J. 2005. “Women’s Experience of In-
timate Partner Violence in Haiti.” Social Science & 
Medicine 61 (2): 343–64.

Gajigo,  Ousman,  and  Mary  Hallward-Driemeier. 
2011.  “Constraints  and  Opportunities  for  New 
Entrepreneurs  in Africa.” World  Bank, Washing-
ton, DC. Processed.

Gilbert,  Robert  A.,  Webster  D.  Sakala,  and  Todd  D. 
Benson. 2002. “Gender Analysis of a Nationwide 
Cropping System Trial Survey in Malawi.” African 
Studies Quarterly 6 (1).

Gilliam, Melissa L. 2010. “Interventions for Prevent-
ing Unintended Pregnancies among Adolescents.” 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 115 (1): 171–72.

Gneezy,  Uri,  Kenneth  L.  Leonard,  and  John  A.  List. 
2009. “Gender  Differences  in  Competition:  Evi-
dence from a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Soci-
ety.” Econometrica 77 (5): 1637–64.

Gornick,  Janet  C.,  and  Jerry  A.  Jacobs.  1998. “Gen-
der,  the  Welfare  State,  and  Public  Employment: 
A  Comparative  Study  of  Seven  Industrialized 
Countries.”  American  Sociological  Review  63  (5): 
688–710.

Haddad, Lawrence, John Hoddinott, and Harold Al-
derman. 1997. Intrahousehold Resource Allocation 
in  Developing  Countries:  Models,  Methods,  and 
Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University.

Hallward-Driemeier,  Mary.  2011.  “Improving  the 
Legal  Investment  Climate  for  Women  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Hindin,  Michelle  J.,  Sunita  Kishor,  and  Donna  L. 
Ansara. 2008. “Intimate Partner Violence among 
Couples  in  10  DHS  Countries:  Predictors  and 
Health  Outcomes.”  DHS  Analytical  Studies  18, 
U.S.  Agency  for  Iinternational  Development, 
Washington, DC.

Hjort,  Jonas,  Michael  Kremer,  Isaac  Mbiti,  and  Ed-
ward Miguel. 2010. “Vocational Education Vouch-
ers  and  Labor  Market  Returns:  A  Randomized 
Evaluation among Kenyan Youth.” Harvard Uni-
versity and Southern Methodist University, Berke-
ley, CA. Processed.

Hoddinott, John, and Lawrence Haddad. 1995. “Does 
Female  Income  Share  Inﬂ uence  Household  Ex-
penditures? Evidence from Côte D’Ivoire.” Oxford 
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 57 (1): 77–96.
Holzer, Harry J., and David Neumark. 2000. “Assess-
ing Afﬁ rmative Action.” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 38 (3): 483–568.

Hurst,  Erik,  Chang-Tai  Hsieh,  Charles  Jones,  and 
Peter  Klenow.  2011.  “The  Allocation  of  Talent 
and Economic Growth.” Chicago Booth, Chicago. 
Processed.

ICF Macro. 2010. “Demographic and Health Surveys.” 

Measure DHS, ICF Macro, Calverton, MD.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2010. “Key 

Indicators of the Labour Market.” ILO, Geneva.

ICRW  (International  Center  for  Research  on 
Women). 2006. Property Ownership & Inheritance 
Rights  of Women  for  Social  Protection: The  South 
Asia Experience. Washington, DC: ICRW.

Iyer,  Lakshmi,  Anandi  Mani,  Prachi  Mishra,  and 
Petia  Topalova.  2010.  “Political  Representation 
and Crime: Evidence from India’s Panchayati Raj.” 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Washington,  DC. 
Processed.

Jensen, Robert. 2010. “Economic Opportunities and 
Gender  Differences  in  Human  Capital:  Experi-
mental Evidence for India.” Working Paper Series 
16021,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Cambridge, MA.

Jeyaseelan,  L.,  Shuba  Kumar,  Nithya  Neelakantan, 
Abraham  Peedicayil,  Rajamohanam  Pillai,  and 
Nata  Duvvury.  2007. “Physical  Spousal  Violence 
against Women in India: Some Risk Factors.” Jour-
nal of Biosocial Science 39 (5): 657–70.

Kabeer, Nalia. 1996. “Agency, Well-Being & Inequal-
ity: Reﬂ ections on the Gender Dimensions of Pov-
erty.” IDS Bulletin 27 (1): 11–21.

———.  1999.  “Resources,  Agency,  Achievements: 
Reﬂ ections  on  the  Measurement  of  Women’s 
Empowerment.” Development and Change 30 (3): 
35–64.

Katz, Elizabeth, and Juan Sebastian Chamorro. 2003. 
“Gender, Land Rights, and the Household Econ-
omy  in  Rural  Nicaragua  and  Honduras.”  Paper 
presented at the Annual Conference of the Latin 
American and Caribbean Economics Association, 
Puebla, Mexico, October 9.

Kinkingninhoun-Mêdagbé, Florent M., Aliou Diagne, 
Franklin  Simtowe,  Aﬁ avi  R.  Agboh-Noameshie, 
and Patrice Y. Adégbola. 2010. “Gender Discrimi-
nation  and  Its  Impact  on  Income,  Productivity, 

 

Overview 

43

and  Technical  Efﬁ ciency:  Evidence  from  Benin.” 
Agriculture and Human Values 27 (1): 57–69.

Kishor, Sunita, and Kiersten Johnson. 2004. Proﬁ ling 
Domestic Violence: A Multi-Country Study. Calver-
ton, MD: ORC Macro.

Koenig,  Michael  A.,  Rob  Stephenson,  Saifuddin 
Ahmed,  Shireen  J.  Jejeebhoy,  and  Jacquelyn 
Campbell. 2006. “Individual and Contextual De-
terminants  of  Domestic  Violence  in  Northern 
India.” American Journal of Public Health 96 (1): 
132–38.

Kremer,  Michael,  Edward  Miguel,  and  Rebecca 
Thornton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.” Review of 
Economics and Statistics 91 (3): 437–56.

Leonard, Jonathan S. 1989. “Women and Afﬁ rmative 
Action.”  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  3  (1): 
61–75.

Lewis, Maureen A., and Marlaine E. Lockheed. 2006. 
Inexcusable Absence: Why 60 Million Girls Aren’t in 
School and What to Do About It. Washington, DC: 
Center for Global Development.

Lim, Stephen S., Lalit Dandona, Joseph A. Hoisington, 
Spencer  L.  James,  Margaret  C.  Hogan,  and  Em-
manuela Gakidou. 2010. “India’s Janani Suraksha 
Yojana, A Conditional Cash Transfer Programme 
to Increase Births in Health Facilities: An Impact 
Evaluation.” Lancet 375 (9730): 2009–23.

Luke, Nancy, and Kaivan Munshi. 2011. “Women as 
Agents  of  Change:  Female  Income  and  Mobility 
in  India.”  Journal  of  Development  Economics  94 
(1): 1–17.

Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. 
Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and Wives Pool Their 
Resources?  Evidence  from  the  United  Kingdom 
Child Beneﬁ t.” Journal of Human Resources 32 (3): 
463–80.

Martin, Sandra L., Kathryn E. Moracco, Julian Garro, 
Amy  Ong  Tsui,  Lawrence  L.  Kupper,  Jennifer  L. 
Chase,  and  Jacquelyn  C.  Campbell.  2002.  “Do-
mestic  Violence  across  Generations:  Findings 
from  Northern  India.”  International  Journal  of 
Epidemiology 31 (3): 560–72.

Martinez,  Sebastian,  and  others.  2011.  “Hard  Skills 
or  Soft  Skills.”  Presentation  to  the  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC. 

McEwen,  Bruce  S.  1999.  “Stress  and  Hippocampal 
Plasticity.” Annual Review of Neuroscience 22 (1): 
105–22.

Miller,  Grant.  2008.  “Women’s  Suffrage,  Political 
Responsiveness,  and  Child  Survival  in American 
History.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 
1287–327.

Moock, Peter R. 1976. “The Efﬁ ciency of Women as 
Farm Managers: Kenya.” American Journal of Agri-
cultural Economics 58 (5): 831–5.

Natarajan, Mangai. 2005. “Status of Women Police in 
Asia: An Agenda for Future Research.” Journal for 
Women and Policing 17: 45–47.

Nguyen,  Trang.  2008.  “Information,  Role  Models 
and Perceived Returns to Education: Experimen-
tal  Evidence  from  Madagascar.”  Working  Paper, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  Cam-
bridge, MA.

Ñopo,  Hugo,  Miguel  Robles,  and  Jaime  Saavedra. 
2007. “Occupational  Training  to  Reduce  Gender 
Segregation: The Impacts of ProJoven.” Working 
Paper  Series  623,  Inter-American  Development 
Bank Research Department, Washington, DC.

Nyamu-Musembi, Celestine. 2002. “Are Local Norms 
and Processes Fences or Pathways? The Example 
of Women’s Property Rights.” In Cultural Trans-
formations and Human Rights in Africa, ed. Ab-
dullahi A. An-Na’im. London: Zed Books.

Oladeebo, J. O., and A. A. Fajuyigbe. 2007. “Technical 
Efﬁ ciency of Men and Women Upland Rice Farm-
ers in Osun State, Nigeria.” Journal of Human Ecol-
ogy 22 (2): 93–100.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development). 1993. Private Pay for Public Work. 
Performance-Related Pay for Public Sector Manag-
ers. Paris: OECD.

Pathmanathan, Indra, Jerker Liljestrand, Jo M. Mar-
tins,  Lalini  C.  Rajapaksa,  Craig  Lissner,  Amalia 
de  Silva,  Swarna  Selvaraju,  and  Prabha  Joginder 
Singh. 2003. “Investing in Maternal Health Learn-
ing  from  Malaysia  and  Sri  Lanka.”  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Prata,  Ndola,  Paige  Passano,  Amita  Sreenivas,  and 
Caitlin Elisabeth Gerdts. 2010. “Maternal Mortal-
ity in Developing Countries: Challenges in Scaling 
Up Priority Interventions.” Women’s Health 6 (2): 
311–27.

Pronyk, Paul M., James R. Hargreaves, Julia C. Kim, 
Linda  A.  Morison,  Godfrey  Phetla,  Charlotte 
Watts, Joanna Busza, and John D. H. Porter. 2006. 
“Effect  of  a  Structural  Intervention  for  the  Pre-
vention of Intimate-partner Violence and HIV in 
Rural South Africa: A Cluster Randomized Trial.” 
Lancet 2368 (9551): 1973–83.

Qian, Nancy. 2008. “Missing Women and the Price of 
Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Speciﬁ c Earnings 
on Sex Imbalance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
123 (3): 1251–85.

Quisumbing, Agnes R., and John A. Maluccio. 2000. 
“Intrahousehold  Allocation  and  Gender  Rela-
tions:  New  Empirical  Evidence  from  Four  De-
veloping  Countries.”  Discussion  Paper  84,  Food 
Consumption  and  Nutrition  Division,  Interna-
tional  Food  Policy  Research  Institute,  Washing-
ton, DC.

Rawlings, Laura, B., and Gloria M. Rubio. 2003. “Eval-
uating  the  Impact  of  Conditional  Cash  Transfer 
Programs:  Lessons  from  Latin  America.”  Policy 
Research Working Paper Series 3119, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

44 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Reed,  Elizabeth,  Anita  Raj,  Elizabeth  Miller,  and 
Jay  G.  Silverman.  2010.  “Losing  the  ‘Gender’  in 
Gender-Based Violence: The Missteps of Research 
on  Dating  and  Intimate  Partner  Violence.”  Vio-
lence Against Women 16 (3): 348–54.

Ross, David A., John Changalucha, Angela I. N. Obasi, 
Jim Todd, Mary L. Plummer, Bernadette Cleophas-
Mazige,  Alessandra  Anemona,  Dean  Everett, 
Helen  A.  Weiss,  David  C.  Mabey,  Heiner 
Grosskurth, and Richard J. Hayes. 2007. “Biologi-
cal and Behavioural Impact of an Adolescent Sex-
ual Health Intervention in Tanzania: A Commu-
nity-Randomized Trial.” AIDS 21 (14): 1943–55.

Rubalcava,  Luis,  Graciela  Teruel,  and  Duncan 
Thomas.  2009.  “Investments,  Time  Preferences, 
and  Public  Transfers  Paid  to Women.”  Economic 
Development and Cultural Change 57 (3): 507–38.
Sabarwal,  Shwetlena,  Katherine  Terrell,  and  Elena 
Bardasi.  2009.  “How  Do  Female  Entrepreneurs 
Perform?  Evidence  from  Three  Developing  Re-
gions.” World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Saito,  Katrine  A.,  Hailu  Mekonnen,  and  Daphne 
Spurling.  1994.  “Raising  the  Productivity  of 
Women  Farmers  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa.”  Africa 
Technical  Department  Discussion  Paper  Series 
230, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Schady,  Norbert,  and  Maria  Caridad  Araujo.  2006. 
“Cash Transfers, Conditions, School Enrollment, 
and  Child  Work:  Evidence  from  a  Randomized 
Experiment in Ecuador.” Policy Research Working 
Paper Series 3930, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Schady,  Norbert,  and  José  Rosero.  2008.  “Are  Cash 
Transfers  Made  to  Women  Spent  Like  Other 
Sources  of  Income?”  Economics  Letters  101  (3): 
246–48.

Schmidt, Manfred G. 1993. “Gendered Labour Force 
Participation.”  In  Families  of  Nations:  Patterns  of 
Public Policy in Western Democracies, ed. Frances 
G. Castles. Dartmouth Publishing Company, Al-
dershot, U.K., and Brookﬁ eld, VT.

Sen,  Amartya.  1990.  “Gender  and  Cooperative 
 Conﬂ ict.”  In  Persistent  Inequalities:  Women  and 
Development, ed. Irene Tinker. Oxford, U.K.: Ox-
ford University Press.

———.  1992.  “Missing  Women.”  British  Medical 

Journal 304: (6827): 587–8.

———.  1999.  Development  as  Freedom.  New  York: 

Knopf.

Swaminathan, Hema, Cherryl Walker, and Margaret 
A.  Rugadya,  eds.  2008.  Women’s  Property  Rights, 
HIV  and  AIDS,  and  Domestic  Violence:  Research 
Findings from Two Rural Districts in South Africa 
and Uganda. Cape Town: HSRC Press. 

Terefe, Almas, and Charles P. Larson. 1993. “Modern 
Contraception  Use  in  Ethiopia:  Does  Involving 

Husbands Make a Difference?” American Journal 
of Public Health 83 (11): 1567–71.

Thomas, Duncan. 1990. “Intra-Household Resource 
Allocation:  An  Inferential  Approach.”  Journal  of 
Human Resources 25 (4): 635–64.

Thomas,  Duncan,  John  Strauss,  and  Maria-Helena 
Henriques. 1990. “Child Survival, Height for Age, 
and Household Characteristics in Brazil.” Journal 
of Development Economics 33 (2): 197–234.

Udry, Christopher. 1996. “Gender, Agricultural Pro-
duction, and the Theory of the Household.” Jour-
nal of Political Economy 104 (5): 1010–46.

United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs. 2009, “World Population Prospects 2009.” 
United Nations, New York.

———.  2010.  “The  World’s  Women  2010:  Trends 

and Statistics.” United Nations, New York.

Vargas Hill, Ruth, and Marcella Vigneri. 2009. “Main-
streaming  Gender  Sensitivity  in  Cash  Crop 
Markets Supply Chains.” International Food Pol-
icy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Waddington, Hugh, Birte Snilstveit, Howard White, 
and  Lorna  Fewtrell.  2009.  “Water,  Sanitation 
and Hygiene Interventions to Combat Childhood 
Diarrhoea  in  Developing  Countries.”  Interna-
tional Initiative for Impact Evaluation 31E, Syn-
thetic Review, New Delhi, London, and Washing-
ton, DC.

WHO  (World  Health  Organization).  2005.  “WHO 
Multi-country  Study  on  Women’s  Health  and 
 Domestic Violence against Women: Initial Results 
on  Prevalence,  Health  Outcomes  and  Women’s 
Responses.” WHO, Geneva.

WHO,  UNICEF  (United  Nations  Children  Fund), 
UNFPA  (United  Nations  Population  Fund),  and 
World Bank. 2010. “Trends in Maternal Mortality: 
1990 to 2008.” WHO, Washington, DC.

World  Bank.  2001.  “Engendering  Development—
Through  Gender  Equality,  Resources,  and Voice. 
Policy Research Report, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.”

———-. 2005. World Development Report 2006: Eq-
uity and Development. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

———. 2008. Growth Report. Strategies for Sustained 
Growth  and  Inclusive  Development.  Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———. 2011. “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: 
Talking with Women and Men around the World, 
A  Multi-Country  Qualitative  Study  of  Gender 
and Economic Choice.” World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Yount,  Kathryn  M.,  and  Jennifer  S.  Carrera.  2006. 
“Domestic  Violence  against  Married  Women  in 
Cambodia.” Social Forces 85 (1): 355–87.

A guide to the Report

Gender  refers  to  socially  constructed 

and learned female and male roles, 
behaviors, and expectations. All cul-
tures interpret and translate the bio-
logical  differences  between  men  and  women 
into beliefs about what behaviors and activities 
are appropriate for each gender as well as their 
rights, resources, and power. For example, most 
societies give the primary responsibility for the 
care  of  infants  and  young  children  to  women 
and girls, and that for military service and na-
tional security to men. Gender thus shapes one’s 
life chances and one’s role in the home, in soci-
ety, and in the economy.

Played out over the life cycles of individuals, 
gender  can  translate  into  inequalities—in  hu-
man  capital,  economic  opportunities,  citizen-
ship,  and  political  participation.  It  determines 
the  way  households  allocate  resources  to  sons 
and  daughters,  through  decisions  about  boys’ 
or  girls’  education  or  about  where  they  work, 
with sons typically working on the farm and in 
other market work while daughters work in the 
home and care-giving activities. By the time girls 
and boys become adults and form households, 
women typically have fewer years of education 
than  men  (although  this  is  changing  rapidly), 
work longer hours but fewer in the labor force, 
earn lower wages, and have less say in their com-
munities and societies.

GENDER EQUALITY AND 
DEVELOPMENT: WHY DO THE 
LINKS MATTER?

Why do these gender differences matter for de-
velopment, and how do they evolve as countries 

develop? We argue in this Report that the links 
between  gender  equality  and  development  go 
both  ways  and  that  each  direction  of  this  re-
lationship  matters  for  policy  making.  Higher 
incomes  and  improved  service  delivery—both 
essential elements of broad-based economic de-
velopment—contribute to greater gender equal-
ity. That is why the rise in global prosperity in 
the past quarter century has seen the unprece-
dented narrowing of gender gaps on many edu-
cation and health outcomes as well as in labor 
market  opportunities.  More  women  than  men 
now  attend  universities  across  the  world.  And 
women make up over 40 percent of the world’s 
labor force.

But  not  all  gender  gaps  have  shrunk  or  are 
shrinking  with  rising  incomes.  Poor  girls  and 
those who live in remote areas or belong to ex-
cluded  groups  are  far  less  likely  to  attend  pri-
mary  and  secondary  school  than  boys  in  the 
same circumstances. Compared with their high-
income counterparts, women and girls in low- 
and  middle-income countries die at higher rates 
relative  to  men,  especially  in  the  critical  years 
of  infancy  and  early  childhood,  and  in  their 
reproductive  years.  Women  continue  to  clus-
ter in sectors and occupations characterized as 
“female”—many of them lower paying. Women 
are more likely to be the victims of violence at 
home and to suffer more severe injuries. And al-
most everywhere, the representation of women 
in politics and in senior managerial positions in 
business remains far lower than that of men.

Understanding which of these gaps respond 
to economic development and why they do so is 
relevant to policy because it helps shine the light 
on the gender gaps that need attention. The dis-
parities between women and men or girls and 

 

A guide to the Report 

47

boys that shrink as countries get richer—differ-
ences in access to education, for example—need 
less policy attention through a gender lens than 
those  that  are  more  persistent,  such  as  differ-
ences  in  wages,  agricultural  productivity,  and 
societal voice.

The reverse relationship—from gender equal-
ity  to  development—also  matters  for  policy 
for two reasons. First, gender equality matters 
in its own right, because the ability to live the 
life of one’s own choosing and be spared from 
absolute  deprivation  is  a  basic  human  right, 
to be enjoyed by everyone, whether one is male 
or  female.  Because  development  is  a  process 
of expanding freedoms equally for all people, 
gender  equality  is  a  core  objective  in  itself. 
Just as lower income poverty or greater access 
to justice is part of development, so too is the 
narrowing of gaps in well-being between males 
and females. 

Second, greater gender equality can enhance 
economic  efﬁ ciency  and  improve  other  devel-
opment  outcomes.  Evidence  from  a  (slowly) 
growing set of microeconomic studies points to 
three main channels for greater gender equality 
to promote growth:
•  Reducing  barriers  to  more  efﬁ cient  alloca-
tion of women’s skills and talents can gener-
ate large (and growing) productivity gains. 
•  Improving women’s endowments, opportu-
nities,  and  agency  can  shape  more  positive 
outcomes for the next generation.

•  Increasing women’s individual and collective 
agency  produces  better  outcomes,  institu-
tions, and policy choices. 

Misallocating women’s skills and talent 
comes at a large (and rising) economic cost
Gender equality can have large impacts on pro-
ductivity, especially with women now represent-
ing  larger  shares  of  the  world’s  workforce  and 
university  graduates.  For  countries  to  be  per-
forming at their potential, the skills and talents 
of these women should be applied to activities 
that make the best use of those abilities. But this 
is not always the case. Women’s labor is too of-
ten  underused  or  misallocated—because  they 
face discrimination in markets or societal insti-
tutions  that  prevents  them  from  having  access 
to productive inputs and credit, entering certain 
occupations, and earning the same incomes as 
men. The consequence: economic losses.

The  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization 
(FAO)  estimates  that  equalizing  access  to  pro-
ductive  resources  for  female  and  male  farmers 
could  increase  agricultural  output  in  develop-
ing countries by as much as 2.5 to 4 percent.1 
Eliminating  barriers  preventing  women  from 
entering  certain  sectors  or  occupations  would 
have  similar  positive  effects,  increasing  output 
per worker by 13 to 25 percent.2 

These  gains  are  large  in  the  21st  century’s 
integrated  and  competitive  world,  where  even 
modest  improvements  in  the  efﬁ ciency  of  re-
source use can have signiﬁ cant effects on growth. 
In a world of open trade, gender inequality has 
become  more  costly  because  it  diminishes  a 
country’s  ability  to  compete  internationally—
particularly if the country specializes in export-
ing  goods  and  services  that  men  and  women 
workers  are  equally  well  suited  to  produce.3 
Industries  that  rely  more  on  female  labor  ex-
pand more in countries where women are more 
equal.4  In  a  globalized  world,  then,  countries 
that reduce gender-based inequalities, especially 
in secondary and tertiary education and in eco-
nomic participation, will have a clear advantage 
over those that delay action.

The  rapid  aging  of  the  world’s  population 
implies  that  fewer  workers  will  be  supporting 
growing  numbers  of  elderly  in  the  decades  to 
come, unless labor force participation increases 
signiﬁ cantly among groups that participate less 
today—mainly women. For instance, in Europe 
an  anticipated  shortfall  of  24  million  workers 
by 2040 could be reduced to 3 million if female 
participation rates rise to those of men.5 Nor is 
the problem limited to rich countries. In devel-
oping countries and regions with rapidly aging 
demographic  structures,  like  China  or  Eastern 
Europe,  encouraging  women  to  enter  and  re-
main in the labor force can dampen the impact 
of shrinking working-age populations. 

Women’s endowments, opportunities, and 
agency shape those of the next generation
Women’s economic empowerment and greater 
control over resources also increase investments 
in  children’s  health,  education,  and  nutrition, 
boosting  future  economic  growth.  Evidence 
from  a  range  of  countries  (Bangladesh,  Brazil, 
Côte  d’Ivoire,  Mexico,  South  Africa,  and  the 
United  Kingdom,  among  others)  shows  that 
increasing the share of household income that 
women control, either through their own earn-

48 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

ings or cash transfers, changes spending in ways 
that beneﬁ t children.6 

Improvements  in  women’s  health  and  edu-
cation  also  beneﬁ t  the  next  generation.  Better 
nutritional status and higher education levels of 
mothers are associated with better child health 
outcomes—from immunization rates to nutri-
tion  to  child  mortality.7 And  mothers’  school-
ing is positively linked to children’s educational 
attainment  across  a  broad  set  of  countries.  In 
Pakistan,  children  whose  mothers  have  even  a 
single  year  of  education  spend  one  extra  hour 
studying at home every day and receive higher 
test scores.8

Women’s lack of agency—evident in domes-
tic  violence—has  consequences  for  their  chil-
dren’s  cognitive  behavior  and  health  as  adults. 
Medical research from developed countries has 
established a link between exposure to domes-
tic  violence  in  childhood  and  health  problems 
in adulthood. Numerous studies also document 
how witnessing violence between one’s parents 
as a child increases the likelihood that women 
experience violence from their own partners as 
adults, and that men perpetrate violence against 
their partners.9

Increasing women’s individual and 
collective agency produces better 
outcomes, institutions, and policy choices
Across countries and cultures, men and women 
differ  in  agency—that  is,  their  ability  to  make 
choices  that  lead  to  desired  outcomes—with 
women usually at a disadvantage. When women 
and men do not have equal chances to be socially 
and  politically  active—and  to  inﬂ uence  laws, 
politics,  and  policy  making—institutions  and 
policies  are  more  likely  to  systematically  favor 
the  interests  of  those  with  more  inﬂ uence.  So, 
the institutional constraints and market failures 
that feed gender inequalities are less likely to be 
addressed  and  corrected,  perpetuating  gender 
inequality over generations.

Women’s  collective  agency  can  be  trans-
formative  for  society  as  a  whole.  Empowering 
women as political and social actors can change 
policy choices and make institutions more rep-
resentative of a range of voices. Female suffrage 
in  the  United  States  led  policy  makers  to  turn 
their  attention  to  child  and  maternal  health 
and helped lower infant mortality by 8–15 per-
cent.10 In India, giving power to women at the 
local  level  (through  political  quotas)  increased 

the  provision  of  public  goods  (both  female-
preferred  goods  such  as  water  and  sanitation, 
and  male-preferred  goods  such  as  irrigation 
and  schools).  It  also  reduced  corruption  and 
increased reported crimes against women along 
with arrests for those crimes.11 

Several  studies  have  also  examined  the 
relationship  between  gender  equality  and 
economic  growth  at  an  aggregate  level  us-
ing  cross-country  data.  Because  the  links  be-
tween growth and gender equality go in both 
directions,  the  results  of  this  work  are  more 
difﬁ cult  to  interpret  than  those  of  microeco-
nomic  studies  (box  0.1).  But  combined,  the 
two  strands  of  research  provide  considerable 
evidence that gender equality and growth are 
correlated  and  that  gender  equality  matters 
for many aspects of growth. Even so, as we ar-
gue in the box, more careful work is needed, 
especially  microeconomic  analysis  that  can 
establish  causal  relationships  between  gender 
equality  and  growth  and,  in  so  doing,  high-
light the channels for policy to reduce gender 
gaps and increase economic growth. 

WHAT DOES THIS REPORT DO?

This World Development Report focuses on the 
economics of gender equality and development. 
It uses an economic lens to understand what un-
derlies and drives differences between men and 
women in key determinants of welfare—in hu-
man capital endowments such as education and 
health, in access to economic opportunities and 
productive resources, and in the ability to make 
choices  and  take  action,  or  agency.  It  uses  the 
same  approach  to  explore  which  policy  inter-
ventions and broader societal action can reduce 
these gender differences and improve outcomes. 
The  Report  does  not  limit  itself  to  economic 
outcomes, however—indeed, it devotes roughly 
equal attention to human capital endowments, 
to economic opportunities, and to agency, sig-
naling that all three are important and interre-
lated in determining welfare. Nor does it ignore 
the  central  role  of  social  and  political  institu-
tions, whether formal or informal, in determin-
ing gender outcomes. 

In  examining  gender  gaps  and  their  pat-
terns across countries and over time, we adopt 
a strongly empirical approach, preferring rigor-
ous and evidence-based analysis, and highlight-

 

A guide to the Report 

49

BOX 0.1   Problems with estimating the effect of gender equality on growth

One thing is clear. Income and gender equality are positively corre-
lated.  Box  fi gure  0.1  shows  this  correlation  for  one  measure,  the 
World  Economic  Forum’s  Index  of  Economic  Participation  and 
Opportunity, which measures male-female diff erences in labor force 
participation, wages, income, political participation, and number of 
technical workers.

BOX FIGURE 0.1   GDP per capita and gender equality are positively 

correlated

)
s
g
o

l
 

n
i
(
 
9
0
0
2
n

 

i
 

 

P
D
G
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p

12

10

8

6

4

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Index of Economic Participation and Opportunity

Sources: World Development Indicators and World Economic Forum 2010.

What  is  not  clear  is  whether  this  correlation  is  capturing  the 
eff ect of growth on gender equality or the eff ect of gender equal-
ity on growth. In reality, it is probably capturing some of both, but 
we cannot tell which relationship matters more from cross-country 
data.a

1.   There are good reasons for the relationship to go in both directions. 
First,  with  changes  in  technology  (changing  with  economic 
development), the relative return to manual skills has declined as 
that for cognitive skills has increased. Second, the better service 

delivery that accompanies economic development can increase 
gender equality, as in education (chapter 3). 

2.   Other things are going on that could drive changes in both gender 
equality  and  growth.  Consider  investments  to  improve  health. 
Studies  of  deworming  and  nutrition  interventions  show  that 
they  benefi t  girls  more  than  boys.  Each  intervention  improves 
gender equality and human capital, each of which is indepen-
dently important for growth. Now consider institutional change: 
institutions can boost growth, and some kinds of institutions can 
improve gender equality. Suppose that a country is improving its 
legal system by expanding the reach and effi  ciency of the courts 
and  police.  That  expansion  will  contribute  to  growth  (as  con-
tracts are better enforced) and could contribute to gender equal-
ity (by making it easier for women to use justice systems). In the 
data,  we  observe  a  correlation  between  gender  equality  and 
growth, but this relationship is not causal—the underlying cause 
is  a  change  in  institutions.  So  the  correlation  between  gender 
quality and growth may actually be capturing the relationship 
with a third factor that is causing changes in both gender equal-
ity and growth. 

3.   The relationship is not robust. Empirical work shows that the cor-
relation between gender equality and growth is quite sensitive to 
time  periods  and  countries.  Work  on  the  relationship  between 
female education and growth, for example, shows that results are 
quite  sensitive  to  how  the  analysis  is  done.  Indeed,  changes  in 
how this relationship is measured can cause the eff ect of female 
education on growth to change from negative to positive.

In sum, the relationship between gender equality and growth is 
not only complex—it clearly goes in both directions. Broad-brush, 
cross-country studies cannot tell the magnitude of this relationship, 
nor can they provide signifi cant insights into what drives this rela-
tionship.  Careful  microeconomic  work  (some  exists,  but  more  is 
needed) can provide more defi nitive evidence—both on the impor-
tance of gender equality for growth and on where policy interven-
tions are needed.

Sources: Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn forthcoming; Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton 2004; Maluccio and others 2009; Munshi and Rosenzweig 2005; Qian 2008.

a.  For a more detailed discussion of these reasons, see Bandiera and Natraj 2011 and Cuberes and Teignier 2011.

ing causality where feasible. For this, we draw on 
a  large  and  growing  body  of  quantitative  gen-
der research, complemented by new analysis—
particularly  on  time  use;  domestic  violence; 
mortality  risks;  and  earnings  and  productivity 
in labor markets, agriculture, and entrepreneur-
ship. We also draw on new qualitative ﬁ eld re-
search,  which  involved  more  than  4,000  men 
and  women  in  98  communities  from  19  de-
veloping  countries  (map  0.1),  exploring  how 
gender affects their daily lives as well as their as-
pirations, education, job choices, decision mak-

ing, and other aspects of well-being (see box 3 in 
the overview for details).12 

A global report like this one cannot attempt 
to provide in-depth analysis of speciﬁ c country 
circumstances. Nor can it cover all relevant di-
mensions of gender equality. Instead, the Report 
proposes  a  conceptual  framework  to  explain 
gender inequality and recommend public poli-
cies, which can be adapted as necessary to spe-
ciﬁ c countries, issues, and sectors. Building on 
earlier Bank work on gender and development 
(most  notably  on  Engendering  Development), 

50 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

MAP 0.1   Economies where qualitative assessments were conducted

Poland

Moldova

Serbia

West Bank and
Gaza

Afghanistan

Bhutan

Vietnam

Burkina
Faso

Sudan
(North
Sudan)

Liberia

Yemen,
Rep.

Tanzania

India
(Orissa,
Andhra
Pradesh)

Indonesia
(Jakarta, Banten,
Sumatera Barat)

Papua

   New Guinea

Fiji

locations where WDR qualitative assessments were carried out

South Africa
(Kwazulu-Natal)

Dominican
Republic

Peru

Source: WDR 2012 team.

the framework posits that gender outcomes can 
be understood through the responses of house-
holds to the functioning and structure of mar-
kets and institutions, both formal and informal. 
The Report then illustrates the use of this frame-
work by focusing on aspects of gender equality 
where there has been most progress worldwide 
(education,  life  expectancy,  labor  force  par-
ticipation,  and  the  extension  of  legal  rights  to 
women) and those where there has been little or 
very slow change (excess female mortality, seg-
regation in economic activity, gaps in earnings, 
responsibility  for  house  and  care  work,  asset 
ownership,  and  women’s  agency  in  the  private 
and public spheres).

This  empirical  approach  helps  establish  the 
link between analysis and policy choice. It em-
phasizes  that  the  design  of  policies  targeted  at 
reducing speciﬁ c gender gaps needs to take into 
account what happens in the household, as well 
as  the  functioning  and  structure  of  markets 
and formal and informal institutions—and the 
interactions  between  all  of  them.  Through  the 
analysis  of  alternative  policies,  it  shows  that, 
when  these  aspects  are  not  considered,  the  in-
tended  results  of  policy  interventions  can  be 
muted or even contrary to what is expected.

NAVIGATING THIS REPORT: 
A ROADMAP

The  Report  has  nine  chapters  in  three  parts. 
Part 1—Taking stock of gender equality—presents 
the facts that will then provide the foundation 
for the rest of the Report. It combines existing 
and  new  data  to  document  changes  in  key  di-
mensions of gender equality over the past quar-
ter century and across regions and countries. Its 
main  message  is  that  very  rapid  and,  in  some 
cases, unprecedented progress has been made in 
some dimensions of gender equality (chapter 1), 
but that it has not reached all women or been 
uniform across all dimensions of gender equal-
ity (chapter 2).

The contrast between the patterns and trends 
described in the ﬁ rst two chapters of the Report 
prompts one to ask what explains the progress 
or lack of it. Part 2—What has driven progress? 
What impedes it?—constitutes the analytical core 
of the Report. It presents the conceptual frame-
work and uses it to examine the factors that have 
fostered  change  and  the  constraints  that  have 
slowed progress. The analysis focuses on gender 
differences in education and health (chapter 3), 
agency (chapter 4), and access to economic op-

 

A guide to the Report 

51

portunities  (chapter  5)—discussing  the  roles 
of economic growth, households, markets, and 
institutions  in  determining  outcomes  in  these 
three  spheres.  Part  2  concludes  with  a  discus-
sion  of  the  impact  of  globalization  on  gender 
inequality,  paying  attention  to  the  opportuni-
ties  and  challenges  created  by  new  economic 
and  social  trends  (chapter  6).  The  analysis  in 
these four chapters leads to the identiﬁ cation of 
four  priority  areas  for  action:  reducing  gender 
gaps in human capital endowments, promoting 
higher access to economic opportunities among 
women, closing gender gaps in household and 
societal voice, and limiting the intergenerational 
reproduction of gender inequality.

Part  3—The  role  and  potential  for  public 
action—presents policy recommendations, ex-
amines  the  political  economy  of  reforms  for 
gender equality, and proposes a global agenda 
for action. The discussion starts with a detailed 
description  of  policy  options  addressing  the 
four  priority  areas,  complemented  with  con-
crete illustrations of successful interventions in 
different contexts (chapter 7). An examination 
of the political economy of gender reforms fol-
lows, with an emphasis on the issues that dis-
tinguish  reform  in  this  area  from  other  types 
of redistributive or equality-enhancing reforms 
(chapter  8).  Global  action  on  gender  equality 
should  focus  on  complementing  country  ef-
forts on the four priority areas identiﬁ ed in the 
Report (chapter 9).

NOTES

  1.  FAO, IFAD, and ILO 2010. 
  2.  Cuberes and Teignier Baqué 2011; Hurst and oth-

ers 2011.

  3.  Do, Levchenko, and Raddatz 2011.
  4.  Ibid.
  5.  McKinsey & Company Inc. 2007.
  6.  Haddad,  Hoddinott,  and  Alderman  1997;  Katz 
and Chamorro 2003; Duﬂ o 2003; Thomas 1990; 
Hoddinott  and  Haddad  1995;  Lundberg,  Pol-
lak, and Wales 1997; Quisumbing and Maluccio 
2000;  Attanasio  and  Lechene  2002;  Rubalcava, 
Teruel, and Thomas 2009; Doss 2006; Schady and 
Rosero 2008.

  7.  Thomas, Strauss, and Henriques 1990; Allendorf 

2007. 

  8.  Andrabi,  Das,  and  Khwaja  2008;  Dumas  and 

Lambert 2010.

  9.  Kishor and Johnson 2004; Jeyaseelan and others 
2007;  Hindin,  Kishor,  and Ansara  2008;  Koenig 
and others 2006; Martin and others 2002.

10.  Miller 2008.
11.  Beaman and others, forthcoming; Chattopadhyay 

and Duﬂ o 2004; Iyer and others 2010.

12.  World Bank 2011.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn F. 
2011.  “Fertility  and  the  Plough.”  American  Eco-
nomic  Review  Papers  and  Proceedings  101  (3): 
499–503. 

Allendorf,  Keera.  2007.  “Do  Women’s  Land  Rights 
Promote  Empowerment  and  Child  Health  in 
Nepal?” World Development 35 (11): 1975–88.

Andrabi,  Tahir,  Jishnu  Das,  and  Asim  Ijaz  Khwaja. 
2008. “A Dime a Day: The Possibilities and Lim-
its of Private Schooling in Pakistan.” Comparative 
Education Review 52 (3): 329–55.

Attanasio,  Orazio,  and Valérie  Lechene.  2002. “Tests 
of Income Pooling in Household Decisions.” Re-
view of Economic Dynamics 5 (4): 720–48.

Bandiera,  Oriana,  and  Ashwini  Natraj.  2011. “Does 
Gender Inequality Hinder Growth? The Evidence 
and  Its  Policy  Implications.”  Background  paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Beaman, Lori, Esther Duﬂ o, Rohini Pande, and Petia 
Topalova. Forthcoming. “Political Reservation and 
Substantive Representation: Evidence from Indian 
Village Councils.” In India Policy Forum, 2010, ed. 
Suman Bery, Barry Bosworth, and Arvind Pana-
gariya.  Brookings  Institution  Press  and  The  Na-
tional  Council  of  Applied  Economics  Research, 
Washington, DC, and New Delhi.

Chattopadhyay,  Raghabendra,  and  Esther  Duﬂ o. 
2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a 
Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econo-
metrica 72 (5): 1409–43.

Cuberes,  David,  and  Marc  Teignier  Baqué.  2011. 
“Gender  Inequality  and  Economic  Growth.” 
Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Do,  Quy-Toan,  Andrei  Levchenko,  and  Claudio 
Raddatz. 2011. “Engendering Trade.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Doss, Cheryl R. 2006. “The Effects of Intrahousehold 
Property  Ownership  on  Expenditure  Patterns 
in  Ghana.”  Journal  of  African  Economies  15  (1): 
149–80.

Duﬂ o,  Esther.  2003.  “Grandmothers  and  Grand-
daughters: Old-Age Pensions and Intrahousehold 
Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic 
Review 17 (1): 1–25.

Dumas, Christelle, and Sylvie Lambert. 2011. “Edu-
cational Achievement and Socio-Economic Back-

52 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

ground:  Causality  and  Mechanisms  in  Senegal.” 
Journal of African Economies 20 (1): 1–26.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the 
United  Nations),  IFAD  (International  Fund  for 
Agricultural  Development),  and  ILO  (Interna-
tional Labour Ofﬁ ce). 2010. “Gender Dimensions 
of  Agricultural  and  Rural  Employment:  Differ-
entiated Pathways Out Of Poverty. Status, Trends 
and Gaps.” FAO, IFAD, and ILO, Rome.

Haddad, Lawrence, John Hoddinott, and Harold Al-
derman. 1997. Intrahousehold Resource Allocation 
in  Developing  Countries:  Models,  Methods,  and 
Policy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University.
Hindin,  Michelle  J.,  Sunita  Kishor,  and  Donna  L. 
Ansara. 2008. “Intimate Partner Violence among 
Couples  in  10  DHS  Countries:  Predictors  and 
Health  Outcomes.”  DHS  Analytical  Studies  18, 
U.S.  Agency  for  International  Development, 
Washington, DC.

Hoddinott, John, and Lawrence Haddad. 1995. “Does 
Female  Income  Share  Inﬂ uence  Household  Ex-
penditures? Evidence from Côte D’Ivoire.” Oxford 
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 57 (1): 77–96.
Hurst, Erik, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Charles Jones, and Pe-
ter  Klenow.  2011. “The Allocation  of  Talent  and 
Economic Growth.” Chicago Booth, Chicago, IL. 
Processed.

Iyer, Lakshmi, Anandi Mani, Prachi Mishra, and Pe-
tia Topalova. 2010. “Political Representation and 
Crime:  Evidence  from  India’s  Panchayati  Raj.” 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Washington,  DC. 
Processed.

Jeyaseelan,  L.,  Shuba  Kumar,  Nithya  Neelakantan, 
Abraham  Peedicayil,  Rajamohanam  Pillai,  and 
Nata  Duvvury.  2007. “Physical  Spousal  Violence 
against Women in India: Some Risk Factors.” Jour-
nal of Biosocial Science 39 (5): 657–70.

Katz,  Elizabeth  G.,  and  Juan  Sebastian  Chamorro. 
2003. “Gender,  Land  Rights,  and  the  Household 
Economy  in  Rural  Nicaragua  and  Honduras.” 
Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the 
Latin American and Caribbean Economics Asso-
ciation, Puebla, Mexico, October 9.

Kishor,  Sunita,  and  Kiersten  Johnson.  2004.  Proﬁ l-
ing  Domestic  Violence—A  Multi-Country  Study. 
Calverton, MD: ORC Macro.

Koenig,  Michael  A.,  Rob  Stephenson,  Saifuddin 
Ahmed, Shireen J. Jejeebhoy, and Jacquelyn Camp-
bell.  2006. “Individual  and  Contextual  Determi-
nants  of  Domestic  Violence  in  Northern  India.” 
American Journal of Public Health 96 (1): 132–38.

Kremer,  Michael,  Edward  Miguel,  and  Rebecca 
Thornton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.”  Review of 
Economics and Statistics 91 (3): 437–56.

Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. 
Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and Wives Pool Their 
Resources?  Evidence  from  the  United  Kingdom 

Child Beneﬁ t.” Journal of Human Resources 32 (3): 
463–80.

Maluccio, John A., John Hoddinott, Jere R. Behrman, 
Reynaldo  Martorell,  Agnes  R.  Quisumbing,  and 
Aryeh D. Stein. 2009. “The Impact of Improving 
Nutrition during Early Childhood on Education 
among Guatemalan Adults.” Economic Journal 119 
(537): 734–63.

Martin, Sandra L., Kathryn E. Moracco, Julian Garro, 
Amy  Ong  Tsui,  Lawrence  L.  Kupper,  Jennifer  L. 
Chase, and Jacquelyn C. Campbell. 2002. “Domes-
tic  Violence  across  Generations:  Findings  from 
Northern India.” International Journal of Epidemi-
ology 31 (3): 560–72.

McKinsey  &  Company  Inc.  2007.  “Women  Mat-
ter.  Gender  Diversity,  A  Corporate  Performance 
Driver.” McKinsey & Company Inc., London.

Miller,  Grant.  2008.  “Women’s  Suffrage,  Political 
Responsiveness,  and  Child  Survival  in American 
History.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 
1287–327.

Munshi,  Kaivan,  and  Mark  Rosenzweig.  2006. “Tra-
ditional  Institutions  Meet  the  Modern  World: 
Caste, Gender and Schooling Choice in a Global-
izing  Economy.”  American  Economic  Review  96 
(4): 1225–52.

Qian, Nancy. 2008. “Missing Women and The Price of 
Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Speciﬁ c Earnings 
on Sex Imbalance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
123 (3): 1251–85.

Quisumbing, Agnes R., and John A. Maluccio. 2000. 
“Intrahousehold Allocation and Gender Relations: 
New  Empirical  Evidence  from  Four  Developing 
Countries.” Discussion Paper 84, Food Consump-
tion  and  Nutrition  Division,  International  Food 
Policy Researcy Institute, Washington, DC.

Rubalcava, Luis, Graciela Teruel, and Duncan Thomas. 
2009. “Investments, Time Preferences, and Public 
Transfers Paid to Women.” Economic Development 
and Cultural Change 57 (3): 507–38.

Schady,  Norbert,  and  José  Rosero.  2008.  “Are  Cash 
Transfers  Made  to  Women  Spent  Like  Other 
Sources  of  Income?”  Economics  Letters  101  (3): 
246–48.

Thomas, Duncan. 1990. “Intra-Household Resource 
Allocation:  An  Inferential  Approach.”  Journal  of 
Human Resources 25 (4): 635–64.

Thomas,  Duncan,  John  Strauss,  and  Maria-Helena 
Henriques. 1990. “Child Survival, Height for Age, 
and Household Characteristics in Brazil.” Journal 
of Development Economics 33 (2): 197–234.

World  Bank.  2011.  “Deﬁ ning  Gender  in  the  21st 
Century: Talking with Women and Men around 
the  World,  A  Multi-Country  Qualitative  Study 
of  Gender  and  Economic  Choice.”  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

World Economic Forum. 2010. “Global Gender Gap 

Report 2010.” World Economic Forum, Japan.

PART I
Taking stock of gender equality 

W

omen’s lives have improved greatly over the past de-
cades. Enjoying ever higher education, women have 
greater control over their life choices. They use those 
choices to participate more in the labor force; have fewer children; 
diversify their time beyond housework and child care; and shape 
their  communities,  economies,  and  societies.  And  the  pace  of 
change for many women in the developing world has accelerated. 
But progress has not been uniform. A vast chasm persists to-
day in more than one way. There are women in every region of 
the world for whom life has not changed much. They still battle 
many of the issues that women before them had to face. Some 
girls still cannot go to school on a par with boys. They may not 
inherit assets from their parents. And they have lower legal and 
social status. Even in Sweden and the United States, change is still 
hard to come by in many facets of life and the economy. Women 
are paid less and are still employed disproportionately in nurs-
ing and teaching, for example, while men dominate engineering 
and construction. Only 28 chief executive ofﬁ cers of the Fortune 
1000 companies are women.

Why so much progress in some areas and so little in others? 
Part 1 provides a factual foundation for the rest of the Report by 
assembling existing and new data to map out patterns and trends 
in gender equality over time and across regions and countries. It 
takes stock of the changes in gender outcomes across the world 
in recent decades. Many of these changes have occurred because 
of the wave of global prosperity that has swept across much of 
the  developing  world.  Yet  this  prosperity  has  not  worked  for 
many women around the world, and in some respects not at all. 
The focus here is on three key domains of gender equality: 
the accumulation of endowments, the use of those endowments 
to take up economic opportunities and generate incomes, and the 
application of those endowments to take actions (agency) affect-
ing individual and household well-being. 

Endowments  encompass  education,  health,  land,  and  other 
assets  such  as  ﬁ nancial  resources  that  women  and  men  accu-
mulate during their lifetimes. Many, such as basic education, are 
amassed at early stages in life, reﬂ ecting mostly the decisions of 
parents. Others, such as material assets, are acquired later through 
such mechanisms as productive labor and inheritance rights. 

Access  to  economic  opportunities  determines  how  endow-
ments and time generate income and consumption—key dimen-
sions  of  well-being.  Decisions  about  time  allocations  between 
home and workplace, productive activity, and leisure take place 
in the household. They depend on the value placed on women’s 

 

potential contribution to the well-being of the household in 
relation to other household members—and on views of gen-
der roles and women’s preferences and needs. 

Agency  is  the  process  by  which  women  and  men  make 
choices and translate them into desired outcomes. It has many 
dimensions. This Report focuses on ﬁ ve outcomes closely as-
sociated with women’s ability to make choices: control over 
resources,  decision  making  over  family  formation,  control 
over  movement,  freedom  from  violence,  and  the  ability  to 
have a voice in society.

In these three domains, shortfalls of choice are reﬂ ected in 
shortfalls  of  welfare.  These  three  domains  matter  in  and  of 
themselves.  But  they  are  also  closely  interlinked. Agency  al-
lows women to build their endowments. Endowments shape 
access to economic opportunities and incomes. The ability of 
women  to  access  economic  opportunities  and  earn  income 
can inﬂ uence their agency. And so on.

Chapter  1  documents  the  unprecedented  gains  women 
have  made  in  rights,  in  human  capital  endowments,  and  in 
access to economic opportunities. Most countries today have 
explicit guarantees in their constitutions for the equality of all 
citizens and for nondiscrimination between men and women. 
Not only have things changed for the better; changes are also 
happening much faster than when today’s rich countries were 
much poorer. 

Chapter 2, by contrast, shows that things have not changed 
for all women or in all aspects of gender equality. First, for poor 
women and for women in poor places, sizable gender gaps re-
main, even in education enrollments and fertility, where global 
progress has been great. For the wealthiest people across coun-
tries, there is little gender disadvantage, but it is large for severely 
disadvantaged populations at the bottom of the income distribu-
tion. Ethnicity, distance, disability, or sexual orientation, among 
other factors, further compound gender inequality. Second, in 
some domains of gender equality there has been very little—or 
very slow—change, even as countries get richer. These “sticky” 
domains include excess female mortality in key periods of the 
life cycle and occupational differences in the economic sphere. 
In many areas of women’s agency, including political voice and 
representation, differences between men and women remain en-
trenched, even in very rich countries and despite nearly a century 
of women’s activism. Third, systemic shocks, such as droughts 
or  economic  downturns,  adversely  affect  males  and  females, 
and their precise impacts depend on the context and the shock.

 

55

1CHAPTER

A wave of progress

Despite  the  hardships  many  women 

endure  in  their  daily  lives,  things 
have changed for the better—and at 
a  speed  that  would  not  have  been 
expected  even  two  decades  ago.  In  four  major 
areas—women’s  rights,  education,  health,  and 
labor force outcomes—the gains in the second 
half of the 20th century were large and fast in 
many  parts  of  the  world.  Improvements  that 
took 100 years in wealthier countries took just 
40 years in some low- and middle-income coun-
tries.  Change  has  also  been  accelerating,  with 
gender equality gains in every decade building 
on gains from the decade before.

TIMES ARE CHANGING?

This  chapter  traces  where  progress  has  been 
made on gender equality and how. It starts with 
the  evolution  of  women’s  rights  and  the  ﬁ ght 
for  equality  under  the  law.  Equality  of  rights 
matters  because  a  lack  of  rights  can  constrain 
the choices available to women in many aspects 
of life. Achieving them in today’s high-income 
countries  took  considerable  time.  In  contrast, 
gains under the law have occurred much faster 
in  the  developing  countries,  aided  by  a  rising 
global consensus supporting formal rights and 
guarantees of equality for women.

In tandem with these gains in formal rights, 
low-  and  middle-income  countries  have  seen 
unprecedented  gains  in  outcomes  for  women, 
both in absolute terms and relative to men. More 
women are literate and educated than ever be-
fore, and the education gap with men has shrunk 

“

Let our daughters go to school and 
let them get good jobs. The moment 
they will be independent from men in 
thinking and earning, then they will 
have very good lives.

Adult woman, Tanzania

”

dramatically.  For  younger  cohorts,  the  gender 
gap in primary education enrollments has prac-
tically  disappeared,  and  the  gains  in  second-
ary and higher education have been enormous. 
Women  are  living  longer  and  healthier  lives  in 
much  of  the  world,  in  part  because  lower  fer-
tility  has  reduced  their  risk  in  childbirth.  And 
they are participating more than ever in market 
work. Economic growth has driven much of the 
progress,  through  higher  household  incomes, 
better service delivery, and new labor market op-
portunities for women. But it has not been the 
only factor—the association between economic 
growth and better outcomes for women has been 
neither automatic nor uniform across countries.
Changes  in  one  domain  of  gender  equality 
have fostered change in others, inﬂ uencing the 
next generation, reinforcing the whole process. 
For  example,  the  expansion  of  economic  op-
portunities  for  women  in  service  industries  in 
Bangladesh  and  India  has  boosted  school  en-
rollments for girls, which feeds into higher labor 
force participation and better educational out-
comes for the next generation.1 

This is not to say that all problems have been 
solved or that progress was easy. Indeed, chapter 

 

A wave of progress 

57

2 looks at countries and population groups with 
continuing  gender  disadvantages  as  well  as  at 
the many facets of life where gender imbalances 
remain serious, even crippling. Delineating the 
areas of change provides a foundation for un-
derstanding  the  constraints  to  gender  equal-
ity—especially where they remain pervasive and 
deep. And this understanding can help in setting 
priorities for policy and public action. 

RISING GLOBAL CONSENSUS 
FOR WOMEN’S RIGHTS

The past three decades have seen great progress 
in  securing  women’s  formal  rights  and  consti-
tutional guarantees of equality. The Convention 
on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimi-
nation  against  Women  (CEDAW),  which  the 
United  Nations  General  Assembly  adopted  in 
1979,  established  a  comprehensive  framework 
for the advancement of women. Ten years later, 
almost 100 nations across all continents had rat-
iﬁ ed this international bill of rights for women. 
And today, the number of signatories has almost 
doubled, to 187 countries.

More than 30 years in the making, CEDAW 
is the most widely supported international hu-
man rights treaty and the primary international 
vehicle  for  monitoring  and  advocating  gender 
equality.  Deﬁ ning  what  constitutes  discrimina-
tion against women and setting an agenda for na-
tional action, CEDAW is particularly concerned 
with civil rights, the legal status of women, re-
productive  roles  and  rights,  and  the  impact  of 
cultural factors on gender relations and on bar-
riers to the advancement of women. It is the only 
human  rights  treaty  to  explicitly  address  deci-
sions about family planning and family forma-
tion. Countries ratifying CEDAW are required to 
ensure that domestic legislation complies with it, 

“

I know that [women] have many 
rights: I can remember the right to 
education, the prohibition of the 
excision, and the prohibition to forced 
marriage.
 

Adult woman, Burkina Faso

”

with  progress  monitored  independently  by  the 
Committee  on  the  Elimination  of  Discrimina-
tion against Women. 

Despite  being  known  in  the  1980s  as  the 
“Cinderella treaty” for its vagueness of language 
and  weak  monitoring  and  sanctions,  CEDAW 
has  promoted  legislative  and  administrative 
change.2 In 1998, it inﬂ uenced Turkey’s domes-
tic violence act (Law No. 4320 Family Protection 
Law).  Turkey’s  Constitutional  Court  also  an-
nulled requirements that husbands give permis-
sion for a wife’s professional activities, making 
extensive references to CEDAW.3 Australia’s Sex 
Discrimination Act 1984 draws on CEDAW to 
prohibit discrimination in public life on the ba-
sis of sex, marital status, pregnancy, or potential 
pregnancy. 

In 2003, the African Union adopted the Pro-
tocol to the African Charter on Human and Peo-
ples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa. 
Better known as the Maputo Protocol, it asserts 
women’s rights to take part in the political pro-
cess, to enjoy social and political equality with 
men,  and  to  control  their  reproductive  health. 
Article  5  refers  to  the “elimination  of  harmful 
practices,”  including  ending  polygamous  mar-
riage and female genital cutting. Of 53 African 
countries, 46 signed the protocol, and by Febru-
ary 2011, 30 countries had ratiﬁ ed it.4 

Under  the  auspices  of  the  Organization  of 
American  States,  all  Latin  American  coun-
tries  signed  in  1994  the  Belém  do  Pará  Inter-
American Convention on the Prevention, Pun-
ishment  and  Eradication  of  Violence  against 
Women.  Since  then,  28  nations  have  enacted 
laws with sanctions against domestic abuse.

These  different  international  legal  frame-
works  reﬂ ect  the  rising  global  consensus  on 
equal rights for men and women—a consensus 
that did not emerge overnight but rather evolved 
from  a  long,  slow  struggle  for  equal  rights  for 
women that started in the advanced economies 
as early as the 18th century and continued in de-
veloping countries in the second half of the 20th 
century, reinforced by the emphasis on gender 
equality in the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) (box 1.1).

Equal rights in the advanced 
economies—A long time coming
Women’s circumstances in the 18th century were 
very different than they are today. In 1789, the 
French revolution asserted that men are “born 

58 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 1.1  Gender and the Millennium Development Goals 

The  2010  MDG  Summit  concluded  with  a  global  action  plan  to  achieve  the 
eight MDGs by 2015. It also adopted a resolution calling for action to ensure 
gender parity in education and health, economic opportunities, and decision 
making  at  all  levels  through  gender  mainstreaming  in  the  formulation  and 
implementation of development policies. The resolution and the action plan 
refl ect  the  belief  of  the  international  development  community  that  gender 
equality and women’s empowerment are development objectives in their own 
right  (MDG  3),  as  well  as  critical  channels  for  the  achievement  of  the  other 
MDGs. Gender equality and women’s empowerment help to promote universal 
primary  education  (MDG  2),  reduce  under-fi ve  mortality  (MDG  4),  improve 
maternal mortality (MDG 5), and reduce the likelihood of contracting HIV/AIDS 
(MDG 6). 

The 2010 resolution also stresses that achieving the MDGs will require coor-
dinated interventions that target women and other vulnerable groups across 
sectors:

• 

• 
• 

Taking action to improve the number and active participation of women 
in all political and economic decision-making processes, including invest-
ing in women’s leadership in local decision-making structures and creating 
an even playing fi eld for men and women in political and government 
institutions
Expanding access to fi nancial services for the poor, especially women
Investing in infrastructure and labor-saving technologies, especially in rural 
areas, that benefi t women and girls by reducing their domestic burdens

•  Promoting and protecting women’s equal access to housing, property, and 

land, including rights to inheritance.

Source: WDR 2012 team.

and remain free and equal in rights” universally, 
but the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of 
the Citizen did not include women, and a year 
later, the National Assembly chose not to extend 
civil  and  political  rights  to  women.  The  legal 
system in the British colonies, based on English 
common  law,  is  another  case.  As  Sir  William 
Blackstone summarized in his Commentaries on 
the Laws of England in 1765:

By  marriage,  the  husband  and  wife  are 
one  person  in  law:  that  is,  the  very  being 
or  legal  existence  of  the  woman  is  sus-
pended  during  the  marriage,  or  at  least  is 
incorporated  and  consolidated  into  that 
of  the  husband;  under  whose  wing,  pro-
tection,  and  cover,  she  performs  every-
 thing;  and  is  therefore  called  in  our 
law-french a femme-couvert. For this rea-
son,  a  man  cannot  grant  anything  to  his 
wife, or enter into covenant with her: for 
the grant would be to suppose her separate 
existence.

The  march  toward  equal  property  and  suf-
frage  rights  has  been  slow  and  long.  Only  in 
1857 did the British Parliament pass the Matri-
monial Causes Act, allowing married women to 
inherit property and take court action on their 
own behalf. And not until 1882 did the Married 
Women’s Property Act recognize a husband and 
a wife as two separate legal entities, conferring 
to wives the right to buy, own, and sell property 
separately. Suffrage was not universal until 1928, 
when,  as  a  result  of  the  Representation  of  the 
People Act, women over age 21 received the vote 
on equal terms as men. The story is similar in 
Scandinavia: Norway, for example, provided full 
economic rights to women in 1888 and suffrage 
rights in 1913. 

In the United States, New York was the ﬁ rst 
state to pass, in 1848, a Married Women’s Prop-
erty Act. Wives’ rights to earnings and property 
gradually spread to other states over the follow-
ing  half  century.  Political  voice  was  longer  in 
coming. A proposed constitutional amendment 
guaranteeing  women’s  right  to  vote  was  intro-
duced in the U.S. Senate in 1878, but it did not 
receive  a  full  vote  until  1887,  only  to  be  voted 
down.  Three  more  decades  elapsed  before  the 
19th amendment to the constitution guarantee-
ing universal suffrage was ratiﬁ ed in 1920.

The struggle against discrimination in other 
domains,  such  as  labor  and  family  law,  picked 
up  momentum  in  the  second  half  of  the  20th 
century.

 In the United States, until the passage of Title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, women could 
legally  be  passed  over  for  promotions  in  the 
workplace. Married women needed the consent 
of their husbands to obtain a loan. And marital 
rape was not recognized as a criminal act.5 Until 
the 1980s, female ﬂ ight attendants were required 
to be single when they were hired and could be 
ﬁ red if they married. 

In  Germany  in  the  early  1950s,  women 
could be dismissed from the civil service when 
they married. And through 1977, they ofﬁ cially 
needed  their  husbands’  permission  to  work. 
Until reuniﬁ cation with East Germany in 1990, 
children of single mothers were assigned a legal 
guardian.6

Japan’s Equal Employment Opportunity Act 
of 1985 obliged employers merely to endeavor 
to  treat  men  and  women  equally  during  job 
recruitment,  assignment,  and  promotion.  The 
mandate  for  equal  treatment  came  about  in 

 

A wave of progress 

59

1997. The ﬁ rst domestic violence law was passed 
in 2001.

Progress  has been faster in low- and 
middle-income countries
Progress  has  been  most  notable  for  political 
rights, tied to a change in the concept of citi-
zenship.  National  franchise  movements  gave 
shape  to  a  more  inclusive  paradigm  of  the 
nation-state  in  the  ﬁ rst  half  of  the  20th  cen-
tury. Until then, citizenship had long been con-
strued as “male.” Extending suffrage in already 
established  nation-states  involved  local  social 
movements and social networks redeﬁ ning citi-
zenship only after a lengthy renegotiation of do-
mestic political power. In contrast, new nations 
emerged into a “new world order.” National and 
international organizations embraced a gender-
neutral model of citizenship, with women fully 
accepted  as  persons  capable  of  autonomous 
decisions.7  Only  three  countries  that  became 
independent in the 1900s (Austria, Ireland, and 
Libya) extended suffrage to men before women. 
But  Switzerland  did  not  break  with  tradition 
and extend the franchise to women until 1971. 
Among the latest countries to give women the 
right  to  vote,  Bhutan  changed  the  practice  of 
casting  one  vote  per  household  and  adopted 
women’s full suffrage in 2008. Today, only Saudi 
Arabia  restricts  the  franchise  to  men  and  re-
moving this restriction for municipal elections 
is under consideration.

Similar progress has been made in women’s 
rights  beyond  full  suffrage.  In  the  Philippines, 
sweeping  legislative  changes  in  the  1980s  and 
1990s recognized gender equality across a wide 
array  of  domains.  The  1987  constitution  rein-
forced  earlier  constitutions  by  giving  added 
emphasis to the notion of gender equality. The 
Comprehensive Agrarian  Reform  Law  of  1988 
assured equal rights to ownership of land. And 
a 1989 act amended the Labor Code to protect 
women from discrimination in hiring and pay. 
Similarly, in 2004, Morocco overhauled its fam-
ily  code  to  promote  greater  equality  between 
women and men in multiple spheres.

The ratiﬁ cation of CEDAW and other inter-
national  treaties  established  a  comprehensive 
framework  to  promote  equality  for  women. 
These  treaties  spurred  further  progress  toward 
securing  formal  rights  in  other  domains  of 
women’s lives, in large part by facilitating new 
legislation or promoting the repeal of discrimi-

natory  legal  provisions.  In  2005,  the  Kenyan 
Court of Appeal held that there was no reason-
able  basis  for  drawing  a  distinction  between 
sons and daughters in determining inheritance. 
In 2001, the Tanzanian High Court held that a 
widow is entitled to administer the estate on be-
half of her children. In both cases, principles of 
equality and nondiscrimination prevailed.

BETTER OUTCOMES FOR 
WOMEN IN MANY DOMAINS

The march for women’s rights has gone hand in 
hand with better outcomes for many women—
both in absolute terms and relative to men. Dur-
ing the past quarter century, sustained growth in 
many countries has reduced disparities on some 
dimensions of gender equality. And the pace of 
change in these outcomes has been much faster 
in  today’s  low-  and  middle-income  countries 
than it was in high-income countries. That can be 
seen in indicators as varied as fertility, female ed-
ucation and literacy, and female labor force par-
ticipation. In most countries where broad-based 
income growth has combined with better insti-
tutions for service delivery and more economic 
opportunities for women, the improvements in 
these  indicators  have  been  dramatic—and  in 
some cases at rates never before witnessed. 

Moreover, they occurred along some dimen-
sions even in the face of social turmoil or sig-
niﬁ cant institutional challenges. Consider Ban-
gladesh, Colombia, and the Islamic Republic of 
Iran.

Starting  from  a  low  base,  the  Bangladesh 
economy  has  almost  tripled  since  1980.  The 
Bangladesh constitution, adopted in 1972, guar-
anteed equal rights to all citizens, regardless of 
gender,  religion,  or  other  social  divisions,  and 
reserved  15  parliamentary  seats  for  women, 
later  increased  to  30.  In  1975,  the  government 
reserved  10  percent  of  public  jobs  for  women 
and created a special Ministry of Women’s Af-
fairs. Outcomes for women also improved dra-
matically on various fronts: 
• 

 From 1971 to 2009, the total fertility rate—
the number of children a woman is expected 
to have through her reproductive years—de-
clined from 6.9 children to 2.3.

• 

 Between 1991 and 2005, the number of girls 
in school increased from 1.1 million to 4 mil-

60 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

• 

lion. Female enrollment climbed from 33 per-
cent of the total to 56 percent, with somewhat 
smaller increases among girls from the poor-
est two quintiles. 
 The labor force participation of young wom-
en (ages 20–24) increased almost two and a 
half times over 1995–2000. Although overall 
labor  force  participation  remains  low,  the 
 expansion of employment opportunities for 
young  women  (linked  to  the  growth  of  the 
garment industry, health services, and social 
work) has increased girls’ school enrollment 
and lifted social restrictions on female mobil-
ity, allowing for a visible feminization of pub-
lic spaces (chapter 6).8

The economy of Colombia, an upper-middle- 
income country in Latin America, has expanded 
over one and a half times since 1980. Following 
upheavals and a recession in 1999, it stabilized 
after 2002. Colombia has also long been beset by 
violence and the illegal drug trade. One remark-
able feature is the improvement in women’s sta-
tus in the past 25 years:
•  From  1986  to  2005,  the  total  fertility  rate 

dropped from 3.2 children to 2.4.

•  Women reversed the education gap and now 
have  higher  completion  rates  than  men  for 
primary, secondary, and even tertiary educa-
tion.  The  last  is  particularly  striking  given 
that in 1984 almost twice as many men rela-
tive to women were college educated. 

•  In 1980, the labor force participation of Co-
lombian females in the 13 largest cities was 
the second lowest in the region (above only 
Costa Rica), but by 2004, it was the second 
highest,  next  to  Uruguay.  Remarkably,  the 
largest  increases  were  among  women  with 
children  ages  0–6—women  least  likely  to 
work in most countries. And the representa-
tion  of  women  is  high  in  managerial  posi-
tions and in ﬁ nance—the glass ceilings noto-
riously  hard  to  break  in  many  advanced 
economies.

The Islamic Republic of Iran’s economy has 
almost doubled since 1980. And human devel-
opment outcomes among Iranian women have 
consistently  improved  along  some  key  dimen-
sions in the aftermath of the Islamic revolution:
•  From 1979 to 2009, the Islamic Republic of 
Iran saw the world’s fastest decline in fertil-
ity—from 6.9 children to 1.8 (below replace-
ment).

•  The female-to-male ratio in primary school 
is the world’s highest, with 1.2 girls enrolled 
for every boy. The number of women in sec-
ondary school as a percentage of the eligible 
age group more than doubled from 30 per-
cent  to  81  percent,  and  in  2009,  more  than 
half of all Iranian university students, 68 per-
cent of the students in science, and 28 per-
cent in engineering were women.

•  Women  make  up  30  percent  of  the  Iranian 
labor force today, with the percentage of eco-
nomically  active  women  having  increased 
from  20  percent  in  1986  to  31  percent  in 
2008.

Each of these three societies has faced some 
circumstances  commonly  viewed  as  constrain-
ing  gender  equality. Yet  in  all  of  them,  income 
growth,  better  institutions  for  service  delivery, 
and new market opportunities for women have 
contributed to greater gender equality in health, 
education, and labor market outcomes even as 
women in these countries continue to face sig-
niﬁ cant challenges in other aspects of their lives.

More girls in school
More women are literate than ever before. Be-
tween 1950 and 2010, the average schooling for 
women over age 15 in low-income countries in-
creased from 1.5 years to 6.5. Compare that with 
an increase from 2.6 years to 7.6 for men—and 
with current averages in adult high-income pop-
ulations of 10.9 years for women and 11.2 years 
for men.9 Because the adult population includes 
older people who do not increase their educa-

“

Child marriages have stopped. Girls are being sent to school. Even the poorest of us are 
sending our daughters to school.

Adult man, India 

”

 

A wave of progress 

61

FIGURE 1.1   Gender parity in enrollments at lower levels has been achieved in much of the world, and 

tertiary enrollments now favor women

Primary education

Secondary education

Tertiary education

%

 
,
t
e
n

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

Some African
countries lag behind

girls
disadvantaged

%

 
,
t
e
n

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

80

60

40

20

0

Enrollment gaps dwarf
gender gaps

girls
disadvantaged

%

 
,
s
s
o
r
g

 
,

n
e
m
o
w

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

men
disadvantaged

80

60

40

20

0

 

Women are
more likely 
to participate
than men

 

20

80
school enrollment, boys, net %

40

60

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

school enrollment, boys, net %

school enrollment, men, gross %

East Asia and Pacific
South Asia

   Sub-Saharan Africa

High-income countries

 

   Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

   Middle East and North Africa

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Development Indicators.

Note: The 45° line in each ﬁ gure above shows gender parity in enrollments. Any point above the 45° line implies that more women are enrolled relative to men.

tion,  these  rising  averages  reﬂ ect  even  greater 
changes  among  young  cohorts.  In  the  United 
States, it took 40 years, from 1870 to 1910, for 
the share of 6–12-year-old girls in school to in-
crease from 57 percent to 88 percent. Morocco 
did the same in 11 years from 1997 to 2008.

These  younger  cohorts  in  all  world  regions 
have experienced steady and sustained improve-
ment toward greater gender equality in primary 
education.  In  the  past  decade,  female  enroll-
ments have grown faster than male enrollments 
in the Middle East and North Africa, South Asia, 
and Sub-Saharan Africa. Gender parity has been 
reached in 117 of 173 countries with data (ﬁ g-
ure 1.1). Even in regions with the largest gender 
gaps—South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (par-
ticularly  West  Africa)—gains  have  been  con-
siderable. In 2008, in Sub-Saharan Africa, there 
were about 91 girls for every 100 boys in primary 
school, up from 85 girls in 1999; in South Asia, 
the ratio was 95 girls for every 100 boys.

The  patterns  are  similar  in  secondary  edu-
cation, with one notable difference. In roughly 
one-third  of  developing  countries  (45),  girls 
outnumbered  boys  in  secondary  education  in 
2008 (see ﬁ gure 1.1). Although the female gen-
der gap tends to be higher in poorer countries, 

boys were in the minority in a wide range of na-
tions  including  Bangladesh,  Brazil,  Honduras, 
Lesotho, Malaysia, Mongolia, and South Africa.
Tertiary  enrollment  growth  is  stronger  for 
women  than  for  men  across  the  world.  The 
number of male tertiary students globally more 
than  quadrupled,  from  17.7  million  to  77.8 
million between 1970 and 2008, but the num-
ber of female tertiary students rose more than 
sevenfold,  from  10.8  million  to  80.9  million, 
overtaking  men.  Female  tertiary  enrollment 
rates in 2008 lagged behind in only 36 develop-
ing countries of 96 with data (see ﬁ gure 1.1). 
In Tunisia, 59 percent of the 351,000 students 
enrolled in university in 2008 were women. As 
chapter 6 shows, this increase in female enroll-
ment is consistent with an increasing demand 
for “brain” rather than “brawn” jobs in a glo-
balizing world.

Although  boys  are  more  likely  than  girls  to 
be enrolled in primary school, girls make better 
progress—lower  repetition  and  lower  dropout 
rates—than  boys  in  all  developing  regions.10 
According  to  international  standardized  stu-
dent achievement tests, girls tend to outperform 
boys in language skills, while boys tend to have 
a  smaller  advantage  over  girls  in  mathematics. 

62 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

The  2009  Program  for  International  Student 
 Assessment  shows  that  15-year-old  girls  in  all 
participating  countries  performed  better  than 
boys in a reading test.

Economic  growth  has  lowered  the  barriers 
to  school  entry  for  millions  of  boys  and  girls 
throughout  the  world  and  reduced  gender  in-
equality  in  schooling,  particularly  as  countries 
move  from  lower  to  middle  and  higher  in-
comes.11  First,  as  countries  prosper  economi-
cally,  the  supply  of  services  by  government  or 
other service providers increases. Second, rising 
incomes erode the need for families to differen-
tiate  educational  investments  across  children, 
on the basis of gender, birth order, or any other 
reason,  as  they  face  less  stringent  budgets.12 
Because  more  girls  than  boys  had  been  out  of 
school,  overall  improvements  in  enrollments 
tend  to  reduce  gender  differences.  Third,  as 
growth  opens  new  employment  opportunities 
for women in sectors that demand a certain level 
of skills, such as light manufacturing or services, 
incentives for parents to invest in their daugh-
ters’ education increases, because that education 
now yields a greater return. 

Eliminating school fees has had a similar ef-
fect in increasing overall enrollments and reduc-
ing gender differences. The free primary educa-
tion  programs  across  Sub-Saharan Africa  have 
had  an  overwhelming  response.  In  their  ﬁ rst 
year, student enrollments climbed 68 percent in 
Malawi and Uganda and 22 percent in Kenya.13 
States have also mandated and enforced par-
ticipation in schooling through compulsory ed-
ucation laws. Mass education systems expanded 
quickly after World War II, and universal edu-
cation laws can now be found in almost all na-
tions.14 Such laws, usually combined with large 
infrastructure and human resource investments 
to enhance service delivery, have brought more 
children  into  school  throughout  the  world.  In 
1997,  Turkey  sought  to  increase  educational 
opportunities  for  children  ages  11–13  years, 
particularly  rural  girls,  by  expanding  manda-
tory education from ﬁ ve years to eight. With the 
launch of the Basic Education Program, enroll-
ments jumped by 1.5 million children. Net en-
rollment rates, on the decline between 1991 and 
1997, then rose from 86 percent in 1997 to 96 
percent in 2002. Gains for rural girls were par-
ticularly impressive, jumping 160 percent in the 
program’s ﬁ rst year alone in the nine provinces 
(of 81) with the greatest gender disparity.15 

Gender  now  explains  very  little  of  the  re-
maining inequality in school enrollment (ﬁ gure 
1.2). In a large number of countries, a decompo-
sition of school enrollments suggests that wealth 
is the constraining factor for most, and in only 
a  very  limited  number  will  a  narrow  focus  on 
gender (rather than poverty) reduce inequalities 
further (chapter 3).16 

Healthier lives
The  second  half  of  the  20th  century  also  saw 
large  improvements  in  men’s  and  women’s 
health. Life expectancy at birth most clearly re-
ﬂ ects  improvements  in  health  in  populations 
across the world. The average number of years 
women could expect to live rose from 54 (51 for 
men) in 1960 to 71 (67 for men) in 2008. This 
period also saw the world’s fastest ever decline 
in fertility—from an average of about 5 births 
per  woman  in  1960  to  2.5  in  2008,  lowering 
the number of deaths associated with maternal 
mortality. And bearing fewer children has given 
women more time to invest in acquiring human 
capital and to participate in market work. 

In  most  world  regions,  life  expectancy  for 
both  men  and  women  has  consistently  risen, 
with women on average living longer than men. 
The  gap  between  male  and  female  life  expec-
tancy, while still rising in some regions, stabilized 
in others. On average, life expectancy at birth for 
females  in  low-income  countries  rose  from  48 
years in 1960 to 69 years in 2008, and for males, 
from 46 years to 65. Mirroring the worldwide in-
crease in life expectancy, every region except Sub-
Saharan Africa added between 20 and 25 years 
of life between 1960 and today (ﬁ gure 1.3). And 
since 1980, every region has had a female advan-
tage in life expectancy.

But  there  have  been  notable  reversals.  In 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia, women’s ad-
vantage  in  life  expectancy  increased  partly  be-
cause  of  a  sharp  increase  in  male  mortality, 
with the differences apparently increasing over 
time (see ﬁ gure 1.3 for Ukraine). In some Sub-
Saharan countries, the ravaging effects of AIDS, 
especially  for  women,  are  evident.  Since  1990, 
gains in female life expectancy relative to men 
have shrunk (see ﬁ gure 1.3 for Botswana).

Increases in female life expectancy have been 
driven in part by a signiﬁ cant decline in the risk 
of mortality during one of the most dangerous 
periods in a woman’s life—the early reproductive 
years and the experience of childbirth. First, the 

 

A wave of progress 

63

FIGURE 1.2   Gender explains little of the inequality in education participation for children 

12–15 years old

Low inequality

Moderate inequality

High inequality

%

 
,

y
t
i
l

a
u
q
e
n

i
 
l

a
t
o
t
 
o
t
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

100

80

60

40

20

0

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
y
n
e
K

)
0
1
–
9
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
n
a
g
U

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
R
n
a
c
i
n
m
o
D

i

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
)
e

l
l
i

v
a
z
z
a
r
B
(
 
.

p
e
R

 
,

o
g
n
o
C

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
y
u
G

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
n
a
d
r
o
J

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
e
n
a
r
k
U

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
e
m
r
A

i

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
b
A

l

i

)
7
0
–
6
0
0
2
(
 
d
n
a

l
i
z
a
w
S

)
7
0
–
6
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
a
N

i

i

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
s
e
v
d
a
M

l

i

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
a
Z

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
v
o
d
o
M

l

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
n
a
j
i
a
b
r
e
z
A

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
i
t
i
a
H

)
8
0
–
7
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
z
n
a
T

i

)
2
0
0
2
(
 

m
a
n
t
e
V

i

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
i

l

w
a
a
M

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
h
G

)
8
0
–
4
0
0
2
(
 
u
r
e
P

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
e
w
b
a
b
m
Z

i

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
v

i

i
l

o
B

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
o
o
C

l

i

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
n
o
o
r
e
m
a
C

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
e
u
q
b
m
a
z
o
M

i

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
o
b
m
a
C

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
.

 

p
e
R
b
a
r
A

 
,
t
p
y
g
E

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
l

a
p
e
N

)
0
1
–
9
0
0
2
(
 
o
h
t
o
s
e
L

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
a
i
r
e
b
L

i

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
i
r
e
g
N

i

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
r
a
c
s
a
g
a
d
a
M

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
o
s
a
F
a
n
k
r
u
B

i

 

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
p
o
h
t
E

i

i

)
4
0
–
3
0
0
2
(
 
o
c
c
o
r
o
M

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
l

a
g
e
n
e
S

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
e
n
o
e
L
a
r
r
e
S

i

 

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
i
l

a
M

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
e
n
u
G

i

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
n

i

I

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
r
e
g
N

i

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
d
a
h
C

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
n
n
e
B

i

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
y
e
k
r
u
T

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
e
r
i
o
v

I
’

 

d
e
t
ô
C

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
 
.

 
.

p
e
R
m
e
D

 
,

o
g
n
o
C

gender                   wealth                        other factors

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys.

Note: The measure of inequality refers to the percentage of total opportunities that must be reallocated to ensure that all the circumstances groups have the same average cover-
age rate. Low inequality is between 0.3 percent and 2.1 percent, moderate inequality is between 2.3 percent and 6.4 percent, and high inequality is between 6.5 percent and 
26.7 percent. Results are sorted by size of gender contribution to total inequality.

risk of death per birth declined. During 1990–
2008, 147 countries experienced declines in the 
maternal mortality ratio, 90 with a decline of 40 
percent or more.17 The Middle East and North 
Africa had the largest decline (59 percent), fol-
lowed by East Asia and Paciﬁ c (56 percent) and 
South Asia (53 percent). Second, the exposure to 
the risk of death was lower because of dramatic 
declines in fertility rates all over the world. With 
women  choosing  to  have  fewer  children,  the 
lifetime risk of death from maternal causes de-
clined, even where the risk of death during each 
birth changed little. 

In most developing countries, fertility rates 
fell  sharply  in  a  fairly  short  period.  These  de-
clines were much faster than earlier declines in 
today’s rich countries. In the United States, fer-
tility  rates  fell  gradually  in  the  1800s  through 
1940,  increased  during  the  baby  boom,  and 
then  leveled  off  at  just  above  replacement.  In 
India, fertility was high and stable through 1960 
and  then  sharply  declined  from  6  births  per 
woman to 2.3 by 2009. What took the United 

States more than 100 years took India 40 (ﬁ gure 
1.4). Similarly, in Morocco, the fertility rate fell 
from 4 children per woman to 2.5 between 1992 
and 2004. 

On various other aspects of health status and 
health care, differences by sex are small. In many 
low-income  countries,  the  proportion  of  chil-
dren  stunted,  wasted,  or  underweight  remains 
high, but girls are no worse off than boys. In fact, 
data from the Demographic and Health Surveys 
show that boys are at a slight disadvantage.18 In 
Brazil,  Côte  d’Ivoire,  and  Vietnam,  men’s  and 
women’s heights are increasing at almost identi-
cal rates, while in Ghana women’s heights have 
increased more rapidly than those of men.19 In 
many  countries,  children’s  and  adults’  anthro-
pometric outcomes do not allow them to reach 
their full potential, but an individual’s sex is not 
the main culprit. North Indian states are a no-
table  exception;  women  have  grown  taller  at  a 
much slower rate than men, and girls’ anthro-
pometric outcomes remain worse than boys—
both in levels and in changes over time.20 

64 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 1.3  Women are living longer than men

East Asia and Pacific

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

80

70

60

50

40

80

70

60

50

40

 

h
t
r
i
b
 
t
a
y
c
n
a
t
c
e
p
x
e
e
f
i
l

 

 

h
t
r
i
b
 
t
a
y
c
n
a
t
c
e
p
x
e
e
f
i
l

 

 

h
t
r
i
b
 
t
a
y
c
n
a
t
c
e
p
x
e
e
f
i
l

 

women, Ukraine

men, Ukraine

80

70

60

50

40

 

h
t
r
i
b
 
t
a
y
c
n
a
t
c
e
p
x
e
e
f
i
l

 

80

70

60

50

40

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

years

women

men

years

women

men

years

women

men

Middle East and North Africa

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

80

70

60

50

40

 

h
t
r
i
b
 
t
a
y
c
n
a
t
c
e
p
x
e
e
f
i
l

 

80

70

60

50

40

women,
Botswana

men,
Botswana

 

h
t
r
i
b
 
t
a
y
c
n
a
t
c
e
p
x
e
e
f
i
l

 

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

years

women

men

years

women

men

years

women

men

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Development Indicators.

FIGURE 1.4   What took the United 
States 100 years took 
India 40 and the Islamic 
Republic of Iran 10

How fast can fertility decline?

Iran, 
Islamic Rep.
Bangladesh

Morocco

Zimbabwe

Colombia

India
United
States

40

20

0
100
number of years for the total fertility
rate to fall from more than 6 children

80

60

to less than 3

Source: http://www.gapminder.org.

Similarly, there is little evidence of systematic 
gender discrimination in the use of health ser-
vices  or  in  health  spending.  Out-of-pocket 
spending on health in the 1990s was higher for 
women than for men in Brazil, the Dominican 
Republic, Paraguay, and Peru.21 Evidence from 
South  Africa  reveals  the  same  pro-female  pat-
tern,22 as does that for lower income countries. 
In the Arab Republic of Egypt, more was spent 
per capita on outpatient services for females (68 
Egyptian  pounds  a  year)  than  on  male  health 
care  (58).23  The  gender  difference  in  amounts 
spent on inpatient services also favored females 
but much less. In Ghana, females absorbed more 
of a health subsidy than males did (56 percent 
of  overall  health  spending  in  1992).  Evidence 
from India, Indonesia, and Kenya tells a similar 
story.24

For preventive health services such as vacci-
nation, poverty rather than gender appears to be 
the major constraining factor (ﬁ gure 1.5).25 As 
with  education  enrollments,  a  decomposition 

 

A wave of progress 

65

FIGURE 1.5   Gender explains little of the inequality in use of preventive health services

Low inequality

Moderate inequality

High inequality

%

 
,

y
t
i
l

a
u
q
e
n

i
 
l

a
t
o
t
 
o
t
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

100

80

60

40

20

0

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
l

a
g
e
n
e
S

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
h
s
e
d
a
g
n
a
B

l

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
s
a
r
u
d
n
o
H

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
s
e
v
d
a
M

l

i

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
v

i

i
l

o
B

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
n
a
w
R

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
e
n
o
e
L
a
r
r
e
S

i

 

)
0
1
–
9
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
n
a
g
U

)
4
0
–
3
0
0
2
(
 
o
c
c
o
r
o
M

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
a
Z

i

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
h
G

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
n
a
d
r
o
J

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
o
b
m
a
C

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
b
A

l

i

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
i

l

w
a
a
M

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
a
i
s
e
n
o
d
n

I

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
.

 

p
e
R
b
a
r
A

 
,
t
p
y
g
E

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
s
e
n
p
p

i

i
l
i

h
P

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
o
o
C

l

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
n
o
o
r
e
m
a
C

)
7
0
–
6
0
0
2
(
 
d
n
a

l
i
z
a
w
S

)
7
0
–
6
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
a
N

i

i

)
8
0
–
4
0
0
2
(
 
u
r
e
P

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
y
n
e
K

)
0
1
–
9
0
0
2
(
 
o
h
t
o
s
e
L

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
.

 

p
e
R
n
a
c
i
n
m
o
D

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
v
o
d
o
M

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
o
s
a
F
a
n
k
r
u
B

i

 

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
i
l

a
M

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
l

a
p
e
N

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
r
e
g
N

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
e
n
u
G

i

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
y
e
k
r
u
T

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
i
r
e
g
N

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
e
m
r
A

i

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
.

p
e
R

 
.

m
e
D

 
,

o
g
n
o
C

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
)
e

l
l
i

v
a
z
z
a
r
B
(
 
.

p
e
R

 
,

o
g
n
o
C

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
p
o
h
t
E

i

i

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
n
n
e
B

i

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
a
i
r
e
b
L

i

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
e
u
q
b
m
a
z
o
M

i

)
9
0
-
8
0
0
2
(
 
r
a
c
s
a
g
a
d
a
M

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
e
w
b
a
b
m
Z

i

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
n

i

I

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
n
a
j
i
a
b
r
e
z
A

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
i
t
i
a
H

gender                   wealth                  other factors

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys.

Note: The measure of inequality refers to the percentage of total opportunities that must be reallocated to ensure that all the circumstances groups have the same average cover-
age rate. Low inequality is between 1.0 percent and 3.2 percent, moderate inequality is between 3.4 percent and 5.2 percent, and high inequality is between 5.2 percent and 
22.0 percent. Results are sorted by size of gender contribution to total inequality.

suggests  that  only  a  handful  of  countries  have 
high  inequality  in  measles  vaccinations  (other 
vaccines  are  even  more  universal)  and  where 
gender is a major contributing circumstance.

More women participate in market work
Female labor force participation has grown since 
1960, dramatically in some regions. Expanding 
economic opportunities have drawn large num-
bers of new female workers into the market. Be-
tween 1980 and 2008, the global rate of female 
labor  force  participation  increased  from  50.2 
to 51.8 percent while the male rate fell slightly 
from  82.0  to  77.7  percent.  So  the  gender  gap 
narrowed from 32 percentage points in 1980 to 
26 percentage points in 2008 (ﬁ gure 1.6).26

Driving  the  convergence  across  countries 
are  large  increases  in  participation  in  coun-
tries that started with very low rates (primarily 
in  Latin  American  and  the  Caribbean  and  in 
the  Middle  East  and  North Africa)  combined 
with  small  declines  in  countries  that  started 
with very high rates (primarily in Eastern Eu-
rope and Central Asia). Participation rates now 
exceed 50 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa, East 

Asia and the Paciﬁ c, Europe and Central Asia, 
and  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  while 
more  than  60  percent  of  women  remain  eco-
nomically inactive in South Asia and the Mid-
dle East and North Africa.

Labor force participation increased markedly 
for women with more education, but declined 
among women ages 15–24, who have remained 
in school longer, slowing the growth in overall 
participation since 1990. 

Around  the  world,  for  very  poor  countries, 
female labor force participation is high, reﬂ ect-
ing  a  large  labor-intensive  agricultural  sector 
and signiﬁ cant numbers of poor households.27 
In  this  situation,  women  are  willing  to  enter 
the labor force even at fairly low wages because 
unearned  incomes  are  also  low.  As  per  capita 
incomes  rise,  unearned  income  rises  (through 
higher  male  wages  and  earnings),  and  these 
higher  incomes  are  typically  associated  with 
women  withdrawing  from  the  labor  market. 
Social barriers against women entering the paid 
labor  force  also  regain  prominence,  and  their 
participation  rates  fall.  But  as  countries  con-
tinue  to  develop,  further  increases  in  women’s 

66 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 1.6   The gender gap in labor force participation 

narrowed between 1980 and 2008

%

 
,

8
0
0
2

 
,

 

p
a
g
n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
e
a
m
-
e
a
m
e
f

l

l

 

0

–20

–40

–60

–80

–80

changes positive
toward women

–60
female-male participation gap, 1980, %

–40

–20

0

East Asia and Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and North Africa

South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
high-income countries

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on International Labour Organization 2010.

Note: The 45° line in the ﬁ gure above shows parity in the values on the vertical and horizontal axis.

estimated on the basis of data from 130 coun-
tries  around  1980  and  2008,  highlights  these 
two  features  (ﬁ gure  1.7).  First,  there  is  a  clear 
U-shape relationship across countries at differ-
ent incomes for both periods. Second, the par-
ticipation rate associated with each level of de-
velopment  increases  over  time—the  U-shaped 
curve moves upward as time passes. So at each 
level of income, more women were participating 
in market work in 2008 than in 1980.

Changes  in  education  and  family  struc-
ture  have  also  driven  women’s  employment 
over  time.  Delays  in  the  timing  of  marriage 
and childbearing as well as lower fertility have 
brought  more  women  into  the  labor  market, 
ranging  from  as  little  as  7  percent  in  Bolivia 
to about 30 percent in Argentina and Colom-
bia, and contributing an average of 21 percent 
overall  to  the  rise  in  female  labor  force  par-
ticipation across 10 Latin American countries. 
An additional 42 percent of the rise in female 
labor force participation in Latin America can 
be attributed to more education—in Panama, 
education accounts for as much as 81 percent. 
Urbanization,  household  technology,  and  the 
sectoral  structure  of  the  economy  appear  to 
matter much less in bringing women into the 
labor force.28 

FIGURE 1.7   Across countries, at every income level, female 

CHANGE BEGETS CHANGE

labor force participation increased between 
1980 and 2008

2008

80

70

60

 

%

 
,

e
t
a
r
 
n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
e
c
r
o
f
 
r
o
b
a

 

l
 

50

l

e
a
m
e
40f

1980

4

6

10
log, GDP per capita (constant 2000 US$)

8

12

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on International Labour Organization 2010. 

education and wages move them back into the 
labor market.

The  relationship  between  economic  devel-
opment  and  female  labor  force  participation, 

A  notable  transformation  has  taken  place 
around  the  world  with  impressive  gains  in 
women’s rights, educational attainment, health 
outcomes, and labor force participation. Positive 
feedback loops between gains in these different 
areas explain why change has been so quick in 
the developing world. 

Improvements  in  one  area  (higher  educa-
tion) can drive changes in other areas (such as 
lower fertility and higher labor force participa-
tion).  Similarly,  better  labor  opportunities  can 
in turn induce more investments in education 
and in women’s health for the next generation, 
while equal rights can underpin progress on all 
fronts. Conversely, a lack of improvement in, say, 
rights can hold back improvements in women’s 
access  to  market  work,  and  failures  to  redress 
gender gaps can impair a whole range of health 
outcomes  for  women.  Understanding  these 
feedback  loops  is  important  for  policy  design. 
So is understanding the constraints to progress, 
and whether they are rooted in what happens in 

 

A wave of progress 

67

households, in how markets operate, or in insti-
tutions (formal and informal).

New labor market opportunities can 
spur investments in education and health 
for girls
How  much  parents  invest  in  their  children’s 
education is partly determined by the returns to 
that  education.  Early  studies  showed  that  new 
agricultural technologies that favored women’s 
production increased girls’ enrollment.29 A new 
generation of studies extends these insights in a 
globalizing economy. 

For  instance,  the  rise  of  outsourcing  in  In-
dia offers new opportunities for women in the 
wage sector and increases parental investments 
in  girls’  education.30  Recruitment  services  that 
informed families about new employment op-
portunities  for  Indian  women  increased  the 
chances of girls ages 5–15 years to be in school 
by 3 to 5 percentage points but had no effect on 
boys.31 The girls also had higher body mass in-
dex (a measure of health) and were 10 percent 
more likely to be employed in wage work. Per-
ceived improvements in the likelihood of a job 
triggered investments in human capital for girls 
even when there were no changes in other po-
tential limiting factors, such as poverty, cost, or 
distance  to  school.  Evidence  of  greater  returns 
was enough to stimulate greater human capital 
accumulation.

It  has  often  been  posited  that  cultural  and 
social norms (or “informal institutions” in the 
Report’s framework) “hold back” human capi-
tal  investments.  So,  many  policy  efforts  try  to 
change the status quo by trying to nudge norms. 
The results here present an alternative route—
expand  economic  opportunities,  and  human 
capital  investments  in  girls  will  increase.  Mar-
kets can affect private household decisions, even 
with slow-moving social norms.

Investing in the future 
A  similar  consideration—linking  parental  in-
vestments  in  education  and  returns  down  the 
line—underpins the relationship between health 
and schooling. At its starkest, lowering the risk 
of  death  should  lead  to  greater  human  capital 
accumulation during childhood. Put simply, the 
longer you get a payout from your investment, 
the more attractive it is to make that investment. 
If the risk of dying from childbirth is high, par-
ents factor in this risk and reduce investments 
in daughters. 

Perhaps  the  clearest  demonstration  of  the 
link  comes  from  declines  in  maternal  mortal-
ity.  Life  expectancy  rose  sharply  in  Sri  Lanka 
between  1946  and  1953  as  a  result  of  declines 
in maternal mortality ratios, from 180 per 1,000 
live births to 50. Given that women had 5 chil-
dren  on  average,  1  in  10  women  died  giving 
birth before these declines—a huge risk. Using 
variation in the timing of the declines in differ-
ent parts of the country, one study shows that 
the  overall  declines  in  maternal  mortality  ra-
tio boosted female life expectancy by 1.5 years, 
female literacy by 1 percentage point, and female 
education by 0.17 years.32

Given that a reduction in the maternal mor-
tality  ratio  also  reduces  maternal  morbidity,  it 
increases the ability of women to participate in 
the labor force. Evidence from the United States 
shows that in 1920 one in six women suffered 
from  a  long-term  disability  incurred  in  child-
birth.  A  sharp  decline  in  maternal  mortality 
resulting  from  the  discovery  of  sulfa  drugs  in 
1936  (and  their  immediate  widespread  use) 
went  hand  in  hand  with  dramatic  improve-
ments  in  health  for  women  after  childbirth. 
Improvements  in  the  conditions  of  childbirth 
were the biggest force behind the rise in married 
women’s labor force participation in the United 
States between 1920 and 1950.33

Who  would  have  thought  that  the  fastest 
way  to  increase  female  labor  force  participa-
tion  in  the  United  States  at  the  beginning  of 
the 20th century would be to reduce maternal 
mortality? Households, markets, social norms, 
and  formal  institutions  are  inextricably  con-
nected, and the key is to ﬁ nd ways to stimulate 
progress  in  all  domains.  For  reducing  mater-
nal mortality, chapter 3 shows that income or 
household actions are less powerful than effec-
tive  institutions—and  public  investments  are 
critical.

“

What are your hopes for your daughter’s future? 
She must be bright and intelligent, educated, 
and look after this community. For my sons, 
they must be educated to take ownership of land, 
build permanent houses, and develop 
this community.

Adult woman, Papua New Guinea 

”

68 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Choosing differently
 Recent ﬁ ndings suggest that women’s rights and 
agency play a role seeing that those public invest-
ments are made. In a world where women care 
about  different  things  from  men  (and  women 
do appear to care for children more than men 
do),  it  may  be  that  when  women  have  more 
voice,  they  can  drive  institutional  investments 
in a way that favors children. So, when women 
have more rights in the political arena, does the 
nature of public investment change? Yes. 

Recall that in the United States women won 
voting rights state by state over the 19th century 
until they were federally mandated by constitu-
tional amendment in 1920. Public health spend-
ing  increased  dramatically  as  women  won  the 
right to vote. The Sheppard-Towner Maternity 
and  Infancy  Protection  Act  of  1921  provided 
federal  funding  for  maternity  and  child  care.  
According to one observer, 

Indeed, fear of being punished at the polls 
by American women, not conviction of the 
bill’s  necessity,  seems  to  have  motivated 
Congress to vote for it. As one senator ad-
mitted to a reporter from the Ladies Home 
Journal, if the members of Congress could 

have  voted  on  the  measure  in  their  cloak 
rooms,  it  would  have  been  killed  as  em-
phatically  as  it  was  ﬁ nally  passed  out  in 
the open. 34

Growth  in  public  spending  led  to  the  scal-
ing up of intensive door-to-door hygiene cam-
paigns and to a sharp decline in child mortality 
by 8 to 15 percent. Roughly 20,000 child deaths 
were averted every year because women won the 
right  to  vote.  A  variant  of  these  broad  results 
has also been documented in Switzerland, with 
the  additional  twist  that  women  seem  to  have 
become more supportive of health and welfare 
expenditures over time than men.35 For Europe, 
the results suggest that female suffrage increased 
spending on health, education, and welfare ex-
penditures over time.36

Intergenerational cycles
The links across sectors also play out over time. 
Recent  studies  show  that,  in  England  and  the 
United States, more maternal education leads to 
a host of better outcomes for children—better 
education  and  better  health.  For  children  ages 
7–8,  an  additional  year  of  mother’s  schooling 
increases the child’s performance on a standard-

FIGURE 1.8   Who agrees that a 

FIGURE 1.9   Who agrees that when 

university education 
is more important for a 
boy than for a girl?

jobs are scarce, men 
should have more right to 
a job than women?

9
9
–
4
9
9
1

 
,

e
e
r
g
a
%

 

50

40

30

20

10

0

changes positive
toward women

Poland

Turkey
Romania

Georgia
Japan
Mexico

Ukraine
Russia Federation

Peru

Brazil
Slovenia
Argentina

Bulgaria

Spain
United States

China

Chile

South Africa

Uruguay

Finland
Colombia

Norway

Australia

Sweden
New Zealand

Germany

India

9
9
–
4
9
9
1

 
,

e
e
r
g
a
%

 

80

60

40

20

0

changes positive
toward women

Turkey
Georgia

India
Russia Federation

Poland
Romania

China

South Africa

Ukraine
Brazil Bulgaria
Chile
Uruguay
Japan
Switzerland
Mexico

Slovenia
Australia
Great Britain

Spain
Germany
Peru
United States

Argentina

Norway

Finland

New Zealand

Sweden

0

10

20

30

40

50

0

20

40

60

80

% agree, 2005–07

% agree, 2005–07

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Values Surveys, 
1994–99 and 2005–07 waves.

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Values Surveys, 
1994–99 and 2005–07 waves.

Note: The 45° line in the ﬁ gure above shows parity in the values on 
the vertical and horizontal axis.

Note: The 45° line in the ﬁ gure above shows parity in the values on 
the vertical and horizontal axis.

 

A wave of progress 

69

ized math test and reduces the incidence of be-
havioral  problems.37  Similar  results  document 
the link between maternal education and child 
education in low-income countries, where even 
a  single  year  of  maternal  education  can  make 
a  large  difference.  Children  of  mothers  with  a 
single year of education in Pakistan spent an ad-
ditional  hour  every  day  studying  at  home  and 
reported higher test scores.38

The intergenerational impact of female edu-
cation is not restricted to the home. Contempo-
raneous and intertemporal links came together 
in  the  rise  of  private  schooling  in  Pakistan, 
which exploded after 1990.39 A curious feature 
of the expansion was that these private schools 
were overwhelmingly located in villages where a 
public girls’ secondary school had existed a de-
cade  earlier.  By  establishing  secondary  schools 
for girls in rural areas, the government created 
a cohort of teachers who could then teach chil-
dren at the primary level in the next generation. 
The students of today became the teachers of to-
morrow. An institutional improvement (public 
secondary schools for girls) enabled a household 
response (more girls with secondary education) 
that then played out in a change in the market 
(private schools and more female employment 
opportunities) one generation later.

Changes in attitudes
Upholding rights also has a ripple effect in so-
cial mores and attitudes. The World Values Sur-
vey provides a window on how social percep-
tions have shifted. Traditionally, social attitudes 
toward women have given primacy to their do-
mestic roles as mothers and homemakers. Pro-
gressively, social norms appear to be shifting to 
be more accepting of women as social actors—
across  a  large  number  of  countries  with  data, 
even  if  signiﬁ cant  differences  remain  across 
countries.

Women are increasingly considered to have 
equal  standing  with  men  in  access  to  tertiary 
education and participation in the labor force. 
In  most  countries  with  data,  there  has  been  a 
signiﬁ cant reduction in the share of people who 
believe  that “university  is  more  important  for 
men  than  for  women”  and “men  should  have 
more right to a job than women when jobs are 
scarce” (ﬁ gures 1.8 and 1.9). In Turkey, the share 
of individuals concurring that higher education 
is preferable for men fell from 34 to 20 percent 
in 10 years. 

NOTES

  1.  Kingdon  and  Theopold  2008;  Pitt,  Rosenzweig, 

and Hassan 2010.

  2.  Chinkin 2010.
  3.  Acar 2000.
  4.  http://www.au.int/en/sites/default/files/999 

Rights_of_Women.pdf.

  5.  Zaher 2002.
  6.  Bennhold 2010.
  7.  Ramirez, Soysal, and Shanahan 1997.
  8.  Hossain 2011.
  9.  Barro and Lee 2010.
10.  Grant and Behrman 2010.
11.  Dollar and Gatti 1999.
12.  Filmer 1999.
13.  Avenstrup, Liang, and Nelleman 2004.
14.  Meyer, Ramirez, and Soysal 1992.
15.  Dulger 2004.
16.  Hoyos and Narayan 2011.
17.  WHO and others 2010.
18.  United Nations 2010.
19.  Schultz 2005.
20.  Deaton 2008.
21.  Casas, Dachs, and Bambas 2001.
22.  Irving and Kingdon 2008.
23.  Egypt  Ministry  of  Health  Department  of  Plan-
ning and Harvard School of Public Health–Data 
for Decision Making 1998.

24.  Sen,  Asha,  and  Östlin  2002;  Lee  2009;  Demery 

and Gaddis 2009.

25.  Hoyos and Narayan 2011.
26.  International Labor Organization 2010.
27.  Goldin 1995; Mammen and Paxson 2000.
28.  Chioda, Garcia-Verdú, and Muñoz Boudet 2011.
29.  Bardhan  1974;  Rosenzweig  and  Schultz  1982; 

Foster and Rosenzweig 1999.

30.  Oster and Millet 2010.
31.  Jensen 2010.
32.  Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney 2009.
33.  Albanesi and Olivetti 2009; Albanesi and Olivetti 

2010.

34.  As cited in Miller 2008.
35.  Funk and Gathmann 2007.
36.  Aidt, Dutta, and Loukoianova 2006.
37.  Currie and Moretti 2003; Carneiro, Meghir, and 

Parey 2007.

38.  Andrabi, Das, and Khwaja 2002.
39.  Andrabi, Das, and Khwaja 2011.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

70 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Acar,  Feride.  2000.  “Turkey.”  In  The  First  CEDAW 
Impact Study—Final Report, ed. Marilou McPhe-
dran, Susan Bazilli, Moana Erickson, and Andrew 
Byrnes. Toronto, Ontario: International Women’s 
Right Project, Centre for Feminist Research, and 
York University.

Aidt, Toke S., Jayasri Dutta, and Elena Loukoianova. 
2006.  “Democracy  Comes  to  Europe:  Franchise 
Expansion and Fiscal Outcomes 1830–1938.” Eu-
ropean Economic Review 50 (2): 249–83.

Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2009. “Gen-
der Roles and Medical Progress.” Working Paper 
Series  14873,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Re-
search, Cambridge, MA.

———. 2010. “Maternal Health and the Baby Boom.” 
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Paper 
Series 16146, Cambridge, MA.

Andrabi,  Tahir,  Jishnu  Das,  and  Asim  Ijaz  Khwaja. 
2002. “The Rise of Private Schooling in Pakistan: 
Catering  to  the  Urban  Elite  or  Educating  the 
Rural Poor?” Background Paper for the Pakistan 
Poverty  Assessment,  World  Bank,  Washington, 
DC. Processed.

———. 2011. “Students Today, Teachers Tomorrow: 
Identifying Constraints on the Provision of Educa-
tion.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 5674, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Avenstrup,  Roger,  Xiaoyan  Liang,  and  Soren  Nelle-
mann. 2004. Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi and Uganda: 
Universal  Primary  Education  and  Poverty  Reduc-
tion. Report 30765. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Bardhan, Pranab K. 1974. “On Life and Death Ques-
tions.”  Economic  and  Political  Weekly  9  (32/34): 
1293–304.

Barro,  Robert  J.,  and  Jong-Wha  Lee.  2010. “A  New 
Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 
1950–2010.” Working Paper Series 15902, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Bennhold, Katrin. 2010. “20 Years after Fall of Wall, 
Women of Former East Germany Thrive.” The In-
ternational Herald Tribune, October 6.

Carneiro, Pedro, Costas Meghir, and Matthias Parey. 
2007. “Maternal Education, Home Environments 
and  the  Development  of  Children  and  Adoles-
cents.” IZA Discussion Paper Series 3072, Institute 
for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Casas, Antonio Juan, J. Norberto W. Dachs, and Alex-
andra Bambas. 2001. “Health Disparities in Latin 
America and the Caribbean: the Role of Social and 
Economic  Determinants.”  Pan  American  Health 
Organization, Equity and Health: Views from the 
Pan American Sanitary Bureau, Occasional Publi-
cation 8, Washington, DC.

Chinkin,  Christine.  2010.  “Thoughts  on  the  UN 
Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of 
Discrimination  against  Women  (CEDAW).”  In 
Without Prejudice: CEDAW and the Determination 
of Women’s Rights in a Legal and Cultural Context, 

ed. Meena Shivdas and Sarah Coleman. London: 
Commonwealth Secretariat.

Chioda, Laura, with Rodrigo Garcia-Verdú, and Ana 
María  Muñoz  Boudet.  2011.  Work  and  Family: 
Latin  American  Women  in  Search  of  a  New  Bal-
ance. Washington, DC: World Bank, Ofﬁ ce of the 
Chief  Economist  (LCRCE)  and  the  Poverty  and 
Gender  Group  (LCSPP),  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean Region (LAC).

Currie,  Janet,  and  Enrico  Moretti.  2003.  “Mother’s 
Education  and  the  Intergenerational  Transmis-
sion  of  Human  Capital:  Evidence  from  College 
Openings.”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  118 
(4): 1495–532.

Deaton, Angus. 2008. “Height, Health, and Inequal-
ity: The Distribution of Adult Heights in India.” 
American Economic Review 98 (2): 468–74.

Demery, Lionel, and Isis Gaddis. 2009. Social Spend-
ing, Poverty and Gender Equality in Kenya: A Ben-
eﬁ t  Incidence  Analysis.  Nairobi:  Deutsche  Gesell-
schaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ).

Dollar, David, and Roberta Gatti. 1999. “Gender In-
equality,  Income,  and  Growth:  Are  Good  Times 
Good  for  Women?”  Policy  Research  Report  on 
Gender and Development, Working Paper Series 
1, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Dulger,  Ilhan.  2004.  “Turkey:  Rapid  Coverage  for 
Compulsory Education—The 1997 Basic Educa-
tion Program.” Paper presented at the Scaling Up 
Poverty  Reduction:  A  Global  Learning  Process 
and Conference, Shanghai, China, May 25.

Egypt  Ministry  of  Health  Department  of  Planning 
and  Harvard  School  of  Public  Health–Data  for 
Decision  Making.  1998.  Health  Care  Utilization 
and  Expenditures  in  the  Arab  Republic  of  Egypt. 
Cairo and Boston: Egypt Ministry of Health De-
partment  of  Planning  and  Harvard  School  of 
Public Health–Data for Decision Making.

Filmer,  Deon.  1999.  “The  Structure  of  Social  Dis-
parities in Education: Gender and Wealth.” Policy 
Research  Report  on  Gender  and  Development, 
Working  Paper  Series  5,  World  Bank,  Washing-
ton, DC.

Foster,  Andrew  D.,  and  Mark  Rosenzweig.  1999. 
“Missing  Women,  The  Marriage  Market  and 
Economic  Growth.”  Working  Paper  Series  49, 
Stanford  Center  for  International  Development, 
Stanford, CA.

Funk, Patricia, and Christina Gathmann. 2007. “What 
Women  Want:  Suffrage,  Gender  Gaps  in  Voter 
Preferences and Government Expenditures.” Uni-
versitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona; Stanford Uni-
versity, Stanford, CA. Processed.

Goldin,  Claudia.  1995.  “The  U-Shaped  Female  La-
bor  Force  Function  in  Economic  Development 
and Economic History.” In Investment in Women’s 
Human Capital, ed. T. Paul Schultz. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.

 

A wave of progress 

71

Grant, Monica J., and Jere R. Behrman. 2010. “Gen-
der Gaps in Educational Attainment in Less De-
veloped Countries.” Population and Development 
Review 36 (1): 71–89.

Hossain,  Naomi.  2011.  “Exports,  Equity  and  Em-
powerment: The Effects of Readymade Garments 
Manufacturing Employment on Gender Equality 
in Bangladesh.” Background paper for the WDR 
2012.

Hoyos,  Alejandro,  and  Ambar  Narayan.  2011.  “In-
equalities  of  Opportunities  among  Children: 
How  Much  Does  Gender  Matter.”  Background 
note for the WDR 2012.

ILO (International Labor Organization). 2010. “Key 

Indicators of the Labour Market.” ILO,  Geneva.

Irving,  Margaret,  and  Geeta  Gandhi  Kingdon.  2008. 
“Gender Patterns in Household Health Expendi-
ture Allocation: A  Study  of  South Africa.”  CSAE 
Working  Paper  Series  2008–32,  Centre  for  the 
Study  of  African  Economies,  Oxford  University, 
Oxford, U.K.

Jayachandran,  Seema,  and  Adriana  Lleras-Muney. 
2009.  “Life  Expectancy  and  Human  Capital  In-
vestments:  Evidence  from  Maternal  Mortality 
Declines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1): 
349–97.

Jensen, Robert. 2010. “Economic Opportunities and 
Gender  Differences  in  Human  Capital:  Experi-
mental Evidence for India.” Working Paper Series 
16021,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Cambridge, MA.

Kingdon, Geeta Gandhi, and Nicolas Theopold. 2008. 
“Do  Returns  to  Education  Matter  to  Schooling 
Participation?  Evidence  from  India.”  Education 
Economics 16 (4): 329–50.

Lee,  Jinhyun.  2009.  “Estimating  Individual  Non-
linear Health Expenditure and Income Relation-
ships  using  Household  Data:  The  Indonesian 
SUSENAS  Case.”  School  of  Economics  and  Fi-
nance,  University  of  St.  Andrews,  St.  Andrews, 
Fife, U.K. Processed.

Mammen,  Kristin,  and  Christina  Paxson.  2000. 
“Women’s  Work  and  Economic  Development.” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (4): 141–64.

Meyer, John W., Francisco O. Ramirez, and Yasemin 
Nuhoglu Soysal. 1992. “World Expansion of Mass 

Education, 1870–1980.” Sociology of Education 65 
(2): 128–49.

Miller,  Grant.  2008.  “Women’s  Suffrage,  Political 
Responsiveness,  and  Child  Survival  in American 
History.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 
1287–327.

Oster,  Emily,  and  M.  Bryce  Millet.  2010.  “Do  Call 
Centers  Promote  School  Enrollment?  Evidence 
from India.” Working Paper Series 15922, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Pitt,  Mark  M.,  Mark  R.  Rosenzweig,  and  Nazmul 
Hassan.  2010.  “Human  Capital  Investment  and 
the Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based 
Economy.” Economic Growth Center Discussion 
Paper Series 989, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
Ramirez, Francisco O., Yasemin Soysal, and Suzanne 
Shanahan.  1997.  “The  Changing  Logic  of  Po-
litical Citizenship: Cross-National Acquisition of 
Women’s Suffrage Rights, 1890 to 1990.” American 
Sociological Review 62 (5): 735–45.

Rosenzweig,  Mark  R.,  and  Theodore  Paul  Schultz. 
1982.  “Market  Opportunities,  Genetic  Endow-
ments  and  the  Intrafamily  Distribution  of  Re-
sources: Child Survival in Rural India.” American 
Economic Review 72 (4): 803–15.

Schultz, T. Paul. 2005. “Productive Beneﬁ ts of Health: 
Evidence from Low-income Countries.” In Health 
and  Economic  Growth:  Findings  and  Policy  Im-
plications,  ed.  Guillem  López-Casanovas,  Berta 
Rivera,  and  Luis  Currais.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT 
Press.

Sen, Gita, George Asha, and Piroska Östlin, eds. 2002. 
Engendering  International  Health:  The  Challenge 
of Equity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

United  Nations  2010.  The  World’s  Women  2010: 

Trends and Statistics. New York: UN.

WHO  (World  Health  Organization),  UNICEF 
(United  Nations  Children’s  Fund),  UNFPA 
(United  Nations  Population  Fund),  and  World 
Bank.  2010.  Trends  in  Maternal  Mortality:  1990 
to  2008.  New York  and Washington,  DC: WHO, 
UNICEF, UNFPA, and World Bank.

Zaher,  Claudia.  2002.  “When  a  Woman’s  Marital 
Status  Determined  Her  Legal  Status: A  Research 
Guide on the Common Law Doctrine of Cover-
ture.” Law Library Journal 94 (3): 459–87.

2CHAPTER

The persistence of gender inequality

Things have changed for the better, but 

not for all women and not in all do-
mains of gender equality. Progress has 
been  slow  and  limited  for  women  in 
very  poor  countries,  for  those  who  are  poor, 
even amid greater wealth, and for those who face 
other forms of exclusion because of their caste, 
disability, location, ethnicity, or sexual orienta-
tion.  Whether  for  comparisons  between  men 
and  women  in  the  same  country,  or  absolute 
comparisons  of  women  across  countries,  the 
progress in some domains is tempered by the so-
bering realities that many women face in others.
Consider the likelihood of women dying dur-
ing  childbirth  in  Sub-Saharan Africa,  which  is 
still comparable to the rate in Northern Europe 
during  the  19th  century.  Or  the  difference  in 
school enrollments in Nigeria, where a wealthy 
urban child averages around 10 years of school-
ing,  while  poor  rural  Hausa  girls  average  less 
than 6 months.1 Or the fact that women remain 
severely disadvantaged in their control over re-
sources and assets in the household. Or that the 
earnings differentials between men and women 
have not changed much. Or that women’s rep-

“

We are not educated. We don’t
know anything and do not know 
how we can be able to change 
our life and obtain power and 
freedom.

”

Adult woman, rural Afghanistan

resentation in policy making remains far lower 
than  men’s.  Or  that  domestic  violence  contin-
ues to exact a heavy toll on women around the 
world—regardless of individual or country in-
come, women continue to be the primary vic-
tims  of  violence  at  home  and  to  suffer  more 
severe injuries. 

Where is progress absent?

•  Severely  disadvantaged  populations.  Across 
and  within  countries,  gender  gaps  widen  at 
lower incomes, and, in the poorest economies, 
gender  gaps  are  larger.  The  beneﬁ ts  of  eco-

“

There is no such thing as equality between men and women in this community, 
maybe in towns and urban areas, but not here! A man is always above 
the woman. 

Adult man, rural South Africa

Women just started entering society, so the man is still trying to maintain 
his control. 

Adult man, West Bank and Gaza

”

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

73

nomic growth have not accrued equally to all 
men and all women for some parts of society. 
Household  poverty  can  mute  the  impact  of 
national development, and the differences are 
often compounded by other means of social 
exclusion, such as geography and ethnicity. 
•  “Sticky” domains. Improvements in some do-
mains of gender equality—such as those re-
lated  to  occupational  differences  or  partici-
pation  in  policy  making—are  bound  by 
constraints that do not shift with economic 
growth and development. Gender disparities 
endure even in high-income economies de-
spite  the  large  gains  in  women’s  civil  and 
 economic  rights  in  the  past  century.  These 
outcomes are the result of slow-moving in-
stitutional dynamics and deep structural fac-
tors that growth alone cannot address. 

•  Reversals.  External  shocks—sometimes  eco-
nomic, sometimes political, sometimes insti-
tutional—can  erase  hard-earned  gains.  In 
some  instances,  improvements  in  gender 
equality have been reversed in the face of un-
expected  shocks  that  revealed  or  worsened 
institutional  or  market  failures.  The  shocks 
affect  both  males  and  females,  but  multiple 
factors shape their impact on gender differen-
tials—among  them,  the  source  and  type  of 
shock, economic and institutional structures, 
and social norms. Even when shocks do not 
have differential gender impacts, the absolute 
welfare  losses  for  both  men  (and  boys)  and 
women (and girls) can be substantial. In par-
ticular, adverse circumstances early in life, as 
in the critical ﬁ rst three years, can have irre-
versible long-term effects. 

SEVERELY DISADVANTAGED 
POPULATIONS 

While  much  of  the  world  has  reduced  gender 
gaps  in  health  and  education,  conditions  for 
women in some low-income countries have not 
improved much. In many South Asian and Sub-
Saharan countries, girls’ enrollments in primary 
and secondary education have progressed little. 
In  Eritrea,  the  female  primary  net  enrollment 
rate rose from a very low base of 16 percent in 
1990 to just 36 percent in 2008. In Afghanistan, 
Chad,  and  the  Central African  Republic,  there 
are fewer than 70 girls per 100 boys in primary 

“

Money. And someone who would 
convince my dad to let me continue 
my education. . . . If I had enough 
money, I would enroll somewhere as a 
part-time student. You have to pay for 
every exam.

Young woman, Serbia 

”

school. The Republic of Yemen has one of the 
world’s largest gender disparities in net enroll-
ment  rates,  and  progress  has  been  difﬁ cult  to 
sustain.2 School enrollments for girls 5–19 years 
old in Mali are equivalent to those in the United 
States around 1810 (ﬁ gure 2.1). 

Gender disparities have also lingered among 
groups  that  have  not  beneﬁ ted  from  growth 
within  countries:  income  poverty  widens  gen-
der  gaps.  While  the  educational  attainment  of 

FIGURE 2.1   Female enrollments remain strikingly low in some 

countries

)

%

(
 
,

9
1
–
5
 
s
e
g
a

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s
 
e
a
m
e
f

l

.

 

p
e
R
b
a
r
A

 
,
t
p
y
g
E

h
s
e
d
a
g
n
a
B

l

i

e
u
q
b
m
a
z
o
M

n
a
t
s
i

k
i
j
a
r T
e
g
N

i

a
i
r
e
g
N

i

e
r
i
o
v

I
’

 

d
e
t
ô
C

i

a
p
o
h
t
E

i

 

n
a
t
s
i
k
a
P

United States
in 1900

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

i
l

a
M

 

o
s
a
F
a
n
k
r
u
B

i

1770

1780

1790

1800

1820

1830

1840

1850

1860

1870

1880

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2005

1900
1890
year

United States
trend line (United States, 1850–2000)

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on U.S. Census and the International Income Distribution Data-
base (I2D2). 

Note: Values between 1760 and 1840 are based on female school enrollment trending between 1850 and 
2000.

74 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 2.2   In some countries, female disadvantage augments at lower incomes …

Benin

Congo, Dem. Rep.

The Gambia

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

5

0

10

5

0

1

3

2
income quintile

4

5

India

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

5

0

10

5

0

1

2

3

4
income quintile

5

Pakistan

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

5

0

10

5

0

1

2

3

4
income quintile

5

Togo

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

income quintile

income quintile

girls

boys

income quintile

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on EdAttain.

wealthy  boys  and  girls  is  very  similar,  gender 
inequalities are intensiﬁ ed among the poor. In 
India, the median boy and girl ages 15–19 in the 
wealthiest ﬁ fth of the population reach grade 10, 
but the median boy in the bottom ﬁ fth reaches 
only grade 6, and the median girl only grade 1. 
Across countries there is little gender disadvan-
tage for the wealthiest: households in the top in-
come quintile tend to achieve full gender parity 
in education. 

Poor  girls  face  a  signiﬁ cant  schooling  dis-
advantage in much of Africa and South Asia, a 
disadvantage that increases at lower incomes, as 
in  Benin,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo, 
The  Gambia,  and  Togo  (ﬁ gure  2.2).  Yet  the 
opposite  can  be  observed  elsewhere—in  Ban-
gladesh,  Brazil,  the  Dominican  Republic,  the 
Philippines,  and  the  República  Bolivariana  de 
Venezuela, girls at low levels of wealth tend to 
stay longer in school than boys (ﬁ gure 2.3). Re-
gardless of whether the gender gap favors boys 
or girls at low household incomes, in countries 
where  the  difference  between  rich  and  poor 

tends  to  be  small—as  in  Uzbekistan  or  Viet-
nam—gender differences also tend to be small.
The disadvantage for girls tends to be more 
pronounced and to emerge earlier than for boys. 
A girl in the poorest ﬁ fth of the population in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo studies three 
fewer years than a poor boy. And a cumulative 
gender  bias  against  girls  builds  over  the  edu-
cational  life  cycle.  In  2008,  there  were  only  66 
female tertiary students for every 100 male stu-
dents  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  and  76  in  South 
Asia.3  Sub-Saharan  Africa  is  the  only  region 
where  growth  in  male  tertiary  enrollment  has 
outpaced  female  enrollment  growth,  especially 
for doctoral degrees.

The gaps between rich and poor are the same 
in health. Lower fertility rates imply that fewer 
women  are  exposed  to  the  risk  of  childbirth, 
and reductions in parity (the number of times 
a woman has given birth) and the age-structure 
of  births  have  accounted  for  a  sizable  fraction 
of  declines  in  the  lifetime  risk  of  death  from 
maternal  causes.4  Although  fertility  rates  have 

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

75

FIGURE 2.3   … yet in others, at low levels of wealth girls stay longer in school than boys

Bangladesh

Brazil

Dominican Republic

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

8

6

4

2

10

8

6

4

2

1

3

2
income quintile

4

5

Philippines

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

,

 

i

d
e
n
a
t
t
a
e
d
a
r
g
n
a
d
e
m

i

 

9
1
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

10

8

6

4

2

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

income quintile

Venezuela, RB

income quintile

10

8

6

4

2

10

8

6

4

2

1

3

2
income quintile

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

income quintile

girls

boys

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on EdAttain.

dropped dramatically in all regions since 1960, 
they  have  been  rising  in  many  Sub-Saharan 
countries. In Nigeria, the total fertility rate rose 
from 4.7 children in 1999 to 5.7 in 2008.5 

As in education, household wealth makes a 
difference. In all countries, fertility rates for the 
poor  are  higher  than  for  the  rich  (ﬁ gure  2.4). 
Yet  at  low  fertility  (typically  in  richer  coun-
tries), the differences between the bottom and 
the top quintiles tend to be small—on the order 
of 0.5 to 1 live birth. At higher fertility (usually 
in  poor  countries),  the  differences  widen.  In 
Zambia, the average fertility of a woman in the 
poorest quintile is 8.5 children (the highest in 
the world), but for a woman in the richest ﬁ fth, 
it is just over 3.

In  addition  to  household  wealth,  ethnicity 
and  geography  are  important  for  understand-
ing  and  addressing  gender  inequality.  Even  in 
countries  that  have  grown  rapidly,  poor  and 
ethnic minority women tend to beneﬁ t far less 
than  their  richer  and  ethnic  majority  counter-
parts. So, wide gender disparities endure. Many 

ethnic minorities are poorer and less urban than 
the general population. An estimated two-thirds 
of girls out of school globally belong to ethnic 
minorities in their countries.6 In Guatemala, the 
illiteracy rate among indigenous women stands 
at 60 percent, 20 percentage points above indig-
enous males and twice that of nonindigenous fe-
males.7 For ethnic minorities in Vietnam, more 
than 60 percent of childbirths take place with-
out prenatal care, twice the rate for the majority 
Kinh. More urban ethnic minority groups and 
groups not concentrated in poor regions tend to 
experience  smaller  differences  with  the  major-
ity populations. In China, rural ethnic minority 
groups have less access to education and health 
than  the  more  urban  Han,  Hui,  and  Manchu, 
but the school enrollment and health insurance 
gaps narrow in urban areas.8

Other factors of exclusion, such as caste, dis-
ability, or sexual orientation, also tend to com-
pound disadvantages in ways that affect devel-
opment outcomes. More research is needed to 
better understand these links. 

76 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 2.4   At low incomes, fertility rates remain high—And 
the poorer the country, the larger the gap between 
rich and poor 

Niger
Mali
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Chad
Zambia
Malawi
Liberia
Angola
Guinea
Tanzania
Nigeria
Rwanda
Ethiopia
Sierra Leone
Cameroon
Senegal
Madagascar
Congo, Rep. (Brazzaville)
Kenya
Pakistan
Ghana
Haiti
Swaziland
Zimbabwe
Jordan
Namibia
Lesotho
Cambodia
Philippines
Honduras
Nepal
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Bangladesh
India
Indonesia
Colombia
Dominican Republic
Azerbaijan
United States
Australia
Armenia
Moldova
Ukraine

Zambia: Women in 
the poorest quintile 
bear more than 
8 children on 
average; whereas 
in the richest 
quintile, the 
average drops 
to 3.5 children.

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧
⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

0

1

2

3

4

6
average number of children

5

8

7

⽧

richest quintile

fertility rate

average

fertility rate

poorest quintile

fertility rate

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys.

“STICKY” DOMAINS, DESPITE 
ECONOMIC PROGRESS

In two areas, income growth has brought only 
modest  and  gradual  progress  toward  gender 
equality  in  most  developing  countries:  female 
mortality and access to economic opportunities. 
And gender gaps have not narrowed in women’s 

control over resources, women’s political voice, 
or the incidence of domestic violence. 

In some cases, individual preferences, mar-
ket  failures,  institutional  constraints,  and  so-
cial  norms  continue  to  reinforce  gender  gaps 
despite  economic  progress.  Income  growth 
may  also  have  unexpected  adverse  effects  on 
gender equality through new gendered prefer-
ences.  In  other  cases,  development  outcomes 
have  not  always  reﬂ ected  extensive  formal 
gains in securing equal rights. Despite notable 
improvement in expanding legal guarantees to 
women  and  men  alike,  slow  implementation 
has impeded a move into gender parity. Social 
norms continue to bind to varying degrees in 
all nations, and a chasm remains between the-
ory and practice. 

Economic growth can even temporarily ag-
gravate  gender  differentials  in  some  countries. 
In China, new opportunities for rural industrial 
wage work led families initially to favor the ju-
nior secondary education of males, considerably 
widening  the  gender  gap  in  the  1980s.9  But  as 
the  economy  continued  to  grow,  girls  rapidly 
caught up with boys in the 1990s. Sub-Saharan 
Africa is in the midst of a signiﬁ cant expansion 
of secondary education. As in China, more Af-
rican boys than girls attended secondary school 
between 1999 and 2008, deepening the gender 
gaps. In 2008, there were 79 girls for every 100 
boys, down from 83 girls per 100 boys in 1999. 
Indeed, girls face signiﬁ cant barriers to second-
ary school entry, but enrollment rates tend to be 
low all around. 

In some cases, these gaps work against boys. 
Everywhere  in  the  world,  repetition  and,  to  a 
lesser  extent,  dropout  rates  are  higher  among 
boys  than  among  girls.  Some  upper-middle-
income and advanced economies are concerned 
about  male  underachievement  in  education—
girls  outperforming  boys  academically.  In  the 
United States and Israel, girls obtain better grades 
in all major school subjects, including math and 
science.10 In France, women are the majority in 
enrollments at the elite Grandes Ecoles de Com-
merce  (business  schools).11  Male  underperfor-
mance in higher education usually is not rooted 
in social exclusion, but men can also be subject 
to  cultural  norms  that  steer  them  away  from 
academic achievement. Identifying education as 
primarily a “female” endeavor means that young 
men in several Caribbean nations, such as Dom-
inica and Jamaica, withdraw from school.12 

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

77

Missing girls at birth and excess 
female mortality
Sex ratios at birth and mortality across coun-
tries in 1990, 2000, and 2008 reveal continuing 
disadvantages  for  women  in  many  low-  and 
middle-income countries (and disadvantages 
for men in some regions for speciﬁ c reasons). 
First,  the  problem  of  skewed  sex-ratios  at 
birth in China and India (and in some coun-
tries  in  the  Caucasus  and  the  Western  Bal-
kans) remains unresolved (table 2.1). Popula-
tion  estimates  suggest  that  an  additional  1.4 
million girls would have been born (mostly in 
China and India) if sex ratios at birth in these 
countries  resembled  those  found  worldwide. 
Second, compared with developed economies, 
the rate at which women die relative to men in 
low-  and  middle-income  countries  is  higher 
in many regions of the world.13 Overall, miss-
ing girls at birth and excess female mortality 
under age 60 totaled an estimated 3.9 million 
women  in  2008—85  percent  of  them  were 

My sister gave birth when she was 14 
and died.

Young woman, the Republic of Yemen

“ ”

in  China,  India,  and  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  In 
other  countries—notably  some  post-transi-
tion  economies—excess  male  mortality  has 
become serious.

Over  the  past  three  decades,  some  aspects 
of the problem remained the same, while oth-
ers  changed  dramatically.  Skewed  sex  ratios  at 
birth  were  identiﬁ ed  in  the  early  1990s,14  and 
as  prenatal  sex  determination  spreads  and  fer-
tility  declines,  the  problem  has  become  worse. 
Excess female mortality is slowly shifting from 
early childhood in South Asia to adulthood in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, declining in all low-income 
countries  except  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (see 
chapter 3).

TABLE 2.1   Missing girls at birth increased between 1990 and 2008 in India and China, as did excess 

 
 

female mortality in adulthood in Sub-Saharan Africa
Excess female deaths in the world, by age and region, 1990 and 2008
(thousands)

China

India

Sub-Saharan Africa

High HIV-prevalence countries

Low HIV-prevalence countries

South Asia (excluding India)

East Asia and Pacific (excluding China)

Middle East and North Africa

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

girls at birth

girls under 5

girls 5–14

women 15–49

women 50–59

   1990 2008
1,092 

  890 

1990
259 

2008
71 

1990
21 

2008
5 

 1990
208 

2008
56 

 1990
92 

 2008
30 

  265 

  42 

 

0 

  42 

 

 

 

 

 

0 

3 

5 

7 

0 

257 

53 

0 

53 

1 

4 

6 

14 

0 

428 

183 

6 

177 

99 

14 

13 

3 

11 

251 

203 

39 

163 

72 

7 

7 

1 

5 

94 

61 

5 

57 

32 

14 

4 

0 

3 

45 

77 

18 

59 

20 

9 

1 

0 

1 

388 

302 

38 

264 

176 

137 

43 

12 

20 

228 

751 

328 

423 

161 

113 

24 

4 

10 

81 

50 

4 

46 

37 

48 

15 

4 

17 

75 

99 

31 

68 

51 

46 

15 

3 

17 

Total
women
under 60

 1990
1,470 

1,255 

639 

53 

586 

346 

216 

80 

27 

51 

2008
1,254

856

1,182

416

766

305

179

52

23

33

Total

 1,212 

1,427 

1,010 

617 

230 

158 

1,286 

1,347 

343 

334 

4,082 

3,882

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Health Organization 2010 and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs 2009.
Note: Totals do not necessarily add up because of rounding.

78 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 2.5   Maternal mortality in many developing countries 

is similar to that in Sweden before 1900

s
h
t
r
i
b
e
v

 

i
l
 

,

0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p

 
,

o
i
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
l

a
t
r
o
m

 
l

a
n
r
e
t
a
m

Afghanistan

Chad

Liberia
Lib i

1,600

1,400

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

Cameroon
Cameroon

Burkina

Malawi

i

a
d
o
b
m
a
C
C

hh
s
e
d
a
g
n
a
B
B

l

a
i
s
e
n
n
o
d
n

I

India

Dominican Republic

E

a

Lat

and the Caribbean
dthe Caribbean
Eastern Europe and
Latin A meric
ntral Asiasia
Poland
2000

1970

1960

1980

1990

CeC

Chinan

Europepr pe
1930
1950
1940

TTanzania
anzania
TTTT

Sub-Saharan
Africa

sulfa drugs introduced
in 1930s and large-sc
in 1930s and large scaleale
institutionalization
of birthstt

1690

1700

1710

1720

1730

1740

1750

1760

1770

1780

1790

1800

1810

1820

1830

1860

1870

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1850
1840
year

Sweden
trend line (Sweden, 1750–1850)

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Health Organization and others 2010.

What accounts for these patterns? Chapter 3 
provides a deeper discussion, but two issues are 
highlighted  here:  maternal  mortality  and  the 
preference for sons. The female disadvantage in 
mortality during the reproductive ages is in part 
driven  by  the  risk  of  death  in  pregnancy  and 
childbirth and associated long-term disabilities.15
Although  maternal  mortality  ratios  have  fallen 
by  34  percent  since  1990,  they  remain  high  in 
many parts of the world: Sub-Saharan Africa had 
the highest ratio in 2008 at 640 maternal deaths 
per  100,000  live  births,  followed  by  South Asia 
(280), Oceania (230), and Southeast Asia (160).16
Bangladesh,  Cambodia,  India,  and  Indonesia 
have  maternal  mortality  ratios  comparable  to 
Sweden’s around 1900, and Afghanistan’s is simi-
lar to Sweden’s in the 17th century (ﬁ gure 2.5). 

These  high  mortality  ratios  translate  into 
large absolute numbers of maternal deaths, es-
pecially  where  fertility  rates  remain  high.  In 
2008, there were 63,000 maternal deaths in India 
and 203,000 (more than half of the total) in Sub-
Saharan Africa,  in  stark  contrast  to  rich  coun-

tries, with only 1,900 maternal deaths.17 One of 
every 10 women in Afghanistan and 1 of every 
14  in  Somalia  and  Chad  die  from  maternal 
causes, and a much larger fraction suffer long-
term  health  issues  stemming  from  complica-
tions during and after childbirth.

Progress in maternal mortality has not kept 
up with GDP growth. During 2000–08, the econ-
omies of Chad and Tanzania grew at impressive 
annual  rates  of  9.4  percent  and  7  percent,  but 
maternal mortality declined by a mere 8 percent 
(to 1,200 per 100,000 live births) in Chad and 
by 14 percent (to 790) in Tanzania. South Africa 
grew at a modest 4 percent annually during the 
same period, and maternal mortality  increased
by 8 percent to 410 per 100,000 births—a mani-
festation of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Since 1990, 
both India and Equatorial Guinea had declines 
of 41 percent in their maternal mortality ratios, 
which fell to similar levels in 2008, but the two 
countries had radically different growth trajec-
tories—a  mere  3  percent  a  year  in  Equatorial 
Guinea compared with a solid 8 percent in In-
dia.  Driving  the  high  maternal  mortality  rates 
in many countries are poor obstetric health ser-
vices and high fertility rates. Income growth and 
changes  in  household  behavior  alone  appear 
insufﬁ cient to reduce maternal mortality; pub-
lic  investments  are  key  to  improving  maternal 
health care services.

The  disadvantage  against  unborn  girls  is 
widespread in many parts of Asia and in some 
countries in the Caucasus (such as Armenia and 
Azerbaijan), where the intersection of a prefer-
ence for sons, declining fertility, and new tech-
nology  increases  the  missing  girls  at  birth.  In 
China  and  India,  sex  ratios  at  birth  point  to  a 
heavily skewed pattern in favor of boys. Where 
parents continue to favor sons over daughters, 
a gender bias in sex-selective abortions, female 
infanticide,  and  neglect  is  believed  to  account 
for  millions  of  missing  girls  at  birth.  In  2008 
alone, an estimated 1 million girls in China and 
250,000  girls  in  India  were  missing  at  birth.18
The abuse of new technologies for sex-selective 
abortions—such  as  cheap  mobile  ultrasound 
clinics—accounted  for  much  of  this  shortfall, 
despite  laws  against  such  practices  in  many 
nations,  such  as  India  and  China.19  Economic 
prosperity will continue to increase amniocen-
tesis and ultrasound services throughout the de-
veloping world, possibly enabling the diffusion 
of sex-selective abortions where son-preferences 
exist.20

These preferences do not appear to change 
easily. Even among later children of South and 
Southeast  Asian  immigrants  in  Canada,  the 
United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States,  the 
share of male births remains unusually high.21
This  does  not  imply  that  change  is  impos-
sible: The Republic of Korea’s male-female sex 
ratio  under  age  ﬁ ve  was  once  the  highest  in 
Asia, but it peaked in the mid-1990s and then 
reversed—a link to societal shifts in normative 
values  stemming  from  industrialization  and 
urbanization.22 

In  a  smaller  set  of  countries,  there  are  also 
missing  men.  In  Eritrea  in  the  1990s,  a  large 
number of young men went missing due to con-
ﬂ ict. In some countries in Latin America and the 
Caribbean, violence may have contributed to ex-
cess deaths among young males. In Eastern Eu-
rope and Central Asia, a much larger number of 
men are missing in middle age, and this excess 
male  mortality  has  been  linked  to  the  preva-
lence of types of conduct deemed more socially 
acceptable among men, such as alcohol use and 
other risky behavior. 

“

Men and women are not paid the 
same daily wages. If men get Nu 200, 
then women get only Nu 150 for 
doing the same work. It is not fair or 
just.

Adult woman, Bhutan 

”

Different work, less pay
Men  and  women  work  in  different  industries 
and  occupations  in  developed  and  developing 
nations. But as chapter 1 showed, although more 
women are working outside the home in almost 
all  countries,  they  are  clustered  into  selected 
parts of the “economic space,” with little change 
over time, even in high-income countries. Three 
markers of the segregated workspace are partic-
ularly striking. First, women are more likely to 
engage in low productivity activities than men 
and to work in the informal sector (ﬁ gure 2.6). 
Women are more likely to be wage workers and 
unpaid  family  workers  than  men,  to  have  less 
mobility between the formal and informal sec-
tors, and to transition more between the infor-
mal sector and being out of the labor force.23

Second,  among  the  self-employed,  women 
outside  agriculture  tend  to  operate  small  in-

The persistence of gender inequality

79

FIGURE 2.6   Women are more likely 
than men to work in the 
informal sector 

Nepal
Bolivia
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Peru
Indonesia
Brazil
Colombia
Argentina
India
South Africa
Mexico
Russian Federation
Thailand
Ukraine
Turkey
Macau SAR, China
Kyrgyz Republic
Kenya

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

informal sector employment
as a % of total employment
men

women

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on International Labour 
Organization 2010. 

Note: Most recent year available between 1999 and 2006.

formal businesses, often out of their homes. Of 
industrial  homeworkers  in  some  developing 
countries, such as Chile and Thailand, 80 per-
cent are women.24 Because of the nature of these 
businesses,  female  owners  are  concentrated  in 
the smallest ﬁ rms—smaller in employees, sales, 
costs, and the value of physical capital. They also 
have  lower  proﬁ ts  than  male-owned  ﬁ rms.  In 
Latin  America,  average  proﬁ ts  are  between  15 
and 20 percent of a standard deviation lower for 
female than for male-owned ﬁ rms.25

Third, even within the formal and informal 
sectors, women and men choose very different 
jobs (ﬁ gure 2.7). Women are more likely to be 
in communal and public services, retail services, 
and trade. Men are overrepresented in danger-
ous professions—such as mining, construction, 
transport, and heavy manufacturing—with high 
occupational injury rates in poor and rich coun-
tries alike. The burdens of defense and maintain-
ing public order also fall heavily on men. These 
patterns are similar across countries and regions, 
and, if anything, they are accentuated at higher 
incomes.

80 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 2.7   Women and men work in different sectors (and 

different occupations)

distribution of female / male employment across sectors

31%

21%

13%

4%

0.5

%

0.5

%

2%

27%

1%

100%

Communication Services

Retail, Hotels, and Restaurants

Manufacturing

Finance and Business

Electricity, Gas and Steam, and Water

Mining

Transport and Telecommunications

Agriculture, Hunting, etc.

Construction

All Sectors / All Occupations

16%

17%

12%

4%

1%

2%

7%

29%

11%

100%

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from LABORSTA Labor Statistics Database, International 
Labour Organization. 

Note: Totals do not necessarily add up due to rounding.

Such  gender-differentiated  patterns  con-
tribute to the persistence of sizable gender gaps 
in  earnings.  Differences  in  average  wages  by 
gender range from 20 percent in Mozambique 
and Pakistan to more than 80 percent in Côte 
d’Ivoire, Jordan, Latvia, and the Slovak Repub-
lic. The gaps are slowly diminishing, partly be-
cause  of  improvements  in  education  among 
women relative to men, differences in the con-
centration of women in some sectors and oc-
cupations,  and  shifts  in  work  experience  pat-
terns and career interruptions linked to greater 
control over fertility.26

Housework and care are still a 
woman’s domain
One domain where gender differences appear to 
be particularly persistent is the allocation of time 
to  housework  and  care.  Over  time  and  across 
countries,  irrespective  of  income,  women  bear 
disproportionate  responsibility  for  housework 
and care, while men are mostly responsible for 
market  work.  These  differences,  deeply  rooted 
in  gender  roles,  reduce  women’s  leisure,  wel-
fare, and well-being. An immediate outcome of 
these  different  domestic  responsibilities  is  that 
men  and  women  have  very  different  patterns 
of  time  use  and  different  amounts  of  leisure. 
These  patterns  have  implications  for  women’s 
ability to invest in education (chapter 3), their 
agency (chapter 4), and their ability to take up 
economic  opportunities  (chapter  5),  and  to 
participate more broadly in economic, political, 
and social life (chapters 4 and 6). 

In  six  countries—with  widely  different  in-
comes, economic structures, and social norms—
the patterns are remarkably similar (ﬁ gure 2.8). 
Everywhere, women devote 1 to 3 hours more a 
day to housework than men; 2 to 10 times the 
amount  of  time  a  day  to  care  (of  children,  el-
derly, and the sick), and 1 to 4 hours less a day to 
market activities. These are averages for all men 
and women, and the differences are accentuated 
with  family  formation. As  chapter  5  describes, 
marriage  signiﬁ cantly  increases  the  time  de-
voted to housework for women but not for men. 
Children signiﬁ cantly increase the time spent on 
care by both men and women but more so for 
women.

Time  use  for  women  and  men  converge  as 
income and education increase, mainly because 
women become more like men (increasing their 
hours devoted to market work and decreasing the 

“

Women need more free time, women are more tired than men. . . . They take care of the 
house, of the children. While men, they are the entire day at work and don’t have to 
take care of the house. And if the woman has a job also, then she gets even more tired.

Adult woman, Moldova

These days, for a woman to be rated as a ‘good wife’ one has to be a superwoman, 
working very hard both at home and in the oﬃ  ce, fulﬁ lling every demand of your 
family members as if we don’t have any right to enjoy.

Adult woman, Bhutan

”

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

81

FIGURE 2.8   Across the world, women spend more hours each day on housework 
and care than men … and men spend more time in market activities

FOR SALE

Market activities

Housework

Child care

Pakistan

Cambodia

South Africa

Bulgaria

Sweden

Italy

0.6

4.7

5.5

2.5

1.2

0.2

2.7

3.8

4.4

3.3

0.9

0.1

2.1

3.8

4.2

1.8

0.5

0.0

2.9

3.9

4.7

2.6

0.4

0.1

3.2

4.6

3.2

2.3

0.6

0.3

2.1

4.8

4.9

1.4

0.6

0.2

women
men

= 12 hours

Source: Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011.

hours to housework and care), not because men 
take up more housework and care (chapter 5).

Less voice and less power
Some  dimensions  of  gender  equality  where 
progress has been slowest fall in the domain of 
women’s agency. Consider three aspects. First, 
women’s ability to make decisions about earned 

income or family spending reﬂ ects their con-
trol over their own lives and their immediate 
environment. Second, trends in domestic vio-
lence capture intrahousehold gender dynamics 
and asymmetric power relations between men 
and women. Third, patterns in political voice 
can measure inclusiveness in decision making, 
exercise of leadership, and access to power. 

82 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 2.9   Who controls women’s own income? 

Ukraine
Colombia
Honduras
Moldova
Peru
Haiti
Niger
Indonesia
Bolivia
Benin
Morocco
Madagascar
Philippines
Swaziland
Cambodia
Congo, Rep. (Brazzaville)
Dominican Republic
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Burkina Faso
Ethiopia
Zimbabwe
Armenia
Ghana
Chad
Azerbaijan
Mali
Guinea
Kenya
Cameroon
Lesotho
Turkey
Namibia
Bangladesh
Nepal
Uganda
Nigeria
India
Mozambique
Zambia
Rwanda
Liberia
Sierra Leone
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Malawi

⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧
⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

⽧

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

⽧

45

% of women not involved in decisions about their own income

⽧

women in richest quintile
women in poorest quintile
all women, average

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys.

Less control over resources
Many  women  have  no  say  over  household  ﬁ -
nances,  even  their  own  earnings.  The  Demo-
graphic  and  Health  Surveys  show  that  women 

in  some  developing  countries,  particularly  in 
Sub-Saharan Africa  and Asia,  are  not  involved 
in  household  decisions  about  spending  their 
personal earned income. As many as 34 percent 
of married women in Malawi and 28 percent of 
women in the Democratic Republic of Congo are 
not involved in decisions about spending their 
earnings. And 18 percent of married women in 
India and 14 percent in Nepal are largely silent 
on how their earned money is spent.27 

Husbands  have  more  control  over  their 
wives’ earning at lower incomes. In Turkey, only 
2 percent of married women in the richest ﬁ fth 
of the population have no control over earned 
cash income, a proportion that swells to 28 per-
cent in the poorest ﬁ fth. In Malawi, 13 percent 
of married women in the richest ﬁ fth have no 
control, compared with 46 percent in the poor-
est ﬁ fth (ﬁ gure 2.9).

Less control over resources and spending is 
partly  a  reﬂ ection  of  large  differences  between 
men and women in the assets they own. Assets 
are typically inherited, acquired at marriage, or 
accumulated over the lifetime through earnings 
and saving. As shown above and explored fur-
ther in chapter 5, women typically earn less than 
men, particularly when aggregated over the life 
cycle. This disparity directly affects their ability 
to  save,  irrespective  of  male-female  differences 
in savings behavior. And as chapter 4 explores, 
inheritance and property rights often apply dif-
ferently to men and women so that gender dis-
parities  in  access  to  physical  capital  and  assets 
remain large and signiﬁ cant. Land makes up the 
largest  share  of  household  assets,  particularly 
for the poorest and rural households.28 Women 
own as little as 11 percent of land in Brazil and 
27 percent in Paraguay. And their holdings are 
smaller than those of men. In Kenya, as little as 5 
percent of registered landholders are women.29 
In Ghana, the mean size of men’s landholdings 
was three times that of women’s.30 

In many countries, land ownership remains 
restricted to men only, both by tradition and by 
law.  In  most  African  countries  and  about  half 
of  Asian  countries,  customary  and  statutory 

“

Some working women don’t even know how much they get paid for their job because 
their husbands cash their salary for them.

Adult man, West Bank and Gaza

”

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

83

laws  disadvantage  women  in  land  ownership. 
According  to  customary  law  in  some  parts  of 
Africa, women cannot acquire land titles with-
out a husband’s authorization.31 Marriage is the 
most  common  avenue  for  women  to  gain  ac-
cess to land. But husbands usually own it, while 
wives only have claim to its use. While property 
rights for women have slowly begun to improve 
in some countries, legislation has often proved 
insufﬁ cient to change observed practices. 

More vulnerable to violence at home
Physical,  sexual,  and  psychological  violence 
against  women  is  endemic  across  the  world. 
A  ﬂ agrant  violation  of  basic  human  rights 
and  fundamental  freedoms,  violence  can  take 
many forms. International statistics are not al-
ways comparable, yet incontrovertible evidence 
shows  that  violence  against  women  is  a  global 
concern.32 

Women  are  at  far  greater  risk  than  men  of 
violence  by  an  intimate  partner  or  somebody 
they know than from violence by other people. 
According  to  South African  data,  for  example, 
teachers  were  the  most  common  perpetrators 
of the rape of girls under age 15 (one-third of 
cases).33 About 50 percent of female homicides 
in South Africa were perpetuated by an intimate 
partner. The mortality rate from intimate part-
ner violence there is estimated at 8.8 per 100,000 
women.34 Overall, women are more likely than 
men to be killed, seriously injured, or victims of 
sexual violence from intimate partners.35 

The number of countries with laws regulat-
ing intimate partner violence has risen. In 2006, 
60 countries had speciﬁ c legislation to address 
domestic violence, up from 45 in 2003, and 89 
had some form of legal provision. Many of these 
are  higher-income  countries;  most  developing 
countries with laws against intimate partner vi-
olence are in Southeast Asia and Latin America. 
Yet in many nations, violence against women 
is perceived as acceptable or justiﬁ able. On aver-
age, 29 percent of women in countries with data 
concurred that wife beating was justiﬁ ed for ar-
guing with the husband, 25 percent for refusing 
to have sex, and 21 percent for burning food. In 
Guinea, 60 percent of women found it permis-
sible to be beaten for refusing to have sex with 
their spouses. In Ethiopia, 81 percent of women 
say that it is justiﬁ ed for a husband to beat his 
wife for at least one of the reasons listed in the 
Demographic  and  Health  Surveys;  61  percent 
reported violence to be appropriate for burning 

“

I think that women are now a problem: they 
get money and they no longer listen to us. 
So, if you want to continue being a man in the 
house, you need to bring the discipline. You 
must beat her up, and if any child intervenes, 
you also beat them. Then they all fear and 
respect you.

”

Adult man, Tanzania

food and 59 percent for arguing with their hus-
bands (ﬁ gure 2.10).

The  prevalence  of  domestic  violence  varies 
greatly across rich and poor countries. Physical 

FIGURE 2.10   Perceptions in many nations are that wife-

 beating is justiﬁ able

Ukraine
Peru
Dominican Republic
Philippines
Honduras
Bolivia
Moldova
Armenia
Swaziland
Nepal
Malawi
Indonesia
Bangladesh
Haiti
Madagascar
Namibia
Ghana
Turkey
Nigeria
Benin
India
Zimbabwe
Rwanda
Lesotho
Azerbaijan
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Kenya
Mozambique
Cameroon
Liberia
Zambia
Morocco
Sierra Leone
Congo, Rep. (Brazzaville)
Niger
Uganda
Burkina Faso
Mali
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Ethiopia
Guinea

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

percentage of women who agree

Rationale for beating

argues with husband
refuses to have sex

burns food
respondents agree with at least one

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys.

84 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 2.11   There is great 

heterogeneity in rates 
of domestic violence 
reported across nations

l

a
r
u
r

n
a
b
r
u

Brazil (Pernambuco)
Thailand (Nakhonsawan)
Tanzania (Mbeya)
Bangladesh (Matlab)
Peru (Cusco)
Ethiopia (Butajira)
Samoa

Japan (Yokohama)
Serbia (Belgrade)
Brazil (Sao Paulo)
Namibia (Windhoek)
Thailand (Bangkok)
Tanzania (Dar es Salaam)
Peru (Lima)
Bangladesh (Dhaka)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

% of women having suffered
physical or sexual violence

lifetime
last 12 months

Source: World Health Organization 2005.

or  sexual  abuse  by  an  intimate  partner  within 
the last 12 months was most prevalent in Ethio-
pia  (Butajira)  and  Peru  (Cusco),  involving  54 
and  34  percent  of  women  respectively.  At  the 
other  extreme,  Japan  (Yokohama)  and  Serbia 
(Belgrade)  are  below  the  4  percent  mark  (ﬁ g-
ure  2.11).  In  many  instances,  the  violence  can 
be grave. In Peru (Cusco), almost 50 percent of 
women  are  victims  of  severe  physical  violence 
during  their  lifetime.36  And  even  with  low  in-
cidence, the numbers are unacceptably high. A 
3 percent domestic abuse incidence rate for Po-
land is equivalent to 534,000 women in one year, 
or 1,463 new women a day.37 

Domestic  violence  knows  no  boundaries, 
but incidence rates tend to rise with socioeco-
nomic  deprivation.  Reported  across  all  eco-
nomic  groupings,  it  is  usually  most  prevalent 
among  economically  disadvantaged  women. 
Women’s low social and economic status can be 
both a cause and a consequence of domestic vi-
olence. Low educational attainment, economic 
duress, and substance abuse are among the many 
compounding factors for abusive behavior.

Men can also be victims. Domestic violence 
against them is more circumscribed than against 
women,  in  incidence,  nature,  and  severity. Ac-
cording  to  the  National  Crime  Victimization 
Survey  in  the  United  States,  intimate  partner 
violence  affected  4.1  females  per  1,000—more 
than half a million women—and 0.9 males per 
1,000—117,000 men—in 2009. So men were a 
ﬁ fth  as  likely  to  be  victims  of  domestic  abuse 
as  women.  In  England  and  Wales,  about  two 
in ﬁ ve domestic violence victims between 2004 
and  2009  were  men.  Based  on  data  from  the 
British Crime Survey, about 4.0 percent of men 
(4.8 percent of women) reported suffering part-
ner abuse in the past 12 months, an estimated 
600,000 male victims.38 

Less likely to hold political ofﬁ ce
Few nations have legal restrictions for women to 
run for public ofﬁ ce, yet the number of women 
holding  parliamentary  seats  is  very  low,  and 
progress  in  the  last  15  years  has  been  slow.  In 
1995,  women  accounted  for  about  10  percent 
of members of the lower or single houses of na-
tional parliaments, and in 2009, 17 percent.39 In 
Africa and most of Asia, the number of female 
parliamentarians more than doubled. Also dur-
ing  the  last  15  years,  the  number  of  countries 
with  at  least  30  percent  women  as  parliamen-
tarians  rose  from  5  to  23—including  7  from 
Sub-Saharan Africa as well as Argentina, Cuba, 
Finland, Iceland, the Netherlands, and Sweden. 
Rwanda’s parliament has 56 percent women, up 
from 17 percent in 1995. East Asia registered the 
least progress, and the number of women par-
liamentarians in particular is low in the Paciﬁ c 
Islands. 

Although men and women are equally likely 
to  exercise  their  political  voice  by  voting,  men 
are often perceived to be superior in exercising 
political power. Responses to the World Values 
Surveys  over  several  years  point  to  a  general 
positive  evolution  of  views  on  gender  equality 
in  politics  in  the  last  decade  (ﬁ gure  2.12).  But 
people continue to view men as “better” politi-
cal and economic leaders than women. 

And men have better chances than women of 
winning an election. The likelihood of a female 
candidate winning a parliamentary seat over a 
man is estimated to be 0.87 (with 1 signifying 
that men and women are equally likely to suc-
ceed in an electoral contest), with considerable 
variation across countries. Women have greater 

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

85

FIGURE 2.12   Men are perceived as 

better political leaders 
than women

Georgia
India
Russian Federation
Turkey
Romania
Ukraine
China
South Africa
Chile
Bulgaria
Japan
Poland
Brazil
Slovenia
Mexico
Uruguay
Peru
Sweden

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

% of people who believe that 

men make better political
leaders than women do

highest value is past’s value and the lowest is today’s value

highest value is today’s value and the lowest is past’s value

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Values Surveys, 
waves 1994–97 and 2005–07.

chances of prevailing over men in Africa. In con-
trast, in Asia and high-income countries, wom-
en’s chances drop considerably. Women are least 
likely to win elections in the Paciﬁ c Islands and 
Latin America and the Caribbean.40

Quotas and reservations have helped expand 
female  parliamentary  representation.  Ninety 
countries have some quota mechanism for par-
liamentary representation, whether in seat reser-
vation, candidate quota legislation, or voluntary 
political  party  quotas.  Sixteen  countries,  all  in 
Africa and Asia, explicitly reserve parliamentary 
seats for women. In others, such as Finland, there 
has been little change. For instance, 38.5 percent 
of newly elected members of parliament in Fin-
land  in  1991  were  women,  and  by  2011,  this 
share had increased marginally to 42.5 percent.
Women’s  participation  in  cabinets,  regard-
less  of  the  structure  and  size,  has  also  lagged. 
The  proportion  of  women  among  ministers 
was  on  average  17  percent  in  2008,  up  from  8 

percent in 1998. Higher female participation in 
cabinet  positions  can  be  observed  in  every  re-
gion,  especially  in  Western  Europe,  Southern 
Africa,  and  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean. 
In 1998, women occupied more than 20 percent 
of ministerial posts in only 13 countries, but 63 
countries 10 years later. In 2008, Chile, Finland, 
France,  Grenada,  Norway,  South Africa,  Spain, 
Sweden,  and  Switzerland  had  cabinets  with 
more than 40 percent female ministers.41 

REVERSALS

The  gender  disadvantages  discussed  in  this 
chapter  form  the  backbone  for  the  analysis 
in  the  remainder  of  the  report—and  the  poli-
cies  advanced  to  mitigate  them.  In  contrast  to 
these  facets  of  gender  relations,  where  there  is 
often a clear pathway for analysis, the gendered 
impact  of  external  shocks,  which  can  gener-
ate  large  losses  in  welfare  and  well-being,  de-
pends on many speciﬁ c circumstances. In some 
cases, men or boys are worse affected; in others, 
women and girls. The impact of shocks can be 
temporary, with large losses in welfare after the 
shock  followed  by  subsequent  catch-up.42  But 
some  shocks,  especially  when  they  hit  early  in 
life (as in the critical ﬁ rst three years) can also 
have irreversible consequences. Outlined here is 
the multifaceted nature of external shocks and 
their  impacts.  The  message:  protection  against 
shocks should be a key part of any development 
policy, and whether a gendered lens is appropri-
ate depends on context.

Whether the source is ﬁ nancial, political, or 
natural (box 2.1), shocks and hazards can affect 
men and women differently, a function of their 
distinct social roles and status. First, market fail-
ures, institutional constraints, and social norms 
can  amplify  or  mute  gender  differences  in  the 
impact of shocks. The mechanisms that produce 
these  outcomes  are  multiple.  For  example,  the 
higher  mortality  rates  for  girls  and  women  in 
the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami have been re-
lated to their more limited mobility caused by 
restrictive  clothing  and  caring  for  small  chil-
dren.43  Second,  those  failures,  constraints,  and 
norms can amplify or mute gender differences in 
the vulnerability to shocks. The fact that women 
tend to own and control fewer assets than men, 
for example, can make them more vulnerable to 
expected income shocks. 

86 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 2.1  The many faces of climate change

Climate change results in more frequent droughts and fl oods and more vari-
able  rainfall.  A  rising  fraction  of  the  world  population  is  aff ected  by  climatic 
shocks and natural disasters as a result of their greater frequencies and larger 
numbers of people in disaster-prone areas. Cold days, cold nights, and frosts 
have become less frequent, while the frequency and intensity of heat waves 
have increased. Both fl oods and droughts are occurring more often. The interi-
ors of continents have tended to dry out despite an overall increase in total 
precipitation. Globally, precipitation has increased, with the water cycle sped 
up by warmer temperatures, even as the Sahel and Mediterranean regions have 
more  frequent  and  more  intense  droughts.  Heavy  rainfall  and  fl oods  have 
become more common, and there is evidence that the intensity of storms and 
tropical cyclones has increased.

Women appear more vulnerable in the face of natural disasters, with the 
impacts strongly linked to poverty. A recent study of 141 countries found that 
more women than men die from natural hazards. Where the socioeconomic 
status of women is high, men and women die in roughly equal numbers during 
and  after  natural  hazards,  whereas  more  women  than  men  die  (or  die  at  a 
younger age) where the socioeconomic status of women is low. Women and 
children are more likely to die than men during disasters. The largest numbers 
of fatalities during the Asian Tsunami were women and children under age 15. 
By contrast, 54 percent of those who died in Nicaragua as a direct result from 
Hurricane Mitch in 1998 were male.

Erratic weather can also aff ect agricultural productivity, which can reduce 
the income and food of households. The reductions in food availability may not 
aff ect all household members equally. And temperature and precipitation fl uc-
tuations may aff ect the prevalence of vector-borne, water-borne, and water-
washed diseases, as well as determine heat or cold stress. 

Men and women may be aff ected diff erently by changing weather. House-
hold evidence from rural India and Mexico suggests that this may be indeed 
the case, but the impact and direction depend on the climatic shock and envi-
ronmental  context.  In  some  locations  in  Mexico,  rural  girls  can  have  lower 
height-for-age than boys after a positive rainfall shock or a negative tempera-
ture shock. Yet girls in high-altitude areas have higher height-for-age than boys 
as a result of warmer weather.

Sources: Jacoby, Saﬁ r, and Skouﬁ as 2011; Neumayer and Plümper 2007; Skouﬁ as, Vinha, and Conroy 2011; 
World Bank 2009.

Two areas where shocks can generate signiﬁ -
cant reversals are in education and health out-
comes and in access to economic opportunities. 

Reversals in education and health
The  health  of  infant  girls  tends  to  fare  worse 
as  a  result  of  negative  income  shocks.  Under-
nutrition  during  gestation  or  infancy  and  de-
clines  in  health-care-seeking  behavior  increase 
mortality  and  morbidity  risks  in  later  life.  In 
India, the mortality of girls rises signiﬁ cantly as 
a result of macroeconomic crises, but boys ap-
pear to be better protected.44 A study of 59 de-
veloping countries suggests similar results. The 
average  increase  in  infant  mortality  during  an 

economic contraction is 7.4 deaths per 1,000 for 
girls, ﬁ ve times the 1.5 for boys.45 With proper 
nourishment, older children and adults can usu-
ally compensate for nutritional deﬁ cits during a 
shock.

In  contrast,  the  impact  of  economic  crises 
on  associated  risky  behavior,  morbidity,  and 
mortality tends to be greater for men. The sud-
den  political  and  economic  transformation  in 
Eastern Europe fueled a sharp and unexpected 
drop in male life expectancy. In many countries 
in the region, particularly the Russian Federa-
tion, men bear a greater share of the burden of 
ill  health.  Premature  male  mortality  has  been 
overwhelmingly  concentrated  in  the  unmar-
ried  population.  Women  outlive  men  by  nine 
years on average—a gap larger than in the rest 
of  world.  The  rise  in  male  mortality  is  partly 
related  to  increased  risky  behavior,  including 
smoking  and  alcoholism.46  In  Russia,  a  recent 
survey shows that 19 percent of men, but only 
1 percent of women, were classiﬁ ed as problem 
drinkers.47 Stress owing to the absence of eco-
nomic activities (challenging traditional gender 
roles of men as breadwinners) and weak family 
or social support networks are linked to the de-
clines in male health.48

When families experience an income shock, 
girls’ education suffers more than boys’ in some 
countries but not in others. Girls in Turkey were 
more likely than boys to drop out of school in 
response to lower household budgets.49 And in 
Indonesia, girls were more likely to be pulled out 
in response to crop losses.50 Vulnerability to ex-
ternal shocks is particularly important because 
interruptions in schooling can increase the risk 
of dropping out, and lags and delays in school 
progression  can  have  a  permanent  impact  on 
overall grade attainment. In Ethiopia, girls ages 
7−14 are 69 percentage points more likely to be 
in  school  if  they  attended  school  in  the  previ-
ous period, and boys 21 percentage points more 
likely.51

But  boys  may  also  be  pulled  out  of  school 
during  an  economic  shock,  usually  to  bolster 
household ﬁ nances. When low-skilled work op-
portunities  are  available,  boys  more  than  girls 
are very likely to be used to complement dwin-
dling family income. While Ethiopian boys have 
generally  enjoyed  greater  access  to  schooling, 
in times of economic crisis they have also been 
the ﬁ rst to be withdrawn from school to work.52 
And in Côte d’Ivoire, while enrollments of both 

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

87

boys and girls fell in response to drought, boys’ 
enrollments fell more (chapter 3).

Income  shocks  may  have  mixed  effects  in 
relation  to  endowment  accumulation.  In  some 
instances  (mainly  in  middle-  and  high-income 
economies),  income  shocks  can  actually  bring 
boys and girls back into school. Wage reductions 
or poor labor market conditions in a crisis lower 
the  opportunity  cost  of  schooling,  inducing 
households to keep their children in school—es-
pecially boys who are more likely to be engaged 
in wage labor. In Nicaragua, the school participa-
tion of rural boys increased 15 percentage points 
after  a  sudden  drop  in  coffee  prices  around 
2000–02.53  In  Argentina,  the  deterioration  in 
employment  rates  during  the  deep  1998–2002 
ﬁ nancial crisis also increased the probability of 
boys attending school.54

Reversals in access to economic 
opportunities
Shocks  can  bring  about  reversals  in  economic 
opportunities  for  both  men  and  women. 
Women tend to hold more precarious jobs, op-
erate smaller and less capitalized ﬁ rms, and be 
engaged in more vulnerable economic activities 
than men, suggesting that they would be more 
likely to be affected by economic shocks. But the 
evidence does not support this oft-held view. 

In  the  recent  ﬁ nancial  crisis,  there  were  no 
common  patterns  by  gender  and  no  evidence 
that women were more affected than men.55 Ev-
idence  from  41  middle-income  countries  sug-
gests  that  the  main  impact  was  on  the  quality 
of employment (number of hours worked and 
wages),  rather  than  on  the  number  of  jobs.56 
Gender  impacts  vary  signiﬁ cantly  by  country 
and defy simple generalizations.57 

Both  labor  market  entry  (added  workers) 
and  exit  (discouraged  workers)  during  crises 
might  operate  simultaneously,  affecting  differ-
ent groups of women differently. Women from 
low-income  households  typically  enter  the  la-

“

The ﬁ nancial situation in Moldova 
is very bad. I think that women 
should stay home and take care of 
the family.

Adult man, Moldova

”

bor force, while younger, more educated women 
from wealthier households often exit the labor 
market in response to economic crises. The im-
pact of crises on women’s labor force participa-
tion has often been the strongest in the informal 
or  unregulated  sectors  of  the  economy,  which 
more readily absorb additional women in petty 
commerce or domestic service.58

The  direction  of  labor  market  impacts  and 
their  gender  differences  depend  on  the  nature 
of  the  macroeconomic  shock.  Export-oriented 
industries,  such  as  light  manufacturing,  were 
the initial casualties in the most recent ﬁ nancial 
crisis. Higher female participation rates in these 
ﬁ elds  led  to  strong  ﬁ rst-round  negative  em-
ployment effects for women. But lower female 
participation rates in sectors that shrank in the 
crisis, such as construction, or industries depen-
dent on external demand, such as tourism, im-
plied that the aggregate employment effects for 
women relative to men were muted once these 
second-round  effects  are  taken  into  account. 
In Latvia, Moldova, Montenegro, and Ukraine, 
men tended to lose their jobs more than women. 
The sectors most affected by the crisis in those 
countries—such as construction and manufac-
turing—tend to be male-dominated. 

Similarly,  during  the  Asian  crisis  of  1997, 
female  employment  was  not  the  hardest  hit. 
Women in East Asian nations were dispropor-
tionately employed in ﬁ rms more resilient to the 
crisis.59 But the gender earnings gap increased, 
particularly  in  larger  ﬁ rms.  In  other  words, 
women’s smaller net employment impact came 
at  the  expense  of  a  larger  reduction  in  their 
earnings.

“STICKY” GETS “STICKIER”

Chapter  1  noted  that  changes  are  intercon-
nected.  Progress  in  one  dimension  of  gender 
equality  can  multiply  the  effects  on  another 
dimension.  The  same  applies  to  an  absence  of 
change.  A  lack  of  progress  in  one  dimension 
can  compound  the  negative  effects  in  another 
dimension. Gender differences can thus endure, 
bound  together  by  many  layers  of  constraints 
that reinforce one other. Breaking this impasse 
requires action on various strands of this web of 
persistent inequality. 

Maternal  education  is  inversely  correlated 
with  infant  and  child  mortality  in  developing 

88 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

countries. In Mozambique, low maternal educa-
tion is a strong predictor of low health service 
use and child malnutrition.60 And stunted chil-
dren—before  24  months  of  age—have  poorer 
psychomotor skills and lower cognitive achieve-
ment.  Undernourished  boys  and  girls  are  also 
less likely to be enrolled in school or enter school 
late, sustaining the cycle of deprivation.61 

Poor  health  of  girls  and  women  spills  over 
into  the  next  generation.  Both  contemporary 
and  childhood  health  of  the  mother  matter 
for the health of the next generation. Maternal 
well-being—measured  through  short  stature, 
low  body  mass  index,  and  anemia—affects 
size at birth, survival, and child growth. So un-
derinvesting  in  the  health  of  girls  and  women 
contributes to child mortality and intergenera-
tional cycles of poor health among survivors.62 
Girls who are born small and do not catch up 
in growth fail to attain the height predicted by 
their  genetic  potential.  Their  reduced  uterine 
and ovarian size implies lower birth weights for 
their offspring, engendering a new intergenera-
tional cycle of deprivation.63 

Lack of property ownership and control mat-
ters for women’s agency. Assets are an important 
element  to  boost  voice  and  bargaining  power 
in  household  decision  making,  access  to  capi-
tal, and overall economic independence. Nepali 
women  who  do  not  own  land  have  less  say  in 
household  decision  making  than  women  with 
land.64  In  Colombia,  a  lack  of  property  or  so-
cial assets constrains women in negotiating for 
the right to work, controlling their own income, 
moving freely, and contesting domestic abuse.65 
In Kerala, India, women’s independent owner-
ship of immovable property is a signiﬁ cant pre-
dictor of long-term physical and psychological 
domestic  violence,  over  and  above  the  effects 
of other factors. The odds of being beaten if a 
woman owns both a house and land are a twen-
tieth of those when she owns neither.66

Cash employment is also strongly associated 
with  women’s  empowerment.  Not  earning  a 
cash income is most consistently associated with 
married women not making decisions—on top-
ics  such  as  their  health  care,  large  household 
purchases, purchases for daily needs, and visits 
to  family  or  friends.  Higher  household  wealth 
by itself does not consistently enhance the likeli-
hood that women will make decisions alone or 
jointly in most countries.67 

The clustering of men and women in differ-
ent occupations and sectors begins earlier, in the 
educational system. While female participation 
is  increasing  across  all  ﬁ elds  of  study  as  more 
women enter tertiary education, segregation by 
area of specialization remains. Male bias is most 
marked  in  engineering,  manufacturing,  and 
construction. In about two-thirds of the world’s 
countries, men also outnumber women in sci-
ence.  But  in  nine-tenths  of  the  world,  women 
outnumber men in education; humanities and 
arts;  social  sciences,  business,  and  law;  and 
health and welfare. 

Educational  segregation  by  specialization 
does  not  go  away—and  even  appears  to  in-
crease—with  economic  development.  Cam-
bodia,  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic,  Mo-
rocco,  and  Namibia  are  among  the  countries 
with the least gender segregation by study areas, 
though men are more likely to obtain a tertiary 
degree.  Among  Organisation  for  Economic 
 Co-operation and Development (OECD) coun-
tries, Turkey has the least gender segregation in 
tertiary  ﬁ elds  of  study,  while  Croatia,  Finland, 
Japan, and Lithuania have the most. In Norway 
and  Denmark,  women  make  up  two-thirds  of 
tertiary enrollments, but only a third of science 
students is female.68

These  are  just  several  examples,  among 
many, of how constraints in one aspect of gen-
der equality can hold back progress on other di-
mensions, causing gender inequality to persist. 
This  persistence  comes  with  large  economic, 
social, and political costs. Part 2 of the Report 
analyzes the foundations of these persistent gen-
der disparities, rooting them in the interactions 
between  households,  markets,  and  formal  and 
informal institutions. 

NOTES

  1.  UNESCO 2010.
  2.  Yuki and others 2011.
  3.  UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2010.
  4.  Berry 1977; Högberg and Wall 1986.
  5.  USAID 2006.
  6.  Lewis and Lockheed 2006.
  7.  Chioda, Garcia-Verdú, and Muñoz Boudet 2011.
  8.  Hannum and Wang 2010.
  9.  Hannum 2005.
10.  Perkins and others 2004.
11.  Vincent-Lancrin 2008.
12.  Jha and Kelleher 2006.

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

89

13.  See chapter 3, technical annex.
14.  Sen 1999.
15.  AbouZahr 2003.
16.  WHO and others 2010.
17.  Ibid.
18.  The  estimate  could  be  affected  where  births  of 

girls go unreported.
19.  Jha and others 2006.
20.  Guilmoto 2009.
21.  Abrevaya  2009;  Almond,  Edlund,  and  Milligan 

2009; Dubuc and Coleman 2007.

22.  Chung and Das Gupta 2007.
23.  Bosch  and  Maloney  2010;  Gong  and  van  Soest 

2002.

24.  Beneria 2001.
25.  Bruhn 2009; Mead and Liedholm 1998.
26.  Chioda, Garcia-Verdú, and Muñoz Boudet 2011.
27.  UN DESA 2010.
28.  Banerjee and Duﬂ o 2007.
29.  Nyamu-Musembi 2002.
30.  Deere and Doss 2006.
31.  Katz and Chamorro 2003.
32.  In  addition,  the  absence  of  longitudinal  data 
prevents analyzing how trends have evolved over 
time.

33.  Jewkes and others 2002.
34.  Abrahams and others 2009.
35.  Reed and others 2010.
36.  United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and 

Social Affairs 2010.

37.  UN DESA 2010.
38.  Home Ofﬁ ce British Government 2009.
39.  UN DESA 2010.
40.  Ibid.
41.  Ibid.
42.  Dercon 2011.
43.  Nishikiori and others 2006.
44.  Bhalotra 2010.
45.  Baird, Friedman, and Schady 2007.
46.  World Bank 2007.
47.  Bobrova and others 2010.
48.  Doyal 2000.
49.  Tansel 2002.
50.  Cameron and Worswick 2001.
51.  Mani, Hoddinott, and Strauss 2010.
52.  Rose and Al-Samarrai 2001.
53.  Maluccio 2005.
54.  López Bóo 2010.
55.  Habib and others 2010.
56.  Khanna, Newhouse, and Paci 2010.
57.  Cho and Newhouse 2011; Turk and Mason 2009.
58.  Sabarwal, Sinha, and Buvinic 2010.
59.  Hallward-Driemeier, Rijkers, and Waxman 2010.
60.  Lindelow 2008.
61.  Naudeau  and  others  2011;  Victora  and  others 

2008.

62.  Bhalotra and Rawlings 2011.

63.  Ibañez and others 2000.
64.  Allendorf 2007.
65.  Friedemann-Sánchez 2006.
66.  Agarwal and Panda 2007.
67.  Kishor and Subaiya 2008.
68.  UNESCO 2009.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

AbouZahr, Carla. 2003. “Global Burden of Maternal 
Death and Disability.” British Medical Bulletin 67 
(1): 1–11.

Abrahams, Naeemah, Rachel Jewkes, Lorna J. Martin, 
Shanaaz Mathews, Lisa Vetten, and Carl Lombard. 
2009. “Mortality of Women From Intimate Part-
ner Violence  in  South Africa: A  National  Epide-
miological  Study.”  Violence  and  Victims  24  (4): 
546–56.

Abrevaya, Jason. 2009. “Are There Missing Girls in the 
United States? Evidence from Birth Data.” Applied 
Economics 1 (2): 1–34.

Agarwal,  Bina,  and  Pradeep  Panda.  2007.  “Toward 
Freedom from Domestic Violence: The Neglected 
Obvious.” Journal of Human Development and Ca-
pabilities 8 (3): 359–88.

Allendorf,  Keera.  2007.  “Do  Women’s  Land  Rights 
Promote Empowerment and Child Health in Ne-
pal?” World Development 35 (11): 1975–88.

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Kevin Milligan. 
2009. “O Sister, Where Art Thou? The Role of Son 
Preference and Sex Choice: Evidence from Immi-
grants  to  Canada.”  Working  Paper  Series  15391, 
Nartional  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Cam-
bridge, MA.

Baird, Sarah, Jed Friedman, and Norbert Schady. 2007. 
“Aggregate Income Shocks and Infant Mortality in 
the Developing World.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 93 (3): 847–56.

Banerjee,  Abhijit  Vinayak,  and  Esther  Duﬂ o.  2007. 
“The Economic Lives of the Poor.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 21 (1): 141–67.

Beneria,  Lourdes.  2001.  Changing  Employment  Pat-
terns  and  the  Informalization  of  Jobs:  General 
Trends and Gender Dimensions. Geneva: Interna-
tional Labor Ofﬁ ce.

Berniell, María Inés, and Carolina Sánchez-Páramo. 
2011. “Overview of Time Use Data Used for the 
Analysis of Gender Differences in Time Use Pat-
terns.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Berry, Linda G. 1977. “Age and Parity Inﬂ uences on 
Maternal  Mortality:  United  States,  1919–1969.” 
Demography 14 (3): 297–310.

90 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Bhalotra, Sonia. 2010. “Fatal Fluctuations? Cyclicality 
in Infant Mortality in India.” Journal of Develop-
ment Economics 93 (1): 7–19.

Bhalotra, Sonia, and Samantha B. Rawlings. 2011. “In-
tergenerational Persistence in Health in Develop-
ing Countries: The Penalty of Gender Inequality?” 
Journal of Public Economics, 95(3–4): 286–99. 

Bobrova,  Natalia,  Robert  West,  Darya  Malyutina, 
 Sophia Malyutina, and Martin Bobak. 2010. “Gen-
der  Differences  in  Drinking  Practices  in  Middle 
Aged and Older Russians.” Alcohol and Alcoholism 
45 (6): 573–80.

Bosch,  Mariano,  and  William  F.  Maloney.  2010. 
“Comparative Analysis of Labor Market Dynam-
ics Using Markov Processes: An Application to In-
formality.” Labour Economics 17 (4): 621–31.

Bruhn, Miriam. 2009. “Female-Owned Firms in Latin 
America.  Characteristics,  Performance,  and  Ob-
stacles to Growth.” Policy Research Working Paper 
Series 5122, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Cameron, Lisa A., and Christopher Worswick. 2001. 
“Education Expenditure Responses to Crop Loss 
in Indonesia: A Gender Bias.” Economic Develop-
ment and Cultural Change 49 (2): 351–63.

Chioda, Laura, Rodrigo Garcia-Verdú, and Ana María 
Muñoz  Boudet.  2011.  Work  and  Family:  Latin 
American  Women  in  Search  of  a  New  Balance. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Cho, Yoonyoung, and David Newhouse. 2011. “How 
Did  the  Great  Recession  Affect  Different  Types 
of  Workers?  Evidence  from  17  Middle-Income 
Countries.” IZA Discussion Paper Series 5681, In-
stitute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Chung, Woojin, and Monica Das Gupta. 2007. “The 
Decline  of  Son  Preference  in  South  Korea:  The 
Roles of Development and Public Policy.” Popula-
tion and Development Review 33 (4): 757–83.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Cheryl  R.  Doss.  2006. 
“Gender and the Distribution of Wealth in Devel-
oping Countries.” Research Paper Series 2006/115, 
United  Nations  University–World  Institute  for 
Development Economics Research, Helsinki.

Dercon, Stefan. 2011. “Young Lives: Are There Gender 
Differences in Children’s Outcomes?” Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Doyal,  Lesley.  2000. “Gender  Equity  in  Health:  De-
bates  and  Dilemmas.”  Social  Science  &  Medicine 
51 (6): 931–9.

Dubuc,  Sylvie,  and  David  Coleman.  2007.  “An  In-
crease  in  the  Sex  Ratio  of  Births  to  India-Born 
Mothers in England and Wales: Evidence for Sex-
Selective Abortion.” Population and Development 
Review 33 (2): 383–400.

Friedemann-Sánchez,  Greta.  2006.  “Assets  in  Intra-
household Bargaining among Women Workers in 
Colombia’s  Cut-Flower  Industry.”  Feminist  Eco-
nomics 12 (1–2): 247–69.

Gong, Xiaodong, and Arthur van Soest. 2002. “Wage 
Differentials  and  Mobility  in  the  Urban  Labor 
Market: A Panel Data Analysis for Mexico.” Labour 
Economics 9 (4): 513–29.

Guilmoto, Christophe Z. 2009. “The Sex Ratio Transi-
tion in Asia.” Population and Development Review 
35 (3): 519–49.

Habib,  Bilal,  Ambar  Narayan,  Sergio  Olivieri,  and 
Carolina  Sanchez-Paramo.  2010.  “Assessing  Ex-
ante the Poverty and Distributional Impact of the 
Global Crisis in a Developing Country: A Micro-
simulation Approach with Application to Bangla-
desh.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 5238, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Bob Rijkers, and Andrew 
Waxman. 2011. “Ladies First? Firm-level Evidence 
on  the  Labor  Impacts  of  the  East  Asian  Crisis.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Hannum,  Emily.  2005.  “Market  Transition,  Educa-
tional Disparities, and Family Strategies in Rural 
China:  New  Evidence  on  Gender  Stratiﬁ cation 
and Development.” Demography 42 (2): 275–99.

Hannum, Emily, and Meiyan Wang. 2010. “China: A 
Case Study in Rapid Poverty Reduction.” In “In-
digenous  Peoples,  Poverty  and  Development,” 
ed. Gillette Hall and Harry Patrinos, World Bank, 
Washington, DC. Processed.

Högberg, Ulf, and Stig Wall. 1986. “Age and Parity as 
Determinants of Maternal Mortality—Impact of 
Their Shifting Distribution among Parturients in 
Sweden from 1781 to 1980.” Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization 64 (1): 85–91.

Home  Ofﬁ ce  British  Government.  2009. “Crime  in 
England and Wales 2008/2009, Volume 1—Find-
ings from the British Crime Survey and Police Re-
corded Crime.” In Home Ofﬁ ce Statistical Bulletin, 
ed. A. Walker, J. Flatley, C. Kershaw, and D. Moon. 
London: Home Ofﬁ ce British Government.

Ibañez,  Lourdes,  Neus  Potau,  Goya  Enriquez,  and 
Francis  de  Zegher.  2000.  “Reduced  Uterine  and 
Ovarian  Size  in Adolescent  Girls  Born  Small  for 
Gestational Age.” Pediatric Research 47 (5): 575–77.
ILO (International Labor Organization). 2010. “Key 

Indicators of the Labour Market.” ILO, Geneva.

Jacoby, Hanan G., Abla Saﬁ r, and Emmanuel Skouﬁ as. 
2011. “Climate Variability and Child Health in In-
dia.” World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Jewkes, Rachel, Jonathan Levin, Nolwazi Mbananga, 
and  Debbie  Bradshaw.  2002.  “Rape  of  Girls  in 
South Africa.” Lancet 359 (9303): 319–20.

Jha,  Jyotsna,  and  Fatimah  Kelleher.  2006.  Boys’  Un-
derachievement  in  Education:  An  Exploration 
in  Selected  Commonwealth  Countries.  London: 
Commonwealth Secretariat, Gender Section, and 
Commonwealth of Learning.

Jha, Prabhat, Rajesh Kumar, Priya Vasa, Neeraj Dhin-
gra, Deva Thiruchelvam, and Rahim Moineddin. 
2006. “Low Male-to-Female Sex Ratio of Children 

 

The persistence of gender inequality 

91

Born  in  India:  National  Survey  of  1.1  Million 
Households.” Lancet 367 (9506): 211–18.

Katz,  Elizabeth  G.,  and  Juan  Sebastian  Chamorro. 
2003. “Gender,  Land  Rights,  and  the  Household 
Economy  in  Rural  Nicaragua  and  Honduras.” 
Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the 
Latin American and Caribbean Economics Asso-
ciation, Puebla, Mexico, October 9.

Khanna, Gaurav, David Newhouse, and Pierella Paci. 
2010.  “Fewer  Jobs  or  Smaller  Paychecks?  Labor 
Market  Impacts  of  the  Recent  Crisis  in  Middle-
 Income  Countries.”  Poverty  Reduction  and  Net-
work Economic Management, Economic Premise, 
April 2010, No. 11, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Kishor, Sunita, and Lekha Subaiya. 2008. “Understand-
ing  Women’s  Empowerment:  A  Comparative 
Analysis  of  Demographic  and  Health  Surveys 
(DHS)  Data.”  DHS  Comparative  Reports  20, 
Macro International, Calverton, MD.

Lewis, Maureen A., and Marlaine E. Lockheed. 2006. 
Inexcusable Absence: Why 60 Million Girls Aren’t in 
School and What to Do About It. Washington, DC: 
Center for Global Development.

Lindelow,  Magnus.  2008. “Health  as  a  Family  Mat-
ter:  Do  Intra-household  Education  Externalities 
Matter for Maternal and Child Health?” Journal of 
Development Studies 44 (4): 562–85.

López Bóo, Florencia. 2010. “In School or at Work? 
Evidence from a Crisis.” IZA Discussion Paper Se-
ries 4692, Institute for Labor Studies, Bonn.

Maluccio, John A. 2005. “Coping with the ‘Coffee Cri-
sis’  in  Central America:  The  Role  of  the  Nicara-
guan Red de Protección Social.” FCND Discussion 
Paper  188,  International  Food  Policy  Research 
Institute, Food Consumption and Nutrition Divi-
sion, Washington, DC.

Mani,  Subha,  John  Hoddinott,  and  John  Strauss. 
2010. “Long-Term Impact of Investments in Early 
Schooling: Empirical Evidence from Rural Ethio-
pia.” Discussion Paper Series 00981, International 
Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Mead,  Donald  C.,  and  Carl  Liedholm.  1998.  “The 
Dynamics of Micro and Small Enterprises in De-
veloping  Countries.”  World  Development  26  (1): 
61–74.

Naudeau,  Sophie,  Naoko  Kataoka,  Alexandria  Val-
erio,  Michelle  J.  Neuman,  and  Leslie  Kennedy 
Elder. 2011. Investing in Young Children: An Early 
Childhood Development Guide for Policy Dialogue 
and Project Preparation. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

Neumayer,  Eric,  and  Thomas  Plümper.  2007.  “The 
Gendered Nature of Natural Disasters: The Impact 
of Catastrophic Events on the Gender Gap in Life 
Expectancy, 1981–2002.” Annals of the Association 
of American Geographers 97 (3): 551–66.

Nishikiori, Nobuyuki, Tomoko Abe, Dehiwala G. M. 
Costa, Samath D. Dharmaratne, Osamu Kuni, and 
Kazuhiko  Moji.  2006. “Who  Died  as  a  Result  of 
the  Tsunami?:  Risk  Factors  of  Mortality  among 
Internally Displaced Persons in Sri Lanka: A Ret-
rospective Cohort Analysis.” BMC Public Health 6 
(1): 73–81.

Nyamu-Musembi, Celestine. 2002. “Are Local Norms 
and Processes Fences or Pathways? The Example 
of Women’s  Property  Rights  in  Rural  Kenya.”  In 
Cultural  Transformations  and  Human  Rights  in 
Africa,  ed. Abdullahi A. An-Na’im.  London:  Zed 
Books.

Parish,  William  L.,  Tianfu  Wang,  Edward  O.  Lau-
mann, Suiming Pan, and Ye Luo. 2004. “Intimate 
Partner  Violence  in  China:  National  Prevalence, 
Risk  Factors  and  Associated  Health  Problems.” 
International Family Planning Perspectives 30 (4): 
174–81.

Perkins,  Robert,  Brian  Kleiner,  Stephen  Roey,  and 
Janis  Brown.  2004.  The  High  School  Transcript 
Study:  A  Decade  of  Change  in  Curricula  and 
Achievement,  1990–2000.  Washington,  DC:  Na-
tional  Center  for  Education  Statistics,  U.S.  De-
partment of Education.

Reed,  Elizabeth,  Anita  Raj,  Elizabeth  Miller,  and 
Jay  G.  Silverman.  2010.  “Losing  the  ‘Gender’  in 
Gender-Based Violence: The Missteps of Research 
on  Dating  and  Intimate  Partner  Violence.”  Vio-
lence against Women 16 (3): 348–54.

Rose, Pauline, and Samer Al-Samarrai. 2001. “House-
hold Constraints on Schooling by Gender: Empir-
ical Evidence from Ethiopia.” Comparative Educa-
tion Review 45 (1): 36–63.

Sabarwal,  Shwetlena,  Nishta  Sinha,  and  Mayra  Bu-
vinic.  2010.  “The  Global  Financial  Crisis:  As-
sessing  Vulnerability  for  Women  and  Children.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Sen,  Amartya.  1999.  Development  as  Freedom.  New 

York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Skouﬁ as,  Emmanuel,  Katja  Vinha,  and  Hector  V. 
Conroy. 2011. “The Impacts of Climate Variabil-
ity on Welfare in Rural Mexico.” Policy Research 
Working  Paper  Series  5555,  World  Bank,  Wash-
ington, DC.

Tansel, Aysit. 2002. “Determinants of School Attain-
ment  of  Boys  and  Girls  in  Turkey:  Individual, 
Household  and  Community  Factors.”  Economics 
of Education Review 21 (5): 455–70.

Turk, Carolyn, and Andrew Mason. 2009. “Impacts of 
the Economic Crisis in East Asia: Findings from 
Qualitative  Monitoring  in  Five  Countries.”  Pa-
per presented at the Third China-ASEAN Forum 
on  Social  Development  and  Poverty  Reduction, 
Fourth ASEAN+3 High-level Seminar on Poverty 
Reduction,  and  Asia-wide  Regional  High-level 
Meeting  on  the  Impact  of  the  Global  Economic 
Slowdown  on  Poverty  and  Sustainable  Develop-

92 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

ment in Asia and the Paciﬁ c Meeting, Hanoi, Sep-
tember 28.

UNESCO  (United  Nations  Educational,  Scientiﬁ c, 
and Cultural Organization). 2009. Global Educa-
tion  Digest  2009:  Comparing  Education  Statistics 
Across the World. Paris: UNESCO.

——–—. 2010. EFA Global Monitoring Report: Reach-
ing  the  Marginalized.  Oxford,  U.K.:  Oxford  Uni-
versity Press for UNESCO.

UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2010. Global Educa-
tion  Digest  2010:  Comparing  Education  Statistics 
across  the World.  Special  Focus  on  Gender.  Mon-
treal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics.

UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic 
and Social Affairs). 2009. World Population Pros-
pects 2009. New York: United Nations.

going Trend.” In Higher Education to 2030 Volume 
1:  Demography,  ed.  Organisation  for  Economic 
Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD).  Paris: 
OECD Publishing.

World  Bank.  2007.  Global  Monitoring  Report  2007: 
Millenium  Development  Goals,  Confronting  the 
Challenges  of  Gender  Equality  and  Fragile  States. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

——–—. 2009. World Development Report 2010: De-
velopment and Climate Change. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

WHO  (World  Health  Organization).  2005.  WHO 
Multi-country Study on Women’s Health and Do-
mestic Violence  against Women:  Initial  Results  on 
Prevalence,  Health  Outcomes  and  Women’s  Re-
sponses. Geneva: WHO.

——–—. 2010. The World’s Women 2010: Trends and 

——–—. 2010. World Health Statistics 2010. Geneva: 

Statistics. New York: United Nations.

WHO.

USAID  (U.S.  Agency  for  International  Develop-
ment).  2006.  Women’s  Lives  and  Experiences: 
Changes in the Past Ten Years. Washington, DC: 
USAID.

Victora, Cesar, Linda Adair, Caroline Fall, Pedro Hal-
lal, Reynaldo Martorell, Linda Richter, and Harsh-
pal  Sachdev.  2008. “Maternal  and  Child  Under-
nutrition:  Consequences  for  Adult  Health  and 
Human Capital.” Lancet 371 (9609): 340–57.

Vincent-Lancrin,  Stéphan.  2008.  “The  Reversal  of 
Gender Inequalities in Higher Education: An On-

WHO  (World  Health  Organization),  UNICEF 
(United  Nations  Children’s  Fund),  UNFPA 
(United  Nations  Population  Fund),  and  World 
Bank. 2010. Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 to 
2008. Geneva: WHO. 

Yuki,  Takako,  Keiko  Mizuno,  Keiichi  Ogawa,  and 
Mihoko  Sakai.  2011. “Promoting  Gender  Parity, 
Lessons  from  Yemen:  A  JICA  Technical  Coop-
eration  Project  in  Basic  Education.”  Japan  Inter-
national Cooperation Agency Research Institute.
Background paper for the WDR 2012.

94 
94 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

SPREAD 1  

  Women’s pathways to empowerment: Do all roads lead to Rome?

W hat gives women power? Conversations with 

almost  2,000  women  across  19  countries 
show that they depend on a combination of 
factors to feel empowered.1 “Increased conﬁ dence to man-
age the house independently,” “more communication with 
neighbors and community members,” the ability to “go out 
of house to do marketing, shopping, and other household 
work such as paying electricity and water bills,” “increased 
control of ﬁ nancial transactions in and outside the house,” 
and “husband’s support and permission to go outside of the 
house”  were  the  main  answers  of  women  in  Bhubane-
swar, India, when asked to describe what it meant to be 
powerful  and  free.  Similarly,  rural  women  from  Paro, 
Bhutan,  associated  gains  in  power  with  education, 
spouse’s and family members’ support, and hard work—
but also with education programs for women who have 
missed school and with role models such as elected fe-
male community leaders who “have helped women think 
better” and female small business owners who have pros-
pered and boosted the conﬁ dence of the women in their 
community. 

The characteristics of a powerful woman that come 
up  most  often  are  related  to  generating  and  managing 
income, followed closely by acquiring an education, and 
then  by  personal  traits  and  access  to  social  networks 
(spread ﬁ gure 1.1).

It is also clear that no single factor can explain changes 
in  empowerment.  Any  one  factor  may  be  present  for 
many  women  with  different  levels  of  power  and  may 
even determine gains or losses in power, depending on 
other  factors  operating  in  women’s  lives.  For  example, 
changes in marital and family conditions create oppor-
tunities for some women when “the husband supports his 
wife” (Papua New Guinea), or if they “get a good and un-
derstanding husband who can allow her to do business and 
engage in educational activities” (Tanzania). And even a 
divorce can be positive. “Divorce can free a woman from 
a  lot  of  strains  and  she’ll  become  stronger,”  recognized 
women  in  West  Bank  and  Gaza.  But  for  other  women 
the same process can have the opposite effect: “a woman 
can fall [can lose power] if she loses her husband, her chil-
dren, or the support of her parents” (Burkina Faso). “If you 
have three children and your husband dies, a single income 
would not be sufﬁ cient” (Peru). “[A] divorce when the man 
leaves the wife it’s even worse than death for her” (Poland).
Women’s pathways to empowerment are determined 
by different combinations of factors. To trace such path-
ways,  women  in  each  country  were  asked  to  place  100 
representative women from their community on differ-

SPREAD FIGURE 1.1   Main factors in moving 

up the ladder

occupational and 
economic change 

financial management

education and training 

social networks 

individual 
characteristics/behaviors 
marital or family 
status change 

psychological traits 

marital relations 

social assistance 

leadership 

illegal activities 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

% of mentions by communities

urban women

rural women

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st 
Century: A Multi-Country Assessment” (dataset).

ent steps on a ﬁ ctional “ladder of power and freedom”—
with the top step for women with the most power and the 
bottom for those with the least. They were also asked to 
repeat  this  ranking  to  reﬂ ect  where  the  women  would 
have been on the ladder 10 years ago. In 79 percent of 
cases, women saw a dramatic upward movement in the 
past  10  years  (almost  20  percentage  points  larger  than 
men’s perception of their gains in power in the same pe-
riod). But that was not so in all cases. A community in 
rural South Africa saw 80 percent of its women as being 
at the bottom of the ladder, “All of us here are struggling, 
so we have little power, and we are not free to do what we 
want to do because we do not have money,” explained one 
woman. They mentioned not having savings and having 
difﬁ culty purchasing basic goods, “What can they possibly 
save, because whatever little money they have they spend on 
food. It is very difﬁ cult to think about savings if you hardly 
get money and you are always hungry because the little you 
might get you want it to make your children happy at least 
for that day,” said another woman. They also pointed to 

 
 

Women’s pathways to empowerment: Do all roads lead to Rome? 
Women’s pathways to empowerment: Do all roads lead to Rome? 

95
95

the  daunting  number  of  people  suffering  from  HIV/
AIDS. A powerless woman “is often sick, her health is un-
stable, and she cannot even access health facilities because 
the clinic is very far and she does not have money for trans-
port,” and “her husband is likely to be sick.”

In the Dominican Republic’s capital city, Santo Do-
mingo,  women  reported  fast  upward  movement  on 
their  ladders  thanks  to  two  factors: “now  women  study 
more and work more.” In Afghanistan’s Jabal Saraj, where 
women  placed  60  of  the  100  women  on  the  top  step, 
twice the number of 10 years before, a larger combina-
tion  of  conditions  was  identiﬁ ed: “In  the  past,  women 
did  just  home  chores  like  cooking  at  home  and  warming 
the  oven,  but  now  there  are  possibilities  such  as  gas  and 
electricity.” “Now some women have jobs out of the house 
and most of the girls are going to school.” And women have 
“participated in election as candidates for provincial coun-
cil and others.”

Each  community  had  its  own  stories  to  explain 
changes in women’s power, but many elements were the 
same  from  community  to  community.  To  understand 
the  main  commonalities  and  combinations  of  factors 
driving female empowerment, a comparative qualitative 
analysis combining dimensions of agency with the struc-
ture of opportunities in the community and the national 
human development level was conducted.2 The variables 
included:
•  Dimensions  of  agency.  Women’s  control  over  assets, 
control over family formation, freedom from domes-
tic violence, freedom of physical mobility, and bridg-
ing  social  capital—from  community  networks  to 
family support and friends. 

•  Speciﬁ c characteristics of the community environment 
or  structure  of  opportunities.  Informal  institutions 
(level  of  pressure  to  conform  to  gender  norms  and 
positive/negative vision of gender norms); formal in-
stitutions  (presence  of  services  in  the  community 
such as transport, schools, health, electricity, and wa-
ter);  and  economic  opportunities  for  women  and 
markets  (availability  of  jobs  and  share  of  women 
working in the community).

•  General  national  context  for  human  development—
measured by the country’s score on the United Na-
tions  Development  Programme’s  Human  Develop-
ment Index (HDI).

Various  combinations  of  these  factors  were  tested 
to  distinguish  the  necessary  conditions  for  women’s 
empowerment  in  each  case,  the  common  explanations 
across countries and cultures, and the factors that were 
sufﬁ cient  by  themselves  to  explain  gains  in  power  and 

freedom in relation to other constraints and barriers that 
women were facing. 

A higher national HDI or a low prevalence of domes-
tic violence was sufﬁ cient to explain women’s empower-
ment gains in half the communities across all countries. 
Either factor by itself counters negative conditions, such 
as restricted mobility or lack of jobs.

For rural women, participation in social networks—
organizations and networks for women in the commu-
nity, their relevance in the community, and the presence 
of female leaders—was a key factor. Higher social capital 
and network presence countered obstacles like domestic 
violence in 25 percent of the communities. Social capital 
is the only factor that allows women to feel empowered 
even when facing high levels of domestic violence in their 
communities.  In  its  absence,  women  have  to  increase 
their agency on many aspects—freedom of movement, 
control over family formation, and control of assets—to 
counter the disempowering force of domestic violence. 
Restrictions in any of the other agency conditions are less 
binding if domestic violence incidence is low.

Urban women depend as much on the local structure 
of  opportunities—availability  of  jobs  for  women  and 
a  dynamic  labor  market—as  they  do  on  social  capital. 
In  fact,  when  both  come  together,  lack  of  control  over 
family formation or high incidence of domestic violence 
becomes less of an obstacle. When social capital is not 
strong,  the  relevance  of  the  local  structure  of  oppor-
tunities  increases,  but  it  needs  to  be  paired  with  other 
positive gains in agency such as increased control over 
assets or freedom of movement and of violence threats 
for women to move up their power ladder. 

These  different  combinations  show  that  pathways 
may vary, but some combinations drive women’s gains 
faster and better. The effect of any factor is likely to de-
pend on the conﬁ guration of other factors—the role of 
economic  opportunities  will  depend  on  each  woman’s 
ability to move freely as well as on asset ownership and 
social capital. 

What  do  these  pathways  look  like?  Two  examples 

from two communities:

“A woman who is powerful is called omukazi [powerful 
woman]. I think most of us here are powerful women,” says 
Joyce in Bukoba, Tanzania, after acknowledging that the 
lives of women in her community have prospered, “Yes, 
women have always moved up. I was married, and I really 
suffered with my husband. When I left him, it is when I 
started doing my things and I am now very ﬁ ne: I can get 
what I want; I can do what I want; I take my children to 
school” (spread ﬁ gure 1.2).

For women in Bukoba, social capital has been the key 
element. The community has a good array of organiza-

96 
96 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

SPREAD FIGURE 1.2   Ladder shares now and 
10 years ago in Bukoba, 
Tanzania (urban)

t
n
e
c
r
e
p

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

SPREAD FIGURE 1.3   Ladder shares now 
and 10 years ago in 
Dhamar, Republic of 
Yemen (rural)

 
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

women now women 10
years ago

men now

men 10
years ago

women now women 10
years ago

men now

men 10
years ago

top step

middle step

bottom step

top step

middle step

bottom step

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st 
Century: A Multi-Country Assessment” (dataset).

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st 
Century: A Multi-Country Assessment” (dataset).

tions helping women, and 33 percent of the local council 
members are female. Women recognize the value of their 
networks: “We have these self-help groups, we meet there 
and talk about so many things that happen in our lives. You 
get advice from your fellow woman on how to deal with 
men who disturb you in your family or how to do business.” 
“Once you get the right group and listen to what they say, 
you get up.” Friends also have a central role: “These are the 
people you count on as woman. They will give you advice. 
They form part of the groups you belong to. And when you 
have quarrels with your husband, they will be the ﬁ rst ones 
to come and assist. If you have small children, they will al-
ways keep an eye on your children.”

But social capital is not enough to increase women’s 
empowerment.  It  needs  to  be  combined  with  a  good 
structure of opportunities and services, which women in 
Bukoba also seem to have: “You can go to the factory and 
ask for different kinds of jobs, such as sweeping, cleaning 
dishes or the compound, and even becoming their agent to 
buy and bring ﬁ sh to the factory.” Favorable laws are also 
in place: “It is easy because the law is clear. No one loses as 
such: you want to divorce, you divide the property, and each 
one goes his or her way.”

Women  in  Bukoba  also  recognize  the  barriers  that 
prevent  other  women  in  the  community  from  gaining 
power and freedom: “The moment you know that you can 
do things by yourself and not depend on a man is the mo-
ment you begin going up. I see some women being beaten 

by their husband every day and they are there. When you 
talk to them, they say they are married and they cannot 
separate. These  women  will  never  climb  the  ladder;  they 
will stay at the bottom.”

In rural Dhamar in the Republic of Yemen, women 
also  see  themselves  moving  up  despite  low  economic 
participation and education in their community (spread 
ﬁ gure 1.3). Like the Bukoba women, their pathway in-
cludes social capital—in this case in the shape of informal 
networks—as well as some gains in education, all in an 
environment with too few opportunities and some mo-
bility  restrictions.  “Men  can  ﬁ nish  their  education;  men 
have the freedom to go out and to learn [but] women visit 
each other in their free time and chat,” said Fatima and 
Ghalya when comparing their happiness with men’s. In 
their community, a powerful woman would have many 
acquaintances  and  friends,  while  a  woman  with  little 
power “is the woman who doesn’t have inﬂ uence among 
Dhamar’s women.”

Women in Dhamar see two factors as the most press-
ing: having an education, and being able to move more 
freely. Having freedom means having the ability to move 
within the village. But most women cannot travel out-
side  the  village  without  appropriate  companionship: 
“A woman cannot work outside the village unless she has 
Mahram (male legal guardian) with her.” Gaining mobil-
ity will allow them to ﬁ nish their education and those 
who  dropped  out  of  school  to  resume  it.  “If  there  is 

 
 

Women’s pathways to empowerment: Do all roads lead to Rome? 
Overview 

97
97

transportation, they will let me learn, and I can become a 
teacher,” says a young woman. Job aspirations are linked 
to mobility restrictions: “Work opportunities are limited 
inside the village except teaching, and recruitment for men 
in  agricultural  work.”  Although  these  Yemeni  women 
experience  many  difﬁ culties,  they  nonetheless  see  im-
provements in their power and freedom over the previ-
ous generations.

NOTES

1.   The study economies include Afghanistan, Bhutan, Burkina 
Faso, the Dominican Republic, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Libe-
ria, Moldova, North Sudan, Peru, Papua New Guinea, Po-
land,  Serbia,  South  Africa,  Tanzania,  Vietnam,  West  Bank 
and Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen. The focus groups in-
cluded male adults, female adults, male youth, female youth, 
male  adolescents,  and  female  adolescents;  the  adolescent 
groups were conducted only in a subset of 8 of the 19 coun-

tries. For further information, the assessment methodology 
can be found at http://www.worldbank.org/wdr2012.

2.   Fuzzy-set  qualitative  comparative  analysis  (fs/QCA).  For 
references, see Ragin (2008) and Ragin (2000). The tech-
nique  allows  for  testing  models  of  different  pathways  to 
achieve  an  end,  in  this  case,  the  levels  of  empowerment 
reported by the women in the various community groups. 
Given  the  nature  of  qualitative  data—textual  and  repre-
sentative  of  individuals’  voices,  perceptions,  and  experi-
ences—comparing  across  countries  and  communities  is 
done  by  measuring  different  degrees  in  the  cases  that  ﬁ t 
each model (membership degrees).

REFERENCES

Ragin, Charles. 2000. Fuzzy Set Social Science. Chicago: Chicago 

University Press.

———.  2008.  Redesigning  Social  Inquiry:  Fuzzy  Sets  and  Be-

yond. Chicago: Chicago University Press.

PART II
What has driven progress? 
What impedes it?  

P

art  2  of  this  World  Development  Report  explains  why 
progress  toward  gender  equality  has  been  made  in 
some areas but not in others. For this purpose, we use 
a  conceptual  framework  positing  that  households,  markets, 
and institutions (both formal and informal) and the interac-
tions  among  them  shape  the  relationship  between  economic 
development and gender equality and that, in doing so, they 
ultimately  determine  gender  outcomes  (see  overview  box  4). 
This framework builds on earlier work within the World Bank 
and elsewhere.

We apply this framework to analyze the evolution of gender 
differences in endowments (chapter 3), agency (chapter 4), and 
access to economic opportunities (chapter 5) as well as the im-
pact of globalization on gender equality, with a focus on access 
to economic opportunities (chapter 6).

This  empirical  approach  helps  establish  the  link  between 
analysis  and  policy  choices.  It  emphasizes  that  the  design  of 
 policies to reduce speciﬁ c gender gaps needs to take into account 
what happens in the household, in the functioning and structure 
of markets, and in formal and informal institutions as well as in 
the interactions between all of them. When these aspects are not 
considered, the intended results of policy interventions can be 
muted or even contrary to expectations.

EXPLAINING THE FRAMEWORK 

The  proposed  framework  builds  on  three  premises.  First,  the 
household  is  not  a  unitary  block  with  a  common  set  of  pref-
erences and goals. Instead, it is made up of different members 
with their own preferences, needs, and objectives, as well as dif-
ferent abilities to inﬂ uence decision making in the household. 
Second, markets and institutions affect the relationship between 
economic  development  and  gender  equality  both  directly  and 
indirectly (through their impact on household decisions). Third, 
markets and institutions are not static but are shaped and con-
ditioned by society (understood as the sum of individuals and 
households). And it is precisely this process that allows markets 
and  institutions,  including  social  norms  and  values,  to  evolve 
over  time  in  response  to  policy  interventions  or  exogenous 
changes brought about by, say, globalization.

Building on these three ideas, the framework captures how 
households make decisions, how they interact with markets and 

 

institutions  to  determine  gender  outcomes,  and  how  policy 
can affect these interactions and ultimately gender outcomes.

Understanding how households make decisions
Households make decisions about how many children to have 
and  when  to  have  them,  how  much  to  spend  on  education 
and health for daughters and sons, how to allocate different 
tasks (inside and outside the household), and other matters 
that determine gender outcomes. These choices are made on 
the basis of the preferences, decision-making (or bargaining) 
power, and incentives and constraints of different household 
members.

Preferences can be innate or shaped by gender roles, so-
cial  norms,  and  social  networks  (grouped  under  the  label 
in formal  institutions).  And  they  may  be  shared  by  or  dif-
fer  across  individuals  within  the  household.  For  instance, 
evaluations of transfer programs, such as pensions and con-
ditional cash transfers, show that spending decisions differ 
depending  on  whether  money  is  given  to  women  or  men 
within  the  household,  suggesting  differences  in  men’s  and 
women’s preferences.1

Bargaining capacity is determined by two distinct sources 
of individual power: economic and social. Economic bargain-
ing power depends primarily on the wealth and assets each 
individual controls and his or her contribution to total house-
hold income, while social bargaining power results primarily 
from formal and informal institutions. For instance, a wom-
an’s capacity to decide how to allocate her time across various 
activities in and outside the household may be weakened by 
her lack of asset ownership (low economic bargaining power) 
or by strong social proscriptions against female work outside 
the home (low social bargaining power).

In addition, economic and social bargaining power is in-
ﬂ uenced by an individual’s capacity to take advantage of op-
portunities  outside  the  household  and  to  bear  the  costs  of 
leaving the household (“exit”). For example, where custody of 
children in the case of divorce is based primarily on ﬁ nancial 
capacity to care for the children, women’s capacity (and will-
ingness) to use the threat of exit as a bargaining tool may be 
limited by their own incomes and assets. 

Finally,  incentives  and  constraints  are  largely  inﬂ uenced 
by markets and institutions. Markets determine the returns 
to  household  decisions  and  investments  and  thus  provide 

 

99

100 
100 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

incentives  for  the  allocation  of  limited  resources  to  compet-
ing  ends.  For  instance,  the  returns  to  education  in  the  labor 
market—both in better employment opportunities and higher 
wages—will inﬂ uence decisions to send a girl or boy to school. 
Similarly,  the  level  of  female  wages  will  inﬂ uence  whether 
women will devote more time to market work, at the expense of 
housework and care.

Constraints arise from markets, institutions, and their inter-
play. Discrimination against women in the labor market, for ex-
ample, limits the number and types of jobs that women can take 
on.  And  traditional  norms  for  women’s  role  in  the  economic 
sphere may reinforce the discrimination. Similarly, the availabil-
ity  of  an  adequate  school  can  affect  the  decision  to  send  girls 
(and boys) to school.

Understanding the relationship between economic 
development and gender equality
The  relationship  between  gender  equality  and  economic  de-
velopment  (the  combination  of  higher  incomes  and  better 
service  delivery)  is  a  two-way  relationship.  In  the  framework 
here,  households,  markets,  and  institutions  and  their  interac-
tions shape this relationship and ultimately determine gender 
outcomes. 

Start with the impact of economic development on gender 
equality. Higher incomes and better service delivery can increase 
gender equality, acting through markets and institutions in ways 
that affect household decisions. Education and health provide a 
good illustration. 
•  First, to the extent that aggregate economic growth translates 
into higher household incomes, constraints on access to edu-
cation and some health services are relaxed. So, fewer house-
holds will have to choose between girls and boys and women 
and men in providing or accessing these services. 

•  Second,  the  changes  in  market  structures  and  signals  that 
typically accompany growth (such as the expansion of man-
ufacturing and service activities) and encourage the greater 
participation of women in the wage labor market also work 
to reduce these gaps by placing a greater value on girls’ edu-
cation  and  by  empowering  women  in  household  decision 
making. 

•  Third, economic development means the improved delivery 
of public services such as health and education. And these in-
stitutional improvements lower their costs to households, al-
lowing them to use more of them—for males and females—
with attendant improvements in gender outcomes. 

The  combination  of  higher  incomes,  higher  returns  to  hu-
man capital investments, and better access to services strength-
ens the incentives for and lowers the constraints to investing in 
girls  and  women’s  human  capital  and  is  then  likely  to  lead  to 
a  reduction  in  gender  gaps  in  educational  attainment  and  in 
health outcomes such as life expectancy.

But markets and institutions can also dampen the impacts 
of growth for many gender outcomes, which means that some 
gender biases do not disappear with economic development—
the “sticky domains” discussed in Part 1. Persistent differences 
in the jobs that men and women perform provide a good ex-
ample. These differences are rooted in the ways markets and 
institutions work and channel men and women into different 
segments of the economic space. These mutually reinforcing 
market  and  institutional  barriers,  including  those  related  to 
gender roles and norms, mute the impact of economic devel-
opment on the incentives and constraints for women’s access 
to economic opportunities.

What about the impact of gender equality on economic de-
velopment? As argued in this Report, greater gender equality 
enhances economic efﬁ ciency and improves other develop-
ment  outcomes  through  three  main  channels:  productivity 
gains  associated  with  better  use  of  existing  resources,  im-
provements in outcomes for the next generation, and more 
representative institutions and policy making. When aligned, 
households,  markets,  and  institutions  can  support  and 
strengthen these positive links. For example, well-functioning 
and affordable education and health systems can ease restric-
tions on access to human capital among women—especially 
where distance and mobility are factors and where the private 
sector can step in to ﬁ ll gaps in public sector provision. Simi-
larly, if labor markets work well, educated women will enter 
the labor force and contribute their talents and skills.

But in some cases, market and institutional constraints can 
lead to inefﬁ cient gender outcomes both in the household and 
outside it, impeding economic development. For instance, in-
secure land property rights among female farmers in Africa 
lead to lower than optimal use of fertilizer and other produc-
tive inputs and shorter than optimal fallowing times, reducing 
agricultural productivity. And when employment segregation 
excludes women from management positions, the average tal-
ent of managers is lower, reducing technology adoption and 
innovation.

We refer to these situations as market failures and institu-
tional constraints. Market failures occur with discrimination, 
information problems, or limitations in the type and nature 
of contracts available.2 Institutional constraints, by contrast, 
arise from legal restrictions, customary practices, social norms, 
or other formal or informal institutional arrangements that 
result in failures to determine and enforce rights. Correcting 
these  market  failures  and  institutional  constraints  can  yield 
substantial productivity gains and broader economic beneﬁ ts. 
And in a more competitive and integrated world, even modest 
improvements in how efﬁ ciently resources are used can have 
signiﬁ cant effects on a country’s competitiveness and growth.
These ideas are illustrated in our framework graph by the 
interconnected gears representing markets, formal and infor-
mal institutions, and households (ﬁ gure P2.1). Propelled by 
economic growth, the gears representing markets and insti-

 
 

What has driven progress? What impedes it? 
What has driven progress? What impedes it? 

101
101

FIGURE P2.1   Gender outcomes result from interactions between households, markets, and institutions 

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

N D E R  EQUALITY

E

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

G

R

O
WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

tutions turn, moving the household gear. The combined move-
ment of these gears ultimately triggers the turning of the gear 
representing gender outcomes, thus increasing gender equality. 
One can also imagine the movement going in the opposite di-
rection—that is, with the gender equality gear moving those rep-
resenting households, markets, and institutions and ultimately 
generating higher economic growth. In this setting, market and 
institutional constraints can be thought of as wedges that prevent 
one or more gears from turning, thereby weakening both direc-
tions of the two-way relationship between economic growth and 
gender equality. Throughout the Report we use the color green 
to indicate when markets, formal, and informal institutions are 
functioning to strengthen the relationships between economic 
development and gender equality, and the color red to indicate 
when they are acting as constraints on these links.

Although we have described the framework as a snapshot at 
one point in time, we also use it to look at changes over time. 
Allocation  decisions  and  agency  formation  in  the  household 
take place in a dynamic context, with outcomes today affecting 
both decision making and returns in the future. For example, as 
individuals work and earn income, they can accumulate assets, 
affecting their bargaining power and thus future household al-
location decisions. In addition, greater access to assets may mean 
that  the  household  or  some  individuals  in  the  household  can 

also command higher returns, increase their productivity, or 
both—and ultimately earn a higher income.

An individual or a household has little capacity to change 
the  way  markets  and  social  institutions  function,  but  soci-
ety does (as the sum of individuals and households). And it 
is precisely this capacity that allows markets and institutions 
to evolve over time as a result of collective action, policy in-
terventions, or outside changes brought about by, say, expo-
sure to norms, values, and practices in other societies through 
global integration.

APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK

The four chapters in Part 2 use this framework to address two 
questions. What explains progress or the lack of progress in 
closing  gender  gaps  in  endowments,  agency,  and  access  to 
economic opportunities? And how has globalization affected 
gender equality? The answers to these questions point to the 
role for policies and their likely impacts.

Applying  this  framework  produces  important  insights. 
Progress  has  come  fastest  in  areas  where  market  and  insti-
tutional  forces  have  aligned  to  provide  strong  incentives 
for  households  and  societies  to  invest  equally  in  men  and 

102 
102 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

women—reversing  any  previous  disadvantages  that  girls  and 
women may have faced. In these cases, progress has been pro-
pelled  by  forces  acting  through  various  points  of  entry—
markets, formal institutions, and informal institutions. This pro-
cess has been aided where economic growth has been sustained 
and broad-based, as in education, where gender gaps have closed 
very rapidly (chapter 3).

In  contrast,  progress  has  stalled—even  with  economic 
growth—where  market  and  institutional  constraints  reinforce 
inequalities between women and men in endowments, agency, 
and access to economic opportunities. This situation can arise 
when constraints in one of the three spheres through which eco-
nomic development affects households—markets, formal insti-
tutions, and informal institutions—are particularly binding, or 
when constraints in all three spheres are mutually reinforcing. 
In the ﬁ rst case, there is a single entry point for policy action 
in that the most binding constraint has to be removed for im-
provements in gender outcomes to occur, as illustrated by the 
discussion of excess female mortality in chapter 3. In the second 
case, improvements in gender equality will require coordinated 
interventions in a number of spheres, as illustrated by the dis-
cussion of women’s agency and access to economic opportuni-
ties in chapters 4 and 5.

Against this background, globalization has operated through 
markets and institutions to lift some of the constraints to gen-
der equality in human capital, agency, and access to economic 
opportunities. But the women most affected by existing con-
straints risk being left behind in the absence of public action 
(chapter 6).

Based on the analysis in chapters 3–6, four priority areas for 
public  action  are  identiﬁ ed:  reducing  gender  gaps  in  human 
capital, promoting women’s access to economic opportunities, 
closing gender gaps in voice and agency, and limiting the inter-

generational reproduction of gender inequality. In these areas, 
progress has been slow and often unresponsive to economic 
development alone.

So,  in  these  areas,  the  role  of  policy  is  twofold.  It  can 
strengthen the relationship between gender equality and eco-
nomic growth, and it can address the market failures and in-
stitutional constraints that stall progress. The ﬁ rst idea is illus-
trated by the drops of oil that ease the turning of the market 
and institutions gears. The second is equivalent to removing 
wedges that stop some gears from moving. A more detailed 
discussion of the rationale for and role of public action is in 
Part 3.

NOTES

1.   Duﬂ o 2003; Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales 1997.
2.   Information problems include information asymmetries and ex-
ternalities.  With  information  asymmetries,  market  participants 
are  unable  to  gather  or  have  differential  access  to  necessary  in-
formation.  Externalities  imply  that  the  behavior  of  some  mar-
ket participants affects the outcomes of others in the same—or 
other—market.

REFERENCES

Duﬂ o, Esther. 2003. “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old-Age 
Pensions and Intrahousehold Allocation in South Africa.” World 
Bank Economic Review 17 (1): 1–25.

Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales. 1997. “Do 
Husbands and Wives Pool Their Resources? Evidence from the 
United Kingdom Child Beneﬁ t.” Journal of Human Resources 32 
(3): 463–80.

3CHAPTER

Education and health: Where do 
gender differences really matter?

Investments  in  health  and  education—

human  capital  endowments—shape  the 
ability of men and women to reach their 
full potential in society. The right mix of 
such investments allows people to live longer, 
healthier,  and  more  productive  lives.  System-
atic  differences  in  investments  between  males 
and  females,  independent  of  their  underlying 
causes, adversely affect individual outcomes in 
childhood and adulthood and those of the next 
generation. Left uncorrected, these differences 
translate into large costs for societies.

Where do gender differences arise in human 
capital  endowments,  how  are  they  reduced, 
and when do they persist? Global comparisons 
of participation in education and mortality risks 
among women and men show that progress has 
been  tremendous  where  lifting  a  single  bar-
rier is sufﬁ cient—for households, markets, or 
 institutions.

Consider  the  increasing  participation  of 
women at all educational levels. Gaps in primary 
enrollments have closed, and in secondary and 
tertiary enrollments, new gaps are emerging—
for boys. College enrollments increased sevenfold 
for women over the past three decades, fourfold 
for  men.  The  reason  is  that  interventions  tar-
geted at any one of households or markets or in-
stitutions have all increased enrollments. Where 
all three drivers have come together, change has 
accelerated. Conversely, where all three have not 
changed, progress has stalled. Further reducing 
girls’ disadvantages in educational participation 
requires sharpening the focus on severely disad-
vantaged populations, for whom all the drivers of 
progress are missing.

Overall,  progress  has  been  slower  where 
multi ple  barriers  among  households,  markets, 
and  institutions  need  to  be  lifted  at  once  or 
where there is only a single effective point of en-
try for progress. Consider each in turn.

Although girls participate equally (or more) 
at all education levels, the educational streams 
they choose are remarkably different and stable 
across countries at very different incomes. Men 
continue  to  study  engineering  while  women 
continue to learn how to be teachers. While part 
of  the  problem  lies  in  the  educational  system, 
these  patterns  are  reinforced  by  gender  norms 
in households and markets. Some gender norms 
relate to care in the household (overwhelmingly 
provided  by  women)  and  its  implications  for 
the  kinds  of  jobs  that  women  choose.  Others 
have  to  do  with  the  continuing “stickiness”  in 
employers’  attitudes  toward  family  formation 
and childbearing. Equal gender participation in 
different ﬁ elds of studies requires simultaneous 
changes among households, markets, and insti-
tutions. That has not happened so far.

Things can also get stuck where there is only 
one  point  of  entry:  households  or  markets  or 
institutions.

Health disadvantages for women fall in this 
category. Consider girls missing at birth (a deﬁ -
cit  of  female  births  relative  to  male  ones)  and 
excess female mortality after birth (women and 
girls who would not have died in the previous 
year  had  they  been  living  in  a  high-income 
country after accounting for the overall mortal-
ity of the country they live in). 

Globally,  girls  missing  at  birth  and  deaths 
from excess female mortality after birth add up 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

105

to 6 million women a year, 3.9 million below the 
age  of  60.  Of  the  6  million,  one-ﬁ fth  is  never 
born,  one-tenth  dies  in  early  childhood,  one-
ﬁ fth in the reproductive years, and two-ﬁ fths at 
older ages. Because those who died in the earlier 
ages also had the longest to live, they account for 
the bulk of lost women years around the world. 
The problem is not getting any better. In 1990, 
missing girls and excess female mortality below 
the age of 60 accounted for 4 million women a 
year; in 2008, the number was 3.9 million, fueled 
by a near doubling in Sub-Saharan Africa. Unlike 
Asia,  where  population-adjusted  excess  female 
mortality fell in every country (dramatically in 
Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Vietnam), most Sub-
Saharan African countries saw little change in the 
new  millennium. And  in  the  countries  hardest 
hit by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, things got worse. 
In South Africa, excess female deaths increased 
from (virtually) zero between the ages of 10 and 
50 in 1990 to 74,000 every year by 2008.

Comparisons with Europe, where excess fe-
male  mortality  existed  during  the  early  20th 
century  but  disappeared  by  1950,  suggest  that 
the patterns today reﬂ ect a combination of overt 
discrimination  before  birth,  and  poor  institu-
tions combined with the burden of HIV/AIDS 
after birth. More than 1.3 million girls are not 
born in China and India every year because of 
overt  discrimination  and  the  spread  of  ultra-
sound  technologies  that  allow  households  to 
determine the sex of the fetus before birth. In-
formal  institutions  that  generate  a  preference 
for sons are the primary bottleneck.

After  birth,  overt  discrimination  plays  a 
smaller role. Instead, poor institutions of public 
health and service delivery exact a heavy burden 
on  girls  and  women.  In  parts  of  Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  HIV/AIDS  risks  have  compounded  the 
problem.  But  where  countries  have  improved 
basic  institutions  of  public  health  and  service 
delivery,  excess  female  mortality  has  declined. 
Even in countries where historical studies iden-
tiﬁ ed discrimination against girls (like Bangla-
desh), better public health measures improved 
life-chances for both boys and girls, but more so 
for girls.1

Clearly, excess female mortality is not a prob-
lem in all countries. In the Russian Federation 
and some other post-transition countries, mor-
tality  risks  have  increased  for  both  sexes—but 
particularly for men. In these contexts, there is 
excess  male  mortality  relative  to  high-income 
countries  today.  Unlike  mortality  risks  among 

“

. . . [we want] sons. Everybody does. They can work 
and earn. Girls have to marry.

Adolescent girls, rural India

In-laws decide how many children to have. If the 
fi rst child is a girl, then they will ask to have more 
children until a son is born.

Young woman, urban India

”

women,  which  arise  from  poor  institutions, 
excess  male  mortality  is  often  tied  to  behavior 
deemed  more  socially  acceptable  among  men, 
such as smoking, heavy drinking, and engaging 
in risky activities.

Understanding both sorts of mortality risks 
and  what  can  be  done  about  them  is  critical 
for any notion of human justice. Solving excess 
female mortality requires institutional changes; 
solving  missing  girls  at  birth  and  excess  male 
mortality delves fundamentally into social norms 
and  household  behavior—both  of  which  are 
more difﬁ cult to understand and tackle. 

ENDOWMENTS MATTER

Education and health investments have a huge 
impact  on  the  ability  of  individuals—whether 
men  or  women—to  function  and  reach  their 
potential  in  society.  For  both  boys  and  girls, 
childhood investments in health affect outcomes 
throughout the course of life. Low birth weights 
and  childhood  exposure  to  disease  have  been 
linked to lower cognitive development, school-
ing  attainment,  and  learning  in  adolescence. 
Less healthy children are at an elevated risk of 
becoming  less  healthy  adults.2  Poorer  health 
outcomes in adulthood in turn affect economic 
outcomes,  reﬂ ected  in  health-related  absences 
from the labor force and lower work hours and 
earnings.3 

“

Educated women do not sit around 
and wait for men to provide for them. 
They do not need a man to buy things 
for them.

Young woman, urban South Africa

”

106 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Similarly, as chapter 5 shows, investments in 
education  determine  women’s  ability  to  earn 
higher wages and to own and operate produc-
tive farms and ﬁ rms. On average, differences in 
education  explain  a  signiﬁ cant  fraction  of  the 
variation in wages and incomes among adults. 
In  both  high-  and  low-income  countries,  gen-
der  differences  in  education  have  contributed 
signiﬁ cantly  to  the  productivity  and  wage  gap 
between men and women.

Health and education investments in women 
are also special in three ways. First, in their roles 
as mothers, educated women pass on the ben-
eﬁ ts of higher education to their children. Chil-
dren  born  to  more  educated  mothers  are  less 
likely to die in infancy and more likely to have 
higher  birth  weights  and  be  immunized.4  Evi-
dence from the United States suggests that some 
of the pathways linking maternal education to 
child health include lower parity, higher use of 
prenatal care, and lower smoking rates.5 In Tai-
wan, China, the increase in schooling associated 
with the education reform of 1968 saved almost 
1 infant life for every 1,000 live births, reducing 
infant mortality by about 11 percent.6 In Paki-
stan,  even  a  single  year  of  maternal  education 
leads to children studying an additional hour at 
home and to higher test scores.7 

Second, women face particular risks during 
pregnancy and childbirth: 1 of every 11 women 
in  Afghanistan  and  1  of  every  29  in  Angola 
dies during childbirth.8 Compare that with 1 of 
 every 11,400 in Sweden. As this chapter shows, 
maternal mortality and excess female mortality 
in the reproductive ages are closely linked. But 
high maternal mortality rates also have implica-
tions for educational investments and the ability 
of women to participate in society. As the risk 
of dying in childbirth declines, educational in-
vestments increase (and more so for girls).9 In 
Sri Lanka, reductions in the maternal mortality 
ratio  increased  female  literacy  by  1  percentage 
point.10  And  because  reductions  in  maternal 
mortality  ratios  also  reduce  maternal  morbid-
ity  (in  the  United  States  in  1920,  one  of  every 
six women suffered from a long-term disability 
stemming from giving birth), improvements in 
the conditions of childbirth can drive increases 
in the labor force participation rate of married 
women.11

Third,  overt  discrimination  that  leads  to 
male-biased  sex  ratios  at  birth  can  have  long-

run implications for society. If more boys than 
girls are born, eventually many men will be un-
able to ﬁ nd wives. Recent research suggests that 
such a “marriage squeeze” is already well under 
way in China and India.12

These  basic  themes—educating  girls  and 
women,  improving  health  outcomes  in  child-
hood, lowering the risks of giving birth, and ad-
dressing skewed sex ratios at birth (the latter two 
leading to excess female mortality and missing 
girls at birth)—play out consistently in the rest 
of the chapter. The focus throughout is twofold: 
ﬁ rst,  separating  the  problems  that  will  likely 
diminish  with  income  growth  from  those  that 
will remain “sticky,” and, second, understanding 
how and where policy can be effective through 
the framework of this Report—the interactions 
between households, markets, and institutions.

EDUCATION

A  decade  into  the  new  millennium,  there  are 
many reasons to feel optimistic about the state 
of women’s education around the world. Prog-
ress has been remarkable, and many of the gaps 
salient  in  the  20th  century  have  closed.  Today, 
girls  and  boys  around  the  world  participate 
equally in primary and secondary education. In 
tertiary education, a clear bias is emerging that 
favors  women—with  enrollments  increasing 
faster for women than for men.

These gains have been possible because, for 
enrollments, lifting single barriers, whether stem-
ming from households, markets, or institutions, 
has been sufﬁ cient. These multiple entry points 
have allowed policies to circumvent bottlenecks 
arising from adverse preferences, low returns to 
female education, or poor institutions.

But  the  optimism  has  to  be  tempered  on 
three  fronts.  First,  in  some  countries  and  in 

“

It is good to go to school because as a 
woman if you are an educated person, 
then men won’t take advantage of 
you. So it is important that you go to 
school.

Young woman, urban Liberia

”

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

107

some  populations  within  countries  girls  are 
still the last to enroll and the ﬁ rst to drop out 
in difﬁ cult times. These severely disadvantaged 
populations  face  a  host  of  different  problems, 
and the “best” solution to their problems will be 
context speciﬁ c. Second, children in low-income 
countries learn far less than their high-income 
counterparts.  Low  learning  affects  both  boys 
and girls, and gender differences are small. In a 
globalizing  world,  poor  skills  will  dramatically 
affect the future outcomes of all children. 

Third, women and men continue to choose 
very  different  ﬁ elds  of  study  in  secondary  and 
tertiary education. These patterns of stream di-
vergence are similar across poor and rich coun-
tries,  suggesting  that  increases  in  enrollments 
and  learning  are  necessary,  but  not  sufﬁ cient, 
to even the playing ﬁ eld in later life. The ﬁ elds 
of study that men and women choose feed into 
their occupational choices, which in turn affect 
the wages they earn throughout their adult lives. 
There has been less success in addressing stream 
divergence  because  many  barriers  need  to  be 
lifted  at  the  same  time—households,  markets, 
and institutions need to change simultaneously, 
through  complex  polices  that  act  on  multiple 
fronts.

The good news
Most  countries  around  the  world  have  at-
tained  gender  parity  in  primary  education, 
with  an  equal  number  of  boys  and  girls  in 
school.  Among  children  currently  not  attend-
ing primary school, 53 percent are girls, with a 
concentration of gender disadvantage in some 
African countries, including Benin, Chad, Niger, 
and Togo. But, even in these countries, progress 
has been substantial: in Sub-Saharan Africa the 
number of girls for every 100 boys in primary 
school increased from 85 in 1999 to 91 in 2008.
Moving from primary to tertiary enrollment 
shows  three  patterns  (ﬁ gure  3.1).  First,  most 
children  participate  in  primary  schooling,  but 
secondary enrollments range from very low to 
very  high  across  countries;  again,  some  coun-
tries in Sub-Saharan Africa stand out for their 
particularly  low  rates  of  participation.  In  ter-
tiary  education,  low  participation  is  the  norm 
in developing countries. Therefore, increases in 
secondary  (and  tertiary)  enrollment  for  both 
boys and girls are necessary in several countries. 
Second, at low overall levels of secondary enroll-
ment, girls are less likely to be in school, while 
at high levels the pattern reverses with the bias 

FIGURE 3.1   Gender parity in enrollments at lower levels has been achieved in much of the world, but tertiary 

enrollments are very low and favor women

Primary education

Secondary education

Tertiary education

%

 
,
t
e
n

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

Some African
countries lag behind

girls
disadvantaged

%

 
,
t
e
n

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

80

60

40

20

0

Enrollment gaps dwarf
gender gaps

girls
disadvantaged

%

 
,
s
s
o
r
g

 
,

n
e
m
o
w

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e

 
l

o
o
h
c
s

100

men
disadvantaged

80

60

40

20

0

 

Women are
more likely 
to participate
than men

 

20

40

80
school enrollment, boys, net %

60

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

school enrollment, boys, net %

school enrollment, men, gross %

East Asia and Pacific
South Asia

 

   Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

   Middle East and North Africa

   Sub-Saharan Africa

High-income countries

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Development Indicators.

Note: The 45° line in each ﬁ gure above shows gender parity in enrollments. Any point above the 45° line implies that more women are enrolled relative to men.

108 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

now against boys. The number of countries with 
girls  disadvantaged  in  secondary  education  is 
similar to the number with boys disadvantaged. 
Third, in tertiary education, girls are more likely 
to  participate  than  boys—a  difference  that  in-
creases with overall participation rates. Between 
1970  and  2008,  the  number  of  female  tertiary 
students  increased  more  than  sevenfold  (from 
10.8 million to 80.9 million), compared with a 
fourfold increase among males.

While  these  results  are  positive,  they  illus-
trate disparities by gender only. An alternative 
question is whether there are other dimensions 
of disadvantage, and if so, what is the relative 
weight  of  gender  versus  (say)  poverty  in  the 
production  of  inequality  in  schooling  partici-
pation? Decomposing overall inequality in the 
educational  system  into  four  components—
location,  parental  education,  wealth,  and  gen-
der—helps answer this question.13 

Suppose that in two countries there is an equal 
number of rich and poor households with boys 
and girls in every income group. In Country A, 

all the rich, but only 50 percent of the poor, are 
enrolled, and enrollment is no different for boys 
and girls. In Country B, all rich and poor boys, 
but only 50 percent of rich and poor girls, are in 
school. Both countries have equal total inequal-
ity  in  the  educational  system,  but  the  patterns 
are very different. Decomposing total inequality 
in these countries would show that inequality is 
generated entirely by wealth (with all differences 
across wealth groups) in Country A but entirely 
by gender in Country B.

Repeating  this  exercise  across  many  coun-
tries  represented  in  the  Demographic  and 
Health Surveys shows that in most of them, the 
situation is similar to Country A—with differ-
ences in wealth accounting for most educational 
inequality—not to Country B (ﬁ gure 3.2). Pov-
erty rather than gender feeds overall educational 
inequalities in most of the world. In fact, even 
in  countries  with  high  total  inequality  (coun-
tries where the differences in school enrollment 
between advantaged and disadvantaged groups 
are high), gender accounts for at most 38 per-

FIGURE 3.2   In most countries with moderate or high total inequality in educational outcomes, less than 

 

%

 
,

y
t
i
l

a
u
q
e
n

i
 
l

a
t
o
t
 
o
t
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

100

80

60

40

20

0

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
y
n
e
K

)
0
1
–
9
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
n
a
g
U

one-ﬁ fth of inequality stems from gender
Inequality in school attendance among children 12–15 years old

Low inequality

Moderate inequality

High inequality

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
y
u
G

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
n
a
d
r
o
J

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
e
n
a
r
k
U

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
e
m
r
A

i

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
b
A

l

i

)
7
0
–
6
0
0
2
(
 
d
n
a

l
i
z
a
w
S

)
7
0
–
6
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
a
N

i

i

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
s
e
v
d
a
M

l

i

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
a
Z

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
v
o
d
o
M

l

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
n
a
j
i
a
b
r
e
z
A

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
i
t
i
a
H

)
8
0
–
7
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
z
n
a
T

i

)
2
0
0
2
(
 

m
a
n
t
e
V

i

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
i

l

w
a
a
M

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
n
a
h
G

)
8
0
–
4
0
0
2
(
 
u
r
e
P

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
e
w
b
a
b
m
Z

i

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
v

i

i
l

o
B

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
b
m
o
o
C

l

i

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
n
o
o
r
e
m
a
C

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
e
u
q
b
m
a
z
o
M

i

i

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
o
b
m
a
C

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
.

 

p
e
R
b
a
r
A

 
,
t
p
y
g
E

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
R
n
a
c
i
n
m
o
D

i

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
)
e

l
l
i

v
a
z
z
a
r
B
(
 
.

p
e
R

 
,

o
g
n
o
C

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
 
.

 
.

p
e
R
m
e
D

 
,

o
g
n
o
C

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
l

a
p
e
N

)
0
1
–
9
0
0
2
(
 
o
h
t
o
s
e
L

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
a
i
r
e
b
L

i

)
8
0
0
2
(
 
a
i
r
e
g
N

i

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
r
a
c
s
a
g
a
d
a
M

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
o
s
a
F
a
n
k
r
u
B

i

 

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
p
o
h
t
E

i

i

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
i
l

a
M

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
e
n
u
G

i

)
4
0
–
3
0
0
2
(
 
o
c
c
o
r
o
M

)
9
0
–
8
0
0
2
(
 
l

a
g
e
n
e
S

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
e
n
o
e
L
a
r
r
e
S

i

 

)
6
0
–
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
d
n

i

I

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
r
e
g
N

i

)
4
0
0
2
(
 
d
a
h
C

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
n
n
e
B

i

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
y
e
k
r
u
T

)
5
0
0
2
(
 
e
r
i
o
v

I
’

 

d
e
t
ô
C

gender                   wealth                        other factors

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic Health Surveys in various countries during 2002–10.

Note: The measure of inequality refers to the percentage of total opportunities that must be reallocated to ensure that all possible combinations of circumstances have the same 
average enrollment. Low inequality is between 0.3 percent and 2.1 percent, moderate inequality is between 2.3 percent and 6.4 percent, and high inequality is between 6.5 per-
cent and 26.7 percent. Results are sorted by size of gender contribution to total inequality. 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

109

cent  of  overall  inequality;  in  contrast,  poverty 
frequently  accounts  for  50  percent  or  more  of 
the total. Almost all countries where gender in-
equality is a problem, and where total inequality 
is high, are in Africa—with India and Turkey the 
only exceptions.

This basic description of progress on educa-
tion shows that change has come to every coun-
try and region, and that in most countries, the 
remaining inequalities are concentrated around 
poverty and other circumstances (notably, rural 
or urban residence) rather than gender. A global 
focus  on  inequality  would  thus  imply  that,  in 
most contexts, redistributive efforts should now 
be directed to poverty.

What explains the progress?
One key message of this Report is that progress 
has  come  in  areas  where  lifting  a  single  bar-
rier  is  sufﬁ cient.  Consistent  with  this  message, 
studies now show that increasing the returns to 
educational investment in girls or removing in-

stitutional  constraints  or  increasing  household 
incomes is sufﬁ cient to increase female partici-
pation in education (ﬁ gure 3.3). When all three 
have happened simultaneously, change has been 
even faster. Take each in turn.

Changing returns. Starting from the early 1980s, 
empirical evidence emerged that when returns 
to women’s education increased, so did parental 
investments in the schooling of girls. These early 
studies showed that changes in the agriculture 
technology that increased the returns to female 
education also led parents to invest more in girls’ 
schooling. A new generation of work brings to-
gether globalization and returns to education in 
the context of changing technologies. 

The  rise  of  outsourcing  in  India  is  offer-
ing  new  work  opportunities—particularly  for 
women.  The  opening  of  a  new  information-
technology-enabled  service  (ITES)  center,  for 
example,  increased  the  number  of  children 
 enrolled  in  a  primary  school  by  5.7  percent, 

FIGURE 3.3  What explains progress in school enrollments?

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

N D E R  EQUALITY

E

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

e

T
E
g  r
c

u

a

s

n

r

n

u
t
ti o

K
R
M A
s i n
a
e
d
o   e
t

r

c

I n

HOUSEHOLDS
More stable

incomes

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS
Lower direct, indirect,
and opportunity

costs

G

R

O
WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

110 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.4  Free primary education reduced gender gaps in enrollments

a.  Malawi, by bringing more girls into school

b.  Lesotho, by bringing more boys into school

 

x
e
d
n

i
 

y
t
i
r
a
p
 
r
e
d
n
e
g

105 

100 

95 

90 

85 

80 

free primary education 

 

 

1
e
d
a
r
g

 
,
t
n
e
m

l
l

o
r
n
e
 
s
s
o
r
g

210 

190 

170 

150 

130 

110 

90 

free primary education 

1990 

1993 

1996 

1999 

2002 

2005 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

2007 

girls 

boys 

Source: WDR 2012 team based on Edstats. 

with  the  increase  driven  primarily  by  higher 
enrollments in English-language schools.14 This 
increased enrollment was equally large for boys 
and girls, reﬂ ecting very local information mar-
kets on the returns to education.

Similarly,  business  process  outsourcing 
(BPO)  opportunities  affect  education  of 
 women.15  In  randomly  selected  villages  in  In-
dia, three years of BPO recruiting services were 
provided to women primarily to increase aware-
ness  and  information  about  the  employment 
opportunities.  Given  that  the  intervention  was 
at the level of the village, the study found large 
effects—three years later, girls ages 5–15 in the 
villages that received the intervention were 3–5 
percentage  points  more  likely  to  be  in  school, 
had  a  higher  body  mass  index  (a  measure  of 
health), and were 10 percent more likely to be 
employed in wage work. Human capital invest-
ments  for  boys  did  not  change.  The  interven-
tion did not change either structures within the 
household  (for  instance,  the  bargaining  power 
of  the  mother)  or  the  way  schools  functioned. 
Information  about  market  returns  alone  suf-
ﬁ ced to increase female enrollment and improve 
outcomes for girls.

Changing institutional constraints. If female en-
rollment responded only to increasing returns, 
progress would have been slower—returns can 
be notoriously slow to move and can take a long 

time to evolve. But even where returns have been 
low, changes in the structure of formal institu-
tions  have  increased  educational  attainment. 
These pathways are perhaps best illustrated by 
looking at changes in the price of schooling—
where  the  costs  incurred  could  be  direct  (fees 
and uniforms), indirect (distance to school), or 
result  from  forgone  opportunities  (wages  that 
children could earn outside school).

Reductions in schooling fees erode the need 
for families to differentiate educational invest-
ments  across  children.  The  free  primary  edu-
cation programs launched across Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  for  instance,  increased  student  enroll-
ments 68 percent in the ﬁ rst year in Malawi and 
Uganda  and  22  percent  in  Kenya.  The  aboli-
tion  of  education  levies  contributed  to  bring-
ing more girls relative to boys into school and 
reducing  the  existing  gender  gap  in  primary 
education  in  Malawi  (ﬁ gure  3.4).  In  Lesotho, 
the  government  launched  a  similar  program 
phased  in  yearly  beginning  in  the  ﬁ rst  grade, 
and participation jumped 75 percent (see ﬁ gure 
3.4).16  In  contrast  to  Malawi,  boys  in  Lesotho 
have  been  historically  less  likely  than  girls  to 
be  enrolled  in  primary  school,  particularly  in 
the higher grades. Free primary education sup-
ported a signiﬁ cant inﬂ ux of overage boys into 
the educational system.

Reductions  in  the  distance  to  school  have 
also helped. In Pakistan, adult women who grew 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

111

up  in  a  village  with  a  school  by  the  time  they 
were  seven  years  old  reported  higher  primary 
schooling  than  those  whose  villages  received  a 
school after they were seven or those whose vil-
lages never received a school.17 In Afghan com-
munities randomly selected to receive a school, 
enrollment  of  girls  increased  by  15  percentage 
points more than that of boys—over and above 
a  50  percent  increase  in  attendance  for  both 
sexes.18 After six months, the girls in the villages 
with such schools also reported far higher test 
scores.

The price of schooling also reﬂ ects opportu-
nity  costs  stemming  from  forgone  child  labor, 
either  in  the  formal  labor  market  or  at  home 
in household chores. Higher children’s employ-
ment tends to be associated with lower school 
attendance.19 Employment rates for 14–16-year-
old boys and girls in urban Brazil increased as la-
bor markets improved, and children were more 
likely to leave school as local labor market con-
ditions became more favorable.20 For Ethiopia, 
an increase of 10 percentage points in the adult 
employment rate generated a 10–25 percentage 
point increase in the probability of ﬁ nding em-
ployment for youth ages 10–24.21 This effect was 
stronger for youth who never attended school. 
On  average,  boys  are  more  likely  to  engage  in 
agricultural or other paid or unpaid productive 
work: the opportunity cost of education is of-
ten higher for males than females, leading more 
boys  out  of  education  and  into  nondomestic 
child labor.22

The ﬂ ip side of greater male involvement in 
the formal labor market is that girls bear a larger 
share of domestic labor. Households rely heavily 
on children, especially girls, for natural resource 
collection and caring for family members. Ma-
lawian girls ages 6–14 spend 21 hours a week on 
domestic  work,  while  boys  spend  13½  hours; 
in rural Benin, girls spend 1 hour a day collect-
ing water compared with 25 minutes for boys.23 
In the Arab Republic of Egypt, a 10 percentage 
point  increase  in  the  probability  of  domestic 
work—measured by household access to piped 
water, piped sewerage, and garbage collection—
reduces the marginal probability of girls’ school-
ing by 6 percentage points.24 In Peru, in-house 
water  supply  has  a  signiﬁ cant  impact  on  the 
grade-for-age of girls but not of boys.25 And in 
Kenya, simulation models suggest that reducing 
the distance to a source of water by 2 kilometers 
would  increase  overall  enrollment  and  attain-
ment twice as much for girls as for boys.26

Changing  household  constraints.  Higher  and 
more stable sources of household income have 
helped bring girls into school even when returns 
and salient institutional features remained un-
changed.  Household  income  has  been  tied  to 
greater  enrollments  for  children—more  so  for 
girls—and increases in maternal income have a 
greater impact on girls’ schooling than increases 
in  paternal  income.27  When  households  face 
a  sudden  drop  in  income,  perhaps  because  of 
poor harvests, they immediately reduce invest-
ments  in  schooling.  Whether  these  reductions 
affect boys more than girls depends on the un-
derlying labor market conditions.

In  villages  affected  by  droughts  in  Côte 
d’Ivoire in 1986 and 1987, school enrollment fell 
14 percentage points for boys and 11 percentage 
points for girls.28 During the same period, en-
rollment increased 5 percentage points for boys 
and 10 percentage points for girls in villages not 
affected by droughts. Girls in primary and sec-
ondary schools in Turkey were more likely than 
boys to drop out in the face of household bud-
get  constraints.29  Similar  results  are  found  in 
countries  ranging  from  Ethiopia  (1996–2000) 
to Indonesia (1993).30 In higher-income coun-
tries, by contrast, a reduction in job opportuni-
ties  for  school-age  children  brought  about  by 
economic contractions may support investments 
in schooling, as work opportunities for children 
dry up.31 Typical results from Latin America—
notably Argentina, Mexico, and Nicaragua—all 
show that reductions in labor market opportu-
nities increased enrollments in school for boys 
relative to girls.32 

Unsurprisingly,  programs  that  provide  in-
come  to  households  and  help  them  weather 
economic  downturns  keep  children  in  school. 
Perhaps  the  most  convincing  evidence  on  this 
front  comes  from  studies  of  conditional  cash 
transfers—cash given to households only if their 
children attend school for a minimum number 
of days. Giving the household the ability to pro-
tect  educational  investments  in  children  when 
times are bad is precisely one of the roles these 
transfers were intended to play, and the evidence 
shows that they work.33

The bad news
Despite  signiﬁ cant  progress,  gender  disparities 
in education have not been entirely erased. Girls 
in many regions of the world continue to face 
severe  disadvantages  in  primary  and  second-
ary  school  enrollment,  and  across  the  board, 

112 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

children in low-income countries learn little in 
school. As countries grow richer, the problems 
of enrollment and learning become less salient, 
but girls and boys continue to choose very dif-
ferent ﬁ elds of study in secondary and tertiary 
education. These choices have repercussions for 
the occupations they choose and the wages they 
earn. Consider each in turn.

Severely disadvantaged populations in 
primary and secondary enrollment
In  speciﬁ c  regions,  missing  economic  drivers 
of female education combined with other area-
speciﬁ c ecologies—such as poor safety, scattered 
populations,  and  linguistic  differences—give 
rise to gender disadvantages, which mostly, but 
not  always,  work  against  girls.  These  ecologies 
are likely very different, and policies that ﬁ nely 
target  local  problems  will  vary  across  severely 
disadvantaged populations. Six examples clarify 
the problem for different populations.

Afghanistan and Pakistan are two of the few 
countries where female enrollment remains low 
even  at  the  primary  level.  It  is  widely  believed 
that  this  is  because  households  discriminate 
against  girls  in  their  schooling  decisions.  Yet, 
new evidence suggests that families are as eager 
to  send  their  girls  to  school  as  boys  when  the 
school is close by, but are more reluctant to en-
roll  their  girls  in  schools  that  are  farther  from 
their  houses.  In  Pakistan,  a  half-kilometer  in-
crease in the distance to school decreased female 
enrollment  by  20  percentage  points.34  Among 
families living next to a school, girls are as likely 
as boys to go to school in both Afghanistan and 
Pakistan. Part of the “distance penalty” for girls 
could reﬂ ect safety concerns in crossing settle-
ment  boundaries  within  the  same  village.35  In 
this severely disadvantaged population, solving 
the  problem  of  distance  to  school  for  female 
enrollment, rather than tackling any innate dis-
crimination  at  the  household  level,  will  yield 
large dividends. 

The population in the highlands of northeast 
Cambodia is scattered in remote and small vil-
lages. Lack of access to land, religious suppres-
sion,  and  limited  learning  and  use  of  Khmer 
(the  national  language)  all  marginalize  these 
communities and de facto restrict access to edu-
cation.  The  indigenous  Kreung  and  Tampuen 
communities in 2001 had high child mortality 
(twice  the  national  average  for  children  under 
ﬁ ve)  and  low  literacy  rates—only  5  of  1,970 

adults  surveyed  had  completed  primary  edu-
cation. There were very few schools, and grade 
ﬁ ve  completion  was  low;  often  more  children 
were  out  of  school  than  in  school. Attendance 
rates varied among these villages, ranging from 
10 percent to 60 percent for girls. Many out-of-
school girls were caring for siblings or working 
in the ﬁ elds. While most members of these com-
munities  suffered  from  hunger  and  malnutri-
tion, girls were particularly disadvantaged—the 
last to eat, they did not receive nutritious food, 
such as meat.36

Of 945,000 children ages 6–14 not studying at 
any school in Turkey in 2006, 194,000 said they 
could not afford school expenses, while 22,000 
had to work and thus could not study. Among 
these children, thousands are seasonal workers. 
At  the  crucial  14–15  age  range,  when  children 
typically  transition  from  primary  to  second-
ary  school,  children  in  advantaged  groups  (in 
households with fewer children living in urban 
areas of better-off regions) had 100 percent en-
rollment compared with 10 percent for those in 
disadvantaged groups (in households with more 
children, living in worse-off regions). 

In  recent  years,  Jamaican  boys  have  under-
achieved  in  school,  starting  in  the  early  years 
and  increasing  in  secondary  and  tertiary  edu-
cation.  With  declines  in  boys’  participation  in 
secondary schooling, the gender parity ratio in 
secondary education in 2008 was 1.04 in favor 
of girls, with boys twice as likely as girls to re-
peat  a  grade.  Apart  from  technical  vocational 
subjects  and  physics,  girls  outperform  boys  in 
the Caribbean Secondary Education Certiﬁ cate 
examinations,  with  30  percent  of  girls  passing 
ﬁ ve  or  more  subjects  compared  with  only  16 
percent  of  boys.37  A  recent  program  identiﬁ es 
four key challenges in boys’ development38: low 
self-esteem among young boys, violence and a 
lack of discipline, masculine identities that drive 
boys and young men away from better academic 
performance, and limited opportunities for jobs 
after graduation. 

As  a  region,  Sub-Saharan Africa  stands  out 
in the low participation of females in schooling. 
The  disadvantage  has  narrowed  dramatically 
between 1990 and 2008, with the ratio of female 
to-male  primary  completion  increasing  from 
0.78  to  0.91.  Yet  girls  remain  at  a  signiﬁ cant 
disadvantage in Central and West Africa, where 
only 8 girls complete primary school for every 
10 boys.39 Take Burkina Faso. Estimates suggest 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

113

that  three-ﬁ fths  of  the  population  live  on  less 
than $1 a day and more than four-ﬁ fths live in 
rural areas, many surviving on subsistence agri-
cultural activities. Of every 1,000 children born, 
207 will die before age ﬁ ve—the ninth-highest 
child mortality rate in the world. Schooling—at 
a net enrollment rate of 42 percent for boys and 
29 percent for girls—is among the lowest in the 
world. Not only are schools distant and difﬁ cult 
to  access,  there  often  is  insufﬁ cient  room  for 
children who do enroll, and high out-of-pocket 
expenses further discourage participation.40

The  problems  in  these  six  severely  disad-
vantaged populations are very different—from 
distance  in  Pakistan  and  Afghanistan,  to  poor 
economic  opportunities  in  Cambodia,  to  high 
costs and low income in Turkey, to violence and 
masculine  identities  in  Jamaica,  to  low  physi-
cal access and overall poverty in Burkina Faso. 
One way forward is to develop context-speciﬁ c 
strategies that address the speciﬁ c issues. Com-
munity schools in Afghanistan have reduced the 
distances girls must travel, and in villages where 
these schools have been built, female disadvan-
tages in enrollment have vanished.41 Turkey has 
conducted large campaigns to promote the en-
rollment of girls in school, some targeting dis-
advantaged  regions,  such  as  “Father,  send  me 
to  school”  and “Girls,  off  to  school.”  Similarly, 
Jamaica  is  involving  fathers  in  schooling  and 
making the curriculum more boy-friendly, and 
a school-feeding program in Burkina Faso has 
increased boys’ and girls’ enrollment by 5–6 per-
centage points.42

But in each of these regions, alleviating insti-
tutional or household constraints also helps—
whether  by  increasing  supply  through  more 
school  construction  or  by  increasing  demand 
through easing households’ ﬁ nancial constraints. 
Pakistan,  Turkey,  Cambodia,  and  Jamaica  all 
have  programs  that  give  cash  to  households  if 
they send their children (in some cases, speciﬁ -
cally  girls)  to  school,  and  these  have  increased 
enrollments for targeted children. The increases 
have been fairly large: 10 percentage points for 
primary-age  girls  in  Pakistan,  11  percentage 
points  for  secondary-age  girls  in  Turkey,  30  to 
43 percentage points for girls transitioning from 
primary to secondary schools in Cambodia, and 
0.5 days a month in Jamaica.43 Preliminary re-
sults from a ﬁ nancial transfer pilot in Burkina 
Faso  suggest  similar  results.44  Similarly,  school 
construction  in  countries  like  Burkina  Faso 

(through  satellite  schooling  facilities)  and  Af-
ghanistan  (through  community  schools)  helps 
reduce the costs of travel and again brings girls 
into  school.45  A  comparison  of  the  character-
istics  of  children  in  and  out  of  school  in  Sub-
 Saharan Africa suggests that in 11 countries out-
of-school  children  are  very  similar  to  enrolled 
children and that policies that have been effec-
tive  in  expanding  enrollments  in  the  past  will 
bring these children in.46

The precise policy to be followed depends on 
the  context  and  how  much  is  known  about  it. 
For  instance,  ﬁ nancial  transfers  to  households 
conditional on school attendance bring girls in. 
But  if  the  purpose  of  the  transfer  is  purely  to 
increase educational participation (these trans-
fers also beneﬁ t poor households directly), they 
are expensive tools, because transfers also reach 
households that would have sent their children 
to school even without the added incentive—in 
most  of  these  countries,  the  cost  of  the  trans-
fer per additional child enrolled is close to the 
country’s per capita GDP. But numerous condi -
tional  cash  transfer  programs  are  producing 
 results  across  countries,  suggesting  that  if   spe-
ciﬁ c  policies  are  hard  to  design,  a  uniform 
 “second-best”  solution—conditional  transfers 
to households—could work just as well but cost 
more.  The  problems  of  severely  disadvantaged 
populations  for  education  could,  in  part,  be 
solved by getting more money to households—
provided  that  adequate  educational  facilities 
 exist. 

Poor learning for girls and boys
In addition to the problems of severely disad-
vantaged populations, a second issue, common 
to  many  low-income  countries,  is  poor  learn-
ing.  Children  in  low-income  countries  typi-
cally learn less and more slowly relative to their 
high-income counterparts. Although there are 
small  differences  across  boys  and  girls  (where 
these exist, boys tend to do better at mathemat-
ics and girls at reading), the gender difference 
is dominated by the difference across countries 
(ﬁ gure 3.5).

To see how big these differences are, look at 
the  raw  numbers.  Only  27  percent  of  children 
ages 10 and 11 in India can read a simple pas-
sage, do a simple division problem, tell the time, 
and handle money. This low learning is not an 
Indian problem; it recurs in nearly all low- and 
middle-income  countries.  For  the  developing 

114 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.5   Cross-country differences in mean scores on the 2009 PISA dwarf gender differences 

within countries

a.  Mathematics

b.  Literacy

Kyrgyz Rep.
Panama
Peru
Qatar
Indonesia
Tunisia
Albania
Colombia
Brazil
Jordan
Argentina
Montenegro
Kazakhstan
Trinidad
Mexico
Thailand
Chile
Uruguay
Romania
Bulgaria
Azerbaijan
Serbia
Turkey
Israel
Croatia
Greece
Russian Federation
Lithuania
Latvia
Italy
Spain
Portugal
Ireland
United States
Luxembourg
Hungary
United Kingdom
Czech Republic
Sweden
Poland
Austria
Slovak Republic
France
Norway
Slovenia
Denmark
Iceland
Estonia
Germany
Australia
Belgium
New Zealand
Macao SAR, China
Netherlands
Canada
Japan
Switzerland
Liechtenstein
Finland
Korea, Rep.
Hong Kong SAR, China
Singapore

Kyrgyz Republic
Azerbaijan
Peru
Panama
Qatar
Albania
Kazakhstan
Argentina
Indonesia
Tunisia
Jordan
Montenegro
Brazil
Colombia
Trinidad
Thailand
Romania
Mexico
Uruguay
Bulgaria
Serbia
Chile
Russian Federation
Turkey
Lithuania
Austria
Luxembourg
Israel
Croatia
Slovak Republic
Czech Republic
Spain
Greece
Slovenia
Latvia
Italy
Macao SAR, China
Portugal
Hungary
United Kingdom
Denmark
France
Ireland
Germany
Sweden
Liechtenstein
United States
Iceland
Poland
Switzerland
Estonia
Norway
Belgium
Netherlands
Australia
Japan
New Zealand
Canada
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR, China
Finland
Korea, Rep.

300 

350 

400 

450 

500 

550 

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3 Level 4

mean scores

boys
girls

300 

350 

400 

450 

500 

550 

Level 1

Level 2
mean scores

Level 3

Level 4

Source: WDR 2012 team based on Edstats. 
Note:  The highest level is 6. In mathematics, at level 1, students answer clearly deﬁ ned questions involving familiar contexts; at level 3, students execute clearly deﬁ ned procedures; 
at level 5, students develop and work with models for complex situations. In literacy, at level 1 students are capable of completing only the least complex reading tasks; at level 4, 
students demonstrate an accurate understanding of long or complex texts whose content or form may be unfamiliar; at level 6, students make multiple inferences, comparisons, 
and contrasts, which are both detailed and precise.

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

115

countries as a whole, 21.3 percent of 15-year-old 
children tested by the Program for International 
Student  Assessment  (PISA)  could  not  achieve 
level  1  proﬁ ciency  in  mathematics—the  most 
basic skills. In Argentina, the ﬁ gure was 64 per-
cent, in Brazil 72.5 percent, in Indonesia 65 per-
cent, and in Thailand 53 percent. In a globalizing 
world, the top performers also matter. Just over 
13  percent  of  children  in  developed  countries 
perform at competency level 5 or above. Com-
pare  that  with  1  percent  or  less  in  Argentina, 
Brazil, and Indonesia. Clearly, ﬁ xing poor learn-
ing is imperative for both boys and girls.

The problem of stream divergence
As countries grow richer and systems of service 
delivery  improve,  enrollment  deﬁ cits  for  se-
verely disadvantaged populations and the over-
arching issue of poor learning may become less 
of a problem. But the playing ﬁ eld will still not 
be  level  for  women  and  men.  Signiﬁ cant  and 
persistent gaps remain in the ﬁ elds of study that 
women and men choose as part of their formal 
education, and the patterns of these choices are 
very similar in rich and poor countries.

As  with  enrollment  and  learning,  these 
choices matter because, as chapter 5 shows, they 
translate into gender differences in employment 
and  ultimately  into  differences  in  productivity 
and earnings: gender differences in occupation 
and  sector  of  employment  account  for  10–50 
percent of the observed wage gap in 33 low- and 
middle-income countries (of 53 with data). As 
countries  grow  richer,  gender  disparities  may 
shift from enrollments and learning to segrega-
tion in ﬁ elds of study. So, policy attention may 
have to shift accordingly. 

These  gender  differences  in  education  tra-
jectories emerge early and grow larger as young 
men  and  women  acquire  more  education.  At 
the  secondary  level,  women  are  more  likely 
than men to choose general education and less 
likely to choose vocational education. In 63 per-
cent of countries (109 of 172), the fraction of 
women  enrolled  in  general  secondary  educa-
tion is higher than that of women enrolled in 
vocational  secondary  education.47  At  the  ter-
tiary level, these differences magnify. Across the 
world, women are overrepresented in education 
and  health;  equally  represented  in  social  sci-
ences, business, and law; and underrepresented 
in  engineering,  manufacturing,  construction, 
and science (table 3.1).

A REFLEX (Research into Employment and 
Professional Flexibility) study uncovers similar 
patterns. For example, Italian men and women 
are equally represented in about half the ﬁ elds 
of study, but large gender disparities exist in the 
other half.48 Women are more likely to obtain a 
degree  in  education  and  humanities,  and  men 
in  engineering,  architecture,  and  agricultural 
and veterinary science. The gender distribution 
of graduates in social sciences, business, law, sci-
ence  and  mathematics,  health,  and  social  ser-
vices  corresponds  to  that  of  the  population  of 
tertiary graduates. 

The sharp divergence in ﬁ elds of study does 
not reﬂ ect the capabilities of men and women 
in different subjects. There is no systematic evi-
dence of large gender differences in average or 
subject-related  ability  at  the  secondary  level. 
Test scores from standardized secondary school 
graduation tests are similar for men and women 
in Indonesia but are slightly higher for women 
with a college education in both Indonesia and 
Italy.49 What matters instead is stronger sorting 
on ability among men, combined with signiﬁ cant 
gender differences in attitudes. In the REFLEX 
study,  male  top  performers  on  the  secondary 
graduation tests were 10 percent more likely to 
choose a male-dominated ﬁ eld than other males, 
while the impact of test scores on choice was in-
signiﬁ cant  for  female-dominated  and  neutral 
ﬁ elds and among female top performers. More-
over,  “choosing  a  demanding/prestigious  ﬁ eld 

TABLE 3.1  Gender segregation in ﬁ eld of study: In most countries, 

women dominate health and education studies and 
men dominate engineering and sciences

Fraction of countries where the

fi eld of study is

Number of
countries

Field of study

Agriculture

Education

Engineering, manufacturing, 
and construction

Health and welfare

Arts and humanities

Science

Services

Female 

dominated

%

Male 

dominated

%

  3

84

  0

82

55

13

21

  74

  6

100

    4

    6

  68

  59

Neutral

%

22

10

  0

13

39

20

21

Social sciences; business 
and law
Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from UNESCO Institute for Satistics.

  16

23

61

89

97

97

97

96

96

87

97

116 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

of study” signiﬁ cantly increased the probability 
of enrolling in a male-dominated ﬁ eld for men 
but not for women, and it decreased the prob-
ability of enrolling in a female-dominated ﬁ eld 
for both. Countries pay a heavy cost when the 
average quality of every ﬁ eld is reduced because 
of the mismatch between training and ability.

Stream  divergence  is  difﬁ cult  to  address 
precisely  because  it  requires  policies  that  act 
on  households,  markets,  and 
institutions 
simultaneously.

Part  of  the  problem  lies  in  the  educational 
system,  which  generates  expectations  about 
what girls and boys are “supposed” to study. For 
example,  some  English  subject  textbooks  cur-
rently in use in Australia and Hong Kong SAR, 
China, tend to depict women in a limited range 
of  social  roles  and  present  stereotyped  images 
of women as weaker and operating primarily in 
domestic domains.50 

Part  of  the  problem  lies  with  informal  in-
stitutions that inﬂ uence household aspirations. 
The  Young  Lives  study  looked  at  educational 
aspirations and noncognitive skills of boys and 
girls  at  ages  8,  12,  and  15  for  12,000  children 
across Ethiopia, Andhra Pradesh in India, Peru, 
and Vietnam. Parental aspirations for the educa-
tion of their children were biased toward boys 
in Ethiopia and India by the age of 12 and to-
ward girls in Peru and Vietnam. By the age of 
15,  these  biases  had  been  transmitted  to  chil-
dren, with clearly higher educational aspirations 
shown  among  boys  in  Ethiopia  and  India  and 
among  girls  in Vietnam. Also  by  age  15,  mea-
sures of agency or efﬁ cacy showed a strong male 
bias  in  India  and  Ethiopia  but  not  in  Peru  or 
Vietnam. Asked “when  you  are  about  20  years 
old,  what  job  would  you  like  to  be  doing,”  31 
percent of girls and 11 percent of boys in India 
chose “teacher,” whereas 35 percent of boys and 
9 percent of girls wanted to enroll in university. 
In Peru, 21 percent of boys (5 percent of girls) 
wanted to be engineers, while in Vietnam there 
were few notable differences.51

Part  of  the  problem  lies  with  markets  and 
ﬁ rms  that  have  been  unwilling  to  experiment 
with new forms of ﬂ exible production and em-
ployment  that  support  family  formation  and 
childbearing,  even  in  countries  where  other 
gender  differences  are  notably  smaller.  Reduc-
ing stereotypes in education can go only so far if 
there is no maternal leave down the line and the 
woman has to do 90 percent of the housework, 

even when she brings home all the income—as 
in Ghana (see ﬁ gure 5.10 in chapter 5). Reduc-
ing  the  time  allocated  to  care  at  home  will  go 
only so far if schooling reinforces gender norms 
about what girls should study and parental as-
pirations feed into how much children want to 
study and what they want be when they “grow 
up.” And unless ﬁ rms are willing to experiment 
with  hiring  women  in  male-dominated  occu-
pations  and  vice-versa,  shifting  the  allocation 
of tasks at home or changing the ﬁ eld of study 
is  not  going  to  help  (it  may  even  hurt).  The 
school system needs to say that it is acceptable 
for a man to be a nurse and a woman to be an 
engineer. Firms need to be willing to hire male 
nurses and female engineers. And tasks at home 
need  to  be  allocated  according  to  individuals’ 
time  constraints  and  capabilities,  not  gender 
norms. Unless all three happen simultaneously, 
change will be hard.

From education to health
Despite dramatic improvements in educational 
participation, much remains to be done for se-
verely  disadvantaged  populations  around  the 
world. Poor learning affects both boys and girls 
and hampers the future ability of young popula-
tions to participate in an increasingly globalized 
world where, as chapter 6 shows, jobs are shifting 
from those based on “brawn” to jobs based on 
“brain.” And girls and boys systematically choose 
different ﬁ elds of study in all countries; these are 
choices that shape later life employment choices 
and hence wages. The framework of households, 
markets,  and  institutions  helps  illustrate  that 
progress has been rapid where improvements in 
any one has helped circumvent potential bottle-
necks in another; progress has been slower where 
all three need to move together.

Health  issues,  by  contrast,  are  different. 
First, unlike education, where biological differ-
ences may play a smaller role, women and men 
are  intrinsically  different  physically  and  in  the 
health  risks  they  face.  Given  the  same  inputs, 
girls and boys may achieve similar educational 
outcomes, but because of biological differences, 
the same health inputs may result in very dif-
ferent health outcomes. Any analysis of health 
issues needs to account for these fundamental 
differences.  Second,  health  outcomes  reﬂ ect  a 
type of irreversibility that is different from that 
in  education  outcomes.  True,  health  and  edu-
cation investments during childhood and their 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

117

timing will irreversibly affect cognitive develop-
ment  and  learning  outcomes  throughout  the 
course of life. But a teacher absent from school 
on any given day harms learning in a completely 
different  way  from  a  doctor  who  happens  to 
be absent from a facility at the time a woman 
goes  into  labor,  a  situation  that  can  turn  life-
threatening  within  minutes.  So,  formal  service 
delivery institutions will naturally play a larger 
role in health, and for some health issues, they 
will be the primary bottleneck. 

HEALTH

Gender disadvantages in health can arise in both 
sickness and death. Yet because women and men 
are biologically different, ascribing gender differ-
ences in mortality and morbidity to biological 
differences is fraught with conceptual dangers. If 
women live longer than men (which they do in 
most countries52), is it because they are biologi-
cally stronger or because there is discrimination 
against men? Further, biological differences may 
still  be  malleable:  a  biological  predisposition 
may be easy to ﬁ x, much like a pair of glasses will 
ﬁ x genetically poor eyesight. But when men and 
women are biologically susceptible to different 
diseases (breast or prostate cancer), how can we 
judge  whether  one  is  more  crippling  than  the 
other? Cutting across the conceptual issues are 
poor data: in many countries, the information 
on  morbidity  is  sparse  and  of  uneven  quality. 
More  troubling,  regions  with  good  data  may 
be precisely those where gender differences are 
smaller, leading to misplaced policy priorities. 

To  present  a  global  picture,  this  chapter 
adopts a reductionist approach, focused entirely 
on sex ratios at birth and mortality after birth. 
If  the  disadvantages  thus  uncovered  are  small, 
it would be a mistake to argue that gender dis-
advantages in health are small—they could well 
emerge in comparisons of morbidity. But four 
ﬁ ndings  suggest  that  mortality  disadvantages 
are not small. 

First,  the  well-known  problem  of  skewed 
sex  ratios  at  birth  in  some  countries  remains 
unresolved. Second, compared with developed 
economies, the rates at which women die rela-
tive to men are systematically higher in many 
low-  and  middle-income  countries  around 
the  world.  Third,  while  men  die  more  than 
women at all ages in developed economies, in 

many Sub-Saharan African countries the pat-
tern is reversed, and differences are increasing, 
as  are  overall  adult  mortality  risks  for  both 
sexes.  Worsening  female  mortality  rates  are 
particularly notable in the HIV/AIDS-afﬂ icted 
countries, but even in Central and West Africa, 
where  HIV/AIDS  prevalence  rates  are  lower, 
mortality risks are getting worse. Sub-Saharan 
Africa is the only region in the world where rel-
ative mortality risks are worsening for women. 
Fourth, male mortality risks have increased in 
many post-transition countries, reﬂ ecting par-
ticular types of behavior and health risks that 
appear  to  have  worsened  over  the  last  three 
 decades.

The ﬁ ndings—interpreted within the frame-
work of households, markets, and institutions—
yield  sharp  policy  conclusions.  Depending 
where they are in the life cycle, women and men 
face  disadvantages  for  different  reasons.  Miss-
ing girls at birth arise from household discrimi-
nation.  Any  solution  to  this  problem  has  to 
come through household decision-making pro-
cesses.  These  processes  can  be  manipulated 
through markets and institutions, but markets 
and institutions alone will not do the trick. Af-
ter birth, although discrimination remains sa-
lient in some countries, in many other countries 
high female mortality reﬂ ects poorly perform-
ing  institutions  of  service  delivery.  Improving 
institutions is the key to reducing female mor-
tality. Even in populations with discrimination, 
better institutions can help reduce the adverse 
impacts  of  differential  treatment.  High  male 
mortality usually reﬂ ects types of behavior that 
are  socially  deemed  more  acceptable  among 
men. Because there is a single point of entry for 
each  of  these  problems,  solving  them  will  be 
hard. But for any notion of human justice, it is 
imperative. 

The facts on dying and death in 
low-income countries
Some issues that this chapter highlights are bet-
ter known than others: skewed sex ratios at birth 
in North India and China, high female mortal-
ity  in  infancy  and  early  childhood  in  South 
Asia,  and  rising  male  mortality  in  some  post-
transition  countries  have  all  received  attention 
in the past decade. Less well known is that excess 
female  mortality  is  a  continuing  phenomenon 
beyond  childhood  and  a  growing  problem  in 
Sub-Saharan  Africa.  Simple  comparisons  of 

118 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.6   Adult and child mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa

s
h
t
r
i
b
e
v

 

i
l
 

,

0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d

 
,

y
t
i
l

 

a
t
r
o
m
5
-
r
e
d
n
u

 

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
 
t
l
u
d
a
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
t
l
u
d
a

,

200 

150 

100 

50 

䊱

䊱

䊱
䢇
䢇

䢇

䊱

䊱

䢇
䢇
䊱

䢇

䊱

䊱

䢇

䢇

䊱
䢇

䊱

䢇

䊱

䢇

䊱
䢇

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0 
1975–70 

1980–84 

1985–89 

1990–94 

1995–99 

period 

0 
2000–04 

䊱

䢇

䊱

䢇
䊱

䢇

non-Sub-Saharan Africa, under-5
non-Sub-Saharan Africa, adult
Sub-Saharan Africa, lower HIV, under-5
Sub-Saharan Africa, lower HIV, adult
Sub-Saharan Africa, higher HIV, under-5
Sub-Saharan Africa, higher HIV, adult

Source: de Walque and Filmer 2011. Adult mortality rates are based on sibling rosters from 83 Demographic 
and Health Surveys collected over time from 46 countries, and are estimated between 1975 and the most 
current period, typically 2000; they show the likelihood of dying in every ﬁ ve-year period of the data.

male and female mortality risks over time help 
make that point. 

Of  every  1,000  adults  between  the  ages  of 
15  and  60  in  the  rich  countries,  somewhere 
between  56  (Iceland)  and  107  (United  States) 
men and women will die each year.53 In India, 
that number rises to 213 (in China to 113). In 
Central  and  West  Africa,  adult  mortality  rates 
are higher, routinely exceeding 300 and in many 
countries 400. Compare that with conﬂ ict coun-
tries like Iraq (285) and Afghanistan (479). And 
in  HIV/AIDS-affected  countries,  the  numbers 
rise to between 481 (Malawi) and 772 (Zimba-
bwe). In their mortality risks, these countries are 
worse than Afghanistan (and far worse than Iraq 
or Pakistan).

Comparisons  over  time  highlight  the  dra-
matic  difference  between  Sub-Saharan  Africa 
and other regions of the world (ﬁ gure 3.6). Here 
are the patterns54:
•  Infant and early childhood mortality (under-
ﬁ ve  mortality)  has  declined  in  both  Sub-

Saharan Africa and other countries, although 
the  rate  of  decline  has  been  slower  in  the 
former. 

•  Adult mortality rates in other countries have 
remained  roughly  stable  over  the  past  25 
years, but in Sub-Saharan Africa, they dou-
bled between 1980 and 2000.

•  A  large  portion  of  this  increase  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa is attributable to HIV/AIDS, 
with  adult  mortality  rates  in  high  HIV-
prevalence countries reaching more than half 
the levels seen in the years of the genocides in 
Rwanda and Cambodia—but on a sustained 
and rising basis. 

•  Particularly  surprising  is  the  fact  that  adult 
mortality did not decrease, and actually in-
creased, in several countries in Sub-Saharan 
Africa  with  low  HIV/AIDS  prevalence,  par-
ticularly those in Central and West Africa.

Figure 3.7 uses World Health Organization 
(WHO)  estimates  for  all  countries  between 
1990 and 2008, to show how the relative rates 
of  adult  mortality  for  women  and  men  have 
changed over this period. Countries below the 
solid  maroon  line  saw  a  worsening  of  rela-
tive  mortality  risks  for  women,  and  those  to 
the right of the dashed black line saw a wors-
ening  of  adult  mortality  (so  countries  in  the 
lower right quadrant, for instance, saw a wors-
ening  of  both).  Although  the  numbers  are 
not strictly comparable to those in ﬁ gure 3.6 
(partly because of different time periods, and 
partly because of the measure of adult mortal-
ity), the broad story remains similar (also see 
box 3.1).

In most countries, adult mortality risks de-
clined. In the HIV-affected Sub-Saharan African 
countries (those with a prevalence above 5 per-
cent in 2008), mortality risks are getting worse, 
and relatively more women are dying than men. 
Surprisingly,  a  large  number  of  African  coun-
tries saw very small improvements in mortality, 
with  greater  improvements  for  men;  over  this 
period,  almost  no  country  in  Africa  saw  rela-
tive  declines  in  mortality  risks  for  women.  In 
contrast,  the  majority  of  countries  around  the 
world  experienced  declines  in  adult  mortality 
and relative improvements for women. Less sur-
prisingly, the other main country grouping that 
stands out prominently in ﬁ gure 3.7 consists of 
some Eastern Europe and Central Asian coun-

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

119

tries,  where  again  mortality  risks  have  gotten 
worse, but more so for males.55

In  2008,  the  14  countries  with  the  highest 
adult  mortality  risk  for  women  (in  descend-
ing order) were Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Swaziland, 
Zambia,  South Africa,  Malawi,  the  Central Af-
rican  Republic,  Mozambique,  Tanzania,  Chad, 
Uganda, Cameroon, Burundi, and Nigeria. Af-
ghanistan comes in at number 15, and Pakistan 
at number 64. For child mortality (under ﬁ ve, 
per 1,000 births), the worst places for girls (in 
descending  order)  were  Afghanistan,  Angola, 
Chad, Somalia, Mali, the Democratic Republic 
of  the  Congo,  Nigeria,  Sierra  Leone,  Guinea-
Bissau,  the  Central  African  Republic,  Burkina 
Faso,  Niger,  Burundi,  Equatorial  Guinea,  and 
Liberia. 

This  basic  description  highlights  the  ap-
proach in the rest of the chapter. We will show 
that  the  focus  on  female  mortality  is  slowly 
shifting  from  childhood  to  adulthood  and 
from  South Asia  to  Sub-Saharan Africa,  while 
the  problem  of  missing  girls  at  birth  remains 
rooted in India and China. To do so, the argu-
ment triangulates by looking at every country 
over time, by examining the historical context 

FIGURE 3.7   Adult mortality: Over time and by sex

2 

 

 

0
9
9
1
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
r
 
,

l

8
0
0
2

 
,

y
t
i
l

a
t
r
o
m

 

 
f
o
o
i
t
a
r
 
x
e
s

1.5 

1 

.5 

0 

Declining adult
mortality, especially
for women

Maldives 

India 

China 

Bangladesh 

Iran,Islamic Rep.

Eritrea 

Liberia 

Tonga 

Jamaica 
Iraq 

Kenya 

Mozambique 

Lesotho 

Botswana 

South Africa 

Swaziland 

Zimbabwe 

Increasing adult mortality,
with disproportionately
higher increased
mortality for women

0 

1 

2 

3 

adult mortality ratio, 2008, relative to 1990

East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development countries
Sub-Saharan Africa: low HIV prevalence

Europe and Central Asia
Middle East and North Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa: high HIV prevalence

Source: World Health Organization 2010.

Note: Adult mortality is expressed as the probability of death between the ages of 15 and 60. The sex ratio 
of mortality is male adult mortality divided by female adult mortality. 

BOX 3.1   Adult mortality risks: Who are the outliers?

Several countries in fi gure 3.7 highlight particular 
stories, help motivate the analysis in the remainder 
of this chapter, and remind us why any particular 
summary of the data can be problematic, requiring 
country-by-country analysis. 

In  Eritrea and Liberia  the  cessation  of  confl icts 
around 1990 reduced mortality risks for men (and 
somewhat for women). The drop in male mortality 
rates, however, worsened the relative mortality risk 
for women. A good thing for both men and women, 
this shows how a misinterpretation can be avoided 
by comparing mortality with a single reference for 
all countries, instead of within countries and over 
time (as the fi gure implicitly does). 

Iraq and Jamaica saw large increases in relative 
male  mortality  risks.  In  both  countries,  crime  and 
violence are taking men’s lives and increasing over-
all mortality risks. The link between confl ict, violent 
crime, and male mortality is taken up in the chap-
ter’s discussion of male mortality and specifi c issues 
in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Between 1990 and 2008, overall mortality risks 
declined  dramatically  in  Maldives,  especially  for 

women,  who  benefi ted  from  the  country’s  focus 
on  maternal  mortality  and  safe  motherhood.  The 
chapter highlights the fundamental role of mater-
nal mortality and related health issues in contribut-
ing to female mortality in the adult population.

Tonga  saw  large  increases  in  relative  female 
mortality  risks.  The  problems  that  this  chapter 
focuses on are absent in Tonga: It has high immu-
nization  rates  among  children,  very  few  infant 
deaths, and no maternal deaths in 2008. But Tonga 
also has severe problems with noncommunicable 
diseases  and  one  of  the  world’s  highest  diabetes 
rates:  75  percent  of  women  are  obese  relative  to 
56  percent  of  men.  Heart  attacks  accounted  for 
48 percent of all deaths in 2006. Although the chap-
ter only touches on morbidity and mortality caused 
by noncommunicable diseases, Tonga reminds us 
that the problems today may well be diff erent from 
those  tomorrow  and  that  every  region  will  have 
its own specifi cs that a global report cannot ade-
quately address.a

a. Somanathan and Hafez 2010.

120 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

of the now-rich countries, and by ensuring that 
the facts and interpretations are robust to alter-
native data sources. At the end, “stress-testing” 
yields robust conclusions that point to the need 
for  fundamental  institutional  reform,  better 
provision  of  public  goods  such  as  clean  water 
and  sanitation,  and  a  continuation  of  the  war 
against HIV/AIDS.

Missing girls at birth and excess female 
mortality post-birth
Ideally, analysis of mortality risks by sex and age 
would look at the relative age-mortality proﬁ les 
of  women  and  men  across  countries  and  over 
time. But that is hard to do because it requires 
comparing  different  age-mortality  functions, 
especially  difﬁ cult  when  mortality  risks  across 
comparison  groups  cross  (perhaps  multiple 
times) at different ages. To summarize this com-
plex  data  in  a  readily  understandable  manner, 
the chapter computes two measures.

Missing  girls  at  birth  are  estimated  through 
comparisons of the sex ratio at birth in coun-
tries  around  the  world  with  those  in  compa-
rable  populations  with  no  discrimination.56 
It also computes excess female (male) mortality  
by comparing the mortality risks of women rel-
ative to men in every country and every age with 
those seen in developed economies today—the 
“reference population.”57

This  excess  mortality  measure  is  computed 
for all countries around the world at three points 
in time—1990, 2000, and 2008. To understand 
what may drive these mortality risks, the same 
measure  is  computed  for  13  developed  coun-
tries  historically—in  some  cases  going  back  to 
1800.  Changes  in  the  relative  mortality  proﬁ le 
by age for developed countries affect the com-
putation of excess mortality in other countries. 
So, to better interpret patterns across countries 
and over time, the chapter always maintains the 
same “reference” for all computations. Assump-
tions built into this particular summary of the 
mortality data are discussed in the technical an-
nex to this chapter. 

These  two  computations  suggest  that  miss-
ing girls at birth and excess female mortality af-
ter birth add up to more than 6 million women 
a  year.  Of  these,  23  percent  are  never  born,  10 
percent  are  missing  in  early  childhood  (under 
ﬁ ve years), 21 percent in the reproductive years 
(15–49 years), and 38 percent in the age 60 and 
older group. These are the three most dangerous 

periods in a woman’s life after birth. But because 
women under 60 years also have the longest to 
live,  they  account  for  81  percent  of  the  annual 
years lost around the world to excess female mor-
tality. Excess male mortality accounts for 1 mil-
lion men a year, primarily concentrated in some 
post-transition countries (more than half) and 
some Latin American countries. Because of the 
greater life-years lost to mortality before 60 and 
because of greater sensitivity to the choice of the 
reference group in the older years (see technical 
annex), the focus of this chapter is on mortality 
risks below age 60, particularly in the three criti-
cal periods for women—at birth, in infancy and 
early childhood, and in the reproductive years.

While missing girls at birth are indeed con-
centrated  in  India  and  China,  consistent  with 
the  earlier  discussion,  excess  female  mortality 
after birth is highest in Sub-Saharan Africa, the 
only  region  where  the  numbers  are  going  up 
over time (table 3.2 and map 3.1). These three 
population groupings—China (with a popula-
tion of 1.3 billion), India (1.15 billion), and Sub-
Saharan Africa (0.8 billion)—together account 
for 87 percent of the world’s missing girls and 
excess female mortality.

But  the  age  proﬁ les  are  very  different.  In 
China, most excess female mortality is at birth. 
In India, missing girls at birth and excess female 
mortality in early childhood and in the repro-
ductive years each account for roughly a third. 
In Sub-Saharan Africa, excess female mortality 
in  the  reproductive  years  accounts  for  78  per-
cent in the HIV/AIDS countries and 55 percent 
in the low-HIV countries. Sub-Saharan Africa is 
the only region in the world where the numbers 
increased between 1990 and 2008—both abso-
lutely  (from  0.6  million  a  year  to  1.1  million) 
and as a fraction of the female population.

At  the  outset,  we  rule  out  one  explanation 
for  excess  female  mortality  and  missing  girls 
at  birth—lack  of  income  growth  (ﬁ gure  3.8). 
There is a strong relationship between income 
and  excess  female  mortality—Sweden,  unsur-
prisingly, has lower excess female mortality than 
Cameroon, but there is little or no relationship 
between the change in excess female mortality 
between 1990 and 2008 and economic growth 
in  the  same  period.  Some  countries  that  have 
grown (Angola and South Africa) have seen little 
change or a worsening in excess female mortal-
ity; others with less growth (Nepal) have seen a 
dramatic decline. The lack of a relationship be-

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

121

TABLE 3.2   Skewed sex ratios at birth and excess female mortality persist across the world, leading 

to females missing at birth and excess female mortality during childhood and the 
reproductive years

 

Missing girls at birth and excess female deaths (in thousands)

China

India

Sub-Saharan Africa

High HIV-prevalence countries

Low HIV-prevalence countries

South Asia (excluding India)

East Asia and Pacific (excluding China)

Middle East and North Africa

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

girls at birth

girls under 5

girls 5–14

women 15–49

women 50–59

   1990 2008
1,092 

  890 

1990
259 

2008
71 

1990
21 

2008
5 

 1990
208 

2008
56 

 1990
92 

 2008
30 

  265 

  42 

 

0 

  42 

 

 

 

 

 

0 

3 

5 

7 

0 

257 

53 

0 

53 

1 

4 

6 

14 

0 

428 

183 

6 

177 

99 

14 

13 

3 

11 

251 

203 

39 

163 

72 

7 

7 

1 

5 

94 

61 

5 

57 

32 

14 

4 

0 

3 

45 

77 

18 

59 

20 

9 

1 

0 

1 

388 

302 

38 

264 

176 

137 

43 

12 

20 

228 

751 

328 

423 

161 

113 

24 

4 

10 

81 

50 

4 

46 

37 

48 

15 

4 

17 

75 

99 

31 

68 

51 

46 

15 

3 

17 

Total
women
under 60

 1990
1,470 

1,255 

639 

53 

586 

346 

216 

80 

27 

51 

2008
1,254

856

1,182

416

766

305

179

52

23

33

Total

 1,212 

1,427 

1,010 

617 

230 

158 

1,286 

1,347 

343 

334 

4,082 

3,882

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from the World Health Organization 2010 and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs 2009.

Note: Totals do not necessarily add up due to rounding. 

tween gender disadvantages in mortality and in-
come growth is consistent with a large literature 
that comes to the same conclusion.58

To examine why there are missing girls at birth 
and excess female and male mortality and what 
can be done about it, we need alternative expla-
nations.  Given  the  age-grouping  of  disadvan-
tage around birth, infancy, and the reproductive 
years, each of which may have different causes, 
the chapter develops the arguments in turn.

Girls missing at birth—The India-China 
problem
The  problem  of  many  missing  girls  was  ﬁ rst 
documented,  separately,  by  Coale,  Das  Gupta, 
and Sen.59 Subsequent studies conﬁ rm the geo-
graphical variation within India and China—in 
India initially in the northern belt but gradually 
spreading south, and in China a gradual spread-
ing inland from the eastern coast.60

“

The fi rstborn must be male. After that 
it’s all the same.

Young man, rural Serbia

”

A deadly combination of three factors led to 
increasing numbers of unborn girls in the late 
20th century (ﬁ gure 3.9). First, fertility started 
dropping as female education and the returns to 
it in the labor force increased; in China, the one-
child policy reduced fertility. Second, ultrasound 
became widely available (allowing for prenatal 
sex determination), starting from big cities and 
moving  to  small  towns  and  rural  areas.  Third, 
the preference for sons remained unchanged—
families now want two children, but they want 
at least one son.

122 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

MAP 3.1   In China and India, the number of girls missing at birth remains high, and parts of Africa 

experienced large increases in excess female mortality during 1990–2008

MISSING AT BIRTH

UNBORN FEMALES IN 2008
PER 100,000 FEMALE BIRTHS

0–1,000
1,000–2,000
2,000–5,000
5,000–15,000
No data
Reference countries

Countries with the highest fractions
of unborn females in 2008

India
Serbia

Georgia

Azerbaijan

Armenia

China

0

5,000

10,000

15,000

Unborn female per 100,000 female births

Central African Republic

 
Countries with the highest fractions
of women missing in 2008

 

EXCESS FEMALE DEATHS AFTER BIRTH

500

EXCESS FEMALE DEATHS
IN 2008 PER 100,000 FEMALE
POPULATION

0–100
100–300
300–650
No data
Reference countries

Swaziland

Zimbabwe

550

650
Excess female deaths per 100,000 female population

600

CHANGE IN EXCESS FEMALE DEATHS

CHANGE IN EXCESS FEMALE
DEATHS PER 100,000 FEMALE
POPULATION, 1990–2008

-300–0
0–300
300–600
No data
Reference countries

Countries with
largest declines

Countries with
largest increases

Bangladesh

Bolivia

Nepal

-200

South Africa

Swaziland

Zimbabwe

0

200

400

Change in excess female deaths per 100,000 female population

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from World Health Organization 2010 and United Nations Department of Social and Economic Aﬀ airs 2009.

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

123

FIGURE 3.8   Income growth did not reduce excess female mortality during 1990–2008 in low- and middle-

 

,

0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e
n

l

 

 

i
 

e
g
n
a
h
c

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
e
a
m
e
f

l

 

income countries

Did income growth reduce excess female mortality during

1990−2008 in low- and middle-income countries?

There is no relationship 
between income growth
and excess mortality
in either age group

300

200

100

0

–100

–200

–.2

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

income growth, log

excess female mortality, ages 0–4
excess female mortality, ages 15–49

 

,

l

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
e
a
m
e
f
 
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

In South Africa and Angola,
income increased—and so
did excess female deaths

In Nepal, income
increased less 
dramatically, but
excess deaths declined

400

300

200

100

0 

1990 

left axis 

2000 

2008 

right axis 

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0 

 

a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
P
D
G

 

excess female mortality 
0–59 years, Angola 
excess female mortality 
0–59 years, Nepal 
excess female mortality 
0–59 years, South Africa 

income, Angola 

income, Nepal 

income, South Africa 

Source: Staﬀ  calculations based on data from World Development Indicators 2009; World Health Organization 2010; and United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Af-
fairs, Population Division 2009.

Note: Growth is deﬁ ned as changes in log GDP per capita during 1990–2008. Missing women numbers are expressed as a fraction of female population in relevant age group.

To  see  how  these  factors  play  out,  think  of 
an earlier time when every household had four 
children. In this scenario, if the ﬁ rst child was a 
girl, the likelihood would still be high that one 
of the remaining children would be a boy. But if 
households had only two children, and the ﬁ rst 
one was a girl, there was an even chance of hav-
ing  yet  another  girl—rather  than  the  son  they 
wanted. As ultrasound became available, so did 
the “solution”—if the unborn child was a girl, 
the parents could abort the child and try again.

Unfortunately, this is precisely what the data 
indicate.  In  the  absence  of  sex-selective  abor-
tion, the odds are even that the second child will 
be a boy or a girl independent of the sex of the 
ﬁ rst. The data show, however, that the probabil-
ity of the second child being a boy or a girl is 

even when the ﬁ rst child is a boy, but when the 
ﬁ rst child is a girl, the second child is much more 
likely to be a boy. This phenomenon has been 
demonstrated in China, the Republic of Korea, 
and India; for India, it is particularly strong for 
educated Hindu women in northern India.61 In 
addition, antenatal investments, like inoculation 
against tetanus, were higher when women were 
pregnant with boys rather than girls—and even 
higher when the ﬁ rst child was female.62

These  last  results  hold  not  only  for  north-
ern  India  but  also  for  Bangladesh,  China,  and 
Pakistan, suggesting that forms of disadvantage 
against unborn girls may be widespread across 
South  and  East  Asia.63  And  they  may  be  very 
hard to change: as in their own countries, Chi-
nese and Indians living in the United States show 

“

Sons would ensure continuation of their family, would take care of parents at old age 
and perform funeral rites when parents die.

Young woman, rural India

”

124 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.9   Why are so many girls missing at birth?

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

S o n   p r e f e r e n c e

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

MARKETS

HOUSEHOLDS
Prenatal sex
selection and
lower fertility

AGENCY

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

ENDOWMENTS

Unborn

Girls

Source: WDR 2012 team.

“

very similar patterns of sex selection in ﬁ rst and 
second births.64 

Not only does son preference affect the gen-
der composition of birth, it may also affect the 
way children already born are treated. One argu-
ment demonstrates the nuanced links between 
son preference and gender disadvantages for al-
ready born children.65

Take again the simple framework of son pref-
erence and instead of ﬁ xing fertility, let fertility 
itself be a matter of choice. In some families, the 
ﬁ rst child will be a son. If their “stopping” rule is 
the birth of a son, these will be single-child fam-

Lhamo was told that if she gave birth to a 
daughter again, he was going to leave her once 
and for all. Lhamo was soon conceived with her 
third child. He would often beat her, but she was 
still willing to take the chance of giving Dorji a 
son so that their lives would come back to 
normalcy.

Adult woman, Bhutan

”

ilies with one son. If the ﬁ rst child is a daughter, 
the family will have another child, stopping if it 
is a son and carrying on if it is a daughter. The 
result? Girls will disproportionately have many 
more siblings than boys.66 

One result of son preference is that girl chil-
dren receive less nutrition than boys in northern 
India  (but  not  worldwide,  as  nutritional  dif-
ferences show). Given the repercussions of son 
preference  on  the  different  number  of  siblings 
for boys and girls, could it be that some share of 
the female disadvantage stems from the number 
of  siblings  rather  than  from  overt  discrimina-
tion? As it turns out, once family size is appro-
priately controlled for, there is no female disad-
vantage in nutrition. That is, the entire observed 
difference in nutrition between boys and girls is 
attributable to the difference in the numbers of 
their  siblings.  Gender  disadvantage  in  the  un-
born child—manifest in fertility behavior—has 
no further impacts on the nutritional outcomes 
of the born child once fertility behavior is con-
trolled for.

In  a  similar  fashion,  families  may  wait  less 
time to have a second child following the birth 
of a girl than the birth of a boy. The desire to have 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

125

Nowadays, men and women are equal. 
But according to tradition, we still 
prefer having a son to carry on the 
family line.

Young man, rural Vietnam

”

 

“

a son following the birth of a girl may result in 
disadvantages for the born female, if the mother 
reduces  breast-feeding  to  increase  fertility  and 
hasten  conception.67  The  fundamental  insight 
from these ﬁ ndings is that preferences over the 
unborn  child  drive  gender  disadvantage—po-
tentially manifest in children already born.

The  intersection  between  son  preference, 
declining  fertility,  and  new  technologies  has 
added to the number of girls missing at birth 
and  may  well  disadvantage  children  already 
born  through  the  number  of  siblings  and  the 
timing  of  births.  Changes  in  informal  institu-
tions  and,  through  them,  household  behavior 
are key to resolving this problem. And it can be 
done. Korea, where the male-to-female ratio at 
birth ﬁ rst increased sharply and then declined, 
suggests  that  broad  normative  changes  across 
society brought about by industrialization and 
urbanization can ulti mately return sex ratios at 
birth to normal ranges.68

Excess female mortality in early childhood
What causes excess mortality among girls dur-
ing infancy and early childhood? One possible 
explanation that has received a lot of attention 
is  discrimination  by  parents  toward  girls.  Cer-
tainly,  in  parts  of  the  world  like  Afghanistan, 
China, northern India, and Pakistan, such dis-
crimination  is a  serious problem. Studies have 
shown delays in seeking medical care and lower 
expenditures for girls, and in the 1990s, even in a 
period of sharp economic growth, anthropomet-
ric outcomes for boys improved faster than for 
girls.69 An economic rationale for such discrimi-
nation is a link to the structure of returns—for 
instance, in districts within India, where the soil 
is amenable to higher female labor use in agri-
culture, excess mortality among females is lower 
than  the  average  in  India.70  Higher  women’s 
wages are associated with greater female mobil-
ity and authority, while higher male wages have 
the  opposite  effect.71  Beyond  economics,  the 

impact of kinship structures on the value placed 
on girls has also been advanced as the dominant 
hypothesis  for  why  excess  female  mortality  is 
seen in some societies but not others.72

Is  such  discrimination  against  girls  a  wide-
spread pattern linked to excess female mortality 
in early childhood? Perhaps, as was discovered 
in  Bangladesh  in  the  early  1970s  and  India  in 
the 1980s, girls are less likely to be vaccinated, 
less likely to be given medical care, and less likely 
to receive nutrition at home.73 But a compari-
son  of  countries  around  the  world  shows  two 
things. First, these differences are small or non-
existent  to  begin  with  (in  Sub-Saharan  Africa, 
for instance, it is the boys who suffer nutritional 
deprivation).  Second,  there  is  little  association 
between excess mortality among girls and disad-
vantages in vaccination, differential use of med-
ical  care,  or  differences  in  childhood  nutrition 
as measured through the heights and weights of 
boys and girls (ﬁ gure 3.10). Nor is there any as-
sociation with female labor force participation. 
These patterns too reﬂ ect similar ﬁ ndings in the 
previous literature.74

Even if households treat boys and girls simi-
larly, it could be the case that health care pro-
viders  might  discriminate  against  girls.  To  as-
sess this possibility, researchers observed more 
than  30,000  interactions  between  doctors  and 
patients in seven countries around the world—
Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, India, Mozambique, 
Paraguay, Rwanda, and Uganda—and recorded 
the time spent, questions asked, and examina-
tions  completed,  all  markers  of  medical  care 
that correlate with overall quality of care. Sur-
prisingly,  the  main  ﬁ nding  was  that  girls  and 
boys  are  treated  very  similarly  once  they  are 
taken  to  health  care  facilities.  There  were  no 
differences between boys and girls (or between 
women  and  men)  (ﬁ gure  3.11).  In  all  seven 
countries,  doctors  spent  the  same  time,  asked 
the  same  questions,  and  completed  the  same 
number  of  examinations  regardless  of  the  sex 
of the patient.75

If neither households nor providers discrim-
inate against girls, what is the source of excess 
female mortality in early childhood? Historical 
forensics provide the key to this puzzle. In the 
early  20th  century,  European  countries  faced 
the same patterns—no girls missing at birth but 
high excess mortality among girls in early child-
hood. Between 1900 and 1930, the excess mortal-
ity vanished in almost all of them (ﬁ gure 3.12). 

126 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.10   There is little or no gender disadvantage in 

vaccination rates, nutrition outcomes, or use of 
health services when a child falls sick

 

%

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 

 

%

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

80 
60 
40 
20 
0 

Respiratory illness: 

Taken to a health facility 

Boys disadvantaged 

Polio vaccination 

Boys disadvantaged 

Girls disadvantaged 

 

%

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 

0 

20 

60 
40 
boys, % 

80 

100 

0 

20 

Girls disadvantaged 

80 

100 

60 
40 
boys, % 

Stunting prevalence 

Measles vaccination 

Boys disadvantaged 

Girls disadvantaged 

Boys disadvantaged 

 

%

 
,
s
l
r
i
g

100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 

0 

20 

40 
60 
boys, % 

80 

100 

0 

20 

Girls disadvantaged 

80 

100 

40 
60 
boys, % 

Small differences do not explain the variation
in the fraction of excess deaths across countries

 

l

 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e
n

 

i
 

e
g
n
a
h
c

 

l

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
e
a
m
e
f
 
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p

,

60

40

20

0

–20

The coefficient b1 on the explanatory variable 
in the regression: Excess deaths = b1 x +b2 is 
close to zero and almost always insignificant.

stunting

health facility
use in case of
respiratory illness

measles

vaccination

polio

vaccination

female

labor force
participation

estimated regression coefficient
on explanatory variable X

95% confidence
interval

domestic hygiene practices. In the United States, 
clean water and sanitation accounted for the en-
tire decline in infant mortality during this time 
and in the disappearance of excess female mor-
tality in infancy.76

Epidemiological  changes  caused  by  these 
public health investments explain both declining 
infant mortality and the disappearance of excess 
female mortality in infancy and early childhood. 
Between the early 1900s and 1930, the share of 
infectious diseases as a cause of death declined, 
increasing the share of perinatal and congenital 
factors.77  Although  girls  were  (and  are)  more 
robust  than  boys  for  both  infectious  diseases 
and perinatal conditions, they are even more ro-
bust than boys for perinatal conditions relative 
to infectious diseases. Boys always had a disad-
vantage in mortality, and as infectious diseases 
declined, their disadvantage increased. Today, a 
high  burden  of  infectious  disease  in  countries 
where  poor  public  health  systems  do  not  pro-
vide clean water, sanitation, waste disposal and 
drainage, is part of the reason for higher relative 
female mortality risks in early childhood com-
pared with the rich countries.

If  this  institutional-biological  hypothesis 
were  true  today,  one  would  expect  to  see  less 
excess female mortality in countries with lower 
infant mortality. And that is indeed the case: the 
relationship  between  excess  mortality  for  girls 
and overall infant mortality is exactly the same 
in 2000 as it was in 1900 for the European coun-
tries  (see  ﬁ gure  3.12).  Bangladesh,  China,  and 
Vietnam, which have managed to reduce overall 
infant mortality through clean water and better 
sanitation, have also reduced the excess female 
mortality in infancy and early childhood. But in 
much of West Africa, there has been less focus 
on  clean  water  and  sanitation:  between  1990 
and 2005, the fraction of urban households with 
piped water actually declined from 50 percent to 
39 percent in 32 African countries. Not surpris-
ingly,  countries  like  Burkina  Faso  and  Nigeria 

Source: Staﬀ  calculations based on data from the World Health Organization 2010; United Nations, Depart-
ment of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs, Population Division 2009; World Development Indicators 2009; and 
Demographic Health Surveys 1985–2008. 

Note: Data for vaccination coverage and health service use were pooled over the years 1990–2008.

This  sharp  decline—after  virtually  no  change 
during the entire 19th century—was coinciden-
tal with large investments in public health, nota-
bly clean water and sanitation (broadly deﬁ ned 
to include waste disposal, drainage, toilets, and 
vector control), along with outreach to improve 

“

Before pollution, we could cook and 
drink the river water. Now oil palm 
pollution has spoiled our river . . . we 
have no choice but we have to drink 
the water from the river.

Adult woman, rural Papua New Guinea

”

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

127

FIGURE 3.11   Men and women, boys and girls, are treated the same when they visit health facilities
 Average period of time spent with practitioner at each visit and questions asked and examinations 
 
conducted by practitioner

a.  Children 

Average time spent

with patient (minutes)

% of essential questions

asked by practitioner

% of essential examinations
conducted by practitioner

Afghanistan 

Burkina Faso 

Mozambique 

Rwanda 

Tanzania 

7
6

7

9

59
58

No data available

17
18

29
28

No data available

No data available

No data available

19

25

20

27

7
6

71
69

47
50

48
45

Uganda

No data available

b.  Adults 

Average time spent

with patient (minutes)

% of essential questions

asked by practitioner

Afghanistan 

Burkina Faso 

Mozambique 

Rwanda 

Tanzania 

Uganda

7
6

17
16.5

17

15

33

37

57

61

No data available

13
14

9
8

17

14

female 

male 

Source: Ali and others 2011.
Note: There were no signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences between boys (men) and girls (women) conditional on disease.

83
85

88

80

No data available

% of essential examinations
conducted by practitioner

86
87

55

61

No data available

14
13

49

53

43
42

77
79

85
86

have seen a much slower decline in early child-
hood excess female mortality.

Bringing down mortality risks for boys and 
girls in low-income countries today is largely a 
question  of  providing  the  basic  public  health 

services  that  governments  in  most  European 
countries provided in the early part of the 20th 
century. Reducing the burden of infectious dis-
eases  will  produce  declines  in  child  mortality, 
more for girls than boys.

128 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.12   Levels of excess female childhood mortality in 
high-income countries in the early 1900s were 
similar to those of low- and middle-income 
countries today . . . 

 
,

 

,

l

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
e
a
m
e
f
 
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

4
–
1
 
s
e
g
a

 

Excess female 
mortality in childhood  
disappeared in Europe  
between 1900 and 1930

1,500

1,000

500

0

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Belgium 
England and Wales 
France 
Japan 
Norway 

Spain 
Switzerland 
Denmark 
Finland 

Italy 
Netherlands 
Portugal 
Sweden 

. . . and the excess female mortality declined with reduction in 

overall childhood mortality

 

l

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
e
a
m
e
f
 
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

,

1,500

1,000

500

0

–500

The two lines overlap

The relationship between excess 
female deaths and overall childhood 
mortality is the same today as it 
was in the early 1900s

0

5

10

15

20

childhood mortality rate

high-income countries, 1900–30
low- and middle-income countries, 2008

Sources: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from World Health Organization 2010; United Nations 
Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs 2009; and Human Mortality Database 2011, Max Planck Insti-
tute for Demographic Research, and University of Califormia, Berkeley.

Excess mortality in adulthood—Women
Excess female mortality also affects women ages 
15–60, particularly women in their reproductive 
years (ages 15–49) who live in low- and middle-
income countries. In this age group, excess female 
mortality has declined in absolute numbers and 
as a proportion of population in every region of 
the world except Sub-Saharan Africa, which di-
vides into two regions: the HIV/AIDS–affected 
countries,  where  excess  female  mortality  has 
increased even as a fraction of population; and 
those countries, mainly in Central and Western 
Africa,  where  HIV/AIDS  is  less  of  a  problem 
and where excess female mortality has declined, 
albeit  slowly.  Two  mechanisms  drive  excess 
mortality  in  the  reproductive  years—maternal 
mortality  and  morbidity  related  to  childbirth, 
and  HIV/AIDS.  Maternal  mortality  is  funda-
mentally different from excess female mortality 
at other ages in that, to reduce it, societies must 
focus  on  an  intrinsically  female  condition  and 
speciﬁ cally on improving the maternal health-
care system. Throughout this Report, “maternal 
mortality” implies not only death during child-
birth  but  also  concurrent  morbidities  brought 
on  by  the  experience  of  pregnancy  and  child-
birth. These include severe anemia (and its rela-
tionship with malaria) and obstetric ﬁ stula.78

As in early childhood, adult women in some 
populations  around  the  world  experience  sig-
niﬁ cant  discrimination  in  health  expenditures 
and health-seeking behavior. But, again as with 
early  childhood,  this  discrimination  does  not 
appear  to  be  systematic.  In  countries  ranging 
from India to Egypt to South Africa, a small bias 
favors women in overall health expenditure and 
sometimes  in  use  of  the  health  system  (chap-
ter 1). Clinical observations of practice in seven 
countries  were  also  unable  to  uncover  differ-
ences in the way men and women were treated 
by health providers (see ﬁ gure 3.11). While these 
ﬁ ndings could still be consistent with discrimi-
nation, due to biological differences and differ-
ent health needs, they also suggest that evidence 
of such discrimination will be difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd. 
In  contrast,  the  two  issues  discussed  next—
maternal  mortality  and  HIV/AIDs—have  very 
clear and obvious pathways to women’s health, 
particularly to their mortality.

Maternal mortality
In high-income countries, there were a total of 
about 1,900 maternal deaths in 2008. In India, 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

129

there  were  63,000,  and  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa, 
203,000 (56.7 percent of the global total). One 
of every 14 women in Somalia and Chad will die 
from causes related to childbirth. As a propor-
tion of all births, more women die in childbirth 
in India today than did in Sweden at the begin-
ning of the 1900s—and in Liberia today than in 
Sweden in the 17th century.79

Between 1930 and 1960, the maternal mor-
tality ratio—the risk of death for every birth—
fell signiﬁ cantly in developed countries (ﬁ gure 
3.13). The ratio began to drop sharply in the late 
1930s in most countries, driven in part by the 
introduction of sulfa drugs in 1936 and by an in-
crease in the number of institutional births with 
better care.80 The ratios then converged strongly 
across countries in the 1940s and 1950s—most 
countries  reached  modern  levels  in  the  early 
1960s; Italy, Japan, and Portugal reached those 
levels in the mid-1970s. Declines were sharper 
in  the  Anglo-Saxon  countries  relative  to  the 
Nordics, which already had low maternal mor-
tality rates in 1935. 

The  United  States  stands  out  as  the  coun-
try  with  the  highest  maternal  mortality  ratio 
for 1900–30, but like the others, sharp declines 
began  around  the  mid-1930s  and  fell  to  cur-
rent levels by 1960. These declines were brought 
about largely by simultaneous improvements in 
the medical system at the point of delivery and 
in services to pregnant women, and by shifts in 
expectations of where to deliver––from home to 
hospital.81

The  patterns  are  fully  reﬂ ected  in  changes 
in excess female mortality in the reproductive-
age groups for selected countries (ﬁ gure 3.14). 
For  these  countries,  excess  female  mortality  in 
adulthood remained fairly high until 1930 (with 

FIGURE 3.13   Maternal mortality ratios declined steeply in 

selected countries during 1930–60

large declines 
in the maternal
mortality rate
between 1930–60

800

500

400

200

0

,

 

s
h
t
r
i
b
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d

 
l

a
n
r
e
t
a
m

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Belgium
England and Wales
France
Japan
Norway

Source: Albanesi and Olivetti 2010.

year

Spain
Switzerland
Denmark
Finland

Italy
Netherlands
Portugal
Sweden

a spike downward coinciding with World War I 
and a peak in 1918 with the ﬂ u epidemic) and 
then declined sharply to zero between 1930 and 
1960.82 The late declines are precisely for coun-
tries—Italy, Japan, and Portugal—where mater-
nal mortality rate declines occurred latest.

For all countries in 1990–2008 and for high-
income countries with historical data, the basic 
pattern  remains  similar  with  higher  maternal 
mortality  ratios  associated  with  greater  excess 

“

Nobody in this village has access to drinking water. People bring water from a spring 
and a water pool that are at a 100–1,000 meter distance from the village. Those also 
dry out during some seasons and the children and especially the girls spend more than 
fi ve hours daily to bring water. . . . 

Between the neighboring villages, sometimes violence occurs over drinking water and 
residential places because there is not enough water for people and they don’t have 
shelters and they make homes for themselves in the desert. And they sometimes fi ght 
each other over this.

Adult man, rural Afghanistan

”

130 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.14   High income countries today had excess 
female mortality at the reproductive ages 
during the ﬁ rst half of the 20th century . . . 
 Excess mortality among women in 13 European 
countries, 1900–2000

 

,

0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

9
4
–
5
1
 
s
e
g
a

 
,

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
e
a
m
e
f
 
f
o

l

 

excess female 
mortality in the 
reproductive ages 
disappeared in 
Europe between 
1930 and 1960

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

World
War I

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Belgium 
England and Wales 
France 
Japan 
Norway 

Spain 
Switzerland 
Denmark 
Finland 

Italy 
Netherlands 
Portugal 
Sweden 

. . . and the excess mortality at all income levels declines with 
reductions in maternal mortality

 

,

0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

 

 

9
4
–
5
1
d
e
g
a
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
e
a
m
e
f

l

l

 

The relationship between excess 
female mortality at 15–49 and
maternal mortality has not
changed much over time

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

0

200

400

600

maternal deaths per 100,000 live births

Sources: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from World Health Organization 2010; United Nations 
Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs 2009; Human Mortality Database 2011, Max Planck Institute for 
Demographic Research, and University of California, Berkeley; and Albanesi and Olivetti 2010. 

female mortality in adulthood. Reducing mater-
nal mortality rates is thus critical for reducing 
excess female mortality in adulthood. This can 
be  done  in  one  of  two  ways—reducing  fertil-
ity  so  that  women  are  less  exposed  to  the  risk 
of death (including the risk from unsafe abor-
tions) or reducing the maternal mortality ratio 
(the risk of death for every birth).

Take  each  in  turn.  When  fertility  rates  are 
high, reductions in the rate will reduce the risk 
of dying from causes related to childbirth. Ma-
ternal mortality risks depend on the age of the 
mother (slightly higher in young ages than the 
average across age groups and then increasing 
in older ages in a “J” shape); parity, or number 
of children borne by a woman (the ﬁ rst preg-
nancy  and  higher  parities  increase  mortality 
risks  to  the  mother);  independent  cohort  ef-
fects  (mothers  born  in  cohorts  that  smoked 
more,  for  instance,  would  have  higher  risks); 
and  time  effects  (later  decades  imply  better 
medical care). In rich countries, changes in ma-
ternal age and shifting parity distributions ac-
counted for 18 percent of the decline in mater-
nal mortality.83 Studies in a limited number of 
low-income  countries  (typically  subnational) 
report similar estimated reductions of around 
25 percent, using models that eliminate births 
after  parity  ﬁ ve  and  those  outside  the  safest 
ages for birth (20 to 39). 84 So, changes in the 
age and parity structure of birth in high fertil-
ity  contexts  could  reduce  maternal  mortality 
by 20 percent or so.

The  studies  from  low-income  countries 
were  for  periods  when  total  fertility  rates 
were high—more than 6 births per woman in 
Bangladesh, for example. Today, fertility rates 
are  that  high  in  just  six  countries—Afghani-
stan,  Chad,  Niger,  Somalia,  Timor-Leste,  and 
Uganda.  Forty  countries  have  fertility  rates 
higher  than  4,  and  all  but Afghanistan,  Gua-
temala, Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste, and 
the Republic of Yemen are in Sub-Saharan Af-
rica.  For  the  most  part,  however,  fertility  has 
declined  dramatically  over  the  past  30  years 
in  most  low-  and  middle-income  countries. 
In countries with fertility at 3 or less, further 
shifts in the age and parity distributions may 
not have large impacts on the maternal mor-
tality  ratio.  Because  family  planning  policies 
account  for  10–15  percent  of  the  reductions 
when starting from initially high levels, these 
policies  could  continue  to  help  in  selected 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

131

FIGURE 3.15   What explains excess mortality among girls and women in the reproductive ages?

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

MARKETS

HOUSEHOLDS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS
Improve infrastructure
and human resources

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS
Excess female

deaths

Source: WDR 2012 team.

countries  but  are  unlikely  to  substantially 
reduce  the  number  of  women  who  die  from 
childbirth every year.85 The best way to reduce 
the unacceptably high number of women who 
die from childbirth (and related causes) every 
year in low-income countries will likely be re-
gion speciﬁ c and will depend both on fertility 
reductions and speciﬁ c policies to reduce the 
maternal mortality ratio (ﬁ gure 3.15). 

HIV/AIDS
In  addition  to  maternal  mortality,  the  HIV/
AIDS epidemic is contributing to excess female 
mortality in Africa (ﬁ gure 3.16). In Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  women  account  for  60  percent  of  all 
adult HIV infections,86 with the gender gap in 
prevalence largest for younger adults. The ratio 
of female to male prevalence for 15–24 year olds 
is 2.4 across Sub-Saharan Africa.87 Comparisons 
of  age-infection  proﬁ les  for  women  and  men 
show that after age 34, HIV prevalence rates are 
similar for men and women.88

Biology and behavior have both contributed 
to greater prevalence of HIV among women—
referred  to  as  the  “feminization  of  AIDS.”89 

Women  are  biologically  1.2  times  more  likely 
to acquire the virus because women’s bodies are 
more susceptible to infection than men. Sexu-
ally active young women, whose bodies are still 
developing, may be especially vulnerable. Sexu-
ally transmitted diseases (such as herpes simplex 
virus type 2) that affect men and women differ-
ently also contribute to the greater susceptibility 
of  women  to  HIV  infection.90 With  respect  to 
behavior, women date and marry men who are 
a few years older, which also contributes to a dif-
ferential age-gradient among men and women 
in HIV infection rates.

Without treatment, HIV infection develops 
into AIDS and, after 7–10 years, death. But the 
HIV/AIDS  link  to  excess  female  mortality  in 
 Africa  is  not  relevant  for  all  countries  in  the 
region,  particularly  those  in  Central  and West 
Africa. It is concentrated among the set of high-
prevalence  countries  in  Southern  Africa  and 
parts  of  East  Africa,  which  bear  a  dispropor-
tionate share of the burden of AIDS in Africa as 
well as globally (box 3.2).

Not only has HIV/AIDS hit women the hard-
est, but coping with the crisis has had system-

132 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 3.16   Excess female mortality by age in four countries with high HIV prevalence

a.  Botswana

b.  Kenya

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

.8 

.6 

.4 

.2 

0

10 

5 

0 

–5 

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

10 

5 

0 

–5 

0

20 

age, years 

40 

60 

0 

20 

40 

60 

age, years 

c.  Uganda

d.  South Africa

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

20 

15 

10 

5 

0 

–5 

0 

20 

age, years 

40 

60 

0 

20 

40 

60 

age, years 

1990 

2000 

2008 

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from World Health Organization 2010 and United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs 2009.

wide impacts on the delivery of health services. 
Prenatal care, care during birth, and children’s 
vaccination rates have suffered where HIV rates 
are the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa.91

Encouragingly, these patterns are now chang-
ing, and so will excess female mortality, both as 
life-prolonging  treatment  becomes  available 
and as incidence rates change. As of end-2009, 
an  estimated  5.2  million  people  in  low-  and 
middle-income  countries  were  receiving  anti-
retroviral  therapy  (ART)  and  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  nearly  37  percent  of  people  in  need  of 
treatment could obtain those life-saving medi-
cines.92 In the countries with the highest preva-
lence,  treatment  coverage  varies:  83  percent  in 
Botswana, 48 percent in Malawi, 36 percent in 
South Africa, 43 percent in Uganda, 68 percent 
in  Zambia,  and  34  percent  in  Zimbabwe.  This 

coverage is an extraordinary achievement: as re-
cently as 2003, only a few privileged HIV/AIDS 
patients had access to ART in Africa. And it will 
reduce the number of deaths from HIV/AIDS—
and  decrease  female  mortality  rates  in  adult-
hood.  Botswana,  Kenya,  and  Uganda—which 
have  high  ART  coverage  rates—experienced  a 
reduction  in  excess  female  mortality  between 
2000 and 2008 (although the levels are still sig-
niﬁ cantly above those in 1990). In contrast, with 
a  high  HIV  prevalence,  large  population,  and 
slower  expansion  of  ART,  South  Africa  saw  a 
steady increase in excess female mortality from 
1990 to 2000 and a further increase to 2008.

Excess mortality in adulthood—Men
In  some  countries,  the  analysis  illustrates  pat-
terns of excess male mortality. In the formerly 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

133

FIGURE 3.17   In some countries, there is excess male mortality

Eritrea 

Mexico 

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

0 

–2 

–4 

–6 

0 

–20 

–40 

–60 

4 

2 

0 

–2 

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

0 

20 

age, years 

40 

60 

0 

20 

Russian Federation 

40 

60 

age, years 

Thailand 

 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e

l

 

5 

0 

–5 

–10 

0 

20 

age, years 

40 

60 

0 

20 

40 

60 

age, years 

1990 

2000 

2008 

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on data from World Health Organization 2010 and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs 2009. 
Note: A value on the y axis less than zero implies excess male mortality. For example, at age 20, about 5,000 excess male deaths occurred in Eritrea in 1990.

socialist countries, in countries and regions with 
high rates of violent crime or periods of war and 
conﬂ ict, and in those experiencing localized epi-
demics of HIV in parts of the male population, 
men die at a signiﬁ cantly higher rate relative to 
men in high-income countries, after accounting 
for overall mortality conditions in their country 
of residence.

First,  men  are  the  immediate  victims  of 
armed conﬂ ict. A study of conﬂ icts in 13 coun-
tries  during  1955–2002  found  that  81  percent 
of violent war deaths were among males.93 An 
example is Eritrea, where a 30-year war of inde-
pendence ended in 1991. Figure 3.17 illustrates 
the  signiﬁ cant  excess  male  mortality  that  oc-
curred there in the last full year of the war. 

Outside  situations  of  warfare,  violence  re-
mains gendered: men stand charged for 80–90 
percent of all violent crimes in Australia, Europe 
and the United States, and the higher prevalence 
of male criminal behavior translates into higher 
incarceration rates for men.94 More male deaths 
result from homicide than from armed conﬂ ict. 
Of all violent deaths globally in 2000, just un-
der  a  third  were  victims  of  homicide,  the  vast 
majority  among  men.  Latin  America  had  the 
highest homicide rate (27.5 per 100,000), more 
than three times the rate reported in any other 
region.  Mexico,  in  particular,  as  a  substantial 
transit  and  production  hub  for  cocaine,  mari-
juana, and other illicit drugs, experienced most 
of the region’s drug-related violence.95

134 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Most victims of homicide in Latin America 
are young males from low socioeconomic back-
grounds, and rates peak among males between 
the  ages  of  15  and  24  years.96  In  addition  to 
its  relation  with  drugs  and  turf  battles  among 
competitive  cartels,  violence  in  Latin  America 
has also been linked to ideals about masculin-
ity that force men to confront others when chal-
lenged.  Studies  of  youth  violence  in  República 
Bolivariana de Venezuela, for example, show the 
importance  among  males  of  ‘‘earning’’  respect 
in front of others, and acts of violence are one 
way  to  achieve  this  status.97  Excess  male  mor-
tality in Latin American countries is precisely in 
the  20–40  age  group  where  such  behavior  be-
comes salient. 

Second, the formerly socialist countries are the 
location of a stark male disadvantage in health. 
In addition to the economic and social upheavals 
the populations of many of these countries en-
dured, they also experienced sharply rising death 
rates—the only region other than Sub-Saharan 
Africa to do so during the last three decades. In 
Russia, male life expectancy at birth declined by 
6.6 years between 1989 and 1994 (from 64.2 to 
57.6 years), and prime age men were hit hardest. 
Studies  have  identiﬁ ed  increased  alcohol  con-
sumption and psychosocial stress, likely brought 
on by changes in the economic environment and 
weakening social safety nets, as the primary fac-
tors causing the spike in mortality among men.98 
More broadly, deaths and disability rates related 
to  alcohol  and  substance  abuse  are  higher  for 
men than for women across the world.99

In Thailand, male mortality in the late 1980s 
rose as the ﬁ rst wave of the HIV epidemic struck 
intravenous drug users, mostly men. Because the 
epidemic diffused into the general heterosexual 
population  much  later,  from  commercial  sex 
workers to their clients, and then from clients to 
their spouses, the peak in mortality among men 
occurred earlier and reached a higher level than 
among women.100 In addition, proportionately 
more women (53 percent) received antiretrovi-
ral  therapy  than  men,  who  typically  presented 
with a more advanced stage of the disease than 
women.101 Studies note the role of social norms 
that  condoned  risky  sexual  behavior  among 
men, for whom visits to commercial sex work-
ers before and after marriage, often in the com-
pany of peers, were widely accepted.102 Women, 
by contrast, were expected to be abstinent before 
marriage and faithful afterward.103 

Higher  male  mortality,  whether  from  sub-
stance use, violent crime, or risky sexual behav-
ior,  is  not  a  feature  of  these  low-  and  middle-
income  settings  alone.  These  behaviors  also 
prevail  among  men  across  the  industrialized 
world,  where  women  live  on  average  5  to  10 
years longer than men. This female advantage in 
longevity  is  not  purely  genetic  (and  where  ge-
netic factors play a role, they continue to be mal-
leable). Studies show that differences in mortal-
ity are sensitive to environmental factors. Men 
smoke  more  than  women,  have  poorer  diets, 
and internalize stress differently. Improvements 
along  any  of  these  dimensions  would  narrow 
the gender gap in life expectancy.

This ﬁ nding raises a more pertinent question: 
What  are  the  factors  that  mediate  men’s  risk-
taking, substance use, and increased health risks? 
Do  societies  condone  these  behaviors  among 
men, because they reﬂ ect underlying ideals about 
“masculinity”  or  “manliness,”  at  least  up  to  a 
certain point? A growing body of literature sug-
gests this might indeed be the case, and at least 
in the high-income countries health systems have 
started to emphasize both “behavior” change and 
institutional improvements. Although policy le-
vers to effect behavioral change are multifaceted 
and  difﬁ cult  to  pinpoint  (after  all,  they  require 
a  shift  from  understanding  the  body  to  under-
standing the brain), the success of antismoking 
campaigns in the West suggests that this challenge 
is now being addressed around the world.104

Poor institutions and bad default options
To  repeat:  missing  girls  at  birth  and  excess  fe-
male mortality below the age of 60 account for 
nearly  3.9  million  women  a  year.  Excess  male 
mortality, primarily resulting from conﬂ ict and 
risky behavior, also leads to unnecessary deaths. 
There has been little change in the numbers in 
the past three decades, and in several countries 
in Sub-Saharan Africa, mortality risks are wors-
ening. The solutions for reducing female mor-
tality  risks  after  birth  are  largely  institutional: 
clean water and sanitation for infancy and early 
childhood, and better care for expectant moth-
ers, and reductions in HIV/AIDS and improved 
family planning services in some countries for 
the reproductive years.

Skeptics may question why a century of in-
creased medical knowledge and better medical 
care has not reduced the salience of the institu-
tional provision of clean water and sanitation or 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

135

BOX 3.2  Four Africas

Between  1980  and  2000,  school  enrollments  in  most  of  Sub-
Saharan Africa increased and mortality in early childhood decreased 
(albeit more slowly than in other low-income countries), but mor-
tality  risks  for  adults  increased.  Data  from  the  Demographic  and 
Health Surveys show that the increases were largest among men 
with  less  than  primary  education—although  mortality  increased 
for both men and women and for those with and without primary 
schooling.a Ten years later, after a period of rapid growth in many 
African  countries,  where  do  mortality  risks  stand?  And  how  does 
Sub-Saharan Africa compare with countries in South Asia, such as 
Afghanistan, India, and Pakistan, usually thought of as places with 
high  gender  discrimination?  There  are  now  four  Africas,  each  of 
which has a diff erent eff ect on women’s ability to acquire and enjoy 
a  healthy  life:  progressive  countries  throughout  the  continent, 
where education levels are high and mortality risks low; the HIV/
AIDS Africa, primarily in the South; confl ict countries like Eritrea and 
Liberia; and, curiously, West and Central Africa.

Progressive Africa. Countries such as Ethiopia, Ghana, Madagas-
car, and Togo have largely escaped the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Mortal-
ity  rates  of  children  under  age  fi ve  are  around  100  per  1,000  live 
births  (under  76  in  Ghana).  Excess  female  mortality  after  birth  is 
lower, and school enrollments are relatively high. Reductions in fer-
tility rates have decreased exposure to mortality risks during child-
birth; total fertility rates are now between 4 and 5. In health and 
education,  these  countries  look  like  Pakistan  but  with  somewhat 
higher  enrollments  at  the  primary  school  level.  Fertility  rates  are 
still higher than in India (2.7) and Pakistan (3.9), as are under-fi ve 
mortality rates. 

Confl ict Africa: Sub-Saharan Africa has experienced two types of 
confl icts over the past three decades. During the 1980s and 1990s, 
outright war in countries like Eritrea and Liberia claimed the lives of 
many young men. Except for periodic fl are-ups, these are decreas-
ing over time. Yet the eff ects last. In Bargblor Town in Liberia, no one 
has access to electricity, piped water, public stand pipes, or a sew-
age system. There is no public transport, and the nearest hospital 
takes approximately 3½ hours to reach by foot. In an emergency, 
women report having to run or walk to the hospital. Children who 
die in the hospital are carried home to their village to be buried. In 
other  countries,  widespread  civil  confl ict  continues  to  extract  a 
heavy toll among women. A recent study suggests that in the Dem-
ocratic  Republic  of  Congo,  29  of  every  1,000  women  were  raped 
between  2006  and  2007—58  times  the  annual  rate  in  the  United 
States.b Excess female mortality increased between 1980 and 2008. 
Total fertility rates hover between 5 and 6, under-fi ve mortality rates 

Men are just like us, we all go through this hell 
together.

Adult woman, Liberia

“ ”

are  between  150  and  200  per  1,000  live  births,  and  while  school 
enrollments have increased in recent years, they are still low.

HIV/AIDS Africa: The third Africa consists of countries with high 
HIV/AIDS  prevalence.  At  the  end  of  2009,  in  countries  such  as 
Botswana,  Lesotho,  Swaziland,  South  Africa,  Zambia,  and  Zim-
babwe,  about  one  in  six  to  one  in  four  adults  between  the  ages 
of 15 and 49 were living with HIV/AIDS. Mortality risks during early 
childhood,  school  enrollments,  and  fertility  rates  are  similar  to 
those in India today. In 1990, mortality profi les for men and women 
in Botswana and South Africa were similar to those in high-income 
countries  today.  But  by  2000,  mortality  risks  increased  in  adult-
hood, more so for women. In 1980, mortality risks were higher for 
more educated men, while women with more schooling and both 
men  and  women  in  urban  areas  had  a  mortality  advantage.  By 
2000–04, less educated men and women had higher mortality risks 
than their more educated counterparts, and mortality rates among 
both men and women in rural areas were equal to those of their 
urban counterparts. 

“

The worst abuse happening today is when 
a man infects a woman with HIV/AIDS . . . 
Unprotected sex causes fi ghts between a 
man and a woman, because a woman would 
say she wants to use condom but a man 
would refuse.

Adult woman, South Africa

”

Central and West Africa:  The  real  puzzles  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa 
are the Central and West African countries, including Burkina Faso, 
Chad, Mali, Niger, and Nigeria, among others (Somalia is very similar 
to these countries). Except Ghana and Senegal, many of these coun-
tries have seen either no change or a worsening of overall mortality 
risks during this time. In these countries, mortality risks for women 
have  systematically  increased.  Women  with  more  than  primary 
schooling  have  seen  the  greatest  increase  in  the  risk  of  dying, 
although even in 2000, urban and educated women still had lower 
mortality than other groups. Today, Burkina Faso, the Central Afri-
can  Republic,  Chad,  Mali,  Niger,  and  Nigeria  look  very  much  like 
Afghanistan in their mortality risks, fertility rates, and girls’ school-
ing. In these countries, mortality under the age of fi ve ranges from 
170 to 220 (Afghanistan is higher, at 257), total fertility rates range 
from 4.5 to above 7 (Afghanistan is 6.6), and adult mortality risks are 
virtually the same as those in Afghanistan. Their enrollments in pri-
mary and secondary school also mirror the Afghan data.

These fi ndings are puzzling because the countries in this group 
have  little  in  common.  Some  are  landlocked,  some  coastal;  some 
are  anglophone,  others  francophone;  some  fast-growing,  others 
slow-growing, and some have seen confl ict and some have not. The 

136 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 3.2  Four Africas (continued) 

one  thing  they  do  have  in  common  is  that  women’s  livelihoods, 
already weak, are deteriorating. 

The four Africas highlight the dramatic eff ects of HIV/AIDS and 
confl ict—and  the  fact  that  poor  institutions  and  service  delivery 
can harm women just as much, or even more, than outright gender 
discrimination. In determining where the international community 
should focus, it is worth pointing out just how little is known about 

the  continent,  particularly  Central  and  West  Africa.  Of  all  papers 
published  in  the  top  202  economics  journals  between  1985  and 
2004, 149 papers were on Pakistan and 1,093 on India—but there 
were no papers on the Central African Republic, 1 on Chad, 14 on 
Benin, 2 on Guinea Bissau, and 20 on Niger. Only for Burkina Faso 
(47) and Nigeria (148) do the numbers start picking up. Before decid-
ing what to do, the global community should seek to understand 
what is going on.c

a.  de Walque and Filmer 2011.
b. Peterman, Palermo, and Bredenkamp 2011; Shannon 2010.
c.  Das and others 2009.

better maternal care. Even without clean water, 
parents  now  know  to  boil  water  before  giving 
it to children. Even when children get diarrhea, 
most parents know how to treat them. House-
holds can always take pregnant mothers to hos-
pitals. These kinds of private solutions run into 
two problems. First, private actions do not take 
into  account  the  fact  that  sick  children  infect 
other children as well. These “externalities” for 
infectious diseases generate well known under-
investments in private behavior. 

Second, while private actions work well when 
there are few key choices to be made, reality can 
be very different. Poor people around the world 
are forced to make many, many choices—most 
of them bad—every time a child falls sick: where 
do  they  get  ﬁ rewood  to  boil  the  water,  where 
should they get sugar, should they take the child 
to the doctor who could be ﬁ ve hours away, how 
much will the doctor charge, should the mother 
wait for the husband if the child needs to be car-
ried?  Each  choice  can  have  devastating  conse-
quences if things don’t pan out. 

Poor people everywhere have to choose and 
make  many  decisions  about  many  things  that 
richer people take for granted every day. When 
institutions  are  bad,  so  are  people’s  default 
choices—and “free to choose” becomes “forced 
to choose.” Under these circumstances, many ill-
nesses and many life choices create excess female 
mortality.

To illustrate these points, look at this example 
of providing oral rehydration solution to a sick 
child in a poor village:

The tall man pointed to the young woman 
suckling  her  baby  and  said,  “Look,  look 

there—that  baby  is  burning  with  a  fever. 
I walked all the way yesterday to a nearby 
town to get a pill. I spent whatever money 
I  had  earned  in  the  town  yesterday  and 
trudged back late at night, but the pill has 
made  no  difference.”  I  touched  the  baby’s 
forehead—it was burning and he was suck-
ing at the breast desperately but the mother 
did not seem to have much milk. I asked the 
mother if she had eaten anything. Now the 
others joined in the conversation and said 
that they were waiting for some of the men 
to return. There was no food in the house. 
They  would  cook  something  if  the  men 
managed to earn some rice or some coarse 
grain.  Concerned  about  the  baby’s  condi-
tion, I asked if they knew about oral rehy-
dration  solution. They  did  not  know  any-
thing about it—the ANM (Auxiliary Nurse 
Midwife) never came up to the hamlet.. . . .
The Sarpanch (headman) who was ac-
companying me was getting quite defensive. 
He said if these people do not come down, if 
they do not tell us what troubles them, how 
can we help them? I asked the Sarpanch to 
explain to the young mother and the older 
woman sitting next to her how important it 
was for the baby to receive ﬂ uids. In his dia-
lect,  he  began  to  explain. “You  have  some 
salt in the house, don’t you? Well take this 
much  sugar,  put  in  this  much  water  and 
boil it and then put a pinch of salt in it and 
squeeze a few drops of lemon. No sugar in 
the  house?  Yes,  but  go  down  to  someone 
on  the  lower  hamlet—they  may  not  give 
you  sugar  if  it  is  for  yourself,  but  if  you 
say that it is needed to save the life of the 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

137

child, they will surely give you a ﬁ stful.” The 
woman  nodded.  “Where  will  you  get  the 
water from?” I asked. Now a new problem 
arose, for the nearest pump was not work-
ing.  They  were  all  drinking  water  from  a 
stream nearby that was stagnant and dirty. 
The  Sarpanch  told  the  baby’s  grandfather 
that  the  water  must  be  boiled  and  cooled. 
I  was  beginning  to  see  the  hopelessness  of 
the situation. No sugar, no source of clean 
drinking water, and a shortage of fuel. But 
the man who was inebriated again got ag-
gressive, “Whatever you say, we will not go 
to anyone’s door to beg.” The women were 
listening more intently and I thought they 
intended  to  follow  it  up. “But  do  not  just 
feed it to him all at once,” I said, “give it in 
small sips.” (How shall I demonstrate that?) 
The woman took a leaf, folded it in a kind 
of spoon and said, “like this?” The Sarpanch 
promised to help by getting a packet of oral 
rehydration solution.105

This  is  not  an  isolated  story.  Take  maternal 
mortality.  Technically,  much  maternal  mortal-
ity can be reduced if treatment is prompt and 
adequate.  Yet  that  is  easier  said  than  done.  A 
pathbreaking  study  from  Ghana,  Nigeria,  and 
Sierra Leone illustrates that even when women 
are  taken  to  hospitals,  delays  in  receiving  care 
can lead to devastating outcomes:

Today, Mary, the lady who helps us in the 
house, came late to work. I told her off for 
being late and asked why. She said that one 
of her townswomen . . . had died in the hos-
pital while giving birth to a baby. This was 
her ﬁ fth delivery. She was not from a far off 
village but from Sokoto city itself. She had 
not gone too late to hospital, but rather had 
gone on time. . . . By the time they found a 
vehicle  to  go  to  hospital,  by  the  time  they 
struggled to get her an admission card, by 
the time she was admitted, by the time her 
ﬁ le was made up, by the time the midwife 
was called, by the time the midwife ﬁ nished 
eating, by the time the midwife came, by the 
time  the  husband  went  and  bought  some 
gloves, by the time the gloves were brought 
to the hospital, by the time the midwife was 
called, by the time the midwife came, by the 
time the midwife examined the woman, by 
the time the bleeding started . . . by the time 

the doctor was called, by the time the doctor 
could be found, by the time the ambulance 
went to ﬁ nd the doctor, by the time the doc-
tor came, by the time the husband went out 
to buy drugs, IV set, drip, and bottle of ether, 
by the time the husband went round to look 
for blood bags all round town, by the time 
the husband found one and by the time the 
husband  begged  the  pharmacist  to  reduce 
the prices since he had already spent all his 
money on the swabs, dressings, drugs, and 
ﬂ uids,  by  the  time  the  hematologist  was 
called,  by  the  time  the  hematologist  came 
and  took  blood  from  the  poor  tired  hus-
band  .  .  .  by  the  time  the  day  and  night 
nurses  changed  duty,  by  the  time  the  day 
and night doctors changed duty, by the time 
the  midwife  came  again,  by  the  time  the 
doctor  came,  by  the  time  the  t’s  had  been 
properly crossed and all the i’s dotted and 
the  husband  signed  the  consent  form,  the 
woman died. Today the husband wanted to 
sell  the  drugs  and  other  things  they  never 
used to be able to carry the body of his wife 
back to their village but he could never trace 
[the body] again in the hospital.” 106

Every  step  of  the  way  to  delivering  a  baby 
safely is fraught with problems, beginning with 
the  recognition  of  danger  signs.107  Even  when 
danger  signs  are  recognized,  families “are  also 
aware that there is not much the medical facil-
ity can do for her when there is no trained doc-
tor  or  nurse-midwife,  when  blood  shortages 
are  regular,  and  when  equipment  is  frequently 
broken. People do not bother to seek care when 
they know that they probably will not be cured, 
that they are even likely to die in the hospital.”108 
Even  the  ﬁ rst  stage  of  delay—the  detection  of 
danger  signs—is  unlikely  in  medical  facilities. 
For  instance,  a  study  of  provider  knowledge 
of  preeclampsia—a  life-threatening  condition 
of high blood pressure in pregnancy—showed 
that fewer than 25 percent of providers surveyed 
would  have  referred  a  textbook  case  of  such  a 
condition to a hospital.109 Nor are these prob-
lems restricted to maternal mortality: a study of 
malaria deaths, for instance, showed that 75 per-
cent had received care from health care provid-
ers, and some from multiple sources.110

The  returns  to  solving  these  problems  are 
large. The poorest 40 percent in Africa have lim-
ited access to safe drinking water and are most 

138 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

likely  to  use  contaminated  water  sources.111 
Treatment at the point of use has a large impact 
in  reducing  diarrhea,  with  similar  impacts  for 
hand washing and sanitation (water treatment 
at source is less effective because of recontami-
nation). Increasing the coverage of piped water 
and sanitation in urban Argentina reduced dis-
eases associated with dirty water and resulted in 
an 8 percent decline in child mortality.112 Simi-
larly, access to clean water in the United States 
at the turn of the 20th century led to nearly half 
the  dramatic  mortality  reduction  in  the  coun-
try then, three-quarters of the infant mortality 
reduction, and two-thirds of the child mortal-
ity reduction.113 And the returns are higher for 
girls.  A  randomized  evaluation  of  water  treat-
ment at source showed declines in diarrhea inci-
dence only among girls under age of three.114

These ﬁ ndings have generated debate about 
the relative beneﬁ ts of different types of water 
treatment and the willingness of households to 
pay for clean water. To an outsider, not steeped 
in the nuances of clean water, this debate is far 
removed from the historical choices by today’s 
rich countries. 

Consider a randomized evaluation of water 
treatment in Kenya: households were not willing 
to walk 3.5 minutes more to access clean water.115 
One  explanation  could  be  that  learning  about 
the impacts of clean water is just very hard. Even 
if  households  fully  understood  the  etiology  of 
diarrheal diseases, the small reduction in over-
all disease burden and the lack of an impact on 
nutritional  outcomes  could  make  it  very  difﬁ -
cult for an individual household to “infer” that 
clean  water  led  to  better  health  outcomes  (for 
researchers, this is precisely why the impact of 
any  intervention  on  mortality  is  impossible  to 
detect unless samples are huge—certainly much 
larger than what a household would have access 
to). In addition, it is difﬁ cult for individuals to 
handle rational calculations when probabilities 
are small and the payoffs are huge. 

An alternative, the historical pattern, is just to 
provide clean water at the point of use through 
piped  delivery,  ensuring  that  the  particular 
choices households make in uncertain environ-
ments with poor learning and difﬁ cult evalua-
tive models are irrelevant—whether for how to 
differentially  treat  males  and  females,  or  what 
particular  water  source  to  use.  Although  this 
solution is often deemed to be “too” expensive, 
it is never clear what the expense is compared 

with: in the United States the social rate of re-
turn for the provision of clean water was 23 to 
1, once the costs of mortality were taken into ac-
count.116 Clean water is known to dramatically 
reduce  the  burden  of  infectious  diseases;  the 
argument  here  is  that  it  will  also  dramatically 
reduce the burden of excess mortality in infancy 
and early childhood for girls.

Similarly, to reduce maternal mortality, the 
entire  system  needs  to  work.  Women  need 
 folic  acid  before  their  pregnancy,  antenatal 
 visits,  identiﬁ cation  of  potentially  dangerous 
conditions,  institutionalized  delivery,  and  a 
functioning hospital. Again, the myriad choices 
that the current system imposes on households 
(which hospital, where do I get the blood, where 
do I get the medicines, how should I get to the 
doctor?) need to be taken out of the equation. 
These institutional solutions reduce the choices 
that people make and move them from a situ-
ation  where  they  are  forced  to  choose  to  one 
where they are free to choose.

Of course, there is a question of whether in-
stitutional improvements alone will make a dif-
ference even in regions where discrimination is 
salient, as in parts of South Asia. Although im-
provements in institutions alone may not go all 
the way, they will deﬁ nitely help. That is partly 
because when households have clean water, the 
question  of  whether  to  boil  the  water  when  a 
boy  is  sick  versus  when  a  girl  is  sick  just  does 
not  arise.  But  in  addition,  the  link  between 
discrimination  and  mortality  does  not  require 
households to treat girls and boys in vastly dif-
ferent  ways.  Tiny  differences  in  the  ways  that 
boys and girls are treated can lead eventually to 
large disadvantages in mortality—precisely be-
cause, at a certain time, a deadly irreversibility 
sets in. Given that children fall sick 50–70 times 
between birth and age ﬁ ve in a country like In-
dia, actions that keep boys alive 99.997 percent 
of the time and girls 99.992 percent of the time 
when  they  fall  sick  can  account  for  the  entire 
mortality differential of 11 percent for boys ver-
sus  13  percent  for  girls  in  infancy.  In  contexts 
where  discrimination  plays  out  in  these  small 
disadvantages, institutions could solve most of 
the problems—not by reducing discrimination 
per se, but by making it irrelevant.

How  institutions  responsible  for  improving 
public  health  through  clean  water,  sanitation, 
and maternal care can be—and have been—im-
proved is discussed further in chapter 7.

 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

139

TECHNICAL ANNEX 3.1

Computing the ﬂ ow of missing girls 
at birth and excess female mortality 
after birth
This Report uses two measures: missing girls at 
birth  and  excess  female  mortality  after  birth. 
Missing girls at birth are computed by compar-
ing  the  sex  ratio  at  birth  with  the  sex  ratio  in 
comparable  populations  with  no  discrimina-
tion—typically, high-income countries, and for 
Sub-Saharan  Africa,  black  populations  in  the 
United States.117 Excess female mortality is com-
puted  by  comparing  the  ratio  of  male-female 
mortality in every country and at every age with 
the  ratio  of  male-female  mortality  in  high-
income  countries  at  the  same  age  in  2000.118 
This  gives  the  excess  female  mortality  at  any 
given age; all ages are then added up, either by 
age categories or over the life course to provide 
the accompanying estimates. The problem of ex-
cess female mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa that 
this measure shows has been discussed in the lit-
erature.119 We discuss the assumptions required 
for this method, and highlight issues that could 
arise.

A  natural  interpretation  of  such  a  compu-
tation of excess female mortality invokes com-
parisons with a “reference” group of countries. 
Another  interpretation  is  that  we  summarize 
functions  of  mortality  proﬁ les  of  women  and 
men by age into a single number by (a) assum-
ing a functional form summarizing the relative 
risks  of  men  and  women  at  every  age  and  (b) 
weighting  each  of  these  relative  risks  at  every 
age. Therefore, we are interested in measures like 
∑wt.h[g(mena),  q(womena)]  with  the  summa-
tion over all ages. The ﬁ rst data reduction is the 
functional form, h[g(mena), q(womena]=mena/
womena. The second reduction is that the set of 
weights at every age, wi are the ratios of male to 
female mortalities in high-income countries.

Figure 5A.1 plots relative mortality risks for 
men and women at every age in ﬁ ve contexts—
the  “reference”  high-income  countries;  Sub-
Saharan Africa, India, China, and the Russian 
Federation.  For  the  reference  high-income 
countries,  the  rates  at  which  men  die  relative 
to  women  are  similar  in  early  childhood,  in-
crease  steeply  with  a  peak  at  age  20  and  then 
level off with a slight hump at 60. Overall mor-
tality  rates  between  15  and  60  are  very  low 
in the high-income countries. China follows a 

FIGURE 3A.1  Sex ratio of age-speciﬁ c mortality, 2008

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

 

y
t
i
l

 

l

a
t
r
o
m
e
a
m
e
f
 
y
b
d
e
d
v
d
y
t
i
l

i

i

 

 

a
t
r
o
m
e
a
m

l

 

numeraire curve
(Reference group)

a sex ratio of mortality 
above the numeraire  

curve indicates 

excess male mortality 

a sex ratio below the 

numeraire curve indicates
excess female mortality

0 

20 

40 

age 

60 

80 

100 

high-income countries 
Sub-Saharan Africa
India 

China 
Russian Federation 

Source: Staﬀ  calculations based on data from the World Health Organization 2010; and United Nations, 
Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs, Population Division 2009,

very similar pattern; in India, relative risks in 
early childhood are signiﬁ cantly lower, but the 
curves  move  closer  until  age  50,  after  which 
they diverge again. In Sub-Saharan Africa, rela-
tive  mortality  risks  are  similar  in  early  child-
hood but worsen from age 10 onward and stay 
below  India  throughout.  In  Russia,  by  age  20 
the relative mortality risks for men are signiﬁ -
cantly  higher  than  in  the  reference  countries 
and remain so until age 80.

For  excess  female  mortality,  weighting  us-
ing the reference group implies that if men and 
women die at the same rate in a country, they 
will receive a higher “weight” between the ages of 
10 and 30—because in the reference countries, 
the differences are the largest here. This weight-
ing matters less at ages where overall mortality 
is low, but becomes important at ages in which 
overall mortality is high. For excess male mor-
tality, it is the opposite. As a consequence:

1.  Any change in the reference group mortality 
proﬁ le will change the computations of ex-
cess  female  mortality.  So,  throughout  the 
analysis, we retain the same reference group 
for all comparisons.

140 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

2.  Increases in adult mortality differentials be-
tween men and women could occur due to 
changes in mortality differentials at every age 
(for  example,  behavioral  changes  that  alter 
the relative risks of mortality at each age) or 
a change in the overall mortality proﬁ le while 
keeping the same ratios (for example, shift-
ing  the  burden  of  death  from  younger  to 
older ages). 

3.  Selection effects could bias the age-mortality 
proﬁ le,  especially  in  high  mortality  regions 
or countries. People who survive to a partic-
ular age may be systematically different from 
those who die at an earlier age. Such effects 
imply that chances of survival in the surviv-
ing cohort would be different from those if 
cohort  members  who  died  earlier  were  still 
alive and part of the cohort, leading to selec-
tion  biases  that  affect  estimates  of  excess 
mortality. 

4.  Using the ratio as a summary implies that ex-
cess female mortality will increase when male 
mortality declines (as in Eritrea or Liberia). 
The  chapter  investigates  speciﬁ c  mortality 
risks and ensures that the highlighted issues 
do not fall in this category, alerting the reader 
when they do.

FIGURE 3A.2   Excess female mortality globally at each age in 

2008 using various reference groups

at age > 60 years, the 
estimates are more sensitive 
to choice of numeraire 

 

l

600 

  1,000 
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
,
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
a
m
e
f
 
s
s
e
c
x
e
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

200 

800 

400 

0 

0 

20 

40 

age 

60 

80 

100 

high-income countries, 2008 
Japan, 2008 
United States, 2008 

Netherlands, 2008 
Great Britain, 1960 

Source: Staﬀ  calculations based on data from the World Health Organization 2010; and United Nations, 
Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs, Population Division 2009,

Any summary of mortality functions will in-
voke assumptions; this particular weighting is 
close to the mortality proﬁ les in many countries 
around the world and fairly robust to different 
“reference”  group  comparisons  until  age  60. 
Figure 5A.2 compares alternative computations 
of  excess  female  mortality  using  alternative 
reference groups of the United States in 2000, 
Japan  in  2000,  the  Netherlands  in  2000,  and 
Great Britain in 1960. Japan has unusually high 
life  expectancies  for  women;  the  Netherlands 
has one of the lowest rates of trafﬁ c accidents 
(which kill many young men); and Great Brit-
ain  in  1960  represents  mortality  proﬁ les  be-
fore additional deaths for males from smoking 
(the greatest difference in smoking prevalence 
by  sex  was  for  the  1900  cohort,  and  smoking 
results in excess deaths after age 60.)120 Excess 
female  mortality  is  similar  using  the  different 
reference groups until age 60 but diverges quite 
sharply after that.

In addition to the robustness issues, choos-
ing high-income country proﬁ les as the weights 
ensures that the risks in the reference group are 
well  understood,  so  problems  that  arise  with 
the  weighting  scheme  are  more  transparent. 
Choosing  less  researched  contexts  could  make 
it harder to understand the consequences of the 
weighting scheme.

Alternative weighting measures include the 
historical  mortality  proﬁ le  in  rich  countries. 
This  literature  on  “missing  women”  focuses 
on  identifying  female  mortality  solely  caused 
by  discrimination.121  By  comparing  mortal-
ity  proﬁ les  today  with  historical  proﬁ les,  the 
literature  tries  to  control  for  the  overall  in-
stitutional  environment  and  mortality  risks. 
In contrast, this chapter seeks not to rule out 
institutional  differences  but  to  rule  them  in. 
If  historical  mortality  patterns  reﬂ ect  current 
mortality proﬁ les plus additional deaths due to 
maternal  mortality,  a  measure  of  discrimina-
tion would try to “control” for high maternal 
mortality. In contrast, we are interested in the 
fraction of female (and male) deaths that could 
be avoided by focusing on maternal mortality. 
There  are  two  reasons  for  doing  so.  First,  the 
chapter treats all deaths equally. Using histori-
cal mortality will show that there is no problem 
in Sub-Saharan Africa, but this interpretation 
would be a serious mistake. There may be no 
deaths  from  discrimination  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  but  poor  institutions  combined  with 

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

141

HIV/AIDS make the continent one of the most 
dangerous for women around the world. Sec-
ond, improving institutions and service deliv-
ery and tackling global health issues are funda-
mental goals of the global community. 

A  ﬁ nal  note  on  the  data.  This  chapter  uses 
the member country life tables from the World 
Health Organization for 1990, 2000, and 2008, 
and  population  projections  from  the  United 
Nations  Department  of  Economic  and  Social 
Affairs. The exact numbers presented here will 
change with updates to the life-tables and with 

new censuses in 2011. Despite improvements in 
the data, in many countries these data are esti-
mates based on surveys and extrapolations. Tri-
angulating with other data sources ensures that 
the results do not depend on any one particular 
method. The chapter presents a global picture. 
Focusing  only  where  the  light  (data)  shines 
could  miss  bigger  problems  in  the  dark.  The 
point is not to reify existing data but to empha-
size the geographical and age proﬁ le of mortal-
ity  risks,  leading  to  further  analysis  and  better 
data in the future.

CHAPTER SUMMARY      In reducing gender gaps in education and health, tremendous 

progress has been made where lifting a single barrier—in 
households, markets, or institutions—is sufﬁ cient to improve 
outcomes. Progress has been slower either where multiple barriers 
need to be lifted at the same time or where a single point of entry 
produces bottlenecks.

WHAT WE SEE
Gender gaps in participation in education have shrunk dramatically 
at all levels, although disparities persist in severely disadvantaged 
populations. In addition, men and women continue to study diff er-
ent disciplines, with similar patterns of segregation across poor and 
rich countries. Finally, both boys and girls learn very little in school 
in many lower-income countries.

Male-biased  sex  ratios  at  birth  persist  in  China,  parts  of  India, 
and some countries in the Caucasus and the Western Balkans. Mor-
tality risks for girls and women (relative to boys and men) are higher 
in  many  low-  and  middle-income  countries  compared  with  their 
counterparts in high-income countries. This “excess female mortal-
ity,” although still widespread, has declined in many parts of world. 
The stark exception is Sub-Saharan Africa, where it has increased.

WHY WE SEE THIS

Education
The  progress  in  reducing  gender  diff erences  in  education  results 
from removal of a single barrier to schooling in households (more 
stable incomes), markets (increasing returns to education), or formal 
institutions (lower costs of schooling). Continued female disadvan-
tage in severely disadvantaged populations stems from an absence 
of economic drivers combined with other forms of social exclusion. 
In contrast, girls’ and boys’ educational paths diverge because of 
multiple  barriers  that  work  simultaneously  to  infl uence  choices. 
These barriers are stereotypes within the education system, norms 
governing gender roles in the household that constrain a woman’s 
choice  of  occupation,  and  employers’  attitudes  toward  family  for-
mation and childbearing.

Health
Male-biased sex ratios at birth result largely from an interaction of 
overt discrimination expressed in preference for sons, increased use 
of prenatal sex selection, and declining fertility. After birth, however, 
poor institutions of public health and service delivery lead to excess 
female  mortality  in  early  childhood  and  the  reproductive  ages.  In 
parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, HIV/AIDS risks have compounded the 
problem in the latter period.

WHAT THIS MEANS FOR POLICY
First,  in  education  much  remains  to  be  done  for  severely  dis-
advantaged  populations,  either  through  developing  context-
specifi c  strategies  or  by  alleviating  institutional  bottlenecks  (e.g., 
school  construction),  or  household  constraints  (e.g.,  conditional 
cash transfers). Second, improving learning outcomes is imperative 
to allow both girls and boys to participate in an increasingly global-
ized world. Third, reducing segregation in fi elds of study, which will 
in turn allow both men and women to develop the skills needed to 
enter  their  desired  occupations,  will  require  simultaneous  change 
among households, markets, and institutions.

Changes in informal institutions that in turn change household 
behavior,  such  as  those  brought  about  by  industrialization  and 
urbanization in Korea, will solve the problem of girls missing at birth. 
Finally, reducing excess female mortality after birth will require fi x-
ing  formal  institutions:  clean  water  and  sanitation  for  early  child-
hood and better maternal care for the reproductive ages, along with 
reductions in HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa.

142 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

NOTES

    1.  Chen, Huq, and D’Souza 1981.
    2.  Case, Ferting, and Paxson 2005.
    3.  Case and Deaton 2003; Cawley 2004; Case, Fert-

ing, and Paxson 2005.

    4.  Strauss and Duncan 1995.
    5.  Currie and Moretti 2003.
    6.  Chou and others 2007.
    7.  Andrabi, Das, and Khwaja 2009.
    8.  WHO 2010.
    9.  Albanesi and Olivetti 2010.
  10.  Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney 2009.
  11.  Albanesi and Olivetti 2010.
  12.  Bhaskar 2011a; Bhaskar 2011b.
  13.  Hoyos and Narayan 2011.
  14.  Oster and Millet 2010.
  15.  Jensen 2010.
  16.  Avenstrup, Liang, and Nellemann 2004. 
  17.  Andrabi, Das, and Khwaja 2008.
  18.  Burde and Linden 2010.
  19.  Guarcello, Lyon, and Rosati 2006.
  20.  Duryea and Arends-Kuenning 2003.
  21.  Guarcello, Lyon, and Rosati 2006.
  22.  Ibid.
  23.  Nankhuni and Findeis 2004; Charmes 2006.
  24.  Assaad, Levison, and Zibani 2010.
  25.  Ilahi 1999.
  26.  Kabubo-Mariara and Mwabu 2007.
  27.  Behrman  and  Knowles  1999;  Brown  and  Park 

2002; Qian 2008.

  28.  Jensen 2000.
  29.  Tansel 2002.
  30.  Cameron  and  Worswick  2001;  Chaudhury, 

  51.  Dercon and Singh 2011.
  52.  Waldron  1998;  Waldron  2000;  and  Waldron 

2003.

  53.  WHO 2010.
  54.  de  Walque  and  Filmer  2011.  The  data  cover 
about 88 percent of the population in SSA and 
14  percent  of  non-SSA  developing  country 
populations.

  55.  Rajaratnam and others 2010.
  56.  Chahnazarian 1988.
  57.  Anderson and Ray 2010.
  58.  See  for  instance,  Filmer,  King,  and  Pritchett 

1998.

  59.  Coale 1984; Das Gupta 1987; Sen 1992.
  60.  Jha  and  others  2006;  Das  Gupta  and  others 

2003.

  61.  Bhalotra  and  Cochrane  2010;  Yi  and  others 

1993; Park and Cho 1995.

  62.  Bharadwaj and Nelson 2010.
  63.  Ibid.
  64.  Abrevaya 2009.
  65.  Yamaguchi 1989, extended by Jensen 2005.
  66.  Filmer, Friedman, and Schady 2008.
  67.  Jayachandran and Kuziemko Forthcoming.
  68.  Chung and Das Gupta 2007.
  69.  World Bank 2005; Tarozzi and Mahajan 2007.
  70.  Rose  (1999),  Rosenzweig  and  Schultz  (1982), 
Foster  and  Rosenzweig  (1999),  and  Carranza 
(2010) all document such a link.

  71.  Rahman and Rao 2004.
  72.  Dyson and Moore 1983.
  73.  Chen, Huq, and D’Souza 1981; Das Gupta 1987; 

Basu 1989.

  74.  Hill  and  Upchurch  1995;  Svedberg  1990;  Case 

Christiaensen, and Asadullah 2006.

and Deaton 2003.

  31.  Ferreira and Schady 2009.
  32.  Maluccio  2005;  McKenzie  2003;  López  Bóo 

2008.

  33.  Fiszbein and others 2009; de Janvry and others 

2006.

  34.  Andrabi and others 2007.
  35.  Jacoby and Mansuri 2011
  36.  Miske, Meagher, and DeJaeghere 2010.
  37.  Jamaica Ministry of Education 2009.
  38.  Jha and Kelleher 2006.
  39.  World Bank 2011.
  40.  Back, Coulibaly, and Hickson 2003.
  41.  Burde and Linden 2010.
  42.  Kazianga, de Walque, and Alderman 2009.
  43.  World Bank 2009.
  44.  Akresh, de Walque, and Kazianga 2011.
  45.  Back, Coulibaly, and Hickson 2003.
  46.  World Bank 2011.
  47.  UNESCO/UIS database.
  48.  Flabbi 2011.
  49.  Giles and Witoelar 2011; Flabbi 2011.
  50.  Lee and Collins 2010.

  75.  Ali and others 2011.
  76.  Cutler and Miller 2005.
  77.  Drevenstedt and others 2008.
  78.  Okoko, Enwere, and Ota 2003; Shulman 1999; 

Rush 2000.

  79.   WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, and World Bank 2010.
  80.  Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney 2009.
  81.  Albanesi and Olivetti 2010.
  82.  Noymer and Garenne 2000.
  83.  Högberg and Wall 1986 and Berry 1977.
  84.  Trussell  and  Pebley  1984;  Fortson  2011;  Chen 

and others 1974.

  85.  May  Forthcoming;  Joshi  and  Schultz  2007; 

Miller 2005.

  86.  UNAIDS 2010b.
  87.  UNAIDS 2010a.
  88.  Corno and de Walque 2007; de Walque 2009.
  89.  New York Times 2004.
  90.  Glynn and others 2001.
  91.  Case and Paxson 2011.
  92.  UNAIDS 2010a.
  93.  Obermeyer, Murray, and Gakidou 2008.

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

143

  94.  Jacoby and Mansuri 2011; International Center 
for  Prison  Studies,  http://www.prisonstudies.
org/2001.
  95.  Rios 2009.
  96.  Briceño-León, Villaveces, and Concha-Eastman 

2008.

  97.  Márquez  1999;  Zubillaga  and  Briceño-León 

2001.

  98.  Brainerd and Cutler 2005.
  99.  WHO 2004.
100.  Weniger  and  others  1991;  Surasiengsunk  and 

others 1998; Le Coeur and others 2009.

101.  Le Coeur and others 2009; Braitstein and others 

2008; Leusaree and others 2002.

102.  Maticka-Tyndale  and  others  1997;  Saengtien-
chai and others 1999; VanLandingham and oth-
ers 1998.

103.  Knodel and others 1999.
104.  Hopkins and others 2001.
105.  Das 1999.
106.  Thaddeus and Maine 1994.
107.  Ibid.
108.  Thaddeus and Maine 1994.
109.  Das and Hammer 2005.
110.  de Savigny and others 2004.
111.  Foster and Briceño-Garmendia 2010.
112.  Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2005.
113.  Cutler and Miller 2005.
114.  Kremer and others Forthcoming.
115.  Ibid.
116.  Cutler and Miller 2005.
117.  Chahnazarian 1988.
118.  Anderson and Ray 2010.
119.  Obermeyer and others 2010; Anderson and Ray 

2010.

120.  Preston and Wang 2006.
121.  Klasen 1994; Klasen and Wink 2002.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

Abrevaya, Jason. 2009. “Are There Missing Girls in the 
United States? Evidence from Birth Data.” Applied 
Economics 1 (2): 1–34.

Akresh, Richard, Damien de Walque, and Harounan 
Kazianga. 2011. “Gender and Conditionality: Cash 
Transfers and Children’s Schooling.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2012. 

Albanesi,  Stefania,  and  Claudia  Olivetti.  2010. “Ma-
ternal Health and the Baby Boom.” Working Pa-
per  Series  16146,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.

ters.  2011. “Patterns  of  Health  Care  Interactions 
in  Seven  Low-  and  Middle-Income  Countries.” 
Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Kevin Milligan. 
2009. “O Sister, Where Art Thou? The Role of Son 
Preference and Sex Choice: Evidence from Immi-
grants  to  Canada.”  Working  Paper  Series  15391, 
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Cam-
bridge, MA.

Anderson,  Siwan,  and  Debraj  Ray.  2010.  “Missing 
Women:  Age  and  Disease.”  Review  of  Economic 
Studies 77 (4): 1262–300.

Andrabi,  Tahir,  Jishnu  Das,  and  Asim  Ijaz  Khwaja. 
2008. “A Dime a Day: The Possibilities and Lim-
its of Private Schooling in Pakistan.” Comparative 
Education Review 52 (3): 329–55.

———. 2009. “What Did You Do All Day? Maternal 
Education and Child Outcomes.” Policy Research 
Working Paper Series, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Andrabi,  Tahir,  Jishnu  Das,  Asim  Ijaz  Khwaja,  Tara 
Vishwanath,  Tristan  Zajonc,  and  LEAPS  Team. 
2007. Pakistan: Learning and Educational Achieve-
ments  in  Punjab  Schools  (LEAPS):  Insights  to  In-
form  the  Education  Policy  Debate.  Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Assaad,  Ragui,  Deborah  Levison,  and  Nadia  Zibani. 
2010.  “The  Effect  of  Domestic  Work  on  Girls’ 
Schooling:  Evidence  from  Egypt.”  Feminist  Eco-
nomics 16 (1): 79–128.

Avenstrup,  Roger,  Xiaoyan  Liang,  and  Soren  Nelle-
mann. 2004. Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi and Uganda: 
Universal  Primary  Education  and  Poverty  Re-
duction.  Report  30765.  Washington,  DC:  World 
Bank.

Back,  Lucien,  N’gra-zan  Christophe  Coulibaly,  and 
Karen  Hickson.  2003.  Evaluation  of  the  African 
Girls’  Education  Initiative  Country  Case  Study: 
Burkina  Faso.  Paris:  United  Nations  Children’s 
Fund.

Basu,  Alaka  Malwade.  1989.  “Is  Discrimination  in 
Food Really Necessary for Explaining Sex Differ-
entials in Childhood Mortality?” Population Stud-
ies 43 (2): 193–210.

Behrman,  Jere  R.,  and  James  C.  Knowles.  1999. 
“Household  Income  and  Child  Schooling  in 
Vietnam.”  World  Bank  Economic  Review  13  (2): 
211–56.

Berry, Linda G. 1977. “Age and Parity Inﬂ uences on 
Maternal  Mortality:  United  States,  1919–1969.” 
Demography 14 (3): 297–310.

Bhalotra,  Sonia,  and  Tom  Cochrane.  2010.  “Where 
Have  All  the  Young  Girls  Gone?  Identifying 
Sex  Selection  in  India.”  University  of  Bristol, 
Working Paper Series 10/254, Centre for Market 
and Public Organisation, Bristol, U.K.

Ali, Rabia, Jishnu Das, Damien de Walque, Kenneth 
L.  Leonard,  Mattias  Lundberg,  and  David  Pe-

Bharadwaj, Prashant, and Leah K. Nelson. 2010. “Dis-
crimination  Begins  in  the  Womb:  Evidence  of 

144 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Sex-Selective Prenatal Investments.” University of 
California, San Diego. La Jolla, CA. Processed.

Bhaskar, V. 2011a. “Corrigendum: Sex Selection and 
Gender Balance.” American Economic Journal: Mi-
croeconomics 3 (2): 52–53.

———. 2011b. “Sex Selection and Gender Balance.” 
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (2): 
14–44.

Brainerd, Elizabeth, and David M. Cutler. 2005. “Au-
topsy on an Empire: Understanding Mortality in 
Russia  and  the  Former  Soviet  Union.”  Working 
Paper  940.  William  Davidson  Institute,  Ann  Ar-
bor, MI.

Braitstein, Paula, Andrew Boulle, Denis Mash, Mar-
tin  W.  Brinkhof,  Francois  Dabis,  Christian  Lau-
rent,  Mauro  Schechter,  Suely  H.  Tuboi,  Eduardo 
Sprinz, Paolo Miotti, Mina Hosseinipour, Marga-
ret May, Matthias Egger, David R. Bangsberg, Ni-
cola Low, and Antiretroviral Therapy in Lower In-
come Countries (ART-LINC) Study Group. 2008. 
“Gender and the Use of Retroviral Treatment in 
Resource-Constrained  Settings:  Findings  from  a 
Multicenter  Collaboration.”  Journal  of  Women’s 
Health 17 (1): 47–55.

Briceño-León,  Roberto,  Andrés  Villaveces,  and  Al-
berto  Concha-Eastman.  2008.  “Understanding 
the Uneven Distribution of the Incidence of Ho-
micide in Latin America.” International Journal of 
Epidemiology 37 (4): 751–7.

Brown, Philip H., and Albert Park. 2002. “Education 
and Poverty in Rural China.” Economics of Educa-
tion Review 21 (6): 523–41.

Burde, Dana, and Leigh L. Linden. 2010. “The Effect 
of  Village-Based  Schools:  Evidence  from  a  Ran-
domized Control Trial in Afghanistan.” New York 
University  and  Columbia  University,  New  York. 
Processed.

Cameron, Lisa A., and Christopher Worswick. 2001. 
“Education Expenditure Responses to Crop Loss 
in Indonesia: A Gender Bias.” Economic Develop-
ment and Cultural Change 49 (2): 351–63.

Carranza,  Eliana.  2010. “Soil  Endowments,  Produc-
tion Technologies and Missing Women in India.” 
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. Processed.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2003. “Consumption, 
Health,  Gender,  and  Poverty.”  Policy  Research 
Working Paper Series 3020, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Case,  Anne,  Angela  Ferting,  and  Christina  Paxson. 
2005. “The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health 
and  Circumstance.”  Journal  of  Health  Economics 
24: 365–89.

Case,  Anne,  and  Christina  Paxson.  2011. “The  Im-
pact of the AIDS Pandemic on Health Services in 
Africa:  Evidence  from  Demographic  and  Health 
Surveys.” Demography 48 (2): 675–97. 

Cawley, John. 2004. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” 

Journal of Human Resources 39 (2): 451–74.

 Chahnazarian, Anouch. 1988. “Determinants of the 
Sex Ratio at Birth: Review of Recent Literature.” 
Social Biology 35 (3–4): 214–35.

Charmes, Jacques. 2006. “A Review of Empirical Evi-
dence on Time Use in Africa from UN-Sponsored 
Surveys.” In Gender, Time Use, and Poverty in Sub-
Saharan Africa, ed. C. Mark Blackden and Quen-
tin Wodon. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Chaudhury, Nazmul, Luc Christiaensen, and Moham-
mad Niaz Asadullah. 2006. “Schools, Household, 
Risk, and Gender: Determinants of Child School-
ing  in  Ethiopia.” Working  Paper  250,  Centre  for 
the Study of the African Economies, Oxford, U.K.
Chen, Lincoln C., Melita C. Gesche, Shamsa Ahmed, 
A. I. Chowdhury, and W. H. Mosley. 1974. “Ma-
ternal Mortality in Rural Bangladesh.” Studies in 
Family Planning 5 (11): 334–41.

Chen, Lincoln C., Emdadul. Huq, and Stan D’Souza. 
1981. “Sex Bias in the Family Allocation of Food 
and Health Care in Rural Bangladesh.” Population 
and Development Review 7 (1): 55–70.

Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and 
Theodore J. Joyce. 2007. “Parental Education and 
Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment 
in Taiwan.” Working Paper Series 13466,  National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Chung, Woojin, and Monica Das Gupta. 2007. “The 
Decline  of  Son  Preference  in  South  Korea:  The 
Roles of Development and Public Policy.” Popula-
tion and Development Review 33 (4): 757–83.

Coale,  Ansley  J.  1984.  Rapid  Population  Change  in 
China,  1952–1982.  Washington,  DC:  National 
Academies Press.

Corno,  Lucia,  and  Damien  de  Walque.  2007.  “The 
Determinants  of  HIV  Infection  and  Related 
Sexual Behaviors: Evidence from Lesotho.” Policy 
Research Working Paper Series 4421, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Currie,  Janet,  and  Enrico  Moretti.  2003.  “Mother’s 
Education  and  the  Intergenerational  Transmis-
sion  of  Human  Capital:  Evidence  from  College 
Openings.”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  118 
(4): 1495–532.

Cutler, David M., and Grant Miller. 2005. “The Role 
of  Public  Health  Improvements  in  Health  Ad-
vances:  The  Twentieth-Century  United  States.” 
Demography 42 (1): 1–22.

Das Gupta, Monica. 1987. “Selective Discrimination 
against  Female  Children  in  Rural  Punjab,  In-
dia.”  Population  and  Development  Review  13  (1): 
77–100.

Das Gupta, Monica, Jiang Zhenghua, Li Bohua, Xie 
Zhenming,  Woojin  Chung,  and  Bae  Hwa-Ok. 
2003. “Why Is Son Preference so Persistent in East 
and South Asia? A Cross-country Study of China, 
India and the Republic of Korea.” Journal of Devel-
opment Studies 40 (2): 153–87.

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

145

Das, Jishnu, Quy-Toan Do, Karen Shaines, and Sow-
mya  Srinivasan.  2009. “U.S.  and  Them:  The  Ge-
ography  of Academic  Research.”  Policy  Research 
Working  Paper  Series  5152,  World  Bank,  Wash-
ington, DC.

Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer. 2005. “Which Doc-
tor? Combining Vignettes and Item Response to 
Measure Clinical Competence.” Journal of Devel-
opment Economics 78 (2): 348–83.

Das, Veena. 1999. “Public Good, Ethics, and Everyday 
Life: Beyond the Boundaries of Bioethics.” Daed-
alus 128 (4): 99–133.

de Janvry, Alain, Frederico Finan, Elisabeth Sadoulet, 
and  Renos  Vakis.  2006.  “Can  Conditional  Cash 
Transfer Programs Serve as Safety Nets in Keep-
ing Children at School and from Working when 
Exposed to Schocks?” Journal of Development Eco-
nomics 79 (2): 349–73.

de  Savigny,  Don,  Charles  Mayombana,  Eleuther 
Mwageni,  Honorati  Masanja,  Abdulatif  Minhaj, 
Yahya  Mkilindi,  Conrad  Mbuya,  Harun  Kasale, 
and  Graham  Reid.  2004. “Care-seeking  Patterns 
for Fatal Malaria in Tanzania.” Malaria Journal 3 
(1): 27.

de  Walque,  Damien.  2009.  “Does  Education  Affect 
HIV  Status?  Evidence  from  Five  African  Coun-
tries.” World Bank Economic Review 23 (2): 209–
33.

de Walque, Damien, and Deon Filmer. 2011. “Trends 
and  Socio-Economic  Gradients  in  Adult  Mor-
tality  around  the  Developing  World.”  Policy  Re-
search  Working  Paper  Series  5716,  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

den Boer, Andrea M., and Valerie M. Hudson. 2004. 
“The  Security  Threat  of Asia’s  Sex  Ratios.”  SAIS 
Review 24 (2): 27–43.

Dercon, Stefan, and Abhijeet Singh. 2011. “From Nu-
trition  to  Aspirations  and  Self-Efﬁ cacy:  Gender 
Bias  over  Time  among  Children  in  Four  Coun-
tries.” Oxford University, Oxford, U.K. Processed.
Drevenstedt,  Greg  L.,  Eileen  M.  Crimmins,  Sarin-
napha Vasunilashorn,  and  Caleb  E.  Finch.  2008. 
“The Rise and Fall of Excess Male Infant Mortal-
ity.” PNAS 105 (13): 5016–21.

Duryea, Suzanne, and Mary Arends-Kuenning. 2003. 
“School Attendance, Child Labor, and Local Labor 
Market Fluctuations in Urban Brazil.” World De-
velopment 31 (7): 1165–78.

Dyson,  Tim,  and  Mick  Moore.  1983.  “On  Kinship 
Structure,  Female  Autonomy,  and  Demographic 
Behavior  in  India.”  Population  and  Development 
Review 9 (1): 35–60.

Ferreira, Francisco H. G., and Norbert Schady. 2009. 
“Aggregate  Economic  Shocks,  Child  Schooling, 
and Child Health.” World Bank Research Observer 
24 (2): 147–81.

Filmer,  Deon,  Jed  Friedman,  and  Norbert  Schady. 
2008.  “Development,  Modernization,  and  Son 

Preference in Fertility Decisions.” Policy Research 
Working  Paper  Series  4716,  World  Bank,  Wash-
ington, DC.

Filmer, Deon, Elizabeth M. King, and Lant Pritchett. 
1998. “Gender Disparity in South Asia: Compari-
sons Between and Within Countries.” Policy Re-
search  Working  Paper  Series  1867,  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Fiszbein,  Ariel,  Norbert  Schady,  Francisco  H.  G. 
Ferreira,  Margaret  Grosch,  Nial  Kelleher,  Pedro 
Olinto,  and  Emmanuel  Skouﬁ as.  2009.  Condi-
tional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future 
Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Flabbi,  Luca.  2011. “Gender  Differentials  in  Educa-
tion, Career Choices and Labor Market Outcomes 
on  a  Sample  of  OECD  Countries.”  Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Fortson,  Jane  G.  2011. “Mortality  Risk  and  Human 
Capital  Investment:  The  Impact  of  HIV/AIDS 
in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 93 (1): 1–15.

Foster,  Andrew  D.,  and  Mark  Rosenzweig.  1999. 
“Missing  Women,  the  Marriage  Market,  and 
Economic  Growth.”  Working  Paper  Series  49, 
Stanford  Center  for  International  Development, 
Stanford, CA.

Foster, Vivien,  and  Cecilia  Briceño-Garmendia,  eds. 
2010.  Africa’s  Infrastructure  A  Time  for  Transfor-
mation.  Washington,  DC:  Agence  Francaise  de 
Développement and World Bank. 

Galiani,  Sebastian,  Paul  Gertler,  and  Ernesto  Schar-
grodsky. 2005. “Water for Life: The Impact of the 
Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortal-
ity.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 83–120.

Giles,  John,  and  Firman  Witoelar.  2011. “Idonesian 
Education  and  Occupational  Segregation  and 
 Labor  Markets  in  Indonesia.”  Background  paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Glynn,  J.  R.,  M.  Caraël,  B.  Auvert,  M.  Kahindo,  J. 
Chege, R. Musonda, F. Kaona, and A. Buvé. 2001. 
“Why  Do  Young  Women  Have  a  Much  Higher 
Prevalence of HIV than Young Men? A Study in 
Kisumu, Kenya and Ndola, Zambia.” AIDS 15 (4): 
S51–S60.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. “Transi-
tions: Career and Family Life Cycles of the Edu-
cational Elite.” American Economic Review 98 (2): 
363–69.

Guarcello,  Lorenzo,  Scot  Lyon,  and  Furio  C.  Rosati. 
2006. “The Twin Challenges of Child Labor and 
Youth Employment in Ethiopia.” Working Paper 
Series 18, Understanding Children’s Work Project, 
Rome.

Hill, Kenneth, and Dawn M. Upchurch. 1995. “Gen-
der  Differences  in  Child  Health:  Evidence  from 
the Demographic and Health Surveys.” Population 
and Development Review 21 (1): 127–51.

146 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Högberg,  U.,  and  S.  Wall.  1986. “Age  and  Parity  as 
Determinants  of  Maternal  Mortality-Impact  of 
their Shifting Distribution among Parturients in 
Sweden from 1781 to 1980.” Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization 64 (1): 85–91.

Hopkins,  David  P.,  Peter  A.  Briss,  Connie  J.  Ricard, 
Corinne  G.  Husten,  Vilma  G.  Carande-Kulis, 
Jonathan  E.  Fielding,  Mary  O.  Alao,  Jeffrey  W. 
McKenna,  Donald  J.  Sharp,  Jeffrey  R.  Harris, 
Trevor A. Woollery, Kate W. Harris, and the Task 
Force  on  Community  Preventive  Services.  2001. 
“Review  of  Evidence  Regarding  Interventions  to 
Reduce  Tobacco  Use  and  Exposure  to  Environ-
mental Tobacco Smoke.” American Journal of Pre-
ventive Medicine 20 (2S): 16–66.

Hoyos,  Alejandro,  and  Ambar  Narayan.  2011.  “In-
equalities of Opportunities among Children: How 
Much Does Gender Matter.” Background note for 
the WDR 2012.

Ilahi, Nadeem. 1999. “Gender and the Allocation of 
Adult Time: Evidence from the Peru LSMS Panel 
Data.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 2744, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Jacoby, Hanan G., and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Cross-
ing Boundaries: Gender, Caste, and Schooling in 
Rural  Pakistan.”  Policy  Research  Working  Paper 
Series 5710, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Jamaica Ministry of Education. 2009. “Jamaica Edu-
cation  Statistics  2008–2009.”  Annual  Statistical 
Review of the Education Sector, Ministry of Edu-
cation, Kingston.

Jayachandran,  Seema,  and  Ilyana  Kuziemko.  Forth-
coming. “Why Do Mothers Breastfeed Girls Less 
than  Boys:  Evidence  and  Implications  for  Child 
Health in India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Jayachandran,  Seema,  and  Adriana  Lleras-Muney. 
2009.  “Life  Expectancy  and  Human  Capital  In-
vestments:  Evidence  from  Maternal  Mortality 
Declines.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1): 
349–97.

Jensen, Robert. 2000. “Agricultural Volatility and In-
vestments  in  Children.”  American  Economic  Re-
view 90 (2): 399–404.

———. 2005. “Equal Treatment, Unequal Outcomes? 
Generating  Sex  Inequality  through  Fertility  Be-
havior.”  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  MA. 
Processed.

———. 2010. “Economic Opportunities and Gender 
Differences in Human Capital: Experimental Evi-
dence for India.” Working Paper Series 16021, Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 
MA.

Jha,  Jyotsna,  and  Fatimah  Kelleher.  2006.  Boys’ 
Under achievement  in  Education:  An  Exploration 
in  Selected  Commonwealth  Countries.  London: 
Commonwealth Secretariat, Gender Section, and 
Commonwealth of Learning.

Jha, Prabhat, Rajesh Kumar, Priya Vasa, Neeraj Dhin-
gra, Deva Thiruchelvam, and Rahim Moineddin. 
2006. “Low Male-to-Female Sex Ratio of Children 
Born  in  India:  National  Survey  of  1.1  Million 
Households.” Lancet 367 (9506): 211–18.

Joshi,  Shareen,  and  T.  Paul  Schultz.  2007.  “Family 
Planning as an Investment in Development: Eval-
uation  of  a  Program’s  Consequences  in  Matlab, 
Bangladesh.”  Economic  Growth  Center  Discus-
sion Paper Series 951, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.

Kabubo-Mariara,  Jane,  and  Domisiano  K.  Mwabu. 
2007.  “Determinants  of  School  Enrolment  and 
Education Attainment: Empirical Evidence  from 
Kenya.” South African Journal of Economics 75 (3): 
572–93.

Kazianga, Harounan, Damien de Walque, and Harold 
Alderman.  2009.  “Educational  and  Health  Im-
pacts  of  Two  School  Feeding  Schemes:  Evidence 
from a Randomized Trial in Rural Burkina Faso.” 
Policy Research Working Paper Series 4976, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Klasen,  Stephan.  1994.  “Missing  Women  Reconsid-

ered.” World Development 22 (7): 1061–71.

Klasen,  Stephan,  and  Claudia Wink.  2002. “A  Turn-
ing Point in Gender Bias Mortality? An Update on 
the Number of Missing Women.” Population and 
Development Review 28 (2): 285–312.

Knodel,  John,  Chapin  Saengtienchai,  Mark  Van-
Landingham, and Rachel Lucas. 1999. “Sexuality, 
Sexual  Experience,  and  the  Good  Spouse: Views 
of  Married  Thai  Men  and  Women.”  In  Genders 
and  Sexualities  in  Modern Thailand,  ed.  Peter A. 
Jackson and Nerida M. Cook. Chiang Mai: Silk-
worm Books.

Kremer,  Michael,  Jessica  Leino,  Edward  Miguel, 
and  Alix  Peterson  Zwane.  Forthcoming. “Spring 
Cleaning:  Rural  Water  Impacts,  Valuation,  and 
Property Rights Institutions.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics. 

Le Coeur, Sophie, Intira J. Collins, Julie Pannetier, and 
Èva  Lelièvre.  2009.  “Gender  and  Access  to  HIV 
Testing and Antiretroviral Treatments in Thailand: 
Why Do Women Have More and Earlier Access?” 
Social Science & Medicine 69 (6): 846–53.

Lee, Fung King Jackie, and Peter Collins. 2010. “Con-
struction of Gender: A Comparison of Australian 
and Hong Kong English Language Books.” Journal 
of Gender Studies 19 (2): 121–37.

Leusaree,  Tasana,  Kanyapak  Srithanaviboonchai,  S. 
Chanmangkang,  Lai Ying-Ru,  and  C.  Natpratan. 
2002. “The  Feasibility  of  HAART  in  a  Northern 
Thai Cohort: 2000-2001.” Paper presented at the 
114th International AIDS Conference. Barcelona, 
July 7.

López  Bóo,  Florencia.  2008. “How  Do  Crises Affect 
Schooling  Decisions?  Evidence  from  Changing 
Labor Market Opportunities and A Policy Experi-

 

Education and health: Where do gender differences really matter? 

147

ment.” Working Paper Series 653, Inter-American 
Development Bank, Washington, DC.

of Maternal Malaria: A Review of Immunological 
Basis.” Acta Tropica 87 (2): 193–205.

Maluccio,  John  A.  2005.  “Coping  with  the  ‘Coffee 
Crisis’ in Central America: The Role of the Nica-
raguan Red de Protección Social.” FCND Discus-
sion  Paper  Series  188,  International  Food  Policy 
Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Márquez,  Patricia  C.  1999.  The  Street  Is  My  Home: 
Youth and Violence in Caracas. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press.

Maticka-Tyndale,  Eleanor,  David  Elkins,  Melissa 
Haswell-Elkins,  Darunee  Rujkarakorn,  Thicum-
porn  Kuyyakanond,  and  Kathryn  Stam.  1997. 
“Contexts  and  Patterns  of  Men’s  Commercial 
Sexual  Partnerships  in  Northeastern  Thailand: 
Implications for AIDS Prevention.” Social Science 
& Medicine 44 (2): 199–213.

May, John F. Forthcoming. World Population Policies: 
Their  Origin,  Evolution,  and  Impact.  New  York, 
NY: Springer.

McKenzie,  David  Y.  2003.  “How  Do  Households 
Cope with Aggregate Shocks? Evidence from the 
Mexican Peso Crisis.” World Development 31 (7): 
1179–99.

Miller, Grant. 2005. “Contraception as Development? 
New  Evidence  from  Family  Planning  in  Colom-
bia.” Economic Journal 120 (545): 709–36.

Miske,  Shirley,  Margaret  Meagher,  and 

Joan 
DeJaeghere.  2010.  “Gender  Mainstreaming  in 
 Education  at  the  Level  of  Field  Operations:  The 
Case of CARE USA’s Indicator Framework.” Jour-
nal of Comparative and International Education 40 
(4): 441–58.

Nankhuni, Flora J., and Jill L. Findeis. 2004. “Natural 
Resource-Collection Work and Children’s School-
ing  in  Malawi.”  Agricultural  Economics  31  (2–3): 
123–34.

New York Times. 2004. “The Feminization of AIDS.” 

New York Times, December 13.

Noymer,  Andrew,  and  Michel  Garenne.  2000. “The 
1918 Inﬂ uenza Epidemic’s Effects on Sex Differ-
entials in Mortality in the United States.” Popula-
tion and Development Review 26 (3): 565–81.

Obermeyer, Ziad, Julie Knoll Rajaratnam, Chang H. 
Park,  Emmanuela  Gakidou,  Margaret  C.  Hogan, 
Alan D. Lopez, and Christopher J. L. Murray. 2010. 
“Measuring  Adult  Mortality  Using  Sibling  Sur-
vival: A New Analytical Method and New Results 
for 44 Countries, 1974–2006.” PLoS Medicine 7 (4). 
e1000260. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000260. 

Obermeyer, Ziad, Christopher J. L. Murray, and Em-
manuela  Gakidou.  2008.  “Fifty  Years  of  Violent 
War Deaths from Vietnam to Bosnia: Analysis of 
Data from the World Health Survey Programme.” 
British Medical Journal 336 (7659): 1482–86.

Okoko,  Brown  J.,  Godwin  Enwere,  and  Martin  O. 
Ota. 2003. “The Epidemiology and Consequences 

Oster, Emily, and Bryce Millet. 2010. “Do Call Cen-
ters Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from 
India.” Working Paper Series 15922, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Park,  Insook  Hary,  and  Lee-Jay  Cho.  1995. “Confu-
cianism and the Korean Family.” Journal of Com-
parative Family Studies 26 (1): 117–27.

Peterman, Amber,  Tia  Palermo,  and  Caryn  Breden-
kamp. 2011. “Estimates and Determinants of Sex-
ual  Violence  against  Women  in  the  Democratic 
Republic  of  Congo.”  American  Journal  of  Public 
Health 101 (6): 1060–7.

Preston, Samuel H., and Haidong Wang. 2006. “Sex 
Mortality  Differences  in  the  United  States:  The 
Role  of  Cohort  Smoking  Patterns.”  Demography 
43 (4): 631–46.

Qian, Nancy. 2008. “Missing Women and the Price of 
Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Speciﬁ c Earnings 
on Sex Imbalance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
123 (3): 1251–85.

Rahman,  Lupin,  and  Vijayendra  Rao.  2004.  “The 
Determinants  of  Gender  Equity  in  India:  Ex-
amining  Dyson  and  Moore’s  Thesis  with  New 
Data.” Population and Development Review 30 (2): 
239–68.

Rajaratnam, Julie Knoll, Jake R. Marcus, Alison Levin-
Rector,  Andrew  N.  Chalupka,  Haidong  Wang, 
Laura  Dwyer,  Megan  Costa,  Alan  D.  Lopez,  and 
Christopher J. L. Murray. 2010. “Worldwide Mor-
tality in Men and Women Aged 15–59 Years from 
1970 to 2010: A Systematic Analysis.” Lancet 375 
(9727): 1704–20.

Rios,  Viridiana.  2009.  “Comparativo  Internacional 
de Homicidios.” Centro de Investigaciones para el 
Desarrollo de Mexico, Ciudad de Mexico.

Rose,  Elaina.  1999.  “Consumption  Smoothing  and 
Excess Female Mortality in Rural India.” Review of 
Economics and Statistics 81 (1): 41–9.

Rosenzweig,  Mark  R.,  and  Theodore  Paul  Schultz. 
1982.  “Market  Opportunities,  Genetic  Endow-
ments  and  the  Intrafamily  Distribution  of  Re-
sources: Child Survival in Rural India.” American 
Economic Review 72 (4): 803–15.

Rush, David. 2000. “Nutrition and Maternal Mortal-
ity in the Developing World.” American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition 72 (1): S212–S240.

Saengtienchai,  Chanpen,  John  Knodel,  Mark  Van-
Landingham, and Anthony Pramualratana. 1999. 
“Prostitutes Are Better than Lovers: Wive’s Views 
on the Extramarital Sexual Behavior of Thai Men.” 
In Genders and Sexuality in Modern Thailand, ed. 
Peter  A.  Jackson  and  Nerida  M.  Cook.  Chiang 
Mai: Silkworm Books.

Sen, Amartya. 1992. “Missing Women.” British Medi-

cal Journal 304 (6827): 587–8.

148 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Shannon, Lisa J. 2010. A Thousand Sisters: My Jour-
ney into the Worst Place on Earth to Be a Woman. 
Berkeley, CA: Seal Press.

Shulman, Caroline E. 1999. “Malaria in Pregnancy: Its 
Relevance to Safe-Motherhood Programmes.” An-
nals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 93 (S1): 
S59–S66.

Somanathan,  Aparnaa,  and  Reem  Hafez.  2010. “Fi-
nancing Options for the Health Sector in Tonga.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Strauss,  John,  and  Thomas  Duncan.  1995. “Human 
Resources:  Empirical  Modeling  of  Household 
and Family Decisions.” In Vol. 3 of Handbook of 
Development Economics, ed. Jere R. Behrman and 
T. N. Srinivasan. Amsterdam and Oxford: North 
Holland.

Surasiengsunk, Suwanee, Suchada Kiranandana, Kua 
Wongboonsin,  Geoffrey  P.  Garnett,  Roy  M.  An-
derson,  and  Godfried  J.  P.  van  Griensven.  1998. 
“Demographic  Impact  of  the  HIV  Epidemic  in 
Thailand.” AIDS 12 (7): 775–84.

Svedberg,  Peter.  1990.  “Undernutrition  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa: Is There a Gender Bias?” Journal of 
Development Studies 26 (3): 469–86.

Tansel, Aysit. 2002. “Determinants of School Attain-
ment  of  Boys  and  Girls  in  Turkey:  Individual, 
Household, and Community Factors.” Economics 
of Education Review 21 (5): 455–70.

Tarozzi,  Alessandro,  and  Aprajit  Mahajan.  2007. 
“Child Nutrition in India in the Nineties.” Journal 
of Economic Development and Cultural Change 55 
(3): 441–86.

Thaddeus,  Sereen,  and  Deborah  Maine.  1994. “Too 
Far to Walk: Maternal Mortality in Context.” So-
cial Science & Medicine 38 (8): 1091–110.

Trussell, James, and Anne R. Pebley. 1984. “The Po-
tential  Impact  of  Changes  in  Fertility  on  Infant, 
Child, and Maternal Mortality.” Studies in Family 
Planning 15 (6): 267–80.

UNAIDS  (United  Nations  Programme  on  HIV/
AIDS).  2010a.  UNAIDS  Report  on  the  Global 
AIDS Epidemic 2010. Geneva: UNAIDS.

——–———.  2010b.  “Women,  Girls  and  HIV.” 

UNAIDS Fact Sheet 10, Geneva.

United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs.  2009.  World  Population  Prospects  2009. 
New York: United Nations.

VanLandingham,  Mark,  John  Knodel,  Chanpen 
Saengtienchai, and Anthony Pramualratana. 1998. 
“In  the  Company  of  Friends:  Peer  Inﬂ uence  on 
Thai  Male  Extramarital  Sex.”  Social  Science  & 
Medicine 47 (12): 1193–2011.

Waldron, Indrid. 1998. “Sex Differences in Infant and 
Early Child Mortality: Major Causes of Death and 
Possible Biological Causes.” In Too Young to Die: 
Genes or Gender?, ed. United Nations. New York: 
United Nations.

———. 2000. “Trends in Gender Differences in Mor-
tality: Relationships to Changing Gender Differ-
ences  in  Behavior  and  Other  Causal  Factors.”  In 
Gender Inequalities in Health, ed. Ellen Annandale 
and Kate Hunt. Buckingham, U.K. and Philadel-
phia, PA: Open University Press.

———.  2003.  “Mortality  Differentials  by  Sex.”  In 
Encyclopedia  of  Population,  Paul  Demeny  and 
Geoffrey McNicoll. New York: MacMillan.

Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2009. “The Com-
petitive  Saving  Motive:  Evidence  from  Rising 
Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China.” Working 
Paper Series 15093, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.

Weniger,  Bruce  G.,  Khanchit  Limpakarnjanarat, 
Kummuan  Ungchusak,  Sombat  Thanprasertsuk, 
Kachit  Choopanya,  Suphak  Vanichseni,  Thong-
chai Uneklabh, Prasert Thongcharoen, and Chan-
tapong  Wasi.  1991.  “The  Epidemiology  of  HIV 
Infection and AIDS in Thailand.” AIDS 5 (Supple-
ment 2): S71–S85.

World  Bank.  2005.  Pakistan  Country  Gender  Assess-
ment: Bridging the Gender Gap: Opportunities and 
Challenges. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———.  2009. “Conditional  Cash  Transfers:  Reduc-
ing Present and Future Poverty.” Policy Research 
Report, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2011a. “Education in Sub-Saharan Africa: A 
Comparative  Analysis.”  World  Bank  African  Re-
gion Human Development Network, Washington, 
DC. Processed.

———.  2011b.  World  Development  Report:  Devel-
opment  and  Climate  Change.  Washington,  DC: 
World Bank.

WHO  (World  Health  Organization).  2004.  World 
Health  Report  2004:  Changing  History.  Geneva: 
WHO.

———. 2010. World Health Statistics. Geneva: WHO.
WHO  (World  Health  Organization),  UNICEF 
(United  Nations  Children’s  Fund),  UNFPA 
(United  Nations  Population  Fund),  and  World 
Bank. 2010. “Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 
to 2008.” WHO, Washington, DC.

Yamaguchi, Kazuo. 1989. “A Formal Theory for Male-
Preferring  Stopping  Rules  of  Childbearing:  Sex 
Differences in Birth Order and in the Number of 
Siblings.” Demography 26 (3): 451–65.

Yi,  Zeng,  Tu  Ping,  Gu  Baochang,  Xu  Yi,  Li  Bohua, 
and Li Youngping. 1993. “An Analysis on Causes 
and  Implications  of  the  Recent  Increase  in  the 
Reported Sex Ratio at Birth in China.” Population 
and Development Review 19 (2): 283–302.

Zubillaga, Veronica, and Robert Briceño-León. 2001. 
“Exclusión, Masculinidad y Respeto: Algunas Cla-
ves para Entender la Violencia entre Adolescentes 
en Barrios.” Nueva Sociedad 173: 34–8.

4CHAPTER

Promoting women’s agency

Even where gender gaps in human capi-

tal and physical assets are narrowed, dif-
ferences  in  gender  outcomes  could 
emerge because girls and boys, and later 
women and men, have unequal capacity to exer-
cise agency. By agency we mean an individual’s 
(or group’s) ability to make effective choices and 
to transform those choices into desired outcomes. 
Agency can be understood as the process through 
which  women  and  men  use  their  endowments 
and take advantage of economic opportunities to 
achieve desired outcomes. Thus, agency is key to 
understanding  how  gender  outcomes  emerge 
and why they are equal or unequal.

Across all countries women and men differ in 
their ability to make effective choices in a range 
of spheres, with women typically at a disadvan-
tage. This chapter focuses on a selection of out-
comes  closely  associated  with  women’s  ability 
(or inability) to make choices. These outcomes 
are related and often compound each other; as 
a result, a women’s ability to choose and act at 
any point in time partly reﬂ ects foundations laid 
earlier  in  her  life,  often  starting  in  childhood. 
These outcomes, or expressions of agency, are
•  Control over resources—measured by wom-
en’s ability to earn and control income and to 
own, use, and dispose of material assets.

•  Ability to move freely—measured by wom-
en’s freedom to decide their movements and 
their ability to move outside their homes. 

•  Decision  making  over  family  formation—
measured by women’s and girls’ ability to de-
cide  when  and  whom  to  marry,  when  and 
how  many  children  to  have,  and  when  to 
leave a marriage. 

•  Freedom  from  the  risk  of  violence—mea-
sured by the prevalence of domestic violence 
and other forms of sexual, physical, or emo-
tional violence.

•  Ability  to  have  a  voice  in  society  and  inﬂ u-
ence policy—measured by participation and 
representation in formal politics and engage-
ment in collective action and associations. 

In  analyzing  how  economic  growth,  formal 
institutions, informal institutions, and markets 
interact to enable or constrain women’s agency, 
four  core  ﬁ ndings  emerge.1  First,  economic 
growth can improve the material conditions for 
exercising  agency—through  higher  incomes, 
greater  access  to  services,  and  expanded  infra-
structure.  But  the  impact  of  higher  aggregate 
incomes  on  women’s  agency  partly  hinges  on 
women’s ability to earn their own incomes; that 
ability increases their bargaining power within 
the  household  and  their  ability  to  accumulate 
autonomous assets. Economic growth alone will 
not eliminate gender differences in agency.

Second,  expanding  women’s  rights  can  fos-
ter  agency  in  some  realms.  But  the  expansion 
of rights for family formation and control over 
household resources has been limited. And the 
effectiveness  of  expanding  rights  in  bringing 
about change depends on their applicability—
often  linked  to  multiple  legal  systems—and 
their enforcement. 

Third,  social  norms  shape  women’s  agency. 
Along  with  markets  and  institutions,  they  de-
termine  the  endowments  and  opportunities 
that women have and whether they can exercise 
the  choices  to  use  them.  Norms  can  constrain 
women’s  agency  when  they  prevent  laws,  ser-

 

Promoting women’s agency 

151

vices, and incomes from beneﬁ ting women and 
men equally. Social norms are particularly bind-
ing  when  increases  in  women’s  agency  would 
 directly  shift  power  balances  in  the  household 
and in society. Reforms in markets and institu-
tions, such as service delivery improvements, in-
formation provision, and creation of networks, 
can reduce the bind of social norms by affecting 
the costs and beneﬁ ts of compliance.

Fourth, women’s collective agency can trans-
form  society.  Women’s  collective  agency  both 
depends  on  and  determines  their  individual 
agency.  Women’s  ability  to  inﬂ uence  their  en-
vironment  goes  beyond  formal  political  chan-
nels, which can be limited by social norms and 
beliefs regarding gender roles and institutional 
structures. Women can inﬂ uence their environ-
ments  through  their  participation  in  informal 
associations  and  through  collective  action,  but 
their success depends in part on their individual 
ability to make effective choices.

WOMEN’S AGENCY MATTERS

Women’s  agency  matters  at  three  levels.  It  has 
intrinsic relevance for women’s individual well-
being and quality of life. It has instrumental rel-
evance for actions that improve the well-being 
of women and their families. And it is required 
if women are to play an active role in shaping 
institutions, social norms, and the well-being of 
their communities.2
•  Women’s ability to inﬂ uence their lives matters 
in and of itself. A person’s ability to make ef-
fective choices and exercise control over one’s 
life is a key dimension of well-being. Women 
and  men  can  contest  and  alter  their  condi-
tions only if they are able to aspire to better 
outcomes,  make  effective  choices,  and  take 
action to improve their lives.

•  Women’s  ability  to  inﬂ uence  their  own  lives 
also  matters  for  other  aspects  of  well-being. 
Agency determines women’s ability to build 
their  human  capital  and  access  economic 
 opportunities.  Family  formation  decisions, 
especially about the timing of marriage and 
childbearing and the number of children, are 
critical  for  women’s  investments  in  educa-
tion. Indeed, delays in marriage are strongly 
associated  with  greater  education,  earnings, 
and health-seeking behavior.3 In Bangladesh, 
women with greater control over health care, 

household  purchases,  and  visits  to  relatives 
and friends were found to have systematically 
higher  nutritional  status  (even  within  in-
come  groups).4  Physical  mobility  is  also 
 critical for girls’ and women’s access to ser-
vices—including  education,  health,  water, 
and justice—and for the development of so-
cial  networks.  In  Zambia,  women  who  live 
fewer  than  two  hours  from  health  institu-
tions  are  twice  as  likely  to  have  an  institu-
tional delivery as those who live farther away.5 
In Pakistan, greater physical mobility is asso-
ciated with greater use of contraceptives and 
access to care.6 In the United States, access to 
contraception increased the age at marriage 
and earnings, while in Europe birth control 
rights increased women’s labor force partici-
pation and income.7 

•  Women’s  exercise  of  agency  improves  their 
children’s welfare. Gender differences in pref-
erences are reﬂ ected in different patterns of 
expenditure  and  consumption  within  the 
household,  with  women  more  strongly  fa-
voring investments in children’s human capi-
tal.  Women’s  control  of  income  and  assets 
is important as an instrument for child wel-
fare. In Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, and the United 
Kingdom,  women’s  greater  control  over  in-
come increases spending on goods that ben-
eﬁ t  children.8  In  Ghana,  the  share  of  assets 
and  the  share  of  land  owned  by  women 
are positively associated with higher food ex-
penditures among rural households.9 In Ne-
pal,  where  mothers  have  greater  ownership 
of  land,  fewer  children  are  severely  under-
weight.10 And in Mexico, the daughters (but 
not the sons) of women with greater control 
over decisions within their households work 
fewer hours in household tasks.11

•  Women’s agency also shapes their children’s fu-
ture behavior. What children see and experi-
ence in the home can inﬂ uence lifelong beliefs 
and behaviors. Childhood witnesses to or vic-
tims of domestic violence are more likely to 
later perpetrate or experience domestic vio-
lence  as  adults—men  who  had  witnessed 
 domestic violence in childhood were two to 
three  times  more  likely  than  other  men  to 
perpetrate violence (ﬁ gure 4.1).12 The percep-
tions  of  children—both  girls  and  boys—of 
what activities or behaviors are acceptable for 
men and women are also often shaped in the 
home. In Japan men raised by full-time work-

152 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 4.1   Witnessing violence as a child is associated with 

perpetrating violence as an adult

%

 
,

 

i

l

e
c
n
e
o
v
g
n
i
t
a
u
t
e
p
r
e
p

 
,

n
e
m

 
t
l
u
d
a

60 

50 

40 

30 

20 

10 

0 

Mexico 

Brazil 

Chile 

India 

Croatia 

Rwanda 

did not witness father’s abuse 

witnessed father’s abuse

Source: Barker and others 2011.

ing mothers are less likely to support the divi-
sion of gender roles, and in the United States 
both women whose mothers worked and the 
wives of men whose mothers worked are sig-
niﬁ cantly more likely to work.13 Thus, wom-
en’s ability to remain safe from violence and 
to exercise greater economic agency can limit 
the intergenerational transmission of violence 
and promote positive norms on gender roles.

•  Women’s  collective  agency  is  transformative, 
promoting changes in society and policy. While 
individual women might have limited voice, 
groups of women and girls can exert much 
more  pressure.  Acting  together  they  can  at 
times overcome constraints facing individu-
als. And while an individual woman’s greater 
ability  to  exercise  agency  might  help  her 
reach better outcomes for herself within her 
environment and constraints, it rarely is suf-
ﬁ cient  to  promote  structural  changes  that 
will  reform  the  environment  for  other 
women. By contrast, women’s collective voice 
can  contribute  to  changes  in  laws,  policies, 
services,  institutions,  and  social  norms  that 
eventually  will  increase  women’s  individual 
agency.  In  higher-income  countries  greater 
female  representation  has  increased  the 
prominence of issues more relevant to wom-
en’s  lives,  including  child  mortality,  mater-
nity  leave,  child  care,  and  violence  against 
women.14 An  analysis  of  changes  in  gender 

policies in 70 countries highlights the signiﬁ -
cant  role  of  women’s  collective  movements 
since  1975  in  promoting  more  egalitarian 
family  laws  and  addressing  violence  against 
women.15 Greater representation in local po-
litical bodies, such as the panchayats in India, 
has also resulted (in some contexts) in greater 
allocations to some infrastructure and other 
services serving women’s and their children’s 
needs—as well as in greater women’s partici-
pation in village meetings, increased report-
ing of crimes against women, and more ar-
rests for such crimes.16 

Overall,  progress  in  outcomes  associated 
with women’s agency has been limited. Women 
still control fewer assets, have less autonomous 
income,  and  have  less  control  over  household 
decisions than men. Levels of domestic violence 
remain  high  across  nations,  and  women  have 
limited voice in governments and parliaments. 
The next three sections, following the analytical 
framework,  systematically  analyze  the  roles  of 
economic growth and markets, formal institu-
tions  (laws  and  services),  and  social  norms  in 
inﬂ uencing women’s capacity for agency (ﬁ gure 
4.2).  They  show  how  these  determinants  play 
a  role  in  deﬁ ning  women’s  agency—and  how 
constraints  in  each  of  them  can  be  mutually 
 reinforcing.

ECONOMIC GROWTH CAN PROMOTE 
WOMEN’S AGENCY BUT HAS 
LIMITED IMPACT 

Economic  growth  can  promote  the  exercise 
of  women’s  agency  by  removing  ﬁ nancial 
constraints,  by  increasing  women’s  economic 
opportunities  and  autonomous  income,  and 
by  expanding  services  and  infrastructure.  But 
its  overall  impact  hinges  on  women’s  greater 
access  to  their  own  incomes  and  economic 
 opportunities.

Higher household incomes remove some 
ﬁ nancial constraints to women’s agency
Higher  household  incomes  and  assets  can  re-
duce  the  need  to  ration  goods  or  services  be-
tween men and women (or boys and girls). For 
example,  programs  in  Colombia,  Kenya,  and 
Malawi that provided cash transfers or subsidies 
for school expenses increased the age at marriage 

Promoting women’s agency

153

FIGURE 4.2   Limited  progress in women’s agency is explained by mutually reinforcing constraints in 

markets, formal institutions, and informal institutions

MARKETS

Female

autonomous

earnings

I N F O R M A L
I N S T I T U T I O N S
r o l e s ,
N o r m s   o n  
i o n s ,
r e l a t
 
p o w e r
  a n d
t y ,
i
l
m o b i
t y /
i n i
m a s c u l
n e t w o r k s

FORMAL
INSTITUTIONS
Laws on ownership
and marriage,
enforcement,
services, and
information

HOUSEHOLDS
Allocation of
resources and
care/housework

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

AGENCY

Control within

household

ENDOWMENTS

Source: WDR 2012 team.

for girls and reduced early pregnancy.17 Greater 
household wealth can also reduce the need for 
girls to marry early to reduce the ﬁ nancial strain 
on  the  household.  Throughout  the  world  girls 
and women in richer households marry later on 
average (although there are exceptions for some 
regions or communities) (ﬁ gure 4.3).

Higher  household  incomes  and  wealth  can 
also release ﬁ nancial constraints on physical mo-
bility. The cost of transportation can be a barrier 
to  accessing  services  and  information  or  em-
ployment opportunities and markets (chapter 5 
discusses  the  latter  in  greater  depth).  In  Brazil 
and Burkina Faso about a fourth of the cost of 
receiving health services in a hospital relates to 
transport.18  And  data  from  36  countries  show 
that  greater  wealth  is  associated  with  weaker 
mobility constraints related to infrastructure.19 
Women  in  wealthier  households  report 
having  greater  control  over  decision  making, 
as  households  enjoy  greater  discretionary  in-
come  beyond  levels  required  to  cover  basic 

expenditure.  In  South  Asia  the  percentage  of 
women who have some role in deciding on vis-
its to  relatives increases from 57 percent for the 
poorest  quintile  to  71  percent  for  the  richest 
quintile, and the share increases from 80 per-
cent to 92 percent for decisions over their own 
earnings (ﬁ gure 4.4). Similar patterns hold for 
other regions.

Women’s earnings opportunities and own 
assets promote their bargaining power
Another  channel  for  economic  growth  (and 
higher  national  incomes)  to  affect  women’s 
agency is through the expansion of earning op-
portunities. Economic growth changes employ-
ment structures in ways that typically open new 
opportunities  for  women  and  create  new  in-
centives for them to join the labor force. When 
higher  incomes  come  mainly  through  men’s 
greater earnings, the impact on women’s agency 
might  be  muted  or  even  negative.  But  higher 
incomes that come through women’s own earn-

154 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 4.3     Richer women marry later

Rwanda 
Ukraine 
Armenia 
Azerbaijan 
Namibia 
Swaziland 
Moldova 
Cambodia 
Kenya 
Ghana 
Haiti 
Colombia 
Philippines 
Morocco 
Bolivia 
Congo, Rep.     
Lesotho 
Zambia 
Peru 
Uganda 
Zimbabwe 
Liberia 
Ethiopia 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Honduras 
Benin 
India 
Chad 
Nepal 
Malawi 
Burkina Faso 
Dominican Republic 
Cameroon 
Madagascar 
Sierra Leone 
Guinea 
Mali 
Mozambique 
Nigeria 
Niger 

0 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

% of girls under age 18 who are married 

richest quintile

poorest 2 quintiles

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys 2003–09. 
Note: Sample of girls ages 15–17; wealth measured by quintiles. 

ings increase their voice and bargaining power 
in multiple ways. 

There  is  also  evidence  of  a  relationship  be-
tween  women’s  assets,  earnings,  and  shares  of 
household income and the incidence of domes-
tic  violence.  In  Colombia,  India,  South  Africa, 
and Uganda, women’s asset ownership is asso-
ciated  with  lower  risk  of  domestic  violence,  at 
least in the medium term.20 And in the United 
States, a reduction in the gap between men and 

women’s  wages  explains  about  a  tenth  of  the 
observed reduction in domestic violence.21 But 
improvements  in  women’s  economic  position 
can also challenge social norms on women’s role 
in the household and in society and lead to an 
increase  in  some  forms  of  domestic  violence 
or threats of such violence in the short term, a 
factor that needs to be taken into account when 
designing interventions.22 

“

What I make and what I buy with 
my own money makes me 
happy.

Adult woman, Vietnam

”

Women’s income affects their accumulation 
of  physical,  human,  and  ﬁ nancial  assets,  in-
cluding pensions and insurance. Together with 
inheritance  or  programs  of  land  redistribu-
tion, a woman’s own income is one of the key 
mechanisms  for  the  accumulation  of  personal 
assets. And personal assets matter greatly for a 
woman’s ability to exit a marriage, to cope with 
shocks, and to invest and expand her earnings 
and economic opportunities. 

Two important assets are land and pensions. 
Evidence  from  six  countries  in  Latin  America 
suggests that markets were the second most im-
portant channel for land acquisition for women, 
but a much less frequent channel of acquisition 
of land than for men (ﬁ gure 4.5). And in coun-
tries where transfers from the state or commu-
nity are sizable, men more frequently are beneﬁ -
ciaries. An  analysis  of  the  factors  behind  these 
differences  points  to  discrimination  in  land 
markets and to differences in incomes and ac-
cess to credit.23 

For pensions the patterns of wealth accumu-
lation  mirror  those  observed  for  labor  market 
earnings, with women around the world having 
on average both lower participation in pension 
systems  and  lower  savings.  Evidence  from  the 
United Kingdom and the United States suggests 
that men’s total pension assets are substantially 
larger than women’s, even when the percentages 
of men and women enrolled in a pension sys-
tem are similar. The well-being of many elderly 
women thus depends on their husband’s access 
to  savings  and  pensions  and  on  the  rules  for 
beneﬁ ts provided to survivors once the pension 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

155

holder dies. In most regimes, some mechanisms 
are in place to ensure that survivors receive part 
of  the  pension  held  by  their  deceased  spouse, 
but the rules can vary greatly in ways that affect 
women’s agency (box 4.1). 

Access  to  formal  savings  instruments  helps 
protect  assets.  And  women  have  more  limited 
access  to  ﬁ nancial  services  than  men  do—in 
Latin America and the Caribbean, 22 percent of 
women  have  savings  accounts  compared  with 
28 percent of men (16 percent and 23 percent, 
respectively, for debit/ATM cards) and in Sub-
Saharan  Africa,  13  percent  of  women  and  18 
percent of men have bank accounts.24 

Greater economic opportunities for women 
and girls can also promote women’s exercise of 
agency  by  broadening  their  networks—from 
mostly kin-related networks—and thus expand-
ing  their  sources  of  information  and  support. 
The increased physical mobility that often comes 
with employment puts women in contact with 
a  new  set  of  individuals  at  work  and  in  other 
places. When women work full time, they are ac-
tively engaged in unions or professional associa-
tions at almost the same rate as men (ﬁ gure 4.6). 
Women make up 44 percent of union members 
(about  50  million  workers)  in  30  European 
countries.25 In many countries, adolescent girls 
tend to dedicate a signiﬁ cant amount of time to 
unpaid  domestic  work,  while  boys  focus  more 
on  paid  work  or  recreational  time. As  a  result, 
girls’ social networks can be thinner than those 
of boys (and can weaken around adolescence).26 

Economic growth also promotes agency 
through expanded infrastructure and 
service provision 
Part of the association between country incomes 
and women’s agency is related to the expansion 
of  infrastructure.  Indeed,  because  of  their  role 
as caregivers, women and girls tend to face im-
portant  constraints  on  their  time  and  physical 
mobility  that  investments  in  electricity,  water, 
roads, and transportation services can mitigate. 
Investments  in  electricity  networks  in  rural 
South  Africa  raised  women’s  employment  by 
almost 10 percentage points in ﬁ ve years. Elec-
tricity freed up time from home production for 
women  and  expanded  the  types  of  market  ac-
tivities available to them (service jobs requiring 
power, for example) but had no signiﬁ cant effect 
on male employment.27 The expansion of rural 
road networks and the provision of urban pub-

FIGURE 4.4   Women’s control is greater in wealthier households 

large

purchases

visits to

family/relatives

how own earnings

are used

100

l

 

o
r
t
n
o
c
e
m
o
s
 
h
t
i

 

w
n
e
m
o
w

%

 
,
s
n
o
i
s
i
c
e
d
 
r
e
v
o

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
s

90

80

70

60

50

40

Q1

Q2

Q3 Q4

Q5 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5

quintiles 

East Asia and Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean 
South Asia 

Europe and Central Asia 
Middle East and North Africa 
Sub-Saharan Africa 

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys 2003–09, 40 countries.

Note: Sample of married women for control over large purchases and visits to relatives and married women 
working for cash for control over own earnings. 

FIGURE 4.5   Form of acquisition of land by gender in six 

Latin American countries

t
n
e
c
r
e
p

100

80

60

40

20

0

8
1

37

54

4
1

73

22

Brazil 
women

6
2
8

84

7
3

25

65

8
5

45

16

7

43

43

35

4
7
8

81

9

34

12

45

10

33

57

16

52

32

1
7

16

75

6

19

27

49

Chile 

Ecuador 

Mexico 

Nicaragua 

Peru 

inheritance 

market 

transfers from state and community 

other 

men

inheritance 

market 

transfers from state and community 

other 

Source: Deere and León 2003.

lic transport services can also improve outcomes 
for  women  and  girls.  In  rural  Guatemala  and 
Pakistan, the expansion of rural road networks 
had  a  strong  impact  on  female  mobility  and 

156 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 4.1   Pensions—Coverage, amounts, and survivor 
benefits are important for women’s autonomy

Women have fewer assets in formal pension systems than men do. Even when 
they work, they are less covered because they have lower earnings, work fewer 
hours, and participate less in the formal sector. Data from 25 European coun-
tries show that only in 6 countries is the share of elderly women receiving a 
pension (as a share of total women over retirement age) larger than the equiva-
lent share for men. In other countries the share is as low as 40 percent (Luxem-
bourg) or 60 percent (Austria, Greece, and Malta). In the United States currently, 
women  and  men  have  similar  coverage  rates  (around  65  percent),  but  the 
amounts women have accumulated in their individual accounts are on average 
half that of men. In China, pensions are the primary source of income for 57 
percent of retired  men in urban areas, but for only 35 percent of women, who 
tend to rely more on family support (box fi gure 4.1.1).

BOX FIGURE 4.1.1   Sources of income for China’s elderly, 2005

men

4%

women

5%

urban

57%

21

%

3
5%

52%

8%

rural

18%

4%4%

39%

49%

1%

8%

2%2%

69%

28%

labor

pension

family support

other

Source: China’s National Bureau of Statistics, one percent population sample 
data. 

On the inheritance of pension rights for spouses, data from 24 countries 
from all regions show that, in most countries, the wife is among the fi rst recipi-
ents, together with her children. In Bolivia, the Philippines, and Togo, the wife’s 
entitlement stops when she remarries, and the daughter’s entitlement similarly 
stops upon her marriage (while sons are usually entitled up to a certain fi xed 
age). The conditional rules suggest that pensions for widows are conceived not 
as entitlements that women have for having provided nonmonetary contribu-
tions to their households, but as mechanisms to replace the main breadwinner 
until they marry another one. 

In recent years, many pension systems have adopted individual accounts, 
reduced  the  redistributional  element  of  the  system,  and  adopted  diff erent 
annuity tables for men and women to refl ect women’s longer life expectancy. 
These reforms leave women with less fi nancial autonomy in their older years.

Sources: ILO 2010; International Social Security Association. Social Security Country Proﬁ les, http://www.issa
.int/Observatory/Country-Proﬁ les; Johnson 1999.

schooling.28 In urban settings, particularly at the 
periphery, the availability, cost, and efﬁ ciency of 
public transport services make a difference. Long 
commutes limit women’s ability to take formal 
or higher paying jobs because they are not com-
patible with their care duties. In Durban, South 
Africa,  women  in  peripheral  areas  suffer  poor 
access to central jobs and to local amenities be-
cause of deﬁ cient transport systems.29 

“

Now women can decide, there is 
family planning. Before, the man used 
to tell the woman how many children 
to have.

Adult woman, Burkina Faso

” 

Higher country incomes are also typically as-
sociated  with  an  increase  in  the  provision  and 
quality of public services. Such services can ex-
pand women’s exercise of agency. For example, re-
productive health services can help women (and 
men) make decisions about their own fertility.30 
Indeed, many young men and women surveyed 
for the qualitative study on gender and economic 
choice prepared for this Report said family plan-
ning  services  were  instrumental  in  shifting  de-
cision  making  about  having  children  from  the 
male  to  the  couple.31  Although  the  availability 
of modern contraceptives has increased signiﬁ -
cantly over the past decades in most countries, 
in  line  with  rising  incomes,  and  these  services 
are  widely  available,  constraints  remain.  The 
main ones, cited by two-thirds of women, were 
health concerns or opposition to contraceptives 
(ﬁ gure 4.7). However, in line with increased ac-
cess, only 8 percent of the women surveyed said 
lack of access and issues of cost were the main 
reasons they did not use contraceptives. The role 
of intrahousehold bargaining over fertility con-

“

If they know about family 
planning, they both decide 
[how many children to have]; 
knowing about family planning 
helps.

”

Young man, Papua New Guinea

 

Promoting women’s agency 

157

trol is illustrated in Zambia, where women used 
contraceptives more frequently when they could 
hide the use from their spouse.32

But in a few countries and for some popu-
lation  groups,  supply  remains  a  signiﬁ cant 
issue—in  Burkina  Faso,  Mozambique,  and  the 
Philippines,  around  20  percent  of  women  in 
need lacked access. And poverty also constrains 
access.  For  instance,  almost  18  percent  of  the 
poorest  ﬁ fth  of  women  in  need  lacked  access 
to contraception in Benin and Indonesia, com-
pared to only 3 percent of the richest ﬁ fth. Also, 
the transition to sexual maturity can be difﬁ cult 
to navigate for adolescent girls, who tend to have 
limited  knowledge  of  reproductive  health  and 
contraception.  They  also  tend  to  have  limited 
bargaining  power,  and  many  experience  un-
wanted  sexual  encounters.33  Social  norms  that 
disapprove or condemn their sexual activity may 
discourage these girls from seeking reproductive 
health  services;  in  some  countries,  young  girls 
must have parental consent before they can re-
ceive such services.34 As a result, about 60 per-
cent of unsafe abortions in Sub-Saharan Africa 
are performed on girls and women ages 15–24; 
worldwide,  an  estimated  25  percent  of  unsafe 
abortions are performed on girls ages 15–19.35

Even  when  country  incomes  and  women’s 
agency  are  associated,  the  association  varies 
greatly across countries and outcomes, suggest-
ing  that  many  aspects  of  agency  are  driven  by 
other  factors.  Formal  institutions—laws  and 
services—can impose or ease constraints on the 
exercise of agency. And prevailing social norms 
and their associated beliefs can promote or re-
strict its expression.

RIGHTS AND THEIR EFFECTIVE 
IMPLEMENTATION SHAPE WOMEN’S 
CHOICES AND VOICES

laws  formalize 
Among  formal  institutions, 
women’s rights and provide the framework that 
deﬁ nes  the  environment  in  which  women  ex-
ercise agency. Many laws reﬂ ect different treat-
ment of men and women in the past or are the 
formal recognition of unequal social norms and 
practices.  So,  ensuring  that  laws  treat  the  two 
sexes equitably can be instrumental in reversing 
the status quo. Acknowledging rights has been a 
critical force behind women’s ability to express 

FIGURE 4.6   Working outside the home broadens men’s and 

women’s networks (almost) equally

 

 

s
r
e
b
m
e
m
n
e
m
o
w
d
n
a
n
e
m
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

 

s
r
e
b
m
e
m
e
v
i
t
c
a
 
r
o

 

 

80 

70 

60 

50 

40 

30 

20 

10 

0 

Middle East 

and 

North Africa 

East Asia

and
Pacific

Latin 

America 
and the 
Caribbean 

Europe and 

Central 

Asia 

OECD 

countries 

Sub-Saharan 

Africa 

South 
Asia 
(India) 

male members of professional associations 

male active members  

female members of professional associations 

female active members  

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys 2004–09, 38 countries. 
Note: Sample of men and women working full time.

their voices, make choices, and accumulate as-
sets in many countries. 

But the power of laws in increasing women’s 
agency can be limited by four factors. First, dis-
crimination  persists  in  many  formal  statutory 
legal systems, particularly around marriage and 
control over resources. Second, customary laws 
in  many  countries  have  large  spheres  of  inﬂ u-
ence, especially in relation to family law. Third, 
the  enforcement  of  rights—and  the  ability  of 
women to seek redress or to demand that their 
rights be enforced—is critical if rights are to have 
an impact on women’s ability to exercise agency. 
Fourth, markets and social norms interact with 
laws, either limiting or enhancing their impacts.

Rights matter for women’s agency
Voting rights for women are now near univer-
sal.  Head  of  household  rules  in  Napoleonic 
codes,  the  doctrine  of  couverture  in  common 
law statutes, and religious or customary law that 
restricted  married  women’s  legal  capacity  and 
their right to work have been reformed in many 
countries, although a few exceptions persist. 

Changes in other laws can promote women’s 
agency. Indeed, many laws can increase women’s 

158 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 4.7   In most countries, access to contraceptives is a less signiﬁ cant 

constraint than lack of knowledge and opposition to contraception 

Cambodia 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
Ukraine 
Swaziland 
Jordan 
Chad 
Nigeria 
Mali 
Haiti 
Rwanda 
Armenia 
Ethiopia 
Honduras 
Azerbaijan 
Dominican Republic 
Madagascar 
Bangladesh 
Morocco 
Moldova 
Ghana 
Malawi 
Cameroon 
Kenya 
India 
Sierra Leone 
Guinea 
Zambia 
Nepal 
Pakistan 
Zimbabwe 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Niger 
Bolivia 
Indonesia 
Lesotho 
Benin 
Namibia 
Uganda 
Colombia 
Congo, Rep. 
Peru 
Mozambique 
Burkina Faso 
Philippines 

0 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

Share of women citing reasons for not using contraceptives, % 

issues of access, distance, or cost
lack of knowledge of method or source 

health concerns, fear of side effects, inconvenient to use
opposition by woman/partner or religion 

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys 2003–09. 

Note: Sample of women who do not want children in next two years, are fecund, and do not use contraception. 

autonomy even if that was not their intended ob-
jective. For example, laws requiring compulsory 
education have delayed marriages and childbear-
ing, increasing women’s agency. In Turkey, where 
out-of-wedlock birth is not socially accepted, the 

legal extension of compulsory schooling by three 
years in 1997 (to age 14) reduced the proportion 
of 16-year-old girls who were married by 45 per-
cent and the percentage of those giving birth by 
age 17 by 36 percent.36 While the share of women 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

159

who eventually marry or the number of children 
they eventually have was not affected, the timing 
matters because early marriage and childbearing 
reduce educational achievements and thus earn-
ings and agency in adult life. 

Laws that increase control over income and 
assets  may  improve  women’s  position  within 
their  own  households  by  strengthening  their 
ability  to  leave  marriages  (“exit  options”)  and 
increasing their bargaining power. The improve-
ment in the legal status of girls can also, by in-
creasing  their  value,  induce  other  changes:  in-
vestments in girls’ education may increase, ages 
at  marriage  may  increase,  or  childbearing  may 
be delayed. For example, reforms to inheritance 
laws in India resulted in delays in marriage for 
girls, more education (increasing the number of 
years of schooling by an average of 11–25 per-
cent), and lower dowry payments.37 

Laws that allow or facilitate divorce can also 
increase women’s capacity to choose. For exam-
ple, laws that enable women to seek divorce and 
that  provide  for  equitable  ﬁ nancial  provisions 
affect  the  spouses’  work  and  income  transfers 
within households. In countries where women 
receive half the household’s wealth upon divorce, 
women may work fewer hours because they feel 
more sheltered by the prospect of an equitable 
division  of  marital  property.38  In  the  United 
States,  these  laws  also  reduced  investments  in 
marriage-speciﬁ c capital, such as investments in 
the education of a spouse (although home own-
ership was not affected) because of the increased 
risk of losing the asset upon divorce; domestic 
violence also fell by around 30 percent.39

Progress in areas that regulate relations 
within households has been limited 
Progress in improving laws has been slowest in 
areas that regulate relations within households. 
Many programs and policies seem to stop at the 
household’s doorstep and avoid interfering with 
relations  within  households.  This  resistance  is 
also reﬂ ected in the reservations that countries 
make  when  signing  up  for  the  Convention  to 
Eliminate All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women.  Of  the  187  countries  that  have  rati-
ﬁ ed the convention, 29 have not fully endorsed 
article  16,  which  calls  for  the  elimination  of 
discrimination  in  all  matters  relating  to  mar-
riage  and  family  relations,  including  the  right 
to  enter  marriage;  the  right  to  freely  choose  a 
spouse; equal rights in marriage and its dissolu-

tion; equal parental rights and rights over chil-
dren; equal personal rights as spouses; and equal 
rights  in  ownership,  acquisition,  management, 
and disposition of property.40 

Women  now  have  the  legal  ability  to  own 
assets in most countries, but men and women 
still  have  different  ownership  rights  in  at  least 
nine  countries.41  Women  may  be  restricted  in 
acquiring,  selling,  transferring,  or  bequeathing 
property, and the consent of a male guardian or 
husband  is  needed  before  a  woman  can  make 
any purchase, sale or, transfer of assets. In some 
cases, a woman may control only a portion of 
her personal property. Any breach of these lim-
its could trigger a husband’s right to administer 
a wife’s personal property. In some cases, even 
property  registration  may  require  the  consent 
of  a  male  guardian.  Citizenship  laws  may  pre-
vent women from passing on their nationality to 
foreign husbands or their children. This matters 
because  lack  of  citizenship  can  limit  access  to 
state beneﬁ ts such as free education and curtail 
the extent to which national laws apply.

Inheritance is one of the main mechanisms 
for the accumulation of assets. In many coun-
tries,  women  and  girls  still  have  fewer  inheri-
tance rights than men and boys. In 21 of the 63 
countries that have data for more than 40 years, 
women have unequal inheritance rights (in the 
absence of wills) (ﬁ gure 4.8). This is particularly 
relevant  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  where  fewer 
than  half  of  widows  (or  their  children)  report 
having received any of their late husband’s assets 
(data from 16 countries, see box 4.6). All coun-
tries in the Organisation for Economic Co-op-
eration and Development (OECD), the former 
Soviet Union, and Latin America reformed their 
inheritance laws more than 50 years ago. Non-
OECD countries that have a common law legacy 
or that recognize customary or religious law are 
more  likely  to  exhibit  unequal  rights  for  sons 
and daughters. Among majority Muslim coun-
tries, there are important doctrinal differences, 
with  some  granting  greater  inheritance  shares 
for girls. In Turkey, inheritance rights for boys 
and girls have long been equal in practice as well 
as in law. And in the Islamic Republic of Iran, 
girls’  share  of  inheritance  is  generally  equal  to 
boys. In other countries, such as Bangladesh, the 
law provides for unequal inheritance rights, but 
mechanisms exist for families to agree on more 
equitable distributions if they so desire. Finally, 
in a few countries, such as Bhutan, girls inherit 

160 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 4.8   Progress on inheritance is faster for daughters than for widows
(percentage of countries with equal, unequal, or customary inheritance)

Daughters

100 

50 

59 

Middle East and

North Africa

Widows

100 

50 

South Asia

50 

50 

34 

7 

Sub-Saharan Africa

44 

46 

10 

75 

25 

East Asia and Pacific

75 

25 

100 

OECD countries,
Latin America

Central Asia

and the Caribbean,

and Europe and

100 

0 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

0 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

percentage of countries with equal,
unequal, or customary inheritance

percentage of countries with equal,
unequal, or customary inheritance

equal inheritance 

unequal inheritance 

customary inheritance 

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Htun and Weldon 2011b, Women Africa database, and World Bank’s Gender Law Library. 
Note: Countries are given equal weight in the calculation of regional percentages. 

most  of  their  parents’  property,  and  property 
titles are mostly in women’s names.42

Even when countries reform their laws toward 
more equal treatment of men and women, im-
portant differences can persist. In India, amend-
ments  to  inheritance  legislation  that  granted 
sons and daughters equal rights in joint family 
property  in  a  few  states  signiﬁ cantly  increased 
daughters’ likelihood to inherit land, but the le-
gal change alone was insufﬁ cient to fully com-
pensate for females’ underlying disadvantage.43 
Laws are sometimes ignored or weakly enforced 
or  may  be  circumvented  through  the  making 
of  wills  (for  example,  when  families  explicitly 
choose to give more to sons than to daughters). 
Some countries with systems based on religious 
laws limit the discretion individuals have in des-
ignating their heirs (or provide venues for chal-
lenging a will), helping to ensure that women’s 
share of the inheritance is protected. The same 
approach  is  sometimes  found  in  nonreligious 
codes.  In  Brazil,  wills  have  to  give  at  least  half 
the estate to children and widows, and boys and 
girls  must  inherit  equally.  This  requirement 

leaves  discretion  in  the  allocation  of  the  other 
half of the estate, which individuals can choose 
to pass on only to their sons, but it does offer 
some protection for girls and widows.44 

Rights in marriage and its dissolution are 
critical for women’s agency 
In many countries, legal systems do not uphold 
equal rights for women at all stages of the life 
cycle.  Marriage  is  a  milestone  that  sometimes 
weakens women’s legal and property rights. In 
some cases the legal capacities and responsibili-
ties women have before marriage are transferred 
to their husbands upon marriage. In some coun-
tries marriage reduces women’s civil capacity—
by  preventing  them  from  applying  for  a  pass-
port, entering a contract, or appearing in court 
without their husbands’ permission.

The impact of marriage is also felt in prop-
erty regimes that stipulate the amount of assets 
women  can  control,  both  during  the  marriage 
and  in  case  of  divorce.  The  type  of  property 
regime  can  thus  shape  the  bargaining  power  a 
woman  has  within  her  household.  A  property 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

161

regime that allows a woman to leave a marriage 
with  a  signiﬁ cant  share  of  household  assets—
lowering the cost of leaving the household and 
hence making the threat of leaving more credi-
ble—might increase her bargaining power, even 
if she never exercises that right. Conversely, a re-
gime that limits women’s control to the assets she 
brings  to  the  marriage—which  are  often  fewer 
than those brought by men45—or to assets she 
acquires herself, limits her bargaining power. 

Countries in Latin America and Africa previ-
ously  colonized  by  France,  Belgium,  Germany, 
the Netherlands, Portugal, or Spain were largely 
shaped by old codes that they inherited and typ-
ically have community of property as a default 
(box 4.2). Countries from the former Soviet bloc 
also  usually  have  default  community  of  prop-
erty regimes. Countries shaped by common or 
by Islamic law, and countries where polygamy is 
formally allowed, typically have separate owner-
ship of property as a default (Turkey, with com-
munity of property as the default, is an excep-
tion among Muslim-majority countries). 

Sixty percent of the adults in the WDR 2012 
qualitative study on gender and economic choice 
reported  that  divorce  is  difﬁ cult,  and  younger 
adults have only a slightly more positive view.46 
Lack of fairness (for women) in the division of 
assets and custody of children was one of mul-
tiple obstacles to divorce mentioned by both men 
and women surveyed. Opposition by families and 
communities,  social  isolation,  and  stigma  were 
also identiﬁ ed as key impediments to divorce. 

For  many  women  across  the  world,  widow-
hood is associated with a critical loss in the use 
and control of assets, because their husband’s as-
sets revert to his family, and the widows lose con-
trol and at times the use of the land and house 
(box 4.3). While widows are protected in coun-
tries with community of property regimes, their 
situation  under  separate  ownership  regimes  is 
weaker. Indeed, default inheritance rights usually 
award less than half of the estate to the widow; 
the  usual  share  in  Sub-Saharan  African  ranges 
from 0 to 30 percent, and customary land is at 
times  excluded  from  the  property  widows  can 
inherit (with exceptions in matrilineal societies).
In many countries, reforms to strengthen the 
rights of widows are less advanced than reforms 
to strengthen the rights of daughters (see ﬁ gure 
4.8). While major reforms affecting women have 
occurred in other areas of family law and land 
laws in Kenya, Morocco, Tanzania, and Tunisia, 

“

They [divorced women] come to their 
parental home after divorce, but they get 
no alimony or share of the property from the 
husband’s side, nor do they get any share of the 
parental property. . . . In some cases, they are 
forced to remarry an elderly man so that they 
can earn a living by working in their master’s or 
husband’s ﬁ eld.

Adult woman, India

 
When you die, your property is distributed by 
your relatives, and does not go to your wife or 
daughter. If you have a son, all property will 
belong to the son.

Young woman, Afghanistan

[Family law] has assisted us. When you leave 
the man’s home, you divide the property 
and go with something to begin your 
new life.

Adult woman, Tanzania

”

inequalities affecting widows persist. This short-
coming is partly linked to the underlying prem-
ise that male relatives are obliged to look after 
dependent female relatives. But this obligation is 
not always fulﬁ lled. Lessons from reforming in-
heritance rights for daughters could be extended 
to  widows’  rights.  Community  of  property  re-
gimes may also help widows where inheritance 
and intestacy laws do not allow for a 50 percent 
share. Citizenship laws should also be a focus for 
reform, because they can also confer rights that 
affect  women’s  access  to  beneﬁ ts  and  property 
for  themselves  and  their  families  and  may  be 
more easily changed than personal laws.

Arrangements for the custody of children af-
ter  divorce  can  deter  a  woman  from  leaving  a  

“

It can get very litigious because 
now that there are laws stipulating 
individuals’ rights, compensations 
are bigger and people are aware of 
the law.

Adult man, Bhutan

”

162 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 4.2   Property in marriage (and divorce) 

Community  of  property.  This  regime  typically  gives  protection  to 
the wife in case of divorce, usually splitting marital property equally 
between the spouses. All property acquired during the marriage is 
owned equally between spouses (personal property owned before 
the marriage and property inherited or received as a gift to a spouse 
may remain the property of that spouse). In a universal community 
of property regime, property acquired by the spouses before the 
marriage also becomes joint marital property. This regime implic-
itly  recognizes  nonmonetized  contributions  to  the  household 
(including  care,  childrearing,  household  chores,  or  subsistence 
agriculture), and there is no requirement of proof of contribution. 
Under this regime some countries still give husbands the power to 
administer  joint  marital  property  during  the  marriage,  depriving 
women of control (a leftover from the colonial codes). That is the 
case in 10 of the 43 countries surveyed that have had community of 
property as the default regime over the past 50 years—including 8 
Sub-Saharan countries, Chile (the only country of Latin America to 
retain this provision), and the Philippines (which reformed its family 
laws but retained this provision) (box map). France removed its pro-
vision in 1985.

Separate  ownership  of  property.  Spouses  have  ownership  of  any 
property they acquire during the course of a marriage. This regime 
protects women entrepreneurs, who can keep control of their pro-
ductive  assets  on  divorce.  But  it  tends  to  penalize  most  women, 
because, unless legislated for, nonmonetized contributions are not 
recognized upon divorce (and women typically have fewer mone-
tized  contributions  than  men  and  thus  fewer  assets  of  their  own 
during  marriage).  A  few  countries  have  added  provisions  to  mar-
riage  laws  that  recognize  women’s  nonmonetized  contributions 
(although in many countries these contributions are assumed to be 
less than men’s).

Of the 35 countries whose laws on separate ownership of prop-
erty were surveyed, only 7 recognized nonmonetary contributions 
(including Bangladesh, Malaysia, Morocco, and Tanzania). Nonmon-
etary contributions have not traditionally been recognized by cus-
tomary or religious law in Sub-Saharan Africa. In Muslim-majority 
countries, the practice of Mehr (dowry given to the bride on mar-
riage) does provide for women who divorce, but the value in some 
cases  can  be  too  low  to  put  women  on  an  equal  footing.  Some 
countries have tried to increase its value, as in Bangladesh, or index 
it to infl ation, as in the Islamic Republic of Iran, where women are 
also classifi ed as priority creditors and their right to Mehr is superior 
to the claims of all other creditors. Some Muslim countries such as 
Morocco and Tunisia allow optional marital regimes of community 
of property, and the latter is the default regime in Turkey. 

Customary  regimes.  These  regimes  are  the  default  in  only  four 
countries  in  Africa—Botswana,  Burundi,  Nigeria,  and  Swaziland. 
They are generally disadvantageous to women, with men tradition-
ally administering marital property and with no recognition of non-
monetized contributions. Husbands usually have control over the 
assets during marriage. In some cases women even lose the prop-
erty they brought into the marriage upon divorce. 

Multiple regimes.  In some countries, multiple regimes are available, 
and each couple can select from among them. While women theo-
retically could choose the regime that off ered them the most pro-
tection, most couples opt for the default regime. For instance, fam-
ily law reforms in both Morocco and Tunisia have meant that couples 
can opt out of the separate ownership regime and chose the com-
munity of property regime, but in practice use of that option has 
been limited. Choosing the default marital regime is thus an impor-
tant policy decision. 

BOX MAP 4.2.1   Women in different parts of the world have different control over assets—Which matters in case of divorce or the husband’s 

death

Community of property
Community of property (with husband control)
Separation of property and recognition of non-monetary contribution
Separation of property, no recognition of non-monetary contribution
Separation of property no recognition of non-monetary contribution (with husband control)
Customary law & husband control
No data

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Htun and Weldon 2011b, Women LEED Africa database, and World Bank Gender Law Library. 

Promoting women’s agency

163

BOX 4.3  Widows risk losing their assets but might gain some freedom

Risks of reversals in autonomy appear after the death of a spouse—
a  threat  that  disproportionately  aff ects  older  women,  who  are 
nearly three times as likely as old men to lose a spouse. Given lon-
ger female life expectancy and the age diff erences between hus-
bands and wives, far more women than men experience the death 
of a spouse at some point in their lives. In Mali many young women 
fi nd themselves widows with few rights, and their children are more 
likely to be undernourished and out of school, suggesting an inter-
generational transmission of poverty stemming from widowhood. 
Moreover, across the world among the elderly who do not live in an 
extended household, more women live alone, and more men live 
with their spouses (box fi gure 4.3.1). Men are also more likely than 
women to remarry. 

BOX FIGURE 4.3.1   Elderly women are more likely to live alone and 

elderly men with their spouses 

United States

Latin America
and the Caribbean

Europe

Asia

Africa

0

20

40

60

80

100

percent

women living with spouse
women living alone

men living with spouse
men living alone

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Table II.7 in United Nations Depart-
ment of Economic and Social Aﬀ airs (2005). 
Note: Sample excludes elderly living in extended households.

Becoming a widow is often associated with signifi cant changes 
in a woman’s life, and participants in the WDR 2012 qualitative study 
on gender and economic choice systematically rank widows very 
low  on  the  scale  of  power  and  rights—something  that  does  not 
apply to widowers.

The process for women to accumulate assets is aff ected by pre-
vailing inheritance laws and practices, which in many regions are 
signifi cantly weaker for women.a Evidence from Cambodia, Guyana, 
Haiti, and Vietnam suggests that wives (or their children) inherit the 
majority of assets from their deceased husbands. In contrast, in 16 
Sub-Saharan countries, more than half the widows do not inherit 
any  assets  from  their  spouses’  estate,  and  only  a  third  reported 
inheriting the majority of assets. In 14 of these countries, the major-
ity of assets was inherited by the husband’s children and family (box 
fi gure  4.3.2)—the  two  exceptions  are  Rwanda  and  Swaziland. 
Greater inheritance is generally associated with higher education 
and wealth, indicating that women with higher socioeconomic sta-
tus  may  be  more  able  to  negotiate  a  favorable  asset  inheritance. 
This pattern is also found for widow’s ownership of land and live-
stock. In 70 percent of the countries with available data, households 

BOX FIGURE 4.3.2   Husband’s family receives the majority of his 

assets in most countries

Sierra Leone
Congo, Rep.
Côte d'Ivoire
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Benin
Niger
Nigeria
Guinea
Namibia
Mali
Zambia
Tanzania
TT
Uganda
Zimbabwe
Swaziland
Haiti
Rwanda
Guyana
Vietnam
Cambodia

1

7
1

16
18
21
24
26
29
30
30
31
33
35
38
39
40

0

20

69
75
73
63

68
64
61

61
64
58
63
57

52

55

16
5

7

10
8

9
6
4
11

3
3
5
22
2
5
2
3
2
4

38

32

23
21

23

60

80

6

100

3

3

4
5
7
2

3
1

52
53

66
67

22

7
22

92

77

40

recipient of majority of deceased husband’s assets, %

ff

wife/her children
husband’s family

other wifeff
other

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Peterman (2010) and Demographic 
and Health Surveys (2005–08).
Note: Sample of ever-widowed women whose husbands had assets.

headed  by  a  widow  (with  no  working-age  men  present)  are  less 
likely to own land than male-headed households.

Where  women  lose  access  to  the  marital  home  or  land  in  the 
husband’s village, they have to return to their parental community 
or fi nd another man to marry. But older widows’ options to remarry 
are limited because men are more likely to marry younger women. 
Indeed,  in  Mali  widows  were  found  to  be  more  likely  to  enter  a 
polygamous  union  as  lower-rank  wives,  further  reducing  their 
agency and well-being. 

On  a  more  positive  note,  widowhood  can  be  associated  with 
important gains and growing freedoms. The WDR 2012 qualitative 
study on gender and economic choice suggests this is particularly 
true where the institution of marriage is typically associated with 
social, economic, and physical restrictions. In Afghanistan, widows 
were ranked high on the scale of power and rights because “they 
have power within the house because there is no man. All decisions 
are made by them. They are not rich but they have power and free-
dom within their household.” The discussion suggested that wid-
ows  were  the  only  women  able  to  have  independent  economic 
activities,  such  as  raising  sheep.  In  Indonesia,  women  noted  that 
widows enjoyed the advantage of no longer having to request their 
husband’s permission for their activities. In the Republic of Yemen, 
widows  who  needed  to  work  to  provide  for  their  families  had 
greater  freedom  of  mobility  than  married  women  and  were  not 
frowned on for taking jobs.

Sources: Catell 1997; van de Walle 2011; Velkoﬀ  and Kinsella 1993; World Bank 2011. 
a.  WDR 2012 team estimates based on RIGA Survey, data for rural areas. Diﬀ erences were noted in Albania, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Ghana, Guatemala, Indonesia, Nigeria, 
Pakistan, Panama, Tajikistan, and Vietnam, but were absent in Bolivia, Kenya, Malawi, Nepal, and Nicaragua.

164 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

marriage,  diminishing  her  agency  in  the  house-
hold. In many countries, mothers usually have cus-
tody until a certain age, and then custody reverts to 
the father (or the child is allowed to choose). But 
when the mother is not a citizen, her entitlement to 
custody is usually weaker. And in some countries, 
fathers may obtain custody if women remarry or 
may keep guardianship even when mothers have 
custody.  Guardianship  laws  are  often  conceived 
to protect women and aim to ensure that fathers 
provide ﬁ nancially for their children even where 
they do not retain custody (as in Morocco), but in 
practice these laws may diminish mothers’ ability 
to make decisions about their children. In other 
contexts where some fathers would neglect their 
roles and responsibilities, countries have laws to 
force  men  to  support  their  children,  even  those 
born outside wedlock. In Brazil and Costa Rica, 
legislation  establishes  rights  and  obligations  for 
parents independent of legal marriage, as well as 
mechanisms  to  determine  paternity  and  ensure 
that  fathers  support  their  children  born  out  of 
wedlock. Such legislation increased women’s bar-
gaining power in Brazil.47

“

Some women fear that the 
husband will take the children 
away.

”

Adult woman, Serbia

On domestic violence, many countries have 
passed strong regulations, and many women in 
the WDR 2012 qualitative study on gender and 
economic choice study are aware of laws against 
it.48 But many penal and civil law codes still fail 
to criminalize certain kinds of physical, sexual, 
or emotional violence—just over half the coun-
tries  have  speciﬁ c  legislation  on  sexual  harass-
ment49—or  still  include  provisions  that  make 
convictions  unlikely.  Nor  does  the  legislation 
always cover violence against girls and women 
perpetrated by family members other than their 
spouses—parents, step-parents, siblings, uncles 
or aunts, grandparents. In some countries, the 
law lessens the penalty for perpetrators if female 
inﬁ delity can be established and allows rapists to 
escape criminal sanction by agreeing to marry 
their victims. In many parts of the world, rape 
within marriage remains highly controversial; it 
has been made illegal in only a third of all coun-

tries.  Progress  in  legislating  against  violence 
against women has been uneven across regions, 
with greater advances in Latin America and the 
Caribbean,  Europe  and  Central  Asia,  and  the 
OECD countries, and more limited advances in 
the Middle East and North Africa, Sub-Saharan 
Africa, East Asia and Paciﬁ c, and South Asia.50 

Many  countries  restrict  women’s  ability 
to  work  outside  the  home  either  by  requir-
ing  consent  of  the  husband  or  by  allowing 
the husband to contest the wife’s working if it 
conﬂ icts  with  family  interests—the  case  in  23 
of  the  117  countries  with  information  for  the 
past 50 years. Most restrictions are in countries 
with codes based on colonial-era civil codes and 
customary  or  religious  laws  (and  usually  are 
not found in countries with common law tra-
ditions). Germany, Greece, Spain, and Switzer-
land ﬁ nally removed the last elements of such 
provisions  in  the  late  1970s  or  early  1980s.  In 
practice, however, these laws do not seem to be 
binding in many countries and are not strongly 
associated  with  lower  female  labor  force  par-
ticipation, except in the Middle East and North 
Africa, where both restrictions and low partici-
pation rates prevail. In the Islamic Republic of 
Iran, where female labor force participation is 
high, women have circumvented the restriction 
by using a template marriage contract that gives 
them the right to work outside of the home.

Where  marital  relations  are  inﬂ uenced  by 
“patrilocal”  customs—when  the  wife  moves  to 
the  husband’s  family  home—laws  may  reﬂ ect 
the prevailing social norm. In Nigeria, women’s 
work is not speciﬁ cally restricted under statutory 
law, but customary law and religious law prevail 
for the majority of the population. In rural Ethio-
pia (Amhara and Hadiya), where the family code 
was reformed in 2000 and where fewer women 
are living with their husband’s family, 48 percent 
of women felt they needed their husband’s per-
mission to work—far fewer than the 90 percent 
of women in Northern India (Uttar Pradesh) and 
Nigeria (Maguzawa and Hausa) and 75 percent 
in  Southern  India  (Tamil  Nadu).  In  the  Ethio-
pian capital, the percentage dropped to 28 per-
cent, suggesting that urbanization and changing 
family structures can inﬂ uence norms.51

Plural legal systems can affect women’s 
autonomy and equality 
In  most  countries  of  the  world,  different  legal 
systems coexist, a situation we call legal plural-

 

Promoting women’s agency 

165

ism. Deﬁ ned simply, legal pluralism arises when 
the population (or a part of it) recognizes more 
than one source of law (box 4.4). Within these 
countries  (and  sometimes  outside  of  them) 
there are different venues where individuals can 
bring a case, and different types of laws that may 
be applied by judges or other decision makers.

Legal pluralism matters for women’s exercise 
of agency, because the interaction between the 
multiple systems and norms usually inﬂ uences 
critical areas such as family formation, divorce, 
assets  and  land  ownership,  and  inheritance, 
among others. 

Legal pluralism is neither intrinsically good 
nor bad for women’s agency and gender equal-
ity more generally. Indeed, multiple systems can 
coexist  without  hindering  women’s  agency—
when  all  systems  are  nondiscriminatory  and 
gender-responsive.  And  all  systems  may  prove 
to be equally ill-suited to serve women’s inter-
est when they reﬂ ect underlying unequal social 
norms and power dynamics.52

Nevertheless,  coexisting  systems  may  afford 
different  entitlements.  Many  statutory  regimes 
give  women  more  rights  than  customary  laws 
do.  In  such  cases,  customary  law  can  dilute 
statutory rights and result in a situation that is 
very  different  from  what  the  statutory  regime 
prescribes.  For  example,  some  countries  that 
recognize  customary  law  in  their  constitutions 
also exempt such customary law from the prin-
ciple  of  nondiscrimination  (especially  in  Sub-
Saharan  Africa)  (map  4.1).  That  does  not 
mean  that  customary  laws  are  necessarily  dis-
criminatory, but it can open the door for state-
sanctioned  discrimination.  And  it  does  limit 
the mechanisms available to challenge the laws 
when they are discriminatory (by removing the 
option of declaring them unconstitutional). 

But  customary  practices  can  also  in  some 
instances  be  more  beneﬁ cial  to  women  than 
statutory laws. For example, the process of for-
mally  titling  land  (statutory  law)  has  in  some 
countries removed the access to land or use of 
land  that  women  had  under  customary  law.53 
In Kenya, access to land was regulated through 
communal systems of use that included women, 
and the introduction of statutory laws on land 
ownership vested communal land rights in men, 
marginalizing women in land transactions, be-
cause  women’s  rights  of  usage  were  not  inte-
grated into the formal system. Similar examples 
can be found in Mozambique and the Solomon 

BOX 4.4  Legal pluralism and its prevalence 

What is legal pluralism? Legal pluralism emerges when there is plurality of laws 
and venues for resolving disputes—national, supranational and international 
laws  and  bodies,  alternative  dispute  resolution  mechanisms,  religious  and 
customary authorities. Legal institutions may be formal and embedded in the 
state system. Or they can be informal—independent from the state system—
as is the case of street committees in Brazil, Animist or Christian authorities in 
Chinese  villages,  or  tribal  jirgas  in  Afghanistan  and  Pakistan.  Finally,  some 
hybrid institutions can share elements of both state and nonstate systems—
they may be created or recognized by the state and integrated in the formal 
judicial system—as in the case of India’s lok adalats— but be able to apply dif-
ferent strands of law. 

How prevalent is pluralism? All legal systems are plural. In the United King-
dom, for instance, Shari’ah courts function in parallel to and under the ambit of 
state courts, and in Kenya, formal courts can interpret and apply customary law 
as well as statutory law. But while legal pluralism exists in most societies, it is 
particularly infl uential in low-income settings, rural areas, and postconfl ict and 
fragile states. In situations of legal pluralism, customary and religious laws are 
sometimes offi  cially recognized in constitutions or legislation and integrated 
into formal legal systems. An in-depth review of laws prevailing in 63 countries 
over the past 50 years revealed that more than half offi  cially recognize custom-
ary  or  religious  laws.  Offi  cial  recognition  is  most  prevalent  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa (in 27 of the 47 countries analyzed). Some of the countries reviewed have 
only  recently  offi  cially  acknowledged  customary  law  in  their  constitutions—
the Philippines in 1987 and Mozambique in 2004. 

In many contexts of legal pluralism, customary and religious laws play a role 
in the lives of large population groups, independently of their offi  cial recogni-
tion. For example, despite the existence of alternatives, approximately 80 per-
cent of women in Ghana celebrate their marriage under customary law. Also, 
about 72 percent of all land is held under customary law in Malawi, 80 percent 
in Mozambique, 60 percent in Swaziland, and 80 percent in Zambia. So, even 
where  formal  laws  exist  to  protect  women’s  rights,  they  do  not  necessarily 
apply universally. More broadly, where the state system is weak or inaccessible, 
local  traditional  or  religious  dispute  resolution  bodies  can  play  a  more  pro-
nounced role. 

Sources: Chiongson and others 2011; Fenrich 2001; Hallward-Driemeier 2011.

Islands.54 Customary practices can also be more 
beneﬁ cial  for  women  in  some  traditionally 
matrilineal societies.

So  two  areas  must  be  considered  by  those 
promoting  women’s  rights  in  the  context  of 
 legal  pluralism.  First,  discrimination  must  be 
addressed  in  both  formal  laws  and  informal 
laws.  Statutory  laws  can  strengthen  women’s 
bargaining power over customary law represen-
tatives, and serve as a magnet to pull customary 
laws toward greater equality.55 Second, possible 
beneﬁ cial elements that enhance women’s rights 
must be identiﬁ ed within the different systems 
and mechanisms designed so as to mediate con-
ﬂ icts between formal and informal systems and 
to help women navigate both. 

166 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

MAP 4.1   In Sub-Saharan Africa, customary laws are formally recognized in most 

countries, and at times are discriminatory

CAPE
VERDE

MAURITANIA

SENEGAL

THE GAMBIA

GUINEA-BISSAU

SIERRA LEONE

GUINEA

LIBERIA

MALI

NIGER

CHAD

SUDAN

ERITREA

BURKINA FASO

BENIN

CÔTE
D’IVOIRE

GHANA

NIGERIA

TOGO
EQUATORIAL GUINEA

CAMEROON

SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE

GABON

CONGO

CENTRAL

AFRICAN REPUBLIC

SOUTH
SUDAN

ETHIOPIA

SOMALIA

UGANDA

KENYA

DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC
OF CONGO

RWANDA

BURUNDI

TANZANIA

MALAWI

ZIMBABWE

MOZAMBIQUE

ANGOLA

ZAMBIA

NAMIBIA

BOTSWANA

SEYCHELLES

COMOROS

Mayotte
(Fr.)

MADAGASCAR

MAURITIUS

Réunion
(Fr.)

IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA CUSTOMARY LAWS ARE
FORMALLY RECOGNIZED IN THE MAJORIT OF
COUNTRIES, AND AT TIMES ALLOWED TO DISCRIMINATE

SWAZILAND

LESOTHO

SOUTH
AFRICA

Constitution recognizes customary law but prohibits discrimination
Constitution recognizes cusomary law but explicitly exempts it from non-discrimination
Constitution is silent about customary law

Source: Hallward-Driemeier 2011. 

Making rights effective is critical for 
women’s agency
One  of  the  major  limitations  in  translating 
stated  rights  for  women  into  greater  exercise 
of  agency  resides in  women’s  lack  of  access  to 
justice. Many factors may limit this access both 
on the supply side—when legal institutions and 
other state actors do not perform their functions 
adequately—and  on  the  demand  side—when 
individuals or groups do not seek redress. Some 
factors  limiting  access  to  justice,  such  as  the 
affordability of justice and the lack of awareness 
of rights, are common to both men and women. 
Others are by nature more gender speciﬁ c. 

Low capacity of or biases in state institutions 
can constrain the implementation of laws
On the supply side, there is a wide range of de-
cision  making  and  administrative  institutions 
whose  role  is  to  ensure  that  laws  are  imple-
mented and enforced. They range from judicial 
institutions  such  as  state  courts  of  justice,  po-
lice, state legal aid centers, bailiffs, and collection 
agencies,  to  quasi-judicial  bodies  such  as  land 
boards and immigration tribunals, to adminis-
trative bodies such as land registries and birth 
and marriage registries. There also are alterna-
tive private dispute resolution mechanisms and 
customary  religious  and  community  systems, 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

167

such as traditional elders, religious leaders, and 
customary councils in communities.

The capacity of these actors to ensure the en-
forcement of rights is limited in many countries. 
Institutions can have limited knowledge of the 
law and limited administrative capacity to imple-
ment it, and procedures can be poorly designed. 
For example, procedures for land titling might 
not be conducive to including women on titles, 
even when the law promotes equal ownership by 
spouses. After a law is adopted, the justice insti-
tutions have a role in deﬁ ning the rights granted, 
the  responsibilities  of  different  institutions  in 
their implementation, and the enforcement pro-
cesses. Establishing gender-sensitive procedures 
can  ensure  stronger  implementation  of  rights. 
In  the  context  of  domestic  violence,  such  pro-
cedures would include rules allowing for private 
testimony for survivors of violence and nonad-
versarial processes for resolving conﬂ icts. 

More generally, a lack of accountability and 
oversight  often  hinders  enforcement.  The  at-
titudes of police ofﬁ cers or judges all too often 
mirror  the  social  norms  prevailing  in  the  so-
ciety, thus limiting the ability of the system to 
enforce some laws. For instance, a survey reveals 
that almost all police ofﬁ cers interviewed in In-
dia agreed that a husband is allowed to rape his 
wife, half the judges felt that women who were 
abused by their spouses were partly to blame for 
their situation, and 68 percent of them said pro-
vocative attire was an invitation to rape.56

Indeed,  in  many  contexts  social  attitudes 
result  in  hesitant  enforcement.  In  the  United 
States,  judges  and  juries  are  more  reluctant  to 
convict  for  date  or  marital  rape  than  for  rape 
by  a  stranger.57  More  generally,  justice  institu-
tions  have  in  some  contexts  been  reluctant  to 
promote  women’s  rights,  especially  around 
property  ownership,  marital  matters,  and  do-

mestic  violence.58  This  reluctance  could  be  re-
lated in part to men’s domination of many jus-
tice institutions. In more than two-thirds of the 
countries  studied,  women  represent  less  than 
a quarter of supreme court benches, and their 
presence  remains  limited  even  in  lower  courts 
(except in some Eastern European countries).59 
In  some  courts,  female  judges  may  not  have 
the same rights or responsibilities as their male 
counterparts. In Vanuatu island courts, for ex-
ample, social norms mean that women justices 
cannot  take  part  in  walking  the  boundaries  of 
the land.60 Similarly, in 11 of 13 countries with 
data—including India, Romania, Sierra Leone, 
Sweden,  and  the  United  States—women  make 
up less than 20 percent of the police force.61 

“

Doctors’ reports are always late; the woman 
cannot call the police because the husband will 
kill her. The police tell you to call if somebody 
winds up dead. The court will not believe 
me if I say that I am savagely beaten 
every day.

Woman, rural Serbia

”

Low  capacity,  reluctance,  and  lack  of  sensi-
tivity likely are compounded by the difﬁ culty in 
monitoring  and  assessing  the  implementation 
of rights, especially for rights that play out in the 
privacy of homes. The status of many women’s 
rights is not easily observable within households 
and thus not easy to assess and address. 

Lack of awareness, social norms, and biased 
services limit women’s demand for justice
In many situations, women are not able to de-
mand enforcement, either because they are not 

“

Women know about laws on discrimination, but they are violated in real life. They are
asked whether they will marry at job interviews or are ﬁ red when they become pregnant.
Woman, Serbia

After widowhood, the [husband’s] family collects everything. We don’t manage to make 
sure the laws are applied within families.

Woman, Burkina Faso

”

168 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 4.9   Few women seek services in case of domestic 

violence

urban areas

YY

Japan (Yokohama)
Serbia (Belgrade)
Thailand (Bangkok)
Brazil (São Paulo)
Namibia (Windhoek)
Tanzania (Dar es Salaam)
TT
Bangladesh (Dhaka)
Peru (Lima)

1

3

11

4

5

1

4

13

8

rural areas

Brazil (Pernambuco)
Thailand (Nakhonsawan)
Samoa
Bangladesh (Matlab)
Tanzania (Mbeya
)
TT
Ethiopia (Butajira)
Peru (Cusco)

1

111

2

2

0

16

5

11

10

23

23

27

31

33

34

34

40

49

41

42

47

49

20

30

40

50

percentage of women

61

60

ever physically abused

of which, sought services

Source: World Health Organization 2010. 

aware  of  their  rights  or  because  of  the  direct 
costs of pursuing claims. While this lack of access 
concerns both men and women, it is likely to af-
fect women more because of their lower literacy, 
lower incomes, lower mobility, and less extended 
social networks. Some countries have deployed 
paralegals to disseminate legal information and 
provide  assistance  to  women  in  rural  areas.  In 
Indonesia, after women identiﬁ ed court fees as a 
barrier to obtain divorce certiﬁ cates (required to 
access social assistance programs), an increase in 
the Supreme Court’s budget for court fee waiver 
schemes increased access for women, the poor, 
and other marginalized groups.62 

“

We don’t have any kind of access to information, 
so far we don’t know anything about the rules.

Woman, Afghanistan

We don’t know our rights. We don’t know laws 
very well. Not beating your wife—is that in 
the laws?

Woman, Burkina Faso

”

Many women also lack mobility and the time 
to engage with the legal system. Social norms for 
gender roles that often make women responsible 
for care and housework do not allow them the 
time  to  pursue  legal  services,  especially  when 
they must travel long distances to access them. 
Norms  for  acceptable  behavior  and  safety  can 
also constrain women’s mobility and their abil-
ity to access justice services. 

Another  gender-speciﬁ c  factor  is  the  social 
stigma and psychological trauma often involved 
in bringing claims. Women are often reluctant 
to pursue justice where outcomes are not pre-
dictable,  where  legal  institutions  are  gender 
biased,  and  where  legal  actors  themselves  vic-
timize complainants, resulting in a double vic-
timization. A study of selected regions and cities 
in nine countries found that only about 10 per-
cent of women who had been physically abused 
sought  services  (ﬁ gure  4.9).  The  main  reasons 
given for not seeking services were strong social 
norms  unsympathetic  to  the  women’s  claims 
and  a  lack  of  trust  in  the  services  (low  qual-
ity,  institutional  condoning  of  violence,  and 
lack  of  conﬁ dentiality).63  Indeed,  where  good-
quality services are available, more women turn 
to them, as illustrated by the success of special-
ized  units  providing  legal  aid,  health  services, 
and counseling in urban Namibia and female-
run  police  stations  and  specialized  services  in 
Brazil and Peru.64

Other  restrictions  may  also  affect  women 
disproportionately. In the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, women need the permission of a hus-
band or guardian to initiate court proceedings. 
They can face similar restrictions in customary 
tribunals  where  they  may  not  be  able  to  voice 
their grievances directly, and it is up to the male 
head of the family to bring the grievance to the 
attention of elders.65

SOCIAL NORMS PREVENT—OR 
PROMOTE—GAINS IN WOMEN’S 
AGENCY

Social norms inﬂ uence expectations, values, and 
behaviors. As  such  they  can  prevent  laws,  bet-
ter services, and higher incomes from removing 
constraints to agency. In such cases, policy mak-
ers need to consider whether norms themselves  
can  be  shifted  to  improve  gender  outcomes. 
Trying  to  change  social  norms  is  particularly 
relevant where they are inefﬁ cient, or injurious, 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

169

or when the forces that gave rise to them are no 
longer in place. But sometimes social norms can 
change to promote women’s agency in ways that 
counter  limitations  in  laws  and  services—for 
instance, norms around women’s physical mo-
bility  have  changed  quickly  in  countries  such 
as  Bangladesh,  when  the  demand  for  women’s 
labor increased rapidly.

Social norms can prevent policies and 
services from working
Social norms deﬁ ne and constrain the space for 
women  to  exercise  their  agency—by  imposing 
penalties both on those who deviate and on those 
who do not enforce the norms. For example, legal 
restrictions  on  mobility  are  found  in  only  very 
few countries. But mobility is also driven by so-
cial norms on acceptable behavior for women—
norms around their role as caregivers, codes of 
modesty, and codes of honor—as well as by be-
liefs  about  women’s  safety  in  public  spaces.  In 
South Asia and the Middle East and North Af-
rica, greater household resources relieve part of 
the  normative  constraints  that  prevent  women 
from seeking medical advice without having to 
obtain  permission.  But  education  relaxes  this 
constraint even more (ﬁ gure 4.10). In all 19 coun-
tries included in the WDR 2012 qualitative study 
on  gender  and  economic  choice,   social  norms 
are  the  most  frequently  reported  constraint  on 
physical mobility, followed by public safety (in-
frastructure is rarely mentioned).66

Norms that affect women’s mobility include 
those  governing  the  appropriateness  of  using 
public  transportation,  riding  bicycles,  and  ob-
taining driving licenses. In Malawi, social norms 
deterred pregnant women from using a bicycle 
ambulance  that  was  set  up  to  improve  emer-
gency obstetric care.67 In urban areas, concerns 
about safety are more prevalent than issues re-
lated to norms per se. In Morocco and the Re-
public of Yemen, 25–30 percent of urban women 
(particularly younger women) report suffering 
sexual harassment in the street; the numbers are 
much  lower  in  rural  areas—around  5  percent. 
In Yemen, restrictions on school attendance for 
girls were related more to safety than to social 
norms.68 Around adolescence, when safety con-
cerns for girls increase, their mobility can be sig-
niﬁ cantly reduced, which can limit their ability 
to  pursue  economic  opportunities  or  develop 
social  networks.  In  the  WDR  2012  qualitative 
study  on  gender  and  economic  choice,  both 
men  and  women  in  most  urban  communities 

FIGURE 4.10   Education dampens normative constraints 

more than income
Probability of women who need permission to get 
medical care, by education and wealth levels

Middle East and North Africa

level of education

1

2

3

4

South Asia
level of education

1

2

3

4

n
e
m
o
w

 

 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
r
e
p
g
n
i
r
i
u
q
e
r

25

20

15

10

5

0

n
e
m
o
w

 

 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
r
e
p
g
n
i
r
i
u
q
e
r

25

20

15

10

5

0

1

3

2
4
wealth quintile

5

1

3

4
2
wealth quintile

5

education

wealth

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys 2003–09, 40 countries.
Note: The blue line is the probability that women with average wealth and control characteristics require 
permission to get medical care. The yellow line presents the same probability for those with average 
education and control characteristics.

have greater safety concerns than those in rural 
areas. And while women have greater concerns 
than men in rural areas, urban men and women 
express similar levels of concerns, likely a reﬂ ec-
tion of violence in the streets in urban centers.69
Social  norms  can  also  determine  whether 
women’s higher independent incomes translate 
into  greater  bargaining  power  within  house-
holds. In India, the ability of women to use their 
earnings  to  inﬂ uence  household  decisions  de-
pends on their social background, with women 
with weaker links to their ancestral communities 
more  able  to  challenge  social  norms  and  reap 
the  beneﬁ ts  of  autonomous  incomes.70  About 
20  percent  of  the  participants  in  the  WDR 
2012  study  said  that  husbands  have  complete 
control over their wives’ autonomous earnings 
(the share was a little more pronounced in ru-
ral areas). Participants also reported that when 
women do not keep control over their earnings, 
the potential empowering role of autonomous 
earnings is limited.71

Social norms appear particularly binding in 
areas  such  as  family  formation. Very  few  boys 
marry  at  a  very  young  age,  but  the  prevalence 
of child marriages for girls is still high in many 
countries.  Numerous  countries  legally  allow 
marriages of girls at a young age (usually with a 
lower minimum age than for boys)—from South 

170 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 4.11     Despite differences in the age of marriage, many 

girls still marry before the age of 18

d
e
i
r
r
a
m

 
t
a
h
t
 
3
2
–
8
1
 
s
e
g
a
n
e
m
o
w
%

 

 

 

 

l

d
o
 
s
r
a
e
y
7
1
–
2
1
e
r
e
w
y
e
h
t
 
n
e
h
w

 

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Mali

Bangladesh
Niger

Chad

Guinea

Dominican Republic

Burkina Faso

Sierra Leone
Nigeria

Pakistan
Mozambique

Madagascar

Turkey
Egypt, Arab Rep.

Jordan
Haiti

Morocco

0

10 20 30 40 50

60 70 80 90 100

% women ages 44–49 that married
when they were 12–17 years old

countries in which less than 30% of young brides marry men at least 10 years older
countries in which more than 30% of young brides marry men at least 10 years older

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on Demographic and Health Surveys 2003–09.

Note: The 45° line in each ﬁ gure above shows parity in the values on the vertical and horizontal axis.

Africa  and  Tanzania  in  Sub-Saharan Africa,  to 
Bolivia  and  Venezuela  in  Latin  America,  and 
Kuwait in the Middle East.72 Many child brides 
are married to much older men. Both younger 
age at marriage for women and a greater age gap 
between  spouses  are  associated  with  women’s 
lower bargaining power and higher risk of vio-
lence (as well as higher risk of contracting HIV 
in high-prevalence settings).73 In 29 of 46 coun-
tries analyzed, more than 30 percent of girls ages 
18–23 had been married between the ages of 12 
and 17. And in 11 of these countries, more than 
30 percent of girls married early are married to 
men at least 10 years older (ﬁ gure 4.11).

Social  norms  on  relations  within  house-
holds  partly  explain  why  domestic  violence 
remains  prevalent,  even  when  national  and 
individual  incomes  grow.74  Attitudes  toward 
domestic violence have been changing in some 
countries over the past decade, as evidenced by 
data from Armenia, Malawi, and Rwanda. But 
these changes are still rather limited, and many 
forms of physical, emotional, and sexual abuse 
are  still  condoned  by  many  men  and  women 
alike.  In  countries  such  as  Guinea,  Mali,  and 
Niger, around 60 percent of women think it is 
acceptable for a man to beat his wife if she re-
fuses to have sex. And in Burkina Faso, Ethio-

pia, Guinea, Mali, Morocco, and Sierra Leone, 
over 50 percent think it is acceptable when she 
argues with him. Such beliefs are more preva-
lent in rural areas—where they are held by 10 
percent more women on average—but younger 
women hold beliefs that are surprisingly similar 
to  those  of  their  elders  for  all  the  dimensions 
explored  (with  the  exception  of  slightly  lower 
beliefs that a man can beat his wife if she refuses 
to have sex).75 Social norms on the acceptabil-
ity of violence also help explain why domestic 
violence  often  coincides  with  broader  societal 
violence in the form of ﬁ ghts, robberies, or gun 
violence, for instance. A study of selected cities 
in six countries found that men who had per-
petrated physical violence against their spouses 
were two to ﬁ ve times more likely to have also 
participated in violence outside the home.76

Few  survivors  of  violence  seek  help  from 
public  or  private  services.  Women’s  accounts 
of the main reasons for not reporting domestic 
 violence  include  a  feeling  of  shame  or  guilt,  a 
perception of violence as being normal or justi-
ﬁ ed, fear of consequences, and lack of support 
from family members and friends (ﬁ gure 4.12). 
These feelings are mostly driven by social norms 
on the acceptability of violence, by the view that 
survivors themselves are responsible for the vio-
lence,  by  the  fear  the  families  and  friends  will 
not recognize or provide support to the survi-
vor, and by the fear of the penalties that would 
be imposed if one deviated from the norm.77 In 
many contexts women are held responsible for 
the violence they face outside the home—in the 
streets, workplaces, or schools. 

In  most  countries,  tasks  associated  with 
housework, childrearing, and caring for the sick 
and elderly are usually considered women’s sole 
and  primary  responsibility,  while  men’s  main 
role is that of provider. The WDR 2012 quali-
tative  study  on  gender  and  economic  choice 
shows that while the deﬁ nition of a “good man” 
has evolved a little over the past 10 years to in-
clude a few elements related to caring for their 
families, the deﬁ nition of a “good woman” re-
mains  mostly  anchored  in  her  role  in  the  do-
mestic  sphere  (box  4.5).  And  this  perception 
likely conditions girls’ aspirations and parents’ 
motivation to invest in girls’ human capital.

Some  social  norms  are  also  strongly  bind-
ing for men and boys because they deﬁ ne their 
membership in society as men—and can con-
tribute to reinforcing norms that affect women 

and  girls  (box  4.6).  Men  are  also  constrained 
by social norms that dictate their roles and be-
haviors,  their  ability  to  make  choices,  achieve 
their goals, and control their lives. On gender 
roles, even as women have increased their in-
volvement in productive activities outside the 
home,  men  have  rarely  increased  their  con-
tribution  in  the  home  (see  chapter  5).  So,  a 
man’s  identity  is  deeply  rooted  in  his  ability 
to provide for his family.78 In the 19 countries 
covered  by  the  WDR  qualitative  assessment, 
a  wife  with  a  higher  income  was  generally 
seen  as  a  threat  to  male  status  rather  than  as 
a  boost  to  the  household  economy,  although 
there were isolated examples where men were 
receptive  to  women’s  economic  roles.  Partici-
pants highlighted that economic stress is often 
at the root of domestic violence, likely because 
it challenges men’s ability to fulﬁ ll their role as 
providers. And discussions suggested that one 
of the ways women verbally or psychologically 
abuse men is by exacerbating the emasculation 
of joblessness. Men who experience economic 
stress were more likely to use violence against 
their intimate partners than those who did not 
in regions of Brazil, Chile, Croatia, and India.79
They were also more likely to suffer from de-
pression,  and  in  India,  men  who  experience 
economic stress are two and a half times more 
likely than their peers to regularly abuse alco-
hol,  which  presents  a  health  risk  for  them  as 
well as a risk factor for domestic violence.80

Because  social  norms  shape  the  context  in 
which markets and institutions operate, they also 
condition the impact of policies and public ser-
vices on women’s choices. For example, the ex-
tension of reproductive health services in Zam-
bia reduced unwanted births only when women 
had  autonomy  in  their  use  of  contraceptives, 
a  ﬁ nding  that  revealed  binding  social  norms 

Promoting women’s agency

171

FIGURE 4.12     Reasons why victims of violence do not seek help

rural

urban

Tanzania (Mbeya
)
TT
Thailand (Nakhonsawan)
Samoa
Peru (Cusco)
Ethiopia (Butajira)
Brazil (Pernambuco)
Bangladesh (Matlab)

Tanzania (Dar es Salaam)
TT
Thailand  (Bangkok)
Serbia (Belgrade)
Peru (Lima)
Namibia (Windhoek)
Japan (Yokohama)
Brazil (Sao Paulo)
Bangladesh (Dhaka)

YY

0

60

80

90

20

10
percentage of women citing specific reasons forff

50

70

30

40

not seeking help from formal institutions

ff

embarassed or ashamed

fear of consequences
ff

violence is normal or not serious

Source: World Health Organization 2010.

around fertility control within households.81 In 
Turkey, in an example discussed earlier, the im-
pact of compulsory education on family forma-
tion hinged on social norms for sequencing edu-
cation, marriage, and childbearing. And in some 
cases,  laws  that  strongly  oppose  social  norms 
have  had  perverse  effects.  That  was  the  case  in 
the  United  States  where  strict  laws  that  forced 
the police to arrest and prosecute perpetrators of 
domestic  violence,  even  when  complaints  were 
withdrawn, ended up reducing reporting rates.82  

“

Particularly when women are successful, men’s vanity won’t stand that. It is diﬃ  cult for 
a woman to earn more than a man, provide him with money, and tell him what to do, 
and for the man to tolerate such a situation without being ashamed of himself.

Adult man, urban Serbia

[In response to job loss], men would get very frustrated, get very upset, get drunk, 
beat the wife.

Adult man, Papua New Guinea

”

172 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 4.5   What does it mean to be a “good wife” and a “good husband”? 

What is a good wife? What is a good husband? In both urban and 
rural settings around the world, in both poor and rich communities, 
the social norms for what makes a good wife are remarkably similar. 
Above all, the good wife adeptly handles her domestic respon-
sibilities  and  is  caring  and  understanding  toward  others.  Good 
wives are “able to manage the home,” said a woman in Papua New 
Guinea. “They have to cook well,” stated another one in Poland. In 
Gaza, a good wife “spends most of her time in housework and also 
the  education  of  children.”  Whether  a  woman  works  outside  the 
home and whether she is educated are rarely mentioned.

Even where women often work outside their homes, the norms 
surrounding a good wife remained similar. In Orissa, India, a group 
explained that a good wife “wakes up early in the morning, does all 
household chores, takes care of children and elderly, goes for wage 
work inside the village if there is an opportunity, and collects forest 
products for sale in the market to contribute to household income.” 
Similarly,  in  Bhutan,  a  village  woman  said,  “Even  if  a  woman  and 
man work on the farm at the same time, once back in the house, the 
woman is expected to cook, wash the clothes, tend to animals, and 
look after the children.” 

Being a good wife also systematically involves respecting one’s 
husband—being faithful, supportive, respectful, and submissive. In 
South  Africa,  the  good  wife  “respects  her  husband  and  cooks  for 
him.” In Peru, wives must have a “good character, love their husband, 
help their husband, and be a homemaker.” In communities where 
gender norms proscribe women from working outside the home, 
being a good wife includes not having other tasks outside the home. 
In Afghanistan, “a good wife is busy at home with tasks and looks 
after her children at home and does not have other tasks.” 

When comparing the good wife of today to those in previous 
generations, many women observe positive changes. They regard 
their mothers as selfl ess and hard-working homemakers, as well as 
more subservient and dependent on their husbands than the good 

wives of today. According to a woman in Poland, in her mother’s 
time, “the perception of women was diff erent, she was a maid. But 
luckily  it  has  changed.  Nowadays,  a  woman  thinks  of  the  others, 
and of her family, but she doesn’t forget about her own needs.” The 
ability to earn an income has also appeared toward the top of the 
list of qualities of good wives. 

Men’s and women’s defi nition of what it means to be a good 
husband  reaffi  rmed  many  stereotypes  about  masculinity.  Across 
diverse contexts, what defi nes a good husband, over and above all, 
is the ability to provide. “If you are a man and you do not provide, 
what kind of man are you?” said a man in Tanzania. According to 
men in Vietnam, “a good husband should be a good income earner. 
His main responsibility is to bring money home.” And in Poland, “a 
good husband works a lot, provides for his family, is a real head of 
the household, and respects members of his family.” 

Yet  the  men’s  groups  also  acknowledged  that  the  times  are 
pushing them to adopt more gender equitable norms in their roles 
as  husbands  and  fathers.  In  that  same  Tanzanian  village,  a  very 
powerful man would “take his children to school; he has a good 
relationship with his wife; he decides with the family.” Most often, 
focus groups linked the shift in norms for a good husband to a mix 
of  men’s  present-day  struggles  with  being  good  providers  and 
women’s increasing role as breadwinners for their families. In Viet-
nam,  men  said  that  with  women  working  and  earning  income, 
“men have limited power,” and now “there should be discussions 
and  agreements  made  between  husband  and  wife.”  In  Fiji,  men 
said a good husband used to “teach family morals” and was “strict,” 
and now he still maintains “family unity and morals” but will also 
“spend time with family” and “listen to his wife.” Over the past 10 
years, the need for good husbands to have authority and be the 
main decision maker has become less important and is now men-
tioned less frequently than caring characteristics—including help-
ing in housework. 

Source: World Bank 2011. 

Social norms can be very persistent
Social norms are typically most resilient in ar-
eas that directly affect power or control. Those 
who  would  lose  power  under  a  change  in  the 
social  norm  actively  resist  change,  and  those 
who would gain often are too weak to impose 
change.  The  resilience  of  dysfunctional  social 
norms may also stem from the difﬁ culty of the 
potential  gainers  to  credibly  commit  to  com-
pensate the losers after the change is made. 

Some gender norms can be very persistent—
from practices that no longer exist such as sati 
(the Hindu tradition of a widow’s immolation 
on her husband’s funeral pyre) and foot bind-
ing,  to  the  current  practice  of  female  genital 
cutting  and  restrictions  on  women’s  physical 
mobility or more ordinary but still detrimen-

tal examples of gender norms for occupations 
and  the  allocation  of  domestic  tasks.  Box  4.7 
explores  some  of  the  reasons  for  persistence 
and explains how norms can persist even when 
most or all individuals who uphold the norm 
would be better off without it or have prefer-
ences  that  go  against  it.  It  also  explains  how 
women themselves may propagate and enforce 
social  norms  that  injure  them.  Because  many 
norms  are  learned  at  an  early  age,  obsolete 
or  disliked  norms  can  be  transmitted  across 
 generations.  Recent  studies  have  emphasized 
the intergenerational transmission of attitudes 
and views, as in the United States, where stud-
ies show evidence that women pass on their be-
liefs about the importance of nurturing to their 
children.83

 

Promoting women’s agency 

173

The  persistence  of  social  norms  is  further 
accentuated by self-conﬁ dence or self-efﬁ cacy. 
Indeed,  scientiﬁ c  evidence  shows  that  indi-
viduals’ perceptions of their abilities and their 
likelihood of success are important to their ac-
tual performance. So, a social norm suggesting 
that women are less able than men to perform 
a particular function (be a leader in politics or 
business, or be successful in scientiﬁ c careers) 
will likely be internalized by girls and women, 
who will then not perform as well as men be-
cause they lack a sense of self-efﬁ cacy or who 
will  be  less  likely  to  develop  aspirations  for 
these roles. Thus, the social norm will be fur-
ther conﬁ rmed and sustained. Self-conﬁ dence 
and  the  tendency  for  people  to  misread  evi-
dence as additional support for their initial be-
liefs explain how norms can persist even with-
out any foundation.84 

In  many  countries,  experimental  evidence 
shows that women are more averse to competi-
tion than men, even when they are equally com-
petent. This difference is linked to men’s greater 
conﬁ dence,  a  gap  that  can  narrow  as  women 
acquire experience. It is also inﬂ uenced by nur-
ture and socialization. Indeed, such differences 
are  not  present  between  young  boys  and  girls 
but  appear  when  social  norms  on  gender  be-
come  more  relevant,  often  around  puberty.  In 
female-dominated  societies,  this  pattern  is  re-
versed. Groups of men and women in a female-
dominated society (the Khasi in Northeast In-
dia) and a male-dominated society at a similar 
level of development (the Maasai in Tanzania) 
were asked to choose between a game where the 
payoffs  depended  only  on  their  performance 
and a game where the payoffs depended on the 
outcome  of  a  competition  with  others.  In  the 
patrilineal society (Maasai), twice as many men 
as women chose to compete. But in the matri-
lineal  society  (Khasi),  more  women  chose  to 
compete than men. And these patterns persisted 
even when differences in education, income, and 
age were taken into account. This study suggests 
that nurture and socialization shape preferences 
toward competitiveness and that nature by itself 
cannot  explain  the  ﬁ ndings  of  gender  differ-
ences in competitiveness.85

Market incentives, information, and 
networks can shift social norms 
Markets forces can sometimes help weaken so-
cial  norms  by  compensating  for  the  sanctions 

BOX 4.6   Masculinity and its impact on roles, preferences, 

and behaviors

Prevailing  concepts  of  masculinity  are  specifi c  to  sociocultural  contexts,  but 
some  characteristics  tend  to  cut  across  most  cultures.  Norms  of  masculinity 
infl uence men’s and boys’ relationships with women, children, and other men. 
Ideals about men—including ideas that men should be strong and tough, take 
risks, and endure pain to assert their manhood—appear to be nearly universal. 
These beliefs have consequences for risky behavior and health. 

A critical characteristic of masculinity is the ability to provide for one’s fam-
ily. And the social norms on men as providers result, in some contexts, in very 
high levels of stress and mental health issues, when men do not have enough 
work or income and thus fail to comply with the social norms (higher incidence 
of  depression,  arrest,  violence,  alcohol  abuse).  Beyond  providing  for  their 
households, another prerequisite of masculinity is becoming a husband and 
father and having control over one’s family. This expectation puts a lot of pres-
sure  on  men  in  regions  where  single  men  are  considered  with  suspicion  or 
treated diff erently. 

Domestic roles are closely associated with women, and a signifi cant pro-
portion of men view changing diapers or washing clothes as strictly feminine. 
As a result, even as women work more outside the home, men do not take on 
more housework and unpaid care and thus miss out on the positive psycho-
logical and health benefi ts provided by greater engagement with their fami-
lies.  Surveys  suggest  that  better  educated  men  are  more  likely  to  put  more 
time into domestic roles and care giving, perhaps because education changes 
norms and weakens stereotypes and because more educated men have higher 
incomes, which may aff ect their ability or inclination to challenge norms. 

In  some  countries,  such  as  Jamaica,  underperformance  in  schooling  and 
education often defi nes masculinity even as it reduces men’s future employ-
ment and earnings opportunities. Pressures to publicly defi ne themselves as 
“real” men can lead boys to exaggerate their masculinity through risky be havior 
as well as sexual experiences that focus on achievement or sexual competence, 
rather than on intimacy, and which can be associated with sexual abuse. In con-
fl ict  settings,  norms  for  masculinity  heighten  sexual  and  physical  violence 
toward women (young men are also often victims of sexual violence during 
confl icts). Confl icts also challenge men’s ability to fulfi ll their role as providers 
and protectors of their families while in the battlefi eld. 

Men  remain  mostly  invisible  in  discussions  of  gender  equality.  Programs 
and policies for gender equality are generally designed for women, and if they 
involve men it is often to limit or constrain their behavior. Much less often, pol-
icy is framed as providing an opportunity to change constructions of masculin-
ity in a positive way—one notable example is paternal leave in Scandinavian 
countries, where changing men’s roles is an explicit goal of social welfare pol-
icy. But the formation of gender identities for men, as with women, is a dynamic 
process malleable over time. 

Sources: Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn 2011; Bannon and Correia 2006; Barker and others 2011; Barker and 
Ricardo 2005; Barker, Ricardo, and Nascimento 2007; Connell 2003; Connell and Messerschmidt 2005; 
Emslie and others 2005; Greene and Levack 2010; Kimmel 2010; Möller-Leimkühler 2003; Ousgane and 
Morrell 2005; Pollack 1995; WHO 2000.

imposed for departing from them. For example, 
if women’s earnings in labor markets or social 
transfers conditional on girls’ attending school 
are large enough, they can provide strong incen-
tives for women to enter the labor force and for 
parents to educate their daughters even in places 

174 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 4.7  Why do social norms persist? 

Cultural  beliefs  shape  views.  Evidence  from  psychology  and  other 
social sciences shows that the beliefs of individuals shape what they 
pay attention to and how they interpret it. People have a cognitive 
bias that leads them to misinterpret new information in ways that 
can reinforce their initial beliefs. As a result of this bias, a belief can 
be diffi  cult to dislodge even when it is not supported by evidence. 
Indeed,  if  two  groups  have  diff erent  initial  beliefs,  the  same  new 
information may lead both groups to strengthen their confi dence 
that their original beliefs are correct. 

Because many presuppositions held by individuals are shaped 
by the society in which their parents or grandparents lived, a given 
set  of  beliefs  may  serve  widely  in  a  society  as  an  unconsciously 
applied fi lter of how behavior is perceived and how it is interpreted. 
Culture  shapes  cognition.  Cognition  in  turn  shapes  behavior.  For 
example, beliefs that men have innately greater ability than women 
in some domains may shape individuals’ self-conceptions and per-
ceptions and, in turn, their behavior in ways that create diff erences 
in ability that confi rm the beliefs in a context in which neither abili-
ties and nor opportunities diff er between genders.

Widespread practices shape views. When (nearly) all households 
adhere to a social norm, and when the consequences from depart-
ing from the norm are signifi cant, voluntary compliance with the 
practice can become almost universal. For instance, in China, foot 
binding  was  practiced  in  all  classes  (except  the  poorest)  within 
intramarrying groups—so the penalty for departing from the prac-
tice for a particular person or family was the loss of opportunities to 
marry within the group and a loss of honor or status. The practice 

was  abandoned  only  when  community  members  collectively 
decided to end it, by pledging not to bind their daughters or not to 
let their sons marry bound women. When practices are nearly uni-
versal,  individuals  might  simply  be  unable  to  imagine  alternative 
practices. With female genital cutting, for instance, the universality 
itself  shapes  beliefs  by  preventing  a  comparison  of  the  sexual 
morality of cut and uncut women (ensuring sexual morality is one 
of the common justifi cations for cutting). 

Power  shapes  views.  When  a  social  norm  benefi ts  a  particular 
group, that group will deploy various mechanisms to suppress dis-
sent and maintain the status quo—including presenting the norm 
as god given or the natural order of things, and withholding infor-
mation  to  prevent  the  disadvantaged  group  from  understanding 
that alternatives exist. Indeed, cultures are constructed and at times 
deliberately shaped to ensure that men have greater control.

Pluralistic  ignorance  shapes  views.  The  benefi t  of  following  a 
social norm often depends on how many others follow it. Pluralistic 
ignorance describes a situation in which most members of a group 
privately reject a norm, but assume (incorrectly) that most others 
accept it: “no one believes but everyone thinks that everyone else 
believes.” Departing from the social norm in this case is thus diffi  -
cult. In addition, departing from a norm can be diffi  cult if individu-
als believe that they must ostracize norm violators or themselves 
risk ostracism. Then it can happen that, to avoid ostracism, all indi-
viduals adhere to a norm that no one benefi ts from and that no one 
personally endorses. 

Sources: Akerlof 1976; Benhabib 2002; Bruner and Potter 1964; Douglas 1986; Hoﬀ  and Stiglitz 2010, 2011; North 2005; Powell and DiMaggio 1991; Rabin and Schrag 1999. 

where social norms dictate otherwise. In some 
cases, social norms have evolved very quickly in 
response to strong incentives from markets. In 
Bangladesh, social norms for women’s physical 
mobility evolved rapidly, largely in response to 
growing economic opportunities for women in 
the garment industry.86 

Two kinds of interventions can be deployed to 
inﬂ uence social norms—those promoting greater 
knowledge about alternatives (to lower the cost 
of learning about options), and those promoting 
the coordination of individuals to challenge social 
norms  or  collective  action  (which  is  addressed 
later  in  this  chapter).  Some  interventions,  such 
as girls’ clubs, encompass both of these elements 
by providing girls with increased access to peers, 
social support, information, and ways to learn the 
value of and mechanisms for collective action.

In other contexts, information can shift social 
norms. A lack of knowledge on women’s ability 
as political leaders, resulting from women’s lack 
of  exposure  to  such  political  roles,  can  shape 
perceptions about their worthiness and reduce 
the likelihood that women aspire to the political 
sphere, and policies such as quota systems can 
alleviate these constraints. In India, villagers who 
had  never  had  a  female  leader  preferred  male 
leaders and perceived hypothetical female leaders 
to be less effective than their male counterparts, 
even when stated performance was identical. Ex-
posure to a female leader did not alter villagers’ 
preference  for  male  leaders,  but  it  did  weaken 
stereotypes about gender roles in the public and 
domestic spheres, and it eliminated the negative 
perception  among  male  villagers  about  female 
leaders’ effectiveness. These changes in attitudes 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

175

were  electorally  meaningful:  after  10  years  of 
the  quota  policy,  women  were  more  likely  to 
stand for and win free seats in villages that had 
been  continuously  required  to  have  a  female 
chief councilor.87

In  many  new  democracies,  fewer  women 
than men vote initially, partly because the cost 
of participation may be too high. Social norms 
may discourage the expression of preferences. 
Norms on women’s physical mobility (includ-
ing  security  concerns)  might  constrain  par-
ticipation, and women might lack information 
about the signiﬁ cance of their vote, their rights, 
and electoral processes. In such cases, informa-
tion  can  increase  political  participation.  In 
Pakistan,  the  lack  of  information  reinforced 
social  norms  and  further  disengaged  women 
from  public  life.  But  campaigns  to  promote 
participation  increased  turnout  (by  12  per-
cent) and increased women’s independence in 
choosing candidates.88

Role  models  can  also  convey  information. 
When  women  discover  that  other  women—
elected ofﬁ cials, successful entrepreneurs,  public 
ﬁ gures—do  not  submit  to  prevailing  norms, 
they  feel  more  comfortable  questioning  those 
norms. Indeed, experiments suggest that expo-
sure to information on how abilities can grow 
can remove gender differences in performance.89 
Role models can also affect an individual’s self-
concept.  Gender  stereotypes  impair  women’s 
intellectual  performance.  Media  exposure  or 
education that increases knowledge of options 
and reduces the cost of discovering new infor-
mation can thus inﬂ uence choices that girls and 
women make in their lives (box 4.8). With glo-
balization, greater dissemination of role models 
from one culture to another can contribute to 
this pattern, as chapter 6 explores.

At  times,  individuals’  exposure  to  differ-
ent models and information can change social 
norms.  In  Brazil,  exposure  to  TV  soap  opera 
programs where characters have small families 
contributed to a reduction in both desired and 
actual  fertility,  equivalent  to  the  impact  of  an 
additional two years of education.90 In rural In-
dia, cable television affected gender attitudes, re-
sulting in decreased fertility (primarily through 
increased  birth  spacing)  and  bringing  gender 
attitudes in rural areas much closer to those in 
urban  areas.91  The  expansion  of  information 
and communication technologies can accelerate 

BOX 4.8  How stereotypes inﬂ uence performance 

Histories of social diff erences can create stereotypes—widely held beliefs that 
members of one group are inherently diff erent from those in another group. 
And stereotypes aff ect performance in ways that perpetuate such diff erences. 
Experiments show that when people are reminded that one of their charac-
teristics is associated with negative stereotypes, they underperform. For exam-
ple,  when  people  were  asked  to  state  their  race  before  taking  a  test,  those 
whose  race  is  associated  with  a  negative  stereotype  performed  worse  than 
when they were asked to state their race after taking the test. 

Another experiment addressed the stereotype that Asian students perform 
better than other ethnic groups and the stereotype that women perform worse 
than men. Asian-American women took a test after completing a questionnaire 
that contained many questions about Asians, a questionnaire that contained a 
variety of questions related to gender, or a neutral questionnaire with no refer-
ences to Asia or gender. The fi rst group did best, the second worst. This study 
showed  a  clear  pattern  of  activation  of  self-doubt  and  group  identity  that 
reduced  performance.  Similarly,  invoking  the  feeling  that  a  person  has  little 
power has been found to impair his or her performance in complex tasks, while 
invoking feelings of greater power improves performance. 

Both negative stereotypes and feelings of powerlessness depress perfor-
mance, a fi nding that helps to explain why historical inequalities often persist 
despite progressive reforms. It also suggests a way to try to reverse the pat-
terns.  Indeed,  recent  experiments  show  that  changing  beliefs  about  innate 
gender  diff erences  in  intelligence,  and  teaching  individuals  that  they  have 
the  power  to  raise  their  performance,  can  reduce  or  eliminate  the  eff ects 
described here. 

Sources: Ambady and others 2001; Hoﬀ  and Pandey 2011a; Hoﬀ  and Pandey 2011b; Krendl and others 
2008; Shih, Pittinsky, and Ambady 1999; Smith and others 2008; Steele 2010; Steele and Aronson 1995.

the speed of information sharing, especially as 
younger generations gain access to them. Popu-
lation movements—and in particular the return 
of migrants to their original communities—can 
also  provide  mechanisms  for  information  to 
travel and norms to evolve. In China, migrants 
returning  to  rural  areas  have  weakened  son 
preference  and  promoted  greater  acceptance 
of family planning use in their communities of 
origin.92 

A  broadening  of  women’s  networks,  which 
can be enhanced by greater participation in la-
bor  markets  and  by  greater  physical  mobility, 
can also reduce the cost of discovery—the cost 
of acquiring new information—for women. By 
broadening  women’s  sources  of  information 
beyond their immediate family (often the fam-
ily of their husbands) and peers, these networks 
expand the range of known alternatives and op-
tions. Labor force participation is an important 
mechanism  to  broaden  and  deepen  networks 
(see ﬁ gure 4.6). 

176 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Adolescence  can  be  a  particularly  criti-
cal period where social networks thin and the 
world  contracts,  both  because  safety  concerns 
and  social  norms  on  acceptable  behavior  re-
duce girls’ physical mobility and because their 
role as care providers within the home becomes 
more pronounced. That is particularly true for 
poor, rural girls. In Guatemala, adolescent girls 
and boys both report lack of money and lack of 
interest as important reasons for not being en-
rolled in school. But among 13- to 24-year-olds, 
33  percent  of  girls  said  household  chores  was 
the main reason and 56 percent of boys listed 
work outside the home as the core reason (also 
mentioned by another 18 percent of girls). So, 
many of these girls lose their school networks 
and do not replace them with new ones in the 
workplace.93 In Ethiopia, adolescent girls have 
weaker  networks  than  boys—fewer  friends, 
fewer places to stay overnight if needed, fewer 
places  where  they  can  safely  meet  their  same-
sex peers.94 Evidence from Bangladesh, Burkina 
Faso, Ghana, India, Malawi, South Africa, and 
Uganda  also  suggests  that  young  women’s 
friendship networks are less robust than those 
of their male peers.95 

A  weakening  of  the  social  fabric—the  ties 
that  link  individuals  or  families  with  their 
communities—can also mute social norms. For 
example,  migration  from  rural  to  urban  areas 
or  between  rural  areas  can  weaken  family  and 
group ties and diminish the ability of groups to 
enforce  social  norms.  Similarly,  greater  female 
labor  force  participation  can  provide  women 
with mechanisms to reduce the control of their 
peers and families. Some social norms related to 
a husband’s control over other members of his 
household in urban areas are less binding than 
in rural areas, likely a reﬂ ection of greater labor 
force participation and different patterns of time 
use.  The  share  of  women  who  report  needing 

“

Now, it is an obligation to have women among 
candidates on the ballot. Women can be part 
of the local council, not like before when they 
couldn’t. We even have a female judge and that 
gives me more trust in justice, and she also provides 
better advice.

Adult woman, urban Peru

”

permission to go for health care is signiﬁ cantly 
lower  in  urban  areas  than  in  rural  areas  in  all 
countries where permission is a constraint.96 

But in some cases, migration to cities can re-
sult in the loss of social networks and in greater 
isolation for migrants. And in other cases, mi-
grant communities apply stronger social norms 
than  they  did  in  their  location  of  origin.97 
Similarly, increased globalization and informa-
tion ﬂ ows can pressure groups to adopt inter-
national  social  norms,  and  these  can  be  met 
with  resistance,  leading  to  more  conservative 
social norms, at least in the short term. In some 
countries in the Middle East, younger men hold 
more  conservative  attitudes  than  their  elders 
about  women  working  outside  of  the  home. 
Despite  progress  in  female  education,  around 
40 percent of men in Amman ages 15–44 think 
women  should  not  work  outside  the  home, 
many more than the 29 percent for men over 
the age of 45.98

WOMEN’S COLLECTIVE AGENCY 
CAN SHAPE INSTITUTIONS, MARKETS, 
AND SOCIAL NORMS

The ability to challenge the status quo and in-
crease individual agency of women also depends 
on  women’s  ability  to  speak  collectively.  Chal-
lenging  existing  institutions  and  social  norms 
requires  voices  that  speak  in  favor  of  greater 
gender equality, including the voices of women. 
Women are not the only ones who can promote 
equality-enhancing policies (and not all women 
promote  them);  in  many  contexts,  men  have 
been  a  driving  force  behind  such  policies  and 
are critical allies for further reforms (chapter 8). 
But  women’s  participation  in  decision-making 
processes is important in moving toward more 
gender-equal societies. 

For  women  to  push  for  reforms,  and  for 
their  voices  to  be  transformative,  they  need  to 
be heard where decisions are made—in parlia-
ments,  legal  institutions,  formal  professional 
associations,  governments,  legally  recognized 
labor  movements,  land  boards,  zoning  and 
planning  committees,  and  the  like.  This  voice 
can be achieved either by their participating in 
these decision-making institutions—as say, par-
liamentarians, judges, board members, or police 
ofﬁ cers—or  by  their  shaping  the  context  for 
(men’s) decisions. 

Promoting women’s agency

177

FIGURE 4.13   Even in 2010, women ministers were twice as likely to hold a social portfolio than an 

 economic one

35%

social affairs
and welfare

19%

economy,
trade, and
finance

12%

home affairs

and local

government

10%

culture,

sports, and

tourism

7%

environment,

natural 
resources,
energy 

5%

foreign

affairs and
defense

ff

5%

human 

rights and 

justice 

3%

communications 

3%

science,

technology, yy
and research

1%

ministers 
without a 
portfolio 

ff

Source: Data from Inter-Parliamentary Union 2010, as presented in UNIFEM 2010.

Women have limited inﬂ uence in political 
decision making 
Women do vote, but they do not enter or prog-
ress in formal political institutions as much as 
men. Despite increases in representation at na-
tional  and,  more  markedly,  subnational  levels 
and in designated positions, progress generally 
has been slow and remains below the level typi-
cally considered sufﬁ cient to ensure voice (often 
thought  to  be  around  30  percent).99  Indeed, 
European (excluding the Nordic countries) and 
North American countries have not made more 
progress than countries in Asia, Latin America, 
or Sub-Saharan Africa. Despite recent improve-
ments, the situation is particularly striking in the 
Middle East and North Africa, where only about 
1  parliamentarian  in  10  is  a  woman  (up  from 
1 in 25 in 2000).100

When women enter the political arena, they 
tend to remain in the lower ranks and to cluster 
into  sectors  perceived  as “female.”  Even  where 
women’s  representation  increases,  it  can  make 
a  difference  only  when  women  have  access  to 
key decision-making bodies. For example, many 
women were in the legislature in the former So-
viet Union, but they were almost totally excluded 
from the central committees and state council of 
ministers, where the real power resided. Women 
are also more likely to lead ministries of health, 
education,  or  social  welfare,  rather  than  hold 
portfolios in economy or ﬁ nance (ﬁ gure 4.13).101
Constitutional  restrictions  on  women  becom-
ing heads of state still exist in some countries, 
guaranteeing that women are excluded from the 
highest rung of leadership. 

Women’s  participation  in  the  judiciary  re-
peats  this  pattern.  There  generally  are  more 
female  judges  in  the  lower  courts  than  in  the 
higher  courts.  Men  typically  dominate  other 
quasi-judicial bodies as well. 

Gender gaps in women’s role in unions often 
mirror the gaps in political bodies. The propor-
tion of women who work full time and belong 
to  a  labor  union  is  almost  the  same  as  that  of 
men  (around  30  percent  in  developed  coun-
tries,  20  percent  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  South 
Asia, and Europe and Central Asia, and 10 per-
cent in East Asia and Paciﬁ c), and their overall 
lower  participation  simply  reﬂ ects  their  lower 
labor force participation. Accordingly, the num-
ber of women leaders at the local level is fairly 
high but falls dramatically for high-level leader-
ship. Women represent 44 percent of members 
of a group of European unions with 50 million 
members, but less than 10 percent of their presi-
dents, 20 percent of their secretaries general, and 
a third of their vice presidents.102 

As  a  result,  many  issues  that  affect  women 
are left off the agenda. For example, labor move-
ments have effectively advocated for equal work 
for equal pay within the same job classiﬁ cation 
but have not devoted the same attention to ad-
vocating  for  higher  pay  for  female-dominated 
jobs.103 Unions can even work against women. 
After  World  War  I,  for  example,  the  largest 
civil service unions in the United Kingdom fa-
vored  retention  of  the  marriage  bar  (whereby 
women had to resign when they married). And 
the  Trades  Union  Congress  waited  until  1963 
to ask for legislative intervention on equal pay. 
In other cases, unions can defend women’s in-
terest  even  when  their  leadership  structure  is 
male-dominated,  as  in  the  case  of  the  central 
role  played  by  teachers’  unions  in  the  United 
States after World War II when they successfully 
fought the law that forced women to leave the 
workforce when they married.104 In Canada, Ja-
pan, Mexico, and Malaysia (but not the United 
States), the impact of unions on women’s wages 
was  often  greater  than  on  men’s  wages.105  Be-

178 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 4.14   Women’s voice in society is limited by social norms on women’s roles and abilities and by 

formal institutions

I N F O R M A L
I N S T I T U T I O N S
N o r m s   o n   w o m e n ’ s
i e s ;
i
l
r o l e s   a n d   a b i
  n e t w o r k s
s o c i a l

t

FORMAL
INSTITUTIONS
Associations and
electoral laws;
political parties

HOUSEHOLDS
Allocation of
resources and
care/housework

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

AGENCY
Voice in
society

ENDOWMENTS

MARKETS

Source: WDR 2012 team.

yond unions’ roles in promoting greater equal-
ity, they can broaden women’s social networks, 
increasing their ability to exercise agency. 

Women also have low representation on the 
boards of large ﬁ rms (around 12 percent in Eu-
rope,  10  percent  in  the Americas,  7  percent  in 
Asia  and  Paciﬁ c,  and  3  percent  in  the  Middle 
East  and  North  Africa).106  That  pattern  is  re-
peated in universities. In 2000, only 12 of the 70 
leadership  positions  on  Princeton  University’s 
undergraduate  campus  were  ﬁ lled  by  women 
(up from 6 in the 1970s, but down from 18 in 
the 1980s and 22 in the 1990s). Women are dis-
proportionately represented at lower, less visible, 
posts behind the scenes.107

Women’s  limited  voice  in  society  reﬂ ects  a 
series of compounding constraints, as reﬂ ected 
in  our  conceptual  framework  (ﬁ gure  4.14).  In 
particular,  social  norms  about  women’s  roles 
and  abilities,  their  limited  networks,  and  their 
low  representation  in  formal  institutions  play 
an important role.

Social norms and beliefs regarding 
women’s abilities and gender roles limit 
women’s voice in formal politics
In many countries men (and women) still view 
men  as  better  political  leaders  than  women. 
Among  younger  and  more  educated  groups, 
and  in  such  regions  as  Latin America,  percep-
tions  have  weakened  over  recent  years.108  But 
in 2005–08, more than 50 percent of men still 
held this perception in half the countries with 
data  (ﬁ gure  4.15).  Part  of  the  persistence  of 
these  perceptions  results  from  a  lack  of  expo-
sure to women leaders, and thus most men and 
women do not know how effective they can be 
(an  information  failure).  Indeed,  when  parties 
(or  unions)  have  adopted  quotas  on  their  lists 
of candidates, or when countries have reserved 
seats for women for some elections, perceptions 
have shifted and the effect of quotas has lasted 
beyond their implementation period.109

Women also tend to be less engaged in poli-
tics  than  men,  with  party  afﬁ liation  rates  on 

Promoting women’s agency

179

FIGURE 4.15   Perceptions on leadership skills are still very prevalent, and less 

educated cohorts are more biased
Percentage who agree with the statement, “men make better political leaders”

men

women

 

h
t
i

 

 

w
n
e
m
g
n
o
m
a
e
r
a
h
s

 

%

 
,
l

e
v
e

l
 

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
h
g
h

i

 

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

h
t
i

 

 

w
n
e
m
o
w
g
n
o
m
a
e
r
a
h
s

 

%

 
,
l

e
v
e

l
 

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
h
g
h

i

 

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

share among men with low education level, %

share among women with low education level, %

Sub-Saharan Africa
East Asia and Pacific
Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and North Africa

OECD countries
South Asia

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Value Survey 2005–08.

Note: The 45° line in each ﬁ gure above shows parity in the values on the vertical and horizontal axis.

average about half those of men (ﬁ gure 4.16). 
Strong social norms on women’s roles can also 
lead women to prefer men in leadership posi-
tions  and  discriminate  against  other  women 
because they overestimate men’s skills and have 
low  perceptions  of  their  own  skills.  In  Spain, 
women tend to overestimate the qualiﬁ cations 
of male candidates during the selection process 
for the judiciary. Being interviewed by a panel 
with a majority of women reduces female can-
didates’ chance of success by 17 percent (com-
pared with their chance when interviewed only 
by men) and increases men’s likelihood of be-
ing selected by 34 percent.110

Time  constraints,  largely  stemming  from 
social norms on the role of women as the main 
providers  of  child  care  and  household  work, 
also prevent women from accessing many for-
mal institutions. Finally, women’s lack of polit-
ical participation in ofﬁ ce can be partly attrib-
uted to a lack of professional networks. In more 
advanced economies, women are less likely to 
be  employed  in  jobs  that  generate  the  politi-
cal  networks  and  social  capital  for  entry  into 
the political sphere, while in developing coun-
tries  women’s  role  in  the  home  prevents  the 
building  of  strong  and  broad  networks.  Time 
constraints  and  social  norms  relating  to  per-
ceptions of women as leaders are the key fac-

FIGURE 4.16   Women are much less likely to belong to a 

political party than men

 
,

%
y
t
r
a
p

 
l

a
c
i
t
i
l

 

o
p
a
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
e
m

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

5

2

Middle East 
and North 

Africa 

26

17

10

7

7

11

11

5

10

7

OECD 

countries 

East Asia

and
Pacific

Europe 

and 

Central 

Asia 

Sub-Saharan 

Africa 

South 
Asia 

5

2
Latin 

America 
and the 
Caribbean 

countries

women

men

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Values Surveys, 1994–99 and 2005–07 waves.

tors in women’s low participation in politics in 
middle- and low-income countries in Asia.111

These  constraints  often  result  in  women 
concentrating 
in  activities  that  are  more 
“women friendly” and accommodating of time 
constraints—such  as  children’s  schools  or  re-

180 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

ligious  associations’  activities.  In  these  sub-
groups, women can progress, but these groups 
do not usually provide the networks that allow 
women to advance into higher decision-making 
positions.112  In  many  countries,  from  South 
 Africa to the United Kingdom, female represen-
tatives report struggling with established prac-
tices within parliaments—from sessions being 
scheduled late in the day at a time that is not 
compatible with family responsibilities to inap-
propriate language and attitudes.113 

Electoral laws, political parties, and public 
campaign funding perpetuate women’s 
marginal role in formal politics
The political and electoral system and process de-
termine women’s representation and the impact 
of  policies  designed  to  change  it.  Proportional 
representation systems are more effective at get-
ting women in parliament, and quotas work best 
in  closed-list  proportional  representation  sys-
tems. But women in such systems are also under 
greater pressure to vote along party lines.114 

Voters can elect more women representatives 
only if they are listed on the ballot. Because po-
litical parties are the gatekeepers to the political 
system, many efforts at increasing women’s rep-
resentation in elected bodies have called on po-
litical parties to ensure greater gender balance in 
their lists of candidates. But many incumbents 
resist sharing power. 
•  In Spain, which follows the voluntary party 
quota system, parties have at times adhered to 
the guidelines for putting more women at the 
top of lists but only in constituencies where 
ballot order was not relevant for the outcome. 
Where the ballot order mattered, parties have 
tended  at  times  to  nominate  female  candi-
dates to poorer positions on the ballot.115 

•  In France, parties have at times circumvented 
quotas by placing women in the most chal-
lenging  districts,  paying  ﬁ nes  for  failing  to 
comply, or even setting ad hoc separate elec-
toral lists for male candidates who otherwise 
would be displaced by women.116 

•  In  Norway,  the  Labor  Party  introduced  a 
quota but eased its rules during the 2009 par-
liamentary  elections—replacing  the  ballot 
requirement  that  the  same  number  of  men 
and women had to be ﬁ rst and second candi-
dates) with a requirement on the total num-

ber of men and women candidates irrespec-
tive of their order of appearance on ballots. In 
other  cases,  parties  have  been  suspected  of 
proposing weak female candidates who act as 
surrogates for men or who are unable to chal-
lenge traditional patterns.117 

Practices  like  these  help  explain  why  some 
countries put additional conditions on the po-
sition  of  women  on  lists,  such  as  stipulating 
that the ﬁ rst two individuals on a list must be 
of the opposite sex. In line with this discussion, 
the  analysis  of  reforms  toward  greater  gender 
equality highlights the importance of the elec-
toral system, the internal democracy of parties, 
women’s  voting  patterns,  the  penalties  associ-
ated with noncompliance, and state capacity for 
implementation of the quota laws.118

In parties and unions, women at times form 
segregated, alternative groupings to circumvent 
the  glass  ceiling  in  the  mainstream  part  of  the 
institution. Tired of a lack of representation in 
national  executive  committees,  female  union 
members in Canada formed women-only com-
mittees to inﬂ uence the overall agenda and pro-
mote women to leadership positions. In the early 
1980s, women successfully campaigned for afﬁ r-
mative action positions on the executive commit-
tees of central labor bodies.119 In Iceland, around 
the same time, women formed a political party, 
the Women’s Alliance, to increase their presence 
in politics and to focus on issues important to 
them—increasing female representation.

The  institutional  context  can  also  limit  the 
translation  of  women’s  presence  in  decision-
making  bodies  into  actual  changes  on  the 
ground. Parties might exert strong control over 
their members, preventing elected women from 
challenging the status quo and promoting dif-
ferent priorities—once elected, women may be 
obliged to follow party lines rather than gender 
lines. In South Africa, women in the African Na-
tional Congress (ANC) sided with the party line 
and approved the Communal Land Rights Act, 
despite  its  failure  to  extend  full  rights  of  land 
ownership  and  control  to  women,  because  of 
the political threat to the ANC by a constituency 
hostile to women’s interests.120 

Party allegiances are likely to be particularly 
important  at  the  national  level,  where  parties 
have  more  inﬂ uence  over  their  representatives, 
and are perhaps more limited at the local level, 
where elected ofﬁ cials might be more account-

 

Promoting women’s agency 

181

able to their constituencies. The ability of elected 
ofﬁ cials or voters to inﬂ uence policies of course 
depends  on  the  overall  strength  of  the  institu-
tions they sit in or vote for.121 In Uganda, 30 per-
cent of land board members have to be women, 
but  the  land  legislation  does  not  bestow  un-
equivocal  land  rights  on  women  and  does  not 
provide  clear  women-friendly  administrative 
procedures, limiting the impact of female board 
members.122

Large and sudden gains in political represen-
tation for women are unlikely to take place un-
less the political systems themselves experience 
broader shifts—after a conﬂ ict, a political rup-
ture, or another shock. These shifts offer unique 
opportunities for women to enter the political 
process without displacing male incumbents or 
without challenging the status quo when a sin-
gle party dominates the political scene.123 With-
out such shifts, progress is slower. More gener-

ally, democratic transitions can create windows 
of  opportunity  for  reform,  as  in  Brazil,  Chile, 
Greece, South Africa, Spain, and Turkey (but re-
form is not automatic).124 

Women play a larger role in 
informal groups
Women often resort to more informal groups—
women’s collectives organized around economic 
activity,  informal  labor  unions,  and  so  on.125 
The  success  of  informal  groups  is  related  to 
their  ability  to  remove  the  barriers  preventing 
women  from  exerting  decision-making  power 
in the formal arena, or to gain beneﬁ ts denied 
to  them  in  the  formal  sector  and  to  inﬂ uence 
the overall policy agenda. Informal associations 
allow women to gather in a more ﬂ exible envi-
ronment  that  accommodates  time  constraints, 
provide a less threatening space in line with their 
sense of self-efﬁ cacy, and offer a more practical 

CHAPTER SUMMARY      Women continue to have less capacity than men to exercise agency

WHAT WE SEE
Entrenched diff erences exist between women’s and men’s capacity to 
exercise agency—defi ned as the ability to make eff ective choices—
both in the household and in society more broadly. Where women’s 
agency has increased, it has led to improvements in women’s welfare 
and that of their children; yet shifts in agency have generally proven 
diffi  cult to achieve. In some aspects of agency, such as political voice 
and  representation,  diff erences  persist  even  in  rich  countries  and 
despite a century of women’s activism and change in other domains.

WHY WE SEE THIS
Economic development can promote women’s agency by improv-
ing the conditions that allow agency to be exercised, such as higher 
incomes,  greater  access  to  services,  and  expanded  infrastructure. 
However, this potential impact relies in part on women’s increased 
bargaining power within the household resulting from the ability to 
earn their own income. Moreover, the eff ects of economic develop-
ment vary across countries and are limited for some outcomes asso-
ciated with agency.

THE IMPORTANCE OF EFFECTIVE APPLICATION 
OF LAWS
Although expansion of women’s rights has fostered agency in some 
realms, the eff ect of laws has been weakest in areas regulating rela-
tions within households, especially as they pertain to control over 
resources and family matters. Nor does progress in the form of legal 
change necessarily result in improvements in agency, because the 

eff ectiveness of these laws depends crucially on the ability and will-
ingness  of  governments  to  ensure  they  are  fully  applied  and 
enforced.

THE POWER OF NORMS
Social norms can limit the eff ect of laws, services, or incomes, to the 
detriment  of  gender  equality.  And  they  are  particularly  binding 
where an increase in women’s agency would threaten the balance 
of power in the household. Social norms can also inhibit women’s 
collective agency—for instance, by limiting the political roles they 
can hold or their access to positions of power in business. In some 
instances, changes in norms can promote women’s agency. 

WHAT THIS MEANS FOR POLICY
When  laws,  services,  social  norms,  and  markets  interact,  they  can 
result in mutually reinforcing constraints—and these need to inform 
the  selection  and  sequencing  of  policies.  Shifting  social  norms 
around gender roles and women’s abilities is particularly critical to 
promote women’s agency. This process can be complex and slow, 
but policies can change the costs or benefi ts of complying with pre-
vailing norms by providing the incentives or information needed for 
individuals or groups to challenge them. Although these norms—as 
well as institutional structures—at times limit women from infl uenc-
ing  policies  through  formal  political  channels,  women’s  collective 
agency  can  work  eff ectively  through  less  formal  channels.  This  in 
turn  can  infl uence  policy  debates,  choices,  and  the  factors  that 
themselves shape women’s individual agency. 

182 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

focus on solutions to speciﬁ c issues that are less 
likely  to  cut  along  party  or  ethnic  lines.126  For 
example, in Bangladesh, women garment work-
ers set up their own informal unions rather than 
joining male-dominated unions, so as to better 
represent their interests.127 The spread of infor-
mation  and  communication  technologies  and 
social media can also play a role in facilitating 
women’s  participation  in  informal  groupings, 
despite  the  constraints  of  time  and  physical 
mobility. More generally, women’s involvement 
in associations in the social sphere is seldom a 
direct threat to men, because these groups tend 
to focus more on practical gender interests than 
on strategic ones and because they are conﬁ ned 
to areas such as education or health, which are 
often considered female sectors.128 

Whether  formal  or  informal  channels  are 
more effective facilitators for change depends on 
the political context. In some countries, such as 
France and the United States, with large numbers 
of women’s movements and gender-sensitive so-
cieties, gender issues are high on the agenda de-
spite low representation of women in politics. In 
others, including many countries of the former 
Soviet Union, women’s movements have limited 
inﬂ uence  despite  the  large  numbers  of  women 
in politics.129 And, at times, the interests of civil 
movements  and  formal  groups  align.  In  Latin 
America,  the  interests  of  women’s  movements 
that promote greater formal representation have 
coalesced with those of political parties seeking 
international legitimacy or the extension of their 
demographic voting constituency to women, re-
sulting in efforts to set quotas for women.130 

Which  channels  will  be  most  effective  also 
depends on the issue and the extent to which it 
challenges norms, beliefs, and social institutions. 
As chapter 8 discusses, some issues may concern 
the  status  of  all  women,  while  others  concern 
speciﬁ c  subgroups  of  women.  Similarly,  some 
issues may challenge beliefs and norms of par-
ticular religious or traditional groups, while oth-
ers are perceived as less controversial. The role of 
women’s movements is found to be stronger for 
issues  that  concern  all  women,  while  political 
parties and leaders play a greater role on issues 
relevant  for  a  subgroup  of  women.  The  great 
heterogeneity among women is reﬂ ected in the 
different  types  of  movements,  as  well  as  their 
positions and platforms (at times at odds or re-
ﬂ ecting the interests of speciﬁ c subgroups). 

In  sum,  women’s  collective  voice—either 
through direct participation in decision-making 
institutions or through shaping the context for 
decisions—can  result  in  policies,  programs, 
and laws that are quite different from those that 
would  have  emerged  without  it.  Providing  an 
environment where women’s voice can coalesce 
into a collective voice can thus promote wom-
en’s agency and greater gender equality.

NOTES
    1.  Some of the evidence presented in this chapter 
establishes  an  association  between  agency  and 
its  determinants,  but  does  not  establish  cau-
sality. In such cases, the direction of the causal 
relationship  may  go  in  either  or  both  ways  or 
could be determined by a third factor.

    2.  Alkire 2009; Drèze, Sen, and Hussain 1995; Ka-

beer 1999; Sen 1985.

    3.  Field and Ambrus 2008; Goldin and Katz 2002; 

Pezzini 2005.

    4.  Begum and Sen 2005.
    5.  Stekelenburg and others 2004. 
    6.  Mumtaz and Salway 2005. 
    7.  Goldin and Katz 2002; Pezzini 2005.
    8.  Attanasio and Lechene 2002; Doss 2006; Duﬂ o 
2003; Haddad, Hoddinott, and Alderman 1997; 
Hoddinott  and  Haddad  1995;  Katz  and  Cha-
morro 2003; Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales 1997; 
Quisumbing  and  Maluccio  2000;  Rubalcava, 
Teruel,  and  Thomas  2009;  Schady  and  Rosero 
2008; Thomas 1990. 

    9.  Doss 2006.
  10.  Allendorf 2007.
  11.  Akinbami, Schoendorf, and Kiely 2000; Reggio 

2010; Smith and Pell 2001.

  12.  Likelihood calculated after taking into account 
the inﬂ uence of age, education, economic stress, 
gender  attitudes,  and  alcohol  abuse;  Contre-
ras  and  others  2011.  See  also  Barker  and  oth-
ers (2011); Hindin, Kishor, and Ansara (2008); 
Johnson  and  Cares  (2004);  and  Kishor  and 
Johnson (2004).

  13.  Farré  and  Vella  2007;  Fernández,  Fogli,  and 

 Olivetti 2004; Kawaguchi and Miyazaki 2005. 

  14.  Caiazza 2002; Kittilson 2008; Miller 2008. 
  15.  Htun  and  Weldon  2008;  Htun  and  Weldon 

2011a.

  16.  Ban and Rao 2008; Beaman and others, forth-
coming;  Chattopadhyay  and  Duﬂ o  2004;  Iyer 
and others 2010; Rajaraman and Gupta 2011. 

  17.  Baird  and  others  2009;  DNP  and  others  2008; 

Duﬂ o and others 2006.

  18.  Babinard and Roberts 2006.
  19.  WDR  2012  team  estimates  based  on  Demo-

graphic and Health Surveys.

 

Promoting women’s agency 

183

  20.  Pronyk  and  others  2006;  Panda  and  Agarwal 
2005; International Center for the Research on 
Women ICRW 2006; Swaminathan, Walker, and 
Rugadya 2008.

  21.  Aizer 2010.
  22.  Hjort  and Villanger  2011;  Panda  and  Agarwal 

  51.  Tarazona and Munro 2011.
  52.  Harrington and Chopra 2010. 
  53.  Lastarria-Cornhiel 1997.
  54.  Ayuko and Chopra 2008; Monson 2010.
  55.  Aldashev and others, forthcoming.
  56.  Kapur  1996;  Khan,  Bhuiya,  and  Bhattacharya 

2005. 

  23.  Deere and León 2001.
  24.  WDR  2012  team  estimates  based  on  Gallup 
data, for years 2008, 2009, and 2010, for Burkina 
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Re-
public,  Chad,  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo, 
Côte  d’Ivoire,  Ghana,  Kenya,  Liberia,  Malawi, 
Mali,  Niger,  Nigeria,  Rwanda,  Senegal,  Sierra 
Leone,  South  Africa,  Tanzania,  Uganda,  Zam-
bia,  and  Zimbabwe  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa; 
and Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, 
Costa  Rica,  Dominican  Republic,  Ecuador,  El 
Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, 
Nicaragua,  Panama,  Paraguay,  Peru,  Trinidad 
and Tobago, Uruguay, and República Bolivari-
ana  de  Venezuela  for  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean.

  25.  ETUC 2010. 
  26.  Erulkar and others 2004. 
  27.  Dinkelman 2010.
  28.  Babinard and Scott 2011.
  29.  Venter, Vokolkova, and Michalek 2007. 
  30.  Joshi and Schultz 2007; Gertler and Molyneaux 

1994. 

  31.  World Bank 2011.
  32.  Ashraf, Field, and Lee 2010.
  33.  Jejeebhoy, Shah, and Thapa 2005. 
  34.  Singh  and  others  (2009)  report  that  such  pa-
rental  consent  is  required  for  abortion  in  32 
countries—including many rich countries such 
as Denmark, Greece, Italy, the Slovak Republic, 
and the United States. 

  35.  Lule, Singh, and Chowdhury 2007; World Bank 

2007. 

  36.  Kirdar, Dayioglu Tayfur, and Koç 2010.
  37.  Roy 2011.
  38.  Chiappori, Fortin, and Lacroix 2002.
  39.  Stevenson  2007;  Stevenson  and  Wolfers  2006. 
See also Bargain and others (2010) and González 
and Özcan (2008) for evidence on Ireland.

  40.  Byrnes and Freeman 2011.
  41.  Gender Business Law Library, World Bank.
  42.  World Bank 2011. 
  43.  Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan 2010.
  44.  Deere and Doss 2006a; Deere and Doss 2006b.
  45.  Quisumbing and Hallman 2005.
  46.  World Bank 2011. 
  47.  Rangel 2006. 
  48.  World Bank 2011. 
  49.  UNIFEM 2003. 
  50.  UNIFEM 2010. 

2010. 

  57.  Kahan 2010; UNIFEM 2009.
  58.  UNIFEM 2010.
  59.  Figure 5.4 in UNIFEM 2008. 
  60.  World Bank 2011a.
  61.  Denham 2008. 
  62.  Sumner, Zurstrassen, and Lister 2011.
  63.  Contreras and others 2010; WHO 2010.
  64.  Jubb and Pasinato Izumino 2003.
  65.  Ayuko and Chopra 2008.
  66.  World Bank 2011b.
  67.  Lungu and others 2001. 
  68.  World Bank 2010.
  69.  World Bank 2011b.
  70.  Luke and Munshi 2011. 
  71.  World Bank 2011b.
  72.  The  minimum  age  is  14  for  girls  and  16  for 
boys  in  Bolivia  and  República  Bolivariana  de 
Venezuela,  15  and  18  in  Kuwait,  South Africa, 
and  Tanzania.  Parental  consent  is  required  in 
Bolivia,  Kuwait,  South  Africa,  and  República 
Bolivariana  de  Venezuela  for  the  marriage  of 
girls at these ages. 

  73.  Jensen and Thornton 2003.
  74.  See Iversen and Rao (2011) for a discussion of 
trends  in  the  incidence  of  domestic  violence 
and attitudes toward it in India.

  75.  WDR  2012  team  estimates  based  on  Demo-

graphic and Health Surveys.
  76.  Contreras and others 2011.
  77.  WHO (2010) and references within. 
  78.  Osawa (2011) shows that for the case of Japan, 
this  norm  permeated  the  market  and  created 
a  male-breadwinner-centric  model  for  career 
progression  and  for  social  security  and  social 
beneﬁ ts.

  79.  World Bank 2011b. The International Men and 
Gender  Equality  Survey  took  place  in  Brazil 
(metropolitan  area  of  Rio  de  Janeiro);  Chile 
(metropolitan  areas  of  Valparaiso,  Concep-
cion, and Santiago); Croatia (metropolitan area 
of  Zagreb  and  rural  areas  in  the  East);  India 
(metropolitan areas of Delhi and Vijayawada); 
Mexico  (metropolitan  areas  of  Monterrey, 
Queretaro, and Jalapa); and Rwanda (national 
coverage).

  80.  Abramsky and  others 2011; Contreras and oth-

ers 2011. 

  81.  Ashraf, Field, and Lee 2010. 
  82.  Iyengar 2009.
  83.  Fogli and Veldkamp, forthcoming.
  84.  Hoff and Mansuri 2011.

184 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

  85.  Croson and Gneezy 2009; Gneezy, Leonard, and 
List 2009; Gneezy, Niederle, and Rustichini 2003. 

  86.  Hossain 2011. 
  87.  Beaman  and  others,  forthcoming;  Bhavnani 

2009.

  88.  Giné and Mansuri 2011.
  89.  Good, Aronson, and Inzlicht 2003.
  90.  La Ferrara, Chong, and Duryea 2008.
  91.  Jensen and Oster 2007.
  92.  Chen, Liu, and Xie 2010
  93.  Hallman and others 2007. 
  94.  Erulkar and others 2004.
  95.  References in Bruce and Hallman 2008. 
  96.  WDR  2012  team  estimates  based  on  Demo-
graphic  and  Health  Surveys  2003–09,  40 
countries. 

  97.  Fernández  2007;  Fernández  and  Fogli  2006; 

Fernández and Fogli 2009.

  98.  World Bank Survey of Home-based Work and 
Entrepreneurship in Cairo, Sana’a, and Amman 
2008. See Chamlou 2011.

  99.  Evidence  from  Minnesota  suggests  that  poli-
cies shift once women represent more than 20 
percent of the state legislature and chair com-
mittees  (Minnesota Women’s  Campaign  Fund 
2002  cited  in  Tinker  2004).  In  the  context  of 
forest  management  in  India,  the  likelihood  of 
women attending village meetings, speaking up, 
and holding ofﬁ ce was found to increase when 
women  represent  25–33  percent  of  a  group. 
Agarwal 2010a; Agarwal 2010b.

100.  Inter Parliamentary Union http://www.ipu.org. 
101.  Zetterberg 2008. 
102.  ETUC 2010. 
103.  Kaminski and Yakura 2008.
104.  Donahue 2002. 
105.  Tzannatos 1986; Tzannatos 2008. 
106.  CWDI and IFC 2010.
107.  Steering  Committee  on  Undergraduate  Wom-

en’s Leadership 2011. 

108.  Buvinic and Roza 2004.
109.  Krook 2006; Inter Parliamentary Union http://

www.ipu.org; Bhavnani 2009.

110.  Bagués and Esteve-Volart 2010. 
111.  UNDP 2010. 
112.  Burns,  Schlozman,  and  Verba  2001;  Jayaweera 

1997.

113.  See Tinker (2004) and references therein. In the 
United Kingdom, the issue has been identiﬁ ed 
as  critical  and  the  parliamentary  procedure 
committee is undertaking a review of working 
conditions. 
114.  Krook 2006.
115.  Bagués and Esteve-Volart 2010.
116.  Dahlerup and Freidenvall 2005; Murray, Krook, 

and Opello 2009.

117.  See, for instance, Ballington and Karam (2005), 
Dahlerup  (2002),  and  Vyasulu  and  Vyasulu 
(1999).

118.  Goetz 2009.
119.  Foley and Baker 2009. 
120.  Hassim 2006.
121.  Goetz 2009. 
122.  Kane, Oloka-Onyango, and Tejan-Cole 2005.
123.  Hassim 2010. 
124.  Htun and Weldon 2010.
125.  Baltiwala 1994; Sen and Grown 1988.
126.  Tripp 2003; Tripp 2010.
127.  Dannecker 2000.
128.  Molyneux 1985a; Molyneux 1985b. 
129.  Molyneux 1985a.
130.  Htun and Jones 2002.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally repro-
duced works that may not be commonly avail-
able through libraries.

Abramsky, Tanya, Charlotte H. Watts, Claudia Garcia-
Moreno, Karen Devries, Ligia Kiss, Mary Ellsberg, 
Henrica  A.  F.  M.  Jansen,  and  Lori  Heise.  2011. 
“What  Factors  Are  Associated  with  Recent  Inti-
mate Partner Violence? Findings from the WHO 
Multi-Country  Study  on  Women’s  Health  and 
Domestic Violence.” BMC Public Health 11 (109): 
1–17.

Agarwal,  Bina.  2010a. “Does  Women’s  Proportional 
Strength  Affect  Their  Participation?  Governing 
Local Forests in South Asia.” World Development 
38 (1): 98–112.

———.  2010b.  Gender  and  Green  Governance:  The 
Political Economy of Women’s Presence Within and 
Beyond  Community  Forestry.  New  York:  Oxford 
University Press.

Aizer, Anna. 2010. “The Gender Wage Gap and Do-
mestic Violence.” American Economic Review 100 
(4): 1847–59.

Akerlof,  George  A.  1976. “The  Economics  of  Caste 
and  of  the  Rat  Race  and  Other  Woeful  Tales.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4): 599–617.

Akinbami, Lara J., Kenneth C. Schoendorf, and John 
L. Kiely. 2000. “Risk of Preterm Birth in Multipa-
rous Teenagers.” Archives of Pediatrics and Adoles-
cent Medicine 154 (11): 1101–7.

Aldashev,  Gani,  Imane  Chaara,  Jean-Philippe  Plat-
teau, and Zaki Wahhaj. Forthcoming. “Using the 
Law to Change the Custom.” Journal of Develop-
ment Economics.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn. 
2011.  “Fertility  and  the  Plough.”  American  Eco-
nomic  Review  Papers  and  Proceedings  101(3): 
499–503. 

Alkire,  Sabina.  2009.  “Concepts  and  Measures  of 
Agency.”  In  Arguments  for  a  Better World:  Essays 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

185

in Honor of Amartya Sen. Vol. I: Ethics, Welfare and 
Measurement, ed. Basu Kaushik and Kanbur Ravi. 
New York: Oxford.

Allendorf,  Keera.  2007.  “Do  Women’s  Land  Rights 
Promote Empowerment and Child Health in Ne-
pal?” World Development 35 (11): 1975–88.

Ambady, Nalini, Margaret Shih, Amy Kim, and Todd 
L.  Pittinsky.  2001.  “Stereotype  Susceptibility  in 
Children: Effect of Identity Activation on Quan-
titative Performance.” Psychological Science 12 (5): 
385–90.

Ashraf,  Nava,  Erica  Field,  and  Jean  Lee.  2010. 
“Household  Bargaining  and  Excess  Fertility:  An 
Experimental Study in Zambia.” Harvard Univer-
sity, Cambridge, MA. Processed.

Attanasio,  Orazio,  and Valérie  Lechene.  2002. “Tests 
of Income Pooling in Household Decisions.” Re-
view of Economic Dynamics 5 (4): 720–48.

Ayuko, Bonita, and Tanja Chopra. 2008. The Illusion 
of Inclusion: Women’s Access to Rights in Northern 
Kenya. Nairobi: Legal Resources Foundation Trust 
Research Report.

Babinard,  Julie,  and  Peter  Roberts.  2006. “Maternal 
and  Child  Mortality  Development  Goals:  What 
Can  the  Transport  Sector  Do?”  Transport  Paper 
12, Transportation Research Board, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Babinard,  Julie,  and  Kinnon  Scott.  2011. “What  Do 
Existing Household Surveys Tell Us about Gender 
and  Transportation  in  Developing  Countries?” 
Summary  of  the  4th  International  Conference 
on  Women’s  Issues  Transportation,  Conference 
Proceedings  46,  vol.  2.  Transportation  Research 
Board, Washington, DC.

Bagués,  Manuel  F.,  and  Berta  Esteve-Volart.  2010. 
“Can Gender Parity Break the Glass Ceiling? Evi-
dence from a Repeated Randomized Experiment.” 
Review of Economic Studies 77 (4): 1301–28.

Baird, Sarah, Ephraim Chirwa, Craig McIntosh, and 
Berk  Özler.  2009. “The  Short-term  Impacts  of  a 
Schooling Conditional Cash Transfer Program on 
the Sexual Behavior of Young Women.” Policy Re-
search Working  Paper  5089, World  Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.

Ballington, Julie, and Azza Karam, eds. 2005. Women 
in  Parliament:  Beyond  Numbers,  rev.  ed.  Stock-
holm: International Institute for Democracy and 
Electoral Assistance. 

Baltiwala, Srilatha. 1994. “The Meaning of Women’s 
Empowerment.  New  Concepts  from  Action.”  In 
Population Policies Reconsidered: Health, Empow-
erment and Rights, ed. Gita Sen, Lincoln C. Chen 
and  Adrienne  Germain.  Boston,  MA:  Harvard 
University Press.

Ban, Radu, and Vijayendra Rao. 2008. “Tokenism or 
Agency? The Impact of Women’s Reservations on 
Village  Democracies  in  South  India.”  Economic 
Development and Cultural Change 56 (3): 501–30.

Bannon,  Ian,  and  Maria  C.  Correia,  eds.  2006.  The 
Other Half of Gender: Men’s Issues in Development. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Bargain, Olivier, Libertad González, Claire Keane, and 
Berkay Özcan. 2010. “Female Labour Supply and 
Divorce:  New  Evidence  from  Ireland.”  IZA  Dis-
cussion Paper Series 4959, Institute for the Study 
of Labor, Bonn.

Barker, Gary, Manuel Contreras, Brian Heilman, Ajay 
Singh,  Ravi  Verman,  and  Marcos  Nascimento. 
2011. Evolving Men: Initial Results from the Interna-
tional Men and Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES). 
Washington,  DC:  International  Center  for  Re-
search on Women and Instituto Promundo, Men 
and Gender Quality Policy Project.

Barker,  Gary,  and  Christine  Ricardo.  2005.  “Young 
Men  and  the  Construction  of  Masculinity  in 
Sub-Saharan Africa: Implications for HIV/AIDS, 
Conﬂ ict  and  Violence.”  Social  Development  Pa-
pers 26, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Barker,  Gary,  Christine  Ricardo,  and  Marcos  Nasci-
mento. 2007. Engaging Men and Boys in Changing 
Gender-based  Inequity  in  Health:  Evidence  from 
Programme  Interventions.  Geneva:  World  Health 
Organization.

Beaman, Lori, Esther Duﬂ o, Rohini Pande, and Petia 
Topalova. Forthcoming. “Political Reservation and 
Substantive Representation: Evidence from Indian 
Village Councils.” In India Policy Forum, 2010, ed. 
Suman Berg, Barry Bosworth, and Arvind Pana-
gariya.  Brookings  Institution  Press,  Washington, 
DC;  National  Council  of Applied  Economic  Re-
search, New Delhi.

Begum,  Sharifa,  and  Binayak  Sen.  2005.  “Maternal 
Health,  Child  Well-Being  and  Intergeneration-
ally Transmitted Chronic Poverty: Does Women’s 
Agency  Matter?”  Working  Paper  Series  8,  Pro-
gramme for Research on Chronic Poverty in Ban-
gladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Benhabib, Seyla. 2002. The Claims of Culture: Equal-
ity and Diversity in the Global Era. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.

Bhavnani, Rikhil R. 2009. “Do Electoral Quotas Work 
after They Are Withdrawn? Evidence from a Nat-
ural Experiment in India.” American Political Sci-
ence Review 103 (1): 23–35.

Bruce,  Judith,  and  Kelly  Hallman.  2008.  “Reaching 
the  Girls  Left  Behind.”  Gender  and  Development 
16 (2): 227–45.

Bruner, Jerome S., and Mary C. Potter. 1964. “Inter-
ference in Visual Recognition.” Science 144 (3617): 
424–25.

Burns,  Nancy,  Kay  Lehman  Schlozman,  and  Sidney 
Verba.  2001.  The  Private  Roots  of  Public  Action: 
Gender, Equality, and Political Participation. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Buvinic, Mayra, and Vivian Roza. 2004. “Women, Pol-
itics and Democratic Prospects in Latin America.” 

186 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Sustainable  Development  Department  Technical 
Paper Series WID-108, Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank, Washington, DC.

Byrnes, Andrew, and Marsha A. Freeman. 2011. “The 
Impact  of  the  CEDAW  Conventions:  Paths  to 
Equality.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Caiazza, Amy. 2002. “Does Women’s Representation 
in  Elected  Ofﬁ ce  Lead  to  Women-Friendly  Pol-
icy?”  Research-in-Brief  Series  1910,  Institute  for 
Women’s Policy Research, Washington, DC.

Cattell,  Maria  G.  1997.  “African  Widows,  Culture, 
and Social Change: Case Studies from Kenya.” In 
Cultural Context of Aging: Worldwide Perspectives, 
2d  ed.,  Jay  Sokolovsky.  Westport,  CT:  Bergin  & 
Garvey.

Chamlou,  Nadeseh.  2011.  “Will  People  Power  Em-
power Women?”  Blog Voices  and Views:  Middle 
East and North Africa, World Bank, Washington, 
DC, March 20.

Chattopadhyay,  Raghabendra,  and  Esther  Duﬂ o. 
2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a 
Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econo-
metrica 72 (5): 1409–43.

Chen,  Jiajian,  Hongyan  Liu,  and  Zhenming  Xie. 
2010. “Effects  of  Rural-Urban  Return  Migration 
on  Women’s  Family  Planning  and  Reproductive 
Health  Attitudes  and  Behavior  in  Rural  China.” 
Studies in Family Planning 41 (1): 31–44.

Chiappori,  Pierre-André,  Bernard  Fortin,  and  Guy 
Lacroix.  2002. “Marriage  Market,  Divorce  Legis-
lation,  and  Household  Labor  Supply.”  Journal  of 
Political Economy 110 (1): 37–72.

Chiongson, Rea Abada, Deval Desai, Teresa Marchi-
ori,  and  Michael  Woolcock.  2011. “Role  of  Law 
and Justice in Achieving Gender Equality.” Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2012.

Connell, Robert W. 2003. The Role of Men and Boys 
in Achieving Gender Equality. New York and Ge-
neva:  United  Nations  and  International  Labor 
 Organization.

Connell,  Robert  W.,  and  James  W.  Messerschmidt. 
2005.  “Hegemonic  Masculinity:  Rethinking  the 
Concept.” Gender and Society 19 (6): 829–59.

Contreras, Juan Manuel, Sarah Bott, Elizabeth Dart-
nall, and Alessandra Guedes. 2010. Violencia sex-
ual en Latinoamérica y el Caribe: Análisis de Datos 
Secundarios.  Pretoria,  South  Africa:  Iniciativa  de 
Investigación en Violencia Sexual Unidad de In-
vestigación sobre Género y Salud Consejo de In-
vestigación Médica.

Contreras, Juan Manuel, Brian Heilman, Gary Barker, 
Ajay  Singh,  and  Ravi  Verma.  2011.  “Childhood 
Antecedents  of  Adult  Behaviors:  New  Findings 
from the International Men and Gender Equality 
Survey.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Corporate Women  Directors  International  (CWDI) 
and  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC). 

2010. CWDI/IFC 2010 Report: Accelerating Board 
Diversity. Washington, DC: CWDI and IFC.

Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Dif-
ferences in Preferences.” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 47 (2): 448–74.

Dahlerup, Drude. 2002. “Quotas—A Jump to Equal-
ity?  The  Need  for  International  Comparisons 
of  the  Use  of  Electoral  Quotas  to  Obtain  Equal 
Political Citizenship for Women.” Paper presented 
at the Regional Workshop on the Implementation 
of  Quotas:  Asian  Experiences,  Jakarta,  Septem-
ber 25.

Dahlerup, Drude, and Lenita Freidenvall. 2005. “Quo-
tas as a ‘Fast Track’ to Equal Political Representa-
tion for Women—Why Scandinavia Is No Longer 
the Model.” International Feminist Journal of Poli-
tics 7(1): 26–48.

Dannecker, Petra. 2000. “Collective Action, Organisa-
tion  Building,  and  Leadership:  Women  Workers 
in the Garment Sector in Bangladesh.” Gender and 
Development 8 (3): 31–9.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Cheryl  R.  Doss.  2006a. 
“Gender and the Distribution of Wealth in Devel-
oping Countries.” Research Paper Series 2006/115, 
United  Nations  University–World  Institute  for 
Development Economics Research, Helsinki.

———. 2006b. “The Gender Asset Gap: What Do We 
Know  and  Why  Does  It  Matter?”  Feminist  Eco-
nomics 12 (1–2): 1–50.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Magdalena  León.  2001. 
“Who Owns the Land? Gender and Land-Titling 
Programmes in Latin America.” Journal of Agrar-
ian Change 1 (3): 440–67.

Deininger, Klaus, Aparajita Goyal, and Hari Nagara-
jan. 2010. “Inheritance Law Reform and Women’s 
Access  to  Capital:  Evidence  from  India’s  Hindu 
Succession  Act.”  Policy  Research  Working  Paper 
Series 5338, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Denham,  Tara.  2008.  “Police  Reform  and  Gender.” 
In  Gender  and  Sector  Security  Reform  Toolkit,  ed. 
Megan  Bastick  and  Kristin  Valasek.  Geneva:  Ge-
neva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed 
Forces, Organization for Security Co-operation in 
Europe/Ofﬁ ce for Democratic Institutions and Hu-
man Rights, UN-International Research and Train-
ing Institude for the Advancement of Women.

DNP (Departamento Nacional de Planeación de Co-
lombia),  SINERGIA,  ACCION  SOCIAL,  Banco 
Inter-Americano de Desarrollo, and Banco Mun-
dial. 2008. Programa Familias en Acción: Impactos 
en  Capital  Humano  y  Evaluacion  Beneﬁ cio-Costo 
del Programa. Bogota and Washington, DC: DNP, 
SINERGIA,  ACCION  SOCIAL,  IADB,  World 
Bank.

Dinkelman, Taryn. 2010. “The Effects of Rural Elec-
triﬁ cation  on  Employment:  New  Evidence  from 
South Africa.” Working Paper 272, Princeton Uni-

 

Promoting women’s agency 

187

versity, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and In-
ternational Affairs, Research Program in Develop-
ment Studies, Princeton, NJ.

Donahue, David M. 2002. “Rhode Island’s Last Hold-
out: Tenure and Married Women Teachers at the 
Brink of the Women’s Movement.” History of Edu-
cation Quarterly 42 (1): 50–74.

Doss, Cheryl R. 2006. “The Effects of Intrahousehold 
Property  Ownership  on  Expenditure  Patterns 
in  Ghana.”  Journal  of  African  Economies  15  (1): 
149–80.

Douglas,  Mary.  1986.  How  Institutions  Think.  Syra-

cuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.

Drèze,  Jean,  Amartya  Sen,  and  Athar  Hussain,  eds. 
1995.  The  Political  Economy  of  Hunger:  Selected 
 Essays. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Duﬂ o,  Esther.  2003.  “Grandmothers  and  Grand-
daughters: Old-Age Pensions and Intrahousehold 
Allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic 
Review 17 (1): 1–25.

Duﬂ o, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, Michael Kremer, and 
Samuel  Sinei.  2006.  “Education  and  HIV/AIDS 
Prevention: Evidence from a Randomized Evalu-
ation in Western Kenya.” Policy Research Working 
Paper Series 4024, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Emslie, Carol, Damien Ridge, Sue Ziebland, and Kate 
Hunt. 2006. “Men’s Account of Depression: Recon-
structing  or  Resisting  Hegemonic  Masculinity?” 
Social Science & Medicine 62 (2009): 2246–57.

Erulkar, Annabel S., Tekle Ab Mekbib, Negussie Simie, 
and Tsehai Gulema. 2004. The Experience of Adoles-
cence in Rural Amhara Region Ethiopia. New York: 
United Nations Children’s Fund; United Nations 
Population  Fund;  Ethiopian  Ministry  of  Youth, 
Sports and Culture; and Population Council.

ETUC  (European  Trade  Union  Confederation). 
2010.  3rd  Annual  ETUC  8  March  Survey  2010. 
Brussels: ETUC.

Farré, Lídia, and Francis Vella. 2007. “The Intergen-
erational Transmission of Gender Role Attitudes 
and its Implications for Female Labor Force Par-
ticipation.” IZA Discussion Series 2802, Institute 
for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Fenrich,  Jeanmarie,  and  Tracy  E.  Higgins.  2001. 
“Promise Unfulﬁ lled: Law, Culture and Women’s 
Inheritance  Rights  in  Ghana.”  Fordham  Interna-
tional Law Journal 25 (2): 259–341.

Fernández,  Raquel.  2007.  “Alfred  Marshall  Lecture: 
Women, Work and Culture.” Journal of the Euro-
pean Economic Association 5 (2–3): 305–32.

Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2006. “Fer-
tility: The Role of Culture and Family Experience.”  
Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association  4 
(2–3): 552–61.

———.  2009. “Culture:  An  Empirical  Investigation 
of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility.” American Economic 
Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1): 146–77.

Fernández,  Raquel,  Alessandra  Fogli,  and  Claudia 
Olivetti.  2004.  “Mothers  and  Sons:  Preference 
Formation  and  Female  Labor  Force  Dynamics.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1249–99.

Field, Erica, and Attila Ambrus. 2008. “Early Marriage, 
Age of Menarche, and Female Schooling Attain-
ment in Bangladesh.” Journal of Political Economy 
116 (5): 881–930.

Fogli,  Alessandra,  and  Laura  Veldkamp.  Forthcom-
ing. “Nature  or  Nurture?  Learning  and  the  Ge-
ography  of  Female  Labor  Force  Participation.” 
Econometrica.

Foley,  Janice  R.,  and  Patricia  L.  Baker,  eds.  2009. 
Unions, Equity, and the Path to Renewal. Toronto: 
UBC Press. 

Gauri, Varun.  2010. “The  Publicity ‘Defect’  of  Cus-
tomary  Law.”  Policy  Research  Working  Paper 
 Series 5349, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Gertler, Paul J., and John W. Molyneaux. 1994. “How 
Economic  Development  and  Family  Planning 
Programs  Combined  to  Reduce  Indonesian  Fer-
tility.” Demography 31 (1): 33–63.

Giné, Xavier, and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Together 
We  Will:  Evidence  from  a  Field  Experiment  on 
Female Voter Turnout in Pakistan.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC. Background paper for the WDR 
2012.

Gneezy,  Uri,  Kenneth  L.  Leonard,  and  John  A.  List. 
2009. “Gender  Differences  in  Competition:  Evi-
dence from a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Soci-
ety.” Econometrica 77 (5): 1637–64.

Gneezy,  Uri,  Muriel  Niederle,  and  Aldo  Rustichini. 
2003. “Performance in Competitiveness Environ-
ments: Gender Differences.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 118 (3): 1049–74.

Goetz, Anne Marie. 2009. Governing Women: Wom-
en’s  Political  Effectiveness  in  the  Contexts  of  De-
mocratization and Governance Reform. New York: 
Routledge.

Goldin,  Claudia,  and  Lawrence  F.  Katz.  2002. “The 
Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Wom-
en’s  Career  and  Marriage  Decisions.”  Journal  of 
Political Economy 110 (4): 730–70.

González,  Libertad,  and  Berkay  Özcan.  2008.  “The 
Risk of Divorce and Household Saving Behavior.” 
IZA Discussion Paper Series 3726, Institute for the 
Study of Labor, Bonn.

Good,  Catherine,  Joshua  Aronson,  and  Michael 
Inzlicht. 2003. “Improving Adolescents’ Standard-
ized Test Performance: An Intervention to Reduce 
the Effects of Stereotype Threat.” Applied Develop-
mental Psychology 24 (2003): 645–62.

Greene, Margaret E., and Andrew Levack. 2010. Syn-
chronizing Gender Strategies: A Cooperative Model 
for  Improving  Reproductive  Health  and  Trans-
forming  Gender  Relations.  Washington,  DC:  U.S. 
Agency  for  International  Development,  Inter-

188 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

agency Gender Working Group, Population Ref-
erence Bureau, and Engender Health.

Haddad, Lawrence, John Hoddinott, and Harold Al-
derman. 1997. Intrahousehold Resource Allocation 
in Developing Countries: Models, Methods and Pol-
icy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University.

Hallman,  Kelly,  Sara  Peracca,  Jennifer  Catino,  and 
Marta  Julia  Ruiz.  2007.  “Indigenous  Girls  in 
Guatemala:  Poverty  and  Location.”  In  Exclusion, 
Gender and Education: Case Studies from the De-
veloping World, ed. Lewis Maureen and Marlaine 
Lockheed.  Washington,  DC:  Center  for  Global 
Development.

Hallward-Driemeier, Mary. 2011. Improving the Legal 
Investment  Climate  for  Women  in  Sub-Saharan 
 Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hanson,  Valkyrie.  2009.  “A  Social  Label  for  Social 
Dialogue: A Proposal to Improve Working Con-
ditions  for  Women  in  the  Guatemalan  Apparel 
Industry.”  Georgetown  Journal  of  Gender  and  the 
Law 10 (I): 125–64.

Harrington, Andrew, and Tanya Chopra. 2010. “Argu-
ing ‘Traditions’:  Denying  Kenya’s Women Access 
to Land Rights.” Justice for the Poor Research Re-
port No. 2, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Hassim,  Shireen.  2006.  Women’s  Organization  and 
Democracy  in  South Africa:  Contesting Authority. 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.

———. 2010. “Perverse Consequences? The Impact 
of Quotas for Women on Democratisation in Af-
rica.”  In  Political  Representation,  ed.  Ian  Shapiro, 
Susan C. Stokes, Elisabeth Jean Wood, and Alex-
ander  S.  Kirshner.  Cambridge,  U.K.:  Cambridge 
University Press.

Hindin,  Michelle  J.,  Sunita  Kishor,  and  Donna  L. 
Ansara. 2008. “Intimate Partner Violence among 
Couples  in  10  DHS  Countries:  Predictors  and 
Health  Outcomes.”  DHS  Analytical  Studies  18,  
U.S.  Agency  for  International  Development, 
Washington, DC.

Hjort,  Jonas,  and  Espen  Villanger.  2011.  “Backlash: 
Female  Employment  and  Domestic  Violence.” 
University of California, Berkeley, CA. Processed.
Hoddinott, John, and Lawrence Haddad. 1995. “Does 
Female  Income  Share  Inﬂ uence  Household  Ex-
penditures? Evidence from Côte D’Ivoire.” Oxford 
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 57 (1): 77–96.
Hoff, Karla, and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Gender In-
equality beyond the Law: Causes and Policy Im-
plications.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.
Hoff, Karla, and Priyanka Pandey. 2011a. “Discrimi-
nation, Social Identity, and Durable Inequalities.” 
American Economic Review 96 (2): 206–11.

———.  2011b.  “Identity,  Social  Context,  and  De-
velopment:  Experimental  Evidence  from  India.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC. Background paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Hoff, Karla, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2010. “Equilibrium 
Fictions: A Cognitive Approach to Societal Rigid-
ity.”  Policy  Research Working  Paper  Series  5219, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

———.  2011.  “The  Role  of  Cognitive  Frames  in 
 Societal Rigidity and Change.” World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC. Processed.

Hossain,  Naomi.  2011.  “Exports,  Equity  and  Em-
powerment: The Effects of Readymade Garments 
Manufacturing Employment on Gender Equality 
in Bangladesh.” Background paper for the WDR 
2012.

Htun, Mala, and Mark P. Jones. 2002. “Engendering 
the Right to Participate in Decision-making: Elec-
toral Quotas and Leadership in Latin America.” In 
Gender  and  the  Politics  of  Rights  and  Democracy 
in  Latin  America,  ed.  Nikki  Craske  and  Maxine 
Molyneux. New York: McMillan.

Htun, Mala, and S. Laurel Weldon. 2008. “When and 
Why  Do  Governments  Promote  Sex  Equality? 
 Violence  against  Women,  Reproductive  Rights, 
and  Work-Family  Issues  in  Cross-National  Per-
spective.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting 
of  the  American  Political  Association.  Boston, 
MA, August 27.

———.  2010.  “When  Do  Governments  Promote 
Women’s Rights? A Framework for the Compara-
tive  Analysis  of  Sex  Equality  Policy.”  Perspectives 
on Politics 8 (1): 207–16.

———.  2011a.  “Communism,  Colonialism,  and 
Clerical  Power:  Historical  Legacies  and  Feminist 
Activism  in  the  Struggle  over  Family  Law.”  Har-
vard University, Cambridge, MA. Processed.

———.  2011b.  Htun-Weldon  Database.  Purdue 
University,  West  Lafayette,  IN.  http://web.ics.
purdue.edu/~weldons/.

ICRW  (International  Center  for  the  Research  on 
Women).  2006.  Property  Ownership  and  Inheri-
tance  Rights  of  Women  for  Social  Protection:  The 
South Asia Experience. Washington, DC: ICRW.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2010. World 
Social Security Report 2010/11: Providing Coverage 
in Times of Crisis and Beyond. Geneva: ILO.

Iversen,  Vegard,  and  Nitya  Rao.  2011.  “India  Case 

Study.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Iyengar,  Radha.  2009. “Does  the  Certainty  of Arrest 
Reduce Domestic Violence? Evidence from Man-
datory  and  Recommended Arrest  Laws.”  Journal 
of Public Economics 93 (1–2): 85–98.

Iyer, Lakshmi, Anandi Mani, Prachi Mishra, and  Petia 
Topalova.  2010.  “Political  Representation  and 
Crime:  Evidence  from  India’s  Panchayati  Raj.” 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Washington,  DC. 
Processed.

Jayaweera,  Swarna.  1997.  “Women,  Education  and 
Empowerment  in  Asia.”  Gender  &  Education  9 
(4): 411–23.

 

Promoting women’s agency 

189

Jejeebhoy, Shireen J., Iqbal Shah, and Shyam Thapa, 
eds.  2005.  Sex  without  Consent:  Young  People  in 
Developing Countries. New York: Zed Books.

Jensen,  Robert,  and  Emily  Oster.  2007. “The  Power 
of  TV:  Cable  Television  and  Women’s  Status  in 
India.” Working Paper Series 13305, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Jensen, Robert, and Rebecca Thornton. 2003. “Early 
Female Marriage in the Developing World.” Gen-
der and Development 11 (2): 9–19.

Johnson,  Michael  P.,  and  Alison  Cares.  2004.  “Ef-
fects  and  Non-effects  of  Childhood  Experiences 
of  Family  Violence  on  Adult  Partner  Violence.” 
Pennsylvania  State  University,  State  College,  PA. 
Processed.

Johnson, Richard W. 1999. “The Gender Gap in Pen-
sion  Wealth:  Is  Women’s  Progress  in  the  Labor 
Market  Equalizing  Retirement  Beneﬁ ts?”  Brief 
 Series 1, Urban Institute, Washington, DC.

Joshi,  Shareen,  and  T.  Paul  Schultz.  2007.  “Fam-
ily  Planning  as  an  Investment  in  Development: 
Evaluation  of  a  Program’s  Consequences  in 
Matlab,  Bangladesh.”  Economic  Growth  Center 
Discussion Paper Series 951, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT.

Jubb,  Nadine,  and  Wânia  Pasinato  Izumino.  2003. 
“Women  and  Policing  in  Latin  America:  A  Re-
vised Background Paper.” Paper presented at the 
Meeting  of  the  Latin American  Studies Associa-
tion, Dallas, March 27.

Kabeer,  Naila.  1999.  “Resources,  Agency,  Achieve-
ments: Reﬂ ections on the Measurement of Wom-
en’s  Empowerment.”  Development  and  Change 
30 (3): 35–64.

Kahan, Dan M. 2010. “Culture, Cognition, and Con-
sent: Who Perceives What, and Why, in Acquain-
tance-Rape Cases.” University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review 158 (3): 729–813.

Kaminski,  Michelle,  and  Elaine  K.  Yakura.  2008. 
“Women’s  Union  Leadership:  Closing  the  Gen-
der Gap.” Working USA: The Journal of Labor and 
 Society 11 (4): 459–75.

Kane, Minneh, J. Oloka-Onyango, and Abdul Tejan-
Cole. 2005. “Reassessing Customary Law Systems 
as a Vehicle for Providing Equitable Access to Jus-
tice  for  the  Poor.”  Paper  presented  at  the World 
Bank’s confrence “New Frontiers of Social Policy: 
Development  in  a  Globalizing  World,”  Arusha, 
Tanzania, December 12.

Kapur,  Naina.  1996.  Gender  and  Judges:  A  Judicial 

Point of View. New Delhi: Sakshi.

Katz,  Elizabeth  G.,  and  Juan  Sebastian  Chamorro. 
2003. “Gender,  Land  Rights,  and  the  Household 
Economy  in  Rural  Nicaragua  and  Honduras.” 
Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the 
Latin American and Caribbean Economics Asso-
ciation, Puebla, Mexico, October 9.

Kawaguchi, Daiji, and Junko Miyazaki. 2005. “Work-
ing  Mothers  and  Sons’  Preferences  Regarding 
 Female Labor: Direct Evidence from Stated Prefer-
ences.” Discussion Working Paper 110, Hitotsub-
ashi University, Institute for Economic Research, 
Tokyo.

Khan, M. E., Ismat Bhuiya, and Aruna Bhattacharya. 
2010. “A Situation Analysis of Care and Support 
for  Rape  Survivors  at  First  Point  of  Contact  in 
India  and  Bangladesh.”  Injury  Prevention  16: 
A160–61.

Kimmel, Michael S. 2004. The Gendered Society. New 

York: Oxford University Press.

Kirdar, Murat G, Meltem Dayioglu Tayfur, and Ismet 
Koç. 2010. “The Effect of Compulsory Schooling 
Laws on Teenage Marriage and Births in Turkey.” 
Working Paper Series 1035, TÜSIAD-Koç Univer-
sity Economic Research Forum, Sariyer, Istanbul.
Kishor, Sunita, and Kiersten Johnson. 2004. Proﬁ ling 
Domestic Violence: A Multi-Country Study. Calver-
ton, MD: ORC Macro.

———.  2006. “Reproductive  Health  and  Domestic 
Violence: Are the Poorest Women Uniquely Dis-
advantaged?” Demography 43 (2): 293–307.

Kishor,  Sunita,  and  Lekha  Subaiya.  2008.  “Under-
standing  Women’s  Empowerment:  A  Compara-
tive  Analysis  of  Demographic  and  Health  Sur-
veys (DHS) Data.” DHS Comparative Reports 20, 
Macro International, Calverton, MD.

Kittilson,  Miki  Caul.  2008.  “Representing  Women: 
The  Adoption  of  Family  Leave  in  Comparative 
Perspective.” Journal of Politics 70 (2): 323–34.

Krendl,  Anne  C.,  Jennifer  A.  Richeson,  William  M. 
Kelley, and Todd F. Heatherton. 2008. “The Nega-
tive  Consequences  of  a  Threat:  A  Functional 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Investigation of the 
Neural Mechanisms Underlying Women’s Under-
performance  in  Math.”  Psychological  Science  19 
(2): 168–75.

Krook,  Mona  Lena.  2006.  “Reforming  Representa-
tion: The Diffusion of Candidate Gender Quotas 
Worldwide.” Politics & Gender 2 (3): 303–27.

La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Du-
ryea.  2008. “Soap  Operas  and  Fertility:  Evidence 
from  Brazil.”  Working  Paper  Series  633,  Inter-
American Development Bank, Washington, DC.

Lastarria-Cornhiel, Susana. 1997. “Impact of Privati-
zation on Gender and Property Rights in Africa.” 
World Development 25 (8): 1317–33.

Luke, Nancy, and Kaivan Munshi. 2011. “Women as 
Agents  of  Change:  Female  Income  and  Mobility 
in  India.”  Journal  of  Development  Economics  94 
(1): 1–17.

Lule,  Elizabeth,  Susheela  Singh,  and  Sadia  Afroze 
Chowdhury. 2007. “Fertility Regulation Behaviors 
and Their Costs: Contraception and Unintended 
Pregnancies  in  Africa  and  Eastern  Europe  and 

190 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Central Asia.” Discussion Paper, December, World 
Bank,  Health,  Nutrition  and  Population  Family, 
Washington, DC.

Lundberg, Shelly J., Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. 
Wales. 1997. “Do Husbands and Wives Pool Their 
Resources?  Evidence  from  the  United  Kingdom 
Child Beneﬁ t.” Journal of Human Resources 32 (3): 
463–80.

Lungu, K., V. Kamfosa, J. Hussein, and H. Ashwood-
Smith. 2001. “Are Bicycle Ambulances and Com-
munity  Transport  Plans  Effective  in  Strengthen-
ing Obstetric Referral Systems in Southern Mali?” 
Malawi Medical Journal 12: 16–8.

Miller,  Grant.  2008.  “Women’s  Suffrage,  Political 
Responsiveness,  and  Child  Survival  in American 
History.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 
1287–327.

Möller-Leimkühler, Anne Maria. 2003. “The Gender 
Gap in Suicide and Premature Death or: Why Are 
Men So Vulnerable?” European Archives of Psychi-
atry and Clinical Neuroscience 253 (1): 1–8.

Molyneux, Maxine. 1985a. “Family Reform in Social-
ist  States:  The  Hidden Agenda.”  Feminist  Review 
21 (winter): 47–64.

———.  1985b.  “Mobilization  without  Emancipa-
tion? Women’s Interests, the State, and Revolution 
in Nicaragua.” Feminist Studies 11 (2): 227–54.

Monson,  Rebecca.  2010.  “Women,  State  Law  and 
Land in Peri-Urban Settlements on Guadalcanal, 
Solomon Islands.” Brieﬁ ng Notes 4(3), Justice for 
the Poor, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Mumtaz, Zubia, and Sarah Salway. 2005. “ ‘I Never Go 
Anywhere’: Extricating the Links between Wom-
en’s Mobility and Uptake of Reproductive Health 
Services  in  Pakistan.”  Social  Science  &  Medicine 
60 (8): 1751–65.

Murray,  Rainbow,  Mona  Lena  Krook,  and  Kather-
ine A. R. Opello. 2009. “Elite Bias, Not Voter Bias: 
Gender  Quotas  and  Candidate  Performance  in 
France.”  Paper  presented  at  the  First  European 
Conference  on  Politics  and  Gender.  Belfast, 
January 21.

North, Douglass C. 2005. Understanding the Process of 
Economic Change. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.

Ouzgane, Lahoucine, and Robert Morrell, eds. 2005. 
African Masculinities: Men in Africa from the Late 
Nineteenth Century to the Present. New York: Pal-
grave McMillan. 

Osawa,  Mari.  2011. “Gender-Equality  and  the  Revi-
talization of Japan’s Society and Economy under 
Globalization.”  Background  Paper  for  the  WDR 
2012.

Panda,  Pradeep,  and  Bina  Agarwal.  2005.  “Marital 
Violence,  Human  Development  and  Women’s 
Property Status in India.” World Development 33 
(5): 823–50.

Peterman, Amber. 2010. “Widowhood and Asset In-
heritance  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa:  Empirical  Evi-
dence from 15 Countries.” Paper presented at the 
Chronic Poverty Research Center (CPRC)/Over-
seas  Development  Institute  (ODI)  Roundtable 
“Inheritance and the Intergenerational Transmis-
sion of Poverty.” ODI, London, October 11.

Pezzini, Silvia. 2005. “The Effect of Women’s Rights 
on  Women’s  Welfare:  Evidence  from  a  Natural 
Experiment.” Economic Journal 115 (502): C208–
C227.

Pollack, William S. 2003. “No Man Is an Island: To-
ward a New Psychoanalytic Psychology of Men.” In 
A New Psychology of Men, ed. Ronald F. Levant and 
William S. Pollack. New York: Basic Books.

Powell,  Water  W.,  and  Paul  J.  DiMaggio.  1991.  The 
New  Institutionalism  in  Organizational  Analysis. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Pronyk, Paul M., James R. Hargreaves, Julia C. Kim, 
Linda  A.  Morison,  Godfrey  Phetla,  Charlotte 
Watts, Joanna Busza, and John D. H. Porter. 2006. 
“Effect  of  a  Structural  Intervention  for  the  Pre-
vention of Intimate-partner Violence and HIV in 
Rural South Africa: A Cluster Randomized Trial.” 
Lancet 368 (9551): 1973–83.

Quisumbing,  Agnes  R.,  and  Kelly  Hallman.  2005. 
“Marriage in Transition: Evidence on Age, Educa-
tion, and Assets from Six Developing Countries.” 
In The Changing Transitions to Adulthood in De-
veloping  Countries,  ed.  Cynthia  B.  Lloyd,  Jere  R. 
Behrman,  Nelly  Stromquist,  and  Barney  Cohen. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Quisumbing, Agnes R., and John A. Maluccio. 2000. 
“Intrahousehold Allocation and Gender Relations: 
New  Empirical  Evidence  from  Four  Developing 
Countries.” Discussion Paper 84, Food Consump-
tion  and  Nutrition  Division,  International  Food 
Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Rabin, Matthew, and Joel L. Schrag. 1999. “First Im-
pressions Matter: A Model of Conﬁ rmatory Bias.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 37–82.

Rajaraman, Indira, and Manish Gupta. 2011. “Public 
Expenditure Choices and Gender Quotas.” Indian 
Statistical Institute and National Institute of Pub-
lic  Finance  and  Policy,  New  Delhi.  Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Rangel, Marcos A. 2006. “Alimony Rights and Intra-
household Allocation of Resources: Evidence from 
Brazil.” Economic Journal 116 (513): 627–58.

Reggio,  Iliana.  2010.  “The  Inﬂ uence  of  Mother’s 
Power on Her Child’s Labor in Mexico.” Journal of 
Development Economics 96 (1): 95–105. 

Roy,  Sanchari.  2011. “Empowering  Women:  Inheri-
tance Rights and Female Education in India.” Uni-
versity  of  Warwick,  Warwick  U.K.  Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Rubalcava, Luis, Graciela Teruel, and Duncan Thomas. 
2009. “Investments, Time Preferences, and Public 

 

Promoting women’s agency 

191

Transfers Paid to Women.” Economic Development 
and Cultural Change 57 (3): 507–38.

Sato,  Mine.  2011.  “Promoting  Gender  Equality  by 
Facilitating  Women’s  Collective  Problem  Solv-
ing  Capacity  Development:  Japanese  Experience 
with Post-War Life Improvement Program and Its 
Application to Contemporary Developing Coun-
tries.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Schady,  Norbert,  and  José  Rosero.  2008.  “Are  Cash 
Transfers  Made  to  Women  Spent  Like  Other 
Sources  of  Income?”  Economics  Letters  101  (3):  
246–48.

Sen,  Amartya.  1985. “Well-Being,  Agency  and  Free-
dom: The Dewey Lectures 1984.” Journal of Phi-
losophy 82 (4): 169–221.

Sen, Gita, and Caren Grown. 1988. Development, Cri-
ses and Alternative Visions. Third World Women’s 
Perspectives. London: Earthcan Publications.

Shih, Margaret, Todd Pittinsky, and Nalini Ambady. 
1999. “Stereotype Susceptibility: Identity Salience 
and Shifts in Quantitative Performance.” Psycho-
logical Science 10 (1): 80–3.

Singh, Susheela, Deirdre Wulf, Rubina Hussain, Akin-
rinola Bankole, and Gilda Sedgh. 2009. “Abortion 
Worldwide: A Decade of Uneven Progress.” Gutt-
macher Institute, New York.

Smith, Gordon C. S., and Jill P. Pell. 2001. “Teenage 
Pregnancy  and  Risk  of  Adverse  Perinatal  Out-
comes  Associated  with  First  and  Second  Births: 
Population  Based  Retrospective  Cohort  Study.” 
British Medical Journal 323 (7311): 476–9.

Smith, Pamela, Nils B. Jostmann, Adam D. Galinsky, 
and  Wilco  W.  van  Dijck.  2008.  “Lacking  Power 
Impairs  Executive  Functions.”  Psychological  Sci-
ence 19 (5): 441–7. 

Steele, Claude M. 2010. Whistling Vivaldi: And Other 
Clues  to  How  Stereotypes  Affect  Us.  New  York: 
W. W. Norton and Company, Inc.

Steele, Claude M., and Joshua Aronson. 1995. “Stereo-
type Threat and the Intellectual Test Performance 
of African-Americans.” Journal of Personality and 
 Social Psychology 69 (5): 797–811.

Steering  Committee  on  Undergraduate  Women’s 
Leadership. 2011. Report of the Steering Committee 
on Undergraduate Women’s Leadership.” Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University.

Stekelenburg,  Jelle,  Sindele  Kyanamina,  M.  Mukela-
bai, Ivan Wolffers, and Jos van Roosmalen. 2004. 
“Waiting Too Long: Low Use of Maternal Health 
Services  in  Kalabo,  Zambia.”  Tropical  Medicine 
and International Health 9 (3): 390–8.

Stevenson, Betsey. 2007. “The Impact of Divorce Laws 
on  Marriage-Speciﬁ c  Capital.”  Journal  of  Labor 
Economics 25 (1): 75–94.

Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2006. “Bargain-
ing in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce Laws and 
Family  Distress.”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics 
121 (1): 267–88.

Sumner, Cate, Matthew Zurstrassen, and Leisha Lister. 
2011. “Increasing Access to Justice for Women, the 
Poor and Those Living in Remote Areas: An In-
donesian Case Study.” Brieﬁ ng Note vol. 16, issue 
2, Justice for the Poor, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Swaminathan, Hema, Cherryl Walker, and Margaret 
A.  Rugadya,  eds.  2008.  Women’s  Property  Rights, 
HIV  and  AIDS,  and  Domestic  Violence:  Research 
Findings from Two Rural Districts in South Africa 
and Uganda. Cape Town: HSRC Press. 

Tarazona, Marcela, and Alistair Munro. 2011. “Exper-
iments with Households in Four Countries.” Eco-
nomic and Social Research Council and Depart-
ment for International Development, London.

Thomas, Duncan. 1990. “Intra-Household Resource 
Allocation:  An  Inferential  Approach.”  Journal  of 
Human Resources 25 (4): 635–64.

Tinker,  Irene.  2004. “Quotas  for  Women  in  Elected 
Legislatures: Do They Really Empower Women?” 
Women’s  Studies  International  Forum  27  (5–6): 
531–46.

Tripp, Aili Mari. 2003. “The Changing Face of Africa’s 
Legislatures:  Women  and  Quotas.”  Paper  pre-
sented  at  the  Parliamentary  Forum  Conference: 
Implementation  of  Quotas:  African  Experiences, 
Pretoria, South Africa, November 11.

———.  2010.  “Creating,  Collective  Capabilities: 
Women,  Agency  and  the  Politics  of  Representa-
tion.” Columbia Journal of Gender and Law 19 (1): 
219–48.

Tzannatos, Zaﬁ ris. 1986. “Female Pay: Has the State 
Unshackled the Market?” Economic Affairs 7 (2): 
26–8.

———.  2008. “The  Impact  of  Trade  Unions: What 
Do Economists Say?” In In Defence of Labour Mar-
ket Institutions: Cultivating Justice in the Develop-
ing World, ed. Janine Berg and David Kucera. New 
York: Palgrave McMillan.

United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs. 2005. Living Arrangements of Older Persons 
Around the World. New York: United Nations, De-
partment of Economic and Social Affairs, Popula-
tion Division.

UNDP  (United  Nations  Development  Program). 
2010.  Power,  Voice,  and  Rights:  A  Turning  Point 
for Gender Equality in Asia and the Paciﬁ c.  New 
Delhi: McMillan Publishers India Ltd.

UNIFEM  (United  Nations  Development  Fund  for 
Women). 2003. Not a Minute More: Ending Vio-
lence against Women. New York: UNIFEM.

———.  2008.  Progress  to  the  World’s  Women  2008/ 
2009. Who Answers to Women? Gender & Account-
ability. New York: UNIFEM.

———.  2009.  Domestic  Violence  Legislation  and  its 
Implementation: An Analysis for ASEAN Countries 
Based on International Standards and Good Prac-
tices. Bangkok: UNIFEM.

192 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

———. 2010. Gender Justice: Key to Achieving the Mil-
lennium Development Goals. New York: UNIFEM.
van  de Walle,  Dominique.  2011. “Welfare  Effects  of 
Widowhood  in  a  Poor  Country.”  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC. Processed.

Velkoff, Victoria A., and Kevin G. Kinsella. 1993. Ag-
ing in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Economics and Statistics Administration and the 
Bureau of Census.

Venter,  Christoffel,  Vera  Vokolkova,  and  Jaroslav 
Michalek.  2007.  “Gender,  Residential  Location, 
and  Household  Travel:  Empirical  Findings  from 
Low-Income Urban Settlements in Durban, South 
Africa.” Transport Reviews 27 (6): 653–77.

Vyasulu,  Poornima,  and  Vinod  Vyasulu.  1999. 
“Women in Panchayati Raj: Grass Roots Democ-
racy  in  India:  Experience  from  Malgudi.”  Eco-
nomic and Political Weekly 34 (52): 3677–86.

World Bank. 2007. “Population Issues in the 21st Cen-
tury:  The  Role  of  the World  Bank.”  Background 
paper, World Bank, Health, Nutrition, and Popu-
lation Family, Washington, DC.

———. 2010. “Gender and Transport in MENA: Case 
Studies from West Bank Gaza and Yemen.” Middle 
East and North Africa, Knowledge and Learning 
Quick Notes Series 21, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

World  Bank.  2011a.  “Island  Courts  in  Vanuatu.” 

World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

———. 2011b. Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: 
Talking with Women and Men around the World; 
A Multi-Country Qualitative Study of Gender and 
Economic Choice. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WHO  (World  Health  Organization).  2000.  What 
about Boys? A Literature Review on the Health and 
Development of Adolescent Boys. Geneva: WHO.

———. 2010. Preventing Intimate Partner and Sexual 
Violence against Women: Taking Action and Gener-
ating Advice. Geneva: WHO.

Zetterberg,  Pär.  2008.  “The  Downside  of  Gender 
Quotas?  Institutional  Constraints  on  Women  in 
Mexican State Legislatures.” Parliamentary Affairs 
61 (3): 442–60.

194 
194 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

SPREAD 2  

  The decline of the breadwinner: Men in the 21st century

A cross societies and cultures, most men and boys 

have strong ideas about how they should behave 
and  feel  as  men.  From  traditional  roles  in  the 
family such as acting as the household head—the main 
provider  and  main  authority—to  personal  characteris-
tics including strength, toughness, and ambition, the de-
sirable attributes for men are clearly summarized by two 
young men in Moldova: “The man is a conqueror, which 
is  why  he  always  needs  to  conquer  something,  a  title,  a 
woman, social status, a job.”

Most men recognize that the prevalent social norms 
in  the  community  prescribe  the  dominant  roles  they 
should  perform.1  The  main  role  for  men  is  the  one  of 
primary income-earner and breadwinner in the family. 
In all 19 countries in the study, income generation for 
the family was the ﬁ rst and most likely mentioned deﬁ -
nition of a man’s role in the family and of a good hus-
band: “A good husband is a good provider of things such as 
food, clothes” (Afghanistan). “A good husband is one who 
provides for everything in the house. He pays all the bills” 
(Burkina Faso). “A good husband is one who earns a decent 
income and keeps his family in good comfort. . . . He has to 
be a good provider and has to put in extra hours, if neces-
sary for this purpose” (India). “He should go to his work in 
the early morning and get money for his children” (North 
Sudan).  Only  under  speciﬁ c  conditions  can  a  man  be 
excused from this role: “A good husband must be a good 
provider unless he is seriously sick and is unable to work. A 
husband who is not a good provider has no power at all in 
his family” (Vietnam).

The provider role also inﬂ uences men’s perceptions of 
their social status and power: “[A man] is responsible, has 
a job, it is an element of pressure that he must give a sense of 
security” (Poland). “His income is the biggest and the most 
important  for  functioning  of  the  household.  It  gives  him 
self-respect” (Serbia). “One of the reasons why many men 
are not respected in the homes is that they cannot provide 
or provide little and women have become big providers in 
the homes. So, you ﬁ nd that the husband is not in control of 
the family” (Tanzania). The power earned also gives men 
the ﬁ nal say in household decision making.

But gender relations have evolved, and men are now 
also  required  to  adapt  to  new  demands,  new  expecta-
tions,  new  roles.  Being  authoritative  and  ensuring  the 
family’s economic well-being was once enough to deﬁ ne 
a good husband and father. Now men also are expected 
to share child-care tasks, to help in the household, and to 
show emotion and feelings, as well as to value their part-
ner’s  voice  in  decision  making. A  good  husband  today 

has “to be able to balance his job with family life, a good 
husband should have a better time management, and love 
enough his family in order to be open to spend much time 
with his family members” (Moldova). In a community in 
West Bank and Gaza, all men participating in the group 
agreed that “a good husband today helps in the house more 
and consults with his wife and children about things in the 
house, whereas in the past he used to do things without dis-
cussing it with the household or the wife.” 

Men  are  adapting,  but  in  many  cases  not  as  fast 
as  women  are  changing  their  views  and  ways.  While 
women are gaining power and freedom, men are resist-
ing  change.  Many  men  feel  their  male  authority  and 
dominance is being challenged on multiple fronts. Ru-
ral men express this discomfort more than urban men. 
“Everything has changed and gone the opposite direction 
these last 20 years, as if 200 years have passed, everything 
that was not normal is normal today. Everything has been 
radically changed. The whole system of values has disap-
peared,” said a group of rural men in Serbia. Men from 
Papua New Guinea echoed this discomfort, attributing 
it to new laws and rights granted to women: “We do un-
derstand that there are laws relating to rights of women but 
most of us do not take these seriously. As men, we are heads 
of the family. In the past, women and men did not know 
these laws, and women respected husbands. Now, because 
of these laws, women try to control their husbands, which is 
not good. Women, especially educated women, undermine 
their husbands; they must and should submit to their hus-
bands.” Men from South Africa and North Sudan agreed 
with these statements.

Men feel that their power in society has stagnated over 
the past 10 years. Partly because of changes in norms and 
laws  but  also  because  of  lack  of  economic  progress  in 
their countries or communities, men report little to no 
power gains during the 10-year period.  When asked to 
rank a group of 100 men in their communities by the de-
gree of power they held now and 10 years earlier, men in 
about 60 percent of the communities report no or little 
increase in the share of men moving upward and gaining 
power. The remaining 40 percent sees some changes but 
these are not as large as women’s. 

Men’s gains in power largely depend on economic con-
ditions in their countries and communities, particularly 
economic growth and the functioning of local and na-
tional labor markets. An examination of the explanations 
men provide for changes in their power, points to several 
combinations of factors. First, the explanatory model that 
described forces behind perceived expansions in female 

 

The decline of the breadwinner. Men in the 21st century 

195

empowerment held no explanatory power when applied 
to men (see spread 1). In fact, the pathways for men and 
women are entirely different. Female pathways to greater 
empowerment include a broader range of factors, largely 
dependent  on  the  ability  to  make  decisions,  be  free  of 
violence, and participate in social networks. Male path-
ways are much narrower and dominated by the economy 
and  the  existence  of  and  access  to  jobs.  Only  two  pos-
sible combinations of factors were robust, both including 
development in the country (measured by the country’s 
Human Development Index [HDI] score):

(cid:129)  The combination of the availability of private sector 
jobs  and  a  high  HDI  explains  power  changes  in  56 
percent of the communities. 

(cid:129)  The combination of a high HDI, a high score for ac-
tive  local  markets  (as  perceived  by  the  men  in  the 
community), and high male labor force participation 
at the national level explains changes in 39 percent of 
the communities. 

This  model  ﬁ ts  closely  with  men’s  descriptions  of 
those  at  the  top  of  a  power  ladder  and  those  who  fall 
to  the  bottom.    “A  man  should  be  powerful.  But  how 
can he be powerful when the village is undergoing such a 
huge  crisis.  Power  means  ﬁ nancial  security,”  said  a  man 
in Serbia, reﬂ ecting how much weight men give to eco-
nomic conditions and to jobs in deﬁ ning what it means 
for a man to have power. Employment-based status and 
power help those with appropriately masculine jobs to 
remain  buoyant,  sometimes,  to  the  point  of  arrogance 
and  ostentation.  “[A]  man  at  the  top  step  of  the  ladder 
has big houses and a lot of wetland for farming. He will 
have herds of cows and can afford cow butter for cooking, 
and tea. His farms are more mechanized and he has many 
people working for him. He is a proud man and egoistic,” 
said  a  rural  man  in  Bhutan.  In  Liberia,  these  men  will 
be recognized because “they are people whose parents left 
them cocoa or other plantations that [are] needed by both 
the people at top and bottom; they can afford to buy a mo-
tor bike for income generation; they have the resources that 
makes them credit worthy to the top person.” Men report 
occupations and economic conditions as the main fac-
tors driving movement up or down the ladder (spread 
ﬁ gures 2.1 and 2.2).

Men who lose self-esteem in the labor market may try 
to claw it back in other aspects of their lives, from invest-
ments in education to violent domination in the house-
hold  to  risky  behavior.  The  profound  impact  on  male 
self-esteem that occurs when men lose their jobs or when 
women  take  over  as  primary  breadwinners  is  exacer-
bated by high unemployment and lack of job security so 
prevalent in today’s world. Young men invest less in their 

SPREAD FIGURE 2.1   Factors that explain gains 

in power

illegal activities

leadership

marital conditions

social assistance

marital or family
status change

personality traits

financial management

social networks

education or training

behavior

occupational and
economic change

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

% of mentions by communities

urban men

rural men

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: A Multi-
Country Assessment” (dataset).

human capital because they see education as having low 
or mixed value, particularly in labor markets that do not 
operate on merit. Young men in Moldova, Poland, and 
Serbia were the most skeptical, stating that connections 
outstrip  education  in  determining  whether  they  could 
ﬁ nd a job: “I think that education has lost its signiﬁ cance. 
Everything  is  now  about  political  connections.”  (Poland). 
“Connections  are  everything,  and  mainly  the  resourceful 
people have success. Here it is a paradox, the less education 
you have, the more money you can make” (Serbia). High 
unemployment was leaving educated men either without 
jobs or with jobs below their skill levels: “I have two col-
lege diplomas and one vocation school diploma, and I could 
not get a good job” (Moldova). In some instances, there 
was considerable disillusionment: “I dropped out and did 
not want to continue my education because I lacked suf-
ﬁ cient will and desire. It is all the same to me, whether I got 
an education or not, I certainly would not be able to get a 
job that would provide me with a normal life” (Serbia).

Cienfuegos, Dominican Republic, is one of the com-
munities that has seen the largest descent of men in their 
perception of power—mostly stemming from the clos-
ing of the free trade zones after the economic crisis. Here, 

196 
196 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

SPREAD FIGURE 2.2   Factors that explain losses 

of power

lack of 
physical mobility

social networks

shocks

marital conditions

personality traits

illegal activities

marital or family
status change

occupational and
economic change

financial management

behavior

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

% of mentions by communities

urban men

rural men

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: A Multi-
Country Assessment” (dataset).

men  see  that  the  only  way  to  make  money  today  is  to 
sell drugs or embark on some similar unlawful activity. 
Across the world, men’s dependence on employment to 
assess their identity and self-worth makes them vulner-
able to economic volatility: “Men are affected more than 
women [by unemployment], which leads to frustration and 
family  problems  and,  in  some  cases,  leads  to  violence  by 
men against women and children, and may lead to illness” 
(West Bank and Gaza). Asked what men in Papua New 
Guinea would do in response to losing a job, men said 
they would “get very frustrated, get very upset, get drunk, 
and beat the wife.”

NOTE

1.   The study economies include Afghanistan, Bhutan, Burkina 
Faso, the Dominican Republic, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Libe-
ria, Moldova, North Sudan, Peru, Papua New Guinea, Po-
land,  Serbia,  South  Africa,  Tanzania,  Vietnam,  West  Bank 
and Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen. The focus groups in-
cluded male adults, female adults, male youth, female youth, 
male  adolescents,  and  female  adolescents;  the  adolescent 
groups were conducted only in a subset of 8 of the 19 coun-
tries. For further information, the assessment methodology 
can be found at http://www.worldbank.org/wdr2012.

5CHAPTER

Gender differences in employment 
and why they matter 

Gender  differences  in  access  to  eco-

nomic opportunities are frequently 
debated in relation to gender differ-
ences in labor market participation. 
This  chapter  looks  beyond  such  participation 
to focus on productivity and earnings—for two 
reasons. First, a focus exclusively on labor force 
participation provides only a partial picture of 
women’s  and  men’s  experience  in  the  labor 
market. Far from being a simple decision about 
whether or not to join the labor force, partici-
pation  in  market  work  involves  reallocating 
time  across  a  variety  of  activities—a  process 
that can be difﬁ cult and costly, particularly for 
women.  And  a  focus  solely  on  participation 
masks gender differences in the nature and dy-
namics of work. 

Second, despite signiﬁ cant progress in female 
labor  force  participation  over  the  past  25  years 
(see chapter 1 and box 5.1), pervasive and per-
sistent gender differences remain in productivity 
and  earnings  across  different  sectors  and  jobs. 
Indeed, many women around the world appear 
to be caught in a productivity trap—one that im-
poses  signiﬁ cant  costs  on  women’s  welfare  and 
economic empowerment today and serious dis-
incentives to invest in the women of tomorrow.

Despite  lower  earnings  and  productivity, 
women  are  not  worse  farmers,  entrepreneurs, 
and  workers  than  men.  We  argue  instead  that 
gender  differences  in  labor  productivity  and 
earnings are primarily the result of differences 
in the economic activities of men and women—
although  gender  differences  in  human  capital 
and in the returns to worker and job character-
istics also play a role.

Indeed,  men’s  and  women’s  jobs  differ 
greatly, whether across sectors, industries, occu-
pations, types of jobs, or types of ﬁ rms. While 
these  differences  evolve  with  economic  devel-
opment,  the  resulting  changes  in  the  structure 
of  employment  are  not  enough  to  eliminate 
employment segregation by gender. So, women 
all over the world appear to be concentrated in 
low-productivity jobs. They work in small farms 
and run small ﬁ rms. They are overrepresented 
among unpaid family workers and in the infor-
mal sector. And they rarely rise to positions of 
power in the labor market.

Three  main  factors  lead  to  gender  segrega-
tion in access to economic opportunities among 
farmers, entrepreneurs, and wage workers: gen-
der differences in time use (primarily resulting 
from differences in care responsibilities), gender 
differences in access to productive inputs (par-
ticularly  land  and  credit),  and  gender  differ-
ences stemming from market and institutional 
failures. Because the factors causing segregation 
are common across sectors of economic activ-
ity, we can integrate the analysis of the farming, 
entrepreneurial, and wage sectors within a com-
mon framework.

Gender  segregation  in  access  to  economic 
opportunities  in  turn  reinforces  gender  differ-
ences  in  time  use  and  in  access  to  inputs,  and 
perpetuates  market  and  institutional  failures. 
For instance, women are more likely than men 
to  work  in  jobs  that  offer  ﬂ exible  working 
arrangements  (such  as  part-time  or  informal 
jobs) so that they can combine work with care 
responsibilities.  But  because  part-time  and  in-
formal jobs often pay lower (hourly) wages than 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

199

BOX 5.1   Closing the access gap—Recent advances in female labor force participation

Over the past quarter century, women have joined the labor market 
in  increasing  numbers,  partially  closing  the  gender  participation 
gap  (see  chapter  1).  Between  1980  and  2009,  the  global  rate  of 
female labor force participation rose from 50.2 percent to 51.8 per-
cent, while the male rate fell from 82.0 percent to 77.7 percent. Con-
sequently,  gender  diff erentials  in  labor  force  participation  rates 
declined from 32 percentage points in 1980 to 26 percentage points 
in 2009.a

Female labor force participation is lowest in the Middle East and 
North Africa (26 percent) and South Asia (35 percent) and highest in 
East Asia and Pacifi c (64 percent) and Sub-Saharan Africa (61 per-
cent) (box map 5.1.1). Despite large cross-regional diff erences, par-
ticipation rates have converged over time as countries and regions 
that  started  with  very  low  rates  (primarily  Latin  America  and  the 
Middle  East  and  North  Africa)  experienced  large  increases  and 
those with higher rates (primarily Europe and Central Asia and East 
Asia and Pacifi c) experienced small declines (box fi gure 5.1.1).

The combined eff ect of economic development, rising educa-
tion  among  women,  and  declining  fertility  goes  a  long  way  in 
explaining changes in female participation rates over the past 25 
years. Globally, economic development has been accompanied by 
growing economic opportunities for women (particularly in manu-
facturing and services). And greater trade openness and economic 
integration  have,  in  many  countries,  led  to  sig nifi cant  growth  of 
export-oriented  sectors,  with  some,  such  as  garments  and  light 
manufacturing,  employing  large  numbers  of  women  in  recent 
decades  (see  chapter  6).  Both  developments  have  translated  into 
stronger market incentives for women’s labor force participation in 
the  form  of  rising  demand  for  female  labor  and,  in  some  cases, 
higher absolute and relative wages.

In addition, economic development has been accompanied by 
improvements in infrastructure, including electricity, water, roads, 
and transport, which can alleviate time constraints and reduce the 

BOX MAP 5.1.1   Female labor force participation—Some high rates and some low

Source: International Labor Organization (2010a).

70+
60–<70
50–<60
40–<50
0–<40
No data

92%
89%
88%
86%
86%

Burundi
Tanzania
Rwanda
Madagascar
Mozambique
Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Syrian Arab Republic
Yemen, Republic of
Iraq

22%
22%
22%
21%

15%

0

female labor force participation rate, %

50

100

(box continues on next page)

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
C

e
h
t
 
h
t
i

w

R
P
F
L
F
 
t
s
e
h
g
h

i

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
C

e
h
t
 
h
t
i

w

R
P
F
L
F
 
t
s
e
w
o
l

200 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 5.1   Closing the access gap—Recent advances in female labor force participation  (continued)

BOX FIGURE 5.1.1   Participation rates—Converging

world

East Asia and Pacific 

Europe and Central Asia 

Sub-Saharan Africa 

high-income countries

Latin America
and the Caribbean 

South Asia 

52
50

51

64
67

58

61

57

45

52

52

36

35
33

Middle East
Middle East
and North Africa
and North Africa

26

21

world

East Asia and Pacific 

Europe and Central Asia 

Sub-Saharan Africa 

high-income countries

Latin America
and the Caribbean 

South Asia 

Middle East
and North Africa

78

82

80

86

69

77

81
83

70

75

80
81

82

86

75
76

0

50

100

female labor force participation rate,%

2009
1980

0

50

100

male labor force participation rate,%

2009
1980

Source: World Development Indicators 2011.

transaction costs associated with market work, particularly among 
women.

Changes in education have also facilitated women’s integration 
in the labor market. More educated women have traditionally exhib-
ited higher participation rates than their less educated counterparts; 
so as education levels have increased around the world, more women 
have  ventured  into  paid  work.  In  Latin  America,  this  increase  in 
human capital explains 42 percent of the observed increase in female 
labor force participation since 1975.b

Similarly, changes in family formation have increased the labor 
market attachment for young women and women with small chil-
dren. Marriage has traditionally been associated with a decline in 
female  labor  force  participation,  followed  by  further  reductions 
once children are born. In the Arab Republic of Egypt, women who 
had just married in 1997 were 40 percent less likely to participate in 
the labor market than those to be married within a year of the sur-
vey (19 versus 29 percent), whereas 10 years later the gap between 
the  two  groups  had  narrowed  substantially  (32  and  27  percent, 
respectively), suggesting that some women rejoin the labor force 
several years after marriage.c Increases in the age of marriage and 
declines  in  fertility  are  thus  likely  to  have  contributed  to  higher 
participation rates in most countries and regions. 

That said, the impact of economic development and changes in 
education and family formation on female labor force participation 
varies  across  individuals,  countries,  and  regions  and  ultimately 
depends on institutions, formal and informal, as well as on individ-
ual  preferences.  Where  changes  in  markets  and  institutions  have 
aligned to strengthen incentives and erode constraints to participa-
tion, women have joined the labor force in large numbers. In con-
trast,  where  other  constraints  existed—particularly  in  informal 
institutions—or where market and institutional changes generated 
opposing forces, the impacts have been much more muted. 

For  instance,  sustained  economic  growth  has  failed  to  boost 
participation in South Asia, while signifi cant improvements in edu-
cation have had only a limited impact on participation rates in the 
Middle East and North Africa. In both cases, social norms for wom-
en’s role in the economic sphere may have weakened the connec-
tion between stronger incentives to participation in market work 
and actual outcomes. Similarly, following the transition out of com-
munism, female labor force participation in Eastern Europe declined 
from (a relatively high) 56 percent to 50 percent in 2008. The decline 
likely  refl ects  institutional  changes  associated  with  the  regime 
change, whereby participation in market work ceased to be a man-
date for most women, and with the retrenchment of some support 
structures for working mothers, such as child care.

More broadly, both formal and informal institutional structures 
can hinder (or support) female labor force participation. In many 
countries  across  all  regions,  legislation  regulating  market  work, 
such as restrictions on hours and industry of work, treats men and 
women  diff erently.  Countries  that  impose  these  restrictions  on 
women also have on average lower female labor force participa-
tion (45 percent, compared with 60 percent in countries with no 
restrictions)  and  higher  gender  participation  gaps  (45  percent, 
compared with 25 percent in counties with no restrictions). 

In addition, regulation of parental benefi ts and retirement can 
also aff ect female partici pation. Most countries provide some sort 
of maternity leave, but benefi ts vary considerably in the number 
of days, the percentage of leave that is paid, and who pays for it. 
Fewer countries provide  paternity leave, often under more limited 
conditions.  Diff erences  in  parental  leave  between  men  and 
women could increase the perceived cost of em ploying women 
and  therefore  diminish  their  employment  opportunities.  And 
while  earlier  retirement  ages  for  women  workers  have,  in  many 
cases, been motivated by protective instincts, they can create dis-

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

201

BOX 5.1   Closing the access gap—Recent advances in female labor force participation  (continued)

parities in lifetime earnings, pension benefi ts, and career oppor-
tunities, thus discouraging women from market work.

In recent years, increasing attention has been paid to the impact 
of  informal  institutions,  partic ularly  cultural  or  social  norms,  on 
female labor force participation. This research suggests that more 
traditional views negatively correlate, in some cases strongly, with 
female employment rates (and the gender wage gap).d The impact 
of such views appears to be particularly binding for women at two 
distinct but related points in time: adolescence and after marriage 
(also see box 5.10 on family formation and female labor force par-
ticipation in Egypt). In both cases, norms related to gender roles for 

care  and  housework  and  for  mobility  can  limit  (young)  women’s 
participation  in  market  work  (see  chapter  4  and  spreads  on 
WDR2012 Gender Qualitative Assessment).

Finally, individual preferences for market work can also explain 
diff erences  in  participation  rates  across  and  within  countries. 
Although  culture  and  social  norms  within  a  country  or  particular 
group  undoubtedly  infl uence  preferences,  they  nonetheless  play 
an  independent  and  distinct  role  through  their  impact  on  the 
household  decision-making  process.  As  was  the  case  with  social 
norms,  more  traditional  individual  attitudes  and  preferences  are 
negatively correlated with participation in market work.e

a.  World Bank 2011.
b.  Chioda, García-Verdú, and Muñoz Boudet, forthcoming.
c.  World Bank 2010a.
d.  Antecol 2000; Fernández and Fogli 2006; Fortin 2005; Goldin 2006.
e.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b; Fortin 2005.

full-time and formal jobs, a high concentration 
of  women  in  these  lower-paying  jobs  weakens 
the incentives to participate in market work and 
thus reinforces the specialization in nonmarket 
(including care) and market work along gender 
lines within the household.

It is precisely this interaction of segregation 
with  gender  differences  in  time  use,  access  to 
inputs,  and  market  and  institutional  failures 
that traps women in low-paying jobs and low-
 productivity  businesses.  Breaking  out  of  this 
productivity  trap  thus  requires  interventions 
that lift time constraints, increase women’s ac-
cess  to  productive  inputs,  and  correct  market 
and institutional failures.

UNDERSTANDING GENDER 
DIFFERENCES IN PRODUCTIVITY 
AND EARNINGS

Gender  differences  in  productivity  and  earn-
ings  are  systematic  and  persistent.  Whether  in 
agriculture  or  off  the  farm,  among  those  self-
employed or in wage employment, women ex-
hibit lower average productivity and earn lower 
wages  than  men.  These  differences  have  been 
documented in both developed and developing 
countries, and although they have declined over 
time  (primarily  as  a  result  of  the  reduction  in 
the education gap), they remain signiﬁ cant.1

Female farmers have, on average, lower pro-
ductivity  than  male  farmers.  Estimated  yield 
gaps based on female-male comparisons across 

households range widely (table 5.1), but many 
cluster  around  20–30  percent.2  Results  from 
studies  that  compare  the  performance  of  men 
and  women  within  households,  and  thus  ac-
count  for  possible  differences  in  market  con-
ditions  and  institutional  constraints,  provide 
further support for this ﬁ nding. For instance, in 
parts of Burkina Faso, women’s yields were 18 
percent lower than those of male farmers in the 
same household.3

Similarly, female entrepreneurs exhibit lower 
productivity  than  male  entrepreneurs.4  Value 
added per worker is lower in ﬁ rms managed by 
women than in those managed by men in urban 
areas  in  Europe  and  Central  Asia  (34  percent 
lower),  Latin  America  (35  percent),  and  Sub-
Saharan  Africa  (6–8  percent).5  There  are  also 
signiﬁ cant  differences  in  proﬁ tability  between 
female-owned and male-owned businesses op-
erating  in  rural  Bangladesh,  Ethiopia,  Indone-
sia, and Sri Lanka. The differences are largest in 
Bangladesh,  where  average  output  per  worker 
was eight times higher in ﬁ rms operated by men 
than in those operated by women—and small-
est in Indonesia, where output per worker was 6 
percent lower among female-owned ﬁ rms.6

Female-owned enterprises also perform less 
well  than  male-owned  enterprises  in  other  di-
mensions. They tend to be less proﬁ table7 and 
to  generate  lower  sales.8  Survival  probabilities 
are  also  lower  among  female-owned  ﬁ rms,  al-
though the evidence is more mixed.9

Differences  in  average  wages  between  sala-
ried  men  and  women  have  been  extensively 

202 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

TABLE 5.1 Female farmers have lower average productivity than male farmers

Country
Nigeria

(Osun State)

Benin (Central)

Year/season

2002/03

2003–04

Type of gender 

comparison

Gender of the farmer

Gender of the farmer

Ghana

2002 and 2004

Gender of the farmer

Malawi (National)

1998–99

Gender of the farmer

Kenya (Western)

1971

Gender of the farmer

Kenya (Western)

Kenya (Subnational)

Ethiopia (Central 

Highlands)

2004/05 

1989/90

1997

Gender of head of 

household

Gender of the farmer

Gender of head of 

household

Crop(s)

Productivity measure

Rice

Rice

Cocoa

Maize

Maize

Maize

Yields

Yields

Yields

Yields

Yields

Yields

Maize, beans, and 

cowpeas

Gross value of output 

per hectare

All farm output

Yields

Average gender 

diﬀ erence in 

productivity (%)

40

21

17

11–16

4

19

7.7

26

Sources: Alene and others 2008; Gilbert, Sakala, and Benson 2002; Kinkingninhoun-Mêdagbé and others 2010; Moock 1976; Oladeebo and Fajuyigbe 2007; Saito, Mekonnen, and 
Spurling 1994; Tiruneh and others 2001; Vargas Hill and Vigneri 2009. 

documented in both developed and developing 
countries10  (see  ﬁ gure  2.8  in  chapter  2).  Gaps 
have declined over time but remain signiﬁ cant in 
the formal and informal sectors, where women 
often do casual and piece work.11 Gaps tend to 
be smaller in the public sector (ﬁ gure 5.1).

What  lies  behind  these  systematic  gender 
differences in productivity and earnings? Three 
possible explanations: differences in the charac-

teristics of female and male workers, differences 
in  the  types  of  activities  and  jobs  that  women 
and  men  do,  and  differences  in  the  returns  to 
both  worker  and  job  characteristics.  We  argue 
here that while differences in worker character-
istics (especially in human capital) and returns 
matter, it is primarily differences in jobs that ac-
count  for  the  gender  gaps  in  productivity  and 
earnings. 

FIGURE 5.1   There are systematic gender differences in earnings

a.  Gender wage di(cid:1)erences are smaller in the
      public sector than in the private sector

 b.  The gender pay gap, although diminishing
,
       is persistent

pp

 

%

 
,
r
o
t
c
e
s
 
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
h
t
n

i
 

 

p
a
g
y
a
p
 
r
e
d
n
e
g

30

20

10

0 

–10

Iceland

Bulgaria

Finland

ublic

Cz

ech Repu
Austria
K K

Denen

United Kingdo
Netherla

om 
ands
an
Germa y 

enmark 
LatviaaSwS

Lithuaniaa
Slovakvv
Switzerland
Norway

ia

Sweden 

Luxe

Romania
RR
urg
mbourourg
ovenia
Slovov

France

Spain

Cyprus

Italy

Portugal

Poland

Malta

Belgium

gender
pay gap is
smaller in the
public sector

%

,

8
9
–
5
9
9
1

 
,

 

p
a
g
y
a
p
 
r
e
d
n
e
g

40

30

20

10

gender pay gap
is diminishing

Bulgaria

Indonesia

Singanga

gapore

United Kingdom 

Lithuania
Netherlands

Paraguay

Latvia

Hungary

Mexiicocc

Ukraine
Belarus

Kazakhstan

Egypt, Arab Rep.

Costa Rica

Sweden 

West Bank and Gaza

Philippines 

Sri Lanka 

0 

Panama

–10

–10

0 

10

20

30

–10

0 

10

20

30

40

gender pay gap in the private sector, %

gender pay gap, 2007–08, %

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on the Structure of 
Earnings Survey, Eurostat.
Note: The 45° line in each ﬁ gure above shows parity in the values on the vertical and horizontal axis.

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on LABORSTA, 
International Labour Organization.

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

203

Gender gaps in education and experience
Women are still less educated (in some countries) 
and  more  likely  to  suffer  career  inter ruptions 
than  men  (primarily  because  of  childbearing), 
although  the  differences  have  narrowed.  Dif-
ferences  in  education  levels  are  still  signiﬁ cant 
among older workers in some countries but have 
disappeared  among  younger  workers  almost 
everywhere (see chapters 1 and 3). In contrast, 
the number of years an individual has been em-
ployed is greater for men in 15 of 19 countries 
with data, ranging from 0.3 years in Lithuania to 
5.4 years in Ireland.12 While insigniﬁ cant among 
younger workers (ages 18–25), the gender differ-
ences in experience are most prominent among 
men  and  women  ages  26–39,  suggesting  that 
they arise mainly during the childbearing years.
Because education and work experience are 
valuable  inputs  into  production,  gender  dif-
ferences  along  these  dimensions  contribute  to 
differences in productivity and earnings. Farms 
operated  by  more  educated  and  experienced 
individuals  exhibit  higher  productivity  than 
comparable businesses, so gender differences in 
human capital translate into differences in agri-
cultural productivity.13 Similarly, less education 
and lower access to business training among fe-
male entrepreneurs can hold their productivity 
down.14 And in both developed and developing 
countries, differences in human capital have tra-
ditionally been a key contributor to the gender 
wage gap.15

The recent closing of the education gap has 
contributed  to  the  observed  narrowing  in  the 
gender wage gap. But it has also diminished the 
explanatory  power  of  educational  differences 
for the remaining gap. After controlling for in-
dividual  characteristics  and  place  of  residence, 
education differences between men and women 
account for 10–50 percent of the observed wage 
gap  in  5  low-  and  middle-income  countries 
(of 53) and for 0–10 percent in an additional 5 
low- and middle-income countries and 3 high-
income countries (of 17) with data. These low- 
and middle-income countries are mostly those 
where  gender  differences  in  education  levels 
are still signiﬁ cant. In the remaining countries, 
gender education differences are either small or 
have reversed so that women have higher educa-
tion levels than men. In these cases, education 
not  only  does  not  explain  the  observed  gap—
when  taken  into  account,  it  actually  increases 
the unexplained gap.16

In contrast, gender differences in actual ex-
perience  have  narrowed  less  and  remain  sig-
niﬁ cant.  As  a  result,  their  impact  on  earnings 
has  received  special  attention  in  developed 
countries,  where  gender  differences  in  educa-
tion are minimal but women continue to bear 
the responsibility for child rearing. In the United 
States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  career  inter-
ruptions associated with childbearing and other 
family events mean lower wages for women with 
children  than  for  other  women.  Wage  growth 
slows signiﬁ cantly after having children, and the 
pay penalty, higher for skilled women, grows as 
time since the birth passes. 17

Further narrowing of the education and ex-
perience  gaps  will  undoubtedly  contribute  to 
closing the gender gap in productivity and earn-
ings. But given that signiﬁ cant wage gaps remain 
despite enormous progress in closing the educa-
tion gap, further improvements in human capi-
tal alone are unlikely to be sufﬁ cient as long as 
gender differences remain in returns and, espe-
cially, in employment and care responsibilities.

Gender differences in returns to human 
capital and other productive inputs
Differences in returns could explain gender dif-
ferences in productivity and earnings if gender 
matters in production and in determining wages 
beyond systematic differences in individual and 
job characteristics between men and women.

Women are not worse farmers and 
entrepreneurs than men
In agriculture, gender differences in productiv-
ity almost always disappear when access to land 
and  productive  inputs  are  taken  into  account. 
Similarly,  productivity  differences  between  fe-
male-owned and male-owned businesses are of-
ten explained by differences in access to and use 
of productive resources, where these differences 
are primarily a function of the business size and 
sector of operation rather than a gender-speciﬁ c 
factor.18  Among  African  ﬁ rms  in  urban  areas, 
the  median  female-owned  ﬁ rm  in  the  formal 
sector  has  2.5  times  less  start-up  capital  than 
the median male-owned ﬁ rm, but it has 5 times 
more start-up capital than the median female-
owned ﬁ rm in the informal sector. The same can 
be said about the number of paid employees in 
the ﬁ rm.19

This evidence suggests that women are as efﬁ -
cient as men in production when given access to 

204 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 5.2  Women in the boardroom

Women  have  limited  presence  on  boards  of  directors  around  the  world.  The 
share of female directors ranges from 40 percent in Norway, where the govern-
ment imposed a quota, to 21 percent in Sweden, and to less than 2 percent in 
Bahrain,  Japan,  Jordan,  the  Republic  of  Korea,  Qatar,  Saudi  Arabia,  and  the 
United Arab Emirates.a Interestingly, the fraction of companies with at least one 
female  director  presents  a  more  positive  picture,  which  suggests  that  large 
numbers of companies engage in what could be called gender tokenism—90 
percent of French companies have at least one woman director, for example, 
while only 14 percent of all directors are women. 

Besides raising concerns about equity, low gender diversity is seen by many 
as  undermining  a  company’s  potential  value  and  growth.  Higher  diversity  is 
often thought to improve the board’s functioning by increasing its monitoring 
capacity, broadening its access to information on its potential consumer base, 
and  enhancing  its  creativity  by  multiplying  viewpoints.b  Greater  diversity 
implies that board directors can be selected from a broader talent pool.c But it 
could also lead to more confl ict and diminished decision power.d

The impact is diffi  cult to measure, however. Showing that companies with 
more female directors perform better, as a large fraction of the existing litera-
ture does, is not enough. More successful fi rms may have more resources to 
ensure higher diversity, in which case diversity results from success and not the 
other way around. It is thus important to be able to attribute improvements in 
fi rm performance to the presence of female board directors. 

The causal evidence presents mixed results. Carter and others show that a 
female presence on the board of directors leads to better performance among 
Fortune 500 fi rms, primarily through its eff ects on the board’s audit function.e 
Information  for  a  sample  of  U.S.  fi rms  presents  similar  results,  but  positive 
impacts  are  limited  to  fi rms  with  weak  governance.f  The  main  channels  are 
higher attendance rates and better board monitoring. Others have found evi-
dence of board gender diversity leading to increased gender diversity in the 
fi rm’s  top  management  team.g  In  contrast,  in  a  study  of  about  2,500  Danish 
fi rms, female directors elected by staff  have a positive eff ect on performance 
but other female directors have a negative eff ect.h

a.  CWDI and IFC (2010) as cited in Directors and Boards magazine 2010.
b.  Carter and others 2007.
c.  Adams and Ferreira 2009.
d.  Hambrick, Cho, and Chen 1996.
e.  Carter and others 2007.
f.  Adams and Ferreira 2009.
g.  Bilimoria 2006.
h.  Smith, Smith, and Verner 2005.

the same inputs—and that, when provided with 
the  same  amount  of  resources,  female  farmers 
and entrepreneurs can be as productive as their 
male counterparts. In Ghana, where evidence of 
gender differences in farming practices initially 

suggested that women were worse farmers than 
men,  closer  examination  showed  the  practices 
to  be  optimal  given  the  land  tenure  insecurity 
for women.20

Some  authors  argue,  however,  that  gender 
differences  in  management  and  business  per-
formance  reﬂ ect  differences  in  women’s  and 
men’s  attitudes  toward  risk  and  competition, 
as  well  as  toward  personnel  management  and 
business organization—where these differences 
could be innate or learned.21 This literature has 
focused  primarily  on  the  impact  of  gender  on 
entrepreneurship and ﬁ rm performance in de-
veloped countries. Some studies have analyzed 
the role of gender differences in management in 
enhancing ﬁ rm productivity, with a focus on the 
(positive) impact of women in boardrooms on 
ﬁ rm performance (box 5.2).

Others  have  argued  that  gender  differences 
in  attitudes  relevant  to  business  explain  why 
women are less likely to become entrepreneurs 
and why, even when they do, men tend to out-
perform  them  in  their  ﬁ rms’  investment  and 
growth. Traditional female roles and images may 
inﬂ uence women’s perceptions of their abilities 
and  undermine  their  self-efﬁ cacy  and  poten-
tial,  including  that  for  growing  their  business 
(see  chapter  4).22  Evidence  from  experimental 
studies suggests that personal characteristics do 
not  affect  men’s  and  women’s  entrepreneurial 
behavior differently, with the exception of indi-
vidual perceptions of one’s own skills, likelihood 
of failure, and existence of opportunities.23

However, the evidence on the aggregate im-
pact  of  differences  in  management  and  beliefs 
on gender differences in productivity is still lim-
ited and mixed. We therefore conclude that the 
existing evidence, taken as a whole, suggests that 
women  are  not  worse  farmers  and  entrepre-
neurs than men.

Why do women’s jobs pay less?
Women’s  jobs  do  indeed  pay  less  than  men’s 
jobs. First, even after accounting for observable 

“

[Women] are discriminated against in the salary even though they both do the same 
work; for example at . . . the local plastics factory, the woman gets 900 NIS ($247) a 
month and the man gets 1,800 NIS ($495).

Young woman, urban West Bank and Gaza

”

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

205

differences in worker and job characteristics, a 
signiﬁ cant fraction of the gender wage gap re-
mains unexplained.24 Second, wages in female-
dominated  sectors  and  occupations  are  lower 
than those in male-dominated sectors and occu-
pations.  This  phenomenon  has  received  much 
attention,  and  abundant  evidence  shows  that 
individual  wages  vary  systematically  with  the 
gender composition of occupations.25

Two types of explanations have been volun-
teered for these stylized facts: one is gender dis-
crimination in the labor market, and the other 
is (voluntary) selection of men and women into 
different  sectors  and  occupations,  primarily  in 
response to their different care responsibilities. 
That is, women are more likely to choose jobs 
that allow them to adjust working hours and to 
exit and enter the labor market more frequently 
and at a lower cost. The evidence provides (par-
tial) support for both.

An  unexplained  gender  wage  gap  has  often 
been  interpreted  as  evidence  of  labor  market 
discrimination, but caution is needed in inter-
preting these results because they could reﬂ ect 
additional  unobserved  or  unmeasured  differ-
ences in worker and job characteristics between 
men and women.26

Recent  studies  of  gender  wage  differen-
tials and discrimination have taken a new ap-
proach. A  ﬁ rst  set  compares  men  and  women 
in especially homogenous groups, using exten-
sive information on qualiﬁ cations to minimize 
the effect of gender differences in unmeasured 
characteristics.27  These  studies  still  ﬁ nd  an 
unexplained wage gap (ranging from 12 to 20 
percent), albeit a smaller one than when com-
paring  more  heterogeneous  groups  of  work-
ers. A second set tests the economic prediction 
that  competitive  forces  in  the  product  market 
should  reduce  or  eliminate  discrimination  in 
labor  and  other  factor  markets.28  Consistent 
with this reasoning, several authors analyze the 
impact of changes in market power, deregula-
tion, and increased competition through trade 
on the gender wage gap.29 In all cases, the results 
suggest  some  gender  discrimination  in  pay.  A 
third complementary set of studies focuses on 
discrimination in hiring rather than in pay by 
presenting job candidates with equivalent char-
acteristics to potential employers. Its results are 
mixed (box 5.3).

Most  evidence  on  gender  discrimination 
in labor markets comes from developed coun-

BOX 5.3   Gender discrimination in hiring? Evidence from 

employment audit studies

Employment audit studies aim at isolating the impact of gender (or other types 
of) discrimination from that of other factors in the hiring decision by presenting 
otherwise  identical  female  and  male  job  candidates  to  potential  employers. 
Results  are  mixed,  apparently  depending  on  the  context  and  on  the  study’s 
design.

One study found signifi cant evidence of discrimination against women in 
upscale restaurants in Philadelphia.a Female candidates were 0.4 percentage 
points less likely to get an interview and 0.35 percentage points less likely to 
receive a job off er than comparable male candidates. These results should be 
interpreted with caution, however, because individual characteristics such as 
personality and appearance may have played a role in the hiring decision. 

To  address  the  diminished  comparability  resulting  from  individual  diff er-
ences in personal interactions, some studies used written applications instead 
of actual “fake” job applicants.b They failed to fi nd systematic evidence of gen-
der discrimination, although they did fi nd some suggestive gender stereotyp-
ing and statistical discrimination. A similar approach has assessed the mother-
hood penalty in hiring. Correll, Benard, and Paik found that single women were 
more likely to be called for interviews than single men, while childless women 
received  2.1  times  more  calls  than  equally  qualifi ed  mothers.c  A  third  set  of 
studies followed real candidates during their job search process and examined 
diff erences  in  hiring  rates  between  men  and  women.  The  evidence  was 
inconclusive.d In a related study examining the impact of gender-blind audi-
tions  by  symphony  orchestras,  Goldin  and  Rouse  found  evidence  of 
discrimination.e

a.  Hellerstein, Neumark, and Troske 1997.
b.  Bravo, Sanhueza, and Urzua 2008; Riach and Rich 2006.
c.  Correll, Benard, and Paik 2007.
d.  Moreno and others 2004.
e.  Goldin and Rouse 2000.

tries and thus may not be very informative for 
developing  countries.  Indeed,  the  coverage  of 
antidiscriminatory  regulation  and,  especially, 
enforcement capacity are likely to increase with 
income,  suggesting  that  the  severity  and  reach 
of discrimination could be worse in developing 
countries. In Pakistan, female teachers in private 
schools  in  rural  areas  are  paid  30  percent  less 
than their male counterparts, and the difference 
persists  even  after  individual  and  school  char-
acteristics  are  taken  into  account.30  But  more 
systematic information is needed.

The selection hypothesis relies on the notion 
that, because of care and other responsibilities, 
women are more likely than men to choose oc-
cupations that offer more ﬂ exibility and that do 
not  require  large  or  continual  investments  in 
skills unique to a ﬁ rm or group of ﬁ rms—or oc-
cupations where skills do not depreciate signiﬁ -
cantly because of career interruptions.31 These 

206 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 5.4   What do we mean by employment segregation 

by gender?

This Report uses the term employment (or labor market) segregation by gender 
to refer to diff erences in the kind of jobs men and women do. Although this 
term  is  most  frequently  used  to  talk  about  diff erences  in  the  distribution  of 
male and female wage and salaried workers across industries and occupations, 
this Report argues that similar gender diff erences occur in the jobs and activi-
ties undertaken by farmers and entrepreneurs. And it expands the discussion 
of segregation to include such diff erences because doing so provides insights 
about the root causes of gender diff erences in employment outcomes. 

Because farming and entrepreneurial activities diff er from wage employ-
ment in various ways, it is important to clarify what the term segregation refers 
to in each of these spheres. In talking about farmers, the discussion focuses on 
gender diff erences in farm size (measured by land size) and in market orienta-
tion of production. In talking about entrepreneurship, the discussion focuses 
on  fi rm  size  (measured  by  number  of  employees)  and  sector  of  operation. 
Some evidence is also presented on gender diff erences in the motivation to 
become an entrepreneur and the fi rm’s growth orientation. In talking about 
wage employment, the discussion focuses on the industry and occupation of 
employment. The term employment segregation therefore refers to system-
atic diff erences along any of these dimensions.

Note that segregation results from a combination of gender- diff erentiated 
constraints in access to specifi c economic opportunities (including discrimina-
tion) and sorting based on gender-based preferences.

tend  to  be  occupations  where  the  returns  to 
skills and experience are lower and, other things 
equal, so are wages.

The  higher  concentration  of  women  in 
these  jobs  would  then  explain  why  female- 
dominated occupations pay lower wages than 
male-dominated  ones.  Evidence  from  the 
United  States  shows  that  predominantly  fe-
male jobs pay lower wages to women and men 
in these jobs largely because of their (unmea-
sured)  skill-related  characteristics  and  tastes. 
Conﬁ rming this, it has been shown that once 
skill-related  job  characteristics  are  taken  into 
account,  the  negative  impact  of  the  share  of 
female employment on wages is reduced by 25 
percent for women and 50 percent for men.32 
In developing countries, higher job ﬂ exibil-
ity  is  usually  found  in  informal  employment. 

“

Garment companies hardly recruit men because the 
job needs sewing.

Young woman, urban Indonesia

”

   

And although the jury is still out on how much 
employment  is  voluntary  in  the  informal  sec-
tor,  the  reality  is  that  the  returns  to  skills  are, 
on average, lower. Evidence from the Arab Re-
public of Egypt, Tanzania, and several European 
countries suggests that the returns to education 
and experience increase with ﬁ rm size and are 
larger in the formal sector.33 Given that women 
are  overrepresented  among  informal  workers, 
this would translate into female jobs paying less 
than male jobs.

There are men’s jobs and women’s jobs: 
Employment segregation by gender 
There are signiﬁ cant and systematic differences 
between  men’s  and  women’s  jobs,  whether 
across  sectors,  industries,  occupations,  types 
of jobs, or types of ﬁ rms (the phrase “employ-
ment  segregation  by  gender”  refers  to  these 
differences) (box 5.4). Women are more likely 
than  men  to  work  in  agriculture  (37  percent 
of all employed women, against 33 percent of 
all employed men) and in services (47 percent 
of all employed women, against 40 percent of 
all  employed  men).  The  opposite  is  true  for 
manufacturing.34  Women  also  are  overrepre-
sented among unpaid and wage workers and in 
the informal sector. Women account for about 
40 percent of the total global workforce, but 58 
percent of all unpaid work, 44 percent of wage 
employment, and 50 percent of informal em-
ployment (ﬁ gure 5.2).35

These  differences  are  also  pervasive  when 
comparing  men  and  women  within  sectors—
female  and  male  farmers  and  entrepreneurs, 
and  female  and  male  wage  workers.  Women 
are  more  likely  than  men  to  own  and  operate 
smaller farms and to cultivate subsistence crops. 
Land  holdings  among  female-headed  house-
holds  in  rural  areas  are  smaller  than  those  of 
male-headed households in 15 of 16 countries 
analyzed,  with  average  differences  equal  to  or 
larger  than  1.5  hectares  (or  50  percent  of  the 
average plot size) in 6 countries.36 In addition, 
men  manage  most  of  the  commercial  crops, 
although  not  without  women’s  (often  unpaid) 
contributions. And while women participate in 
commercial farming, they do so within a rather 
rigid division of tasks. 

Similarly, the large majority of micro, small, 
and  medium  enterprises  are  run  by  women, 
and  the  percentage  of  female  ownership  de-

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

207

clines  with  ﬁ rm  size.37  This  decline  becomes 
even  sharper  when  using  more  restrictive 
deﬁ nitions  of  ownership  that  account  for  ac-
tual  decision  power  in  the  presence  of  mul-
tiple  owners.38  In  addition,  female-headed 
enterprises  are  more  likely  than  male-headed 
enterprises  to  be  home-based  and  operate 
within the household.39 In Mexico, 30 percent 
of  all  female-headed  businesses  operate  from 
home, compared with only 11 percent of male-
 operated businesses; the respective percentages 
in Bolivia are 23 and 10 percent.40 

Female  entrepreneurs  are  also  more  likely 
than  their  male  counterparts  to  be  “neces-
sity”  entrepreneurs  (to  view  entrepreneurship 
as a choice of last resort) and less likely to be 
“opportunity”  entrepreneurs.  In  the  United 
States,  women  are  underrepresented  among 
high-growth  ﬁ rms,  where  growth  orientation 
is measured by whether the entrepreneur was 
pushed  or  pulled  into  entrepreneurship.41  In 
developing  countries,  women  often  cite  the 
need to supplement household income as the 
main reason to enter entrepreneurship, whereas 
men cite the desire to exploit market opportu-
nities.42 That said, the fraction of female “ne-
cessity” entrepreneurs declines with economic 
development, as more economic opportunities 
open for women.43

As noted, women and men work in different 
industries  and  occupations.  Globally,  women 
represent more than 50 percent of employment 
in  communal  services  (public  administration, 
education, health, and other social services) and 
among  professionals  (including  teachers  and 
nurses),  clerical  workers,  and  sales  and  service 
employees.  They  also  represent  more  than  40 
percent  of  employment—equivalent  to  the  fe-
male  share  of  total  employment—in  the  retail 
and  restaurant  sectors  and  among  agricultural 
workers.44

Industry  segregation  patterns  are  simi-
lar  when  looking  at  ﬁ rms  rather  than  work-
ers.  In  both  developed  and  developing  coun-
tries,  female-owned  ﬁ rms  tend  to  operate 
in  a  restricted  number  of  sectors,  populated 
by smaller ﬁ rms and characterized by low value 
added and low growth potential.45 Women en-
trepreneurs  are  heavily  concentrated  in  the 
service sector and in businesses that conform 
more  to  female  roles  (such  as  beauty  parlors, 
food vending, and sewing).46

FIGURE 5.2   Women are overrepresented among wage and 

unpaid family workers

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e

l

 
l

 

a
t
o
t
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

0

Sub-Saharan
Africa

women

South Asia

Middle East and
North Africa

East Asia
Latin A m erica
and Paciﬁc
and the Caribbean

Europe and
Central Asia

high-inco m e
countries

unpaid family workers

paid employees

self-employed

employers

men

unpaid family workers

paid employees

self-employed

employers

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on International Labour Organization.
Note: Most recent year available for 56 countries in the period 2003–08.

These  gender  differences  in  employment—
with women more likely than men to work in 
sectors,  industries,  occupations,  and  jobs  with 
lower  average  (labor)  productivity—explain  a 
large fraction of the gender gap in productivity 
and earnings.

Gender gaps in agricultural productivity di-
minish signiﬁ cantly or disappear once gender 
differences in the scale of operation (measured 
by  land  size  and  use  of  technical  inputs)  are 
controlled for.47 In all but one of the examples 
in table 5.1, gender differences in productivity 
become insigniﬁ cant after controlling for dif-

“

Bank and teaching jobs are considered safe and 
respectable for women, whereas executive and 
engineering are considered respectable and high-
paying jobs for men.

Young woman, urban Indonesia

”

208 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5.3   Gender differences in agricultural productivity 
diminish considerably when access to and use of 
productive inputs are taken into account 

In Malawi, women’s agricultural 

productivity is 13.5% lower than men’s 

Malawi  (National) 

–13.5% 

Nigeria (Osun State) 

–40% 

Benin (Central) 

Ghana (National)

Ethiopia (Central Highlands) 

Kenya (Subnational) 

Kenya (Western), 2008

Kenya (Western), 1976

0.6% 

0% 

0% 

0% 

 

 

a
n
d
m
e
n
h
a
v
e
e
q
u
a

 

l
 

 

 

i

t
h
i
s
d
ff
e
r
e
n
c
e
d
i
s
a
p
p
e
a
r
s
w
h
e
n
w
o
m
e
n

 

 

a
c
c
e
s
s
 
t
o

 
i

n
p
u
t
s

–21% 

–17% 

–26% 
–25% 

–7.7% 

12.5% 

–19% 

0% 

–4% 

6.6% 

–60  –50 

–40  –30 

–20 

–10 

0 

10 

20 

percent

average gender gap
gender gap with equal access to inputs

Sources: Alene and others 2008; Gilbert, Sakala, and Benson 2002; Kinkingninhoun-Mêdagbé and others 
2010; Moock 1976; Oladeebo and Fajuyigbe 2007; Saito, Mekonnen, and Spurling 1994; Tiruneh and others 
2001; Vargas Hill and Vigneri 2009.

FIGURE 5.4   Differences in productivity between female 

and male entrepreneurs are dwarfed by differences 
in productivity between formal and informal 
entrepreneurs 

female-headed firms,

informal sector

male-headed firms,

informal sector

female-headed firms,

formal sector

male-headed firms,

formal sector

0

100

200

Source: Hallward-Driemeier 2011b.

revenue per worker is almost 600 US$
higher in formal female-headed firms

than in informal male-head firms

400

300
600
revenue per worker (US$)

500

700

800

900

$ = approximately 20 US$

ferences in land size, access to fertilizer, degree 
of mechanization, and other productive inputs 
(ﬁ gure  5.3).  Evidence  from  intrahousehold 
comparisons  produces  similar  results.  Lower 
yields among female farmers in Burkina Faso 
were entirely explained by the lower labor in-
tensity and fertilizer used in women’s plots.48

Differences in sector of operation and size 
of ﬁ rm contribute signiﬁ cantly to average pro-
ductivity  differences  between  female-headed 
and  male-headed  businesses  (where  produc-
tivity  is  measured  as  value  added  or  revenue 
per worker). For instance, 9 percent to 14 per-
cent of the gender earnings differential among 
self-employed  individuals  is  explained  by  in-
dustry of operation.49 Among formal ﬁ rms in 
urban areas in Africa, differences in sector of 
operation explain more than 20 percent of the 
total gender productivity gap, and differences 
in ﬁ rm size explain an additional 30 percent.50 
Impacts  are  similar  among  rural  businesses 
in  Bangladesh,  Ethiopia,  Indonesia,  and  Sri 
Lanka, where sector of operation and ﬁ rm size 
explain between 30 and 90 percent of the gen-
der productivity gap.51 Performance gaps also 
decline  signiﬁ cantly  after  distinguishing  be-
tween formal and informal businesses. Dwarf-
ing  the  differences  in  productivity  between 
female-headed and male-headed ﬁ rms within 
the informal and formal sectors are the differ-
ences across the two sectors (ﬁ gure 5.4).

Differences  in  the  distribution  of  men  and 
women  across  industries  and  occupations  ex-
plain much of the gender wage gap. After con-
trolling for individual characteristics (including 
human  capital)  and  place  of  residence,  gender 
differences in occupation and sector of employ-
ment account for 10–50 percent of the observed 
wage gap in 33 low- and middle-income coun-
tries (of 53) and 14 high-income countries (of 
17) with data. And they account for 0–10 per-
cent in an additional 9 low- and middle-income 
countries  and  3  high-income  countries  (map 
5.1). So differences in occupation and industry 
can account for a large part of the unexplained 
wage gap in more countries than differences in 
education.

In  addition,  when  comparing  female  and 
male  wage  workers  in  these  countries,  a  fairly 
large  number  are  employed  in  jobs  done  only 
by men or only by women—in other words, a 
comparator  male  or  female  cannot  be  found 
for many workers. In some countries, men with 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

209

MAP 5.1   Gender differences in occupation and industry of employment account for a large fraction of the 

gender gap after accounting for individual characteristics

a.  Women earn lower wages than men the world over

b.  Education cannot explain these differences...

In Bolivia, the

gender wage gap is

22%...

...and this gap increases
by 18% when we compare
men and women with the
same level of education...

c. . . . but gender differences in occupation and industry of employment can, to a large extent

6% to –10%
–10% to –20%
–20% to –30%
–30% to –50%
no data

decrease 50% or more
decrease less than 50%
but 10% or more
decrease less than 10%
increase less than 10%
increase more the 10%
but 50% or less
increase more than 50%
no data

decrease 50% or more
decrease less than 50%
but 10% or more
decrease less than 10%
increase less than 10%
increase more the 10%
but 50% or less
increase more than 50%
no data

...instead, the gender
wage gap decreases by

39% when the
diﬀerences in
occupation and

industry of

employment between

men and women

disappear.

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates using data from the International Income Distribution Database (I2D2) and the European Union Statistics 
on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC).

210 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

no female comparator earn higher than average 
wages  and  women  with  no  male  comparators 
earn  lower  than  average  wages,  a  ﬁ nding  that 
supports the premise that gender differences in 
occupation and industry of employment lie be-
hind the observed gender wage gap.52 

The  focus  here  on  productivity  and  earn-
ings as the main characteristic that determines 
whether a job is “good” or “bad” assumes that 
jobs where men and women can be more pro-
ductive  and  earn  higher  wages  are  preferable. 
Qualitative evidence suggests that this assump-
tion is not far from reality, although individuals 
also  take  into  account  other  dimensions  when 
evaluating  the  desirability  of  a  particular  job 
(box 5.5).

The  evidence  discussed  here  suggests  three 
things. First, gender differences in human capital 
contribute to gender differences in productivity 
and earnings, but their relative importance is di-
minishing as the education gap closes the world 
over. Second, women farmers and entrepreneurs 
are as efﬁ cient as their male counterparts, after 
accounting  for  gender  differences  in  access  to 
productive  inputs.  Third,  although  labor  mar-
kets show some evidence of gender discrimina-
tion, a signiﬁ cant part of the observed wage gap 
can  be  explained  by  women  and  men  sorting 
into different occupations.

So, while differences in worker characteristics 
(especially in human capital) and returns matter, 
it  is  primarily  differences  in  employment  that 
account for the gender gaps in productivity and 
earnings.  Gender  differences  in  employment 
matter  both  directly—women  work  in  smaller 
farms and ﬁ rms, as well as in industries and oc-
cupations  with  lower  wages—and  indirectly, 
through their impact on returns, particularly the 
returns to human capital. The rest of this chapter 
is devoted to identifying and understanding the 
causes of employment segregation by gender.

WHAT EXPLAINS EMPLOYMENT 
SEGREGATION BY GENDER? 
A FIRST LOOK

As countries grow richer, the productive struc-
ture  of  the  economy  changes  and,  with  it,  the 
number and nature of available jobs. Farm jobs 
give way to off-farm jobs, the share of wage and 
salaried employment in total employment rises, 
and the incidence of informality declines. And 

as new economic opportunities open in differ-
ent sectors, market prices and wages may change 
to signal where labor productivity is potentially 
highest and workers are needed most. 

It  is  not  clear,  however,  how  these  changes 
in  economic  activity  and  the  structure  of  em-
ployment  affect  employment  outcomes  and 
ultimately  employment  segregation  by  gender. 
Higher gross domestic product (GDP) per cap-
ita  and,  particularly,  higher  service  sector  and 
wage  employment  encourage  women’s  partici-
pation in the labor market (see box 5.1). And as 
the number of female workers increases, women 
are  likely  to  take  traditionally  male  jobs.  But 
other constraints may limit the impact of stron-
ger economic incentives to female employment 
in male-dominated jobs (and vice versa).

The  extent  to  which  households  and  indi-
viduals can—or are willing to—respond to the 
signals triggered by economic development de-
pends  on  their  preferences  and  the  ways  new 
markets  and  institutional  forces  change  incen-
tives  and  constraints.  Because  preferences,  in-
centives, and constraints affect women and men 
differently,  the  impact  of  economic  develop-
ment  on  employment  segregation  needs  to  be 
assessed empirically. We start by looking at the 
relationship  between  economic  development, 
captured by GDP per capita, and employment 
segregation at the aggregate level, with a focus 
on how both the nature and the level of segrega-
tion change as countries get richer.

Is Bangladesh like Sweden? 
The structure of global employment has changed 
as countries have become richer. Over the past 
three  decades,  employment  in  agriculture  de-
clined  from  19.6  percent  of  the  global  labor 
force to 13 percent and that in manufacturing, 
from 31 percent to 23.5 percent—while that in 
services rose from 49 percent to 63.5 percent.53 
In addition, wage and salaried employment grew 
from 73 percent of total global employment to 
76 percent, while self-employment fell from 17 
percent to 16 percent and unpaid work from 8 
percent to 6 percent. The share of entrepreneurs 
in total employment remained roughly constant 
at 2.5 percent. As a result of these changes, infor-
mal employment declined from 25 percent to 21 
percent  of  global  employment.54  These  trends 
are common across regions, with differences in 
the relative importance of different types of jobs 
and in the magnitude of changes.

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

211

BOX 5.5   Good jobs and bad jobs: What are they and who does them?

Women and men in 88 urban and rural communi-
ties  around  the  developing  world  talked  to  us 
about good jobs and bad jobs, what they are, and 
who does them. 

A good job is a well-paid job, as illustrated by 

the following quotes:

“A good job is a job with a good salary.”
Young woman, urban Serbia

“Nursing is a good job because they 
earn lots of money.”
Young woman, urban South Africa

“The best ways to make a living are to work 
in construction abroad, housekeeping, growing 
potatoes and maize, and entrepreneurship. 
These are considered the best jobs because 
they provide a higher income.”
Adult man, rural Moldova

Women and men consider most jobs (60 per-
cent of all jobs identifi ed by the focus groups) to be 
good,  irrespective  of  their  age  or  place  of  resi-
dence. And even though the nature of jobs varies 
by  country  and  between  urban  and  rural  areas, 
there are some remarkable similarities in what are 
considered good and bad jobs. Working as a pub-
lic employee or in a high-skill job (doctors, lawyers, 
or  judges)  is  generally  good.  In  contrast,  “dirty” 

jobs, such as garbage collection and street clean-
ing, are bad.

Across all countries and communities, employ-
ment segregation by gender is signifi cant—about 
50 percent of all jobs are considered to be men’s 
jobs or women’s jobs. And of the gender-specifi c 
jobs, more are men’s than women’s, as the fi gure 
shows.

In most countries, whether a job is considered 
male, female, or neutral refl ects traditional gender 
roles  and  perceptions.  For  example,  men’s  jobs 
are  usually  technical  (electrician,  mechanic)  and 
those  that  require  physical  strength.  In  many 
countries, high-skill jobs are also considered male 
jobs.  In  contrast,  female  jobs  include  retail  and 
personal  services,  as  well  as  domestic  service. 
Many  communities  also  mentioned  “housewife” 
as a female job—even if unremunerated.

The  employment  segregation  by  gender  and 
the  share  of  female  jobs  in  segregated  jobs  are 
higher  for  bad  jobs.  More  than  60  percent  of  all 
bad jobs are gender-specifi c. And of those, 25 to 35 
percent are female jobs, compared with 15 to 30 
percent of gender-specifi c good jobs. Finally, the 
diff erence  in  the  share  of  gender-specifi c  good 
and bad jobs that are female jobs is driven entirely 
by men’s perceptions—in other words, men think 
that  the  fraction  of  gender-specifi c  jobs  that  are 
female is larger for bad jobs than for good ones, 
while women’s perceptions do not vary much with 
the quality of the job.

Good jobs

Bad jobs

50%

33%

17%

38%

43%

19%

men-only job
women-only job
both women and men can do the job

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: A Multi-Country Assessment” (dataset).
Note: Data from focus group discussions with men and women in 88 urban and rural communities in Afghanistan, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, 
Dominican Republic, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Liberia, Moldova, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Serbia, South Africa, Tanzania, Vietnam, West 
Bank and Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen. Focus groups were conducted separately for adult men, adult women, young men, and young 
women. Data present averages. 

Changes  in  the  structure  of  employment 
brought  about  by  economic  development  do 
not,  however,  necessarily  eliminate  or  weaken 
labor market segregation. So employment seg-
regation in Bangladesh looks very similar to that 
in Sweden, despite their very different incomes. 

Using data for 100 developing countries between 
1993 and 2009, we estimate aggregate shares of 
agricultural  and  nonagricultural  employment, 
as well as shares of unpaid and paid wage em-
ployment  and  entrepreneurship—the 
latter 
divided  into  self-employment  and  work  as  an 

212 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5.5   Economic development is positively correlated 

with the share of female workers in wage employ-
ment and negatively correlated with the share of 
women in unpaid work, self-employment, and 
entrepreneurship 

Population ages 18–65 working 

in and outside agriculture

Women

5

6

7

4
low

9

8
10
middle high

log, GDP per capita

Men

5

6

7

4
low

9

8
10
middle high

log, GDP per capita

Women

100

80

60

40

20

0

100

80

60

40

20

0

100

80

60

40

20

0

 

5
6
–
8
1
 
s
e
g
a

 
,

n
e
m
o
w
%

 

5
6
–
8
1
 
s
e
g
a
n
e
m
%

 

 

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
h
c
a
e
n

 

 

i
 

n
e
m
o
w
%

 

Nonagricultural 

employment status

Women

5

6

7

4
low

9

8
10
middle high

log, GDP per capita

Men

5

6

7

4
low

9

8
10
middle high

log, GDP per capita

Women

100

80

60

40

20

0

100

80

60

40

20

0

100

80

60

40

20

0

n

i
 

 

n
e
m
o
w
g
n
k
r
o
w

i

 
f
o
%

 

s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a

 
l

a
r
u
t
l
u
c
i
r
g
a
n
o
n

n

i
 

 

n
e
m
g
n
k
r
o
w

i

 
f
o
%

 

s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a

 
l

a
r
u
t
l
u
c
i
r
g
a
n
o
n

 

h
c
a
e
n

 

i
 

n
e
m
o
w
%

 

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e

l

5

6

7

4
low

9

8
10
middle high

log, GDP per capita

nonagriculture activities
agriculture

5

6

7

4
low

9

8
10
middle high

log, GDP per capita

self-employed
employer
paid employee
unpaid employee

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on the International Income Distribution Database (I2D2). 
Note: Data from 100 developing countries. Most recent years available between 1996 and 2008.

employer—as a function of GDP per capita. We 
do this for male and female workers separately 
and also calculate the share of female workers in 
each employment category.

Both men and women tend to move out of 
agriculture and into nonagricultural activities as 
countries  grow  richer  (ﬁ gure  5.5).  For  nonag-
ricultural employment, the shares of paid em-
ployment and, to lesser extent, employers grow 
with economic development. These patterns are 
common  to  men  and  women,  but  gender  dif-
ferences  in  the  incidence  of  unpaid  work  and 
self-employment  at  low  levels  of  development 
suggest that women are more likely to transition 
from  unpaid  to  wage  work  and  that  men  are 
more likely to transition from self-employment 
to wage employment.

Combined,  these  trends  suggest  that  eco-
nomic  development—rather  than  eliminating 
gender  segregation  by  employment  status—
changes the nature of such segregation. Moving 
from  low  to  medium  per  capita  GDPs  is  posi-
tively correlated with the share of female work-
ers  in  wage  employment  and  negatively  cor-
related  with  the  share  of  women  in  unpaid 
work,  self- employment,  and  entrepreneurship. 
In  other  words,  women  are  overrepresented 
among agri  cultural and unpaid workers at low 
GDP  per  capita  and  among  unpaid  and  wage 
workers  at  medium  GDP  per  capita.  These 
trends  remain  the  same  as  GDP  per  capita  in-
creases  from   medium  to  high,  with  the  excep-
tion  of  the  share  of  women  in  unpaid  work, 
which rises. Notice, however, that the overall in-
cidence of unpaid work is very low at high GDPs 
per  capita,  for  both  men  and  women.  These 
changes in segregation patterns are illustrated by 
comparing Tanzania, a low-income country, and 
Brazil, a middle-income country (ﬁ gure 5.6).

The  impact  of  economic  development  on 
industry and occupational segregation is even 
more  muted.  These  patterns  are  common 
across  countries  with  very  different  levels  of 
economic development and aggregate sectoral 
distributions of employment. For instance, the 
share  of  female  wage  employment  across  the 
nine  main  sectors  of  economic  activity  is  re-
markably  similar  in  Bangladesh,  Mexico,  and 
Sweden,  with  the  most  noticeable  differences 
pertaining to communal services and retail and 
restaurants,  where  the  presence  of  females  is 
signiﬁ cantly lower in Bangladesh. The same is 
true for female employment shares in the eight 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

213

FIGURE 5.6   Tanzania and Brazil illustrate how employment patterns by gender change with economic 

growth

Tanzania (low-income country, 

GDP per capita = $439) 

Brazil (upper-middle-income country, 

GDP per capita = $4,399) 

Distribution of women 

Agriculture:

71%

Nonagricultural
activities: 22%

4% 
4%

employer

22% 

self-employed 

26% 

paid employee 

48%

unpaid employee

Distribution of women 

out of 
the labor 

force: 
42% 

 

%
5

 
:

e
r
u
t
l
u
c
i
r
g
a

Nonagricultural

activities:

53%

3% 
3% 

employer
self-employed

77%

paid employee 

17% 

unpaid employee 

%

 
,

 

n
e
m
d
n
a
n
e
m
o
w

 

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
s

%

 
,

 

n
e
m
d
n
a
n
e
m
o
w

 

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
s

100
90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

%

 
,

 

n
e
m
d
n
a
n
e
m
o
w

 

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
s

%

 
,

 

n
e
m
d
n
a
n
e
m
o
w

 

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
s

100
90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

78

22

55

45

agriculture

nonagricultural

activities

women

men

28

72

53

62

47

38

70

30

unpaid
employee

paid

employee

self-

employed

employer

out of the 

labor force: 7% 

44

56

57

43

agriculture

nonagricultural

activities

women

men

20

80

52

48

70

30

70

30

unpaid
employee

paid

employee

self-

employed

employer

women

men

women

men

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on the International Income Distribution Database (I2D2): Tanzania 2006 and Brazil 2005.
Note: GDP per capita in 2009, at constant 2000 US$.

214 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5.7   Industry and occupational segregation patterns are common across countries with very 

different levels of economic development and aggregate sectoral distributions of employment

a.  Industry segregation patterns

b.  Occupational segregation patterns

agriculture, hunting, etc.

communal services 

construction 

(cid:1)nance and
business services

manufacturing 

mining 

public services 

retail, hotels

transport and
telecommunications

Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden
Bangladesh
Mexico 
Sweden

agricultural worker 

member of 
armed forces

ff

clerical worker

manager

production and
related workers

professional 

ff

services worker 

Bangladesh

Mexico

Sweden

Bangladesh

Mexico

Sweden

Bangladesh

Mexico

Sweden

Bangladesh

Mexico

Sweden

Bangladesh

Mexico

Sweden

Bangladesh

Mexico

Sweden

Bangladesh

Mexico

Sweden

0 

20

40
60
percent

80

100

men

women

0

20

40
60
percent

80

100

men

women

Source: International Labour Organization (Bangladesh 2005, Mexico 2008, Sweden 2008).

main occupational groupings, with the largest 
differences  among  clerical  and  service  work-
ers (ﬁ gure 5.7). Others have presented similar 
evidence using information for different sets of 
countries.55

Higher incomes do not always translate into 
less  industry  or  occupation  segregation,  either 
in cross-sectional comparisons or over time. As 
chapter 2 discussed, there is little or no relation-
ship between GDP per capita and standard mea-
sures of (horizontal) segregation despite signiﬁ -
cant  cross-country  differences  in  industry  and 
occupational segregation. In fact, some authors 
have  argued  that  economic  development  may 
add  to  industry  and  occupational  segregation. 
The factors responsible for the overall integra-

tion of women in paid employment (a growing 
service  sector  and  increased  employment  op-
portunities in the wage sector) may also be re-
sponsible for the institutionalization of gender 
in the labor market through the feminization of 
some sectors and occupations.56

As  the  service  sector  grows,  many “female” 
tasks,  such  as  child  care  and  food  service,  are 
incorporated in the market economy. The afﬁ n-
ity of many of these new service sector jobs to 
women’s traditional domestic roles may broaden 
the gender division of labor into the sectoral and 
occupational spheres. Similarly, the presence of 
a  large  wage  sector  increases  the  possibilities 
for sectoral and occupational distinctions. As a 
result,  gender  differences  in  skills,  family  obli-

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

215

gations, and preferences, as well as engendered 
cultural  norms,  are  more  likely  to  manifest  in 
sectoral and occupational divisions than they do 
in  simpler  economies,  where  gender  stratiﬁ ca-
tion is usually along the home-or-market axis.57 
This  argument  is  consistent  with  evidence  of 
higher  segregation  in  high-income  countries 
and among wage workers.58

If not economic development, then what?
Gender segregation in employment that is per-
sistent (over time) and consistent (across coun-
tries) points toward structural causes rooted in 
economic and institutional systems, both formal 
and informal—with much commonality across 
countries at different levels of development and 
in different social settings.

We  argue  that  three  factors—gender  differ-
ences in time use patterns, in access to produc-
tive  inputs,  and  in  the  impacts  of  market  and 
institutional  failures—condition  women’s  and 
men’s  decisions  for  participation  in  market 
work  and  the  choice  of  a  particular  economic 
activity or job.

Gender  differences  in  education  trajecto-
ries also segregate employment, particularly in 
countries with a signiﬁ cant fraction of tertiary-
educated  men  and  women  (see  chapter  3  and 
box 5.6).

Markets  and  institutions  shape  household 
decisions  about  allocating  time  and  other 
pro ductive  resources  and,  in  so  doing,  deter-
mine gender employment outcomes and their 
response  to  economic  development.  Where 
markets  and  institutions  are  aligned  to  pro-
vide consistent signals for change, households 
respond  to  these  signals,  and  there  is  more 
progress  in  reducing  gender  inequalities.  For 
instance,  women  are  more  likely  to  respond 
to an increase in economic opportunities and 
higher wages brought about by trade openness 
when child-care services are available or when 
women’s  partici pation  in  market  work  is  not 
frowned on socially. In contrast, where signiﬁ -
cant  barriers  remain,  signals  are  more  muted 
or even contradictory, and advances are more 
limited.

But the impact of markets and institutions is 
not limited to their effect on incentives and con-
straints for individuals and households. Instead, 
markets  and  institutions,  particularly  market 
and institutional failures, also impinge on inter-

actions between individuals and households in 
the  economic  sphere—be  it  as  consumers  and 
producers  or  as  employees  and  employers—in 
ways  that  produce,  intentionally  and  uninten-
tionally, gender-differentiated outcomes. For ex-
ample, female farmers may have more difﬁ culty 
than male farmers in accessing markets if prices 
and  other  relevant  information  are  communi-
cated and shared through networks that include 
few women.

Our  framework  captures  these  effects  by 
highlighting  that  gender  differences  in  access 
to  economic  opportunities,  and  the  resulting 
segregation in employment, are the product of 
households, markets, and institutions and their 
interactions. Not only can constraints or barri-
ers  in  any  one  of  these  spheres  block  progress 
toward  higher  access  and  less  segregation,  but 
constraints and barriers in different spheres are 
mutually reinforcing (ﬁ gure 5.8). We elaborate 
on these ideas by examining the roles of house-
holds,  markets,  and  institutions  in  determin-
ing time use patterns and access to productive 
inputs,  reviewing  evidence  on  potential  con-
straints and highlighting areas for policy action. 
A more detailed policy discussion is in part 3 of 
the Report.

GENDER, TIME USE, AND 
EMPLOYMENT SEGREGATION

Time is a resource. It can be devoted to produc-
tive  activities,  including  market  work,  other 
(unpaid) work within the household, and child 
care, or it can be invested in personal activities 
(such as eating and sleeping) and leisure.59 This 
section focuses on the relationship between gen-
der differences in time use and employment seg-
regation by gender. The impact of time use pat-
terns  on  a  variety  of  other  (gender)  outcomes 
and, more broadly, on individual and household 
welfare is discussed in other chapters.

Two basic ideas about time and its use shape 
this  discussion  on  time  allocation  within  the 
household.  The  ﬁ rst  is  that  households  need 
to  allocate  a  minimum  amount  of  time  to 
“survival-related”  personal  activities,  such  as 
cooking, sleeping, fetching water, or ensuring a 
minimum amount of consumption. Only after 
these  tasks  are  taken  care  of  can  time  be  de-
voted to other activities (discretionary time).60 

216 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 5.6   The seeds of segregation are planted early—How gender differences in 

education trajectories shape employment segregation

The  education  gap  is  closing,  yet  signifi cant  gaps 
remain  as  women  and  men  continue  to  acquire 
very diff erent types of skills both as part of their for-
mal  education  and  once  in  the  labor  market  (see 
chapter 3). Limited evidence suggests that gender 
diff erences in education trajectories translate into 
gender diff erences in employment and ultimately 
into diff erences in productivity and  earnings.a

In developing countries, where only a limited 
number of people have a college education, it is 
primarily the level of education—and within ter-
tiary  education,  the  type  of  degree—that  can 
have a large impact in employment outcomes. In 
Indonesia,  a  general  secondary  education  and 
high  academic ability increase the probability of 
completing college for both men and women, but 
impact  on  labor  market  outcomes  varies  with 
gender.  A  college  degree  substantially  increases 
the probability of employment for both men and 
women, independent of whether it is a diploma or 
a BA. But for women, it is basically the entry point 
to a wage job in the public sector, while for men it 
appears to open a wider spectrum of employment 
possibilities.b

In developed countries, where levels of educa-
tion and tertiary enrolment rates are high for both 
men and women, gender diff erences in the fi eld of 
study  become  more  important  in  determining 
labor  market  outcomes.  With  women  and  men 
concentrating  in  diff erent  fi elds  of  study,  these 
patterns  immediately  translate  into  occupational 
diff erences  by  gender.  For  example,  information 
on tertiary graduates in 14 developed economies 

shows that 6 percent of males occupy senior man-
agerial positions, but only 3.8 percent of females. 
In contrast, 11 percent of women are employed in 
clerical positions, but only 7 percent of men.c

Occupational segregation persists even when 
comparing men and women with the same fi eld 
of  study,  suggesting  that  gender  diff erences  in 
education  trajectories  are  only  part  of  the  story. 
Of those with a science degree, 55 percent of men 
but only 33 percent of women are in occupations 
related to physics, mathematics, and engineering. 
In contrast, 22 percent of women but only 13 per-
cent of men with these degrees become teachers. 
Similar  diff erences  are  found  for  other  fi elds  of 
study.d

Gender  diff erences  in  innate  ability  or  aca-
demic  performance  cannot  explain  access  to  ter-
tiary education and selection into diff erent educa-
tion  trajectories.  But  gender  diff erences  in  the 
intensity  of  ability  sorting  and  in  preferences  for 
the fi eld of study can. After controlling for relevant 
individual  characteristics,  the  top  male  academic 
performers in developed economies were 10 per-
cent more likely to choose a male-dominated fi eld 
than other males, while the impact of tests scores 
on choice was insignifi cant among top female per-
formers  and  for  female-dominated  and  neutral 
fi elds. Moreover, choosing a demanding or presti-
gious  fi eld  of  study  signifi cantly  increases  the 
probability of enrolling in a male-dominated fi eld 
for  men  but  not  for  women,  and  it  reduces  the 
probability  of  enrolling  in  a  female-dominated 
fi eld for both.e 

a.   Cliﬀ ord 1996; Goldin and Katz 2008; Morris and others 2006; Stevenson 1986; as well as new work commissioned for this Report: Flabbi 

2011; Giles and Kartaadipoetra 2011.

b.  Giles and Kartaadipoetra 2011; World Bank 2010b.
c.  Flabbi 2011.
d.  Ibid.
e.  Ibid.

Gender differences in discretionary time trans-
late into differences in the capacity of women 
and men to engage in all nonsurvival activities, 
including  such  market-oriented  activities  as 
wage employment.

The second idea is that time can complement 
other production inputs, so some activities may 
require  a  minimum  of  time  to  be  sufﬁ ciently 
productive. For example, market-oriented pro-
duction  of  agricultural  products  may  be  prof-
itable only if enough time is available to travel 
back and forth between home and the market 
place.  Similarly,  (formal)  wage  employment 

may require a ﬁ xed schedule as well as a mini-
mum  amount  of  daily  or  weekly  hours  to  be 
committed to a particular activity. In this sense, 
both  the  availability  of  discretionary  time  and 
its amount and predictability may affect the ca-
pacity of different individuals to take on speciﬁ c 
types of activities.

The  discussion  focuses  on  gender  differ-
ences  in  time  allocated  to  three  main  catego-
ries  of  productive  activities:  housework,  care 
(of both children and elderly), and market or 
paid  work.  Housework  includes  reproductive 
activities  for  which  substitute  markets  could 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

217

FIGURE 5.8   Access to economic opportunities and the resulting segregation in employment are the 

product of households, markets, and institutions, and their interactions

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

G

R

O

W

T

H

Source: WDR 2012 team.

potentially  exist  (cooking,  fetching  water), 
while  market  work  includes  paid  and  unpaid 
work devoted to the production of goods sold 
in  the  market.  Information  on  a  fourth  cat-
egory (survival-related and personal activities, 
including  eating  and  drinking,  personal  care, 
sleep,  education,  leisure,  and  participation  in 
community  and  social  activities)  is  available 
in the data. But given that no signiﬁ cant gen-
der  or  cross-country  differences  exist  in  time 
allocations to these activities, we exclude them 
from the discussion (box 5.7).

First comes love, then comes marriage, 
then comes baby sitting in a carriage
Signiﬁ cant and systematic gender differences in 
time use can be characterized by three stylized 
facts. First, women work more than men once 
all  productive  (housework,  care,  and  market) 
activities  are  taken  into  account.61  This  con-

clusion  is  corroborated  by  data  from  country 
studies.62

Second,  women  bear  the  brunt  of  house-
work and care while men are mostly responsible 
for market work, although the degree of special-
ization varies across countries. In all developed 
and developing countries in the sample, women 
devote more time than men to housework and 
child care, with differences ranging from about 
50  percent  more  in  Cambodia  and  Sweden  to 
about  three  times  more  in  Italy  and  six  times 
more  in  Iraq.63  But  in  no  country  do  women 
invest as many hours as men in market work.64 
In Sweden, women spend about 70 percent of 
the time men spend on market activities, while 
in  Pakistan  this  proportion  is  around  one-
eighth (ﬁ gure 5.9). Similar patterns have been 
documented  by  others  for  other  middle-  and 
low-income countries, as well as for the United 
States.65 

218 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 5.7   Overview of data used in analyzing gender 

differences in time use patterns

Time use data provide a detailed account of the time devoted to diff erent activi-
ties and tasks during a particular period of time—usually a day (24 hours) or a 
week.  Collecting  such  information  requires  individuals  to  record  the  time 
devoted to a large number of activities during the period covered by the survey. 
The number and nature of activities and the instruments for recording the infor-
mation vary across countries and surveys, so cross-country comparisons often 
require some standardization.

This Report uses data from 23 countries collected between 1998 and 2009. 
Information  for  11  countries  comes  from  the  Multinational  Time  Use  Study 
(MTUS). To this are added data for 12 more countries (primarily developing) to 
ensure adequate regional coverage. These data come from country-level sur-
veys and have been standardized to make them comparable with those from 
the MTUS. Activities have been grouped into four aggregate categories (house-
work;  care  of  children,  the  sick,  and  the  elderly;  market  work;  and  survival-
related  or  personal  activities),  and  time  allocations  have  been  expressed  in 
hours per day. Data refer to individuals ages 15 and older, with information in 
some countries restricted to ages 18–65.

Most surveys also provide data on individual and household characteristics, 
although the same characteristics are not included in all surveys (Berniell and 
Sanchez-Páramo provide information on the main variables used for the analy-
sis  and  their  availability).  For  instance,  information  on  household  income  is 
available only in 18 of the 23 countries. Where required information is missing, 
the sample is restricted to only those countries with available data. In addition, 
in 6 countries time use information is available only for one person per house-
hold, so the analysis could only be performed at the individual level.

Finally, aggregate time use data are also available for Argentina, Armenia, 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Estonia, Finland, India, Israel, Japan, Lithu-
ania,  Poland,  Sweden,  Turkey,  and  West  Bank  and  Gaza.  This  information  is 
combined with that from the household surveys when providing country aver-
ages and performing aggregate country comparisons.

Source: Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b.

Third, gender differences in time use patterns 
are primarily driven by family formation. Mar-
riage signiﬁ cantly increases the time devoted to 
housework for women but not for men. In most 
countries,  married  women  spend  at  least  one 
hour a day, or 30 percent, more on housework 
than their single counterparts, after controlling 
for  relevant  individual  and  household  charac-
teristics. Similarly, the presence of children, par-
ticularly  small  children,  signiﬁ cantly  increases 
the  amount  of  care  by  both  men  and  women, 
but more for women. The presence of children 
under 5 years of age is associated with an addi-
tional 1.0–2.8 hours of care a day depending on 
the country, while the presence of older children 
(5–17)  increases  care  by  an  additional  0.1–1.0 
hours a day. Equivalent changes for men range 
from 0.1 to 1.0 hour a day for small children and 
from 0 to 0.5 hours a day for older children. As a 
reference, single women spend an average of 30 

minutes a day, and single men 6 minutes a day, 
in care activities.66

Smaller but signiﬁ cant differences among 
the well-off and educated
For couples, female and male time use converges 
as  income  and  education  increase,  although 
overall differences persist even among the well-
off and educated. Average gender differences in 
hours devoted to housework decline as couples 
get richer and more educated, but half to two-
thirds  of  the  difference  remains  unexplained, 
depending on the country.67

Convergence  implies  different  things  across 
activities and for men and women. Convergence 
in  housework  and,  in  most  cases,  care  work  is 
driven primarily by a decline in hours devoted to 
these tasks by women, rather than an increase in 
hours among men. In addition, the convergence 
is stronger for market work than for housework 
and care work (ﬁ gure 5.10). Even when women 
contribute  a  substantial  fraction  of  total  mar-
ket work (horizontal axis), they continue to be 
largely responsible for housework and care work 
(vertical  axis).  And  although  men’s  contribu-
tion  to  housework  and  care  work  is  generally 
larger in France than in Ghana (increasing with 
income),  for  most  couples  in  both  countries, 
women contribute more than 40 percent of the 
time  devoted  to  these  activities  (more  than  50 
percent  for  care)  irrespective  of  their  employ-
ment status.68

And, in the end, gender trumps money. For 
instance,  women  in  the  United  States  reduce 
their housework as their relative contribution to 
total household income increases, to the point 
where  both  spouses  contribute  equally,  and 
increase  it  again  afterward.69  In  other  words, 
couples that deviate from the normative income 
standard (men make more money than women) 
seem to compensate with a more traditional di-
vision of housework. Perhaps it is more accept-
able  for  women  to  adopt  masculine  behavior, 
such  as  working  for  pay,  than  it  is  for  men  to 
adopt feminine behavior, such as doing house-
work and care work.70 So, allocating more time 
to market work generally comes at the price of 
higher total workloads for women.71

Interestingly,  qualitative  information  from 
focus groups interviews with men and women 
conﬁ rms that gender roles for care, housework, 
and main earner responsibilities are deeply en-
trenched around the world. When asked about 
what  they  and  their  partners  do  during  the 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

219

day,  women  accurately  report  that  men  are 
mainly  working  outside  the  home  and  men 
accurately  report  that  women  are  mainly  de-
voted to care and housework. In contrast, both 
groups  have  relatively  distorted  views  about 
less traditional activities undertaken by the op-
posite sex (box 5.8).

What happens in the home does not stay 
in the home
Gender differences in time use imply that women 
face important ﬁ xed costs associated with mar-
ket work and thus are more likely to value ﬂ ex-
ible  work  arrangements  and  to  supply  fewer 
hours  of  market  work  than  men.  High  ﬁ xed 
costs of market work result from ﬁ xed schedules 
and minimum hour requirements, particularly 
in (formal) wage jobs, and the subsequent need 
to adjust the organization of other activities for 
which women are mainly responsible. They also 
reﬂ ect women’s limited capacity to prevent total 
workloads from increasing as they engage more 
in market work.

Indeed,  women  working  as  paid  wage  em-
ployees  face  higher  adjustment  costs  in  the 
changes  required  in  time  allocated  to  house-
work than women employed as unpaid workers 
or self-employed. Men do not. Moreover, hus-
bands’ time in housework is signiﬁ cantly higher 
when  their  wives  are  employed  as  paid  wage 
workers than when they are unpaid workers or 
self-employed. So, larger intrahousehold adjust-
ments in time allocations are needed for women 
to take on paid wage employment.72

For women looking to do market work, the 
need  to  continue  to  attend  to  housework  and 
care work often implies that jobs offering ﬂ ex-
ibility  or  allowing  for  easy  entry  into  and  exit 
from the labor market are particularly attractive. 
These choices are sometimes associated with a 
potential risk of channeling women into lower-
quality jobs and weakening their labor market 
attachment.

“

Breeding [and] growing fruits, 
vegetables, and cereals are the best 
ways to make a living because we can 
do it not far from our home and still 
earn some money.

Young woman, rural Moldova

”

FIGURE 5.9     Women bear the brunt of housework and care 

while men are mostly responsible for market work

Iraq
Pakistan
Armenia
Timor-Leste
Costa Rica
Guatemala
Italy
Israel
Mexico
Austria
Spain
South Africa
Germany
India
Poland
Netherlands
Uruguay
United Kingdom
France
Belgium
Kyrgyz Republic
Norway
Canada
United States
Finland
Latvia
Sweden
Estonia
Slovenia
Cambodia

10%

11%

25%

26%

26%

28%

31%

31%

31%

32%

33%

35%

36%

36%

36%

36%
36%

37%

38%

38%

39%

39%

40%

40%

41%

41%

41%

41%

41%

42%

71%

72%

86%

84%

81%

86%

77%

75%

74%

74%

75%

81%

71%

64%

74%

67%

64%

65%

65%

63%

77%

61%

62%

61%

63%

67%

59%

65%

64%

60%

0

50

100

women’s share of total time spent by men and women

market activities

housework
and care

gender parity

Market Activities

Housework

Child Care

3.2

4.6

3.2

2.3

0.6

0.3

Sweden

Pakistan

0.6

4.7

5.5

2.5

1.2

0.2

Women
Men

= 12 hours

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on time use surveys.

220 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5.10   Convergence in gender time use patterns is stronger for market work than for housework 

and care work

Ghana 

100

%

 
,

 

l

e
p
u
o
c
e
h
t
 
y
b
e
m
o
h
e
h
t
 
n

 

 

50

i

0

0

In Ghana, a wife does

more than 80% of

household work, even
when she brings home

all the income

50

100

women’s share in market hours

worked by the couple, %

d
e
k
r
o
w
 
s
r
u
o
h
n

 

i
 

e
r
a
h
s
 
s
’
n
e
m
o
w

Mexico 

France 

d
e
k
r
o
w
 
s
r
u
o
h
n

 

i
 

e
r
a
h
s
 
s
’
n
e
m
o
w

100

%

 
,

 

l

e
p
u
o
c
e
h
t
 
y
b
e
m
o
h
e
h
t
 
n

 

 

50

i

0

0

50

100

women’s share in market hours

worked by the couple, %

d
e
k
r
o
w
 
s
r
u
o
h
n

 

i
 

e
r
a
h
s
 
s
’
n
e
m
o
w

100

%

 
,

 

l

e
p
u
o
c
e
h
t
 
y
b
e
m
o
h
e
h
t
 
n

 

 

50

i

0

0

In France, a wife

provides 50% of care
at home, even when

she brings home
all the income

50

100

women’s share in market hours

worked by the couple, %

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on France time use survey 1998, Ghana LSMS 2005, and Mexico time use survey 2009.

household maintenance

care of members of the household

In  high-income  countries,  ﬂ exible  work  ar-
rangements are normally equated with part-time 
formal employment. In Austria, Germany, Swit-
zerland, and the United Kingdom, the percentage 
of women who work part time because of family 
responsibilities is quite high, above 40 percent.73 
Yet  while  part-time  work  might  allow  women 
to combine employment with care, it could also 
trap them in lower-quality jobs.74 Evidence from 
Europe and the United States shows that, even if 
having children causes women to take part-time 
work  temporarily,  part-time  experiences  often 
reduce the probability of full-time employment 
because only a few women can use part time as a 
bridge back into full employment.75 In addition, 
in  most  developed  countries  temporary  part-
time work is penalized, with women who move 
back into full-time work receiving lower hourly 
wage rates for similar work and lower long-term 
wage growth, although the size of these penalties 
varies widely across countries.76 

Career interruptions to care for young chil-
dren are a second way women have tried to make 
their roles as wage earners and mothers compat-
ible. As discussed earlier, these interruptions re-
sult in less actual experience among women and 
ultimately lead to lower wages and wage growth, 
even after these women return to work.77 This 
“mommy-trap”  makes  it  clear  that  women’s 

dual  role  as  workers  and  mothers  places  them 
on a career path different from men’s.

In  developing  countries,  where  formal 
wage employment is a smaller fraction of total 
employment,  ﬂ exibility  generally  takes  other 
forms—particularly, self-employment and in-
formality. In eight countries with information 
on  employment  status,  women  with  heavier 
housework  loads  are  more  likely  to  be  em-
ployed  under  more  ﬂ exible  working  arrange-
ments,  self-employment  and  unpaid  family 
employment. The same is true for care work. In 
some countries, men exhibit similar behaviors, 
but the results are more mixed.78

Gender differences in time use and care can 
also  translate  into  differences  in  labor  market 
transitions  and  labor  market  attachments  for 
men  and  women.  In Argentina,  Brazil,  Ghana, 
Mexico,  Serbia,  and  Thailand,  women  spend 
substantially longer out of the labor force, tran-
sition  less  often  into  formal  employment,  and 
are more likely to move between inactivity and 
informal self-employment.79 These gender dif-
ferences  are  caused  largely  by  household  for-
mation.  Marrying  and  having  children  is  gen-
erally  associated  with  less  formal  employment 
and  more  self-employment.  In  contrast,  single 
women (including those with children) are far 
more  similar  to  men  in  transitions,  and  those 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

221

BOX 5.8   What did you do all day? Perceptions on time use patterns of the opposite sex

Young women and men in 18 developing countries were asked to 
report on their own time use patterns and those of the opposite sex 
as part of the Report’s Gender Qualitative Assessment.

In  all  18  countries,  both  groups  reported  that  women  do  the 
bulk of care and housework, while men devote more time to market 
work. When all work activities are combined, women bear heavier 
burdens than men. This is consistent with the time use survey data.
But agreement in reporting stops there. When asked about the 
opposite sex, women signifi cantly underestimate the time that men 
devote  to  “female”  activities  (care  and  housework)—on  average, 
women  thought  men  spend  0.96  hours  a  day  on  these  activities, 

compared with men’s report of 2.04 hours a day, a 113 percent dif-
ference. And men signifi cantly underestimate the time that women 
devote  to  “male”  activities—on  average,  men  thought  women 
devote 1.65 hours a day to market work, compared with women’s 
report of 2.24 hours a day, a 47 percent diff erence. Both groups also 
tend to overestimate how much leisure the opposite gender enjoys, 
with diff erences being higher for men’s leisure (box fi gure 5.8.1). 

These  diff erences  in  perceptions  are  observed  in  both  urban 
and rural areas and across most countries, although the magnitude 
of  the  diff erence  between  self-reports  and  perceptions  by  the 
opposite sex vary across countries.

BOX FIGURE 5.8.1   Underestimating the amounts of time the opposite sex spends on nontraditional male/female activities and leisure

 

y
a
d
 
r
e
p
 
s
r
u
o
h

10 

8 

6 

4 

2 

0 

Housework and care 

Market activities 

Free time 
9.53 

7.11 

6.44 

7.34 

5.07 

4.96 

4.65 

4.04 

2.04 

2.42 

1.65 

0.96 

women’s 
report 

men’s 

perceptions 

women’s 

perceptions 

men’s 
report 

women’s 
report 

men’s 

perceptions 

women’s 

perceptions 

men’s 
report 

women’s 
report 

men’s 

perceptions 

women’s 

perceptions 

men’s 
report 

hours spent 
by women 

hours spent 

by men 

hours spent 
by women 

hours spent 

by men 

hours spent 
by women 

hours spent 

by men 

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: A Multi-Country Assessment” (dataset).
Note: Focus groups were conducted in Afghanistan, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Dominican Republic, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Liberia, Moldova, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Serbia, 
South Africa, Tanzania, Vietnam, West Bank and Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen. 

without children are generally overrepresented 
in the formal sector (ﬁ gure 5.11). 

Even when women have time available, their 
decision  (and  possibly  capacity)  to  allocate 
it  to  market  work  is  in  many  cases  subject  to 
the  labor  needs  of  (family)  businesses  run  by 
their  husbands  or  other  household  members. 
In Indonesia, women whose husbands are self-
employed are signiﬁ cantly more likely to be un-
paid  workers  than  those  whose  husbands  are 
wage  employees.80  To  the  extent  that  unpaid 
workers in a family business are less likely to re-
ceive an autonomous income, they could have 
less control over household resources and ulti-
mately less agency (see chapter 4).

Finally, women’s weaker labor market attach-
ment and less control over resources over their 
working  lifetime  translates  into  greater  eco-
nomic insecurity, less economic independence, 
and  lower  access  to  pensions  and  other  safety 
nets (see box 4.1 in chapter 4).

Lifting time constraints: Markets, formal 
institutions, and social norms and 
preferences 
Gender differences in time use for a couple or 
household result from differences in men’s and 
women’s productivity in house, care, and mar-
ket work and in their ability to substitute mar-
ket inputs for home time. Factors that increase 

222 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5.11   In Mexico and Thailand, married women are 

more likely to move between inactivity and 
informal self-employment than men and single 
women 

l

t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
-
f
l
e
s

l

t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
-
f
l
e
s

7%

)

9%

a. Thailand

16%

18%

27%

24%

5%

3%

11%
10%

12%

b. Mexico

29%

20%

"

13%

15%

11%

40%

44%4

5%

6%

#

e
c
r
o
f

r
o
b
a
l
 

e
h
t
 
f
o
 
t
u
o

e
c
r
o
f
 
r
o
b
a
l
 

e
h
t
 
f
o
 
t
u
o

woman, single without children
woman, single with children
woman, married without children
woman, married with children
man

Source: Bosch and Maloney 2010.

women’s productivity in home production or 
in the paid sector, or that decrease their transi-
tion costs to market work, are likely to lead to a 
reallocation of their time to market work, away 
from other activities. At the same time, the ex-
tent  to  which  women  are  able  and  willing  to 
reassign time to market activities is a function 
of  existing  institutional  constraints,  such  as 
the  availability  of  ﬂ exible  (formal)  working 
arrangements,  social  norms  regarding  wom-
en’s  role  as  economic  agents,  and  individual 
preferences. 

Time and markets: The impacts of returns to 
market work and of child care 
Women’s capacity to respond to stronger eco-
nomic  incentives  to  participate  in  different 
market-oriented  activities  depends  on  labor 
markets.  When  labor  markets  function  well, 
household  labor  needs  can  be  met  through 

hiring  labor  rather  than  reorganizing  house-
hold resources. For instance, a rural household 
in need of extra hands during the harvest can 
hire additional laborers in the local labor mar-
ket, while other household members continue 
to work in the family business or a wage sector 
job where their productivity and earnings may 
be higher.81 The opposite is true when house-
holds cannot hire sufﬁ cient labor in the mar-
ket. Nonfarm rural family enterprises in Ban-
gladesh, Ethiopia, and Indonesia depend highly 
on  the  household’s  labor  supply,  so  decisions 
for the allocation of labor of various household 
members  depend  on  the  enterprise’s  demand 
for such labor.82

Women’s responses will also depend on their 
ability to reduce the time devoted to housework 
and  particularly  care—either  by  contracting 
those  responsibilities  out  through  markets  or 
reassigning responsibilities in the household.

Access to (subsidized) child (and elderly) care 
is  associated  with  increases  in  the  number  of 
hours worked and, in developing countries, par-
ticipation in formal employment among female 
workers, suggesting that better access to formal 
child care affords women greater ﬂ exibility and 
potentially allows them to seek employment in 
the formal sector.83 But where care options are 
not available, the opposite is true. In Botswana, 
Guatemala,  Mexico,  and  Vietnam,  the  lack  of 
child care pushes mothers from formal into in-
formal employment.84

Take-up  rates  of  child-  (and  elderly-)  care 
services  can  be  muted,  however,  when  prices 
are high. For instance, high child-care costs are 
a disincentive to work in the United States, par-
ticularly  among  less  educated  women,  and  in 
Guatemala.85 

Affordable child care is especially important 
in poor countries and among poor households, 
where, in the absence of such services, women 
are  likely  to  take  their  children  to  work  or  to 
leave them in the care of other household mem-
bers.  In  Pakistan,  Peru,  and  10  African  coun-
tries, 40 percent of working mothers take their 
children to work. Or older siblings, particularly 
older girls, act as caretakers when mothers work 
outside the home.86 

Time and formal institutions: Basic service 
delivery and ﬂ exible working arrangements
Institutions can also affect time use by changing 
the relative productivity of men and women in 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

223

unpaid and paid work and by reducing transac-
tion costs associated with market work.

In the 20th century, electriﬁ cation and run-
ning  water  in  developed  countries  enabled 
families to produce housework at lower cost.87 
But higher productivity in the home had only a 
muted impact on time use and thus on women’s 
supply  of  market  work.88  Rather  than  reduce 
the time devoted to housework, the time-saving 
innovations  changed  the  composition  of  that 
work,  with  less  time  spent  on  preparing  food 
and  more  on  shopping  and  managing  family 
tasks.89 And while increases in female participa-
tion  in  market  work  in  the  second  half  of  the 
century  were  related  to  higher  appliance  own-
ership,90 the decline in women’s housework was 
offset by a rise in housework by other household 
members—so the total time devoted to house-
work increased slightly.91 

The  overall  impact  of  water  and  electricity 
on women’s time allocation to market work in 
developing countries is also unclear. For water, 
the number of studies is small, and results ap-
pear to depend on the speciﬁ c intervention and 
context.92 More conclusive evidence is available 
for  the  impact  of  access  to  electricity  on  time 
spent in market work, perhaps because electric-
ity can reduce the time allocated to housework 
and complement market-oriented activities.93

In  contrast,  investments  in  transportation 
can increase women’s access to economic oppor-
tunities by reducing travel time and increasing 
mobility (see chapter 4).94 Given their multiple 
responsibilities,  women  often  choose  jobs  on 
the basis of distance and ease of travel, choices 
that tie them to local work options. These limi-
tations are particularly severe for poor women, 
who  often  reside  in  more  marginal  neighbor-
hoods  where  most  available  jobs  are  informal 
and low in productivity.

Investments in transport can thus have large 
payoffs.  In  rural  Peru,  77  percent  of  surveyed 
women  reported  that  the  availability  of  reha-
bilitated roads and tracks enabled them to travel 
farther, 67 percent reported that they could travel 
more safely, and 43 percent reported that they 
could  obtain  more  income.95  In  Bangladesh, 
better rural roads led to a 49 percent increase in 
male labor supply and a 51 percent increase in 
female labor supply.96

Making part-time work possible is one in-
stitutional change that can reduce the transac-
tion costs of market work to women, increas-

ing their productivity in the market sector and 
raising their time allocation to paid work. Yet 
in  many  countries,  part-time  work  is  not  le-
gally recognized. And even in countries where 
it  is  available,  the  vast  majority  of  job  open-
ings  in  the  formal  sector  are  in  full-time  po-
sitions. Because women tend to be dispropor-
tionally  responsible  for  housework,  and  thus 
have less time for other activities, the limited 
or  nonavailability  of  reduced-hour  employ-
ment diminishes their ability to participate in 
the formal sector and increases the probability 
that they work in the informal sector. Evidence 
regarding  the  impact  of  the  greater  availabil-
ity of day care on employment outcomes sup-
ports this link between the availability of part-
time work and female participation in formal 
employment.

In developed countries, there is a strong re-
lationship  between  household  formation  and 
part-time  work.97  In  the  United  Kingdom, 
single  women  without  children  are  6  percent 
more likely than single men without children to 
hold a part-time job, but the likelihood rises to 
24 percent for those married without children 
and to 50 percent for those married with small 
children. In developing countries, the evidence 
is more limited, primarily because of the high 
incidence  of  informal  employment.  But  for 
multinational corporations in India and South 
Africa,  employee  demand  for  ﬂ exible  work 
schedules is high, comparable to that in Spain, 
the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States.98 
Less  clear  is  whether  and  how  companies  re-
spond to this demand.

In Argentina, both female labor force partic-
ipation and employment in the formal sector 
increased with part-time contracts, and female 
formal employment grew more in sectors with 
more  part-timers.  Married  women  with  chil-
dren  increased  their  participation  in  formal 
employment 9 percent and reduced their self-
employment  7  percent,  compared  with  mar-
ried women without children. That is equiva-
lent to a fall in female informality of about 4–5 
percent.99

That said, part-time and ﬂ exible work often 
do  carry  a  penalty  in  lower  wages,  fewer  pro-
motions,  and  a  lower  probability  of  full-time 
employment  after  a  part-time  spell.  So,  while 
part-time  and  ﬂ exible  employment  should  be 
available, part-time work should not be used in 
ways that reinforce existing employment segre-

224 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

gation and ultimately reinforce gender roles for 
care  responsibilities.  Companies  that  have  in-
creased female participation in their workforce, 
as well as in management and the boardroom, 
can offer insights on ways to avoid employment 
segregation (see box 8.8 in chapter 8).

Time and informal institutions: Preferences 
and social norms
Social  norms  about  gender  roles  in  the  eco-
nomic  sphere  also  inﬂ uence  women’s  employ-
ment  outcomes.  Traditional  views  and  values 
about women’s participation in market work are 
associated with lower female employment (and 
higher gender wage gaps) the world over.100 But 
the impact is mediated by the status of individ-
uals in the family—fathers, mothers, daughters, 
daughters-in-law,  and  so  on—and  by  house-
hold  structure.  In  India,  daughters-in-law  face 
a  higher  work  burden  than  daughters.101  In 
Mexico, time use and time allocation to market 
work for single mothers are similar to those for 
male heads.102 

Individual preferences for women’s roles as 
wives, mothers, and economic agents also affect 
women’s  decision  to  allocate  time  to  market 
work.  In  particular,  traditional  personal  views 
of  women’s  roles  as  mothers  and  caretakers, 
measured  as  the  degree  of  disagreement  with 
the statement “A working mother can establish 
just as warm and secure a relationship with her 
children as a mother who does not work,” have 
signiﬁ cant and negative effects on the time al-
located to paid work.103

Preferences also affect the choice to work a re-
duced (part-time) schedule, although this is true 
mainly in rich countries. In Australia, the Neth-
erlands, and the United Kingdom, married and 
partnered women in part-time work have high 
levels of job satisfaction, a low desire to change 
their working hours, and partnerships in which 
household production is highly gendered.104 In 
contrast, many women in Honduras would pre-
fer to hold a full-time job but instead work part-
time because of low labor demand.105

Recent studies of the intergenerational trans-
mission of attitudes and views have found that 
a  mother’s  position  in  the  household  and  her 
ability  to  make  her  own  decisions  regarding 
economic participation play an important role 
in the dynamics of social norms.106

Changes in norms and preferences are likely 
to be slow initially and to accelerate as demon-

stration  effects  become  stronger.107  Take  part-
time work among male employees in the Neth-
erlands. It was dominated by women until very 
recently, when a few men in relatively high pro-
fessional  positions  started  experimenting  with 
“daddy Fridays.” Acceptance of this new regime 
was slow at ﬁ rst, but once an example was set, 
part-time rates among male workers grew rap-
idly  to  almost  25  percent.  The  changes  were 
faster in companies where one or more males in 
managerial positions adopted this ﬂ exible sched-
ule early on, highlighting the demonstration ef-
fects.108 The question is whether these relatively 
organic learning processes can then be fostered 
or accelerated through policy interventions that 
generate incentives for experimentation in ways 
that overcome existing constraints to the alloca-
tion of time between market and nonmarket ac-
tivities by men and women.

GENDER DIFFERENCES IN ACCESS 
TO PRODUCTIVE INPUTS AND 
EMPLOYMENT SEGREGATION 

Productive  inputs  determine  the  scale  of  pro-
duction, investment, and growth. Farmers de-
pend  on  land,  labor,  water,  seeds,  fertilizer, 
pesticides, machinery, and other inputs to pro-
duce crops.109 Entrepreneurs require labor and, 
depending on the business’s size and sector of 
operation, capital. Access to credit is crucial for 
farmers and entrepreneurs. The discussion here 
focuses on gender differences in access to land 
and credit based on the belief that they deter-
mine  both  the  access  to  other  inputs  and  the 
scale and mode of production. It would be best 
to  compare  individual  farmers  and  entrepre-
neurs, but data constraints often limit the com-
parisons  to  female-headed  and  male-headed 
households engaged in farming and to female 
and male entrepreneurs (box 5.9).

Gender differences in access to and use of 
land and credit 
Female farmers and entrepreneurs have less ac-
cess  to  land  and  credit  than  their  male  coun-
terparts.  Whether  access  to  land  is  measured 
as  ownership  or  as  the  ability  to  operate  land, 
gender  differences  persist.  Similarly,  both  the 
demand for and use of credit are lower among 
female farmers and entrepreneurs than among 
their male counterparts.

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

225

BOX 5.9   Gender of the household head versus household composition: What 

matters most for policy?

Asset  ownership  and  use  are  often  measured  for 
the  household  rather  than  the  individual.  As  a 
result,  the  analysis  of  gender  diff erences  in  the 
access to and use of land relies mostly on compari-
sons  of  female-headed  and  male-headed  house-
holds  rather  than  on  comparisons  of  individual 
female farmers and male farmers.

But comparisons of female- and male-headed 
households  can  exaggerate  gender  diff erences, 
because  they  fail  to  account  for  the  number  of 
working-age adults in the household and the num-
ber of dependents. Households with a low ratio of 
dependents to working-age adults are better able 

to generate income than those with a high depen-
dency ratio. To account for this fact, we distinguish 
between female-headed households where one or 
more men of working age are present and female-
headed households where no man of working age 
is present (working age is 15–59 years).

Perhaps  not  surprisingly, 

female-headed 
house  holds with a male present often fare better 
than those with no male—and, in some cases, do 
as  well  as  male-headed  households.  This  fi nding 
suggests  that  a  more  nuanced  categorization  of 
rural households may be relevant for policy design 
and targeting.

Source: WDR 2012 team.

On  average,  female-headed  households  are 
less likely to own and operate land than male-
headed households. For 16 countries in ﬁ ve de-
veloping  regions,  55  percent  of  female-headed 
households  own  land,  compared  with  64  per-
cent of male-headed households. The ﬁ gure for 
female-headed  households  where  a  working-
age male is present is 61 percent. Female-headed 
households  are  also  less  likely  to  operate  land 
than  their  male  counterparts—on  average,  83 
percent  of  female-headed  households  operate 
land  in  these  16  countries  (86  percent  among 
those  with  male  presence),  compared  with  89 
percent among male-headed households (ﬁ gure 
5.12).  More  generally,  where  evidence  is  avail-
able  for  all  farmers,  women  seldom  own  the 
land they operate. In Latin America, male farm-
ers represent 70–90 percent of formal owners of 
farmland depending on the country.110

Female-headed households own and operate 
smaller plots than male-headed households. In 
particular, land holdings among female-headed 
households in the data cited in ﬁ gure 5.13 are 
22  percent  smaller  than  those  of  male-headed 
households. The differences for female-headed 
households with a male presence are 21 percent 
for  owned  plots  and  26  percent  for  operated 

plots.111 In Benin, the average size of women’s 
holdings is 1 hectare, compared with 2 hectares 
for  men’s.112  In  Burkina  Faso,  male-controlled 
plots  are  on  average  eight  times  larger  than 
female-controlled  plots.113  And  in  four  other 
African countries, the average area cultivated by 
women ranges from one-third to two-thirds of 
the  average  area  cultivated  by  men.114  Similar 
evidence comes from Latin America.115

Even  when  women  do  have  access  to  land, 
they  suffer  greater  land  tenure  insecurity.  In 
much  of  the  developing  world,  women’s  land 
rights are signiﬁ cantly circumscribed, if not in 
principle, then in practice (see chapter 4).116

Signiﬁ cant  gender  differences  also  exist  in 
access  to  and  use  of  credit,  particularly  formal 
credit.117  Female-headed  households  in  the 
World Bank/Food and Agriculture Organization 
data are less likely to have received credit in the 
past  12  months  than  male-headed  households 
(24  percent,  compared  with  28  percent),  with 
smaller gaps for female-headed households with 
at  least  one  male  of  working  age  (26  percent) 
(ﬁ gure 5.13).118

In addition, businesses managed by women 
are less likely to receive a loan than ﬁ rms man-
aged by men, although the differences narrow 

“

There are no resources for women to turn to for loans and also there is not any kind of 
support and assistance for women.

Adult woman, rural Afghanistan

”

226 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5.12   Female-headed households are less likely to own and operate land than male-headed 

households 

Land ownership among 
rural households

Land operation among 
rural households

Albania

Bangladesh

Bolivia

Bulgaria

Ghana

Guatemala

Indonesia

Kenya

Malawi

Nepal

Nicaragua

Nigeria

Pakistan

Panama

Tajikistan

Vietnam

0

10

20

30

50

40
60
% owning land

70

80

90

100

0

10

20

30

50

40
60
% operating land

70

80

90

100

female head of household (no male) 

female head of household, with at least one 
working age (15–59) male 

male head of household 

Source: World Bank/Food and Agriculture Organization database, most recent year available.

with  ﬁ rm  size  and  are  smaller  among  formal 
businesses.119 In Guatemala, 14 percent of self-
employed men have access to credit, compared 
with  7  percent  of  self-employed  women;  the 
numbers  among  male  and  female  entrepre-
neurs with 2–4 employees are 19 percent and 
9.8  percent,  respectively;  and  18  percent  and 
16.5 percent, respectively among entrepreneurs 
with  ﬁ ve  or  more  employees.120  Among  for-
mal ﬁ rms in Africa, female entrepreneurs have 
about  the  same  access  to  credit  as  their  male 
counterparts.121

Data  on  access  need  to  be  interpreted  with 
caution,  however,  because  they  could  reﬂ ect 
both gender differences in the demand for credit 
as well as differential gender access to and treat-
ment  by  ﬁ nancial  institutions.  Female  entre-
preneurs are less likely to have ever applied for 
loans than male entrepreneurs.122 And when ap-
plying, they are more likely to borrow from ro-
tating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs) 

and microﬁ nance institutions123 and to be more 
credit-constrained than men.124

Undoubtedly,  the  rapid  growth  of  microﬁ -
nance  has  alleviated  credit  constraints  among 
women.  In  2007,  microﬁ nance  organizations 
reached  154.8  million  clients,  106.6  million 
among  the  poorest  when  they  took  their  ﬁ rst 
loan, 83.4 percent of them women.125 It is not 
clear, however, how much microﬁ nance has in-
creased  access  to  formal  ﬁ nancial  services  (by, 
say, helping individuals build a credit record), or 
whether, given the small size of the loans, it has 
lifted constraints for women who want to bor-
row slightly larger amounts.126

How gender differences in access to land 
and credit affect segregation in agriculture 
and entrepreneurship
Gender differences in access to land and credit 
are likely to translate into gender differences in 
production.  First,  the  willingness  and  capacity 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

227

FIGURE 5.13   Female-headed house-
holds in rural areas are 
less likely than male-
headed households to 
have received credit in 
the last 12 months

Household access to credit in rural areas

Indonesia

Vietnam

Nepal

Malawi

Bulgaria

Guatemala

Panama

Ghana

0

30

40

50

20

10
% receiving credit in last year

60

70 80

female head of 
household (no male)

male head of
household

female head of household, with at least one 
working age (15–59) male

Source: World Bank/Food and Agriculture Organization database, 
most recent year available.

to use additional production inputs are affected 
by these resources. Second, access to markets, in-
vestment decisions, and growth potential reﬂ ect, 
to some extent, existing constraints on farmers 
or business owners, as well as their capacity to 
overcome  them.  In  other  words,  gender  dif-
ferences  in  access  to  land  and  credit  affect  the 
relative ability of female and male farmers and 
entrepreneurs  to  invest,  operate  to  scale,  and 
beneﬁ t from new economic opportunities. 

The  combination  of  small  plots,  insecure 
land rights, and binding credit constraints limits 
female farmers’ ability to use agricultural inputs 
and technology. Women have lower access than 
men to agricultural inputs, including fertilizer, 
pesticides,  and  improved  seed  varieties.127  In 
all  countries  in  our  database,  female-headed 
households  are  less  likely  to  use  fertilizer  than 
male-headed households, with differences rang-
ing from 25 percentage points in Pakistan to 2 
percentage points in Nicaragua.128 The same is 
true  for  mechanization—the  use  of  ploughs, 
tractors,  water  pumps,  and  other  agricultural 

machinery.  The  gap  in  rates  of  machinery  use 
between  female-  and  male-headed  households 
ranges  from  almost  20  percentage  points  in 
Guatemala  and  Nicaragua  to  less  than  1  per-
centage point in Indonesia and Tajikistan, with 
the gap in most countries 5 percentage points or 
more (ﬁ gure 5.14). 

Land size and, more generally, the capacity to 
produce at scale determine input use and mech-
anization.129  So,  women  suffer  disproportion-
ately from indivisibilities in the use of inputs and 
machinery because they cultivate smaller plots 
and thus are more likely than men to experience 
higher unit costs. Credit (and cash) constraints 
are also important. One of the most prominent 
barriers to the use of fertilizer is capital. Simi-
larly, the large ﬁ nancial outlays for mechaniza-
tion suggest that credit constraints explain some 
of the gender differences, although the evidence 
for this conclusion is sparser. That women are 
less likely to cultivate cash crops may imply that 
it is not worthwhile to invest in agricultural in-
puts or machines.130

Gender  differences  in  access  to  land,  credit, 
and labor also affect women’s capacity to access 
markets  and  take  advantage  of  new  economic 
opportunities.  Female-headed  households  sell 
a lower fraction of their agricultural output in 
the market than male-headed households in 14 
of the 16 countries in our database (Bangladesh 
and  Nicaragua  are  exceptions).  Gender  differ-
ences  in  market  access  are  largest  in  Pakistan 
(25 percentage points) and lowest in Ghana and 
Tajikistan (2–3 percentage points)—two coun-
tries with the lowest overall market penetration 
(see ﬁ gure 5.14). Gender differences in access to 
markets are even more marked for export agri-
culture.131  In  the  Central  Highlands  of  Guate-
mala, women hold only 3 percent of contracts 
for snow peas and broccoli (two of the most im-
portant crops grown for export in the area).132
In South Africa, Senegal, and China, process-
ing  ﬁ rm  managers  prefer  to  sign  export  con-
tracts  with  men  because  women  have  limited 
access to productive assets, lack statutory rights 
over  land,  and  have  less  authority  over  family 
(and  therefore  over  potential  farm  labor).133 
In Guatemala, women’s independent—but not 
joint—ownership  of  land  was  found  to  be  a 
signiﬁ cant  predictor  of  women’s  participation 
in  nontraditional  agro-export  production.134 
Smaller  plots  and  lower  capitalizations  among 
female  farmers  also  act  as  barriers  to  entering 
into  the  export  sector.135  In  northern  Nigeria, 

228 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 5.14   Access to productive inputs and markets is lower among female-headed households than 

among male-headed households

a.  Fertilizer use in rural areas

b.  Mechanization in rural areas

c.  Access to market in rural areas

Bangladesh
Pakistan
Albania
Guatemala
Bulgaria
Nigeria
Panama
Ghana
Malawi
Nepal
Nicaragua

0

20

30 40 50 60 70 80 90

10
% using chemical fertilizer

Nicaragua
Guatemala
Bulgaria
Vietnam
Albania
Panama
Nigeria
Nepal
Bangladesh
Malawi
Ghana
Tajikistan
Indonesia

Pakistan
Vietnam
Indonesia
Albania
Nepal
Guatemala
Kenya
Bangladesh
Malawi
Nicaragua
Bolivia
Tajikistan
Bulgaria
Ghana
Panama
Nigeria

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

% using mechanization

0

5

10 15 20 25 30 35

% market-oriented producers

female head of household (no male) 

female head of household, with at least one 
working age (15–59) male 

male head of household 

Source: World Bank/Food and Agriculture Organization database, most recent year available.

higher unit costs and more stringent credit con-
straints  make  irrigation  farming  less  feasible 
for female barley outgrowers (those who grow 
crops for others on contract).136

Gender  differences  in  access  to  land  and 
credit also reduce the capacity of female farmers 
to start a business, invest, and grow, relative to 
their male counterparts. Greater land tenure se-
curity promotes higher agricultural investment 
and productivity.137 In Nicaragua, possessing a 
registered  document  increases  the  probability 
of  carrying  out  land-attached  investments  by 
35  percent,  irrespective  of  whether  the  docu-
ment  is  a  public  deed  or  an  agrarian  reform 
title,  but  it  has  no  impact  on  access  to  credit. 
This ﬁ nding suggests that security of tenure is 
the channel for formal land ownership to affect 
investment.138

Credit constraints are also a serious obstacle 
to female-owned business creation, investment 
decisions, and growth. A recent study by the Eu-
ropean Commission shows that difﬁ culties in ac-
cessing ﬁ nancing are among the main obstacles 
for female entrepreneurs-to-be.139 The number 
of  studies  looking  at  start-ups  in  developing 
countries  is  small,  but  the  available  evidence 
points in the same direction.140 In India, among 
those with access to microcredit, women with an 
existing  business  increased  their  consumption 
of durable goods; women with a high probabil-
ity of becoming business owners did the same, 
and at the same time reduced their nondurable 
consumption, which is consistent with the need 
to pay ﬁ xed costs to enter entrepreneurship.141 

Access to credit and savings mechanisms also 
affect the investment decisions of entrepreneurs. 

“

I think you should consider everything carefully if you want to get a loan. If I want 
to get a 10 million loan, what do I want to do with that money? In initial months, 
I breed some livestock to get some revenue. I may spend some money on breeding
pigs and some on breeding chickens. I can use the money I earn from breeding 
chickens to pay for the debt. I have something to rely on to pay for the debt. The 
loan not only helps create jobs for my family members but also improves my family 
conditions.

Adult woman, Vietnam

”

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

229

In Kenya, access to savings accounts had a large 
and positive impact on productive investments 
and expenditures for female microentrepreneurs 
but not for male ones, despite the availability of 
informal saving sources such as ROSCAs.142 Re-
stricted access to ﬁ nance is also likely to curtail 
business growth, particularly among micro and 
small ﬁ rms, because they are less able to provide 
collateral and because the number of ﬁ nancial 
products  that  target  them  speciﬁ cally  is  more 
limited.143

Lifting constraints on access to land 
and credit
Markets,  institutions,  households,  and  their 
interactions—rather  than  economic  develop-
ment—explain  gender  differences  in  access  to 
productive inputs. Market prices can constrain 
women’s  access  to  inputs,  particularly  credit, 
disproportionately. Similarly, formal and infor-
mal  institutional  constraints  can  have  gender-
differentiated  impacts  on  access,  even  when 
they were not intended to do so. And household 
preferences (and underlying gender norms) can 
lead to resource allocations that favor men over 
women, even when these allocations are inefﬁ -
cient. In contrast, many of the gender gaps in ac-
cess to productive inputs are fairly insensitive to 
economic development and to the density and 
coverage of speciﬁ c markets.144

Markets: Discrimination and differential 
pricing in land and credit markets 
Land  and  (formal)  credit  markets  have  been 
weak  means  of  increasing  access  to  land  and 
credit  among  female  farmers  and  entrepre-
neurs.145 And  inequalities  in  one  market  often 
reinforce  inequalities  in  the  other—land  often 
serves as collateral for credit, and credit is often 
needed to acquire land.

Lower  access  to  markets  results  from  the 
combination of gender discrimination and dif-
ferential  pricing.  In  some  parts  of  the  world, 
women  face  discrimination  in  land  and  credit 
markets.146 In Europe and Central Asia, female-
managed  ﬁ rms  pay  higher  interest  rates  than 
their  male  counterparts  (0.6  percentage  point 
more  on  average),  with  even  higher  price  dis-
crimination against female entrepreneurs in the 
region’s least ﬁ nancially developed countries.147 
In  Italy,  female-owned  microenterprises  pay  a 
higher interest rate (about 0.3 percentage point 
more)  than  those  run  by  men,  even  after  ac-
counting for the characteristics of the borrower 

and  business,  and  the  local  conditions  of  the 
credit market.148

Higher  interest  rates  could  also  reﬂ ect  dif-
ferences in observable indicators of credit wor-
thiness or in lenders’ perceptions of borrowing 
risks associated with women in the absence of 
objective information on their performance as 
borrowers.  Because  women  are  less  likely  than 
men to interact with the (formal) ﬁ nancial sys-
tem,  they  are  more  likely  to  suffer  dispropor-
tionately  from  higher  interest  rates  because  of 
the lack of information on their potential per-
formance as borrowers. 

Having  said  that,  market  and  institutional 
constraints (discussed below) on access to for-
mal credit can be surmounted through ﬁ nancial 
innovation and adapting the credit model to ad-
dress the needs of small businesses (see box 7.5 
in chapter 7).

Formal institutions: Land rights, land 
distribution programs, and ﬁ nancial 
regulations 
Institutional structures in land and credit mar-
kets  often  disadvantage  women.  Inheritance 
and  marital  regimes  and  land  titling  perpetu-
ate and sometimes add to gender disparities in 
land  ownership  and  accumulation  (see  chap-
ter  4).149  Marital  property  regimes  governing 
the ownership and control of assets brought to 
and  acquired  during  marriage  determine  how 
women fare in the event of widowhood or mar-
ital  breakdown.150  When  women  are  consid-
ered to be under the guardianship of husbands, 
the control and often the ownership of marital 
property  rests  with  husbands  and  their  fam-
ilies—so  many  women  are  vulnerable  to  dis-
possession at the dissolution of their marriage 
or  the  death  of  their  husband.  Similarly,  cus-
tomary  patrilineal  inheritance  systems,  where 
property passes to and through male members 
of the lineage, can relegate women to the status 
of unpaid family labor on family farms or, for 
the growing numbers of landless and land-poor 
households, to agricultural wage labor.151 Evi-
dence from Ethiopia and the Philippines shows 
that,  by  means  of  marriage  and  inheritance, 
larger and better-quality assets, including land, 
are transferred to men.152

Women  are  also  less  likely  to  beneﬁ t  from 
state-sponsored  land  redistribution  programs. 
In  13  Latin  American  land  reform  programs, 
the fraction of female beneﬁ ciaries was around 
11–12 percent.153 In most cases, gender imbal-

230 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

ances in access can be attributed to the institu-
tional structure of these programs—they tend to 
target household heads (in the past solely identi-
ﬁ ed as male), sometimes restricting households 
to one beneﬁ ciary (perhaps to prevent fraud), so 
men were much more likely to have beneﬁ ted. 
That  implies  that  gender  differences  can  be 
mitigated through policy reform. In Colombia, 
the share of female beneﬁ ciaries from agrarian 
reform increased from 11 percent to 45 percent 
once joint titling for land parcels was mandated 
and enforced.154 

For  credit,  the  rules  and  regulations  ap-
plied  by  formal  and,  in  some  cases,  informal 
institutions  can  restrict  access  by  small  farm-
ers  and  producers,  among  whom  women  are 
overrepresented.  Because  credit  often  requires 
collateral,  preferably  land  or  immobile  assets, 
women are at a disadvantage because they have 
lower or less secure access to land and are dis-
proportionately  employed  in  the  service  sec-
tor where capitalization is lower and output is 
often intangible. In India, the absence of land 
titles signiﬁ cantly limits women farmers’ access 
to  institutional  credit.155  In  the  Middle  East, 
women’s  small  and  medium  enterprises  are 
often  in  services,  where  banks  have  difﬁ culty 
quantifying output because there are no physi-
cal assets, such as machinery, to serve as a basis 
for loan assessment.156 In addition, application 
procedures that require a husband’s or father’s 
cosignature  could  discourage  prospective  fe-
male  borrowers.157  Similar  requirements  are 
sometimes also found in informal and micro-
ﬁ nance institutions.158 

Where credit comes through informal insti-
tutions,  the  structure  of  the  organization  and 
its membership and the norms governing it can 
restrict access to women. For example, rules for 
membership  in  farmers’  clubs  in  Malawi  (one 
of  the  main  sources  for  credit  and  extension 
services  for  small  farmers)  disqualify  married 
women  from  full  membership  and  stigmatize 
single  women  or  women  in  polygamous  mar-
riages,  undermining  their  capacity  to  beneﬁ t 
from the services the club could offer.159

Informal institutions: Gender-based 
preferences and intrahousehold allocations 
of productive resources 
Gender-based  preferences  can  lead  to  unequal 
resource allocations to men and women in the 
same household. For example, inheritance laws 
in Latin America treat men and women equally, 

but  individual  preferences  for  asset  allocation 
on  their  death  may  perpetuate  gender  imbal-
ances in access to land and other assets. A review 
of wills in Mexico shows that partners were cho-
sen to inherit land 39 percent of the time, sons 
39 percent of the time, and daughters 9 percent 
of the time.160 

Some gender-based preferences are so power-
ful that they lead to and help support inefﬁ cient 
allocations of productive resources and imper-
fect resource pooling within households—with 
negative  impacts  on  gender  access.  In  Burkina 
Faso, preference is given to male-controlled plots 
in the allocation of productive inputs, which re-
sults in a 6 percent estimated loss in total house-
hold income.161 In Paraguay, women beneﬁ ted 
more than men from increased access to credit, 
including women in households that were not 
credit constrained, suggesting that ﬁ nancial re-
sources were not effectively pooled across men 
and women in the same household.162

But behavior does respond and adapt to eco-
nomic change that opens new opportunities. In 
southern  Cameroon  and  western  Ghana,  in-
creased bargaining power among women asso-
ciated with higher demand for labor in cocoa, a 
very labor-intensive traditional export crop, has 
led  many  husbands  to  circumvent  traditional 
practice by enabling their wives to inherit land 
through “indirect means” as a reward for help-
ing them plant and cultivate cocoa.163 The result 
was more individual land ownership and stron-
ger women’s land rights.

GENDER IMPACTS OF “AGGREGATE” 
MARKET AND INSTITUTIONAL 
FAILURES

Markets and institutions—their design and op-
eration—are themselves products of the agents 
who  populate  them  as  well  as  of  the  agents’ 
interactions.  The  extent  to  which  market  par-
ticipants share and transmit information deter-

“

If there is a job opening in a 
company that is oriented toward 
male jobs, they will rather hire a 
man.

Adult woman, urban Serbia

”

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

231

mines their behavior and ultimately the market 
outcomes. Market failures in information occur 
when information is lacking or when some par-
ticipants  have  more  information  than  others. 
These failures can affect employment outcomes 
of men and women and therefore contribute to 
employment segregation by gender. 

For  example,  a  recent  female  graduate  in 
industrial engineering may fail to get a job in 
a  private  company  because  the  potential  em-
ployer  is  not  sure  how  well  a  female  worker 
will ﬁ t into an otherwise all-male company. In 
other words, she may not get the job because 
the employer has too little information about 
her potential performance. Similarly, a female 
entrepreneur in a village may use her capital to 
buy  chickens—because  that  is  what  all  other 
women in the village do, not because it would 
yield  the  highest  returns.  In  other  words,  she 
mimics the behavior of others in her network 
because she does not have information about 
productive alternatives.

The structure and rules of different institu-
tions  can  also  affect  how  agents  interact  with 
these  institutions  and  among  themselves.  In 
some  cases,  the  institution’s  structure  or  rules 
could lead to gender-differentiated behavior or 
impacts, even if they were conceived to be gen-
der neutral. These institutional failures can con-
tribute  to  employment  segregation.  For  exam-
ple, a female farmer in rural Ethiopia may have 
limited use for agricultural extension services in 
her  area  because  these  services  focus  on  crops 
cultivated by men. Similarly, a woman of repro-
ductive age may have more difﬁ culty ﬁ nding a 
job in the formal sector if maternal leave is paid 
by  the  employer  than  if  it  is  ﬁ nanced  through 
general  taxes  because  she  will  be  perceived  by 
the  prospective  employer  as  potentially  more 
expensive to hire than an equivalent male.

What you know and whom you know 
matters: Gender impacts of information 
and access to networks 
Lack of information about women’s performance 
arising from the limited presence of women in 
some  markets  may  reinforce  low  female  labor 
participation, especially without compensatory 
measures that foster experimentation and learn-
ing. In many countries, low female participation 
in formal private employment makes it difﬁ cult 
for employers to adequately form expectations 
about female workers’ productivity. So they may 
continue to be reluctant to hire female workers, 

perpetuating  the  bias  against  female  employ-
ment (this behavior is usually referred to as sta-
tistical discrimination).

The  story  is  similar  in  the  credit  market, 
where limited access of women precludes learn-
ing  about  their  potential  performance  as  bor-
rowers, including their ability to repay. Perceived 
cost  or  other  differences  between  men  and 
women and reinforcing social norms exacerbate 
this problem. For example, a preference for well-
tried-and-tested borrowers among commercial 
banks could reduce the credit to small farms and 
nonfarm enterprises and thus for women who 
predominate in these groups.164 

Afﬁ rmative  action  policies  in  the  United 
States and other developed countries have pro-
moted  learning  among  employers  about  the 
performance of such groups by supporting the 
employment  of  underrepresented  groups.  In 
the United States, these policies did indeed re-
distribute  employment  from  white  males  to 
women  and  minority  groups  at  no  signiﬁ cant 
efﬁ ciency costs.165

In the absence of afﬁ rmative action policies, 
female employment in the public sector in fairly 
large numbers can also have such a demonstra-
tion effect. In rich countries, public sector growth 
has been important in integrating women into 
the labor markets.166 Data for 15 developed econ-
omies  show  a  very  strong  correlation  between 
female labor force participation and female pub-
lic sector employment but a much weaker cor-
relation  for  males.  More  important,  increases 
in female labor force participation in countries 
with  large  public  sectors  or  high  public  sector 
employment  growth  are  driven  by  increases  in 
both public and private sector employment. Of 
12 such economies with data, women were more 
likely than men to work in the public sector in 
only 5 countries, and less likely to do so in 4. In 
the remaining 3 countries, gender was not sig-
niﬁ cant  in  explaining  the  probability  of  public 
sector  employment  after  controlling  for  other 
relevant worker characteristics.167

“

People ﬁ nd out [about available jobs] through 
networking and connections; if you know someone 
who is working they will tell you about a job 
opening.

Young woman, urban South Africa

”

232 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 5.10  Family formation and public sector employment in Egypt

In 2006, private sector fi rms accounted for less than 
a  quarter  of  female  employment  in  urban  Egypt. 
Their share in rural female employment was even 
lower, hovering at around 8 percent. The majority 
of  working  urban  women  held  government  jobs, 
and in rural areas the government and household 
enterprises accounted for more than 70 percent of 
female employment.

It  has  been  asserted  that  work  in  the  public 
sector  is  more  compatible  with  women’s  “repro-
ductive role,” off ering “shorter hours, more access 
to  childcare,  and  greater  tolerance  for  maternity 
leave.”  In  2006,  the  proportion  of  workers  who 
reported  having  been  at  work  during  their  last 
pregnancy  was  signifi cantly  higher  in  the  public 
sector.  As  many  as  86  percent  of  public  sector 
workers who had a baby while working were given 
paid maternity leave of at least six weeks, in con-
trast to only 47 percent of those working in the for-
mal private sector. And the percentage of working 
women  aged  15–29  years  who  complain  of  long 
working hours is signifi cantly higher in the private 
sector  (50  percent)  than  in  the  public  sector  (32 
percent).

Job separations are also lower in the public sec-
tor. Among women working in 1998, government 
and public sector employees were the least likely 
to have left the labor force by 2006. Specifi cally, the 
rate of exit of female private fi rm employees was 
about  12  percentage  points  higher  than  that  of 
female government employees, and this diff erence 
was  statistically  signifi cant.  The  exit  rates  for 
women working in an informal fi rm or household 
enterprise or for those self-employed were about 
35 percent points higher than the exit rate of gov-
ernment employees. These diff erences persist after 
accounting for individual characteristics.

Exit rates are driven primarily by marriage, but 
the association between marriage and leaving the 

labor force is far weaker in the government (pub-
lic) sector. Relative to women whose marital status 
was  unchanged,  those  who  married  between 
1998  and  2006  were  signifi cantly  more  likely  to 
have left the labor force by 2006 (by about 14 per-
centage  points).  Moreover,  women  age  20  and 
working in a private sector job in 1998 would have 
a 26 percent chance of exiting the labor force by 
2006  if  they  did  not  marry  in  the  interim,  and  a 
54  percent  chance  of  exiting  if  they  did  marry, 
compared  with  16  and  22  percent  for  women 
employed  in  the  public  sector.  So,  the  eff ect  of 
marriage  was  to  raise  the  exit  rate  for  a  private 
employee by 28 percentage points and that of a 
government  employee  by  6  percentage  points. 
The  eff ect  of  marriage  on  exit  among  informal 
sector  employees  is  signifi cantly  higher  than 
among government employees.

The diff erence across government and informal 
sector  employees  in  women’s  labor  market  exit 
rates after marriage is largely an urban phenome-
non. In rural areas, the diff erence was not statisti-
cally signifi cant. That suggests that informal sector 
work in rural areas, which consists primarily of ani-
mal husbandry and processing of dairy products, is 
just  as  compatible  with  marriage  as  government 
work.  The  line  between  women’s  productive  and 
reproductive  roles  in  rural  areas  is  much  more 
blurred. 

For  urban  areas,  there  is  some  evidence  that 
the post-marriage retention rate is highest among 
women working in household enterprises, higher 
even  than  that  among  government  employees. 
Because work in a household enterprise is likely to 
be very fl exible in hours, this result also supports 
the  idea  that  married  women  are  more  likely  to 
keep  working  if  work  hours  and  married  life  are 
compatible.

Source:  World Bank 2010a.

Public sector employment growth in devel-
oping countries has often been the main or even 
the only opportunity for formal wage employ-
ment  for  women,  especially  for  educated  and 
married  women  and  where  views  of  women’s 
participation in market work are more restric-
tive.  In  Egypt,  women’s  clustering  in  public 
sector  jobs  can  be  partly  explained  by  the  ob-
servation  that  government  jobs  ﬁ t  better  with 
married life (box 5.10).

The  expansion  of  microﬁ nance  may  have 
produced  a  similar  demonstration  effect  in 

credit  markets.  By  targeting  women  and  de-
signing  delivery  mechanisms  that  promote 
good  performance  and  high  repayment  rates 
among  borrowers,  microﬁ nance  institutions 
have generated enormous amounts of informa-
tion about women’s performance as borrowers. 
Updated  expectations  about  the  high  average 
proﬁ tability of lending to women are now at-
tracting more traditional credit providers (see 
box 7.5 in chapter 7).

Low  female  participation  in  some  occupa-
tions or professions not only affects those try-

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

233

ing  to  enter  these  occupations  or  professions 
but can also adversely affect the performance of 
women already employed in them, especially if 
gathering  information  is  costly  or  if  networks 
built around gender are important. For both sets 
of women, there is a beneﬁ t to additional par-
ticipation by women. In the United States, over 
the past century, the evolution of female labor 
force participation can be explained thus: when 
small  proportions  of  women  worked,  learning 
was very slow and the changes in female labor 
force  participation  were  also  small,  but  when 
the proportion of women working was close to 
half the total working, rapid learning and rapid 
changes in female labor force participation took 
place.168 Investment and participation decisions 
are often driven by perceived rather than actual 
returns, so in the absence of critical group mass 
in a speciﬁ c market, imperfect information can 
slow learning even more.169 

Barriers  to  being  part  of  networks,  either 
because of low female participation rates or be-
cause  of  more  explicit  gender-based  member-
ship rules, can reduce women’s productivity by 
limiting their ability to gather and share infor-
mation and potentially access markets. Women 
are less likely than men to participate in nonex-
clusively female networks and to be connected 
to  peers  within  larger,  more  informal  groups. 
Data from the Global Entrepreneurship Moni-
tor  suggest  that  in  high-  and  middle-income 
countries female entrepreneurs are substantially 
less  likely  than  men  to  know  an  entrepreneur 
who started a business in the two years preced-
ing  the  interview.170  Similarly,  Mexican  female 
entrepreneurs’ difﬁ culties in breaking into men’s 
networks constitute one of the most important 
constraints to business growth.171

To  the  extent  that  valuable  information  is 
communicated  through  these  networks,  dif-
ferential  access  by  gender  can  impair  women’s 
economic  performance.  Data  from  Investment 
Climate Surveys on formal urban businesses in 
Sub-Saharan  Africa  show  that  having  a  father 
who  was  an  entrepreneur  or  joining  a  family 

business  improves  ﬁ rm  productivity,172  sug-
gesting  that  better  access  to  networks  boosts 
productivity. But the effect is signiﬁ cant only for 
men,  implying  that  women  face  stronger  con-
straints that diminish the positive impact of this 
potential  advantage.  Women  also  face  barriers 
to membership in rural organizations and coop-
eratives, which may further inhibit a channel to 
facilitate market access.173 Even in West African 
rural markets, despite the fame of the “market 
queens” and greater mobility of women relative 
to other regions, women rarely achieve upward 
economic  mobility.  The  economic  resources 
and  connections  necessary  for  the  spatial  and 
social  mobility  to  amass  wholesale  consign-
ments,  command  transport,  and  own  process-
ing facilities are typically in the hands of men.174 
Here  new  information  and  communications 
technology holds enormous promise for lifting 
some of the time and mobility constraints that 
women face (see chapter 6).

Finally high female participation rates in spe-
ciﬁ c occupations and signiﬁ cant (or “thick”) net-
works can also have negative effects.175 New mar-
ket entrants will be more likely to cluster where 
others from the same group are already present, 
perpetuating  segregation.  This  argument  has 
been used in the education literature to explain 
gender segregation by ﬁ eld of study, as well as the 
feminization of the teaching profession.176 A lack 
of adequate information would only exacerbate 
this phenomenon. For example, employment au-
dits showing that employers discriminate against 
men in “traditionally female” jobs (nursing) and 
against women in “traditionally male” jobs177 are 
more likely to reﬂ ect discrimination arising from 
imperfect  information  than  differential  hiring 
preferences across sectors.

The rules of the game matter: Gender 
impacts of formal (economic) institutions
Institutions conceived to serve men and women 
equally  can  have  unintended  differential  im-
pacts  on  gender  outcomes.  In  some  cases,  the 
design  and  functioning  of  a  particular  institu-

“

[Getting a job] is very diﬃ  cult, even to have an opportunity for apprenticeship. 
I have diﬃ  culties to be an apprentice because only ‘insiders’ can bring people to 
apprenticeships.

Young woman, urban Indonesia

”

234 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

tion are products of existing inequalities, so the 
institution does little to mitigate them. Agricul-
tural extension services illustrate this point. In 
other cases, gender inequalities on dimensions 
other than the ones a speciﬁ c institution deals 
with  directly  mediate  its  impact  in  ways  that 
may lead to differential gender outcomes. “Gen-
der neutral” labor legislation and hiring person-
nel practices illustrate this point. In both cases, 
the failure to account for gender differences in 
the  sphere  of  inﬂ uence  of  a  particular  institu-
tion lead to further gender inequality.

Agricultural extension services for all—
or just for men?
Agricultural extension services—which include 
advisory  services,  information,  training,  and 
access  to  production  inputs  such  as  seeds  and 
fertilizers—increase  the  productivity  of  farm 
activities.  But  extension  services  have  largely 
ignored  women  farmers  in  many  areas.178  In 
Vietnam, women spent 30 percent of their total 
labor  efforts  in  agricultural  self-employment, 
compared with 20 percent for men, but made up 
only 25 percent of participants in training pro-
grams on animal husbandry and 10 percent on 
crop cultivation.179 In Karnataka, India, 29 per-
cent  of  land-holding  male-headed  households 
received an extension visit, while 18 percent of 
female-headed  households  did.  For  livestock 
extension,  by  contrast,  79  percent  of  female-
headed households had contact with an exten-
sion agent, against 72 percent for male-headed 
households.180

Gender differences in access to extension ser-
vices  arise  even  within  households.  In  Ghana, 
12 percent of male-headed households received 
extensions  visits,  compared  with  2  percent  of 
female-headed households. And in male-headed 
households, only 2 percent of spouses received a 
visit. This is particularly striking because Ghana 
is one of the African countries with the largest 
number of female-extension ofﬁ cers.181 

A bias in service delivery toward men has been 
identiﬁ ed as a cause of gender differences in ac-
cess to extension services—bias often stemming 
from the belief that men are the decision makers 
and so should be more actively targeted,182 com-
bined with the assumption that educating men 
will ensure that they share knowledge with other 
household members.183 This reasoning may run 
afoul of the reality of households not acting as a 

single unit, particularly when men and women 
are carrying out different tasks or growing dif-
ferent crops. This pro-male bias can also result 
from discriminatory norms or practices within 
the  institution.  The  U.S.  Department  of  Agri-
culture recently settled with a group of women 
farmers who brought a lawsuit for gender dis-
crimination in access to credit services.

Bias  in  service  delivery  also  arises  because 
the large majority of extension ofﬁ cers are men. 
Only 15 percent of extension agents globally are 
women,184 and in Africa, a mere 7 percent.185 As 
a result, social norms that prevent women from 
moving  around  (and  thus  visiting  the  exten-
sion  ofﬁ cer)  or  speaking  with  a  male  without 
her  husband  present  constrain  women’s  access 
to extension services. In addition, male ofﬁ cers 
tend  to  serve  male  farmers.186  That  extension 
resources  tend  to  be  allocated  toward  larger 
commercially oriented farms, where women are 
underrepresented,  has  also  contributed  to  the 
observed gender differences in access.

How labor legislation and hiring and 
personnel practices can hurt women
Labor  legislation  and  other  practices  regulat-
ing  the  functioning  of  labor  markets  can  have 
signiﬁ cant  gender  impacts.  In  some  cases,  the 
legislation itself focuses on gender; examples in-
clude restrictions on hours of work, industry of 
employment and parental leave. In others, such 
as employment protection laws, the legislation is 
meant to be gender neutral, but its effect is not. 
Practices for hiring and personnel management 
can also hurt women.

Impact of gender-based legislation on women’s 
employment outcomes 
Many countries impose restrictions on women’s 
access to market work and on the kind of work 
that women may do. Numerous African coun-
tries require by law that a woman acquire her fa-
ther’s or husband’s permission to work outside 
the home, while in other places women may not 
open or operate an individual bank account.187 
In addition, restrictions on work hours and in-
dustry of work are often introduced as protec-
tive measures to take into account the health of 
pregnant  women,  nursing  mothers,  or  women 
engaged in potentially hazardous jobs. Industry 
restrictions are more common than work hour 
restrictions, but the two often coexist. Although 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

235

now  gone,  such  practices  were  also  common 
in  the  not  too  distant  past  in  some  developed 
economies such as Spain.

These  restrictions  appear  to  be  associated 
with lower female participation rates and higher 
labor market segregation. Countries that impose 
some kind of work hour or industry restrictions 
have on average lower female labor force partici-
pation (45 percent, compared with 60 percent in 
countries with no restrictions) and higher gen-
der  participation  gaps  (45  percent,  compared 
with  25  percent  in  countries  with  no  restric-
tions). Measures limiting women’s work to day-
time hours, or to a subset of industries, may also 
limit their employment opportunities—driving 
employers to hire only men for jobs that women 
may otherwise chose. Their overall impact de-
pends on women’s preferences for employment, 
however—that is, even without restrictions, few 
women may choose work in mines or work that 
requires strong physical labor.188

Differential regulation of parental leave and 
retirement can also affect female labor force par-
ticipation. Most countries provide some sort of 
maternity leave, but beneﬁ ts vary considerably 
in the number of days, the percentage of leave 
paid, and who pays for it. Fewer countries pro-
vide  paternity  leave,  often  under  more  limited 
conditions. Existing differences in parental leave 
between  men  and  women  could  increase  the 
perceived cost of employing women and there-
fore  diminish  their  employment  opportunities 
(see  chapter  7).  And,  while  differential  retire-
ment ages have in many cases been motivated by 
protective instincts, these differences can create 
disparities in lifetime earnings, pension beneﬁ ts, 
and  career  opportunities,  thus  discouraging 
women from market work (see chapter 4).

The impact of “gender neutral” legislation 
and personnel practices on women’s 
employment outcomes 
Employment  protection  legislation  and  other 
regulation  aimed  at  providing  job  security  to 
those in formal jobs—the insiders—often does 
so at the expense of those who have no access to 
such jobs or have no job at all—the outsiders. 
Unemployment rates and the incidence of tem-
porary contracts are signiﬁ cantly higher among 
women and youth than among men, and these 
differences  are  more  marked  in  places  where 
labor protection is more restrictive and the dif-

ference between permanent and temporary em-
ployment more marked.189

Social security regulations for domestic work-
ers is another clear example of legislation with a 
strong gender impact. Across the world, domes-
tic workers have very limited access to employ-
ment insurance, retirement and health beneﬁ ts, 
and  other  forms  of  workers’  compensation—
even when formally employed. Because the large 
majority  of  domestic  workers  are  women,  this 
translates into signiﬁ cant lower access to social 
security among female workers than their male 
counterparts.190

Job  segregation  by  gender  can  depend  on 
job assignment and promotion practices within 
ﬁ rms. Some people who make job assignments 
intentionally  discriminate  against  one  sex  for 
certain  jobs  (see  box  5.3);  others  discriminate 
statistically, using sex as a proxy for productiv-
ity.  Statistical  discrimination  is  often  based  on 
gender  stereotypes—stereotypes  of  men  as  ra-
tional  and  women  as  emotional  often  favor 
men  for  managerial  positions.191  The  gender 
composition  of  jobs  and  ﬁ rms  inﬂ uences  who 
applies and who is hired, presumably reﬂ ecting 
both the job’s gender labels and the employers’ 
tendency to recruit through employees’ personal 
networks.192 In sum, whether the participants in 
the matching process view the job as appropri-
ate for persons of a particular sex boosts the as-
sociation  between  gender  and  people’s  jobs  or 
place  of  work—in  other  words,  it  boosts  em-
ployment segregation.

  Industry  and  occupational  segregation  in 
turn contributes to the observed gender promo-
tion and authority gaps, as well as to differences 
in workers’ attitudes and behavior.193 First, dif-
ferences in the spacing and length of the job lad-
ders in male- and female-dominated jobs create 
a mobility gap among the sexes. Predominantly 
male jobs have longer ladders  (promotion paths 
that connect lower- and higher-level positions) 
than female jobs.194 In addition, the rungs be-
tween  the  steps  on  ladders  in  predominantly 
female jobs are closer together, so promotions 
yield less advancement for women than men.195 
Second,  women  are  more  likely  to  be  manag-
ers in heavily female industries,196 so men and 
women  usually  have  same-sex  supervisors.197 
Third, men’s and women’s concentration in dif-
ferent jobs or ﬁ rms and their different location 
in  the  ﬁ rm’s “opportunity  structure”  generate 

236 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

differences  in  their  attachment  to  the  labor 
force,  their  career  aspirations,  and  their  work 
behavior. Data from a Fortune 500 corporation 
reveals  that  although  most  workers  in  dead-
end  white-collar  jobs  were  women,  anyone  in 
such  a  job  would  lack  job  commitment,  pre-
ferring  instead  to  socialize  with  coworkers.198 
And while men held most of the jobs on pro-
motion ladders, both men and women in such 
jobs displayed career commitments and sought 
 advancement.199

BREAKING OUT OF THE 
PRODUCTIVITY TRAP: HOW AND 
WHY TO DO IT

We  conclude  with  a  brief  review  on  the  main 
insights  that  arise  from  the  application  of  the 
Report’s framework to the analysis of employ-
ment segregation by gender and its causes and 
their implications for policies, as well as a dis-
cussion  of  the  reasons  for  policy  action  for 
lower segregation. 

Weakening feedback loops and mutually 
reinforcing constraints 
There is a feedback loop between employment 
segregation  and  its  causes.  As  we  have  shown, 
three main factors contribute to gender segrega-
tion in access to economic opportunities among 
farmers, entrepreneurs, and wage workers: gen-
der differences in time use (primarily stemming 
from differences in care responsibilities), gender 
differences in access to productive inputs (partic-
ularly land and credit), and gender-differentiated 
impacts of market and institutional failures.

At the same time, gender segregation in ac-
cess to economic opportunities reinforces gen-
der differences in time use and access to inputs, 
and  markets  and  institutional  failures.  Take 
gender differences in time use. Because women 
tend  to  be  employed  in  low-productivity  and 
low-pay  jobs,  they  have  a  comparative  advan-
tage  in  home  production  relative  to  men.  So, 
gender  differences  in  productivity  in  paid  and 
unpaid work strengthen existing incentives for 
specialization in housework and care work and 
reinforce gender differences in time use.

The same can be argued about gender differ-
ences in access to productive resources. For ex-
ample, lower commercialization among female 
farmers may discourage investments that could 

increase  productivity  of  female  plots  (either 
directly  through  complementary  productive 
inputs  or  indirectly  through,  say,  time-saving 
investments) and potentially increase access to 
markets. And,  a  general  perception  that  wom-
en’s businesses have a more limited capacity for 
growth  among  credit  institutions  could  limit 
access to credit for female entrepreneurs, which 
itself would impede growth.

In  addition,  market  and  institutional  con-
straints  can  be  mutually  reinforcing  so  that 
progress in one area fails to lead to higher gen-
der equality in access to economic opportunity 
without progress in another area. For instance, 
increasing  returns  to  education  in  the  labor 
market  provide  stronger  incentives  for  female 
participation in paid work, but these incentives 
may fail to attract more women to the market 
in the presence of traditional norms for female 
participation in market work. And institutional 
changes  that  allow  more  ﬂ exible  employment, 
such as part-time work, can ease existing time 
constraints  but  may  have  a  limited  effect  on 
women’s employment outcomes in the absence 
of complementary measures such as an expan-
sion in (child) care services. 

This feedback loop between the main causes 
of employment segregation by gender and seg-
regation itself, together with mutually reinforc-
ing  market  and  institutional  constraints,  are 
the  main  reasons  why  women  appear  to  be  in 
a  productivity  trap  (ﬁ gure  5.15).  Breaking  out 
of this trap thus requires interventions that lift 
time  constraints  and  increase  access  to  pro-
ductive inputs among women and that correct 
market and institutional failures. Successful in-
terventions will depend on adequately identify-
ing and targeting the most binding constraint in 
each context, while acknowledging the problem 
of multiple constraints, perhaps by sequencing 
policies (see chapters 7 and 8).

The payoff from breaking out of the 
productivity trap 
The  payoff  from  breaking  out  of  the  produc-
tivity  trap  will  be  apparent  on  several  critical 
fronts.  Increasing  gender  equality  in  access  to 
economic opportunities can have large impacts 
on  productivity.  Women  now  represent  more 
than 40 percent of the global labor force and 43 
percent  of  the  agricultural  workforce.  Accord-
ing to the Food and Agriculture Organization, 
equalizing  access  to  productive  resources  be-

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

237

FIGURE 5.15   Mutually reinforcing market and institutional constraints are the main reason why women 

appear to be in a productivity trap

o

s t
n

d

d

s

n

k

I N S T I T U T I O N S
  n o r m s   o n
  w o r k

I N F O R M A L  
S o c i a l
c a r e / m a r k e t

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS
Biased laws/regulations,
and limited
infrastructure

 

HOUSEHOLDS

Differential
allocation of
time/resources

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

n

R

S
T
E
K
s
e
c
c
ti a l  a
d it /l a
e
r
r / c
t s ,  a
o
e
r
m a
r
o
t w
n

k

e

M A
e
r
b

e
D i ff
l a

G

R

O

W

T

H

Source: WDR 2012 team.

tween female and male farmers could increase 
agricultural  output  in  developing  countries  by 
2.5–4 percent.200 In-depth studies from speciﬁ c 
countries  point  to  similar  gains.  For  example, 
ensuring that women farmers have the same ac-
cess  as  men  to  fertilizer  and  other  agricultural 
inputs  would  increase  maize  yields  by  11–16 
percent  in  Malawi  and  17  percent  in  Ghana. 
And  improving  women’s  property  rights  in 
Burkina  Faso  would  increase  total  household 
agricultural production by about 6 percent with 
no additional resources—simply by reallocating 
fertilizer and labor from men to women.

Eliminating  discrimination  against  female 
workers  and  managers  could  increase  produc-
tivity per worker by 25–40 percent, depending 
on  the  type  and  degree  of  exclusion  from  the 
labor  force  and  the  managerial  pool.201  And 
eliminating  barriers  that  prevent  women  from 
entering certain occupations or sectors of em-
ployment  would  have  similar  positive  effects, 
reducing the productivity gap between men and 

women. For instance, in the United States, about 
40 percent of the convergence in wages between 
the south and the northeast between 1960 and 
1980  and  15−20  percent  of  total  wage  growth 
between 1960 and 2008 resulted from declining 
labor market segregation by gender and race.202
These gains can bring wider beneﬁ ts. To the 
extent  that  increased  access  to  economic  op-
portunities  leads  to  greater  control  by  women 
over  household  income  and  other  resources, 
it  can  strengthen  women’s  agency  and  beneﬁ t 
others  in  the  household,  particularly  children 
(see  chapters  3  and  4).  The  private  sector  can 
support and gain from higher female participa-
tion  in  market  work  and  lower  segregation  as 
women’s skills and talents are employed in jobs 
that  make  the  best  use  of  those  abilities  (box 
5.11).  Taking  advantage  of  this  opportunity 
is  particularly  important  as  rapid  technologi-
cal  change  and  the  spread  of  information  and 
communication  technologies  increase  the  de-
mand for skilled workers around the world, and 

238 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 5.11  The business case for gender equality

More  fi rms  realize  that  promoting  women’s  economic  empower-
ment can be a win-win situation for business and women. Belcorp 
in Peru and Hindustan Unilever in India illustrate how using innova-
tive business models to invest in the female workforce can be good 
for business and bring tangible change to women’s lives and local 
communities.

Belcorp. A well-established cosmetics company with over 40 years 
of  experience  in  the  industry,  Belcorp  has  a  stellar  reputation  for 
high-quality products. Through direct sales, in 15 countries in North 
and Latin America, its 9,000 employees generate US$1.3 billion in 
annual revenue.

Women are crucial to the company’s business model and suc-
cess. They make up 80 percent of Belcorp’s workforce and 77 per-
cent  of  its  senior  staff .  Belcorp  realized  early  on  that  promoting 
women’s empowerment was a sound business strategy. Through its 
operations,  it  gives  each  of  its  650,000  beauty  consultants  (most 
from  low-income  households)  the  opportunity  to  become  entre-
preneurs and to benefi t from business training, social networking, 
and group activities to educate and empower them, their families, 
and their communities.

Belcorp’s  business  model  is  based  on  three  axes:  economic 
 support  (by  providing  a  business  opportunity  with  appropriate 
training), emotional support (through incentives, recognition, and 
confi dence building, as well as awareness on issues such as nutri-
tion, health, and child upbringing, to address both the personal and 
the family considerations crucial to women), and social support (by 
giving women the chance to be part of a network of peers).

Sources: International Finance Corporation 2010a, 2010b. 

Hindustan  Unilever.  With  a  long  record  of  market  leadership  in 
India, Hindustan Unilever has market shares of nearly 60 percent in 
categories including soap, detergent, and shampoos. But the liber-
alization of India’s economy and the opening of markets to foreign 
multinationals such as Proc ter & Gamble increased the pressure to 
improve revenues and profi ts. By the late 1990s, the company was 
looking for the next big opportunity—to reach the really small vil-
lages that were not part of their distribution network. 

The business case of focusing on rural Indian markets was clear. 
India  has  the  world’s  second-largest  population  after  China,  and 
more  than  70  percent  of  its  1.2  billion  people  live  in  rural  areas. 
While the business reason was clear, setting up a distribution chan-
nel to reach remote parts of India was less straightforward. Hindu-
stan Unilever had been tapping into some of the rural populations 
through such tools as van road shows, but a large share remained 
outside its reach. It came up with an interesting solution: build a 
distribution system through a network of women microentrepre-
neurs to get the product directly to consumers.

It designed Shakti, a direct-to-consumer sales distribution net-
work  that  relies  on  45,000  female  microentrepreneurs  and  has 
tapped into 3 million homes across 135,000 villages in remote rural 
markets. The program has brought a new competitive advantage 
and  increased  profi ts  while  increasing  women’s  incomes.  And  by 
packaging  products  into  very  small  amounts  and  selling  them  at 
prices aff ordable to the rural poor, it is improving hygiene and well-
being in rural India.

women—especially  educated  women—present 
an untapped pool of resources in the search for 
talent and skills.

Gender inequality in access to economic op-
portunities is also becoming more costly for most 
countries. Global aging implies that fewer work-
ers will be supporting a growing popu lation of 
elderly in the years and decades to come, unless 
labor force participation increases signiﬁ cantly 
among groups with low rates today—basically, 

women. Europe can expect a shortfall of 24 mil-
lion  workers  by  2040  if  the  participation  rate 
for  women  remains  constant.  If  instead  this 
rate rises to that of men, the projected shortfall 
drops  to  3  million.203 And  in  an  economically 
integrated  world,  even  modest  improvements 
in  the  efﬁ ciency  of  use  of  resources  can  have 
signiﬁ cant  effects,  giving  countries  with  less 
discrimination and more equality a competitive 
edge (see chapter 6).

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

239

CHAPTER SUMMARY      Persistent employment segregation by gender traps women in 

low-productivity, low-paying jobs

WHAT WE SEE
Men’s and women’s jobs diff er greatly and the changes in the struc-
ture of employment brought about by economic development are 
not  enough  to  eliminate  employment  segregation  by  gender.  All 
over the world, women are concentrated in low-productivity, low-
pay jobs. They work in small farms and run small fi rms, they are over-
represented among unpaid workers and in the informal sector, and 
they rarely rise to positions of power.

WHY WE SEE THIS

Care Responsibilities and Time Use
Women bear a disproportionate share of house and care responsi-
bilities and consequently face important fi xed costs associated with 
market  work.  Fixed  schedules  and  minimum  hour  requirements, 
particularly  in  (formal)  wage  jobs,  and  the  diffi  culty  in  adjusting 
responsibilities at home result in barriers to market work for women. 
Social norms around the role of women in the household and soci-
ety also infl uence these trade-off s. Women are thus more likely to 
value fl exible work arrangements and to supply fewer hours of mar-
ket work on average than men, putting them at risk of being chan-
neled into lower-quality jobs.

Land and Credit
Across countries, female farmers and entrepreneurs have less access 
to land and credit than their male counterparts. Gender diff erences 

in  access  to  these  productive  inputs  result  from  a  combination  of 
barriers to market access, including discrimination and diff erential 
pricing  in  land  and  credit  markets,  and  institutional  constraints, 
including land rights and fi nancial rules and regulations. They may 
also refl ect discriminatory preferences within households that favor 
men in the allocation of productive resources. These diff erences are 
likely to translate into gender diff erences in scale of production, pro-
ductivity, and investment and growth capacity.

Market and Institutional Failures
Women’s limited presence in certain markets may create barriers to 
knowledge and learning about women’s performance, which in turn 
reinforces women’s lack of access to these markets. In addition, the 
design and functioning of institutions may be (intentionally or unin-
tentionally) biased against women in ways that perpetuate existing 
inequalities.

WHAT THIS MEANS FOR POLICY
The interaction of employment segregation with gender diff erences 
in time use and access to inputs and with market and institutional 
failures  traps  women  in  low-paying  jobs  and  low-productivity 
businesses.  Breaking  out  of  this  productivity  trap  thus  requires 
interventions  that  lift  time  constraints,  increase  access  to  produc-
tive  inputs  among  women,  and  correct  market  and  institutional 
failures.

240 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

NOTES

    1.  Blau  and  Kahn  2000;  Terrell  1992;  Hertz  and 

others 2009.

    2.  See FAO (2011) for a complete literature review. 
See also Jamison and Lau (1982); Tiruneh and 
others (2001); Horrell and Krishnan (2007).

    3.  Udry and others 1995; Udry 1996; Akresh 2008.
    4.  In this chapter, the term entrepreneur refers to 
individuals who are self-employed with no em-
ployees  (own-account  workers)  and  with  em-
ployees (employers).

    5.  Sabarwal,  Terrell,  and  Bardasi  2009;  Bruhn 
2009;  Hallward-Driemeier  2011a;  Hallward-
Driemeier 2011b.

    6.  Costa and Rijkers 2011.
    7.  Robb and Wolken 2002.
    8.  Chaganti and Parasuraman 1996; Loscocco and 

others 1991.

    9.  Bosma  and  others  2004;  Lohmann  and  Luber 
2004;  Kalleberg  and  Leicht  1991;  Kepler  and 
Shane 2007.

  10.  Blau and Kahn (2000) for the United States; ILO 

(2009) for the European Union. 

  11.  Das and Dutta 2008; Whitehead 2009.
  12.  Austria,  Belgium,  Bulgaria,  Cyprus,  Czech  Re-
public, Estonia, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, 
Lithuania,  Luxemburg,  Netherlands,  Poland, 
Portugal,  Romania,  Slovak  Republic,  Slovenia 
and Spain.

  13.  Alene  and  others  2008;  Kumar  1994;  Moock 

1976; Saito, Mekonnen, and Spurling 1994.

  14.  Aterido  and  Hallward-Driemeier  2009;  Brush 
1992; Costa and Rijkers 2011; Morris and oth-
ers 2006; Watkins and Watkins 1984.
  15.  Blau and Kahn 2000 and Terrell 1992.
  16.  Ñopo, Daza, and Ramos 2011.
  17.  Bertrand,  Goldin,  and  Katz  2010;  Goldin  and 
Katz  2008;  Joshi,  Paci,  and  Waldfogel  1999; 
Wilde, Batchelder, and Ellwood 2010.

  18.  Sabarwal, Terrell, and Bardasi 2009; Hallward-

Driemeier 2011b.

  19.  Gajigo and Hallward-Driemeier 2011.
  20.  Goldstein and Udry 2008.
  21.  Croson and Gneezy 2009.
  22.  Brush and others 2004; Bird and Brush 2002.
  23.  Minniti 2010; Welter and Smallbone 2003.
  24.  Blau  and  Kahn  2000;  Goldin  and  Katz  2008; 

Wood, Corcoran, and Courant 1993.

  25.  Dolado, Felgueroso, and Jimeno 2003; Killings-
worth 1990; Macpherson and Hirsch 1995; Pitts 
2003.

  26.  Blau and Kahn 2000.
  27.  Goldin and Katz 2008; Weinberger 1998; Wood, 

Corcoran, and Courant 1993.

  28.  Becker 1957.
  29.  Black  and  Brainerd  2004;  Black  and  Strahan 

2001; Hellerstein, Neumark, and Troske 1997.

  30.  Andrabi and others 2007.
  31.  Görlich and de Grip 2009.
  32.  Macpherson and Hirsch 1995; Pitts 2003.
  33.  Lallemand and Rycx 2006; Kahyarara and Teal 

2008; Herrera and Badr 2011.

  34.  ILO 2010b.
  35.  ILO 2010b.
  36.  We use the Rural Income Generating Activities 
(RIGA) database, which is a collaborative effort 
of the Food and Agriculture Organization, the 
World Bank, and American University that har-
monized a set of nationally representative sur-
veys  to  study  livelihood  strategies  and  income 
sources.  The  RIGA  database  includes  data  on 
Albania,  Bangladesh,  Bolivia,  Bulgaria,  Ghana, 
Guatemala,  Indonesia,  Kenya,  Malawi,  Nepal, 
Nicaragua,  Nigeria,  Pakistan,  Panama,  Tajiki-
stan,  and Vietnam.  Samples  are  representative 
of rural areas at the national level.

  37.  Bruhn 2009; Hallward-Driemeier 2011a; Sabar-
wal, Terrell, and Bardasi 2009; Costa and Rijkers 
2011.

  38.  Hallward-Driemeier 2011a.
  39.  Mead and Liedholm 1998; Bruhn 2009.
  40.  World Bank 2010d.
  41.  Morris and others 2006.
  42.  Aidis  and  others  2007;  Bardasi  and  Gornick 

2008; World Bank 2008.

  43.  Allen and others 2008.
  44.  ILO 2010b; Anker, Melkas, and Korten 2003. 
  45.  Mayoux 1995.
  46.  Bates 1995; Hallward-Driemeier 2011b; Verheul, 
van Stel, and Thurik 2006; World Bank 2010d, 
World Bank 2007, World Bank 2010a.

  47.  Horrell  and  Krishnan  2007;  Tiruneh  and  oth-
ers 2001; Alene and others 2008; Gilbert, Sakala, 
and  Benson  2002;  Kinkingninhoun-Mêdagbé 
and  others  2010;  Moock  1976;  Oladeebo  and 
Fajuyigbe  2007;  Saito,  Mekonnen,  and  Spurl-
ing 1994; Vargas Hill and Vigneri 2009; Aly and 
Shields 2010; Hasnah and Coelli 2004; Udry and 
others 1995; Bindlish, Evenson, and Gbetibouo 
1993;  Akresh  2008;  Goldstein  and  Udry  2008; 
Rahman 2010.

  48.  Udry and others 1995.
  49.  Hundley 2001.
  50.  Hallward-Driemeier 2011b.
  51.  Costa and Rijkers 2011.
  52.  Ñopo, Daza, and Ramos 2011.
  53.  Decimal ﬁ gures are approximate; ILO 2010b.
  54.  ILO 2010b.
  55.  Anker  1998;  Anker,  Melkas,  and  Korten  2003; 

ILO 2010b.

  56  Charles 1992.
  57.  Charles 1992.
  58.  Tzannatos 2006.
  59.  Becker 1965; Gronau 1977.
  60.  Goodin and others 2008.

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

241

  61.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b.
  62.  See, for instance, Ilahi (1999); Haddad and oth-

ers (1995).

  63.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b.
  64.  Ilahi  2000;  ILO  2010b;  Blackden  and  Wodon 

2006; United Nations 2010.

  65.  Ilahi  2000;  ILO  2010b;  Blackden  and  Wodon 
2006; United Nations 2010; World Bank 2010a; 
Apps  2004;  Bianchi  2000;  Fisher  and  others 
2007; Lachance-Grzela and Bouchard 2010.

  66.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b.
  67.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b. 
  68.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b.
  69.  Bittman and others 2003.
  70.  Badgett  and  Folbre  1999;  Elson  1994;  Folbre 

2006.

  71.  Hochschild  and  Machung  1989;  Hochschild 

1997.

  72.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b.
  73.  European Labor Force Survey 2001.
  74.  OECD 2007; Ronde 2008.
  75.  In  contrast,  Blank  (1989)  and  Farber  (2001) 
conclude from evidence on labor market tran-
sitions in the United States that part-time and 
temporary  work  are  often  part  of  the  transi-
tion  out  of  unemployment,  leading  to  regular 
full-time  employment  in  the  future.  See  also 
Miller  and  Mulvey  (1997);  O’Reilly  and  Both-
feld (2002).

  76.  Bardasi  and  Gornick  2008;  Manning  and 

Petrongolo 2008.

  77.  Bertrand,  Goldin,  and  Katz  2010;  Goldin  and 
Katz  2008;  Wilde,  Batchelder,  and  Ellwood 
2010.

  78.  Berniell and Sánchez-Páramo 2011b.
  79.  Bosch and Maloney 2010.
  80.  Posadas and Smitz 2011.
  81.  Ilahi and Jafarey 1999; Ilahi and Grimard 2000; 
Katz 1995; Kennedy and Cogill 1988; Khandker 
1988; Skouﬁ as 1993.

  82.  Rijkers 2011.
  83.  Attanasio and Vera-Hernandez (2004) for Colom-
bia; Baker, Gruber, and Milligan (2008) for Can-
ada; Berlinski and Galiani (2007) for Argentina; 
Jeaumotte (2003) for the Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development; Havnes 
and  Mogstad  (2009)  for  Norway;  Quisumbing, 
Hallman, and Ruel (2007) for Guatemala.

  84.  Heymann, Earle, and Hanchate 2004.
  85.  Anderson  and  Levine  2000;  Blau  and  Currie 
2006;  Hallman  and  others  2005;  Quisumbing, 
Hallman, and Ruel 2007.

  86.  Hein  2005.  There  is  evidence  that  men  are 
pulled into the home when women work out-
side  (Bloemen  and  Stancanelli  2008;  Fisher 
and others 2007; Newman 2002; Newman and 
Gertler 1994; Skouﬁ as 1993), but in most cases, 
house and care responsibilities are transferred to 

older siblings (Heymann, Earle, and Hanchate 
2004; Kamerman 2002).

  87.  Jacobsen 2011; Oropesa 1993.
  88.  Greenwood,  Seshadri,  and  Yorukoglu  2005; 

Jones, Manuelli, and McGrattan 2003.

  89.  Manning  1964;  Schwartz  Cowan  1983;  Robin-

son and Milkie 1997; Vanek 1973.

  90.  Cavalcanti and Tavares 2008; Coen-Pirani, León, 
and Lugauer 2010; Connelly and Kimmel 2010.

  91.  Ramey 2009.
  92.  See  Ilahi  and  Grimard  (2000)  for  evidence  of 
positive effects; Costa and others (2009); Kool-
wal and van de Walle (2010); and Lokshin and 
Yemtsov (2005) for evidence of no effects.

  93.  Costa and others 2009; Dinkelman 2011; Gro-

gan and Sadanand 2009; Jacobsen 2011.

  94.  Duchène 2011; Peters 2001.
  95.  World Bank 2005.
  96.  Khandker, Bakht, and Koolwal 2006.
  97.  Boeri  Del  Boca,  and  Pissarides  2005;  O’Reilly 

and Fagan 1998; OECD 2007.

  98.  Corporate Leadership Council 2008.
  99.  Bosch and Maloney 2010.
100.  Contreras  and  Plaza  2010;  Fernández  2007a; 
Fortin  2005;  Burda,  Hamermesh,  and  Weil 
2007; Nicodemo and Waldmann 2009.

101.  Fafchamps and Quisumbing 1999.
102.  Cunningham 2001.
103.  Berniell  and  Sánchez-Páramo  2011a;  Fortin 

2005.

104.  Booth and van Ours 2008, Booth and van Ours 

2009; Booth and van Ours 2010.

105.  López Bóo, Madrigal, and Pagés 2009.
106.  Fernández,  Fogli,  and  Olivetti  2004;  Fogli  and 

Veldkamp, forthcoming.

107.  Fernández 2007b.
108.  Bennhold 2010.
109.  The  discussion  in  this  section  has  beneﬁ ted 
signiﬁ cantly from insights provided in Bardasi 
(2011) and Croppenstedt, Goldstein, and Rosas 
(2011).

110.  Deere and León 2003.
111.  For list of included countries, see note 36. 
112.  FAO 2011.
113.  Udry 1996.
114.  Quisumbing, Estudillo, and Otsuka 2004.
115.  Deere 2003.
116.  Agarwal  1994;  Deere  2003;  Kevane  and  Gray 

1999.

117.  Brush  1992;  Carter  and  Cannon  1992;  Carter 

2000.

118.  These  countries  are  Bulgaria,  Ghana,  Guate-
mala,  Indonesia,  Malawi,  Nepal,  Panama,  and 
Vietnam.

119.  Aidis and others 2007; Muravyevy, Talavera, and 

Schäfer 2009.

120.  World Bank 2010d.
121.  Hallward-Driemeier 2011b.

242 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

122.  Buvinic and Berger 1994.
123.  Akoten, Sawada, and Otsuka 2006.
124.  Diagne,  Zeller,  and  Sharma  2000;  Fletschner 

161.  Udry and others 1995; Udry 1996.
162.  Fletschner 2008.
163.  Kumase, Bisseleua, and Klasen 2010; Quisumb-

2008.

125.  Daley-Harris 2009.
126.  Banerjee and others 2010.
127.  Gilbert, Sakala, and Benson 2002; Moock 1976; 

Peterman 2010.

128.  FAO 2011. 
129.  Due and Gladwin 1991; SOAS and others 2008.
130.  Dolan 2001; Due and Gladwin 1991.
131.  von  Bülow  and  Sørensen  1993;  Dolan  2001; 
Katz 1995; Maertens and Swinnen 2009; Porter 
and Phillips-Howard 1997; Raynolds 2001.

132.  Katz 1995.
133.  Eaton and Shepherd 2001; Maertens and Swin-

nen 2009; Porter and Phillips-Howard 1997.

134.  Hamilton and Fischer 2003.
135.  Fafchamps  1992;  Fafchamps  2003;  Porter  and 

Phillips-Howard 1997.

136.  Porter and Phillips-Howard 1997.
137.  It also has a positive effect on labor force par-
ticipation  and  investment  in  housing  quality, 
especially  in  urban  areas.  Besley  (1995)  and 
Goldstein and Udry (2008) for Ghana; Baner-
jee,  Gertler,  and  Ghatak  (2002)  for  India;  Do 
and Iyer (2008) for Vietnam; Galiani and Schar-
grodsky  (2010)  for  Argentina;  Field  (2007) 
and Antle and others (2003) for Peru; and De 
Laiglesia (2005) for Nicaragua.

138.  De Laiglesia 2005.
139.  European Commision 2008.
140.  Demirgüc-Kunt,  Klapper,  and  Panos  2010; 
and 

 Hallward-Driemeier  2011b;  Gajigo 
 Hallward-Driemeier 2011.

141.  Banerjee and others 2010.
142.  Dupas and Robinson 2009.
143.  Bardasi 2011.
144.  Croppenstedt, Goldstein, and Rosas 2011.
145.  Un Millennium Project 2005.
146.  Alesina,  Lotti,  and  Mistrulli  2008;  Deere  and 
León  2001;  Muravyevy,  Talavera,  and  Schäfer 
2009.

147.  Muravyevy, Talavera, and Schäfer 2009.
148.  Alesina, Lotti, and Mistrulli 2008.
149.  Agarwal 1994.
150.  Deere and Doss 2006.
151.  UN-Habitat 2007.
152.  Quisumbing 1994; Fafchamps and Quisumbing 

2005.

153.  Deere and León 2001.
154.  Deere and León 2001.
155.  Srivastava and Srivastava 2009.
156.  McCarter 2006.
157.  Berger 1989; Almeyda 1996.
158.  Frank 2008.
159.  Due and Gladwin 1991.
160.  Deere and León 2001.

ing, Payongayong, and Otsuka 2004.

164.  United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and 

Social Affairs 2009.

165.  Holzer and Neumark 2000.
166.  Gornick and Jacobs 1998; OECD 1993; Schmidt 

1993.

167.  Anghel, de la Rica, and Dolado 2011.
168.  Fernández 2007b.
169.  Jensen 2010.
170.  Kotiranta, Kovalainen, and Rouvinen 2010.
171.  Cunningham and Maloney 2000.
172.  Aterido and Hallward-Driemeier 2009.
173.  Doss 2001; Crowley and others 2005.
174.  Harriss-White 1998.
175.  Schelling 1971.
176.  England and others 2007.
177.  Booth and Leigh 2010.
178.  FAO 2008; FAO 2011.
179.  Government of Viet Nam 2000.
180.  World Bank and International Food Policy Re-

search Institute 2010.

181.  World Bank and International Food Policy Re-

search Institute 2010.

182  World Bank and International Food Policy Re-

search Institute 2010.

183.  Meinzen-Dick and others 2010.
184.  Hertz and others 2009.
185.  Williams 2003.
186.  Hertz and others 2009.
187.  Kelly and Breslin 2010.
188.  World Bank 2010c.
189.  Blanchard and Landier 2002; Cahuc and Postel-

Vinay 2002; de la Rica 2004; Saint Paul 1996.

190.  ILO 2010d.
191.  Kanter 1977.
192.  Fernandez and Sosa 2005.
193.  Reskin and Bielby 2005.
194.  Petersen and Saporta 2004.
195.  Barnett, Baron, and Stuart 2000.
196.  Reskin and McBrier 2000.
197.  Browne, Tigges, and Press 2001.
198.  Kanter 1977.
199.  Bettio and Verashchagina 2009.
200.  FAO 2011.
201.  Cuberes and Teignier Baqué 2011.
202.  Hurst and others 2011.
203.  McKinsey & Company Inc. 2007.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

243

Adams, Renée B., and Daniel Ferreira. 2009. “Women 
in  the  Boardroom  and  Their  Impact  on  Gover-
nance and Performance.” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 94 (2): 291–309.

Agarwal,  Bina.  1994.  A  Field  of  One’s  Own:  Gender 
and Land Rights in South Asia. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Aidis, Ruta, Friederike Welter, David Smallbone, and 
Nina Isakova. 2007. “Female Entrepreneurship in 
Transition Economies: The Case of Lithuania and 
Ukraine.” Feminist Economics 13 (2): 157–83.

Akoten,  John  E.,  Yasuyukiz  Sawada,  and  Keijiro 
 Otsuka. 2006. “The Determinants of Credit Access 
and Its Impacts on Micro and Small Enterprises: 
The Case of Garment Producers in Kenya.” Eco-
nomic  Development  and  Cultural  Change  54  (4): 
927–44.

Akresh, Richard. 2008. “(In) Efﬁ ciency in Intrahouse-
hold Allocations.” University of Illinois at Urbana 
Champaign, Urbana, IL. Processed.

Alene,  Arega  D.,  Victor  M.  Manyong,  Gospel  O. 
Omanya, Hodeba D. Mignouna, Mpoko Bokanga, 
and George D. Odhiambo. 2008. “Economic Efﬁ -
ciency and Supply Response of Women as Farm 
Managers:  Comparative  Evidence  from  Western 
Kenya.” World Development 36 (7): 1247–60.

Alesina, Alberto F., Francesca Lotti, and Paolo Emilio 
Mistrulli. 2008. “Do Women Pay More for Credit? 
Evidence from Italy.” Working Paper Series 14202, 
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Cam-
bridge, MA.

Allen, I. Elaine, Amanda Elam, Nan Langowitz, and 
Monica Dean. 2008. Global Entreprenurship Moni-
tor: 2007 Report on Women and Entreprenurship. 
London: Center for Women’s Leadership at Bab-
son College.

Almeyda,  Gloria.  1996.  Money  Matters:  Reaching 
Women  Microentrepreneurs  with  Financial  Ser-
vices. Washington, DC: Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank.

Aly,  Hassan Y.,  and  Michael  P.  Shields.  2010. “Gen-
der  and  Agricultural  Productivity  in  a  Surplus 
Labor  Traditional  Economy:  Empirical  Evidence 
from  Nepal.”  Journal  of  Developing  Areas  43  (2): 
111–24.

Anderson,  Patricia  M.,  and  Phillip  B.  Levine.  2000. 
“Child  Care  and  Mothers’  Employment  Deci-
sions.” In Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, 
ed.  R.  M.  Blank  and  D.  Card  25–34.  New  York: 
Russell Sage Foundation.

Andrabi,  Tahir,  Jishnu  Das,  Asim  Ijaz  Khwaja,  Tara 
Vishwanath,  Tristan  Zajonc,  and  LEAPS  Team. 
2007.  PAKISTAN:  Learning  and  Educational 
Achievements in Punjab Schools (LEAPS): Insights 
to  Inform  the  Education  Policy  Debate.  Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Anghel, Brindusa, Sara de la Rica, and Juan J. Dolado. 
2011. “The Effect of Public Sector Employment on 

Women’s Labour Market Outcomes.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Anker, Richard. 1998. Gender and Jobs: Sex Segrega-
tion of Occupations in the World. Geneva: Interna-
tional Labour Ofﬁ ce.

Anker,  Richard,  Helinä  Melkas,  and  Ailsa  Korten. 
2003.  “Gender-Based  Occupational  Segregation 
in the 1990s.” In Focus Programme on Promoting 
the  Declaration  on  Fundamental  Principles  and 
Rights at Work. Working Paper Series 16, Interna-
tional Labour Ofﬁ ce, Geneva.

Antecol,  Heather.  2000. “An  Examination  of  Cross-
Country Differences in the Gender Gap in Labor 
Force  Participation  Rates.”  Labour  Economics  7 
(4): 409–26.

Antle,  John,  David  Yanggen,  Roberto  Valdivia,  and 
Charles  Crissman.  2003.  “Endogeneity  of  Land 
Titling and Farm Investments: Evidence from Pe-
ruvian Andes.” Working  Paper August,  Montana 
State University, Department of Agricultural Eco-
nomics, Bozeman, MT.

Apps, Patricia. 2004. “Gender, Time Use and Models 
of the Household.” Policy Research Working Pa-
per Series 3233, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Aterido, Reyes, and Mary Hallward-Driemeier. 2009. 
“Whose  Business  Is  It  Anyway?”  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC. Processed.

Attanasio, Orazio, and Marcos Vera-Hernandez. 2004. 
“Medium- and Long-Run Effects of Nutrition and 
Child Care: Evaluation of a Community Nursery 
Programme  in  Rural  Colombia.” Working  Paper 
Series 04/06, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.

Badgett, M. V. Lee, and Nancy Folbre. 1999. “Assigning 
Care:  Gender  Norms  and  Economic  Outcomes.” 
International Labour Review 138 (3): 311–26.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. 
2008. “Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor Sup-
ply,  and  Family  Well-Being.”  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 116 (4): 709–45.

Banerjee, Abhijit Vinayak, Esther Duﬂ o, Rachel Glen-
nerster,  and  Dhruva  Kothari.  2010.  “Improving 
Immunisation Coverage in Rural India: Clustered 
Randomised  Controlled  Evaluation  of  Immuni-
sation Campaigns With and Without Incentives.” 
British Medical Journal 340 (c2220): 1–9.

Banerjee,  Abhijit Vinayak,  Paul  J.  Gertler,  and  Mai-
treesh  Ghatak.  2002.  “Empowerment  and  Efﬁ -
ciency: Tenancy Reform in West Bengal.” Journal 
of Political Economy 110 (2): 239–80.

Bardasi,  Elena.  2011. “Improving  Employment  Op-
portunities for Women in Developing Countries: 
A  Focus  on  Female  Entrepreneurship.”  World 
Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Bardasi, Elena, and Janet C. Gornick. 2008. “Working 
for Less? Women’s Part-Time Wage Penalties across 
Countries.” Feminist Economics 14 (1): 37–72.

Barnett,  William  P.,  James  N.  Baron,  and  Toby  E. 
Stuart.  2000.  “Avenues  of  Attainment:  Occupa-

244 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

tional  Demography  and  Organizational  Careers 
in the California Civil Service.” American Journal 
of Sociology 106 (1): 88–144.

Bates, Timothy. 1995. “Self-Employment Entry across 
Industry Groups.” Journal of Business Venturing 10 
(2): 143–56.

Becker,  Gary  S.  1957.  The  Economics  of  Discrimina-

tion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

———. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” 

Economic Journal 75 (299): 493–517.

Bennhold,  Katrin.  2010.  “Working  (Part-time)  in 
the 21st Century.” New York Times, December 30, 
A13. 

Berger,  Marguerite.  1989.  “Giving  Women  Credit: 
The Strengths and Limitations of Credit as a Tool 
for  Alleviating  Poverty.”  World  Development  17 
(7): 1017–32.

Berlinski, Samuel, and Sebastian Galiani. 2007. “The 
Effect of a Large Expansion of Pre-Primary School 
Facilities on Preschool Attendance Maternal Em-
ployment.” Labour Economics 14 (3): 665–80.

Berniell, María Inés, and Carolina Sánchez-Páramo. 
2011a. “Closing the Access Gap: Recent Advances 
in Female Labor Force Participation.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

———. 2011b. “Overview of Time Use Data Used for 
the  Analysis  of  Gender  Differences  in  Time  Use 
Patterns.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Bertrand,  Marianne,  Claudia  Goldin,  and  Lawrence 
F. Katz. 2010. “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for 
Young Professionals in the Financial and Corpo-
rate Sectors.” American Economic Journal: Applied 
Economics 2 (3): 228–55.

Besley,  Timothy.  1995. “Property  Rights  and  Invest-
ment  Incentives:  Theory  and  Evidence  from 
Ghana.”  Journal  of  Political  Economy  103  (5): 
903–37.

Bettio,  Francesca,  and  Alina  Verashchagina.  2009. 
Gender  Segregation  in  the  Labor  Market:  Root 
Causes,  Implications  and  Policy  Responses  in  the 
EU.  Brussels:  European  Commission’s  Expert 
Group on Gender and Employment.

Bianchi,  Suzanne  M.  2000.  “Maternal  Employment 
and Time with Children: Dramatic Change or Sur-
prising Continuity.” Demography 37 (4): 401–14.

Bilimoria,  Diana.  2006.  “The  Relationship  between 
Women Corporate Directors and Women Corpo-
rate Ofﬁ cers.” Journal of Managerial Issues 18 (1): 
47–61.

Bindlish,  Vishva,  Robert  Evenson,  and  Mathutin 
Gbetibouo.  1993.  “Evaluation  of  T&V-Based 
Extension  in  Burkina  Faso.”  World  Bank,  Africa 
Technical Paper Series 226, Washington, DC.

Bird, Barbara, and Candida G. Brush. 2002. “A Gen-
dered  Perspective  on  Organizational  Creation.” 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 26 (3): 41–65.
Bittman, Michael, Paula England, Liana Sayer, Nancy 
Folbre, and George Matheson. 2003. “When Does 

Gender Trump Money? Bargaining and Time in 
Household Work.” American Journal of Sociology 
109 (1): 186–214.

Black, Sandra E., and Elizabeth Brainerd. 2004. “Im-
porting  Equality?  The  Impact  of  Globalization 
on Gender Discrimination.” Industrial and Labor 
Relations Review 57 (4): 540–59.

Black,  Sandra  E.,  and  Philip  E.  Strahan.  2001. “The 
Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and Discrimina-
tion in a Regulated Industry.” American Economic 
Review 91 (4): 814–31.

Blackden, C. Mark, and Quentin Wodon, eds. 2006. 
Gender,  Time  Use,  and  Poverty  in  Sub-Saharan 
 Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Blanchard, Olivier, and Augustin Landier. 2002. “The 
Perverse Effects of Partial Labour Market Reform: 
Fixed-Term Contracts in France.” Economic Jour-
nal 112: 214–44.

Blank,  Rebecca  M.  1989.  “The  Role  of  Part-Time 
Work  in  Women’s  Labor  Market  Choices  over 
Time.” American Economic Review 79 (2): 295–9.

Blau, David M., and Janet Currie. 2006. “Preschool, 
Day Care, and Afterschool Care: Who’s Minding 
the Kids?” In Handbook of the Economics of Edu-
cation,  Vol.  2,  ed.  Eric Alan  Hanushek  and  Finis 
Welch. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Blau,  Francine  D.,  and  Lawrence  M.  Kahn.  2000. 
“Gender Differences in Pay.” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 14 (4): 75–99.

Bloemen, Hans G., and Elena G. F. Stancanelli. 2008. 
“How  Do  Parents Allocate  Time?  The  Effects  of 
Wages and Income.” IZA Discussion Paper Series 
3679, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Boeri,  Tito,  Daniela  Del  Boca,  and  Christopher  A. 
Pissarides,  eds.  2005.  Women  at  Work:  An  Eco-
nomic  Perspective.  Oxford,  U.K.:  Oxford  Univer-
sity Press. 

Booth, Alison L., and Andrew Leigh. 2010. “Do Em-
ployers Discriminate by Gender? A Field Experi-
ment  in  Female-Dominated  Occupations.”  Eco-
nomic Letters 107 (2): 236–8.

Booth,  Alison  L.,  and  Jan  C.  van  Ours.  2008.  “Job 
Satisfaction  and  Family  Happiness:  The  Part-
Time Work Puzzle.” Economic Journal 118 (526): 
F77–F99.

———. 2009. “Hours of Work and Gender Identity: 
Does Part-Time Work Make the Family Happier?” 
Economica 76 (301): 176–96.

———. 2010. “Part-Time Jobs: What Women Want?” 
Discussion  Paper  Series  7627,  Centre  for  Eco-
nomic Policy Research, London.

Bosch,  Mariano,  and  William  F.  Maloney.  2010. 
“Comparative Analysis of Labor Market Dynam-
ics Using Markov Processes: An Application to In-
formality.” Labour Economics 17 (4): 621–31.

Bosma,  Niels,  Mirjam  van  Praag,  Roy  Thurik,  and 
Gerrit  de  Wit.  2004. “The Value  of  Human  and 
Social  Capital  Investments  for  the  Business  Per-

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

245

formance  of  Startups.”  Small  Business  Economics 
23 (3): 227–36.

Bravo,  David,  Claudia  Sanhueza,  and  Sergio  Urzúa. 
2008. “An  Experimental  Study  of  Labor  Market 
Discrimination: Gender, Social Class and Neigh-
borhood  in  Chile.”  Research  Network  Working 
Paper R-541, Inter-American Development Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Browne,  Irene,  Leann  M.  Tigges,  and  Julie  Press. 
2001. “Inequality through Labor Markets, Firms, 
and  Families:  The  Intersection  of  Gender  and 
Race/Ethnicity.”  In  Urban  Inequality:  Evidence 
from Four Cities, ed. Alice O’Connor, Chris Tilly, 
and  Lawrence  D.  Bobo.  New York:  Russell  Sage 
Foundation.

Bruhn, Miriam. 2009. “Female-Owned Firms in Latin 
America.  Characteristics,  Performance,  and  Ob-
stacles to Growth.” Policy Research Working Paper 
Series 5122, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Brush,  Candida,  Nancy  M.  Carter,  Elizabeth  Gate-
wood,  Patricia  G.  Greene,  and  Myra  Hart.  2004. 
Clearing  the  Hurdles:  Women  Building  High-
Growth  Businesses.  New  Jersey:  Financial  Times-
Prentice Hall.

Brush, Candida G. 1992. “Research on Women Busi-
ness Owners: Past Trends, a New Perspective and 
Future Directions.” Entrepreneurship: Theory and 
Practice 16 (4): 5–30.

Burda,  Michael  C.,  Daniel  S.  Hamermesh,  and 
Philippe Weil. 2007. “Total Work, Gender and So-
cial Norms.” Working Paper Series 13000, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Buvinic,  Mayra,  and  Marguerite  Berger.  1994.  “Sex 
Differences in Access to a Small Enterprise Devel-
opment Fund in Peru.” World Development 18 (5): 
695–705.

Cahuc, Pierre, and Fabien Poste-Vinay. 2002. “Tempo-
rary Jobs, Employment Protection and Labor Mar-
ket Performance.” Labor Economics 9 (1): 63–91.

Carter,  David  A.,  Frank  D’Souza,  Betty  J.  Simkins, 
and  W.  Gary  Simpson.  2007.  “The  Diversity  of 
Corporate Board Committees and Financial Per-
formance.” Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK. Processed.

Carter, Sara. 2000. “Improving the Numbers and Per-
formance  of  Women-Owned  Businesses:  Some 
Implications for Training and Advisory Services.” 
Education + Training 42 (4/5): 326–34.

Carter, Sara, and Tom Cannon. 1992. Women as En-
trepreneurs:  A  Study  of  Female  Business  Owners, 
Their  Motivations,  Experiences  and  Strategies  for 
Success. London: Academic Press.

Cavalcanti,  Tiago  V.  de  V.,  and  José  Tavares.  2008. 
“Assessing the ‘Engines of Liberation’: Home Ap-
pliances  and  Female  Labor  Force  Participation.” 
Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (1): 81–8.

Chaganti,  Radha,  and  Saroj  Parasuraman.  1996. “A 
Study of the Impacts of Gender on Business Per-

formance  and  Management  Patterns  in  Small 
Businesses.” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 
21 (2): 73–5.

Charles,  Maria.  1992.  “Cross-National  Variation  in 
Occupational  Sex  Segregation.”  American  Socio-
logical Review 57 (4): 483–502.

Chioda, Laura, with Rodrigo Garcia-Verdú, and Ana 
María Muñoz Boudet 2011. Work and Family: Lat-
in American Women in Search of a New Balance. 
Ofﬁ ce of the Chief Economist and Poverty Gender 
Group, LAC. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Clifford, V. 1996. “A Case Study of a Feminist Small 
Business: Theory into Practice.” International Re-
view of Women and Leadership 2 (2): 98–111.

Coen-Pirani,  Daniele,  Alexis  León,  and  Steven  Lu-
gauer.  2010.  “The  Effect  of  Household  Appli-
ances  on  Female  Labor  Force  Participation:  Evi-
dence from Microdata.” Labour Economics 17 (3): 
503–13.

Connelly, Rachel, and Jean Kimmel. 2010. The Time 
Use of Mothers in the United States at the Beginning 
of the 21st Century. Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn 
Institute for Employment Research.

Contreras, Dante, and Gonzalo Plaza. 2010. “Cultural 
Factors in Women’s Labor Force Participation in 
Chile.” Feminist Economics 16 (2): 27–46.

Corporate  Leadership  Council.  2008.  Building  and 
Managing a Work-Life Proposition: Identifying the 
Work-Life Drivers of Attraction and Commitment 
in  the  Labor  Market.  Arlington,  VA:  Corporate 
Executive Board.

CWDI  (Corporate  Women  Directors  International), 
and  IFC  (International  Finance  Corporation). 
2010.  CWDI/IFC  2010  Report: Accelerating  Board 
Diversity. Washington, DC: CWDI and IFC.

Correll, Shelley J., Stephen Benard, and In Paik. 2007. 
“Getting a Job: Is There a Motherhood Penalty?” 
American Journal of Sociology 112 (5): 1297–1338.
Costa,  Joana,  Degol  Hailu,  Elydia  Silva,  and  Raquel 
Tsukada.  2009.  “Water  Supply  in  Rural  Ghana: 
Do  Women  Beneﬁ t?”  One  Pager  Series  101,  In-
ternational  Policy  Centre  for  Inclusive  Growth, 
Brasilia.

Costa, Rita, and Bob Rijkers. 2011. “Gender and Rural 
Non-Farm Entrepreneurship.” Background paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Croppenstedt,  Andre,  Markus  Goldstein,  and  Nina 
Rosas. 2011. “Gender and Agriculture: Inefﬁ cien-
cies,  Segregation  and  Low  Productivity  Traps.” 
Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Dif-
ferences in Preferences.” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 47 (2): 448–74.

Crowley,  Eve,  Stephen  Baas,  Paola  Termine,  John 
Rouse,  Pamela  Pozarny,  and  Genevieve  Dionne. 
2005.  “Organizations  of  the  Poor:  Conditions 
for Success.” Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Membership-Based Organizations 

246 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

of the Poor: Theory, Experience, and Policy, orga-
nized by Cornell University, Women in Informal 
Employment Globalizing and Organizing, and the 
Self-Employed  Women’s  Association,  Ahmeda-
bad, India, January 17.

Cuberes,  David,  and  Marc  Teignier  Baqué.  2011. 
“Gender  Inequality  and  Economic  Growth.” 
Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Cunningham, Wendy V. 2001. “Breadwinner or Care-
giver? How Household Role Affects Labor Choices 
in Mexico.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 
2743, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Cunningham,  Wendy  V.,  and  William  F.  Maloney. 
2000. “Measuring Vulnerability: Who Suffered in 
the 1995 Mexican Crisis?” World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC. Processed.

Daley-Harris,  Sam.  2009.  State  of  the  Microcredit 
Summit Campaign Report 2009. Washington, DC: 
Microcredit Summit Campaign.

Das, Maitreyi Bordia, and Puja Vasudeva Dutta. 2008. 
“Does Caste Matter for Wages in the Indian Labor 
Market?” Paper presented at the Third IZA/World 
Bank Conference on Employment and Develop-
ment, Rabat, Morocco, May 5.

de la Rica, Sara. 2004. “Wage Gaps between Workers 
with  Indeﬁ nite  and  Fixed-Term  Contracts:  The 
Impact  of  Firm  and  Occupational  Segregation.” 
Moneda y Credito 219: 43–69.

De Laiglesia, Juan R. 2005. Investment and Credit Ef-
fects of Land Titling and Registration: Evidence from 
Nicaragua. Germany: Verein für Socialpolitik, Re-
search Committee Development Economics, Pro-
ceedings of the German Development Economics 
Conference.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Cheryl  R.  Doss.  2006. 
“Gender and the Distribution of Wealth in Devel-
oping Countries.” Research Paper Series 2006/115, 
United  Nations  University–World  Institute  for 
Development Economics Research, Helsinki.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Magdalena  León.  2001. 
“Who Owns the Land? Gender and Land-Titling 
Programmes in Latin America.” Journal of Agrar-
ian Change 1 (3): 440–67.

———. 2003. “The Gender Asset Gap: Land in Latin 

America.” World Development 31 (6): 925–47.

Demirgüc-Kunt, Asli, Leora F. Klapper, and Georgìos 
A. Panos. 2010. “Entrepreneurship in Post- Conﬂ ict 
Transition.” Economics of Transition 19 (1): 27–78.
Diagne, Aliou, Manfred Zeller, and Manohar Sharma. 
2000.  “Empirical  Measurements  of  Households’ 
Access to Credit and Credit Constraints in Devel-
oping Countries: Methodological Issues and Evi-
dence.” Discussion Paper Series 90, International 
Food  Policy  Research  Institute,  Food  Consump-
tion and Nutrition Division, Washington, DC.

Dinkelman, Taryn. 2010. “The Effects of Rural Elec-
triﬁ cation  on  Employment:  New  Evidence  from 
South Africa.” Working Paper 272, Princeton Uni-

versity, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and In-
ternational Affairs, Research Program in Develop-
ment Studies, Princeton, NJ.

Directors and Boards magazine. 2010. CWDI and IFC 

2010.

Do, Quy-Toan, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2008. “Land Titling 
and Rural Transition in Vietnam.” Economic De-
velopment and Cultural Change 56 (3): 531–79.

Dolado, Juan J., Florentino Felgueroso, and Juan F. Ji-
meno. 2004. “Where Do Women Work? Analysing 
Patterns in Occupational Segregation by Gender.” 
Annals of Economics and Statistics 71/72: 293–315.
Dolan, Catherine S. 2001. “The ‘Good Wife’: Struggles 
over Resources in the Kenyan Horticultural Sec-
tor.” Journal of Development Studies 37 (3): 39–70.
Doss, Cheryl R. 2001. “Designing Agricultural Tech-
nology for African Women Farmers: Lessons from 
25  Years  of  Experience.”  World  Development  29 
(12): 2075–92.

Duchène,  Chantal.  2011.  “Gender  and  Transport.” 
Discussion  Paper  2011-11,  International  Trans-
port  Forum,  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-
 operation and Development, Paris.

Due, Jean M., and Christina H. Gladwin. 1991. “Im-
pacts of Structural Adjustment Programs on Afri-
can Women Farmers and Female-Headed House-
holds.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 
73 (5): 1431–9.

Dupas,  Pascaline,  and  Jonathan  Robinson.  2009. 
“Savings  Constraints  and  Microenterprise  De-
velopment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in 
Kenya.”  Working  Paper  Series  146931,  National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Eaton,  Charles,  and  Andrew  W.  Shepherd.  2001. 
“Contract  Farming:  Partnerships  for  Growth.” 
Agricultural Services Bulletin 145, Food and Ag-
ricultural Organization, Rome.

Elson,  Diane.  1994.  “Micro,  Meso,  Macro:  Gender 
and  Economic Analysis  in  the  Context  of  Policy 
Reform.” In The Strategic Silence: Gender and Eco-
nomic  Policy,  ed.  Isabella  Bakker.  London,  U.K.: 
Zed  Books  in  association  with  the  North  and 
South Institute.

England, Paula, Paul Allison, Su Li, Noah Mark, Jen-
nifer Thompson, Michelle J. Budig, and Han Sun. 
2007. “Why  Are  Some  Academic  Fields  Tipping 
toward  Female?  The  Sex  Composition  of  U.S. 
Fields  of  Doctoral  Degree  Receipt,  1971–2002.” 
Sociology of Education 80 (1): 23–42.

Fafchamps,  Marcel.  1992.  “Cash  Crop  Production, 
Food  Price Volatility  and  Rural  Market  Integra-
tion in the Third World.” American Journal of Ag-
ricultural Economics 74 (1): 90–9.

———.  2003.  Rural  Poverty,  Risk  and  Development. 
Cheltenham,  U.K.;  Northampton,  MA:  Edward 
 Elgar Publishing.

Fafchamps, Marcel, and Agnes R. Quisumbing. 1999. 
“Human  Capital,  Productivity,  and  Labor  Allo-

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

247

cation  in  Rural  Pakistan.”  Journal  of  Human  Re-
sources 34 (2): 369–406.

———.  2005.  “Marriage,  Bequest,  and  Assortative 
Matching  in  Rural  Ethiopia.”  Economic  Develop-
ment and Cultural Change 53 (2): 347–80.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).  2008. 
Global Review of Good Agricultural Extension and 
Advisory Service Practices. Rome: FAO.

———.  2011.  The  State  of  Food  and  Agriculture 
2010–11. Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gen-
der Gap for Development. Rome: FAO.

Farber, Henry S. 2001. “Job Loss in the United States, 
1981–1999.” Working Paper Series 832, Princeton 
University, Department of Economics, Industrial 
Relations Section, Princeton, New Jersey.

Fernández,  Raquel.  2007a.  Alfred  Marshall  Lecture: 
“Women, Work and Culture.” Journal of the Euro-
pean Economic Association 5 (2-3): 305–32.

———. 2007b. “Culture as Learning: The Evolution 
of Female Labor Force Participation over a Cen-
tury.” Working Paper Series 13373, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2006. “The 
Role  of  Culture  and  Family  Experience.”  Journal 
of  the  European  Economic  Association  4  (2–3): 
552–61.

Fernández,  Raquel,  Alessandra  Fogli,  and  Claudia 
Olivetti.  2004.  “Mothers  and  Sons:  Preference 
Formation  and  Female  Labor  Force  Dynamics.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1249–99.

Fernandez, Roberto M., and M. Lourdes Sosa. 2005. 
“Gendering the Job: Networks and Recruitment at 
a Call Center.” American Journal of Sociology 111 
(3): 859–904.

Field, Erica. 2007. “Entitled to Work: Urban Property 
Rights and Labor Supply in Peru.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 122 (4): 1561–602.

Fisher,  Kimberly,  Muriel  Egerton,  Jonathan  I.  Gers-
huny, and John P. Robinson. 2007. “Gender Con-
vergence in the American Heritage Time Use Study 
(AHTUS).” Social Indicators Research 82 (1): 1–33.
Flabbi,  Luca.  2011. “Gender  Differentials  in  Educa-
tion, Career Choices and Labor Market Outcomes 
on  a  Sample  of  OECD  Countries.”  Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Fletschner, Diana. 2008. “Women’s Access to Credit: 
Does It Matter for Household Efﬁ ciency?” Amer-
ican  Journal  of  Agricultural  Economics  90  (3): 
669–83.

Fogli,  Alessandra,  and  Laura  Veldkamp.  Forth-
coming. “Nature  or  Nurture?  Learning  and  the 
Geography of Female Labor Force Participation.” 
Econometrica.

Folbre,  Nancy.  2006. “Measuring  Care:  Gender,  Em-
powerment, and the Care Economy.” Journal of Hu-
man Development and Capabilities 7 (2): 183–99.

OECD  Countries.”  Oxford  Review  of  Economic 
Policy 21 (3): 416–38.

Frank, Daphne. 2008. Sustainable Housing Finance for 
Low-Income Groups: A Comparative Study. Baden-
Baden, Germany: Nomos.

Gajigo,  Ousman,  and  Mary  Hallward-Driemeier. 
2011.  “Constraints  and  Opportunities  for  New 
Entrepreneurs  in Africa.” World  Bank, Washing-
ton, DC. Processed.

Galiani,  Sebastian,  and  Ernesto  Schargrodsky.  2010. 
“Property  Rights  for  the  Poor:  Effects  of  Land 
Titling.”  Journal  of  Public  Economics  94  (9–10): 
700–29.

Gilbert,  Robert  A.,  Webster  D.  Sakala,  and  Todd  D. 
Benson. 2002. “Gender Analysis of a Nationwide 
Cropping System Trial Survey in Malawi.” African 
Studies Quarterly 6: 1–2.

Giles,  John,  and  Firman  Witoelar  Kartaadipoetra. 
2011.  “Indonesia  Education  and  Occupational 
Segregation.”  Background  note  for  the  WDR 
2012.

Goldin,  Claudia.  2006.  “The  Quiet  Revolution  that 
Transformed  Women’s  Employment,  Education, 
and  Family.”  American  Economic  Review  96  (2): 
1–21.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. “Transi-
tions: Career and Family Life Cycles of the Edu-
cational Elite.” American Economic Review 98 (2): 
363–69.

Goldin,  Claudia,  and  Cecilia  Rouse.  2000. “Orches-
trating Impartiality: The Impact of ‘Blind’ Audi-
tions  on  Female  Musicians.”  American  Economic 
Review 90 (4): 715–41.

Goldstein, Markus, and Christopher Udry. 2008. “The 
Proﬁ ts of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural In-
vestment in Ghana.” Journal of Political Economy 
116 (6): 981–1022.

Goodin, Robert E., James Mahmud Rice, Antti Parpo, 
and  Lina  Eriksson.  2008.  Discretionary  Time:  A 
New Measure of Freedom. Cambridge, U.K.: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Görlich, Dennis, and Andries de Grip. 2009. “Human 
Capital  Depreciation  during  Hometime.”  Oxford 
Economic Papers 61 (2008): 98–121.

Gornick,  Janet  C.,  and  Jerry  A.  Jacobs.  1998. “Gen-
der,  the  Welfare  State,  and  Public  Employment: 
A  Comparative  Study  of  Seven  Industrialized 
Countries.”  American  Sociological  Review  63  (5): 
688–710.

Greenwood,  Jeremy,  Ananth  Seshadri,  and  Mehmet 
Yorukoglu. 2005. “Engines of Liberation.” Review 
of Economic Studies 72 (1): 109–33.

Grogan,  Louise,  and  Asha  Sadanand.  2009.  “Elec-
triﬁ cation  and  the  Household.”  University  of 
Guelph,  Economics  Department,  Guelph,  On-
tario. Processed.

Fortin, Nicole M. 2005. “Gender Role Attitudes and 
the  Labour  Market  Outcomes  of Women  across 

Gronau,  Reuben.  1977. “Leisure,  Home  Production, 
and Work—The Theory of the Allocation of Time 

248 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Revisited.”  Journal  of  Political  Economy  85  (6): 
1099–123.

Haddad, Lawrence, Lynn R. Brown, Andrea Richter, 
and Lisa Smith. 1995. “The Gender Dimensions of 
Economic Adjustment Policies: Potential Interac-
tions and Evidence to Date.” World Development 
23 (6): 881–96.

Hallman,  Kelly,  Agnes  R.  Quisumbing,  Marie  Ruel, 
and Benedicte de la Briere. 2005. “Mothers’ Work 
and Child Care: Findings from the Urban Slums 
of  Guatemala  City.”  Economic  Development  and 
Cultural Change 53 (4): 855–85.

Hallward-Driemeier, Mary. 2011a. Expanding Wom-
en’s  Opportunities  in  Africa.  Washington,  DC: 
World Bank.

———.  2011b.  Improving  the  Legal  Investment  Cli-
mate for Women in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Hambrick, Donald C., Teresha Seung Cho, and Ming-
Jer  Chen.  1996. “The  Inﬂ uence  of  Top  Manage-
ment  Team  Hetereogeneity  on  Firm’s  Competi-
tive  Moves.”  Administrative  Science  Quarterly  41 
(4): 659–84.

Hamilton, Sara, and Edward F. Fischer. 2003. “Non-
Traditional  Agricultural  Exports  in  Highland 
Guatemala:  Understandings  of  Risk  and  Percep-
tions of Change.” Latin American Research Review 
38 (3): 82–110.

Harriss-White,  Barbara.  1998.  “Female  and  Male 
Grain  Marketing  Systems:  Analytical  and  Policy 
Issues for West Africa and India.” In Feminist Vi-
sions of Development: Gender Analysis and Policy, 
ed.  Cecile  Jackson  and  Ruth  Pearson.  London: 
Routledge.

Hasnah, Euan Fleming, and Tim Coelli. 2004. “Assess-
ing the Performance of Nucleus Estate and Small-
hoder  Scheme  for  Oil  Palm  Production  in  West 
Sumatra: A Stochastic Frontier Analysis.” Agricul-
tural Systems 79 (1): 17–30.

Havnes, Tarjei, and Magne Mogstad. 2009. “The Irrel-
evance of Subsidized Child Care for Maternal Em-
ployment: The Norwegian Experience.” University 
of Oslo, Economics Department, Oslo. Processed.
Hein, Catherine. 2005. Reconciling Work and Family 
Responsibilities: Practical Ideas from Global Experi-
ence. Geneva: International Labour Organization.
Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Kenneth 
Troske. 1997. “Market Forces and Sex Discrimina-
tion.” Working Paper Series 5740, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Herrera, Santiago, and Karim Badr. 2011. “Why Does 
Productivity  of  Education Vary  across  Individu-
als  in  Egypt?  Firm  Size,  Gender  and  Access  to 
Technology  as  Sources  of  Heterogeneity  in  Re-
turns  to  Education.”  Policy  Research  Working 
paper Series 5740. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Processed.

Hertz, Tom, Ana Paula de la O Campos, Alberto Zezza, 
Carlo Azzarri, Paul Winters, Esteban J. Quiñones, 
and  Benjamin  Davis.  2009. “Wage  Inequality  in 
International  Perspective:  Effects  of  Location, 
Sector, and Gender.” Paper presented at the FAO-
IFAD-ILO Workshop  on  Gaps,  Trends  and  Cur-
rent Research in Gender Dimensions of Agricul-
tural and Rural Employment: Differentiated Path-
ways out of Poverty, Rome, March 31.

Heymann, S. Jody, Alison Earle, and Amresh Hanchate. 
2004.  “Bringing  a  Global  Perspective  to  Com-
munity,  Work  and  Family:  An  Examination  of 
Extended Work Hours in Families in Four Coun-
tries.” Community, Work and Family 7 (2): 247–72.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 1997. The Time Bind: When 
Work  Becomes  Home  and  Home  Becomes  Work. 
New York: Metropolitan Books.

Hochschild, Arlie Russell, and Anne Machung. 1989. 
The Second Shift: Working Parents and the Revolu-
tion at Home. New York: Viking.

Holzer,  Harry  J.,  and  David  Neumark.  2000. “What 
Does Afﬁ rmative Action Do?” Industrial and La-
bor Relations Review 53 (2): 240–71.

Horrell, Sara, and Pramila Krishnan. 2007. “Poverty 
and  Productivity  in  Female-Headed  Households 
in Zimbabwe.” Journal of Development Studies 43 
(8): 1351–80.

Hundley,  Greg.  2001. “Why Women  Earn  Less  than 
Men  in  Self-Employment?”  Journal  of  Labor  Re-
search 22 (4): 817–29.

Hurst,  Erik,  Chang-Tai  Hsieh,  Charles  Jones,  and 
Peter  Klenow.  2011.  “The  Allocation  of  Talent 
and Economic Growth.” Chicago Booth, Chicago. 
Processed.

IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2010. Pro-
moting  Women’s  Economic  Empowerment:  The 
Learning Journey of Hindustan Unilever. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank and IFC.

ILO (International Labor Organization), 2009. Global 
Employment Trends for Women: March 2009. Ge-
neva: ILO. 

Ilahi, Nadeem. 1999. “Gender and the Allocation of 
Adult Time: Evidence from the Peru LSMS Panel 
Data.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 2744, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

———.  2000.  “The  Intra-Household  Allocation  of 
Time and Tasks: What Have We Learnt from the 
Empirical Literature?” Policy Research Report on 
Gender  and  Development Working  Paper  Series 
13, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Ilahi, Nadeem, and F. Grimard. 2000. “Public Infra-
structure  and  Private  Costs:  Water  Supply  and 
Time  Allocation  of  Women  in  Rural  Pakistan.” 
Economic  Development  and  Cultural  Change  49 
(1): 45–75.

Ilahi, Nadeem, and Saqib Jafarey. 1999. “Guestworker 
Migration, Remittances and the Extended Family: 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

249

Evidence from Pakistan.” Journal of Development 
Economics 58 (2): 485–512.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2009. Glo-
bal  Employment  Trends  for Women:  March  2009. 
Geneva: ILO.

———. 2010a. “Key Indicators of the Labour Mar-

ket.” ILO: Geneva.

———. 2010b. Women in Labor Markets: Measuring 

Progress and Identifying Challenges. ILO: Geneva.

———. 2010c. World Social Security Report 2010/11: 
Providing Coverage in Times of Crisis and Beyond. 
ILO: Geneva.

Jacobsen,  Joyce  P.  2011. “The  Role  of  Technological 
Change in Increasing Gender Equity with a Focus 
on  Information  and  Communications  Technol-
ogy.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Jamison, Dean T., and Lawrence J. Lau. 1982. Farmer 
Education  and  Farm  Efﬁ ciency.  Baltimore:  Johns 
Hopkins University Press.

Jeaumotte,  F.  2003.  “Female  Labour  Force  Partici-
pation.”  Past  Trends  and  Main  Determinants  in 
OECD Countries. Working Paper Series 376, Or-
ganisation for Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment, Economics Department, Paris.

Jensen,  Robert.  2010.  “The  (Perceived)  Returns  to 
Education and the Demand for Schooling.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 125 (2): 515–48.

Jones,  Larry  E.,  Rodolfo  E.  Manuelli,  and  Ellen  R. 
McGrattan.  2003.  “Why  Are  Married  Women 
Working  So  Much?”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  Research  Department  Staff  Report 
Series 317, Minneapolis, MN.

Joshi, Heather, Pierella Paci, and Jane Waldfogel. 1999. 
“The  Wages  of  Motherhood:  Better  or  Worse?” 
Cambridge Journal of Economics 23 (3): 543–64.

Kahyarara, Godius, and Francis Teal. 2008. “The Re-
turns to Vocational Training and Academic Edu-
cation: Evidence from Tanzania.” World Develop-
ment 36 (11): 2223–42.

Kalleberg, Arne L., and Kevin T. Leicht. 1991. “Gender 
and  Organizational  Performance:  Determinants 
of Small Business Survival and Success.” Academy 
of Management Journal 34 (1): 136–61.

Kamerman,  Sheila  B.  2002.  “Early  Childhood  Care 
and  Education  and  Other  Family  Policies  and 
Programs  in  South-East  Asia.”  United  Nations 
Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization, 
Early Childhood and Family Policy Series 4, Paris.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1977. “Some Effects of Pro-
portions  on  Group  Life:  Skewed  Sex  Ratios  and 
Responses to Token Women.” American Journal of 
Sociology 82 (5): 965–90.

Katz,  Elizabeth  G.  1995. “Gender  and  Trade  within 
the Household: Observations from Rural Guate-
mala.” World Development 23 (2): 327–42.

Kelly,  Sanja,  and  Julia  Breslin,  eds.  2010.  Women’s 
Rights in the Middle East and North Africa: Progress 
and Resistance. New York: Freedom House.

Kennedy,  Eileen  T.,  and  Bruce  Cogill.  1988.  “The 
Case of Sugarcane in Kenya: Part 1 Effects of Cash 
Crop Production on Women’s Income, Time Al-
location, and Child Care Practices.” Women and 
International Development Working Paper Series 
167, Michigan State University, East Lansing.

Kepler,  Erin,  and  Scott  Shane.  2007. “Are  Male  and 
Female  Entrepreneurs  Really  That  Different?” 
Working Paper Series 309, U.S. Small Business Ad-
ministration, Ofﬁ ce of Advocacy Small Business, 
Washington, DC.

Kevane, Michael, and Leslie C. Gray. 1999. “A Wom-
an’s Field Is Made At Night: Gendered Land Rights 
and Norms in Burkina Faso.” Feminist Economics 
5 (3): 1–26.

Khandker,  Shahidur  R.  1988.  “Determinants  of 
Women’s  Time Allocation  in  Rural  Bangladesh.” 
Economic  Development  and  Cultural  Change  37 
(1): 111–26.

Khandker, Shahidur R., Zaid Bakht, and Gayatri B. 
Koolwal.  2006.  “The  Poverty  Impact  of  Rural 
Roads:  Evidence  from  Bangladesh.”Policy  Re-
search Working Paper Series 3875, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Killingsworth,  Mark  R.  2007.  “A  Framework  for 
Econometric Analysis of Labor Supply and Wage 
Rate  of  Married  Persons.”  Department  of  Eco-
nomics. Rutgers University, New Brunswick, N.J. 
Processed.

Kinkingninhoun-Mêdagbé, Florent M., Aliou Diagne, 
Franklin  Simtowe,  Aﬁ avi  R.  Agboh-Noameshie, 
and Patrice Y. Adégbola. 2010. “Gender Discrimi-
nation  and  Its  Impact  on  Income,  Productivity, 
and  Technical  Efﬁ ciency:  Evidence  from  Benin.” 
Agricultural and Human Values 27 (1): 57–69.

Koolwal, Gayatri, and Dominique van de Walle. 2010. 
“Access to Water, Women’s Work and Child Out-
comes.”  Policy  Research  Working  Paper  Series 
5302, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kotiranta, Annu, Anne Kovalainen, and Petri Rou-
vinen.  2010. “Female  Leadership  and  Company 
Proﬁ tability.”  In  Women  Entrepreneurs  and  the 
Global Environment for Growth: A Research Per-
spective,  ed.  Candida  G.  Brush,  Anne  de  Bruin, 
Elizabeth  J.  Gatewood,  and  Colette  Henry. 
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Kumar, Shubh K. 1994. Adoption of Hybrid Maize in 
Zambia: Effects on Gender Roles, Food Consump-
tion,  and  Nutrition.  Washington,  DC:  Interna-
tional Food Policy Research Institute.

Kumase, Wokia-azi N., Herve Bisseleua, and Stephan 
Klasen. 2010. “Opportunities and Constraints in 
Agriculture: A Gendered Analysis of Cocoa Pro-
duction in Southern Cameroon.” Poverty, Equity 
and Growth Discussion Paper Series 27, Courant 
Research Centre, Goettingen, Germany.

Lachance-Grzela, Mylène, and Geneviève Bouchard. 
2010. “Why  Do  Women  Do  the  Lion’s  Share  of 

250 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Housework? A Decade of Research.” Sex Roles 63 
(11–12): 767–80.

Lallemand, Thierry, and Francois Rycx. 2006. “Estab-
lishment Size and the Dispersion of Wages: Evi-
dence from European Countries.” Applied Econo-
metrics Quarterly 52 (4): 309–36.

Lohmann, Henning, and Silvia Luber. 2004. “Trends 
in Self-Employment in Germany: Different Types, 
Different Developments?” In The Reemergence of 
Self-Employment:  A  Comparative  Study  of  Self-
Employment  Dynamics  and  Social  Inequality,  ed. 
Richard Arum and Walter Müller. Princeton, NJ: 
Prince ton University Press.

Lokshin,  Michael,  and  Ruslan  Yemtsov.  2005.  “Has 
Rural  Infrastructure  Rehabilitation  in  Georgia 
Helped the Poor?” World Bank Economic Review 
19 (2): 311–33.

López Bóo, Florencia, Lucia Madrigal, and Carmen 
Pagés. 2009. “Part-Time Work, Gender, and Job 
Satisfaction: Evidence from a Developing Coun-
try.” IZA Discussion Paper Series 3994, Institute 
for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Loscocco, Karyn A., Joyce Robinson, Richard H. Hall, 
and John K. Allen. 1991. “Gender and Small Busi-
ness  Success:  An  Inquiry  into  Women’s  Relative 
Disadvantage.” Social Forces 70 (1): 65–85.

Macpherson,  David  A.,  and  Barry  T.  Hirsch.  1995. 
“Wages and Gender Composition: Why Do Wom-
en’s Jobs Pay Less?” Journal of Labor Economics 13 
(3): 426–71.

Maertens,  Miet,  and  Johan  F.  M.  Swinnen.  2009. 
“Trade,  Standards,  and  Poverty:  Evidence  from 
Senegal.” World Development 37 (1): 161–78.

Manning, Alan, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2008. “The 
Part-Time  Pay  Penalty  for  Women  in  Britain.” 
Economic Journal 118 (526): F28–F51.

Manning, Charles A. W. 1964. “S. A. and the World: 
In  Defense  of Apartheid.”  Foreign  Affairs  43  (1): 
135–49.

Mayoux, Linda. 1995. “From Vicious to Virtuous Cir-
cles? Gender and Micro-Enterprise Development.” 
Occasional Paper 3, United Nations Development 
Programme,  United  Nations  Research  Institute 
for Social Development, Geneva.

McCarter, Elissa. 2006. “The Global Advancement of 
Women: Barriers and Best Practices: Women and 
Microﬁ nance:  Why  We  Should  Do  More.”  Uni-
versity of Maryland Law Journal of Race, Religion, 
Gender & Class 6 (2): 353–66.

McKinsey  &  Company  Inc.  2007.  Women  Matter. 
Gender Diversity, A Corporate Performance Driver. 
London: McKinsey & Company Inc.

Mead,  Donald  C.,  and  Carl  Liedholm.  1998.  “The 
Dynamics of Micro and Small Enterprises in De-
veloping  Countries.”  World  Development  26  (1): 
61–74.

Meinzen-Dick,  Ruth,  Agnes  Quisumbing,  Julia 
Behrman, Patricia Biermayr-Jenzano, Vicki Wilde, 

Marco Noordeloos, Catherine Ragasa, and Nienke 
Beintema.  2010.  “Engendering  Agricultural  Re-
search.”  Discussion  Paper  Series  00973,  Interna-
tional  Food  Policy  Research  Institute,  Washing-
ton, DC.

Miller,  Paul,  and  Charles  Mulvey.  1997. “Computer 
Skills and Wages.” Australian Economic Papers 36 
(68): 106–13.

Minniti, María 2010. “Female Entrepreneurship and 
Economic Activity.” European Journal of Develop-
ment Research 22 (3): 294–312.

Moock, Peter R. 1976. “The Efﬁ ciency of Women as 
Farm Managers: Kenya.” American Journal of Agri-
cultural Economics 58 (5): 831–5.

Moreno,  Martin,  Hugo  Ñopo,  Jaime  Saavedra,  and 
Maximo  Torero.  2004. “Gender  and  Racial  Dis-
crimination  in  Hiring:  A  Pseudo  Audit  Study 
for  Three  Selected  Occupations  in  Metropolitan 
Lima.” IZA Discussion Paper Series 979, Institute 
for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Morris, Michael H., Nola N. Miyasaki, Craig E. Wat-
ters, and Susan M. Coombes. 2006. “The Dilemma 
of  Growth:  Understanding Venture  Size  Choices 
of Women Entrepreneurs.” Journal of Small Busi-
ness Management 44 (2): 221–44.

Muravyev,  Alexander,  Dorothea  Schäfer,  and  Olek-
sandr Talavera. 2009. “Entrepreneurs’ Gender and 
Financial  Constraints:  Evidence  from  Interna-
tional Data.” Journal of Comparative Economics 37 
(2): 270–86.

NCFAW (National Committee for the Advancement 
of Women  in Vietnam).  2000.  Situation Analysis 
and  Policy  Recommendations  to  Promote  the  Ad-
vancement of Women and Gender Equality in Viet-
nam. Hanoi: NCFAW.

Newman, Constance. 2002. “Gender, Time Use, and 
Change: The Impact of the Cut Flower Industry 
in Ecuador.” World Bank Economic Review 16 (3): 
375–96.

Newman, John L., and Paul J. Gertler. 1994. “Family 
Productivity, Labor Supply, and Welfare in a Low 
Income Country.” Journal of Human Resources 29 
(4): 989–1026.

Nicodemo,  Catia,  and  Robert  Waldmann.  2009. 
“Child-Care and Participation in the Labor Mar-
ket for Married Women in Mediterranean Coun-
tries.” IZA Discussion Paper Series 3983, Institute 
for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Ñopo, Hugo, Nancy Daza, and Johanna Ramos. 2011. 
“Gender  Earnings  Gaps  in  the  World.”  Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2012.

OECD  (Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation 
and  Development).  1993.  Private  Pay  for  Public 
Work.  Performance-Related  Pay  for  Public  Sector 
Managers. Paris: OECD.

———.  2007.  OECD  Employment  Outlook  2007. 

Paris: OECD.

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

251

O’Reilly, Jacqueline, and Silke Bothfeld. 2002. “What 
Happens  after  Working  Part  Time?  Integration, 
Maintenance or Exclusionary Transitions in Brit-
ain and Western Germany.” Cambridge Journal of 
Economics 26 (4): 409–39.

O’Reilly,  Jaqueline,  and  Colette  Fagan.  1998.  Part-
Time  Prospects:  An  International  Comparison  of 
Part-Time Work in Europe, North America and the 
Paciﬁ c Rim. London: Routledge.

Oladeebo, J. O., and A. A. Fajuyigbe. 2007. “Technical 
Efﬁ ciency of Men and Women Upland Rice Farm-
ers in Osun State, Nigeria.” Journal of Human Ecol-
ogy 22 (2): 93–100.

OECD  (Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation 
and  Development).  1993.  Private  Pay  for  Public 
Work.  Performance-Related  Pay  for  Public  Sector 
Managers. Paris: OECD.

———.  2007.  OECD  Employment  Outlook  2007. 

Paris: OECD.

Oropesa, R. S. 1993. “Female Labor Force Participa-
tion and Time-Saving Household Technology: A 
Case Study of the Microwave from 1978 to 1989.” 
The Journal of Consumer Research 19 (4): 567–79.
Peterman, Amber. 2010. “Widowhood and Asset In-
heritance  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa:  Empirical  Evi-
dence from 15 Countries.” Paper presented at the 
CRPC  (Chronic  Poverty  Research  Centers)/ODI 
(Overseas  Development  Institute)  Roundtable 
‘Inheritance and the Intergenerational Transmis-
sion of Poverty,’ London, October 11.

Peters,  Deike.  2001. “Gender  and  Transport  in  Less 
Developed  Countries:  A  Background  Paper  in 
Preparation for CSD-9.” Background Paper for the 
Expert Workshop “Gender Perspectives for Earth 
Summit 2002: Energy, Transport, Information for 
Decision Making,” Center for Metropolitan Stud-
ies, Berlin. Processed.

Petersen, Trond, and Ishak Saporta. 2004. “The Op-
portunity  Structure  for  Discrimination.”  Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology 109 (4): 852–901.

Pitts,  M.  Melinda.  2003.  “Why  Choose  Women’s 
Work If It Pays Less? A Structural Model of Occu-
pational Choice.” In Worker Well-being and Public 
Policy:  volume  22  (Research  in  Labor  Economics), 
ed. Solomon W. Polacheck. Oxford, UK: Elsevier 
Science Ltd.

Porter,  Gina,  and  Kevin  Phillips-Howard.  1997. 
“Comparing  Contracts:  An  Evaluation  of  Con-
tract Farming Schemes in Africa.” World Develop-
ment 25 (2): 227–38.

Posadas, Joseﬁ na, and Marc Smitz. 2011. “Work De-
cisions  for  Men  and  Women:  A  Household  Ap-
proach for Indonesia and Peru.” Background pa-
per for the WDR 2012.

Quisumbing,  Agnes  R.  1994.  “Intergenerational 
Transfers  in  Philippine  Rice  Villages:  Gender 
Differences  in  Traditional  Inheritance  Customs.” 
Journal of Development Economics 43 (2): 167–95.

Quisumbing, Agnes R., Joanna P. Estudillo, and Kei-
jiro  Otsuka.  2004.  Land  and  Schooling:  Transfer-
ring  Wealth  across  Generations.  Baltimore:  Johns 
Hopkins University Press.

Quisumbing, Agnes R., Kelly Hallman, and Marie T. 
Ruel.  2007.  “Maquiladoras  and  Market  Mamas: 
Women’s Work and Childcare in Guatemala City 
and Accra.” Journal of Development Studies 43 (3): 
420–55.

Quisumbing, Agnes R., Ellen Payongayong, and Kei-
jiro  Otsuka.  2004.  “Are  Wealth  Transfers  Biased 
against  Girls?  Gender  Differences  in  Land  In-
heritance  and  Schooling  Investment  in  Ghana’s 
Western Region.” Discussion Paper Series 186, In-
ternational  Food  Policy  Research  Institute,  Food 
Consumption  and  Nutrition  Division, Washing-
ton, DC.

Rahman, Sanzidur. 2010. “Women’s Labour Contri-
bution to Productivity and Efﬁ ciency in Agricul-
ture: Empirical Evidence from Bangladesh.” Jour-
nal of Agricultural Economics 61 (2): 318–42.

Ramey, Valerie A. 2009. “Time Spent in Home Pro-
duction in the Twentieth-Century United States: 
New  Estimates  from  Old  Data.”  Journal  of  Eco-
nomic History 69 (1): 1–47.

Raynolds,  Laura  T.  2001.  “New  Plantations,  New 
Workers:  Gender  and  Production  Politics  in  the 
Dominican Republic.” Gender and Society 15 (1): 
7–28.

Reskin,  Barbara  F.,  and  Denise  D.  Bielby.  2005.  “A 
Sociological  Perspective  on  Gender  and  Career 
Outcomes.”  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  19 
(1): 71–86.

Reskin, Barbara F., and Debra Branch McBrier. 2000. 
“Why  Not  Ascription?  Organizations’  Employ-
ment  of  Male  and  Female  Managers.”  American 
Sociological Review 65 (2): 210–33.

Riach,  Peter  A.,  and  Judith  Rich.  2006. “An  Experi-
mental Investigation of Sexual Discrimination in 
Hiring in the English Labor Market.” B.E. Journal 
of Economic Analysis & Policy 6 (2): 1–20.

Rijkers, Bob. 2011. “Non-Separability and Labor De-
mand  in  Rural  Non-Farm  Enterprises.”  World 
Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Robb, Alicia, and John Wolken. 2002. “Firm, Owner, 
and  Financing  Characteristics:  Differences  be-
tween  Female-  and  Male-Owned  Small  Busi-
nesses.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
Working  Paper  2002-18,  Board  of  Governors  of 
the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.

Robinson, John P., and Melissa Milkie. 1997. “Dances 
with  Dust  Bunnies:  Housecleaning  in  America.” 
American Demographics 19 (1): 37–42.

Ronde, Kahliya. 2008. “Nederland deeltijdland (maar 
alleen voor vrouwen).” Kennislink.nl, February 13.
Sabarwal,  Shwetlena,  Katherine  Terrell,  and  Elena 
Bardasi.  2009.  “How  Do  Female  Entrepreneurs 

252 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Perform?  Evidence  from  Three  Developing  Re-
gions.” World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.
Saint Paul, Gilles. 1996. Dual Labor Markets. A Macro-
economic Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Saito,  Katrine  A.,  Hailu  Mekonnen,  and  Daphne 
Spurling.  1994.  “Raising  the  Productivity  of 
Women Farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Discus-
sion Paper Series 230, World Bank, Africa Techni-
cal Department, Washington, DC.

Schelling, Thomas C. 1971. “Dynamic Models of Seg-
regation.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1 (2): 
143–86.

Schmidt, Manfred G. 1993. “Gendered Labour Force 
Participation.”  In  Families  of  Nations:  Patterns  of 
Public Policy in Western Democracies, ed. Frances 
G. Castles. Brookﬁ eld, VT: Dartmouth Publishing 
Company.

Schwartz Cowan, Ruth. 1983. More Work for Mother: 
The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open 
Hearth to the Microwave. New York: Basic Books.
Skouﬁ as, Emmanuel. 1993. “Labor Market Opportu-
nities  and  Intrafamily  Time  Allocation  in  Rural 
Households  in  South  Asia.”  Journal  of  Develop-
ment Economics 40 (2): 277–310.

Smith,  Nina,  Valdemar  Smith,  and  Mette  Verner. 
2006.  “Do  Women  in  Top  Management  Affect 
Firm Performance? A Panel Study of 2500 Danish 
Firms.”  International  Journal  of  Productivity  and 
Performance Management 55 (7): 569–93.

SOAS and others. 2008. Due and Gladwin 1991. 
Srivastava,  N.,  and  R.  Srivastava.  2009.  “Women, 
Work, and Poverty Interlinks in Rural India.” Pa-
per  presented  at  the  FAO-IFAD-ILO  Workshop 
on Gaps, Trends and Current Research in Gender 
Dimensions  of  Agricultural  and  Rural  Employ-
ment:  Differentiated  Pathways  out  of  Poverty, 
Rome, March 31.

Stevenson, Lois A. 1986. “Against All Odds: The En-
trepreneurship of Women.” Journal of Small Busi-
ness Management 24 (4): 30–6.

Terrell, Katherine. 1992. “Female-Male Earnings Dif-
ferentials  and  Occupational  Structure.”  Interna-
tional Labour Review 131 (4–5): 387–404.

Tiruneh, Addis, Teklu Testfaye, Wilfred Mwangi, and 
Hugo Verkuijl. 2001. Gender Differentials in Agri-
cultural  Production  and  Decision-Making  among 
Smallholders in Ada, Lume, and Gimbichu Woredas 
of the Central Highlands of Ethiopia. Mexico, DF, 
and Addis Ababa: International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Center and Ethiopian Agricultural 
Research Organization.

Tzannatos,  Zaﬁ ris.  2006.  “Monitoring  Progress  in 
Gender Equality: The Labor Market in Middle In-
come  Countries.” World  Bank, Washington,  DC. 
Processed.

Udry, Christopher. 1996. “Gender, Agricultural Pro-
duction, and the Theory of the Household.” Jour-
nal of Political Economy 104 (5): 1010–46.

Udry,  Christopher,  John  Hoddinott,  Harold  Alder-
man, and Lawrence Haddad. 1995. “Gender Dif-
ferentials  in  Farm  Productivity:  Implications  for 
Household  Efﬁ ciency  and  Agricultural  Policy.” 
Food Policy 20 (5): 407–34.

United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and  So-
cial Affairs.  2009. 2009 World  Survey  on  the  Role 
of Women in Development: Women’s Control over 
Economic  Resources  and  Access  to  Financial  Re-
sources, including Microﬁ nance. New York: United 
Nations.

———. 2010. The World’s Women 2010: Trends and 

Statistics. New York: United Nations.

UN-Habitat  (United  Nations  Human  Settlements 
Programme). 2007. Policy Makers Guide to Wom-
en’s Land, Property and Housing Rights across the 
World. Nairobi: UN-Habitat.

UN Millenium Project. 2005. Taking Action: Achieving 
Gender  Equality  and  Empowering  Women.  Lon-
don: Earthscan.

Vanek,  Joann.  1973. “Keeping  Busy:  Time  Spent  in 
Housework, United States, 1920–1970.” Sociology 
thesis, University of Michigan.

Vargas Hill, Ruth, and Marcella Vigneri. 2009. Main-
stream  Gender  Sensitivity  in  Cash  Crop  Markets 
Supply  Chains.  Washington,  DC:  International 
Food Policy Research Institute.

Verheul, Ingrid, André van Stel, and Roy Thurik. 2006. 
“Explaining Female and Male Entrepreneurship at 
the Country Level.” Entrepreneurship and Regional 
Development 18 (2): 151–83.

von  Bülow,  Dorthe,  and  Anne  Sørensen.  1993. 
“Gender  and  Contract  Farming:  Tea  Outgrower 
Schemes  in  Kenya.”  Review  of  African  Political 
Economy 56: 38–52.

Watkins,  David  S.,  and  Jean  Watkins.  1984.  “The 
Female  Entrepreneur:  Background  and  Deter-
minants of Business Choice, Some British Data.” 
International Small Business Journal 2 (4): 21–31.

Weinberger,  Catherine  J.  1998.  “Race  and  Gender 
Wage  Gaps  in  the  Market  for  Recent  College 
Graduates.” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Econ-
omy and Society 37 (1): 67–84.

Welter, Friederike, and David Smallbone. 2003. “En-
trepreneurship and Enterprise Strategies in Tran-
sition  Economies:  An  Institutional  Perspective.” 
In Small Firms and Economic Development in De-
veloped  and  Transition  Economies:  A  Reader,  ed. 
 David A. Kirby and Anna Watson. Aldershot, UK 
and Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing.

Whitehead,  Ann.  2009.  “The  Gendered  Impacts  of 
Liberalization  Policies  on  African  Agricultural 
Economies  and  Rural  Livelihoods.”  In  The  Gen-
dered Impacts of Liberalization: Towards “Embed-
ded  Liberalism?”  ed.  Shahra  Razavi.  New  York: 
Routledge.

Wilde,  Elizabeth  Ty,  Lily  Batchelder,  and  David  T. 
Ellwood. 2010. “The Mommy Track Divides: The 

 

Gender differences in employment and why they matter 

253

Impact  of  Childbearing  on  Wages  of  Women 
of  Differing  Skill  Levels.” Working  Paper  Series 
16582,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Cambridge, MA.

Williams,  Mariama.  2003.  Gender  Mainstreaming  in 
the  Multilateral  Trading  System.  A  Handbook  for 
Policy-Makers  and  Other  Stakeholders.  London: 
Commonwealth Secretariat.

Wood,  Robert  G.,  Mary  E.  Corcoran,  and  Paul  N. 
Courant.  1993.  “Pay  Differences  among  the 
Highly  Paid:  The  Male-Female  Earnings  Gap  in 
Lawyers’ Salaries.” Journal of Labor Economics 11 
(3): 417–41.

World Bank. 2005. Making Rural Roads Work for Both 
Men and Women: Promising Approaches to Engender-
ing Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———.  2007.  The  Environment  for  Women’s  Entre-
preneurship  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa 
Region. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———.  2008.  Reducing  Gender  Based  Differences 
in  Formality  and  Productivity.  Washington,  DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2010a. Arab Republic of Egypt: Gender Assess-
ment  2010:  Narrowing  the  Gap,  Improving  labor 

Market Opportunities for Women in Egypt. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

———.  2010b.  Indonesia  Jobs  Report.  Washington, 

DC: World Bank.

———.  2010c.  Women’s  Economic  Opportunities  in 
the Formal Private Sector in Latin America and the 
Caribbean: A Focus on Entrepreneurship. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

———. 2010d. Women Business and the Law: Mea-
suring  Legal  Gender  Parity  for  Entrepreneurs  and 
Workers  in  128  Economies.  Washington,  DC: 
World Bank.

———.  Forthcoming.  Regional  Study  on  Gender  in 
Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean:  Linking  Labor 
Market Outcomes and Intra-household Dynamics. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank and International Finance Corporation. 
2010. Promoting Women’s Economic Empowerment: 
The Learning Journey of Bekorp. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

World Bank and International Food Policy Research 
Institute.  2010.  Gender  and  Governance  in  Rural 
Services: Insights from India, Ghana, and Ethiopia. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

6CHAPTER

Globalization’s impact on gender 
equality: What’s happened and 
what’s needed

The world is becoming more and more 

integrated. What started with greater 
trade  openness  is  translating  into 
growing global economic integration 
and  interdependence,  as  transnational  move-
ments of people and capital accelerate and in-
formation becomes ever more accessible. Tech-
nological  developments  are  rapidly  changing 
the way people learn, work, and communicate. 
And  the  world  population  is  concentrating  in 
medium and large cities. 

The  new  forces  associated  with  globaliza-
tion—understood  as  the  combination  of  eco-
nomic integration, technological diffusion, and 
greater  access  to  information—have  operated 
through markets, formal institutions, and infor-
mal institutions to lift some of the constraints to 
greater gender equality.

First,  trade  openness  and  the  diffusion  of 
new  information  and  communication  tech-
nologies (ICTs) have translated into more jobs 
and stronger connections to markets for many 
women,  increasing  their  access  to  economic 
opportunities.  In  some  countries  and  sectors, 
women’s  wages  have  also  increased  relative  to 
those of men.

Second, gender inequality has more costs in 
an integrated world. It can diminish countries’ 
ability to compete internationally—particularly 
for countries with export potential in goods and 
services  with  high  female  employment.  And 
given  growing  global  awareness  of  women’s 
rights,  continued  gender  inequality  can  also 
hurt  a  country’s  international  standing.  These 
factors  strengthen  the  incentives  for  policy  ac-
tion toward gender equality around the world. 

Third,  greater  access  to  information  has  al-
lowed  many  in  developing  countries  to  learn 
about life and mores in other parts of the world, 
including those pertaining to the role of women, 
possibly affecting attitudes and behaviors. A shift 
toward more egalitarian gender roles and norms 
has also been facilitated and, in some cases, rein-
forced by women’s economic empowerment.

But in the absence of public policy, globaliza-
tion alone cannot and will not reduce gender in-
equality. Despite signiﬁ cant increases in agency 
and  in  access  to  economic  opportunities  for 
many women in many countries, the rising tide 
has not lifted everybody. Those often left behind 
are women for whom the existing constraints are 
most binding. That is why public action aimed 
at closing existing gender gaps in endowments, 
agency, and access to economic opportunities is 
necessary for countries to fully capitalize on the 
potential of globalization as a force for develop-
ment and greater gender equality.

This chapter discusses the evidence on the im-
pacts of economic integration, technical change, 
and access to information on gender inequality. 
It examines the literature and, where knowledge 
gaps  exist,  draws  on  new  work  commissioned 
for this Report. This new work focuses on gen-
der equality in trade,1 technological change and 
diffusion,2 and access to information.3 Existing 
evidence is strongest on the impact of trade and 
technology on labor market outcomes. And it is 
weakest, at least in the economic literature, on 
the  impact  of  new  trends  on  gender  roles  and 
norms, so that discussion is more tentative and 
speculative.

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

255

THE WORLD IS BECOMING MORE 
INTEGRATED—RECENT TRENDS 
AND FACTS

The world has witnessed an enormous economic 
transformation  over  the  past  three  decades, 
fostered by growing global ﬂ ows of goods and 
services,  technology,  and  information.  These 
changes  have  transformed  the  way  domestic 
and global markets and institutions function—
and have thus changed the economic landscape 
for individuals, households, ﬁ rms, and govern-
ments. A few numbers illustrate the magnitude 
of these changes. 

Merchandise trade in the low- and middle-
income countries rose from 31 percent of gross 
domestic product (GDP) in 1993 to 57 percent 
in 2008, reﬂ ecting both larger North-South and 
South-South ﬂ ows (ﬁ gure 6.1).4 Signiﬁ cant in-
creases in trade openness occurred in all regions, 
particularly  in  South  Asia,  where  merchandise 
trade rose from 16 percent of GDP to 41 percent, 
and in East Asia, where it rose from 35 percent to 
52 percent. Changes in foreign direct investment 
(FDI) have also been signiﬁ cant, with ﬂ ows in-
creasing from 0.5 percent of GDP in 1980 to 4 
percent in 2007, followed by a decline during the 
recent ﬁ nancial crisis.

As  goods,  services,  capital,  and  people  ﬂ ow 
across  countries  faster  than  ever  before,  infor-
mation  and  knowledge  have  become  global 
commodities.  Technological  change  crosses 
borders embedded in traded goods, accelerating 
its adoption and adaptation. And although tech-
nology transfers tend to happen ﬁ rst in exports 
and imports, they quickly spread beyond them 
as ﬁ rms interact and workers change jobs.5 Sim-
ilarly, ideas and skills move from one country to 
another as the share of skilled migrants in the 
pool of international migrants increases—from 
about 25 percent in 1990 to 36 percent in 2000.
Thanks  to  the  spread  of  cell  phones  and 
the  Internet,  more  men  and  women  are  gain-
ing  access  to  information—global,  domestic, 
and  local.  In  1998,  only  20  percent  of  people 
in developed countries and about 1 percent in 
the developing world had a cell phone subscrip-
tion. By 2009, these shares had climbed to 100 
percent and 57 percent. Internet access and use 
have also grown. In high-income countries, In-
ternet  users  increased  from  12  percent  of  the 
population in 1998 to 64 percent in 2009, and 
from near 0 to 17.5 percent in developing coun-
tries (ﬁ gure 6.2).6

FIGURE 6.1   Global trade has grown rapidly since 1990

Merchandise trade

P
D
G

 

 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2009

high-income countries
middle-income countries

low-income countries
world

Source: World Development Indicators.

These changes have taken place against (and 
possibly contributed to) the backdrop of rising 
economic  growth  in  most  areas  of  the  world, 
particularly  in  some  developing  countries—
even  with  the  recent  food,  fuel,  and  ﬁ nancial 
crises. Until the second half of the 20th century, 
no country had sustained annual per capita in-
come growth averaging 5 percent or more over 
15 years. But since then, more than 35 countries 
have  accomplished  that  feat,  three-quarters  of 
them in the developing world.7

TRADE OPENNESS AND ICTS HAVE 
INCREASED WOMEN’S ACCESS TO 
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES 

Over  the  past  25  years,  trade  openness  and 
the  spread  of  information  and  communica-
tion  technologies  have  expanded  economic 
opportunities.

The  demand  for  female  workers  in  the  ex-
port and ICT-enabled sectors has increased, and 
as  women  have  ﬁ lled  these  new  jobs,  the  gen-
der  distribution  of  employment  across  sectors 
and across countries has changed. Women have 
moved  out  of  agriculture  and  into  manufac-
turing and particularly services. These changes 
have taken place across all countries, but female 
(and male) employment in the manufacturing 
and services has grown faster in developing than 

256 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 6.2   Cell phone and Internet access has increased signiﬁ cantly in both 

developed and developing countries

a.  Cell phone subscriptions (total population, %)

b.  Internet users (total population, %)

developing world

developing world

1998

2009

1%

57%

1998

1%

2009

17.5%

developed world

developed world

1998

2009

20%

100%

1998

12%

2009

64%

Source: International Telecommunications Union 2010.

developed countries, reﬂ ecting broader changes 
in  the  global  distribution  of  production  and 
labor. In developing countries, the shares of fe-
male  manufacturing  and  service  employment 
in  global  female  employment  increased  from 
6 and 17 percent respectively in 1987 to 7 and 
24  percent  in  2007.  In  contrast,  in  developed 
countries  the  share  of  female  manufacturing 
employment  in  global  female  employment  fell 
from 12 percent in 1987 to 6 in 2007, while the 
share of female service employment rose from 
44  to  46  percent  over  the  same  period  (ﬁ gure 
6.3).8 Changes in male employment shares were 
qualitatively similar but different in magnitude.
At the same time, improvements in ICT tech-
nology have allowed women (and men) around 
the world to access markets in growing numbers 
by lowering information barriers and reducing 
the  transaction  costs  associated  with  market 
work. Because time and mobility constraints are 
more severe for women than men, women stand 
to beneﬁ t more from these developments (chap-
ters 4 and 5).

Greater  access  to  economic  opportunities 
and, in some cases, higher returns to economic 
activity provide stronger incentives to accumu-
late human capital, particularly for women, and 
are likely to increase investments in the skills of 
girls  and  young  women—tomorrow’s  workers 
(box 6.1).

Female workers wanted 
The  early  years  of  trade  liberalization  were 
mainly characterized by the move of textile and 
information  technology  manufacturing  from 
developed  to  developing  countries.9  New  em-
ployment  in  manufacturing  often  consisted  of 
labor-intensive assembly line jobs, and the ini-
tial  gains  in  manufacturing  employment  were 
greatest  in  countries  with  abundant  unskilled 
labor and a comparative advantage in produc-
ing basic manufactures.

This shift in geographic location of produc-
tion promoted female labor force participation 
and the feminization of employment in manu-
facturing in developing countries—particularly 
in  Asia  and  Central  America.10  In  the  Repub-
lic  of  Korea,  the  share  of  women  employed  in 
manufacturing grew from 6 percent in 1970 to 
around 30 percent in the 1980s and early 1990s. 
The  importance  of  manufacturing  as  an  em-
ployer of female labor in the Republic of Korea 
has since declined (to 14 percent in 2007), but 
the sector still employs 10 times more women 
today than in the 1960s. Similarly, in Mexico, fe-
male employment in manufacturing grew from 
12 percent in 1960 to 17 percent in 2008, with 10 
times more women in 2008 than in 1960.11 

In the past 15 years, the spread of ICTs has 
expanded trade in services and has, to a lesser 
extent, promoted the growth of ICT sectors in 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed

257

FIGURE 6.3   Economic opportunities have changed

FIGURE 6.3a    Female (and male) employment in the manufacturing and service 

sectors has grown faster in developing countries, reﬂ ecting the 
broader changes in the global distribution of production and labor

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Women

developing
countries

developed
 countries

24

7

15

46

6

2007

17

6

18

44

12
4

1987

 

l

l

t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
e
a
m

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0p

a
t
o
t
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e

 
l

 

Men

developing
countries

developed
 countries

24

13

19

27

15
2

18

10

23

27

18

4

1987

2007

l

t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e
e
a
m
e
f
 
l

l

 

 

a
t
o
t
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

services, developing countries
manufacturing, developing countries
agriculture, developing countries

services, developed countries
manufacturing, developed countries
agriculture, developed countries

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on LABORSTA International Labor Organization.

FIGURE 6.3b   . . . and increases in female employment levels (but not male) 

between 1995 and 2005 were correlated with increases in 
international trade

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
-
o
t
-
t
n
e
m
y
o
p
m
e

l

 
,

x
e
d
n

i
 

 

 

)
0
0
1
=
5
9
9
1
(
 
5
0
0
2

o
i
t
a
r

200

150

100

50

0

100
300
export volume index, 2005 (1995 = 100)

200

400

, fitted values

female
ff
female
ff

male, fitted values
male

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on World Development Indicators.

developing  countries. As  a  result  employment 
shifted from manufacturing, where jobs could 
be  automated,  to  services.  In  the  process,  de-
mand  for  nimble  ﬁ ngers  on  the  assembly  line 
gave  way  to  demand  for  computer  literacy  as 
the tasks became more sophisticated and direct 

interaction  with  clients  and  customers  more 
common. 

As technology advanced, low-skilled women 
in light manufacturing were often displaced by 
men. In Malaysia, women made up to 80 per-
cent of manufacturing workers in the ﬁ rst phase 

258 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 6.1   A job today or a better job tomorrow—The impact 

of increased access to economic opportunities on 
women’s human capital 

Globalization’s impact is not limited to today’s female workers—stronger eco-
nomic incentives to accumulate skills could also foster higher labor force par-
ticipation among young women in the years to come. Whether and how much 
expected  economic  returns  to  education  aff ect  schooling  decisions  have 
received much attention in the literature over the past few decades, particu-
larly in developing countries, where compulsory education laws either do not 
exist or are enforced poorly and where a large part of the young population 
does not go to school. But families and individuals do respond to higher eco-
nomic returns by increasing their investments in education,a and the prospect 
of higher returns matters more for girls (chapter 3).

In  this  context,  increased  employment  opportunities  in  export-oriented 
sectors and ICT-related jobs are expected to strengthen existing incentives for 
investments in education. In India, the emergence of jobs linked to information-
 technology-enabled service centers (mainly call centers) increased the number 
of  children  enrolled  in  school  by  5.7  percent.  English-language  schools  ac--
counted for all of this change, consistent with the idea that new job opportuni-
ties were linked to specifi c skills, such as speaking English.b South Africa pro-
vides similar evidence.c

Because female workers have benefi ted disproportionately more than men 
from the changes brought about by trade openness and technological change, 
girls and young women should have stronger incentives to go to school than 
boys and young men. For example, in rural India business process outsourcing 
recruiting and placement services increased employment among young girls, 
with no eff ect for older women or for men of any age. Girls ages 5–15 in villages 
that received the recruiting services were 3–5 percentage points more likely 
to be in school than comparable girls in other villages. There was no change 
for boys.d

a.  Foster and Rosenzweig 1996; Jensen 2010b.
b.  Oster and Millet 2010.
c.  Levinsohn 2004.
d.  Jensen 2010a

of  globalization,  but  by  1987  that  percentage 
had fallen to 67 percent and has since continued 
to  decline.12  In  Latin America,  too,  low-skilled 
female workers in light manufacturing, particu-
larly electronics, lost their jobs as various aspects 
of production became automated.13

New ICT-enabled jobs in services—particu-
larly information processing in banking, insur-
ance,  printing,  and  publishing—were  mainly 
taken up by women, but not the same women 
who lost their manufacturing jobs, because the 
new  jobs  required  a  different  set  of  skills,  in-
cluding  keyboarding,  English,  and  sometimes 
French. Female employment in data entry and 
processing was initially highest in Barbados, Ja-
maica, and the Philippines.14 Later, ICT-related 
jobs were concentrated in software, call centers, 
and  geographical  information  systems,  and 
clustered  in  Malaysia  and  India,  particularly 

in  Delhi  and  Mumbai,  where  call  centers  em-
ploy more than 1 million people, most of them 
women.15

In both manufacturing and service exports, 
growth  in  female  employment  was  faster  than 
ever before and faster than in other sectors. And 
although exports in many countries initially ac-
counted for a small fraction of total female em-
ployment, their importance grew over time as a 
result of rapid employment growth.

Global  agriculture  has  also  changed.  The 
export  share  of  traditional  crops  has  declined, 
while  the  share  of  nontraditional  and  high-
value-added  exports—such  as  horticulture, 
ﬂ ori culture,  protein-rich  meats,  and  processed 
foods—has  grown  rapidly.  Their  expansion—
driven by advances in refrigeration, lower trans-
port  costs,  and  the  growth  of  supermarkets  as 
dominant  buyers  in  global  value  chains—has 
created a wide range of jobs.16

But the feminization of employment through 
exports appears to be less common in agricul-
tural  economies.  Growth  in  traditional  agri-
cultural  exports  has  beneﬁ ted  men  more  than 
women because women are less likely to work 
on  commercial  crops  and  are  crowded  out  of 
traditionally female-intensive crops when these 
crops  become  commercial.17  In  contrast,  non-
traditional  and  high-value-added  exports  have 
stimulated higher female employment in export 
production, although the impacts vary by coun-
try  and  product.18  In  Chile  and  South  Africa, 
new female employment was mainly temporary 
and  seasonal,19  while  in  Colombia  and  Kenya, 
women  were  more  often  hired  as  permanent 
workers in the ﬂ ower industry.20

Higher  female  employment  in  exports  has 
often  (but  not  always)  been  accompanied  by 
wage  gains.  Transnational  and  exporting  com-
panies  may  be  able  to  pay  higher  wages  than 
locally  owned  ﬁ rms  and  ﬁ rms  producing  for 
the  domestic  market.  They  also  may  be  better 
able  to  insulate  their  workers  from  economic 
cycles—and  their  workers  may  be  better  pro-
tected  by  labor  legislation  and  are  more  likely 
to be unionized and thus eligible for beneﬁ ts.21 
That is why female wages are frequently higher22 
and the gender wage gap is lower in exports than 
in other sectors, even after controlling for worker 
characteristics. Evidence from China shows that 
female workers receive higher wages in the new 
export-oriented  industries  than  in  the  older 
state  industries.23  In  Mexico,  over  1990–95  a 

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

259

higher  export  orientation  was  associated  with 
a  narrowing  of  the  gender  wage  gap.24 And  in 
Bangladesh and Morocco, wage discrimination 
against women in textile exports was lower than 
in  other  manufacturing  in  the  early  stages  of 
liberalization, and it declined even further over 
time.25

In some places, however, greater openness has 
had little impact on the gender wage gap, and in 
others, the gains have been only temporary.26 In 
the Republic of Korea, greater openness had lit-
tle impact or even widened the  gender gap. And 
data  from  Mexico  and  Honduras  suggest  that 
wages in recently established export processing 
zones tend to be higher than local wages but over 
time the differences narrow.27 In the developed 
world, the impact of higher trade openness on 
women and men has been extensively debated 
(box 6.2).

Brain or brawn? 
ICTs have transformed the organization of eco-
nomic  activity  over  the  past  quarter  century, 
increasing  the  demand  for  and  the  returns  to 
brain (cognitive) and nonroutine skills relative 
to brawn (manual) and routine skills (box 6.3).28 
In the United States, for example, brain tasks in-
creased and brawn tasks declined between 1950 
and  2005.29  Driving  this  shift  were  changes  in 
the composition of the economy’s occupational 
structure, such as the rise in the number of doc-
tors per 100 workers and the fall in the number 
of  production  line  operators  per  100  workers. 
Changes  in  speciﬁ c  occupations,  such  as  the 
growing  use  of  robotics  for  production  line 
operators, also contributed to the shift. As with 
growing trade in goods and services, these shifts 
have boosted demand for female workers.

These  changes  are  captured  in  ﬁ gure  6.4, 
where  circles  represent  different  occupations. 
Circles become bigger or smaller between 1950 
and 2005 depending on whether the number of 
people  employed  in  that  occupation  increased 
(lawyers  and  judges)  or  decreased  (farmers) 
during  the  period.  Similarly,  movements  from 
left to right or right to left represent changes in 
the brain requirements of a particular occupa-
tion, whereas movements up and down capture 
changes  in  the  brawn  requirements—where 
requirements  are  measured  on  a  scale  of  0  to 
100. As brain requirements increase and brawn 
requirements decrease between 1950 and 2005, 
most  circles  shift  downward  and  to  the  right. 

BOX 6.2   The impact of globalization on men (and women) 

in developed countries

Greater economic integration has also had an impact on workers in the devel-
oped  world.  It  has  benefi ted  skilled  workers,  sometimes  at  the  expense  of 
unskilled ones. It has increased the demand for skilled workers, relative to that 
for unskilled ones. And this shift has translated into greater wage inequality in 
the United States and greater unemployment among the unskilled in Europe, 
where  labor  market  regulations  prevented  the  wages  of  the  unskilled  from 
falling.a

Impacts were larger among men than among women because men were 
concentrated in the industries and occupations most aff ected by foreign com-
petition  and  the  relocation  of  production  to  the  developing  world.  Higher 
trade openness accounts for 12–33 percent of the employment losses in manu-
facturing and for about 20 percent of the rise in the skill premiums during the 
1980s and 1990s in the United States.b Technological change also accounts for 
an important share of the increase in skill premiums. Evidence of trade’s impact 
on women’s wages and employment is more mixed.c

Trade liberalization and foreign direct investment leading to the off shoring 
of medium- and high-skill jobs may have also raised job insecurity. Workers in 
the United Kingdom in sectors with high foreign investment are more likely to 
report greater economic insecurity.d And U.S. workers in service activities and 
occupations that are potentially tradable report both greater insecurity and a 
stronger desire for a strong government safety net.e

In some cases, the impact of these changes reaches beyond the economic 
sphere. The notion of men as the main breadwinners has been challenged by 
the  greater  economic  opportunities  for  women  and  the  job  destruction  in 
male-dominated sectors; these changes have often led to adjustment in the 
power balance in families.

a.   Freeman 1994; Wood 1995.
b.   Baily and Lawrence 2004; Bivens 2004; Bivens 2006; Harrison, McLaren, and McMillan 2010; Lawrence 

2008.

c.   Black and Brainerd 2004; Wood 1991.
d.  Scheve and Slaughter 2004.
e.  Anderson and Gascon 2007.

BOX 6.3   Occupational tasks and skill requirements—

Getting the terms right

The work performed in a particular occupation can be broken down to tasks, 
each  characterized  by  its  intellectual  or  physical  requirements  and  by  how 
amenable it is to standardization. The discussion here uses the word pairs “cog-
nitive/manual” and “brain/brawn” interchangeably to capture whether a task is 
primarily intellectual or physical. Similarly, tasks amenable to standardization 
are referred to as routine and those that are not as nonroutine. These choices 
refl ect the terminology used in the literature on the impact of technological 
change on occupational skills requirements.

Both manual and routine cognitive tasks are well defi ned in the sense that 
they are easily programmable and can be performed by computers at econom-
ically feasible cost—a feature that makes them amenable to substitution for 
computer  capital.a  Nonroutine  and  cognitive  tasks,  by  contrast,  are  not  well 
defi ned or programmable and, as things currently stand, cannot be easily per-
formed by computers.

a.  Levy and Murnane 1992.

260 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 6.4   The United States experienced a dramatic increase 

in brain requirements and a decline in brawn 
requirements between 1950 and 2005

50kg

a.  Jobs require more brawn, 1950

l

e
a
c
s
 
t
n
e
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
r
 
n
w
a
r
b

l

e
a
c
s
 
t
n
e
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
r
 
n
w
a
r
b

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

brain requirement scale

b.  Jobs require more brain, 2005

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

brain requirement scale

sailors and deck hands

managers, officials, and proprietors 

laundry and dry cleaning operators
lawyers and judges

laborers
farmers

Source: Rendall 2010.

Similar evidence of the impact of ICT and com-
puters on the demand for brain versus brawn is 
also available for other developed countries.30 

Traditionally, men have been more likely to 
be  employed  in  sectors  and  occupations  with 
stronger  physical  requirements  than  women 
(men have an advantage in brawn). So comput-
ers, by deemphasizing physical skills, should fa-
vor women, even if women have no advantage 
over  men  in  using  a  computer  or  acquiring 
computer skills. Evidence from the United States 
and Germany supports this idea. Sustained in-
creases  in  the  demand  for  brain  versus  brawn 
associated  with  ICT  and  the  computerization 

of the workplace explain most of the observed 
rise in demand for female workers, female labor 
force participation, and female employment in 
these  countries  over  the  past  few  decades.31  In 
addition, increases in the returns to brain rela-
tive to brawn can account for a large fraction of 
the  reduction  in  the  gender  wage  gap  in  both 
countries since the 1970s and 1980s.32

To the extent that economic integration and 
particularly foreign direct investment promote 
the move of technological change from the de-
veloped to the developing world and facilitate its 
adoption  and  adaptation,  the  relative  demand 
for—and the returns to—brain should increase 
similarly in developing countries.

The data on this question are very limited,33 
but  new  work  for  this  Report  provides  sup-
porting  evidence  from  Brazil,  India,  Mexico, 
and  Thailand  during  1990–2005.34  In  all  four 
countries,  brawn  requirements  were  signiﬁ -
cantly  higher  and  brain  requirements  signiﬁ -
cantly  lower  in  1990  than  those  in  the  United 
States in 1950. But differences then diminished, 
as brain requirements increased and brawn re-
quirements decreased for both men and wom-
en—driven mainly by the decline in the relative 
importance of agricultural employment and the 
associated changes in the occupational structure 
of the economy.

In  Brazil,  Mexico,  and  Thailand,  women 
were in occupations with lower brawn require-
ments than men at the beginning of the period, 
while in India brawn requirements were similar 
for women and men because of women’s heavy 
presence  in  agriculture.  In  Brazil,  India,  and 
Thailand,  brain  requirements  increased  faster 
for  women  than  for  men.  In  Mexico,  by  con-
trast, the expansion of low-skill female maquila 
employment  meant  that  brain  requirements 
declined  and  brawn  requirements  increased 
slightly among women (ﬁ gure 6.5).35

“

The world is getting computerized 
and without knowledge of computers 
you will be left behind. So I have 
started to learn how to use a 
computer now.

”

Young woman, Bhutan 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed

261

FIGURE 6.5   Men and especially women in Brazil, India, Mexico, and Thailand 

have experienced an increase in brain requirements and a decline in 
brawn requirements over the past 15 years

a.  Brain requirements

50kg

b.  Brawn requirements

n
e
m
o
w

n
e
m

United States

Brazil

India

Mexico

Thailand

United States

Brazil

India

Mexico

Thailand

0 10 20 30 40 50

60 70 80 90 100

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

brain requirements scale
2005

1990

brawn requirements scale

1990

2005

n
e
m
o
w

n
e
m

United States

Brazil

India

Mexico

Thailand

United States

Brazil

India

Mexico

Thailand

Source: Rendall 2011.

Changes in the supply of and returns to brain 
and brawn have also narrowed the gender wage 
gap  in  these  countries,  although  the  impacts 
vary  more  widely.  In  Brazil  and  India,  these 
changes account for a large part of the observed 
decline  in  wage  differences  between  men  and 
women  during  1990–2005.  In  Mexico,  where 
the gender wage gap increased slightly, the rise 
in the returns to brain mitigated the widening 
of the gap. In Thailand, changes in the supply of 
and returns to brain and brawn cannot explain 
changes  in  the  gender  wage  gap—primarily 
because men and women are distributed fairly 
evenly across sectors and occupations.36

More connected and better informed—
ICTs have increased women’s access 
to markets
ICTs  can  improve  access  to  markets  and  in-
crease participation in market work by reduc-
ing transaction costs associated with time and 
mobility constraints. They facilitate the gather-
ing and transmission of price and other infor-
mation and increase the ﬂ exibility in where and 
when  economic  activities  can  occur.  Because 
women often face more restrictions than men 
in  their  mobility  and  available  time  (chapters 

4 and 5), they stand to beneﬁ t more from these 
developments.

The focus here is on cell phones and the In-
ternet because they are the two most commonly 
available ICTs outside the workplace and their 
coverage is expected to continue to rise rapidly.
Mobile phone access, very high in developed 
countries, has grown substantially in the recent 
past  in  the  developing  world,  and  the  gap  be-
tween the two is closing fast. Within countries, 
gender differences in cell phone access and use 
are almost imperceptible in high- and middle-
income countries, especially among young peo-
ple, but gender differences are still large in low-
income countries, where a woman is 21 percent 
less likely than a man to own a mobile phone. 
This ﬁ gure increases to 23 percent in Africa (ﬁ g-
ure 6.6), 24 percent in the Middle East, and 37 
percent in South Asia.37 

In  contrast,  the  differences  in  Internet  ac-
cess and use between developed and developing 
countries are still very large, and gender gaps are 
signiﬁ cant in some countries. Among countries 
with data, Internet use ranges from 90 percent 
of  the  population  in  Iceland  to  10  percent  in 
Honduras  and  Nicaragua.  In  addition,  gender 
gaps are substantial within some developed and 

262 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 6.6   In Africa, women are less likely than men to own 

or use a cell phone 

 

i

l

/
g
n
n
w
o
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

 

e
n
o
h
p

 
l
l

 

 

e
c
a
g
n
i
s
u

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Benin

Kenya Mozambique

Senegal

South
Africa

Tanzania

Uganda

men, age 16 and older

women, age 16 and older

Source: www.ResearchICTafrica.net.

developing  countries  and  appear  to  be  uncor-
related  with  the  overall  levels  of  access  in  the 
country—in  Luxembourg,  Serbia,  Switzerland, 
and Turkey, differences in access to Internet be-
tween  men  and  women  exceed  10  percentage 
points (ﬁ gure 6.7). 

So, mobile phones should have had a much 
more  transformative  impact  than  the  Internet 
in developing countries so far. The evidence on 
both  aggregate  and  gender-disaggregated  im-
pacts of cell phones on labor market participa-
tion  and  access  to  economic  opportunities  in 
these countries is surprisingly sparse, however, 
with most information coming from case stud-
ies, many of them in Africa and South Asia.

Cell  phone  access  and  use  can  alleviate 
time  and  mobility  constraints  for  women  by 
increasing  the  ability  to  coordinate  their  fam-
ily and work lives, reducing the cost of money 
transfers,  and  cutting  down  the  physical  labor 
or travel required to discover information (in-
cluding avoiding fruitless trips to get supplies or 
meet customers).38 In Senegal, female ﬁ shmon-

“

Everybody uses cell phones, even market women 
and all. For example, when their goods come, the 
person will just call them.

Young woman, Liberia

”

gers report that access to cell phones facilitates 
communication  with  their  clients  and  suppli-
ers,  reducing  travel  time  and  costs,  and  with 
their families while they are away from home.39 
Similarly, 41 percent of women interviewed in 
Bolivia, the Arab Republic of Egypt, India, and 
Kenya  declared  that  owning  a  mobile  phone 
had increased their income and their access to 
economic opportunities. The impacts were sig-
niﬁ cantly  higher  among  female  entrepreneurs: 
female business owners reported that they were 
2.5  times  more  likely  than  nonbusiness  own-
ers  to  use  their  mobile  phone  to  earn  income, 
and they were signiﬁ cantly more interested than 
other women in receiving services such as no-
tiﬁ cations  of  money  transfers  on  their  phones 
(63  percent  versus  41  percent).40  Finally,  while 
the focus here is on access to economic oppor-
tunities, the impact of mobile phones is broader 
(box 6.4 and chapter 7).

In  many  cases,  women,  particularly  rural 
women, were willing to reduce expenditures on 
other  items  to  have  access  to  a  mobile  phone, 
suggesting  that  the  perceived  beneﬁ ts  out-
weighed  the  costs,  which  averaged  3.5  percent 
of  household  income  among  those  surveyed. 
Thirty-four percent of women in rural Bolivia, 
Egypt,  India,  and  Kenya  reallocated  resources 
away from other items to pay for a phone sub-
scription, compared with 20 percent among all 
women surveyed and 12 percent among women 
who do paid work. 

Closing the gender gap in cell phone access 
would  bring  the  beneﬁ ts  of  mobile  phones  to 
an  additional  300  million  women  in  low-  and 
middle-income countries. And it could also gen-
erate up to $13 billion in incremental revenue to 
mobile  operators,  given  that  women  represent 
two-thirds  of  the  untapped  market  for  mobile 
growth.41

The  picture  is  quite  different  for  the  Inter-
net. Low private access in the developing world, 
especially in rural areas, has severely limited its 
impact on access to economic opportunities—
beyond the impact of ICTs on outsourcing and 
service  export  employment  discussed  earlier. 
Governments  and  development  agencies  have 
set up village “telecenters” for public use, gener-
ally as a fee for service, to increase access to basic 
ICT  services  among  underserved  populations. 
These centers generally offer computers linked 
to the Internet and are available for word pro-
cessing and graphics work, faxes, e-mail, photo-
copying, and phone lines. They may also feature 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed

263

training on the equipment, and some incorpo-
rate radio broadcasts or video resources.

The lack of systematic evaluation again makes 
it difﬁ cult to assess whether these centers con-
tribute much to business, particularly for female 
entrepreneurs in the local community, but anec-
dotal evidence suggests some positive impacts.42
In  Cameroon,  50  percent  of  female  entrepre-
neurs in textiles reported using these centers for 
both  professional  and  social  uses  and  extolled 
their usefulness for business-related communi-
cation.43 But given high set-up and maintenance 
costs  for  telecenters,  more  conclusive  evidence 
is  needed  on  their  impact  on  (women’s)  labor 
force participation and access to economic op-
portunities.  In  other  places,  groups  of  female 
entrepreneurs  have  used  the  Internet  to  have 
more direct access to domestic and international 
markets. In Morocco, home-based female weav-
ers use the Internet to sell rugs and other textiles 
and to keep a larger share of their proﬁ ts than 
traditional middle-man-based systems.44 

In  high-income  countries,  by  contrast,  ICTs 
allow  people  to  work  from  different  locations 
and on different schedules—in other words, to 
work in more ﬂ exible ways, lowering the trans-
action costs in market work. Telecommuting (or 
telework) is fueled by increased access to home 
computing systems, complementary telecommu-
nication  devices,  and  cheaper  implementation 
costs  associated  with  lower-priced  equipment 
and broadband services. In the United States, 26 
percent of workers used telework fully or regu-
larly in 2009. In the European Union, telework 
almost doubled in 2000–05 to reach 9 percent of 
all workers. This trend appears to reﬂ ect broad 
practices.  Data  from  the  Netherlands  suggest 
that  the  proportion  of  companies  employing 
teleworkers doubled from 2003 to 2007.45

To the extent that time constraints are more 
binding for women, particularly those in fami-
lies with children (chapter 5), telework can have 
big  gender  impacts.  Seven  percent  of  working 
women in Europe report that they telework reg-
ularly, compared with 12 percent of men. These 
differences reﬂ ect the fact that telework is more 
common in sectors where male employment is 
dominant. However, it is women who have ex-
perienced faster growth in telework in the past 
few  years  in  almost  every  European  country 
for  which  data  is  available,  suggesting  a  stron-
ger willingness or desire among women to take 
advantage of more ﬂ exible work arrangements 
(ﬁ gure 6.8).

FIGURE 6.7   Differences in Internet access and use between 

developed and developing countries are still very 
large, and gender gaps are signiﬁ cant in some 
developed and developing countries

Austria
Belgium
Canada
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong SAR, China
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Latvia
Luxembourg
Macao SAR, China
Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Oman
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Azerbaijan
Bulgaria
Lithuania
Macedonia, FYR
Romania
Serbia
Turkey
Ukraine
Thailand
Brazil
Chile
Costa Rica
Ecuador
El Salvador
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Mauritius

high-income
countries

Europe and
Central Asia

East Asia and Pacific

Latin America
and the Caribbean

Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

0

20

40

60

80

100

percentage of Internet users

men

women

Source: World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators database.

Home-based telework is much more limited 
in  other  developing  regions.  Even  in  dynamic 
cities  such  as  Mumbai  and  Kuala  Lumpur,  the 
incidence of telework is 0.4–1.0 percent of em-

264 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 6.4   Leveraging mobile and ICT technology to improve 

access to services

Mobile phones, the Internet, and more traditional communication technolo-
gies,  such  as  radio,  are  providing  new  platforms  to  disseminate  information 
and increase access to services among those in remote or underserved areas 
and among those with lower mobility. Because women are overrepresented in 
these groups, they tend to benefi t disproportionately from these initiatives—
even when the initiatives are not targeted to women.

Most  experiments  have  been  in  banking,  health,  and  education.  A  few 
examples  follow.  Mobile  phone  technology  provides  access  to  fi nancial  ser-
vices, such as processing money transfers and small payments, and promotes 
savings (M-PESA in Kenya). Text messaging provides women and health work-
ers valuable information about pre- and postnatal care, nutrition (Text4Baby in 
the United States and the Russian Federation, Rapid SMS in Rwanda), and ongo-
ing treatments. Some projects allow for interactions with users, including the 
customization of services (Wawanet in Peru). And some health services have 
been combined with other tools to promote savings to pay for the cost of pre-
natal  care  and  delivery  (Mamabika,  in  coordination  with  M-PESA,  in  Kenya). 
Mobile  phones  and  the  Internet  also  promote  literacy  (Mobilink  and  United 
Nations Educational, Scientifi c, and Cultural Organization in Pakistan) and facil-
itate access to distance education, particularly higher and vocational education 
(Community Nurses in Kenya).

Beyond access to services, mobile phones and the Internet allow women to 
be more connected to each other and their communities (Project Zumbido in 
Mexico, Tostan and UNICEF in Senegal) and to have a stronger social and politi-
cal voice (Mobili-ise in Kosovo).

Most of these initiatives are fairly new and have not yet been evaluated. 
Moving forward, it will be important to learn more about what works and what 
does not in each context and to continue experimenting to fully capitalize on 
the potential power of new technologies.

Sources: Franklin and others 2006; GSMA Development Fund 2010; Kanwar and Taplin 2001; Lester and 
others 2010; Melhem, Morrell, and Tandon 2009.

ployment  in  ICT-enabled  jobs.  This  low  level 
may reﬂ ect both women’s preference for institu-
tion-based teleworking and managers’ concerns. 
In  Malaysia,  ICT  ﬁ rm  managers  reported  that 
face-to-face  interaction  with  their  employees 
was  essential,  and  in  India,  managers  also  ex-
pressed a preference for direct monitoring and 
supervision of workers.46

ADAPT OR MISS THE BOAT

Trade openness, technological diffusion, and ac-
cess to information have fundamentally changed 
the  way  countries  interact  and  compete  with 
each other in the global economy. Because gen-
der  (and  other)  inequality  has  more  costs  in  a 
globalized world, these changes could translate 
into stronger incentives for both ﬁ rms and gov-
ernments to move toward gender equality. Spe-
ciﬁ cally in countries with a comparative advan-

tage in female goods, gender differences in access 
to market work and persistent employment seg-
regation  by  gender  could  severely  undermine 
the  country’s  capacity  to  compete  internation-
ally and ultimately hamper economic growth.

Added to this economic reality is growing in-
ternational pressure for countries to grant and 
enforce formal rights for women. International 
action in this area has translated into agreements 
sponsored  by  international  organizations,  pri-
marily  the  International  Labour  Organization 
(ILO)  and  the  United  Nations  (UN),  followed 
by strong international pressure on countries to 
formally  adhere  to  these  agreements  either  di-
rectly or indirectly as part of broader trade and 
other economic agreements. 

The evidence (albeit limited) discussed in the 
following section suggests that this combination 
of  home-grown  and  international  pressure  for 
greater  gender  equality,  fostered  by  globaliza-
tion, has contributed to the progress of the past 
few decades.

The rising costs of (gender) discrimination 
in a global world 
Economic theory says that greater competition 
in product markets should reduce discrimina-
tion in factor (labor, capital, and land) markets.47 
In other words, stronger competitive pressures 
from greater economic integration should force 
employers to reduce costly gender (and other) 
discrimination.48 This idea is supported by data 
from the United States in the 1980s, where in-
creased competition through trade contributed 
to the relative improvement in female wages in 
concentrated  industries,  suggesting  that  trade 
beneﬁ ted  women  by  reducing  ﬁ rms’  ability  to 
discriminate—although there are concerns that 
this decline also reﬂ ects changes in the compo-
sition of employment in favor of more skilled 
female  workers  (at  the  expense  of  less  skilled 
ones).49 

It is not simply the overall level of trade that 
matters  for  how  trade  openness  affects  gender 
equality:  the  comparative  advantage  of  coun-
tries is equally important.50 New work for this 
Report shows that countries with a comparative 
advantage in female- or brain-intensive indus-
tries (ﬁ gure 6.9)—ones employing a large share 
of female workers—face higher costs from gen-
der discrimination when they open to trade. The 
reverse holds for countries with a disadvantage 
in the production of such goods. In addition, the 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed

265

status of women should affect not just trade vol-
umes but also trade patterns in the short run.51

Indeed, gender equality appears to be higher 
in countries with larger export shares in female-
intensive goods and vice versa. Countries with 
higher  female  labor  force  participation,  lower 
fertility,  and  higher  educational  attainment 
have  larger  export  shares  in  sectors  intensive 
in female labor. Speciﬁ cally, moving from low 
equality  (bottom  quarter  of  the  distribution 
for any of the three selected indicators) to high 
equality (top quarter) increases the global ex-
port share of sectors with high shares of female 
employment (female-intensive sectors) by 1–2 
percentage  points  more  than  that  of  sectors 
with  low  shares  of  female  employment  (non-
female-intensive sectors).52 This effect holds af-
ter accounting for gender equality and trade as 
a two-way relationship.

Furthermore,  countries  with  a  comparative 
advantage  in  the  production  of  female-labor-
intensive goods have lower fertility rates and, to 
a lesser extent, higher female labor force partici-
pation and educational attainment. For instance, 
moving  from  low  female-intensity  in  exports 
(bottom quarter of the distribution) to high in-
tensity (top quarter) lowers fertility by as much 
as 0.21 births per woman, or about 10 percent 
of the global total fertility rate.53 As before, the 
effect  is  measured  after  controlling  for  reverse 
causality between gender equality and trade.

The new research undertaken for this Report 
focused speciﬁ cally on the relationship between 
trade  and  labor  force  participation,  but  other 
analysts have examined the role that wages play 
as a source of comparative advantage based on 
low  costs  of  production,  and  have  argued  that 
in some sectors and countries low wages (par-
ticularly  among  women)  have  allowed  export-
oriented  industries  to  remain  competitive.54
Yet, while it is true that wages in export ﬁ rms in 
developing countries are frequently lower than 
those paid by ﬁ rms in developed countries, they 
are often higher than the wages offered by other 
job opportunities in the local labor market (see 
discussion in concluding section).

That  the  nature  of  comparative  advantage 
matters  in  understanding  how  trade  openness 
affects gender equality has implications for pol-
icy. Since 1970, the share of female labor embed-
ded in exports in developing countries has in-
creased by about 10 percent, and most countries 
should expect further increases as ICTs continue 

FIGURE 6.8    Telework has grown rapidly in recent years, 

particularly among female workers

Europe and
Central Asia

Western
Europe

Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Malta
Poland
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Turkey
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom

0

15

20

25

% teleworking at least one quarter of the time

women

2000–01
2005

men

2000–01
2005

Source: WDR 2012 team estimates based on European Working Conditions Survey 2000, 2001, and 2005.

Note: No data are available for Norway, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United Kingdom in 2000–01. 

to spread. Moreover, industries with high shares 
of  female  employment  tend  to  be  more  labor 
intensive than those with low shares and to ac-
count for most export-related employment. So, 
without actions to eliminate existing barriers to 
access to markets, countries with a comparative 
advantage  in  female-intensive  goods  will  lose 
ground to their competitors in global markets.

Peer pressure and international carrots 
and sticks
Since the 1960s, concerns about gender equality 
and  systematic  discrimination  against  women 

266 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 6.9   The share of female employment varies 

FIGURE 6.10   The number of 

signiﬁ cantly across industries

Industries with lowest and highest

shares of female employment

5.4

5.7

10.3

11.3

11.5

logging

coal mining
cement, concrete,
lime, and gypsum
sawmills and
wood preservation
nonmetallic mineral
mining and quarrying
non-manufacturing

manufacturing

25.8

29.7

other apparel and accessories

leather tanning and finishing

retail bakeries

specialized design services

cut and sew apparel

56.3

56.3

58.0

58.0

66.1     

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90 100

percent

countries that have 
ratiﬁ ed CEDAW has 
risen in all regions to 
reach 187, of 193, 
in 2011

200

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

100 +
countries
subscribed to CEDAW
within the first 10 years

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

s
e

 

i

i
r
t
n
u
o
c
g
n
b
i
r
c
s
b
u
s
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

Source: Do, Levchenko, and Raddatz 2011.

Source: CEDAW.

have  gained  momentum  internationally,  lead-
ing  to  both  the  drafting  of  a  number  of  self-
standing international treaties and conventions 
and the inclusion of nondiscriminatory clauses 
in  several  broader-purpose  economic  agree-
ments. These conventions and agreements have 
also  fostered  legislative  action  toward  higher 
gender equality around the world.

The most prominent among the international 
treaties is the Convention on the Elimination of 
All  Forms  of  Discrimination  against  Women 
(CEDAW), adopted in 1979 by the UN General 
Assembly. As of August 2011, 187 countries (of 
a  total  of  193  UN  member  nations)  were  par-
ties to the convention (ﬁ gure 6.10). The coun-
tries that had not yet become party at that time 
were the Islamic Republic of Iran, Palau, Soma-
lia, South Sudan, Sudan, Tonga, and the United 
States. The ILO conventions C.100 (equal remu-
neration  for  equal  work)  and  C.111  (elimina-
tion of discrimination on employment and oc-
cupation) have also been widely ratiﬁ ed around 
the world.

These treaties and conventions have become 
the primary international vehicle for monitor-
ing and advocating for nondiscrimination, and 
their  ratiﬁ cation  has  spurred  progress  toward 

granting formal rights in several areas of wom-
en’s lives, in large part by facilitating legislation 
either  where  it  did  not  exist  or  where  existing 
laws were discriminatory and needed to be over-
turned.55 Some evidence also shows that partici-
pation  in  CEDAW  has  improved  women’s  lit-
eracy levels, labor force participation rates, and 
parliamentary  representation—and  in  some 
cases has reduced absolute gender inequalities.56
But  legal  reform,  however  necessary  to  ensure 
full equality for women, is often not sufﬁ cient in 
the  absence  of  adequate  enforcement  (chapter 
4), so efforts to ensure de facto reform should 
continue.

Trade and other economic agreements have 
provided a second channel for international pres-
sure to elicit domestic action on gender equality. 
These documents often include antidiscrimina-
tory and social clauses, linking a country’s access 
to the economic beneﬁ ts in the agreement to ad-
herence to certain minimum standards. This is 
the case in trade agreements, such as the North 
American  Agreement  on  Labor  Cooperation 
in the North American Free Trade Agreement, 
and agreements regulating member accession to 
economic  zones,  such  as  the  European  Union. 
For enforcement, these agreements have an ad-

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

267

vantage  over  international  conventions  in  that 
economic considerations and, in some cases, the 
threat of potential sanctions may motivate oth-
erwise reluctant countries to accept and imple-
ment some minimum standards. For example, 
countries  more  open  to  trade  also  have  better 
economic  rights  for  women  and  a  lower  inci-
dence of forced labor.57

Pressure from media and consumers in de-
veloped  countries  can  also  lead  multinational 
ﬁ rms to offer better working conditions to their 
workers  in  developing  countries.  For  instance, 
both  wages  and  nonwage  working  conditions 
(such  as  hours  worked,  accidents,  contractual 
characteristics,  work  environment,  and  other 
beneﬁ ts) among formal workers (most of them 
women) in the export textile and apparel indus-
tries  in  Cambodia,  El  Salvador,  and  Indonesia 
were found to be at or above the average in the 
rest of the economy.58 Similarly, antisweatshop 
campaigns  in  Indonesia  led  to  large  wage  in-
creases in foreign-owned and export ﬁ rms, with 
some costs to the ﬁ rms in the form of reduced 
investment, falling proﬁ ts, and increased prob-
ability of closure for smaller plants, but no sig-
niﬁ cant impact on employment.59

Important  challenges  remain  in  working 
conditions for those outside formal employment 
(box  6.5).  In  the  end,  a  combination  of  differ-
ent strategies—including social clauses in trade 
agreements, corporate codes of conduct, and the 
ILO’s “decent work” approach—is needed. Social 
clauses put the onus for workers’ rights on the 
governments of exporting countries rather than 
on the companies that dominate global produc-
tion systems. Codes of conduct put the burden on 
corporations, but they are usually voluntary and 
may not address the behavior of subcontractors 
and others involved in the production of export 
goods. Finally, the ILO aims to engage with gov-
ernments, ﬁ rms, and workers, but its only tools 
are dialogue and persuasion.60 So a combination 
of all three may be the most desirable.

GLOBALIZATION COULD ALSO 
PROMOTE MORE EGALITARIAN 
GENDER ROLES AND NORMS

The changes unleashed by globalization—espe-
cially  the  greater  access  to  economic  opportu-
nities  and  information  among  women—could 
also inﬂ uence existing gender roles and norms, 

BOX 6.5   Globalization and working conditions—
Some progress, but more needs to be done

In the public’s mind, increasing global economic integration and moving pro-
duction to developing countries have been associated with low wages, long 
hours,  and  poor  working  conditions.  Public  opinion  in  developed  countries 
generally  connects  globalization  with  sweatshops  where  child  labor  is  com-
mon and workers are denied the most basic rights. Frequently, it is argued that 
women are especially hurt by this process. The fact that workers willingly take 
this  type  of  job  is  usually  explained  by  the  lack  of  better  options  and  the 
destruction of their traditional ways of life caused by globalization.

In  reality,  the  impact  of  trade  liberalization  on  working  conditions  varies 
across fi rms, sectors, and countries. In some cases, trade openness and eco-
nomic integration have led to the adoption of higher work standards, particu-
larly for formal workers. For example, wages and nonwage working conditions 
for formal workers in the export textile and apparel industries in Cambodia, 
El  Salvador,  and  Indonesia  matched  or  exceeded  the  economy’s  average.a 
Increased trade openness also appears to be correlated with better economic 
rights for women and lower incidence of forced labor.b

In other cases, however, low wages and poor working conditions are part of 
a broader strategy to keep costs low. This is particularly true for workers oper-
ating under subcontracting arrangements with local fi rms where there is no 
control  over  working  conditions—and  may  be  especially  detrimental  to 
women, who are overrepresented in the informal sector.c In India, Pakistan, the 
Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, subcontracted workers suff ered from pre-
carious job security, an almost total absence of benefi ts, and a general impos-
sibility to organize and fi ght for their rights. Yet in many cases, subcontracted 
work  was  the  only  possible  paid  employment  that  women  could  take  that 
meshed with family responsibilities or social norms.d

a.  Robertson and others 2009.
b.  Neumayer and De Soysa 2007.
c.  Carr and Chen 2004.
d.  Balakrishnan 2002.

ultimately  promoting  more  egalitarian  views. 
The evidence on this effect is more limited and 
tentative than that in previous sections but suf-
ﬁ ciently  suggestive  (we  think)  to  merit  some 
discussion here, in the spirit of spurring further 
work on these issues.

Women turned income earners may be able 
to leverage their new position to change gender 
roles in their households by inﬂ uencing the al-
location  of  time  and  resources  among  house-
hold  members,  shifting  relative  power  within 
the  households,  and  more  broadly  exercising 
stronger agency. In fact, women appear to gain 
more control over their income by working in 
export-oriented activities, although the impact 
on  well-being  and  agency  is  more  positive  for 
women  working  in  manufacturing  and  away 
from  their  male  relatives  than  for  those  work-
ing in agriculture. Women in factories feel their 
status has improved.61 They are more likely to 

268 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

marry and have their ﬁ rst baby later than other 
women of similar socioeconomic status and to 
have better quality housing and access to mod-
ern  infrastructure.62  They  also  report  greater 
self-esteem and decision-making capacity, with 
beneﬁ ts extending to other family members.63 In 
contrast, women in agriculture have not experi-
enced  signiﬁ cant  changes  in  decision-making 
capacity or agency as a result of commercializa-
tion and higher export orientation, even when 
typical “women’s crops” are promoted.64

“

I would like to be better [than my mother]. 
In their time, there was no education and they 
were not aware of the world around them. 
Nowadays, we have access to the Internet and 
other media. We can improve our lives and do 
better things.

”

Young woman, Sudan

Beyond the economic sphere, increased access 
to information, primarily through higher expo-
sure to television and the Internet, has also ex-
posed many in developing countries to the roles 
women play in other parts of the world, which 
may affect gender roles and outcomes (chapter 
4). For instance, in Brazil, a country where soap 
opera  watching  is  ubiquitous  and  cuts  across 
social classes, the presence of the Globo signal 
(a television channel that offers many popular 
Brazilian  soap  operas)  has  led  to  lower  fertil-
ity,  measured  as  the  number  of  live  births  for 
women  ages  15–49.65  The  effect  is  about  one-
tenth  that  of  being  married—and  comparable 
to the effect of an increase of 1 doctor or nurse 
per 1,000 people or of two additional years of 
education. In other words, it is signiﬁ cant.

Similarly, evidence from rural India suggests 
that gender attitudes among villagers changed 
with  cable  television.66  Women  with  access  to 
cable  were  less  likely  than  others  to  express  a 
son preference or to report that it is acceptable 
for  a  husband  to  beat  his  wife.  Behaviors  tra-
ditionally  associated  with  women’s  status  also 
changed—women  reported  more  autonomy 
(able to go outside without permission and to 
participate in household decision making) and 
lower  fertility.  As  in  the  Brazil  study,  the  im-

pacts are quite large. For example, cable televi-
sion decreased the differences in attitudes and 
behaviors  between  urban  and  rural  areas  by 
45–70  percent.  The  effects  appeared  quickly, 
with observable impacts in the ﬁ rst year follow-
ing cable’s introduction.

Interestingly, and somewhat contrary to stan-
dard  notions  about  gender  roles  and  women’s 
agency in the household, the evidence discussed 
here suggests that under some circumstances ex-
posure to information can induce large and fast 
change. This ﬁ nding is consistent with work on 
the  broader  impact  of  media  exposure,  which 
typically  ﬁ nds that such exposure leads to sig-
niﬁ cant and rapid changes in behavior such as 
contraceptive use, pregnancy, and latrine build-
ing,  as  well  as  the  perception  of  the  status  of 
one’s village.67

Access  to  economic  opportunities  has  also 
brought change in the public sphere. In Bangla-
desh, the employment of hundreds of thousands 
of women in the ready-made garment industry 
feminized the urban public space, creating more 
gender-equitable  norms  for  women’s  public 
mobility and access to public institutions.68 In 
the  process,  Bangladeshi  women  had  to  rede-
ﬁ ne and negotiate the terms of purdah, typically 
reinterpreting it as a state of mind in contrast 
to its customary expression as physical absence 
from  the  public  space,  modest  clothing,  and 
quiet demeanor.69

The impact of ICTs and access to information 
on gender norms and, more broadly, gender in 
the public sphere is more mixed. The spread of 
ICTs has empowered women socially and politi-
cally by increasing access to networks (box 6.4 
and chapter 8). For instance, activist networks in 
Africa and Latin America have used the Internet 
to increase public awareness about questions of 
gender  inequality.70  But  the  network  structure 
also  allows  women  to  become  actors  without 
fundamentally  changing  their  local  conditions 
or their role in their households, bypassing con-
straints rather than confronting them—in other 
words, the transformative power of technology 
is manifest in a parallel universe.71 The tension 
between immobile personal circumstances and 
greater  awareness  and  public  presence  could 
provide  fertile  terrain  for  further  change.  But 
such  change  will  require  a  critical  mass  of 
women with access to the Internet and other in-
formation sources.72

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

269

OLD PROBLEMS, EMERGING RISKS

The  rising  tide  of  globalization  has  not  lifted 
everybody. Gender differences in endowments, 
time  use  patterns,  access  to  productive  inputs, 
and  agency  have  muted  positive  impacts  for 
some  and,  at  times,  added  to  inequalities  be-
tween men and women and among women. 

Even among those who have beneﬁ ted from 
higher  access  to  economic  opportunities,  old 
patterns of employment segregation by gender 
can emerge. Signs of defeminization of (formal) 
employment in some countries, industries, and 
occupations—combined  with  increased  infor-
mality—suggest that some of the gains may not 
be sustainable.

Public action to close gender gaps in agency, 
endowments, and access to economic opportu-
nities is thus necessary for countries to fully cap-
italize on the potential of globalization as a force 
for development and greater gender equality.

When “old” gaps meet new trends, 
disadvantaged women are left 
farther behind
Women  caught  at  the  intersection  of  “old” 
gender  gaps  (in  endowments,  time  availa-
bility,   access  to  productive  resources,  and 
agency)  and  the  new  forces  unleashed  by 
 globalization  risk  falling  farther  behind  both 
men and women who have managed to bene-
ﬁ t from trade openness, technological change, 
and access to information.

First,  gender  differences  in  education  have 
limited  women’s  access  to  new  employment 
opportunities.  In  agriculture,  besides  having 
a  positive  impact  on  productivity  (chapter  5), 
education affects farmers’ capacity to adopt im-
proved seed varieties and fertilizer73 and, more 
broadly,  to  comply  with  output  standards  and 
other important factors that determine access to 
the nontraditional and high-value export sector. 
Because  of  lower  education  levels,  female  pro-
ducers  experience  more  constraints  in  access-
ing international markets than male producers 
in Samoa and in Mozambique and other Sub-
Saharan countries.74 Insufﬁ cient education and 
skills  have  also  impeded  access  to  export  and 
ICT-enabled jobs in the service sector.

Education sorting along gender lines has also 
limited female presence in occupations directly 
related to ICTs, such as computer programmers, 

engineers, system analysts, and designers (chap-
ter  3).75  Data  from  the  Organisation  for  Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
suggest that women represent a small percentage 
of all ICT-related employment and, within the 
sector, are underrepresented in managerial, sci-
entiﬁ c, and professional positions and overrep-
resented in ofﬁ ce and secretarial occupations.76 
These  differences  are  important  because  ICT 
skills  are  among  the  driving  forces  for  techno-
logical  development,  and  growth  and  employ-
ment in these areas is expected to rise over time. 
Second, gender differences in care responsi-
bilities can prevent women from seizing new ag-
ricultural and wage opportunities in the export 
sector if no other household members can take 
on  their  duties.  That  is  particularly  true  when 
new opportunities arise in large farms or the for-
mal sector, where a premium is placed on longer 
work hours and a ﬁ xed schedule. Studies of the 
cut  ﬂ ower  industry  in  Ecuador,  export  proc-
essing zones in Guatemala, nontraditional and 
high-value  exports  in  Kenya,  and  rural- urban 
linkages  in  Malaysia  all  point  to  the  presence 
of  other  female  members  in  the  household  as 
a determinant of women’s participation in new 
opportunities  created  by  trade.77  These  other 
female household members may be mothers or 
elder daughters available to take on household 
duties  relinquished  by  women  who  go  out  to 
work. Very little is known about their circum-
stances and the price they pay for the realloca-
tion of housework and care in the household.78
Third,  women’s  weaker  property  rights  in 
land  and  limited  access  to  productive  inputs 
also  constrain  their  capacity  to  beneﬁ t  from 
trade openness. This problem has been particu-
larly perverse in Africa, where natural resources 
and  agricultural  products  account  for  a  large 
fraction  of  exports.79  In  Senegal,  only  1  of  59 
french bean farmers (export crop) is a woman80 

“

There is tailoring and embroidery 
work, but people will ﬁ nd the 
best jobs by having computer skills, 
and that is still not provided to 
women.

Adult woman, Afghanistan

”

270 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

while in Meru, Kenya, more than 90 percent of 
export contracts were issued to male household 
members.81

Fourth, conservative gender norms for mo-
bility and women’s role in the economic sphere 
can disproportionately affect women’s access to 
technology (including ICTs) and more broadly 
to  information.  At  home,  men  often  regulate 
the  family  radio,  mobile  phone,  or  television, 
controlling  when  and  how  other  family  mem-
bers can use them.82 At work, men may deter-
mine that operating a plow or a computer is not 
something women should be allowed to learn. 
Even  technology  programs  that  target  women 
can be co-opted by men once their utility and 
proﬁ tability are established—so women who do 
gain access to the technology do not see its eco-
nomic beneﬁ ts.83

Given  that  the  number  of  private  Internet 
connections in developing countries is still low, 
women’s access to ICTs and information is also 
affected by the geographic location of public In-
ternet centers. When Internet centers are a long 
way from residential communities or in unsafe 
neighborhoods, women are less likely to frequent 
them. Beyond safety, women’s access can also be 
inhibited  when  services  are  offered  in  settings 
and institutions that women are unlikely to visit 
or when men and women are expected to share 
the same space. In a 2000 study, 72 percent of 
Arab female Internet users declared that home 
was their preferred place of access.84

Are gains for women sustainable? 
Segregation in new industries and 
occupations
Signs of defeminization of employment in some 
sectors and occupations, together with concerns 
about growing informality among women em-
ployed  in  export-oriented  sectors,  have  raised 
concerns  about  whether  the  segregation  ob-
served in nonexport sectors is emerging in new 
industries and occupations.

Production in export sectors has changed in 
the  past  few  decades  in  two  ways.  First,  ﬁ rms 
have recapitalized to adopt production systems 
based  on  generalized  rather  than  specialized 
equipment,  shifting  comparative  advantages 
in  export-oriented  manufacturing  from  labor-
intensive to capital-intensive technology. Second, 
ﬁ rms  have  reorganized  production  to  be  more 
ﬂ exible, by lowering costs, shortening lead times, 
and  differentiating  product  lines.85  Fostered  by 

intensiﬁ ed competitive pressures and facilitated 
by the spread of ICTs, these changes have con-
tributed to the defeminization and informaliza-
tion of employment in export-oriented sectors.

 In many cases, recapitalization has reduced 
employment  opportunities  for  unskilled,  pri-
marily  female,  workers.  Men  are  perceived  to 
have  the  education  and  skills  to  manage  new 
generalized  technologies,  while  women  are 
pushed  to  smaller  subcontracting  ﬁ rms.  It  is 
not clear, however, what prevents women from 
beneﬁ ting  from  upgrading  and  shifting  pro-
duction  toward  skill-intensive  goods  because 
gender educational gaps are quickly narrowing 
in many countries. One possible explanation is 
that  signiﬁ cant  differences  still  exist  between 
men  and  women  in  the  content  of  their  edu-
cation  and  their  nonformal  skills,  including 
sector-speciﬁ c experience and access to on-the-
job training.86

The struggle for greater ﬂ exibility in produc-
tion has made informal working arrangements 
more common, affecting women disproportion-
ately.87  In  India,  the  decline  in  women’s  share 
of  industrial  employment  (from  21.3  percent 
in 1989–90 to 17.5 percent in 1994–95) despite 
high export growth was associated with an in-
crease in subcontracting to home-based workers 
or small manufacturers that work on a piece-rate 
basis.88 Although more ﬂ exible working alterna-
tives may allow women to better balance work 
and  home  responsibilities,  the  advantages  of 
such arrangements need to be assessed against 
their  potential  negative  impact  on  wages  and 
other beneﬁ ts.89

Greater ﬂ exibility has in some cases also led 
to higher turnover and job instability. In Turkey, 
where  women  beneﬁ ted  from  the  gender  gap 
in net job creation in the export sectors, female 
employment  was  more  volatile  than  men’s.90 
Similarly,  in  Colombia,  workers  employed  in 
less  protected  sectors  have  shorter  job  tenure 
and are less likely to ﬁ nd work in the formal sec-
tor, but these differences are only temporary and 
not affected by gender.91

Perhaps most worrisome about these trends 
is  the  realization  that  old  patterns  of  employ-
ment segregation by gender can quickly emerge 
in  these  new  industries  and  occupations.  So, 
what initially seemed to be a break from estab-
lished gender roles in the labor market ends up 
proving in some cases to be a short-lived devia-
tion. Moreover, the segregation of women seems 

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

271

to arise as (exporting) ﬁ rms move up the value 
chain through recapitalization and retooling of 
workers, both normally associated with higher 
productivity and better wages.

IS THE GLASS HALF FULL OR 
HALF EMPTY? THE NEED FOR 
PUBLIC ACTION

What, then, are we to conclude from the discus-
sion in this chapter? The evidence suggests that 
employment in the export sector represents an 
attractive option for a large number of women 
in  the  developing  world.92  These  jobs  enable 
women  to  contribute  to  household  income, 
increase  their  economic  empowerment  within 
the  household,  and  allow  for  greater  social 
 participation. They sometimes also offer access 
to   government  and  community-support  pro-
grams, which would otherwise be inaccessible.93 
So,  even  where  there  are  negative  work  attri-
butes, there are also many positives, and women 
may still prefer this work to the alternatives.

For example, women in Indonesia perceive 
employment  in  large-scale  export-oriented 
factories as prestigious, because it pays higher 
wages  and  offers  better  working  conditions 
than jobs in the domestic nonexport sector and 
local  services.  Although  educated  women  as-
pire to nonmanual service employment (such 
as teaching and tourism), employment in large 
export- oriented  factories  seems  to  offer  the 
best short-term alternative.94 Similarly, despite 
the  problems  faced  by  female  agricultural 
workers in global production, especially those 
with ﬂ exible and informal work, many still ex-
press a preference for this kind of work over the 
alternatives.95

But persistent gender differences in endow-
ments,  time  availability,  access  to  productive 
inputs  and  agency,  and  pervasive  employment 
segregation by gender, mean that not all women 
have fully beneﬁ ted from the economic oppor-
tunities  brought  about  by  globalization.  And 
even among women who did beneﬁ t, remaining 
gaps,  primarily  in  wages  and  working  condi-
tions, still need to be closed.

CHAPTER SUMMARY      Globalization has the potential to contribute to greater 

gender equality

WHAT WE SEE
The forces unleashed by trade openness, technological change and 
diff usion, and increased access to information have lifted some of 
the  constraints  to  greater  equality.  Not  everyone  has  benefi ted, 
however, and it is often women, for whom existing constraints are 
most binding, who are left behind.

WHY WE SEE THIS
Increased access to economic opportunities
Trade openness and the spread of information and communication 
technologies  (ICTs)  have  increased  women’s  access  to  economic 
opportunities and in some cases increased their wages relative to 
men’s. Growth in export and ICT-enabled sectors, together with a 
decline  in  the  importance  of  physical  strength  and  a  rise  in  the 
importance of cognitive skills, has increased the demand for female 
labor. ICT has also increased access to markets among female farm-
ers and entrepreneurs by easing time and mobility constraints.

Stronger incentives for action
Several factors associated with a more global world strengthen the 
incentives  for  action  toward  greater  gender  equality.  Gender  in -
equality is more costly in an integrated world because it diminishes 
a  country’s  ability  to  compete  internationally—particularly  if  the 
country specializes in female-intensive goods and services. Interna-
tional peer pressure has also led more countries than ever to ratify 

treaties against discrimination, while growing media exposure and 
consumers’  demands  for  better  treatment  of  workers  has  pushed 
multinationals toward fairer wages and better working conditions 
for women.

Shifting gender roles and norms
Increased access to information, primarily through wider exposure 
to  television  and  the  Internet,  allows  countries  to  learn  about  life 
and social mores in other places—knowledge that can change per-
ceptions and ultimately promote adoption of more egalitarian atti-
tudes. And increased economic empowerment for women can rein-
force  this  process  by  promoting  changes  in  gender  roles  and 
allowing  newly  empowered  women  to  infl uence  time  allocation, 
shift relative power within the household, and exercise agency more 
broadly.

WHAT THIS MEANS FOR POLICY
In the absence of public policy, globalization alone cannot and will 
not make gender inequality go away. Despite signifi cant increases in 
agency and in access to economic opportunities for many women in 
many  countries,  large  gaps  remain  in  some  areas.  Public  action 
aimed at closing existing gender gaps in endowments, agency, and 
access to economic opportunities is therefore necessary for coun-
tries to fully capitalize on the potential of globalization as a force for 
development and greater gender equality.

272 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

As long as these differences persist, globaliza-
tion alone cannot—and will not—make gender 
inequality go away. Public action to close gen-
der  gaps  is  therefore  critical  for  countries  to 
fully capitalize on the potential of globalization 
as  a  force  for  development  and  greater  gender 
equality. Such action is also urgent in light of the 
rising costs of gender inequality in a globalized 
world.

NOTES

  1.  Aguayo-Téllez 2011; Do, Levchenko, and Radd-

atz 2011.

  2.  Jacobsen 2011; Rendall 2011.
  3.  Sassen 2011.
  4.  World Bank 2010. 
  5.  Aguayo-Téllez, Muendler, and Poole 2010.
  6.  ITU 2010.
  7.  Stern, Dethier, and Rogers 2005.
  8.  This  calculation  includes  data  for  51  countries. 
The developed countries included are Australia; 
Austria; The Bahamas; Barbados; Belgium; Can-
ada; Cyprus; Denmark; Finland; France; Greece; 
Hong  Kong  SAR,  China;  Hungary;  Ireland;  Is-
rael;  Italy;  Japan;  Korea,  Rep.;  Luxembourg; 
Netherlands;  New  Zealand;  Norway;  Portugal; 
Puerto Rico; San Marino; Singapore; Spain; Swe-
den;  Switzerland;  Trinidad  and  Tobago;  United 
Kingdom; and the United States. The developing 
countries  included  are  Bangladesh;  Botswana; 
Brazil;  Chile;  Costa  Rica;  Egypt,  Arab  Rep.;  El 
Salvador; Guatemala; Indonesia; Malaysia; Paki-
stan;  Panama;  Peru;  Philippines;  Romania;  Sri 
Lanka; Thailand; Turkey; and Venezuela, RB. 

  9.  Fontana 2009.
10.  Baden and Joekes 1993; Pearson 1999; Standing 

23.  Davin 2001.
24.  Artecona  and  Cunningham  2002;  Berik  2000; 

Ghiara 1999.

25.  Bhattacharya 1999; Belghazi 1997, cited in Joekes 

1999a.

26.  Berik, van der Meulen Rodgers, and Zveglich, Jr. 

2003; Seguino 1997; Seguino 2000. 

27.  Fussell 2000; Ver Beek 2001.
28.  Borghans  and  ter  Weel  2004;  DiNardo  and 
Pischke 1997; Entorf, Gollac, and Kramarz 1999; 
Krueger 1993; Lee and Kim 2004.

29.  Rendall 2010.
30.  Black and Spitz-Oener 2010. A related strand of 
the literature has focused on the impact of tech-
nological  change  (and  particularly  skill-biased 
technological change) on the demand for skills, 
where  skills  are  generally  measured  in  terms  of 
workers’ levels of education. Both ideas are com-
plementary in the sense that ICT and the com-
puterization of the workplace have changed the 
nature  of  work  and  in  the  process  altered  both 
the relative importance of the various tasks that 
constitute  an  occupation  and  the  kind  of  skills 
required to perform such occupation.

31.  Black and Spitz-Oener 2010; Rendall 2010; Wein-

berg 2000.

32.  Bacolod and Blum 2010; Black and Spitz-Oener 

2010.

33.  Liu, Tsou, and Hammit 2004; Ng 2006.
34.  Rendall 2011.
35.  Ibid.
36.  Ibid.
37.  GSMA Development Fund 2010.
38.  Comfort  and  Dada  2009;  Kyomuhendo  2009; 

Munyua 2009; GSMA Development Fund 2010.

39.  Sane and Traore 2009.
40.  GSMA Development Fund 2010.
41.  Ibid.
42.  Melhem, Morrell, and Tandon 2009; Ng and Mit-

1999; Wood 1991.

ter 2005.

11.  Wood and Mayer 2001.
12.  Mitter 2000.
13.  Nanda 2000.
14.  Mitter 2000; Pearson 1998.
15.  Mitter 2000.
16.  Barrientos, Kabeer, and Hossain 2004.
17.  von Braun, Johm, and Puetz 1994; Wold 1997.
18.  Arizpe and Aranda 1981; Barndt 1999; Barrien-
tos and others 1999; Barrón 1994; Collins 1993; 
Dolan  and  Sorby  2003;  Thrupp,  Bergeron,  and 
Waters 1995.

19.  Barrientos and others 1999; Barrientos and Kritz-

inger 2003.

20.  Dolan  and  Sorby  2003;  Thrupp,  Bergeron,  and 

Waters 1995.

21.  ILO 2002.
22.  Davin 2001; Fernández-Kelly 1983; Kabeer 2000; 

Lim 1990.

43.  Yitamben and Tchinda 2009.
44.  Schaefer Davis 2005.
45.  Data  from  Statistics  Netherlands  2009.  http://

www.cbs.nl/en-GB/menu/home/default.htm.

46.  Mitter 2000; Ng 2001.
47.  Becker 1957.
48.  Bhagwati 2004.
49.  Black and Brainerd 2004; Kongar 2007.
50.  Do, Levchenko, and Raddatz 2011; van Stavaren 

and others 2007.

51.  Do, Levchenko, and Raddatz 2011.
52.  Ibid.
53.  Ibid.
54.  Seguino 1997; Seguino 2000.
55.  Byrnes and Freeman 2011.
56.  Gray, Kittilson, and Sandholtz 2006.
57.  Neumayer and De Soysa 2007.
58.  Robertson and others 2009.

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

273

59.  Harrison and Scorse 2010.
60.  Barrientos 2007.
61.  Hewett,  Amin,  and  Sen.  2001;  Kabeer  1997; 

Kabeer 2000; Zohir 1998.

62.  Hewett, Amin, and Sen. 2001.
63.  Kusago and Barham 2001; Zohir 1998.
64.  Elson,  Evers,  and  Gideon.  1996;  Katz  1995;  von 

Braun and Kennedy 1994.

65.  La Ferrara, Chong, and Duryea 2008.
66.  Jensen and Oster 2007.
67.  Johnson 2001; Kane and others 1998; Pace 1993; 
Rogers  and  others  1999;  Valente  and  others 
1994.

68.  Hossain 2011.
69.  Feldman 2009; Kabeer 2000.
70.  Adams 2006; Friedman 2005.
71.  Sassen 2011.
72.  Ibid.
73.  Kumar  1994;  Saito,  Mekonnen,  and  Spurling 

1994.

74.  Carr 2004; Tran-Nguyen and Beviglia-Zampetti 

2004.

75.  Hafkin and Taggart 2001.
76.  OECD 2007.
77.  Katz  1995;  Kusago  2000;  McCulloch  and  Ota 

2002; Newman 2001.

78.  Fontana 2009.
79.  Joekes 1999b; Porter and Phillips-Howard 1997; 

von Bülow and Sørensen 1993.

80.  Maertens and Swinnen 2009.
81.  Dolan 2001.
82.  Gill and others 2010.
83.  Ashby and others 2011; Cecchini and Scott 2003; 

Cecelski 2000.

84.  Hafkin and Taggart 2001.
85.  Barrientos, Kabeer, and Hossain 2004.
86.  Ibid.
87.  Barrientos and Barrientos 2002; Carr and Chen 

2004; Standing 1999.

88.  Ghosh 2002.
89.  Barrientos, Kabeer, and Hossain 2004.
90.  Özler 2007.
91.  Eslava and others 2011.
92.  Barrientos, Kabeer, and Hossain 2004; Chiu and 

Lee 1997.

93.  Barrientos and others 1999; Barrientos and Bar-
rientos  2002;  Dolan  and  Sorby  2003;  SERNAM 
2001; Venegas Leiva 1992; Venegas Leiva1993.

94.  Chant  and  McIlwaine  1995;  Grijns  and  others 

1994.

95.  Barrientos, Kabeer, and Hossain 2004.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

Adams,  Melinda.  2006.  “Regional’s  Women’s  Activ-
ism: African Women’s Networks and the African 
Union.” In Global Feminism: Transnational Wom-
en’s Activism, Organizing, and Human Rights, ed. 
Mira  Marx  Ferree  and Aili  Mari  Tripp  187–218. 
New York: New York University Press.

Aguayo-Téllez, Ernesto. 2011. “The Impact of Trade 
Liberalization  Policies  and  FDI  on  Gender  In-
equalities.  A  Literature  Review.”  Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

Aguayo-Téllez, Ernesto, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and 
Jennifer P. Poole. 2010. “Globalization and Formal 
Sector Migration in Brazil.” World Development 38 
(6): 840–56.

Anderson, Richard G., and Charles S. Gascon. 2007. 
“The Perils of Globalization: Offshoring and Eco-
nomic Insecurity of the American Worker.” Work-
ing Paper Series 2007–004A, Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis, St. Louis.

Arizpe,  Lourdes,  and  Joseﬁ na  Aranda.  1981.  “The 
‘Comparative Advantages’ of Women’s Disadvan-
tages: Women Workers in the Strawberry Export 
Agribusiness in Mexico.” Signs 7 (2): 453–73.

Artecona,  Raquel,  and  Wendy  Cunningham.  2002. 
“Effects  of  Trade  Liberalization  on  the  Gender 
Wage Gap in Mexico.” Gender and Development 
Working Paper Series 21, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Ashby,  Jacqueline,  Maria  Hartl,  Yianna  Lambrou, 
Gunnar Larson, Annina Lubbock, Eija Pehu, and 
Catherine  Ragasa.  2008.  Investing  in  Women  as 
Drivers of Agricultural Growth. Washington, DC: 
World  Bank,  Food  and  Agriculture  Organiza-
tion,  and  International  Fund  for  Agricultural 
Development.

Bacolod, Marigee, and Bernardo S. Blum. 2010. “Two 
Sides of the Same Coin: U.S. “Residual” Inequality 
and the Gender Gap.” Journal of Human Resources 
45 (1): 197–242.

Baden,  Sally,  and  Susan  Joekes.  1993.  “Gender  Is-
sues in the Development of the Special Economic 
Zones and Open Areas in the People’s Republic of 
China.” Paper presented at the seminar on Women 
in  the  Economy,  Fudan  University,  Shanghai, 
May 15.

Baily,  Martin  Neil,  and  Robert  Z.  Lawrence.  2004. 
“What Happened to the Great U.S. Job Machine? 
The  Role  of  Trade  and  Electronic  Offshoring.” 
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 2: 211–70.

Balakrishnan, Radhika, ed. 2002. The Hidden Assem-
bly Line: Gender Dynamics of Subcontracted Work 
in a Global Economy. Bloomﬁ eld, CT: Kumarian 
Press.

Barndt,  Deborah,  ed.  1999.  Women  Working  the 
NAFTA  Food  Chain:  Women,  Food  &  Globaliza-
tion. Toronto: Sumach Press.

Barrientos,  Armando,  and  Stephanie  Ware  Barrien-
tos.  2002. “Extending  Social  Protection  to  Infor-

274 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

mal  Workers  in  the  Horticulture  Global  Value 
Chain.” Social Protection Discussion Paper Series 
216, World Bank,Washington, DC.

Barrientos,  Stephanie.  2007.  “Gender,  Codes  of 
Conduct,  and  Labor  Standards  in  Global  Pro-
duction  Systems.”  In  The  Feminist  Economics  of 
Trade, ed. Irene van Stavaren and others. London: 
 Routledge.

Barrientos, Stephanie, Anna Bee, Ann Matear, and Is-
abel Vogel. 1999. Women and Agribusiness: Work-
ing  Miracles  in  the  Chilean  Fruit  Export  Sector. 
Basingstoke, U.K.: Macmillan.

Barrientos, Stephanie, Naila Kabeer, and Naomi Hos-
sain. 2004. “The Gender Dimensions of the Glo-
balization of Production.” Policy Integration De-
partment Working Paper Series 17, International 
Labour Organization Geneva.

Barrientos, Stephanie, and A. Kritzinger. 2003. “The 
Poverty  of Work  and  Social  Cohesion  in  Global 
Exports:  The  Case  of  South  African  Fruit.”  In 
What Holds Us Together. Social Cohesion in South 
Africa,  ed.  David  Chidester,  Phillip  Dexter,  and 
Wilmot James. Cape Town: HSRC Press.

Barrón,  Antonieta.  1994.  “Mexican  Rural  Women 
Wage Earners and Macro-Economic Policies.” In 
The Strategic Silence: Gender and Economic Policy, 
ed. Isabella Bakker. London: Zed Books.

Becker,  Gary  S.  1957.  The  Economics  of  Discrimina-

tion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Belghazi,  S.  1997.  “Rethinking  the  Viability  of  a 
Low  Wage  Export  Strategy  in  Morocco.”  Focus 
on  Integrating Gender into the Politics of Devel-
opment:  Gender  Programme  Newsletter  No.  3, 
United Nations Research Institute for Social De-
velopment, Geneva.

Berik,  Günseli.  2000.  “Mature  Export-Led  Growth 
and Gender Wage Inequality in Taiwan.” Feminist 
Economics 6 (3): 1–26.

Berik,  Günseli,  Yana  van  der  Meulen  Rodgers,  and 
Joseph E. Zveglich Jr. 2003. “Does Trade Promote 
Gender  Wage  Equity?  Evidence  from  East  Asia.” 
Working  Paper  Series  372,  The  Levy  Economic 
Institute of Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, 
NY.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 2004. In Defense of Globalization. 

New York: Oxford University Press.

Bhattacharya,  Debapriya.  1999.  “The  Post-MFA 
Challenges to the Bangladesh Textile and Cloth-
ing Sector.” Paper presented at the United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development, Geneva, 
July 12.

Bivens,  L.  Josh.  2004. “Shifting  Blame  for  Manufac-
turing  Job  Loss:  Effect  of  Rising  Trade  Deﬁ cit 
Shouldn’t  Be  Ignored.”  Brieﬁ ng  Paper  149,  Eco-
nomic Policy Institute, Washington, DC.

———. 2006. “Trade Deﬁ cits and Manufacturing Job 
Loss:  Correlation  and  Causality.”  Brieﬁ ng  Paper 
171, Economic Policy Institute, Washington, DC.

Black, Sandra E., and Elizabeth Brainerd. 2004. “Im-
porting Equality? The Impact of Globalization on 
Gender Discrimination.” Industrial and Labor Re-
lations Review 57 (4): 540–59.

Black,  Sandra  E.,  and  Alexandra  Spitz-Oener.  2010. 
“Explaining  Women’s  Success:  Technological 
Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work.” 
Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (1): 187–94.
Borghans, Lex, and Bas ter Weel. 2004. “Are Computer 
Skills the New Basic Skills? The Returns to Com-
puter, Writing and Math Skills in Britain.” Labour 
Economics 11 (1): 85–98.

Byrnes,  Andrew,  and  Marsha  A.  Freeman.  2011. 
“The Impact of the CEDAW Conventions: Paths 
to  Equality. A  Study  for  the World  Bank.”  Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2012.

Carr,  Marilyn,  ed.  2004.  Chains  of  Fortune:  Linking 
Women Producers and Workers with Global Mar-
kets. London: Commonwealth Secretariat. 

Carr,  Marilyn,  and  Martha  Chen.  2004. “Globaliza-
tion, Social Exclusion and Gender.” International 
Labour Review 143 (1–2): 129–60.

Cecchini, Simone, and Christopher Scott. 2003. “Can 
Information  and  Communications  Technology 
Applications  Contribute  to  Poverty  Reduction? 
Lessons  from  Rural  India.”  Information  Technol-
ogy for Development 10 (2): 73–84.

Cecelski, Elizabeth. 2000. The Role of Women in Sus-
tainable  Energy  Development.  Golden,  CO:  Na-
tional Renewable Energy Laboratory.

Chant, Sylvia, and Cathy McIlwaine. 1995. Women of 
a Lesser Cost: Female Labour, Foreign Exchange and 
Philippine Development. London: Pluto Press.

Chiu, Stephen W. K., and Ching Kwan Lee. 1997. “Af-
ter the Hong Kong Miracle: Women Workers un-
der Industrial Restructuring in Hong Kong.” Asian 
Survey 37 (8): 752–70.

Collins,  Jane  L.  1993. “Gender,  Contracts  and Wage 
Work:  Agricultural  Restructuring  in  Brazil’s  São 
Francisco Valley.” Development and Change 24 (1): 
53–82.

Comfort,  Kazanka,  and  John  Dada.  2009.  “Rural 
Women’s Use of Cell Phones to Meet Their Com-
munication  Needs:  A  Study  from  Northern  Ni-
geria.”  In  African Women  and  ICTs:  Investigating 
Technology,  Gender  and  Empowerment,  ed.  Ineke 
Buskens and Anne Webb. London: Zed Books.

Davin,  Delia.  2001.  The  Impact  of  Export-oriented 
Manufacturing  on  Chinese Women Workers.  New 
York: United Nations Research Institute for Social 
Development.

DiNardo,  John  E.,  and  Jorn-Steffen  Pischke.  1997. 
“The  Returns  to  Computer  Use  Revisited:  Have 
Pencils Changed the Wage Structure Too?” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 112 (1): 291–303.

Do,  Quy-Toan,  Andrei  Levchenko,  and  Claudio 
Raddatz. 2011. “Engendering Trade.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2012.

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

275

Dolan, Catherine S. 2001. “The ‘Good Wife’: Struggles 
over Resources in the Kenyan Horticultural Sec-
tor.” Journal of Development Studies 37 (3): 39–70.
Dolan,  Catherine,  and  Kristina  Sorby.  2003.  “Gen-
der  and  Employment  in  High-Value Agriculture 
Industries.”  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development 
Working Paper Series 7, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Elson,  Diane,  Barbara  Evers,  and  J.  Gideon.  1996. 
“Gender-Aware  Coun-try  Economic  Reports: 
Concepts  and  Sources.”  GENCON  Unit  Work-
ing  Paper  1,  University  of  Manchester  Graduate 
School of Social Science, Manchester, U.K.

Entorf,  Horst,  Michel  Gollac,  and  Francis  Kramarz. 
1999.  “New  Technologies,  Wages,  and  Worker 
Selection.”  Journal  of  Labor  Economics  17  (3): 
464–91.

Eslava,  Marcela,  John  Haltiwanger,  Adriana  Kugler, 
and  Maurice  Kugler.  2011. “Trade  Liberalization 
and Worker  Displacement:  Evidence  from  Trade 
Reforms in Colombia.” World Bank, Washington, 
DC. Processed.

Feldman, Shelley. 2009. “Historicizing Garment Man-
ufacturing  in  Bangladesh:  Gender,  Generation, 
and New Regulatory Regimes.” Journal of Interna-
tional Women’s Studies 11 (1): 268–88.

Fernández-Kelly,  María  Patricia.  1983.  For  We  Are 
Sold,  I  and  My  People:  Women  and  Industry  in 
Mexico’s Frontier. Albany, NY: State University of 
New York Press.

Fontana, Marzia. 2009. “The Gender Effects of Trade 
Liberalization in Developing Countries: A Review 
of the Literature.” In Gender Aspects of Trade and 
Poverty Nexus: A Macro-Micro Approach, ed. Mau-
rizio Bussolo and Rafael E. de Hoyos. Washington, 
DC: Palgrave and McMillan for the World Bank.

Foster,  Andrew  D.,  and  Mark  R.  Rosenzweig.  1996. 
“Technical  Change  and  Human-Capital  Returns 
and Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolu-
tion.” American Economic Review 86 (4): 931–53.

Franklin,  Victoria  L.,  Annalu  Waller,  Claudia  Pagli-
ari, and Stephen A. Greene. 2006. “A Randomized 
Controlled Trial of Sweet Talk: A Text-Messaging 
System to Support Young People with Diabetes.” 
Diabetic Medicine 23 (12): 1332–8.

Freeman, Richard B., ed. 1994. Working under Differ-

ent Rules. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Friedman, Elisabeth Jay. 2005. “The Reality of Virtual 
Reality: The Internet and Gender Equality Advo-
cacy  in  Latin America.”  Latin  America  Politics  & 
Society 47 (3): 1–34.

Fussell, Elizabeth. 2000. “Making Labor Flexible: The 
Recomposition of Tijuana’s Maquiladora Female 
Labour Force.” Feminist Economics 6 (3): 59–79.

Ghiara, Ranjeeta. 1999. “Impact of Trade Liberalisa-
tion on Female Wages in Mexico: An Economet-
ric  Analysis.”  Development  Policy  Review  17  (2): 
171–90.

Ghosh, Jayati. 2002. “Globalization, Export-Oriented 
Employment  for  Women  and  Social  Policy:  A 
Case  Study  of  India.”  Social  Scientist  30  (11/12): 
17–60.

Gill,  Kirrin,  Kim  Brooks,  Janna  McDougall,  Payal 
Patel, and Aslihan Kes. 2010. Bridging the Digital 
Divide: How Technology Can Advance Women Eco-
nomically. Washington, DC: International Center 
for Research on Women.

Gray, Mark M., Miki Caul Kittilson, and Wayne Sand-
holtz. 2006. “Women and Globalization: A Study 
of 180 Countries, 1975–2000.” International Orga-
nization 60 (2): 293–333.

Grijns,  Mies,  Ines  Smyth,  Anita  Van  Velzen,  Sugiah 
Machfud, and Pudjiwati Sayago, eds. 1994. Differ-
ent Women, Different Work: Gender and Industri-
alisation in Indonesia. Brookﬁ eld, VT: Avebury. 

GSMA Development Fund. 2010. Women and Mobile: 
A Global Opportunity: A Study on the Mobile Phone 
Gender Gap in Low and Middle Income Countries. 
London: GSMA and the Cherie Blair Foundation 
for Women.

Hafkin, Nancy, and Nancy Taggart. 2001. Gender, In-
formation  Technology,  and  Developing  Countries; 
An Analytical Study. Washington, DC: U.S. Agency 
for International Development.

Harrison,  Ann,  John  McLaren,  and  Margaret  S. 
McMillan.  2010. “Recent  Findings  on  Trade  and 
Inequality.” Working Paper Series 16425, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Harrison,  Ann,  and  Jason  Scorse.  2010.  “Multi-
national and Anti-Sweatshop Activism.” American 
Economic Review 100 (1): 247–73.

Hewett, Paul C., Sajeda Amin, and Binayak Sen. 2001. 
“Assessing the Impact of Garment Work on Qual-
ity of Life Measures.” In Growth of the Garment In-
dustry in Bangladesh: Economic and Social Dimen-
sions, ed. Binayak Sen. Dhaka: UPL Publications.
Hossain,  Naomi.  2011.  “Exports,  Equity  and  Em-
powerment: The Effects of Readymade Garments 
Manufacturing Employment on Gender Equality 
in Bangladesh.” Background paper for the WDR 
2012.

ILO  (International  Labour  Organization).  2002. 
Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Sta-
tistical Picture. Geneva: ILO.

ITU (International Telecommunications Union). 2010. 

Measuring the Informal Society. Geneva: ITU.

Jacobsen,  Joyce  P.  2011. “The  Role  of  Technological 
Change in Increasing Gender Equity with a Focus 
on  Information  and  Communications  Technol-
ogy.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Jensen, Robert. 2010a. “Economic Opportunities and 
Gender  Differences  in  Human  Capital:  Experi-
mental Evidence for India.” Working Paper Series 
16021,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Cambridge, MA.

276 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

———. 2010b. “The (Perceived) Returns to Educa-
tion  and  the  Demand  for  Schooling.”  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 125 (2): 515–48.

Jensen,  Robert,  and  Emily  Oster.  2007. “The  Power 
of  TV:  Cable  Television  and  Women’s  Status  in 
India.” Working Paper Series 13305, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Joekes, Susan. 1999a. “A Gender-Analytical Perspec-
tive on Trade and Sustainable Development.” Pa-
per  presented  at  the  United  Nations  Conference 
on Trade and Development, Geneva, July 12.

———. 1999b. “Gender, Property Rights and Trade: 
Constraints  to  Africa  Growth.”  In  Enterprise  in 
Africa: Between Poverty and Growth, ed. Kenneth 
King and Simon McGrath. London: Intermediate 
Technology Development Group.

Johnson, Kirk. 2001. “Media and Social Change: The 
Modernizing Inﬂ uences of Television in Rural In-
dia.” Media, Culture and Society 23 (2): 147–69.

Kabeer,  Naila.  1997.  “Women,  Wages  and  Intra-
household Power Relations in Urban Bangladesh.” 
Development and Change 28 (2): 261–302.

———.  2000.  The  Power  to  Choose:  Bangladeshi 
Women  and  Labour  Market  Decisions  in  London 
and Dhaka. London: Verso.

Kane, Thomas, T. Mohamadou Gueye, Ilene Speizer, 
Sara Pacque-Margolis, and Danielle Baron. 1998. 
“The  Impact  of  a  Family  Planning  Multimedia 
Campaign  in  Bamako,  Mali.”  Studies  in  Family 
Planning 29 (3): 309–23.

Kanwar,  Asha  S.,  and  Margaret  Taplin,  eds.  2001. 
Brave New Women of Asia: How Distance Educa-
tion  Changed  Their  Lives. Vancouver:  Common-
wealth of Learning. 

Katz,  Elizabeth  G.  1995. “Gender  and  Trade  within 
the Household: Observations from Rural Guate-
mala.” World Development 23 (2): 327–42.

Kongar, Ebru. 2007. “Importing Equality or Export-
ing Jobs? Competition and Gender Wage and Em-
ployment  Differentials  in  U.S.  Manufacturing.” 
In The Feminist Economics of Trade, ed. Irene van 
Stavaren and others. London: Routledge.

Krueger,  Alan  B.  1993.  “How  Computers  Have 
Changed  the  Wage  Structure:  Evidence  from 
Micro data, 1984–1989.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 108 (1): 33–60.

Kumar, Shubh K. 1994. Adoption of Hybrid Maize in 
Zambia: Effects on Gender Roles, Food Consump-
tion,  and  Nutrition.  Washington,  DC:  Interna-
tional Food Policy Research Institute.

Kusago,  Takayoshi.  2000.  “Why  Did  Rural  House-
holds  Permit  Their  Daughters  to  Be  Urban  Fac-
tory Workers? A Case from Rural Malay Villages.” 
Labour and Management in Development Journal 
1 (2): 3–24.

Kusago,  Takayoshi,  and  Bradford  L.  Barham.  2001. 
“Preference  Heterogeneity,  Power,  and  Intra-
household  Decision-Making  in  Rural  Malaysia.” 
World Development 29 (7): 1237–56.

Kyomuhendo,  Grace  Bantebya.  2009.  “The  Mobile 
Payphone Business: A Vehicle for Rural Women’s 
Empowerment in Uganda.” In African Women and 
ICTs:  Investigating  Technology,  Gender  and  Em-
powerment,  ed.  Ineke  Buskens  and  Anne  Webb. 
London: Zed Books.

La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Du-
ryea.  2008. “Soap  Operas  and  Fertility:  Evidence 
from  Brazil.”  Working  Paper  Series  633,  Inter-
American Development Bank, Washington, DC.

Lawrence, Robert Z. 2008. Blue-Collar Blues: Is Trade 
to Blame for Rising U.S. Income Inequality? Wash-
ington,  DC:  Peterson  Institute  for  International 
Economics. 

Lee, Sang-Hyop, and Jonghyuk Kim. 2004. “Has the 
Internet  Changed  the  Wage  Structure  Too?”  La-
bour Economics 11 (1): 119–27.

Lester,  Richard  T.,  Paul  Ritvo,  Edward  J.  Mills,  An-
tony  Kariri,  Sarah  Karanja,  Michael  H.  Chung, 
William  Jack,  James  Habyarimana,  Mohsen 
Sadatsafavi,  Mehdi  Najafzadeh,  Carlo  A.  Marra, 
Benson Estambale, Elizabeth Ngugi, T. Blake Ball, 
Lehana  Thabane,  Lawrence  J.  Gelmon,  Joshua 
Kimani,  Marta Ackers,  and  Francis A.  Plummer. 
2010. “Effects  of  a  Mobile  Phone  Short  Message 
Service  on  Antiretroviral  Treatment  Adherence 
in Kenya (WelTel Kenya 1): A Randomized Trial.” 
Lancet 376 (9755): 1838–45.

Levinsohn, James A. 2007. “Globalization and the Re-
turns to Speaking English in South Africa.” In Glo-
balization and Poverty, ed. Ann Harrison. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.

Levy,  Frank,  and  Richard  J.  Murnane.  1992.  “U.S. 
Earnings Level and Earnings Inequality: A Review 
of  Recent  Trends  and  Proposed  Explanations.” 
Journal of Economic Literature 30 (3): 1333–81.

Lim, Linda. 1990. “Women’s Work in Export Factories: 
The Politics of a Cause.” In Persistent Inequalities: 
Women and World Development, ed. Irene Tinker. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

Liu, Jin-Tan, Meng-Wen Tsou, and James K. Hammit. 
2004. “Computer Use and Wages: Evidence from 
Taiwan.” Economics Letters 82 (1): 43–51.

Maertens,  Miet,  and  Johan  F.  M.  Swinnen.  2009. 
“Trade,  Standards,  and  Poverty:  Evidence  from 
Senegal.” World Development 37 (1): 161–78.

McCulloch,  Neil,  and  Masako  Ota.  2002.  “Export 
Horticulture and Poverty in Kenya.” Working Pa-
per Series 174, Institute of Development Studies, 
Brighton, U.K.

Melhem, Samia, Claudia Morrell, and Nidhi Tandon. 
2009.  “Information  and  Communication  Tech-
nologies for Women’s Socio-economic Empower-
ment.” Working Paper 176, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Mitter, Swasti. 2000. “Teleworking and Teletrade in In-
dia: Combining Diverse Perspectives and Visions.” 
Economic and Political Weekly 35 (26): 2241–52.

 

Globalization’s impact on gender equality: What’s happened and what’s needed 

277

Munyua,  Alice  Wanjira.  2009.  “Women  Entrepre-
neurs in Nairobi: Examining and Contextualizing 
Women’s  Choices.”  In  African Women  and  ICTs: 
Investigating Technology and Gender and Empow-
erment, ed. Ineke Buskens and Anne Webb. Lon-
don: Zed Books.

Nanda,  Meera.  2000.  “Post-Fordist  Technology  and 
the Changing Patterns of Women’s Employment 
in the Third World.” Gender, Technology and De-
velopment 4 (1): 25–59.

Neumayer, Eric, and Indra De Soysa. 2007. “Global-
ization,  Women’s  Economic  Rights  and  Forced 
Labour.” World Economy 30 (10): 1510–35.

Newman,  Constance.  2001. “Gender,  Time  Use,  and 
Change: Impacts of Agricultural Export Employ-
ment in Ecuador.” Gender and Development Work-
ing Paper Series 18, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Ng, Cecilia, ed. 2001. Teleworking and Development in 
Malaysia.  Penang,  Malaysia:  United  Nations  De-
velopment Programme, Malaysia Southbound. 

Ng, Cecilia, and Swasti Mitter, eds. 2005. Gender and 
the Digital Economy: Perspectives from the Devel-
oping World. New Delhi: Sage Publications. 

Ng,  Ying  Chu.  2006.  “Levels  of  Computer  Self-
Efﬁ cacy,  Computer  Use  and  Earnings  in  China.” 
Economics Letters 90 (3): 427–32.

OECD  (Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation 
and  Development).  2007.  OECD  Employment 
Outlook 2007. Paris: OECD.

Oster, Emily, and M. Bryce Millet. 2010. “Do Call Cen-
ters Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from 
India.” Working Paper Series 15922, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Özler, Sule. 2007. “Export-led Industrialization and 
Gender Differences in Job Creation and Destruc-
tion:  Micro-evidence  from  the  Turkish  Manu-
facturing  Sector.”  In  The  Feminist  Economy  of 
Trade, ed. Irene van Stavaren and others. London: 
 Routledge.

Pace,  Richard.  1993.  “First  Time  Televiewing  in 
Amazônia:  Television  Acculturation  in  Gurupá, 
Brazil.” Ethnology 32 (2): 187–205.

Pearson, Ruth. 1993. “Gender and New Technology in 
the Caribbean.” In Women and Change in the Ca-
ribbean: New Work for Women? ed. Janet Monsen. 
London: James Currey.

———. 1998. “Nimble Fingers Revisited: Reﬂ ections 
on Women and Third World Industrialization in 
the  Late  Twentieth  Century.”  In  Feminist Visions 
of Development, ed. Cecile Jackson and Ruth Pear-
son. London: Routledge.

Porter,  Gina,  and  Kevin  Phillips-Howard.  1997. 
“Comparing  Contracts:  An  Evaluation  of  Con-
tract Farming Schemes in Africa.” World Develop-
ment 25 (2): 227–38.

Rendall,  Michelle.  2010.  “Brain  versus  Brawn:  The 
Realization  of  Women’s  Comparative  Advan-
tage.”    Working  Paper  Series  306,  University  of 
Zurich Department of Economics, Center for In-

stitutions, Policy and Culture in the Development 
Process, Zürich.

———.  2011.  “Technical  Change  in  Developing 
Countries: Has It Decreased Gender Inequality?” 
Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Robertson, Raymond, Drusilla Brown, Gaelle Pierre, 
and Maria Laura Sanchez-Puerta. 2009. Globaliza-
tion, Wages, and the Quality of Jobs: Five Country 
Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Rogers,  Everett  M.,  Peter  W.  Vaughan,  Ramadhan 
M. A. Swalehe, Nagesh Rao, Peer Svenkerud, and 
Suruchi Sood. 1999. “Effects of an Entertainment-
Education Radio Soap Opera on Family Planning 
Behavior in Tanzania.” Studies in Family Planning 
30 (3): 193–211.

Saito, Katrine A., Hailu Mekonnen, and Daphne Spurl-
ing.  1994.  “Raising  the  Productivity  of  Women 
Farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Africa Technical 
Department  Discussion  Paper  Series  230,  World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Sane, Ibou, and Mamadou Balla Traore. 2009. “Mo-
bile Phones in a Time of Modernity: The Quest 
for  Increased  Self-Sufﬁ ciency  among  Women 
Fishmongers  and  Fish  Processors  in  Dakar.”  In 
African Women and ICTs: Investigating Technology, 
Gender and Empowerment, ed. Ineke Buskens and 
Anne Webb. London: Zed Books.

Sassen,  Saskia.  2011. “Digital  Technology  and  Gen-

der.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Schaefer Davis, Susan. “Women Weavers Online: Ru-
ral Moroccan Women on the Internet.” In Gender 
and the Digital Economy: Perspectives from the De-
veloping World, ed. Cecilia Ng and Swasti Mitter. 
New Dehli: Sage Publications.

Scheve, Kevin, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2004. “Eco-
nomic  Insecurity  and  the  Globalization  of  Pro-
duction.” American Journal of Political Science 48 
(4): 662–74.

Seguino,  Stephanie.  1997. “Gender  Wage  Inequality 
and Export Led Growth in South Korea.” Journal 
of Development Studies 34 (2): 102–32.

———. 2000. “The Effects of Structural Change and 
Economic  Liberalisation  on  Gender  Wage  Dif-
ferentials in South Korea and Taiwan.” Cambridge 
Journal of Economics 24 (4): 437–59.

SERNAM (Servicio Nacional de la Mujer). 2001. Acu-
erdos de las Comisiones de la Agro-exportación para 
Trabajadores  y  Trabajadoras  Agrícolas  de  Tempo-
rada. Santiago de Chile: SERNAM.

Standing,  Guy.  1999. “Global  Feminization  through 
Flexible Labor: A Theme Revisited.” World Devel-
opment 27 (3): 583–602.

Stern,  Nicholas,  Jean-Jacques  Dethier,  and  F.  Halsey 
Rogers.  2005.  Growth  and  Empowerment:  Mak-
ing  Development  Happen.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT 
Press.

Thrupp,  Lori  Ann,  Gilles  Bergeron,  and  William 
F.  Waters.  1995.  Bittersweet  Harvests  for  Global 

278 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Supermarkets: Challenges in Latin America’s Agri-
cultural  Export  Boom.  Washington,  DC:  World 
Resources Institute.

Tran-Nguyen,  Anh-Nga,  and  Americo  Beviglia-
 Zampetti.  2004.  Trade  and  Gender:  Opportuni-
ties and Challenges for Developing Countries. Ge-
neva:  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and 
 Development.

Valente, Thomas W., Young Mi Kim, Cheryl Letten-
maier, William  Glass,  and Yankuba  Dibba.  1994. 
“Radio  Promotion  of  Family  Planning  in  The 
Gambia.”  International  Family  Planning  Perspec-
tives 20 (3): 96–100.

van Stavaren, Irene, Diane Nelson, Caren Grown, and 
Nilüfer  Cagatay.  2007.  The  Feminist  Economy  of 
Trade. London: Routledge.

Venegas Leiva, Sylvia. 1992. Una Gota al Día . . . un 
Chorro al Año. El Impacto Social de la Expansión 
Frutícola. Santiago de Chile: LOM Ediciones.

———. 1993. “Programas de Apoyo a Temporeros y 
Temporeras en Chile.” In Los Pobres del Campo: El 
Trabajador Eventual, ed. Sergio Gómez and Emilio 
Klein.  Santiago  de  Chile:  FLACSO/PREALC  and 
International Labour Organization.

Ver Beek, Kurt Alan. 2001. “Maquiladoras: Exploita-
tion or Emancipation? An Overview of the Situa-
tion of Maquiladora Workers in Honduras.” World 
Development 29 (9): 1553–67.

von Braun, Joachim, Ken B. Johm, and Detlev Puetz. 
1994. “Nutritional  Effects  of  Commercialization 
of a Woman’s Crop: Irrigated Rice in The Gam-
bia.” In Agricultural Commercialization, Economic 
Development,  and  Nutrition,  ed.  von  Braun  and 
Kennedy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press for International Food Policy Research 
Institute.

von Braun, Joachim, and Eileen Kennedy, eds. 1994. 
Agricultural  Commercialization,  Economic  De-
velopment,  and  Nutrition.  Baltimore,  MD:  Johns 
Hopkins University Press for International Food 
Policy Research Institute. 

von  Bülow,  Dorthe,  and  Anne  Sørensen.  1993. 
“Gender  and  Contract  Farming:  Tea  Outgrower 
Schemes  in  Kenya.”  Review  of  African  Political 
Economy 56: 38–52.

Weinberg, Bruce A. 2000. “Computer Use and the De-
mand for Female Workers.” Industrial and Labor 
Relations Review 53 (2): 290–308.

Wold, Bjorn K., ed. 1997. Supply Response in a Gender-
Perspective: The  Case  of  Structural Adjustment  in 
Zambia. Reports 97/23. Oslo: Statistics Norway. 

Wood, Adrian. 1991. “North-South Trade and Female 
Labour in Manufacturing: An Asymmetry.” Jour-
nal of Development Studies 27 (2): 168–89.

———. 1995. “How Trade Hurts Unskilled Workers.” 

Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (3): 57–80.

Wood, Adrian, and Jörg Mayer. 2001. “Africa’s Export 
Structure  in  a  Comparative  Perspective.”  Cam-
bridge Journal of Economics 25 (3): 369–94.

World  Bank.  2010.  World  Development  Indicators. 

Washington, DC: World Bank.

Yitamben, Gisele, and Elise Tchinda. 2009. “Internet 
Use Among Women Entrepreneurs in the Textile 
Sector  in  Douala,  Cameroon:  Self-Taught  and 
Independent.” In African Women and ICTs: Inves-
tigating  Technology,  Gender  and  Empowerment, 
ed. Ineke Buskens and Anne Webb. London: Zed 
Books.

Zohir, S. C. 1998. “Gender Implications of Industrial 
Reforms  and  Adjustment  in  the  Manufacturing 
Sector  of  Bangladesh.”  PhD  thesis,  University  of 
Manchester, Manchester, U.K.

280 
280 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

SPREAD 3  

 

 Changing ages, changing bodies, changing times—Adolescent boys 
and girls

A cross  urban  and  rural  communities  in  eight 

countries, 800 girls and boys between the ages of 
11 and 17 talked about their everyday life, their 
use of time, their aspirations and hopes for the future, 
and what it means to be a girl or a boy today.1 Aware of 
the  demands  and  opportunities  of  today’s  world,  boys 
and girls deeply value education and aspire to good jobs. 
Their answers and conversations also bring to light how 
early in life gender differences emerge and how expected 
gender roles and behaviors permeate all aspects of their 
everyday lives—from their relation with their parents to 
their evaluation of each other. That includes their deﬁ ni-
tions of what constitutes appropriate behavior—what it 
means to be a good or bad girl, a good or bad boy (spread 
ﬁ gure 3.1).

Dedicating effort to study and doing well in school 
are deﬁ ning attributes of good girls and boys alike and 
one of their main responsibilities. Second to school for 
girls comes helping at home. Other markers of a good 
girl  include  individual  character  traits—such  as  being 
obedient and respectful. In contrast, lack of modesty in 
dress and going out without a speciﬁ c purpose or stay-
ing out late are perceived as inappropriate behavior for 
girls.  For  boys,  risky  behaviors—smoking,  drinking, 
drug use—are central in the deﬁ nition of a bad boy, and 
a good boy is deﬁ ned as a boy who does not have these 
behaviors. 

Adolescents and their parents alike place a high value 
on  education.  Most  of  the  adolescents  surveyed  were 
attending school at the time of the survey, except for a 
quarter of the girls and boys participating in India. These 
girls  and  boys  had  left  school  at  different  stages  from 
grades  1  to  10,  the  majority  around  grade  5  or  6.  The 
girls left school to help at home or in home agricultural 
production, while boys left to work as painters, carpen-
ters,  and  mechanics  in  urban  areas  and  as  agricultural 
workers in rural communities. 

In  all  cases,  the  adolescents’  participation  in  school 
and their decision to leave largely depended on parental 
views about education, which have changed over time, 
particularly for daughters, as a woman from the Red Sea 
region in North Sudan narrates: 

I was born in 1963 in a middle-income family of a 
Bega tribe. Things were very different then. When I 
became seven years of age, I began to help my mother 
in home farming and household duties. Women in 
our area do not work in farms but they help in seed-

ing and harvesting. I did not go to school, because 
there was no school in our village. Also, there was no 
girl’s education, and there was not one educated girl 
in our area. It was believed that girls’ education was 
shameful.  When  I  was  17  years  old,  they  married 
me to my cousin without asking me. We had seven 
children, three girls and four boys. All my daughters 
started school but only one of them passed grade 4 
and continues studying. . . . I hope, God willing, that 
she would continue and complete her education to 
the  highest  level  reached  by  any  girl  in  the  village. 
Yes, now I have changed my ideas to education, espe-
cially to girls’ education.

Girls  and  boys  have  the  expectation  that  getting  an 
education will give them a better future than their par-
ents had and that it will allow them to meet their aspi-
rations:  “School  is  very  important,  I  see  my  big  brothers 
who are civil servants and I want to be like them” (young 
man, Burkina Faso). “Education lets us join the modern 
world, and offers us better jobs now; in the past it was not 
important since our people were farmers and were not pay-
ing  attention  to  their  future  or  look[ing]  to  change  their 
present” (young man, North Sudan). “Brighter future, less 
hard work than being farmers, better economic life” (young 
man, Vietnam). “Complete education up to university to 
get a job, then become an educated mother” (young woman, 
North Sudan).

But they are also aware that they may not reach the 
education levels they wish. When asked to compare their 
desires with reality, all girls surveyed in Bhutan, Burkina 
Faso, and the Republic of Yemen said they would like to 
attain at least a college degree, but rural girls are aware 
that their schooling is unlikely to extend beyond second-
ary level, if they are lucky. Fijian girls and girls from the 
West Bank and Gaza feel that they will meet their dream 
of a college degree. The overwhelming majority of girls 
in India aspire to a degree, but when asked about how 
far they are really likely to go in their education, answers 
vary, and some think they may just make it to secondary 
school  and  not  fulﬁ ll  their  dreams  to  become  doctors, 
lawyers, or engineers. Boys too aspire to college and pro-
fessional degrees, but in Burkina Faso and rural Fiji, they 
are aware that many will not make it past primary school. 
And  while  some  Gaza  boys  share  dreams  of  advanced 
tertiary education, they know they are likely to stop their 
schooling  at  secondary  level.  Some  boys  from  Burkina 
Faso do not really want to go beyond primary levels. And 

 
 

Changing ages, changing bodies, changing times—adolescent boys and girls 
Changing ages, changing bodies, changing times—adolescent boys and girls 

281
281

SPREAD FIGURE 3.1   Characteristics of good girls/boys and bad girls/boys

s
u
c
o
f
 
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
m

 
f
o
%

 

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
p
u
o
r
g

 

s
u
c
o
f
 
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
m

 
f
o
%

 

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
p
u
o
r
g

 

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

a.  Good girl

b.  Good boy

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

s
u
c
o
f
 
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
m

 
f
o
%

 

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
p
u
o
r
g

 

hardworking
polite

stays home
no boyfriend
dresses appropriately

religious

helps at home
respectful
obedient

studies

0

has good friends
no girlfriend

polite
obedient

studies

helps at home
no vices
respectful
religious
(sm oking, drinking)

c.  Bad girl

d.  Bad boy

s
u
c
o
f
 
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
m

 
f
o
%

 

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
p
u
o
r
g

 

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

lies

fights

roams around/out late
not religious
disrespectful
steals
disobedient
does not study
many girlfriends
vices (sm oking, drinking)

prostitute
fights
boyfriends

does not help at home
roams around/out late
does not listen to parents
disobedient
does not study
disrespectful
not religious
vices (sm oking, drinking)
dresses inappropriately

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: A Multi-Country Assessment” (dataset).

male respondent

female respondent

boys  in  the  Dominican  Republic  share  the  perception 
that studying is not the best path to a better future. 

The reasons that explain the gap between their wishes 
and  reality  range  from  physical  distance  to  economic 
hardship to gender roles. Distance and lack of infrastruc-
ture affects boys and girls alike, but girls have more dif-
ﬁ culties when there is no school in their village or when 
their friends start dropping out and they have no peers 
to join them on their journey to school. In all places, girls 
face more mobility restrictions than boys do. Boys and 
girls  are  also  affected  by  their  family’s  economic  situa-

tion. Boys leave school to contribute to family income, 
girls to help at home. In these cases, the number and or-
der of children play a role in parents’ decisions. “If pos-
sible, all the children are sent to school; if there is a ﬁ nancial 
problem, younger children are sent to school and older kids 
are sent to work,” a boy in India pointed out. Girls from 
other communities in the country offered similar expla-
nations. 

Gender differences also play in the decision to leave 
school. In Bhutan, Burkina Faso, India, North Sudan, and 
the Republic of Yemen, girls leave school to prepare for 

282 
282 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

future marital duties, to keep them safe from danger, or 
to prevent unwanted pregnancies: “My boyfriend got in 
the way of my education when I got in the 6th grade, I got 
pregnant” (young woman, Liberia). “It was my own fault. 
I had a boyfriend and got pregnant while still in school. I 
left school and had to stay home” (young woman, Papua 
New Guinea).

Prevalent  views  of  gender  roles  and  binding  social 
norms shape adolescents’ daily lives. The expectation is 
that girls will help in the house, and their responsibility 
for certain chores means that, in general, girls enjoy less 
free time than boys. Across four communities in Burkina 
Faso,  it  was  unanimously  recognized  that “boys  devote 
more time to having a good time because they have more 
free time, they don’t have to wash or prepare food.” A group 
of  girls  in  the  Dominican  Republic  complained,  “We 
have to clean the ﬂ oors, we have to wash, we have to look 
after our siblings, we have so many things to do!!” Almah, 
from rural Papua New Guinea, explains, “Boys do noth-
ing to help. They look for their friends to tell stories, and 
roam the streets the whole day, chewing gum, listening to 
music, sleeping, and resting. Girls take care of all household 
chores, collect ﬁ rewood, and fetch water. Daughters have to 
take over housework, and they have no free time.” Sangay, 
a boy from Bhutan, agrees, “Girls spend most of the time 
working at home and they play less, whereas boys play more 
and work less at our age.”

While boys are expected to help, their tasks are more 
contained and take less of their time: “Boys don’t have spe-
ciﬁ c tasks to do. They go shopping within the neighborhood 
whenever that is needed, but this doesn’t take more than 
an hour daily.” “I would help at home if I am requested to 
do, but nobody asks me” (young man, North Sudan). And 
while  they  devote  some  of  their  free  time  to  studying, 
boys say they would like to have ways to use their time 
in a more productive way, in part responding to social 
norms of their future roles as income providers for their 
households: “I would like to work more and play less Nin-
tendo”  (young  man,  Dominican  Republic). “Rather  than 
staying at home and doing nothing, I would be happy if I 
could get money and start a small business” (South Africa). 
“We would very much like to get a job or anything useful 
to use our free time” (West Bank and Gaza). “We want to 
engage in activities that will bring income” (Afghanistan). 
Adolescence,  a  time  to  transition  into  adulthood,  is 
also a time when many form a family and have children. 
In two of every ﬁ ve communities in all 19 countries in the 
assessment, young women said that girls are often mar-
ried and have children before they reach age 17. In 11 of 
the 19 countries, young women said marriage and child-
birth was common for girls under the age of 15, more 
so in rural than urban settings. The early onset of sexual 
activity was in some cases associated with early marriage, 

but not always: “I got married when I was 10 years old, 
and I had a child when I was 15 years old. . . . This is not 
the right age. It is good only if they have a child at the age 
of 18 or more. It is good for a girl to have a child when she 
is able to think what is right and what is wrong” (young 
woman, India). In the Dominican Republic most girls say 
that they start having sex—and becoming mothers—at 
age 13. “A friend of mine is 11, and she is pregnant,” said 
a girl from Santo Domingo. In Tanzania, the average age 
for ﬁ rst pregnancy was seen to be 15. “But there are girls 
who have got their ﬁ rst child at the age of 12,” said a young 
woman. “Sometimes  you  can  die  for  having  a  baby  this 
early,” recognized another girl in Liberia.

Most surprising, no adolescent girl or boy in any dis-
cussion group indicated that childbirth at such a young 
age was desirable or acceptable. In fact, when asked about 
the ideal and desired age to start a family, most said age 
18 or older for both marriage and childbirth. There were 
no reports of boys under the age of 15 becoming fathers, 
and they recognize that they begin their sexual activity 
later than girls. In Peru, where 16 was the youngest age 
of sexual activity reported for boys, early onset of sexual 
relations  also  determines  early  household  formation; 
while couples do not formally marry, they start cohab-
iting  once  the  girl  is  pregnant,  acknowledging  that  the 
pregnancy is “a shared mistake,” as a boy called it.

Having a boyfriend or a girlfriend at an early age was 
part of what groups deﬁ ned as bad behavior. For boys, 
bad  behavior  extends  to  bad  habits  and  bad  company. 
Violence and smoking or drinking were frequently men-
tioned,  as  was  participation  in  gangs  and  in  groups  of 
boys that bully other boys or harass girls in the street (see 
spread ﬁ gure 3.1). The bad company was associated with 
boys staying out late more often; increasing their expo-
sure to drugs, alcohol, and other bad habits; and losing 
interest in their studies. While girls are pulled into the 
house, boys are pushed out of it. This freedom of move-
ment  puts  boys  more  at  risk  than  girls.  “The  boys  are 
happy when they are a free man and the girls are happy to 
be in their home,” said boys in North Sudan. “Boys, they 
take their bikes and scoot off and roam around in villages 
here  and  there”  (young  man,  Fiji).  “Boys  can  inﬂ uence 
each other into becoming more violent. Girls aren’t violent 
at all” (adolescent boy, West Bank and Gaza). “Boys are 
in gangs and ﬁ ght each other with machetes, stones, and 
guns” (adolescent boys, Dominican Republic). 

Girls are more restricted to the home space. Boys and 
girls say that girls enjoy being at home or spending time 
with their friends “We feel happy when we play together 
or we mingle with friends, the feeling of togetherness makes 
us happy” (young woman, India). But some of these per-
ceptions are related to speciﬁ c restrictions on girls’ abil-
ity  to  move  about  freely  and  to  have  free  time.  “They 

 
 

Changing ages, changing bodies, changing times—adolescent boys and girls 
Overview 

283
283

have more freedom to be out, girls have limits.” “Girls are 
afraid that if they go out something can happen to them or 
they can get raped,” said girls and boys in the Dominican 
Republic. Their peers in other countries agree: “Boys can 
be  as  free  as  they  wish  and  that  is  alright.  Girls  cannot 
go out in the evening. Boys can go anywhere they wish” 
(Indonesia). “Boys are free to move around the commu-
nity. Wherever they go they don’t worry and no one ques-
tions them” (Republic of Yemen). “Girls have to ﬁ nd fun 
inside the house because they are not allowed to go out like 
the  boys”  (West  Bank  and  Gaza).  “Women  should  stay 
home. . . . It is preferred to be at home and not go out on 
the street or any other place” (North Sudan).

But girls are willing and open to challenge the norms 
that conﬁ ne them to the domestic sphere. While young 
men have a more traditional view of the role of women 
in the household, girls aspire to a different life from their 
mothers and want to combine productive and reproduc-
tive tasks (spread ﬁ gure 3.2). While admiring the hard-
working  nature,  devotion,  and  care  of  their  mothers, 
most girls whose mothers were housewives do not want 
to replicate that in the future. Many boys also want their 
sisters and future wives to have a different life from their 
mother: “She works at home, she is also ﬁ nancially sup-
porting the family, she has more responsibilities at home. 
If  my  father  comes  home  drunk,  he  might  verbally  and 
physically abuse her [but] she has always encouraged the 
boys to dream. We can’t face so many difﬁ culties, we don’t 
want that kind of life” (young boy, India). “Our mothers’ 
lives  were  difﬁ cult,”  said  a  group  of  girls  in  Fiji. “They 
stay  home  and  have  a  lot  of  responsibilities—look  after 
kids, household chores, cooking and cleaning and work on 
farms;” “[we want] better education and advanced job in 
life . . . education ﬁ rst and then work and get married last 
[not at a young age like their mother’s did].”

SPREAD FIGURE 3.2   Adolescents’ opinions on 

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o
%

 

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

5

women’s roles

Views on women’s roles

73

55

45

27

young men’s opinion

young women’s opinion

women should combine domestic and breadwinner roles
women should only perform domestic tasks

Source: WDR 2012 team calculations, based on “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century: A Multi-
Country Assessment” (dataset).

NOTE

1.   The WDR2012 Qualitative Assessment included 19 econo-
mies (the complete country list can be found in Spread 1, 
note  1).  Speciﬁ c  focus  groups  with  adolescents  were  con-
ducted  in  a  subsample  of  8  economies  including  Bhutan, 
Burkina  Faso,  the  Dominican  Republic,  Fiji,  India,  North 
Sudan, West Bank and Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen. In 
many other countries, adolescents participated in interviews 
with young women.

PART III
The role of and potential for 
public action  

T 

he analysis in Part 2 points to four priority areas for pub-
lic action: reducing excess female mortality, especially in 
infancy and early childhood and in reproductive years; 
closing  earnings  and  productivity  gaps  between  women  and 
men; shrinking gender differences in voice in households and in 
society; and limiting the reproduction of gender inequality over 
time, whether it is transmitted through endowments, economic 
opportunities, or agency. Gender gaps in these four areas persist 
despite economic development, thus providing a strong ratio-
nale for public action. 

Part 3 of the Report is concerned with three questions: How 
to choose the right policies? What would enable the successful 
implementation  of  these  policies?  How  can  the  international 
development  community  support  policies  for  greater  gender 
equality?  The  discussion  starts  with  a  detailed  description  of 
policy options for addressing the four priority areas for action, 
complemented with concrete illustrations of their use in various 
country  contexts  (chapter  7).  An  examination  of  the  political 
economy of gender reforms follows, emphasizing the issues that 
distinguish reform in this area from other types of redistributive 
or equality-enhancing reforms (chapter 8). We end by proposing 
a global agenda for action (chapter 9).

In each of the priority areas, the chapter looks at experi-
ences  across  diverse  countries––rich  and  developing––with 
different policies. In evaluating and recommending policies, 
we rely as far as possible on rigorous evidence, including from 
impact evaluations where these exist. We are thus able to dis-
tinguish between policies (such as conditional cash transfers 
to improve educational access or job placement programs to 
promote  wage  employment)  regarding  which  there  is  more 
and  better  evidence  and  other  interventions  where  less  is 
known (such as measures to improve women’s access to jus-
tice or ways of reducing unintended pregnancies among ado-
lescent girls). 

By  looking  beyond  policies  targeted  at  the  underlying 
causes of persistent gender equality, chapter 7 also illustrates 
how the framework can inform effective and strategic gender 
mainstreaming. Many policies are not concerned directly with 
gender but may nonetheless inﬂ uence gender relations within 
the household and society. Ignoring these links can make in-
terventions less effective in achieving their goals. And in some 
circumstances,  taking  account  of  gender-differentiated  im-
pacts can make it possible to use policy as a way of enhancing 
gender equality. 

CHOOSING THE RIGHT POLICIES

ENABLING POLICY IMPLEMENTATION

Policy makers can choose interventions that work through mar-
kets and through formal and informal institutions. The policies 
can also vary with the problem being tackled. For the market, 
prices can be altered through a range of taxes and subsidies. For 
formal institutions, laws can be changed or better enforced, and 
the level and quality of service provision can be enhanced. Poli-
cies  are  typically  more  indirect  when  targeting  informal  insti-
tutions,  particularly  social  norms:  examples  include  providing 
information and facilitating the formation of groups.

Chapter 7 illustrates how the framework in Part 2 helps reduce 
the complexity of policy choice and design in three ways. First, it 
focuses policy attention on the gender gaps of greatest concern. 
Second,  it  shifts  attention  from  symptoms  to  determinants  so 
that policies target the root cause of the problem rather than its 
most apparent manifestation. Third, it provides guidance about 
the  most  binding  constraints  and  the  potential  entry  point(s) 
for policy action. Where mutually reinforcing constraints exist, 
it highlights the need to sequence or combine interventions.
 

Designing  appropriate  policies  is  just  the  ﬁ rst  step  toward 
greater  gender  equality.  Implementing  them  effectively  is 
equally  important.  Chapter  8  looks  at  the  experience  of  a 
range of countries to highlight the main aspects of the politi-
cal economy of gender reform. 

Two  characteristics  of  gender  reforms  are  likely  to  spark 
opposition that needs to be managed if positive change is to 
result.  First,  as  with  all  reforms,  they  redistribute  resources 
and power between groups in society, including between men 
and women. So, even when the reforms enhance economic ef-
ﬁ ciency, some groups may lose. Second, gender reforms often 
challenge powerful societal norms and beliefs regarding gen-
der roles. 

The chapter highlights four political economy issues that 
are especially relevant to gender equality. First, it is essential 
to build coalitions that mobilize around the reforms and cata-
lyze broad-based support. While state action is at the center of 
gender policy reform, coalitions that include nonstate actors 
285

 

286 
286 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

such as political parties, trade unions, civic organizations, and 
the  private  sector  can  be  a  strong  force  for  change.  Women’s 
groups in particular have been, and will continue to be, impor-
tant in working for greater gender equality in labor legislation 
and family law. And while men are still not as active in the push 
for gender equality, there is broader male engagement in many 
areas  and  growing  male  support  for  women’s  rights  in  many 
developing countries. 

Second, ﬁ rms—big and small—have strong business reasons 
to become proponents of gender equality. In a globalized econ-
omy, the competition for talent is great; companies can no  longer 
afford to overlook or ignore talented women. Commitment to 
gender equality is something customers and investors increas-
ingly demand, especially in large corporations. And the growing 
market power of women can encourage businesses to back up 
these commitments with action.

Third,  dislocations  such  as  natural  disasters  or  political  or 
economic change, can present policy makers with windows of 
opportunity to launch reforms that improve gender outcomes. 
The advocacy of transnational agencies and role modeling in the 
global agenda can play a similar role. 

Finally, there are multiple paths to reform. Often governments 
follow societal cues in pacing and pushing reforms. When policy 
formulation and implementation derive from ongoing shifts in 
markets and social norms, convergence and alignment can fuel 
sustainable change. But such “incremental” reforms may not be 
enough to overcome the path dependence and institutional ri-
gidities that result in persistent gender inequality. Bold govern-
ment action with “transformative” reforms may be necessary to 
alter social dynamics and move to a more equitable equilibrium. 
In choosing between incremental and transformative policies as 
part of gender reforms, the challenge for policy makers is to bal-
ance the pace of change with the risks of reversal. 

THE GLOBAL AGENDA FOR ACTION

As  chapters  7  and  8  show,  domestic  public  action  is  central 
to reducing gender inequalities. Yet global action—by govern-

ments, civil society organizations, and international institu-
tions  working  in  concert—can  enhance  the  scope  for  and 
impact of domestic policies. Chapter 9 discusses the moti-
vation for actions by the international community as com-
plements  to  country-level  efforts  and  where  those  actions 
should focus. 

Global  action  for  gender  equality  is  warranted  for  three 
reasons.  First,  progress  on  some  fronts,  such  as  addressing 
the root causes of excess female mortality, requires channel-
ing more resources from rich to developing countries, espe-
cially the poorest and most fragile countries. Second, effective 
action sometimes requires the production of a public good, 
such as the generation or dissemination of new knowledge. 
And third, international coordination among a large number 
of countries and institutions can promote the adoption and 
enhance  the  overall  effectiveness  of  policies,  for  instance  by 
building momentum and pressure for domestic action.

Chapter 9 concludes that this global agenda should focus 
on areas where our analysis has pointed to the largest intrin-
sic gender gaps, where the potential development payoff is 
greatest, and where these gaps persist with income growth. 
So, the international community should focus its efforts on 
complementing countries’ actions in the four priority areas 
identiﬁ ed  in  this  Report:  reducing  excess  female  mortality 
and  closing  education  gaps  where  they  remain;  improving 
access  to  economic  opportunities  for  women;  increasing 
women’s voice and agency in the household and in society; 
and  limiting  the  reproduction  of  gender  inequality  across 
generations.  And  we  highlight  an  additional  cross-cutting 
priority:  supporting  evidence-based  public  action  through 
better  data,  better  knowledge  generation  and  sharing,  and 
better learning.

In these areas, the support from the international commu-
nity should be a mix of providing ﬁ nancing; fostering innova-
tion and learning; and strengthening partnerships, including 
with academia, civil society, and the private sector. As chapter 
9  notes,  the  speciﬁ cs  will  vary  by  country  and  priority  area 
and will require sustaining support in some areas while scal-
ing up support in others.

7CHAPTER

Public action for gender equality

Following on the trends and analysis in 

Parts 1 and 2, this chapter looks at the 
choice of public policies to address the 
most  serious  gender  gaps.  In  practice, 
policies for greater gender equality take a variety 
of forms and work through markets (taxes and 
subsidies), formal institutions (legal or regula-
tory  changes  and  public  service  delivery),  or 
even  through  informal  institutions  (efforts  to 
change social norms). This multiplicity of pos-
sible  interventions  can  make  the  policy  choice 
and design problem appear overwhelming.

Our approach to making this problem more 
tractable is threefold and illustrates how better 
analysis that builds on our framework can help. 
First, we focus on what the analysis in the pre-
ceding chapters highlighted as the gender gaps 
of  greatest  concern.  These  are  the  disparities 
that  matter  for  societal  welfare  and  countries’ 
development  prospects  but  that  do  not  nec-
essarily  close  as  countries  grow  richer.  These 
priorities  are  reducing  excess  female  mortal-
ity,  especially  in  infancy  and  early  childhood 
and in reproductive years; closing earnings and 
productivity  gaps  between  women  and  men; 
shrinking gender differences in voice in society 
and in households; and limiting the reproduc-
tion of gender inequality over time, whether this 
inequality is transmitted through endowments, 
economic  opportunities,  or  agency.  Obviously, 
not all these priorities will apply to all countries 
across  all  income  levels.  And  country  charac-
teristics will dictate how corrective policies will 
need to be customized.

Second, we emphasize that, in choosing and 
designing  policies,  it  is  necessary  to  target  the 

determinants—the  underlying  causes—of  the 
gender gaps of concern rather than their symp-
toms. The analytical framework carried through 
Part 2 of the Report helps highlight these causes 
and  how  they  emerge  from  the  workings  of 
markets and institutions and their interactions 
with each other and with households. 

Third, we draw on the insight from the frame-
work that, despite income growth, some gender 
gaps tend to persist and remain “sticky” for one 
of two main reasons. Either the single impetus 
for progress may be blocked, as with the insti-
tutional improvements needed to reduce infant, 
child, and maternal mortality in many low- and 
middle-income  countries.  Or  the  workings  of 
markets and institutions and their interactions 
with each other and with households can mean 
that  multiple  constraints  to  progress  require 
changes on several fronts. So, addressing gender 
gaps in where women and men work and how 
productive they are may require changes in how 
markets work, in the laws and regulations that 
apply to their work, and in the beliefs and norms 
that apply to the work that men and women do. 
In  practice,  therefore,  policy  makers  need  to 
understand whether a single constraint is most 
salient for a particular problem or whether mul-
tiple constraints are at work, and whether to ad-
dress them simultaneously or sequentially. 

Most  of  the  chapter  is  organized  by  look-
ing at policies to target the priority gender gaps 
within  the  three  dimensions  of  endowments, 
economic opportunities, and agency. Some as-
pects of the reproduction of gender inequality 
over  time,  such  as  pockets  of  disadvantage  in 
education, are covered here. However, we discuss 

 

Public action for gender equality 

289

ways  of  dealing  with  the  gender  disadvantages 
that emerge in adolescence and early adulthood 
separately  both  because  of  the  importance  of 
these gaps in giving rise to “gender inequality” 
traps  and  because  corrective  measures  have  to 
recognize  how  endowments,  economic  oppor-
tunities, and agency are even more tightly linked 
for this age group. 

Addressing  gender  gaps  in  human  capital 
endowments—excess  female  mortality  at  spe-
ciﬁ c  periods  of  the  life  cycle,  and  pockets  of 
gender disadvantage in education—requires an 
emphasis  on  better  delivery  of  public  services. 
Improving  the  availability  of  clean  water  and 
sanitation  to  households  and  providing  timely 
basic services to expectant mothers will go a long 
way to closing gender gaps in excess mortality. 
Education  services  should  focus  on  improving 
access for the signiﬁ cant population groups now 
disadvantaged by poverty, ethnicity, caste, race, 
or geography. Such an emphasis will address the 
“gender  inequality  traps”  that  affect  the  poor 
and excluded, with solutions coming from either 
the demand or the supply side. And broad-based 
safety nets can dampen the adverse impacts of 
income  shocks,  which  can  affect  males  or  fe-
males differently, depending on the nature of the 
shock and the underlying gender relations. 

Closing the gap between women and men in 
their  access  to  economic  opportunities  means 
reducing  earnings  and  productivity  gaps  be-
tween them, whether in wage employment, ag-
riculture,  or  entrepreneurship.  This  effort  will 
take  targeted  policies  to  lift  the  constraints  on 
women’s  time  stemming  from  the  burdens  of 
housework and care and to improve the work-
ings of labor and credit markets and the struc-
ture  of  formal  institutions—particularly  laws 
and delivery of economic services. 

Reducing  gender  gaps  in  voice,  whether 
within  society  or  in  households,  also  typically 
requires policies in multiple domains. Policies to 
improve female education can help. For societal 
voice, measures are needed to provide informa-
tion and change beliefs about women’s abilities 
as  political  and  corporate  leaders  as  well  as  to 
change norms that consider leadership to be a 
male job. For voice within the household, most 
important are policies to expand economic op-
portunities for women and to reduce biases in 
the legal system, enforcement of laws and access 
to  justice,  and  in  some  instances,  measures  to 
inﬂ uence norms. 

To effectively address gender inequalities that 
emerge  in  adolescence  and  early  adulthood,  it 
is necessary both to intervene early and in ways 
that  recognize  how  an  intervention  can  have 
impacts on various outcomes. For example, job 
training for an adolescent girl not only can im-
prove  her  access  to  employment  but  may  also 
delay pregnancy, which in turn can enable her 
to spend more time acquiring skills. 

The ﬁ nal part of this chapter shifts from the 
choice and design of policies targeted at reduc-
ing  gender  inequality  to  looking  at  how  and 
why the gender-differentiated impacts of poli-
cies that have other goals should be taken into 
account. We show how ignoring gender issues 
can  sometimes  make  these  policies  less  effec-
tive in achieving their objectives. And policies 
that  are  not  concerned  with  gender  equality 
can  often  be  designed  in  ways  that  improve 
gender outcomes. So, even where gender equal-
ity  is  not  the  stated  policy  objective,  gender 
may matter for policy design, illustrating how 
gender mainstreaming can be undertaken in a 
strategic way. 

POLICIES TO REDUCE GAPS IN 
HEALTH AND EDUCATION

Many  gender  gaps  in  education—and  some 
in  health—narrow  as  countries  grow  richer. 
For households, higher incomes relax the need 
to  choose  between  sons  and  daughters  when 
spending on basic education, health, and nutri-
tion. For countries, higher incomes permit the 
supply  of  services  in  these  areas  to  expand—
increasing not only the number of schools and 
health  clinics  but  also  their  accessibility.  And 
the  market  signals  that  typically  accompany 
growth and encourage the greater participation 
of women in the wage labor market also work to 
reduce gender gaps by raising the value of girls’ 
education.

But our analysis shows that two gender gaps 
in health and education persist even as incomes 
rise: excess female mortality at speciﬁ c periods 
in  the  life  cycle,  and  pockets  of  gender  disad-
vantage  in  education. Addressing  each  gap  re-
quires  better  service  delivery,  especially  to  the 
poor  and  other  excluded  groups;  that  in  turn 
requires strengthening the institutions respon-
sible for providing the services (colored in green 
in ﬁ gure 7.1).

290 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 7.1  Reducing gaps in endowments 

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

E N D E R EQUALITY

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

R

O

G

WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

For excess female mortality, it’s about 
ﬁ xing institutions 
As  the  World  Development  Report  2004  and 
others  have  shown,  improving  the  delivery  of 
public services is no small or simple task.1 The 
main challenge for all governments is ﬁ nancing 
expanded coverage while ensuring that the ser-
vices are provided efﬁ ciently and remain acces-
sible to poor people. 

Providing clean water and sanitation 
As chapter 3 showed, today’s rich countries re-
solved excess female deaths in infancy and early 
childhood between 1900 and 1930 by improv-
ing access to clean water and better sanitation. 
In general, water treatment at the point of use 
reduces diarrhea more than water treatment at 
the source, which is less effective because of the 
potential  for  recontamination.2  For  example, 
more than half of the water stored in household 
containers tested in Ethiopia showed postsource 
contamination.3 So, governments in rich coun-
tries  chose  to  provide  clean  water  at  the  point 

of use through piped delivery while improving 
sanitation in urban areas. And where water sup-
ply has been improved in developing countries, 
it has made a signiﬁ cant difference. In Argentina, 
improvements  in  water  supply  reduced  child 
mortality by 5 to 7 percent, with even larger ef-
fects in the poorest areas.4

The  Joint  Monitoring  Programme  of  the 
United Nation’s Children’s Fund and the World 
Health Organization noted that while access to 
improved  water  sources  rose  from  71  percent 
in  1990  to  84  percent  in  2008,  access  to  piped 
water  grew  more  slowly––from  39  percent  in 
1990 to 49 percent in 2008––with access in urban 
areas stagnating due to rapid population growth. 
Fewer than a ﬁ fth of the poorest 40 percent of 
Africans  now  have  safe  water  (either  piped  or 
through  standposts).5  In  this  situation,  house-
holds (especially, but not only, the poor) ﬁ nd it 
hard to accurately assess the risks and beneﬁ ts of 
each of the choices they must make concerning 
the puriﬁ cation of water. The problem is that the
default option for these households is generally 

 

Public action for gender equality 

291

bad  and  will  not  improve  unless  water  supply 
and sanitation institutions work better. 

Just  as  the  modes  of  delivering  clean  water 
and improving sanitation in urban and rural ar-
eas differ, so do the ways service delivery can be 
improved in these settings. For most low- and 
middle-income  countries,  substantially  more 
resources will be needed to increase access in all 
settings. For instance, a comprehensive analysis 
of infrastructure funding needs for Sub-Saharan 
Africa concluded that about $11 billion needs to 
be  spent  annually  on  clean  water  and  sanita-
tion needs—about 1.5 times the current level.6 
The  same  study  also  showed  that  addressing 
bottlenecks in capital spending, reducing oper-

ating inefﬁ ciencies, and improving cost recovery 
could yield more than a third of the necessary 
ﬁ nancing.

Enhancing  the  efﬁ ciency  of  the  institutions 
providing water and sanitation services requires 
appropriate regulations that recognize the ratio-
nale for government intervention while improv-
ing accountability to service users. In urban areas, 
water is provided through networks. So, efforts 
need to strengthen both the “short route” of ac-
countability (of the provider to service users) and 
the “long route” of accountability (of policy mak-
ers and politicians to service users and of provid-
ers to policy makers). Ways must also be found to 
keep water affordable for the poor (box 7.1).

BOX 7.1  Improving water supply: Dakar and Phnom Penh

Improving the provision of water services is a diffi  cult, yet achiev-
able goal that can lead to signifi cant reductions in child mortality—
and it is possible even in low-income settings, as the cases of Sene-
gal and Cambodia illustrate. Both these countries have been highly 
successful in improving water service delivery in major urban and 
periurban  areas.  Success  has  come  through  two  main  channels: 
increased  investment  and  complementary  measures  to  increase 
effi  ciency while preserving greater aff ordability for the poor. 

Since  the  mid-1990s,  substantial  improvements  have  been 
made in access to and quality of water in Dakar, home to more than 
half  of  Senegal’s  inhabitants.  Increased  production  capacity  and 
expansion of existing networks, including construction of approxi-
mately  97,000  new  social  connections  (subsidized  access  to  the 
poor), increased the proportion of people with access to water ser-
vices from 79 percent in 1996 to 98 percent in 2006—the highest 
coverage rate in Sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, water users experi-
ence fewer interruptions. 

In parallel, the Senegalese government took several measures 
to ensure services would be provided at aff ordable rates without 
compromising long-run fi nancial sustainability. The tariff  structure 
for  water  services  was  designed  specifi cally  with  this  trade-off   in 
mind, allowing for diff erent prices for domestic and nondomestic 
users,  and  imposing  higher  tariff s  on  those  users  who  surpassed 
specifi c quotas (for example, the well-off  who used water for gar-
dening).  These  tariff   schedules  were  incorporated  into  fi nancial 
models in the planning stages and post-implementation to moni-
tor progress toward fi nancial self-suffi  ciency. To bring down opera-
tional  costs,  the  day-to-day  water  supply  operations  were  trans-
ferred to a private company, which was also made responsible for 
billing and collecting payments for both water and sanitation ser-
vices.  To  encourage  provider  eff ort,  remuneration  was  directly 
linked to performance indicators such as the amount of reduction 
achieved  in  unaccounted-for  water  and  improvements  in  billing 
and collection effi  ciency. In 2006, the tariff  collection rate stood at 
98 percent, up from 80 percent in 1996, and water losses declined 
from 32 percent to less than 20 percent—a saving roughly equiva-

lent  to  the  water  needs  of  nearly  a  million  users—over  the  same 
period. Furthermore, since 2006 the Senegalese urban water sector 
has been able to cover its operational and maintenance costs with-
out direct government subsidies. 

In  the  late  1990s,  reform  in  Cambodia’s  water  sector  trans-
formed access to water in Phnom Penh, where approximately 20 
percent of the country’s population lives. In 1997, only half of the 
city’s population had access to piped water for an average of 12 
hours a day. Between 1997 and 2003, water production doubled, 
distribution networks were expanded by nearly 150 percent, and 
subsidized  connections  for  low-income  groups  mostly  living  in 
periurban areas were introduced. By 2010, over 90 percent of the 
population, including 3,800 poor households, had access to water 
24 hours a day. 

Similar to the Senegalese experience, reducing water losses and 
uncollected revenue and providing a tariff  structure that was aff ord-
able for the poor but that did not threaten long-run sustainability 
were critical to turning around the capital city’s ailing water sector. 
Cambodia  chose  a  diff erent  avenue  to  achieve  effi  ciency  gains, 
however; instead of focusing on public sector participation, it com-
bined increased investment in the public sector with adoption of 
new  technology.  Acquisition  of  a  fully  computerized  monitoring 
system enabled Phnom Penh’s water utility to reduce losses from 
unaccounted-for water from 57 percent in 1998—one of the high-
est rates in Asia—to 17 percent by 2003. The tariff  structure pro-
vided  subsidies  to  the  poorest  users  ranging  between  30  to  100 
percent of fees. The remaining tariff s were set to ensure long-run 
fi nancial  viability  and  were  reviewed  annually  to  determine  the 
necessary  increases  (although  the  signifi cant  reductions  in  water 
losses meant these tariff  increases were modest). Information tech-
nology was also employed to improve the management of account-
ing  data,  which  pushed  the  bill  collection  rate  to  100  percent  in 
2003,  up  from  89  percent  in  1997.  As  in  Senegal,  Phnom  Penh’s 
water  supply  authority  has  reached  fi nancial  autonomy,  and,  in 
2010, it was awarded the Stockholm Industry Water Award for excel-
lence in water management.

Source: World Bank Water Sector project documents.

292 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Improving  the  structure  of  contracts  and 
designing  and  enforcing  appropriate  regula-
tions for service providers is critical in improv-
ing the “long route” of accountability by sepa-
rating  providers  from  policy  makers.  In  some 
cases, the optimal approach may involve private 
participation.  For  example,  private  providers 
played  an  important  role  in  expanding  cover-
age of water supply in Manila from 67 percent 
in 1997 to 99 percent in 2009 and in realizing 
efﬁ ciency gains through lower water losses and 
operating costs.

Buttressing the short route of accountability, 
by increasing the inﬂ uence of users over provid-
ers, can be achieved by benchmarking, ensuring 
that standards of service are clear, and by charg-
ing for services. Cambodia enhanced this form 
of accountability by working through both large 
utilities and small providers (in smaller cities) to 
set up clear mechanisms for charging—install-
ing  meters  at  each  connection,  computerizing 
billing systems, and shutting down water supply 
to those who do not pay—as well as instituting 
complaint mechanisms for clients. 

It is important to charge for water services, 
but at the same time the services must remain 
affordable,  particularly  for  the  poor.  So,  subsi-
dies to some users may be needed to ensure that 
the cost of the service is covered. But two issues 
arise with providing subsidies. The ﬁ rst is how 
to target these subsidies so that they reach the 
poor and do not encourage excessive water use. 
Several  options  exist,  with  attendant  pros  and 
cons.  The  most  commonly  used  structure  is  a 
subsidy based on volume (where the subsidy is 
applied up to a certain volume). However, given 
that  the  rich  and  poor  do  not  consume  vastly 
different quantities of water, this subsidy usually 
ends  up  being  regressive—beneﬁ ting  the  well-
off  more  than  the  poor.  Geographic  targeting 
(as in Colombia) and means-based targeting (as 
in Chile) may provide better ways of targeting 
the  poor,  but  they  require  additional  data  and 
administrative capacity to work effectively. As a 
result, in Chile the targeting is done by an agency 
other than the water utility. Finally, targeting can 
take the form of providing subsidies for inferior 
levels of service––for example, providing subsi-
dies for standpipes but not for households that 
have a house or yard connection. The most ap-
propriate  targeting  mechanism  will  generally 
depend on the context, including the population 
that is not currently served, their socioeconomic 

proﬁ le, and the structure of the customer base 
of the utility. 

The second issue is how to pay for the sub-
sidy.  Cross-subsidization  (for  example,  from 
nonresidential  to  residential  customers)  is  one 
option.  Using  general  government  revenues  is 
another  option.  Ultimately,  the  best  ﬁ nancing 
mechanism will depend on the local context. 

In  rural  areas,  network  provision  of  water 
is feasible where population densities are high, 
as  in  parts  of  East  and  South  Asia  and  where 
community-managed  systems  are  common. 
Elsewhere,  including  in  much  of  rural  Asia 
and Sub-Saharan Africa, households provide for 
themselves  through  groundwater  and  surface 
sources. For community systems, local govern-
ments can make improvements. Uganda uses its 
extensive local networks for income tax collec-
tion to collect an additional small tax—placing 
it in a fund administered by the district council 
to pay only for major water repairs. 

Even where rural supply systems provide ac-
cess,  supply  is  often  spread  quite  thinly.  Poor 
households  are  typically  excluded,  and  many 
households continue to use other unprotected 
sources.  Many  villages  in  Bolivia,  Ghana,  and 
Peru have access, but the use of alternative un-
protected sources remains high—at 21 percent, 
23 percent, and 38 percent, respectively. Access 
to funding is often limited, and problems of ﬁ -
nancial sustainability remain pervasive, so even 
when systems are put in place, maintenance is 
problematic.

Sanitation  differs  from  water  in  that  indi-
viduals  and  households  are  affected  not  only 
by their own choices but also by the actions of 
others in their community. These “externalities” 
need to be taken into account in improving san-
itation in both rural and urban settings. That is 
particularly true for the treatment and safe dis-
posal of waste, where individuals’ willingness to 
pay for proper service is usually below its cost. 
Thus,  government  has  a  clear  role  in  setting 
standards,  regulating  provision,  and  possibly 
providing subsidies. In urban areas, strengthen-
ing  property  rights  including  the  recognition 
of informal settlements can help stimulate de-
mand  and  thus  individuals’  willingness  to  pay 
for sanitation services. On the supply side, en-
suring  that  communities  have  access  to  inde-
pendent providers can help improve services. 

The priority in rural areas and less dense ur-
ban  settings  is  to  raise  awareness  of  sanitation 

 

Public action for gender equality 

293

issues, change behavior, and boost demand. In 
Cambodia,  Indonesia,  and  Vietnam,  appeals 
to  people’s  sense  of  collective  community  re-
sponsibility  contribute  to  sustainable  sanitary 
behaviors. Some rural communities in Vietnam 
agreed  on  targets  for  better  sanitary  practices 
(building facilities, disposing waste), with local 
governments monitoring compliance and pub-
licizing the results over community radio. Some 
communities  in  Indonesia  initiated  competi-
tions by schools and found that the subsequent 
pressure from children to adopt “winning” be-
haviors were the main drivers of changes in hy-
giene practices.

Reducing maternal mortality
While  signiﬁ cant  progress  has  been  made  in 
reducing maternal mortality in the past twenty 
years,  global  progress  is  happening  at  a  pace 
far  short  of  that  needed  to  reach  the  Millen-
nium Development Goal of reducing maternal 
mortality by three-quarters. Certain regions lag 
behind. In Sub-Saharan Africa, a woman faces 
a  1  in  31  chance  of  dying  from  complications 
from pregnancy or childbirth; in rich countries, 
this  risk  is  1  in  4,300.7  Signiﬁ cant  disparities 
exist  within  countries  as  well.  In  Afghanistan, 
the overall maternal mortality rate of 1,400 per 
100,000 live births masks large variations—the 
rate is around 400 in Kabul but over 6,500 per 
100,000 live births in some remote rural areas.8
The  key  to  lowering  maternal  mortality  is 
to  provide  prompt  and  adequate  attention  to 
expectant  mothers. As  chapter  3  noted,  that  is 
easier said than done because of the number of 
links in the chain—for mortality to come down, 
the whole system needs to work. Women need 
attention before, during, and after childbirth so 
that the risk of potentially life-threatening con-
ditions can be mitigated or addressed in a func-
tioning hospital if necessary. Better institutions 
are  critical  because  they  mean  that  pregnant 
women and their families do not need to make a 
series of difﬁ cult decisions about what medical 
attention to seek, when, and where. Improving 
the institutions charged with providing mater-
nal health care means acting on many fronts. 

First, more resources are required to expand 
access  to  the  chain  of  services—especially  to 
front-line  service  providers—that  can  reduce 
maternal mortality. Recognizing that need, the 
global  community  in  2009  committed  an  ad-
ditional $5.3 billion to improve health care for 

mothers and young children. And early in 2011, 
a group of bilateral and multilateral aid agencies 
and private foundations launched a grant facil-
ity—the Grand Challenge for Development—to 
reduce maternal and neonatal mortality.

But as Malaysia and Sri Lanka illustrate, more 
money  is  not  always  the  critical  factor—both 
countries  dramatically  reduced  maternal  mor-
tality with fairly modest increases in spending. 
In  both  countries,  spending  on  maternal  and 
child health since the 1950s has never exceeded 
0.4 percent of GDP annually. Instead, they up-
graded the quality of the people delivering the 
chain of services. 

While  there  will  be  a  continuing  need  for 
 additional  health  workers,  especially  skilled 
birth attendants, coverage can also be increased 
especially  in  underserved  areas  by  drawing  in 
community-level providers and the private sec-
tor.  One  way  of  doing  this  is  to  delegate  many 
clinical tasks from higher-level health providers 
to mid- or lower-level providers. In rural India, 
the management of sepsis, typically done by phy-
sicians, is instead done by trained community-
based  health  workers  using  preassembled  anti-
biotic packages.9 Locating skilled health workers 
closer  to  those  who  lack  access  also  helps.  An 
example  is  Indonesia’s  Bidam  Di  Desa  (village 
midwife)  program,  which  trained  more  than 
50,000 midwives and placed them in rural areas 
throughout  the  country.  The  proportion  of  at-
tended  births  increased  signiﬁ cantly,  especially 
among the poorest rural residents.10 Technology 
can help provide these front-line service provid-
ers with assistance when they need it. Uganda’s 
Rural Extended Services and Care for Ultimate 
Emergency  Relief  program  uses  radios  and 
 walkie-talkies  to  connect  health  facilities,  am-
bulances, and midwives and to provide birth at-
tendants with a way to receive immediate advice 
from more senior medical staff.11 

Purchasing  services  from  private  providers 
can  also  be  a  cost-effective  alternative  to  the 
public provision of maternal health services. In 
Cambodia,  districts  in  which  nongovernment 
organizations  received  government  funding  to 

We need a clinic nearby and it should be open 
every day.

Rural woman, South Africa

“ ”

294 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

provide maternal health services showed greater 
improvements  in  antenatal  care  and  facility-
based  deliveries  than  those  with  services  pro-
vided directly by the government.12

Second,  maternal  health  service  providers 
have to be more responsive to expectant moth-
ers.  One  way  is  by  making  service  providers 
more  accountable  to  them.  For  accountability 
to  work,  users  need  not  only  information  on 
service  standards,  service  quality,  and  policies 
to  improve  them  but  also  some  way  to  act  on 
that information. In Uganda, community-based 
monitoring improved both the quality and the 
quantity of primary health care services.13 Com-
munities  became  more  involved  in  monitoring 
service providers, who then provided more ma-
ternal health services of higher quality. Waiting 
times fell, more professional care was given, and 
facility-based deliveries increased. 

For  maternal  health  services,  ensuring  that 
the long route of accountability works better is 
even more important: citizens need to be able to 
hold their political representatives to account for 
failures in service delivery, and the politicians, in 
turn, need to exercise more effective control over 
the service providers. Take Peru, where improv-
ing maternal health required not only the exten-
sion of coverage but also the right incentives for 
service providers and a citizens’ voice demand-
ing effective services loud enough to be heard by 
policy makers.14 Professional attention at deliv-
eries rose from 58 percent of births in 2000 to 71 
percent in 2004. A new health insurance program 
for the poor made direct payments to front-line 
providers  for  services  actually  provided  rather 
than allot additional budgetary resources to the 
health  ministry  to  distribute.  And  greater  par-
ticipation of citizens in inﬂ uencing policy design 
increased the responsiveness to client needs. 

Third,  the  ﬁ nancial  constraints  that  poor 
women face in accessing maternal health services 
need  special  attention.  One  way  is  to  provide 
poor women with cash transfers conditional on 
their seeking health-care services known to re-
duce maternal mortality. An example is India’s 
Janani  Suraksha  Yojana  program,  which  in-
creased the proportion of women delivering in 
the presence of a skilled attendant by around 36 
percent.15 Schemes  that  provided  vouchers  for 
antenatal  and  postnatal  care  and  institutional 
deliveries,  like  those  in  Bangladesh  and  Cam-
bodia, also increased the proportion of assisted 
deliveries and antenatal and postnatal visits.16 

Fourth, improving these institutions requires 
political  will,  because  maternal  health  services 
are often low on the political agenda (in contrast 
to, say, education). Honduras and Turkey show 
what  is  possible.  Honduras’  maternal  mortal-
ity rate in 1990 was stubbornly high—182 per 
100,000 live births—despite two decades of do-
nor-supported  reforms  to  reduce  it. When  the 
public  was  made  aware  of  this  high  mortality 
rate, the government (and the health minister) 
made  its  reduction  a  national  priority.  A  new 
program  emphasized  health  system  reforms, 
trained  traditional  and  formal  health  workers, 
established  maternity  facilities  for  high-risk 
mothers,  and  formed  private-public  partner-
ships. Donors ﬁ nanced the training and health 
infrastructure. By 1997, the maternal mortality 
rate had fallen to 108.17

Similarly,  Turkey’s  maternal  mortality  rate 
in  2000  was  70  per  100,000  live  births. A  new 
government capitalized on the political support 
that brought it to power and, in 2003, started a 
Health  Transformation  Program,  emphasizing 
institutional reform, client responsiveness, and 
a  focus  on  underserved  areas.  The  budget  for 
primary  health  care  and  prevention  in  under-
served areas rose by 58 percent, air ambulances 
were put in service for remote populations, and 
the health workforce was redistributed for better 
coverage in poor areas. Conditional cash trans-
fers  encouraged  attendance  at  prebirth  hostels 
for  pregnant  mothers  and  deliveries  in  public 
hospitals. By 2009, the maternal mortality rate 
was down to 19.8.18

Fifth,  efforts  to  reduce  maternal  mortality 
must work across sectors, going beyond a focus 
on only improving health systems and services. 
The successes of Malaysia and Sri Lanka in ad-
dressing  maternal  mortality  relatively  early  in 
their development support this point (box 7.2). 
Investments  in  infrastructure  (such  as  rural 
roads), attention to women’s education, efforts 
to increase training of maternal health provid-
ers,  and  investments  in  hospitals  all  combined 
to reduce maternal mortality dramatically and 
consistently.19

Reaching the excluded—Providing 
education to severely disadvantaged 
populations
The institutions that deliver educational services 
matter for gender equality as well. As chapter 3 
showed, the greater access to education accom-

 

Public action for gender equality 

295

panying  economic  growth  and  better  service 
delivery  has  gone  a  long  way  to  reducing  dif-
ferences between boys and girls in enrollments 
at all levels. And while poor learning outcomes 
persist in many countries and will require im-
provements  in  how  educational  systems  are 
managed, there are few gender gaps in them. But 
many groups in many low- and middle-income 
countries still remain underserved by education. 
Because these disadvantaged populations show 
the  largest  and  most  persistent  gender  gaps  in 
enrollments, reaching them is a clear priority for 
educational policy. 

These  severely  disadvantaged  populations 
can be sizable, sometimes making up entire sub-
regions or populous parts of countries (as with 
a broad swath of West Africa and rural Afghani-
stan) or communities within countries (as with 
the Roma in Eastern Europe). What marks them 
all  is  some  combination  of  extreme  poverty, 
remoteness,  and  social  exclusion  on  the  basis 
of ethnicity, race, or some other characteristic. 
And because gender gaps in educational access 
among  these  groups  persist  and  worsen  over 
time,  failure  to  address  them  will  lead  to  their 
perpetuation over time with poor and excluded 
girls and women consigned to “gender inequal-
ity traps.” 

Needed are solutions to address the speciﬁ c 
disadvantages that compound gender inequality. 
At one extreme would be local supply-side solu-
tions that go to the source of the compounding 
disadvantage  in  speciﬁ c  contexts.  For  instance, 
where distance is the key problem, especially for 
girls to get to school (as in rural Afghanistan), 
building more schools in remote areas can reduce 
gender gaps.20 Or if ethnicity is the key problem, 
recruiting teachers who speak the local language 
could be cost-effective. In other instances, there 
will need to be attention to speciﬁ c factors such 
as sexual abuse directed toward girls in schools. 
Such  customized  supply-side  measures  have 
the advantage of directly targeting the underly-
ing problem, but designing them is likely to be 
costly and time-consuming. Recent work from 
Pakistan  tells  a  complicated  story—for  high-
status girls, having to cross settlement boundar-
ies  is  a  constraint  on  enrollment.  But  for  girls 
from  lower  social  groups,  the  main  barrier  is 
attending  school  with  children  from  higher 
groups.21 So distance is the constraint that needs 
to be addressed by policy for the higher-status 
girls,  while  exclusion  needs  to  be  addressed 

BOX 7.2    Reducing maternal mortality: What Malaysia and 

Sri Lanka have done

Improving the delivery of maternal care is hard, but it can be done—even at 
relatively low income levels, as the experience of Sri Lanka and Malaysia show. 
From more than 2,000 deaths (per 100,000 births) in the 1930s, the maternal 
mortality ratio in Sri Lanka fell to about 1,000 by 1947, and then halved to less 
than  500  in  the  next  three  years.  By  1996,  it  had  fallen  to  24.  In  Malaysia,  it 
halved from 534 over the seven years from 1950 to 1957. Then, with a halving 
every decade or so, it came down to 19 by 1997.

To overcome the range of institutional obstacles that hamper the eff ective 
workings of health systems, Sri Lanka and Malaysia adopted integrated and 
phased approaches. And they did so with modest total public expenditures on 
health—1.8  percent  on  average—or  less  than  4  percent  of  GDP    since  the 
1950s. Health programs in both countries exploited synergistic interactions of 
health care with basic education, water and sanitation, malaria control, and 
integrated rural development—including building rural roads, which helped 
deal with obstetric emergencies. Financial, geographic, and cultural barriers 
to maternal care were addressed by making a front line of competent, pro-
fessional midwives widely available in rural areas, providing them with a reli-
able  supply  of  drugs  and  equipment,  linking  them  to  backup  services,  and 
improving communication and transportation. Simultaneously, facilities were 
strengthened  to  provide  obstetric  care  and  deal  with  complications.  Better 
organizational management improved the supervision and accountability of 
providers.  Area-specifi c  mortality  data  were  provided  through  monitoring 
systems so that empowered communities could hold political leaders account-
able, and national and subnational actors were forced to recognize the unac-
ceptability of every maternal death. Finally, both countries were strongly com-
mitted  to  improving  the  status  of  women—women  gained  voting  rights 
before or soon after national independence, and female education received 
special attention. 

Source: Pathmanathan and others 2003.

for  those  of  lower  status.  Designing  solutions 
crafted to the speciﬁ cs of each problem can be 
demanding and complex. 

Where adequate schools exist, simpler mea-
sures  work  to  increase  demand  by  providing 
parents  cash  transfers  conditioned  on  sending 
their daughters to school. While these transfers 
may not be targeted precisely at the underlying 
issues,  programs  in  Pakistan  and  Turkey  show 
that they can be effective, as discussed in chap-
ter 3. And they are easier to design in the short 
term.  The  Pakistan  program  also  shows  how 
such  cash  transfers  can  work  to  reduce  disad-
vantages other than income poverty that com-
pound  gender  inequality:  they  reduced  educa-
tional  attainment  gaps  for  girls  with  mobility 
constraints.  How  groups  are  targeted  is  criti-
cal to the efﬁ ciency of programs in closing the 
gaps, and using different targeting mechanisms 
within  a  country,  such  as  household  poverty 

296 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 7.3   Protecting men and women and boys and girls from 

income shocks

Shocks have gender-diff erentiated impacts. Whether they hurt men or women 
or girls or boys more depends on the nature of the shocks and, at the same 
time, the underlying structure of the local economy, as we saw in chapters 2, 3, 
and 5. The policy response to these shocks thus has been to draw on solid diag-
nostics that identify the relevant gender dimensions and then to design eff ec-
tive  safety  net  measures  that  target  those  gender  diff erences.  Interventions 
can take many forms, including cash transfers, food stamps, temporary subsi-
dies for basic needs (food, basic utilities, health, and education), and temporary 
employment (possibly combined with the active labor market programs dis-
cussed below). Moreover, given that shocks can have long-lasting and irrevers-
ible eff ects on the very young (0–3 years), particularly in low-income countries, 
interventions should be targeted at this group, including, for example, feeding 
programs and cash transfers to parents. 

Source: WDR 2012 team.

 indicators  or  community-based  mechanisms, 
may  help.  Similar  principles  also  apply  to  the 
design of safety nets to address gender differen-
tiated impacts of shocks (box 7.3).

FIGURE 7.2  Improving economic opportunities

POLICIES TO IMPROVE ECONOMIC 
OPPORTUNITIES

As chapter 5 showed, persistent gender gaps in 
earnings and productivity result from the fun-
damentally different experiences of women and 
men  in  accessing  economic  opportunities—
whether  in  wage  employment,  agriculture,  or 
entrepreneurship.

The  different  patterns  of  economic  activity 
for women and men emerge from the ways mar-
kets and formal and informal institutions work 
and how households respond. So, policies need 
to target the underlying determinants of access 
to economic opportunity. Chapter 5 highlighted 
time  constraints,  access  to  inputs,  and  market 
and institutional failures as priorities for inter-
vention. And because more than one factor may 
be at play, a package of interventions is typically 
needed (colored in green in ﬁ gure 7.2). 

This section looks at determinants of gender 
gaps in wage employment, agriculture, and en-
trepreneurship to illustrate the range of policy 

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

E N D E R EQUALITY

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

R

O

G

WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

 

Public action for gender equality 

297

options  and  what  is  known  about  their  efﬁ -
cacy from the experience of different countries 
across income levels. Following our framework, 
the  discussion  of  policies  works  successively 
through  constraints  that  come  from  informal 
institutions, the workings of markets, and for-
mal institutions. 

Informal institutions: Lifting the 
constraints on women’s time 
Constraints on women’s time are a major cause 
of their lower earnings and productivity (chap-
ter 5). These constraints come mainly from in-
formal  institutions—norms  and  beliefs  about 
who does housework and provides care within 
the home. Policies to address these constraints 
primarily work around these norms rather than 
try  to  change  them.  There  are  four  main  ap-
proaches:  providing  increased  access  to  child 
care,  improving  parental  leave  policies,  freeing 
up women’s time through infrastructure invest-
ments,  and  easing  women’s  access  to  markets 
through technology and transport. 

Increasing access to child care
Women  spend  more  time  on  child  care  than 
men—ranging  from  twice  as  much  in  Sweden 
to 4.6 times more in Ghana to 6 times as much 
in Pakistan.22 This greater demand on women’s 
time constrains their economic opportunities—
both because of the sheer quantity of time they 
have  to  devote  to  this  activity  and  because  it 
restricts the continuity of their participation in 
market work. Child care provides a way to relax 
this  constraint  on  women’s  time.  This  service 
can either be provided directly by the state (in-
cluding local governments) or by the private sec-
tor or nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), 
possibly with public subsidies and regulation. 

Evidence  on  the  effects  of  these  various 
forms of child-care policies comes mainly from 
the  high-income  economies  of  Europe  and 
North America,  and  middle-income  countries 
in Latin America. It is mixed on the impacts on 
the number of hours worked by women and on 
their labor force participation rates. In Colom-

bia, the Hogares Comunitarios program, which 
provides subsidies to designated homes turned 
into  community  child-care  centers,  signiﬁ -
cantly  increased  mothers’  participation  in  the 
labor  market  as  well  as  their  hours  worked.23 
In Argentina, the expansion of universal pub-
lic  school  facilities  increased  both  labor  force 
participation  and  hours  worked,  although  the 
magnitudes  differed  across  studies.24  In  low-
income neighborhoods in urban Brazil, access 
to  publicly  provided  child  care  signiﬁ cantly 
increased  the  maternal  employment  rate  but 
did not affect the number of working hours for 
those  already  employed  before  the  program’s 
introduction.25 In other settings, the effects of 
increased  access  to  or  reductions  in  price  of 
child  care  on  female  employment  rates  were 
minimal. In Norway, subsidized and universally 
accessible child care had only negligible effects 
on child care use and female participation.26 In 
Chile, the expansion of public day care centers 
had no impact on female labor force participa-
tion.27 And in the United States, the responsive-
ness of maternal employment to the availabil-
ity of free public day care varied across groups 
with, for instance, no impact for married moth-
ers of ﬁ ve-year-olds with no younger children 
but  large  impacts  for  single  mothers  of  ﬁ ve-
year-olds with no younger children.28

This  diversity  of  experiences  highlights  the 
need for policy design to identify those groups 
of  women  who  face  barriers  to  labor  market 
participation  because  they  lack  child  care  and 
to  understand  better  the  nature  of  these  con-
straints.29  Mothers  who  choose  not  to  partici-
pate in the labor market do so for diverse rea-
sons,  and  their  labor  responses  to  preschool 
programs will vary accordingly. The availability 
and  affordability  of  alternative  child-care  op-
tions also matter. If, for example, fairly cheap al-
ternatives already exist, subsidies to new child-
care programs may crowd them out, and labor 
supply will be unaffected. That was the case in 
Norway,  where  the  program  mostly  crowded 
out informal arrangements, thus imposing sig-
niﬁ cant  costs  while  failing  to  bring  meaning-

“

What will stop us from getting a job is having plenty of children and having nobody 
to mind them.

Young woman, Indonesia

”

298 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

ful  increases  in  overall  child  care  or  women’s 
participation in the labor force.30 The evidence 
from Brazil also suggests a similar crowding out 
of existing informal arrangements. 

Less  is  known  about  ways  to  address  the 
child-care  needs  of  women  who  work  in  the 
informal  sector  (especially  important  in  low-
income  countries)  and  in  rural  areas  more 
generally. Some programs, including those run 
by NGOs, provide guidance on how child care 
could be expanded for these groups. As chapter 
9 highlights, this is an important area for further 
innovation and learning.

In India, the NGO Mobile Creches is experi-
menting  with  different  models  for  providing 
child-care services for women employed in the 
rural informal sector and on public works pro-
grams. 31 Day-care facilities were set up around 
New Delhi on public construction sites in part-
nership  with  contractors,  who  provide  child-
care facilities in addition to sharing other costs. 
These centers responded to the expectation that 
women  would  represent  a  large  proportion  of 
those  taking  up  public  work  programs—for 
example, this ﬁ gure reached 80 percent at some 
sites.  The  day-care  programs  include  a  nutri-
tional component by providing meals during the 
day  and  tracking  nutritional  status  of  children 
over  time,  as  well  as  integrated  health  services 
(for  example,  immunizations,  regular  doctor 
visits). To provide access to child care to women 
working  in  the  informal  sector  in  resettlement 
colonies  in  Delhi,  Mobile  Creches  also  helped 
in the creation of both home-based centers and 
community-based programs by identifying and 
training local women to provide these services. 
Together  with  Pradan,  another  Indian  NGO, 
Mobile Creches also built a group of centers in 
remote rural areas in the states of Jharkhand and 
Bihar  following  discussions  with  local  women 
about  the  child-care  constraints  they  faced  in 
accessing  income-generating  activities  (speciﬁ -
cally,  yarn  production)  in  their  communities. 
These centers follow a community-based model, 
relying on employers as well as the broader com-
munity  for  their  management,  contribution  of 
food  materials,  and  training  and  selection  of 
teachers. 

Similar efforts have been undertaken in the 
Indian  state  of  Gujarat  by  the  Self  Employed 
Women’s  Association  (SEWA),  a  trade  union 
for poor self-employed informal sector workers. 
SEWA has set up day-care centers for its mem-

bers’  children  (up  to  age  six).  This  service  not 
only  provides  education  and  nutrition  for  the 
children but also reduces the work days women 
have to miss to take care of their children––es-
pecially important because few of them are sala-
ried workers.32

Employers can also provide day care. In ru-
ral areas, employer-provided day care is likely to 
work best where a large number of employees 
are  clustered  in  one  location,  as  in  the  case  of 
plantation agriculture. In Kenya, a large export 
coffee producer provides crèches and nurseries 
at each of its plantations to serve both regular 
and  seasonal  workers—a  practice  that  dates 
back to the 1950s.33

An option for publicly provided day care to 
informal  women  workers  is  to  either  lengthen 
the school day (particularly at grades where at-
tendance is only for half of a day) or to lower 
the age at which children enter the school sys-
tem.  Vietnam  implemented  the  former,  while 
the latter approach has been tried in a number 
of  contexts.  In  Israel,  the  government  offered 
free public preschool for children ages three and 
four. This resulted in a signiﬁ cant increase in the 
labor  supply  of Arab  mothers,  whose  children 
were previously less likely to be in any day care.34 
In Kenya, the government is expanding its early 
childhood  and  preschool  education  programs 
with the goal of providing access to all four-to-
ﬁ ve-year-olds throughout the country.35 

Improving parental leave policies
Three main factors determine the effectiveness 
of  parental  leave  in  opening  additional  labor 
market options for women. First is the question 
of who pays. In countries that offer only mater-
nity leave and the costs are borne by employers, 
maternity  leave  reduces  the  incentive  to  hire 
more women. That implies a role for public sub-
sidies or, alternatively, a requirement that ﬁ rms 
grant equal amounts of maternity and paternity 
leave. The second question is what proportion of 
regular wages to cover during the leave period. 
The more pay that is covered, the more leave in-
dividuals are likely to take. And because men ap-
pear to be more responsive than women to the 
coverage  of  earnings  during  leave,  one  way  to 
encourage men’s uptake of paternity leave is to 
cover a greater proportion of earnings. Finally, 
the length of parental leave matters. If it is too 
short, women are more likely to leave the labor 
force instead of taking leave. And if it is too long, 

 

Public action for gender equality 

299

employees  risk  losing  skills  and  experience. 
One solution to the latter is to allow some part-
time work during the leave period, as is done in 
Germany. 

Apart  from  its  impact  on  improving  wom-
en’s  labor  force  opportunities,  alternative  pa-
rental  leave  policies  will  also  differ  in  whether 
they  reinforce  social  norms  around  child  care 
or  try  to  shift  them.  Providing  maternity,  but 
not  paternity,  leave  can  enhance  the  prospects 
for  women  to  participate  in  economic  activity 
opportunities, but it risks reinforcing the norm 
that  women  are  the  primary  household  care 
providers. Such a policy is “incremental” in that 
it takes social norms as given and works around 
them. In contrast, providing both maternity and 
paternity leave and making paternity leave man-
datory likely will be “transformative”—by giving 
men incentives to take on more care duties, it at-
tempts to change the norms around care. This 
latter approach has been tried in some Northern 
European  countries.  In  Norway  and  Sweden, 
offering nontransferable paternity leave has in-
creased its uptake. Iceland’s approach has been 
to  offer  a  package  of  nine  months  of  parental 
leave (with 80 percent of wage replacement); the 
mother and father must each take three months 
and decide how to allocate the remaining three 
months.  Women  take  most  of  this  additional 
leave, but overall this policy has resulted in high 
paternity  leave  uptake  among  men  with  some 
promising changes in gender relations at home 
and in the workplace.36

Freeing up women’s time through 
infrastructure investments
Women also spend more time than men fetch-
ing water and gathering ﬁ rewood. For example, 
in rural Guinea they spend over three and a half 
times more fetching water, while in rural Ghana, 
women  spend  at  least  three  times  more  col-
lecting ﬁ rewood.37 These tasks, as well as other 
household  chores,  represent  a  signiﬁ cant  de-
mand on women’s time, reducing the time they 
have available for market work or leisure.

Electriﬁ cation  is  often  cited  as  one  way  to 
ease  the  demands  on  women’s  time.38  In  rural 
South Africa, it increased female labor partici-
pation by around 9 percent, mainly by reducing 
the  time  spent  on  domestic  tasks  while  in  Ni-
caragua,  it  resulted  in  a  signiﬁ cant  increase  in 
the likelihood that young rural women worked 
outside the home.39 Electriﬁ cation also reduced 

“

We know about the labor laws. About the 
protection of pregnancy. About ﬁ ring. 
Women are better today because of such laws. 

Woman, Dominican Republic

Women are faced with discrimination in case of 
pregnancy. Private company owners always rather 
employ men because they will have no maternity 
leave.

Woman, Serbia

”

the  time  spent  gathering  ﬁ rewood  in  Bhutan 
and increased free time in the evenings in Ban-
gladesh.40  The  increase  in  women’s  time  was, 
in some cases, at least partly matched by an in-
crease in male labor devoted to domestic tasks. 
For example, in Sri Lanka men engaged more in 
household  chores,  including  ironing,  after  the 
introduction of electricity.41

Improved  access  to  water  closer  to  house-
holds also releases demands on women’s time. A 
study from Pakistan, for example, showed that 
water sources closer to the home were associated 
with increased time allocated to market work.42 
Other evidence, however, suggests that the time 
saved is not necessarily used for market work; it 
sometimes increases leisure, thereby improving 
women’s welfare. A broad, cross-country study, 
for instance, did not ﬁ nd an association between 
proximity of water source and increases in mar-
ket work but did ﬁ nd a negative association with 
nonmarket work in some countries—thus indi-
cating  increased  time  for  leisure.43  Similar  re-
sults emerged from a recent randomized study 
of in-home versus standpipe water provision in 
urban Morocco—the gains in time were spent 
on leisure.44 More research is required to under-
stand the effects of improved water supply for 
women’s work outside their households, partic-
ularly in remote rural areas where water sources 
are more distant. 

Bringing women closer to markets and 
markets closer to women
Given the multiple demands on women’s time, 
making it easier for them to access markets will 
also help increase their economic opportunities. 
Improving roads and transport can help achieve 

300 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

this. Men and women use transport differently, 
however,  with  women  more  likely  to  walk,  for 
instance. Mindful of this difference, a project in 
Peru prioritized the repair and improvement of 
over 3,000 kilometers of rural pedestrian tracks. 
A survey of female beneﬁ ciaries found that 77 
percent of women were able to travel farther, 67 
percent  said  they  traveled  more  safely,  and  43 
percent reported that they were able to increase 
their  incomes.45  In  Bangladesh,  the  upgrading 
and expansion of rural roads led to increased la-
bor supply for both men and women and raised 
household incomes.46 

Markets can also be brought closer to women 
through the use of technology. Access to the In-
ternet  and  the  use  of  mobile  phones  can  help 
women get information about prices and con-
nect them with buyers. In India, a program run 
by  an  NGO,  the  Foundation  of  Occupational 
Development,  organized  groups  of  women  to 
market their products directly and increase their 
proﬁ t margins by providing them with access to 
cell phones and the Internet.47 Also in India, the 
SEWA trade facilitation center created an online 
outlet for women to sell textile and handicraft 
products  to  supplement  efforts  along  the  sup-
ply chain to improve quality and reduce deliv-
ery times. Of course, as highlighted in chapter 
6, gaps in women’s access to these technologies 
persist, and looking for ways to close them, as 
noted in chapter 9, should be a priority so that 
women  can  reap  the  gains  from  technological 
progress. 

Improving the working of markets
As discussed in chapter 5, markets can work dif-
ferently for women and men (“gender-differen-
tiated market failures”) because of information 
problems.  These  can  work  against  women  in 
two ways. First, prospective employers may be-
lieve that women workers are not as productive 
in some jobs or sectors precisely because so few 
women  work  in  them.  These  beliefs  reinforce 
their reluctance to hire women, perpetuating low 
female  participation  in  those  jobs,  which  may 
also be strengthened by actual discrimination by 
employers.  Women  farmers  and  entrepreneurs 
can face similar information problems in credit 
markets. Because women in most countries use 
credit less than men do, lenders have little or no 
information  about  women’s  potential  repay-
ment capacity and are unwilling to extend them 
credit even if they are creditworthy. And wom-

en’s lower ownership of assets in most parts of 
the world limits their ability to offer collateral.

Second, information about jobs and the pros-
pects for advancement within professions typi-
cally  exists  within  networks  that  are  gendered. 
This  situation  can  limit  women’s  participation 
and progress in occupations and sectors where 
they  are  underrepresented  while  encouraging 
them  to  concentrate  further  in  jobs,  such  as 
nursing, where they are already overrepresented 
(men  follow  similar  patterns,  seeking  work  in 
jobs in which they are already concentrated, such 
as  engineering).  So,  where  few  women  work, 
their numbers will increase only once a critical 
mass  is  reached.  Similarly,  gendered  networks 
also  may  limit  the  opportunities  for  women-
owned businesses to expand and diversify. 

Overcoming information problems in 
labor markets
Active labor market policies can address infor-
mation problems, especially with skills training 
and  wage  subsidies.48  Several  measures  of  this 
sort provide training; some also place individu-
als  in  new  jobs,  usually  temporarily,  to  allow 
participants to overcome information problems 
by  communicating  their  abilities  to  employers. 
Wage  subsidies  work  by  making  it  cheaper  for 
employers  to  experiment  with  hiring  women 
workers. 

Many of these policies were put in place in re-
sponse to economic downturns rather than with 
the explicit goal of improving women’s economic 
opportunities,  but  they  nonetheless  produced 
signiﬁ cant gains consistent with addressing the 
information problems facing women seeking to 
enter (or reenter) the labor market. 

Some of the early evidence comes from Ar-
gentina’s  Proempleo  program  of  wage  subsidy 
vouchers,  which  had  a  signiﬁ cant  impact  on 
employment but not income. Women beneﬁ ted 
more  than  men.49  In  Mexico,  the  PROBECAT 
program provided short-term vocational train-
ing. Female trainees with work experience were 
more likely to be employed within a year of com-
pleting the training, but the program increased 
monthly earnings only for men.50 

More credible evidence is needed on the im-
pacts of alternative active labor market policies 
in diverse low- and middle-income settings. An 
ongoing effort in Jordan systematically evaluates 
the efﬁ cacy of wage subsidies and skills training 
in  increasing  the  employment  of  women  col-

 

Public action for gender equality 

301

lege graduates (box 7.4), and the early results are 
promising.

A second set of policies uses afﬁ rmative ac-
tion programs, either voluntary or compulsory, 
to increase the entry of women into wage em-
ployment  and  their  advancement  on  the  job 
once they are employed. The public sector can 
take the lead in afﬁ rmative action—both in its 
human  resource  practices  and  in  its  contract-
ing. As the public sector hires more women, and 
women  advance  in  public  sector  institutions 
(and  enterprises),  the  information  that  public 
sector  managers  use  in  hiring  decisions  starts 
to change. It also demonstrates to potential pri-
vate sector employers that women can succeed 
in particular sectors and jobs. The public sector 
can also use the power of the purse to demand 
afﬁ rmative action from its contractors, by mak-
ing  a  certain  level  of  female  employment  and 
management a condition of eligibility for a gov-
ernment contract.

A clear lesson about afﬁ rmative action is that 
voluntary programs have limited effects, if any. 
To be effective, programs need to be mandatory, 
to  track  progress,  and  to  sanction  noncompli-
ance.51 Where mandatory programs have been 
implemented, as in the United States, the effect 
has  clearly  been  to  redistribute  wage  employ-
ment  from  men  to  women.  But  debate  con-
tinues  on  the  economic  efﬁ ciency  impacts  of 
such  policies.  In  theory  this  trade-off  is  clear. 
Gender-based quotas in labor markets can en-
hance efﬁ ciency by reducing discrimination and 
correcting  beliefs  about  women’s  potential  as 
employees. And  they  can  promote  female  em-
ployment  over  time  by  providing  role  models, 
overcoming  negative  stereotypes,  and  enhanc-
ing incentives for educational and other invest-
ments  by  women.  But  such  measures  can  also 
reduce efﬁ ciency if, in their application, less able 
women are selected and promoted. Over time, 
quotas  could  reduce  the  incentives  of  women 
to invest in education and training if they think 
they will be employed even with fewer qualiﬁ ca-
tions. Finally, over time, quotas can also gener-
ate the belief that female employees are under-
qualiﬁ ed and that they succeed only because of 
afﬁ rmative action.

Although  some  evidence  exists  for  each  of 
these impacts, the most comprehensive evidence 
comes from the United States.52 Overall, it indi-
cates that afﬁ rmative action in the labor market 
has had little or no adverse efﬁ ciency effects. The 

BOX 7.4   Catalyzing female employment in Jordan 

Despite  rising  educational  attainment,  labor  force  participation  rates  for 
women in the Middle East and North Africa remain very low. In Jordan, only 17 
percent of women ages 20–45 work, compared with 77 percent of men. This 
gap also holds among the more educated; and with community college gradu-
ates, it starts immediately on graduation and widens thereafter.  

These  low  rates  make  it  diffi  cult  for  new  graduates  seeking  to  enter  the 
labor market. Because relatively few women hold jobs, young women lack both 
role models to follow into employment and the networks to help them fi nd 
jobs. Employers, lacking experience with working women, may be reluctant to 
hire women if they believe women are less committed to staying employed.

The Jordan New Opportunities for Women (Jordan NOW) pilot program rig-
orously evaluates the eff ectiveness of two potential policies: short-term wage 
subsidies, and employability skills training.

Short-term wage subsidies give fi rms an incentive to take a chance on hiring 
young female graduates and an opportunity to overcome stereotypes through 
directly observing young women working for them. They can also give young 
women more confi dence to search for work and to approach employers. In the 
pilot, each voucher has a value equal to the minimum wage for six months.

Employability skills training augments the technical skills graduates learn in 
community  college  with  the  practical  skills  for  fi nding  and  succeeding  in 
employment.  Employers  often  say  recent  graduates  lack  interpersonal  and 
other basic job skills. So, students in the pilot program received 45 hours of 
instruction in team building, communications, presentations, business writing, 
customer service, resume writing, interviewing, and positive thinking.

Demand  for  these  kinds  of  policies  appears  to  be  strong.  Despite  low 
employment rates, the majority of recent female graduates want to work: 93 
percent say they plan to work  and 91 percent say they would like to work out-
side the house after they are married. Of those invited to attend the training 
courses,  62  percent  completed  them,  with  unmarried  women  more  likely  to 
attend. Those who began the courses gave them positive reviews, claiming the 
courses had given them much more confi dence to begin searching for jobs. 
Four  months  into  the  wage  subsidy  program,  about  a  third  of  those  using 
vouchers had found a job.

Early results from a midline evaluation suggest that job vouchers have sig-
nifi cant  employment  eff ects:  employment  rates  among  graduates  who 
received vouchers alone or vouchers plus training are between 55 to 57 per-
cent compared with 17 to 19 percent among those who received training alone 
or received neither training nor vouchers. In all groups, employment eff ects are 
higher for unmarried women. Financial empowerment (measured as the pro-
portion of women who have their own money and can decide how to use it) 
also increased signifi cantly for all who received either vouchers or training or 
both. Follow-up surveys will determine whether these employment eff ects of 
job vouchers are sustained in the longer term and also will focus on other mea-
sures of empowerment and changes in attitudes. It will also allow further inves-
tigation of the link between marriage and work, given the early fi ndings that 
married women are less likely to attend the training, less likely to use the vouch-
ers, and less likely to be employed.

Source: WDR 2012 team.

U.S. experience and that in other countries also 
indicates that some of the negative impacts can 
be addressed in two ways. First, afﬁ rmative ac-
tion policies should be temporary so that they 
do not come to be seen as entitlements. Second, 

302 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

“

Life will be very diﬀ erent if there is marketing 
assistance and credit for the products women can 
make at home.

Urban woman, India

”

employers  need  to  be  encouraged  to  improve 
their  recruitment  and  screening  processes  in 
tandem with the use of the quotas as well as to 
invest in on-the-job training. 

Where these labor market policies focus on 
speciﬁ c  sectors  or  occupations,  they  can  ad-
dress the information problems that arise from 
gendered networks. These measures could in-
clude  providing  information  about  the  wages 
and qualiﬁ cations for a given job or occupation 
or  for  advancement  within  a  profession  and 
engaging experienced female or male workers 
as  mentors  for  younger  workers  of  the  same 
(underrepresented) sex. 

Dealing with information problems for 
farmers and entrepreneurs
Microcredit schemes, in a variety of forms, are 
the most common way of addressing informa-
tion  problems  for  farmers  and  entrepreneurs. 
The  programs  originated  with  group  lending, 
such as Grameen Bank and others in its wake, 
where individuals (who typically lack collateral) 
band together to obtain a loan. The loans go to 
individuals, but the liability for repayment falls 
on the entire group. The size of the group can 
differ (Grameen typically has groups of 5 bor-
rowers  in  Bangladesh,  while  FINCA  (Founda-
tion  for  International  Community  Assistance) 
in Peru has groups of 10 to 50). The common 
characteristic  is  the  joint  liability  of  group 
members coupled with regular group meetings, 
which allow lenders to overcome the informa-
tion problem. 

Microcredit schemes have since evolved be-
yond  group  lending,  ﬁ nding  new  ways  to  deal 
with information problems. Banco Sol in Bolivia 
and  Bank  Rakyat  Indonesia  offer  larger  indi-
vidual loans to established (typically better-off) 
clients  who  begin  within  group  lending.  Such 
individual lending relies not on peer monitoring 
and social sanctions (as group lending does) but 
on incentives for repayment that threaten to ex-
clude borrowers who default from future loans.

The next stage in policy evolution is helping 
borrowers  to  exit  (or  even  skip)  microﬁ nance 
and go to larger formal sources of credit. The In-
ternational Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Women 
in Business programs shows how this step might 
be done. Recognizing that women are less likely 
to have credit records than men, and lower as-
set bases to draw on for collateral, the IFC works 
with large commercial banks in Africa to extend 
credit  to  female-owned  businesses.  Interven-
tions  include  developing  new  products  such 
as loans that are collateralized with equipment 
or based on cash ﬂ ow—as well as training and 
strategic assistance for the staff of ﬁ nancial insti-
tutions to help banks increase their numbers of 
woman clients. Initial experience shows an in-
crease in women entrepreneurs using ﬁ nancial 
services and taking out larger loans, with better-
than-average repayment (box 7.5).

Where  gendered  networks  hinder  women 
business  owners  and  farmers,  a  broader  set  of 
policies  is  needed.  For  business  owners,  both 
ﬁ nance and training for business development 
are critical. One example of the value of training 
comes from Peru, where credit was coupled with 
business  training  on  overall  business  strategy 
and managing the ﬁ rm. The women trained were 
more likely to separate business and household 
accounts, increasing revenues with less variabil-
ity over time.53 Other studies show more limited 
effects of training, but in at least one context the 
combination of ﬁ nance and enterprise training 
had a larger effect than each alone.54 In agricul-
ture, the analogous policy would include exten-
sion services in addition to support in accessing 
product markets, inputs, and ﬁ nance. 

Making formal institutions more 
evenhanded
Formal  institutions—laws,  regulations,  service 
delivery institutions, and the like—can work in 
ways  that  hinder  women’s  access  to  economic 
opportunities. Consider two sets of policy mea-
sures to address these obstacles: correcting dis-
criminatory laws and regulations, and redressing 
gender biases in the delivery of services––where 
either of these affects women as employees, en-
trepreneurs, or farmers.

Correcting discriminatory laws
The main biases in laws blocking economic op-
portunities for women come from labor regula-

 

Public action for gender equality 

303

BOX 7.5  Innovative approaches to expanding access to ﬁ nance for women and entrepreneurs

Financial institutions are recognizing that women, who account for 
half of all entrepreneurs, represent a large and underserved market 
opportunity.  Three  examples  here  show  how  innovative  thinking 
and fl exible business models can help overcome existing barriers to 
women’s access to credit and help fi nancial institutions develop a 
larger  female  clientele.  All  three  examples  emphasize  training, 
fi nancial  literacy,  and  new  products  and  processes  that  directly 
address women’s needs.

Leveraging the power of training and fi nancial innovation to 
promote access to the formal fi nancial sector—Access Bank’s 
and DFCU’s Women in Business programs. 
Access  Bank  in  Nigeria  and  Development  Finance  Company  of 
Uganda (DFCU) are among the largest banks in their countries. In 
2006–07, both banks were looking at ways to improve their market 
share  by  expanding  to  attractive  and  growing  market  segments. 
Nigeria  and  Uganda  have  very  dynamic  and  growing  women-
owned small and medium enterprises, and both banks were eager 
to capture this market but had no previous experience in how to 
do it. 

Access Bank and DFCU partnered with the International Finance 
Corporation  (IFC)  to  design  and  launch  Women  in  Business  pro-
grams  in  the  two  countries.  IFC  provided  an  initial  credit  line  for 
lending to women entrepreneurs and advisory services for imple-
mentation. The programs enabled Access Bank and DFCU staff  to 
off er  better  business  advice  to  women  entrepreneurs.  The  banks 
also  trained  women  clients  on  business  skills.  And  they  boosted 
their confi dence to approach the bank for credit services. 

In Nigeria, Access Bank staff  designed alternative collateral sys-
tems, including the pledging of jewelry and equipment and cash-
fl ow-based lending using assets, debentures, or bills of sales. 

In Uganda, DFCU also developed new products better aligned 
with the needs of women entrepreneurs, such as the Savings and 
Credit Cooperative Societies Loan. It targets registered associations 
and groups whose members have overcome the start-up phase of 

business  but  lack  the  conventional  securities  needed  to  secure 
 individual  business  loans  and  prefer  to  borrow  through  a  group 
approach. 

During  2006–09,  Access  Bank  disbursed  $35.5  million  and 
DFCU $16.1 million in loans to women entrepreneurs, while main-
taining a nonperforming loan ratio of less than 1.5 percent. Both 
banks’ portfolios also increased signifi cantly (Access Bank opened 
more than 1,300 new deposit accounts and 1,700 checking accounts, 
and DFCU created more than 1,800 new deposit accounts). Access 
Bank trained 650 women in business and management skills and 
DFCU 368. 

Access Bank replicated its model in The Gambia and Rwanda in 
2011, and other commercial banks in Nigeria and Uganda adopted a 
similar model. The Access Bank, the fi rst West African bank to be 
admitted to the Global Banking Alliance for Women, received the 
African  Banker’s  2007  Most  Innovative  Bank  award  and  the  Alli-
ance’s 2008 Most Innovative Bank of the Year award. DFCU followed 
suit, winning the Alliance’s 2009 award.

Using leasing to overcome existing barriers to access and 
promote graduation into the formal fi nancial sector—
Sero Lease and Finance in Tanzania. 
Customary law largely excludes women from owning land in Tanza-
nia  (and  many  other  countries).  With  a  predominantly  collateral-
based banking system, women are eff ectively excluded from loans. 
Sero Lease and Finance Ltd. (Selfi na), a women’s leasing and fi nance 
company,  went  into  microleasing  in  1997  to  enable  women  to 
acquire equipment for immediate use with a down payment and a 
fi nancial lease. Targeting 3,000 small and medium enterprises, it has 
a  zero  default  rate  and  a  99  percent  pay-back  rate,  with  average 
loan sizes of $500. 

The IFC brokered a $1 million loan from Tanzania’s Exim Bank to 
Selfi na and supported fi nancial literacy and business planning and 
management  training  for  female  clients.  As  of  October  2007,  150 
Selfi na clients had opened savings accounts. 

Source: International Finance Corporation.

tions and legislation and from laws that confer 
property rights, especially over land.

Labor Laws
Beyond the fundamental step of legislating non-
discrimination  on  the  basis  of  gender  in  em-
ployment practices, the policy priority in many 
countries should be to revisit the limits (includ-
ing outright bans) on part-time work. Such re-
strictions discriminate against women workers 
who  cannot  consider  full-time  work  because 
they bear a disproportionate share of household 
and  care  work.  Relaxing  these  prohibitions 
would give women more opportunities for paid 
employment. In Argentina, for example, remov-

ing the ban on part-time contracts in the formal 
sector led to a signiﬁ cant shift of women with 
children  from  part-time  work  in  the  informal 
sector to part-time contracts in the formal sec-
tor.55 So, the higher informality of female em-
ployment was a consequence not of discrimina-
tion in the formal labor market but of the ban 
on part-time contracts in the formal sector. 

Rather  than  restrict  part-time  work,  some 
countries  have  legislated  greater  ﬂ exibility  in 
work arrangements. Sweden guarantees parents 
of  children  under  age  eight  the  right  to  work 
reduced  hours  in  the  same  job  with  the  same 
pay,  increasing  women’s  labor  force  partici-
pation.56 It also reduces the risk of reinforcing 

304 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

occupational  segregation.  High  levels  of  part-
time  work  by  women  in  developed  countries 
points to the demand for such arrangements. 

Property Laws
Laws  that  determine  property  rights  and  con-
trol over resources within marriage—including 
many  aspects  of  family  law  (governing  mar  -
riage,  divorce,  and  inheritance)  as  well  as  land 
laws—are particularly important for women en-
trepreneurs and farmers. Reforms in family law 
in many developing countries aim at eliminating 
differences in how they treat women and men. 
In the past 15 years, Lesotho, Namibia, and South 
Africa abolished provisions that recognized the 
husband as head of household in civil marriages, 
enhancing  the  wife’s  ability  to  enter  contracts, 
register  property  in  her  name,  and  administer 
the joint property.57 Ethiopia reformed its family 
law in 2000—raising the minimum age of mar-
riage  for  girls,  eliminating  a  spouse’s  ability  to 
deny  permission  for  the  other  spouse  to  work 
outside the home,58 and requiring both spouses 
to agree when administering marital property. 
The impacts of such reforms can be signiﬁ -
cant. The ﬁ rst phase of Ethiopia’s family law re-
form shifted women’s economic activities toward 
occupations that involve higher skills, full-time 
work, and work outside the home.59 Changes in 
inheritance laws that gave equal rights to daugh-
ters  in  some  South  Indian  states  increased  the 
likelihood that women inherited land.60

Providing  for  joint  ownership  of  land  in 
marriage increases women’s ability to use land 
in accessing economic opportunities. But since 
it may be costly for women to get their share of 
the land in the case of divorce, even with joint 
ownership under marriage, a better way to en-
sure women’s land rights is mandatory joint land 
titling (which would have the added beneﬁ t of 
protecting a wife’s rights in the event of her hus-
band’s death). In two regions in Ethiopia where 
land certiﬁ cation involved the issuance of joint 
titles to both spouses, women’s names appeared 
on more than 80 percent of all titles, four times 
the 20 percent in the region where the certiﬁ cate 
was issued only in the name of the household 
head.61 (The discussion of agency, below, looks 
at how changes in property rights can also in-
crease women’s voice within households.)

Addressing biased service delivery
The main service delivery biases against wom-
en’s  access  to  economic  opportunity  in  many 

countries come from the way government land 
distribution and registration schemes and agri-
cultural  extension  agencies  work.  These  biases 
can be addressed in a variety of ways. 

First, service providers could be required to 
target  women  explicitly  and  additionally.  The 
Agricultural  Technology  Management  Agency 
in India targeted women in Orissa to set up self-
help  groups  in  conjunction  with  community 
organizations to provide agricultural extension. 
These  groups  led  women  to  diversify  their  ag-
ricultural  income  sources.62  The  principle  of 
focusing on women also applies when the state 
is (re)distributing resources such as land. Redis-
tribution programs that target the head of the 
household  will  not  serve  women  well,  because 
most heads of household are men (see chapter 
4).  Instead,  the  government  could  issue  joint 
titles  to  land  distributed  by  the  state,  either  at 
the  time  of  distribution  (as  is  the  law  in  Bo-
livia, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Paraguay), or later 
when property rights are registered and titles is-
sued (as has been the experience in Bolivia, for 
example).63 Alternatively, such programs could 
give men and women, individually, equal shares 
of the distributed land. The law alone might not 
be enough, however, and governments may have 
to actively engage to ensure that women receive 
their land, as was the case in South Africa where 
47 percent of the beneﬁ ciaries under one phase 
of  land  redistribution  were  women.64  To  in-
crease women’s access to land markets—where 
they are underrepresented—a number of NGOs 
have been organizing groups of women to lease 
or purchase tracts of land. Such is the case for 
BRAC  (Bangladesh  Rural  Advancement  Com-
mittee) in Bangladesh and the Deccan Develop-
ment Society in India.65 

Second,  the  power  of  women  can  be  en-
hanced within the service delivery organization, 
including  in  setting  priorities.  For  agricultural 
extension,  women  could  be  put  in  decision-
making positions at the Ministry of Agriculture. 
In Ethiopia, local land committees were required 
to have at least one female member, resulting in 
their participation in land registration.66 

Third, technology can be used to expand the 
reach of services to women. An example is the 
Kenya Farmer Helpline, which was introduced 
in 2009 by Kencall, Kenya’s largest call center, to 
provide free advice to small-scale farmers. Call 
center operators provide expert advice in vari-
ous  local  languages  on  a  range  of  agricultural 
practices such as controlling pests, raising live-

 

Public action for gender equality 

305

stock and poultry, harvesting and marketing of 
products, connecting to local markets, and rais-
ing capital. The project follows a demand-driven 
model, in which call content and caller proﬁ les 
are stored and the database then used to ensure 
operators  develop  expertise  on  the  most  fre-
quent or pressing issues encountered. Although 
the impact on yields has not yet been evaluated, 
nearly half of the 30,000 Kenyan farmers reached 
by  the  program  are  women—a  much  higher 
fraction  than  those  reached  through  standard 
agricultural extension services. 

Fourth,  improved  monitoring  can  inform 
policy. Numbers can help tell the story: for in-
stance, the number of female clients served by 
agricultural  extension  agents  as  a  percent  of 
overall female farmers.

Finally,  female  users  of  the  service  can  be 
given information about the level of service they 
are due. This step can be aided by building the 
collective  element  of  demand—for  example, 
supporting  women’s  farmer  organizations  or 
women’s business organizations.

Because  solid  evidence  on  the  effectiveness 
of each of these and the best way to implement 
them  is  patchy,  further  work  is  needed  to  de-
velop a wider repertoire of programs proven to 
work in a variety of contexts. 67

POLICIES TO IMPROVE WOMEN’S 
AGENCY

Chapter 4 showed that women’s agency remains 
constrained both in society and in the household 
even as countries get richer. And the most signif-
icant shortfalls relate to women’s voice. Women 
are  underrepresented  in  decision-making  bod-
ies both in politics and in social and economic 
spheres  such  as  the  judiciary,  the  corporate 
world, and trade unions. And women’s voice in 
the household remains limited in many settings 
and is evident particularly in their lack of control 
over household resources and family formation 
and in the high incidence of domestic violence. 
At the societal level, constraints on women’s 
voice  stem  from  a  combination  of  factors.  So-
cial norms that associate leadership with being 
a  masculine  activity  may  contribute  to  widely 
held  beliefs  that  women  are  unable  to  lead  ef-
fectively or that they should not lead at all. Lack 
of information about women’s abilities as lead-
ers and the absence of women leaders may bias 
beliefs about their performance. The gendered 

networks in politics and other professional set-
tings  also  limit  women’s  leadership  prospects. 
And, as is the case for economic opportunities, 
norms  around  care  and  housework  limit  the 
time  available  to  women  to  invest  in  seeking 
these positions. 

The  muted  voice  of  women  within  their 
households  reﬂ ects  the  combined  inﬂ uence 
of their access to economic opportunities, the 
nature  of  social  norms,  the  legal  framework, 
and the enforcement of laws. For control over 
household resources, key determinants are ac-
cess  to  economic  opportunities  and  the  legal 
framework—particularly  rights  over  property 
within  the  household  as  reﬂ ected  in  family, 
land,  and  inheritance  laws.  For  domestic  vio-
lence,  social  norms  and  the  content  and  en-
forcement  of  laws  play  important  roles.  And 
for fertility, norms and bargaining power plus 
service delivery are critical factors. 

These  limits  on  the  societal  and  domes-
tic  voice  of  women,  therefore,  reﬂ ect  the  ways 
in  which  formal  and  informal  institutions  are 
structured  and  how  they  interact  with  each 
other. So, policies need to target these determi-
nants. As with economic activities, a combina-
tion of interventions may be needed in any spe-
ciﬁ c context (colored in green in ﬁ gure 7.3). 

In the following, we look at how policies that 
directly address several of these constraints can 
increase  women’s  voice  in  society  and  in  the 
household.  These  policies  supplement  some 
of those discussed earlier in this chapter in two 
respects. First, policies that improve female edu-
cation can be important in exercising agency—
ranging  from  literacy,  which  helps  people  un-
derstand their rights, to higher education, which 
increases  their  ability  to  participate  in  political 
life. Second, policies that expand women’s eco-
nomic opportunities, including by addressing the 
impacts of norms around care and housework, 
can also foster agency, particularly by increasing 
women’s control over household resources.

Increasing women’s societal voice
Policies aimed at increasing women’s participa-
tion in societal institutions can do so by address-
ing the information problems or the underlying 
beliefs  that  women  make  worse  leaders  than 
men. Forcing a departure from norms and im-
proving information (to voters and sharehold-
ers, for instance) are likely to be the most feasible 
options. In practice, imposing quotas in politics 
and on corporate boards has proved helpful.

306 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

FIGURE 7.3  Improving women’s agency 

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

E N D E R EQUALITY

G

ECONOMI
C

OPPORTUNITIES

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

R

O

G

WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

Political representation
Quotas,  the  most  common  way  of  increasing 
the representation of women in formal politics, 
take different forms. Political parties can volun-
tarily  commit  to  including  a  given  number  of 
women candidates on electoral lists (voluntary 
party  quotas);  a  certain  fraction  of  candidate 
positions can be reserved for women, often with 
conditions  on  the  position  of  women  on  the 
lists  themselves  (candidate  quotas);  or  a  share 
of  legislative  slots  can  be  reserved  for  women, 
for which only female candidates can compete 
(reserved seats). Among countries with gender 
quotas, 61 percent have voluntary party quotas 
(predominantly in Western Europe), 38 percent 

“

Women have the right to become 
town chiefs.

Adult man, Liberia

”

have candidate quotas (largely in Latin America 
and in part of Africa), and 20 percent have re-
served seats (mostly in South Asia and part of 
Africa).68 

The form that is best for a country depends 
on the political system. For example, reserving 
individual  seats  for  women  is  not  feasible  in 
proportional  representation  systems,  and  vol-
untary  party  quotas  may  work  when  parties 
have  strong  leadership  and  internal  discipline. 
Moreover,  the  detailed  design  of  quotas  and 
their enforcement is key. In Spain, where posi-
tions on the ballot are in alphabetical order for 
elections to the Senate, parties tended to choose 
women  with  last  names  that  put  them  lower 
on the ballot and thus were less likely to win a 
seat—demonstrating the need for more careful 
design on where women’s names were to appear 
on the ballot.69 In France, some political parties 
preferred to pay ﬁ nes rather than comply with 
quotas  in  national  elections,  highlighting  the 
importance  of  enforcement  mechanisms  that 

 

Public action for gender equality 

307

provide strong sanctions for noncompliance—
both through signiﬁ cant ﬁ nancial sanctions and 
through mechanisms to reject lists that do not 
comply with the quotas, as in the case of Costa 
Rica or municipal elections in France. 

In  addition,  the  broader  picture  has  to  be 
kept in mind when designing quotas for politi-
cal  representation.  Mandatory  quotas  circum-
scribe part of the democratic process, and this 
interference has to be balanced against the need 
to  redress  a  persistent  inequality.  One  option, 
used for local governments in India, is to imple-
ment quotas on a rolling basis—with a different 
set  of  seats  chosen  for  reservation  in  different 
elections over time. And as with all afﬁ rmative 
action policies, it can help to specify a clear goal 
or  time  period  up  front. A  ﬁ nal  consideration 
is to think carefully about the structure of the 
reservation.  Designating  particular  seats  for 
women (perhaps even without assignment to a 
particular constituency) runs the risk of creat-
ing “token” women’s seats, which will be signiﬁ -
cantly less effective. 

Quotas can increase women’s representation 
signiﬁ cantly.  Following  the  imposition  of  can-
didate quotas, the representation of women in 
parliament jumped from 16 to 22.6 percent in 
Mexico and from 6.7 to 17.5 percent in Macedo-
nia. With the implementation of reserved seats, 
the proportion of women in parliament jumped 
from 0.6 to 10.8 percent in Morocco and from 
1.3 percent to 5.5 percent in Jordan. 

Quotas can have effects in other dimensions 
as  well,  but  because  countries  pursuing  other 
policies to increase gender equality are probably 
more likely to also put in place quotas for wom-
en’s political participation, assessing the impact 
of the quotas alone can be difﬁ cult.  Local gov-
ernment in India is an exception because reser-
vations  were  assigned  randomly—with  several 
clearly  measurable  effects  on  women’s  voice 
in politics. First, given that this quota required 
women  to  hold  the  ofﬁ ce,  more  women  were 
elected.  Second,  after  the  reservations  were  re-
moved as a result of rotations, women were still 
elected in higher percentages than they were in 
communities  with  no  reservation.70  And  men 
favorably  changed  their  opinion  of  the  poten-
tial of females as leaders.71 So, an initial push of 
forced female representation caused voters, par-
ticularly men, to update their information, over-
coming  the  information  problem  that   appears 
to  be  one  of  the  root  causes  of  female  under-

representation.  However,  in  Pakistan,  quotas 
that  violated  strong  social  norms  have  led  to 
increased discrimination or even persecution of 
women.72

In  many  places,  these  political  reservations 
also  have  had  broader  positive  effects.  Where 
seats were reserved for women, female citizens 
were more likely to participate in village meet-
ings and to receive a constructive response from 
those in power.73 When women were elected to 
head  local  governments,  their  public  invest-
ment decisions were more in line with female 
preferences.74 And  other  dimensions  of  wom-
en’s agency saw improvements as well. For ex-
ample, areas with reserved seats for women saw 
a substantial increase in the number of reports 
of crimes against women, with a concomitant 
increase in arrests.75 Quotas and other similar 
mechanisms can also be effective in enhancing 
women’s  voices  in  peace  and  postconﬂ ict  re-
construction processes with attendant beneﬁ ts 
(box 7.6).

More generally, sustained change will happen 
only when female representation increases at all 
levels—through  quotas  and  otherwise.  And  a 
critical ingredient in sustaining this representa-
tion  includes  providing  capacity  building  and 
mentoring for female party members, emerging 
candidates, and newly elected women, as well as 
building  networks  among  female  politicians—
both within and across countries. 

Chapter 4 also highlighted that women have 
been more successful in achieving greater repre-
sentation in less organized institutions such as 
women’s  producer  organizations  and  informal 
labor  unions.  Policies  to  promote  greater  free-
dom  of  association  and  facilitate  participation 
of such groups in decision making can spur this 
form of voice (as discussed more in chapter 8). 
Increasing  women’s  participation  at  other  lev-
els  of  government,  including  in  administrative 
agencies in charge of implementing laws or in 
the  judiciary,  is  also  critical,  as  discussed  else-
where in this chapter. One example of this type 
of policy comes from Colombia, which requires 
that 30 percent of all political appointees be fe-
male, including in the cabinet. 

Economic representation
In  the  private  sector,  some  governments  have 
imposed  corporate  board  quotas.76  Similar  to 
political  quotas,  the  corporate  quotas  are  de-
signed to increase female representation, which 

308 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 7.6    Including women’s voice in peace and postconflict 

reconstruction processes

Women’s representation in peace and reconstruction processes is extremely 
low. A review of 24 peace processes that took place between 1992 and 2010 
reported female representation to be as low as 2.5 percent of signatories and 
7.6  percent  of  the  negotiating  parties.  Another  review  of  peace  negotiation 
processes  showed  that  only  about  7  percent  of  government  delegates  were 
women. 

Although systematic evidence of the impacts of women’s participation in 
peace and reconstruction is limited, recent experience from a number of post-
confl ict  situations,  documented  by  UNIFEM  (United  Nations  Development 
Fund for Women), points to the likely gains from giving women more voice in 
the process. In Burundi, Guatemala, Sudan (Darfur), and Uganda, when more 
women participated in the process and their inputs were channeled into deci-
sion  making,  gender-related  issues  such  as  support  to  victims  of  sexual  vio-
lence during the confl ict, services for widows and displaced households, and 
health  and  education  services  were  more  likely  to  make  it  onto  the  policy 
agenda.  In  postapartheid  South  Africa  and  some  Latin  American  countries 
(such as Guatemala and Colombia), women’s active participation shifted public 
spending toward social and economic programs. Women’s experiences (and 
typically greater vulnerability) during confl ict are also likely to shape their pri-
orities for the reconstruction agenda. Involving civil society and increasing the 
links between them and political leaders, as was done in Liberia and Rwanda in 
the postconfl ict transition and in postapartheid South Africa, helped align pol-
icy priorities with the needs and concerns of women.

While  more  work  is  needed  to  look  at  the  effi  cacy  of  diff erent  ways  of 
enhancing women’s voice in peace and postconfl ict processes, experience sug-
gests that two mechanisms may be worth considering. First, as with political 
representation,  using  quotas  for  women  can  help  increase  representation, 
especially at the outset of the process. Second, creating thematic units to deal 
with gender issues, as was done in Colombia’s National Commission for Repara-
tion and Reconciliation, can ensure that these concerns receive due attention.

Sources: Anderlini 2007, 2010; Fisas 2008; UNIFEM 2010; World Bank 2011.

in turn can change perceptions of women’s per-
formance as leaders and shift attitudes and so-
cial norms by breaking down gender stereotypes 
of women in positions of power.

In Norway, the only country where legislated 
corporate quotas are now fully effective, female 
representation on boards has increased.77 Some 
studies from the United States provide sugges-
tive analysis that this type of increase translates 
into  a  greater  proportion  of  women  in  other 
high-level  positions  within  companies.  In  one 
study,  a  greater  share  of  female  board  mem-
bers  in  the  previous  year  was  associated  with 
an increase in the share of women in other top 
positions in the following year, suggesting that 
the impact runs from boards to managers and 
not the reverse.78 A similar study ﬁ nds a strong 

positive association between the share of female 
board  members  and  women’s  presence  among 
top executives and top earners.79

Increasing  the  share  of  female  board  mem-
bers  could  also  improve  ﬁ rms’  performance. 
Greater  gender  diversity  on  boards  is  associ-
ated  with  better  indicators  of  organizational 
excellence.80 And there is a positive association 
between board diversity and ﬁ rms’ ﬁ nancial re-
turns.81 But none of these studies employs meth-
ods  that  can  accurately  identify  the  impact  of 
board diversity on ﬁ rm outcomes. Moreover, the 
two studies that present the most rigorous evi-
dence ﬁ nd the opposite result: corporate board 
quotas  led  to  poorer  ﬁ nancial  performance  in 
the short run in Norway.82 Nevertheless, one of 
the Norwegian studies also ﬁ nds that these losses 
resulted from the younger age and lack of high-
level  experience  of  new  board  members  rather 
than from their gender.83 Taken together, these 
results  suggest  that  further  work  is  needed  to 
fully understand the links between greater rep-
resentation of women on corporate boards and 
ﬁ rms’ performance. 

Enhancing women’s voice within 
households
The muted voice of women within their house-
holds  reﬂ ects  the  combined  inﬂ uence  of  their 
access to economic opportunities, the nature of 
social norms, the legal framework, and the en-
forcement of laws. Some of the policies aimed 
at increasing women’s economic opportunities 
have been discussed earlier, and this section fo-
cuses  more  on  the  laws  that  affect  households 
(including their enforcement) as well as on the 
societal  norms  that  impinge  on  households. 
Of the two, the laws and their enforcement are 
more  directly  amenable  to  public  action,  and 
that is the main focus here. Although such legis-
lative change will not by itself shift social norms, 
experience  shows  that  removing  or  amending 
discriminatory laws is an essential part of that 
process over time. And changes in law have to 
be accompanied by other interventions to make 
them effective.

Reconciling multiple legal systems
Before  discussing  speciﬁ c  laws,  it  is  impor-
tant that the overall system function well even 
where, as in many countries, multiple legal sys-
tems exist. Customary law and religious law are 
sometimes  part  of  the  formal  state-sanctioned 

 

Public action for gender equality 

309

legal framework, and, even where these are not 
ofﬁ cially  recognized,  they  continue  to  matter 
in determining women’s capacity to access and 
control assets. So, where there is a constitutional 
nondiscrimination  clause  (as  in  the  major-
ity of constitutions in the world), the ﬁ rst step 
is to make sure that all sources of law are gov-
erned by it. Nondiscrimination needs to be the 
benchmark for the validity for all laws, particu-
larly those determining the control of resources 
within  households  and  families.  For  example, 
Kenya  recently  removed  the  exemption  from 
nondiscrimination  that  the  constitution  had 
previously granted to customary family and in-
heritance law.

Ensuring that all laws conform to the nondis-
crimination clause will also enhance the ability 
of citizens to challenge laws as uncon stitutional. 
Such challenges, initiated by alliances of wom-
en’s groups and other stakeholders, have over-
turned  statutory  laws  favoring  male  heirs  in 
Nepal and Tanzania. A key is ensuring that the 
legal  system  provides  for  constitutional  chal-
lenges and also increases women’s access to the 
justice system. 

In  reconciling  multiple  legal  systems,  cus-
tomary  law  should  not  be  ignored.  It  is  the 
everyday reality for many men and women, so 
recognizing its impact and potential for change 
is both pragmatic and constructive. Customary 
law is more familiar and accessible. It uses me-
diation rather than an adversarial model. And it 
offers  greater  legitimacy  particularly  in  fragile, 
postconﬂ ict  countries  where  the  formal  sys-
tem is nonexistent or decimated. In Botswana, 
where  customary  law  and  customary  courts 
are  formally  recognized,  women  have  become 
tribal  chiefs,  making  decisions  and  breaking 
centuries of tradition. Removing gender biases 
in the customary system through sensitization, 
encouraging  greater  participation  by  women, 
and promoting the system’s values, such as the 
protection  of  women,  should  thus  be  encour-
aged.  And  forging  links  between  the  informal 
and formal systems can help bring about greater 
parity throughout the legal system. 

Control over household resources
While greater economic opportunities can pro-
vide a vehicle for increasing women’s resources 
and their control over these resources, laws are 
a direct way to ensure more control. Modifying 
aspects of family law that govern marriage, di-
vorce, and provisions of land laws that are dis-
criminatory should be a priority. 

Laws over property within marriage
The main inequities in this arena are those that 
concern the rights of husbands and wives to de-
cide on the use and disposition of matrimonial 
property.  Despite  recent  reforms,  many  such 
laws remain on the books of countries, particu-
larly in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East 
and North Africa. Fifteen of the 47 countries in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, still have laws 
that give husbands greater control over marital 
assets. Laws that vest control over marital prop-
erty in the hands of the husband also remain in 
force in Chile. 

But  progress  is  possible.  Ethiopia  reformed 
its family law in 2000, eliminating the husband’s 
ability to deny his wife permission to work out-
side  the  home  and  requiring  both  spouses  to 
agree in administering family property. The ﬁ rst 
phase of these changes contributed to a shift in 
women’s economic activities toward work out-
side the home, full-time work, and jobs requir-
ing higher skills.84 Morocco reformed such laws 
in  the  1990s,  and  in  2004,  the  new  Moroccan 
Family  Code  completely  eliminated  references 
to the husband as the head of the household. 

Registering marriages
What about the many women who do not have 
a  registered  and  legally  recognized  marriage? 
To  bring  more  women  into  the  protection  of 
beneﬁ cial  statutory  regimes,  civil  registration 
procedures  should  be  kept  simple  and  locally 
accessible with low costs, as in Rwanda. An al-
ternative is to legally recognize customary mar-
riages or consensual unions and confer rights on 
women in these relationships, as in South Africa, 
where women in monogamous customary mar-

“

This law has assisted us. . . . When you leave the man’s home, you divide the property 
and go with something to begin your new life.

Adult woman, Tanzania

”

310 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

riages  are  regulated  by  the  same  default  com-
munity of property regimes as civil marriages. 
The key is to keep evidentiary requirements to 
a minimum to take into account the wide range 
of circumstances in establishing a relationship. 
The starting point could be a presumption that 
couples are in a customary marriage if they are 
living together, a presumption that could be left 
up to the contesting spouse to refute. This regis-
tration provides a key step in women’s access to 
legal systems (see below).

Laws for divorce 
The laws that apply to the disposition of marital 
property with divorce and those that determine 
the ability of men and women to seek divorce 
help shape women’s control over resources while 
they  are  still  married  (through  her  bargaining 
power) as well as their welfare if their marriages 
end. For the division of marital property, the de-
fault property regime that prevails during mar-
riage matters for women’s ability to accumulate 
assets—as does having a choice over it. As chap-
ter  4  showed,  community  of  property  regimes 
generally  offer  greater  protection  to  women, 
because marital property is divided equally on 
divorce.85 Many countries, particularly civil law 
countries,  already  have  default  community  of 
property regimes. In Morocco and Tunisia, re-
cent family law reforms allow women to opt for 
a  community  of  property  regime  for  the  ﬁ rst 
time. And making the community of property 
regime the default, as Turkey did in 2001, will 
result in higher uptake than if couples have to 
choose to opt in. 

Where separate property regimes remain the 
default,  recognizing  a  spouse’s  nonmonetary 
contribution  to  household  wealth  in  divorce 
legislation  is  crucial.  If  the  baseline  for  divi-
sion of matrimonial property on divorce is an 
equal split, women who have spent time caring 
for  children,  performing  unpaid  housework, 
and contributing to the welfare of the family in 
other  ways  can  be  compensated  upon  divorce. 
If recognition of nonmonetary contributions is 
enforced, a separate property regime can be as 
effective as community of property in protect-
ing women’s property. One key element in this 
enforcement  is  clear  legislation  that  speciﬁ es 
what  this  compensation  should  be—it  should 
not be left to the courts to interpret an equita-
ble starting point. As Kenya’s experience shows, 
contradictory case law can lead to many differ-
ent outcomes.86 And because the family home is 

often the most valuable marital asset, laws that 
mandate or presume its joint titling can protect 
women from loss of assets in divorce. 

Inheritance laws and widows
In  many  countries,  inadequate  or  discrimina-
tory  inheritance  legislation  places  widows  in  a 
particularly vulnerable situation with regard to 
asset  ownership.  For  example,  22  Sub-Saharan 
African countries do not give widows a right to 
half the estate. And because the writing of wills 
is not common in low-income countries, intes-
tacy  laws  (which  govern  property  distribution 
on death in the absence of a will) determine the 
division of the estate. So, widows’ access to prop-
erty  is  often  reduced,  leaving  them  dependent 
on the goodwill of male relatives or in-laws with 
little guarantee of support. Another problem is 
that plural legal systems often apply to widows’ 
inheritance, particularly land. In Botswana, Ni-
geria, Swaziland, Tanzania, and Togo, customary 
law prevails over statutory law. And in Zambia, 
about 90 percent of the total land is held under 
customary  law,  which  excludes  the  land  from 
the estate and conveys it only to male heirs. 

If  possible,  discriminatory  intestacy  laws 
should  therefore  be  changed,  and  where  indi-
viduals elect to write a will the law should en-
sure  that  widows’  interests  are  protected.  But 
discretion  in  deciding  to  whom  to  bequeath 
property does not always work in favor of wid-
ows or daughters. This pitfall can be avoided by 
designating widows and daughters as necessary 
heirs under the law even when a will exists, as in 
Brazil, where widows and both sons and daugh-
ters are legally entitled to equal shares of half the 
deceased husband’s estate. In Argentina, Bolivia, 
and  República  Bolivariana  de  Venezuela,  wid-
ows  cannot  be  legally  excluded  from  a  will.87 
Laws  that  protect  widows’  assets  by  prosecut-
ing those who evict widows from land can also 
help and are in place in Ghana, Malawi, Uganda, 
and  Zambia.  But  their  enforcement  remains  a 
stumbling  block.  Another  way  to  help  protect 
women’s assets when the spouse dies is to have a 
default community of property marital regime, 
which automatically entitles the widow to half of 
the joint marital property, leaving only the other 
half  for  the  husband’s  estate.  Overall,  progress 
in reforming marital laws has been faster than 
progress in reforming inheritance laws in many 
countries, suggesting that the former can be an 
important entry point for establishing widows’ 
rights early in the reform process. 

 

Public action for gender equality 

311

Reducing domestic violence
Domestic  violence  results  largely  from  a  com-
bination  of  strong  social  norms  surrounding 
power within households as well as from wom-
en’s  limited  bargaining  power  in  their  house-
holds. These determinants need to be addressed 
in addition to strengthening the legal framework 
and improving services to victims of violence.

Shifting norms and behavior through 
information and bargaining power
Although rigorous evaluations are scant, some 
programs to shift norms and behavior around 
domestic violence show promise. These fall into 
two  main  types.  The  ﬁ rst  are  education  and 
awareness  campaigns  aimed  at  men,  women, 
and youth. An example is the Soul City program 
in South Africa, a multimedia program aimed at 
changing norms and beliefs of individuals and 
communities.  Some  norms,  such  as  the  view 
that  intimate  partner  violence  was  a  private 
issue,  changed  after  the  campaign.88  Another 
example,  also  in  South Africa,  is  the  Stepping 
Stones program, which promotes communica-
tion and relationship skills in separate training 
for men and women. A rigorous impact evalua-
tion found that it signiﬁ cantly reduced the per-
petration of intimate partner violence by men.89 
Evaluations of other programs, however, show 
limited or no effects from providing informa-
tion, indicating that further work is needed on 
how to make these programs effective.90

Education and information should also target 
adolescents—for  instance,  at  school—through 
education  on  gender  norms,  rights,  legal  re-
course,  and  available  resources.  School-based 
programs, especially those with several compo-
nents, can strengthen knowledge and protective 
behaviors against abuse, but evidence of their ef-
fect on the incidence of abuse is not available.91 
Rigorous evaluations of programs reducing date 
violence in the United States and Canada show 
that they can have positive effects in preventing 
or reducing violence, with the effects mostly at-
tributable to changes in norms, roles, and greater 
awareness of community services.92 

Second,  increasing  women’s  bargaining 
power  in  the  household  can  reduce  domestic 
violence,  but  experience  shows  that  a  cautious 
approach is warranted. Increased economic op-
portunities  or  larger  transfers  (through  condi-
tional cash transfers, for instance) to women are 
likely to increase their bargaining power but can 
also increase domestic violence (at least in the 

short  run).  Complementary  programs  directly 
targeting this cause of violence may help reduce 
it.  Improving  women’s  fallback  positions  may 
also provide more durable ways to improve bar-
gaining  power  and  thus  reduce  domestic  vio-
lence. One option is to increase women’s asset 
base,  particularly  the  ownership  of  a  dwelling 
(which gives them somewhere to go) and land. 
Work in Kerala, India, has shown that women’s 
property  ownership  is  associated  with  signiﬁ -
cantly  lower  levels  of  domestic  violence.93  A 
second option is to improve women’s ability to 
leave their marriage. Unilateral divorce laws in 
the United States reduced domestic violence by 
around 30 percent.94 Attention also needs to be 
paid to the custody of children and the resources 
available to them after divorce.

Putting laws against domestic violence in place 
Continuing  efforts  are  needed  in  many  coun-
tries in the Middle East and North Africa, South 
Asia,  and  Sub-Saharan  Africa  to  enact  laws 
against domestic violence. Such laws serve many 
purposes  including  deﬁ ning  different  types  of 
violence  against  women,  prescribing  mandates 
and duties for various actors in enforcing laws 
and investigating charges, raising societal aware-
ness,  and  signaling  government  commitment. 
Countries that already have laws on the books 

“

Men used to beat us and everything 
would carry on as normal. But now 
we can report them to the 
police.

Adult woman, South Africa

”

should review them to ensure that they are spe-
ciﬁ c  and  actionable.  Additional  reforms  can 
include  enacting  legislation  and  implementing 
policies  that  regulate  criminal  procedures  and 
responses to victims (restraining orders, foren-
sic  procedures,  victim  assistance,  and  medical 
protocols).

Providing an effective response to 
domestic violence
Support  to  victims  should  be  quick  and  inte-
grated—with  telephone  hotlines,  emergency 
shelters,  legal  assistance,  psychological  care, 
support  groups,  income  generation  programs, 
and  child  welfare  services.95  Integrating  these 

312 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

“

They are bombarding us with stories about 
safe houses, but that is a smokescreen. What 
does it mean for us, the two safe houses [that] 
are in Belgrade, while all of us rural women 
can be killed?

”

Young woman, Serbia

services makes the response more effective be-
cause  of  the  importance  of  a  timely  response 
both to establish the facts and to protect victims. 
For example, Malaysia has one-stop crisis cen-
ters  at  government  hospitals.  When  a  woman 
arrives at an emergency department with inju-
ries from domestic violence, she is immediately 
examined and treated by medical personnel and 
referred to social workers and volunteers from 
women’s  organizations  who  then  see  that  she 
receives  counseling,  if  needed,  and  coordinate 
further assistance. A similar integrated response 
should also be in place elsewhere in the system, 
particularly in police stations, which may be the 
ﬁ rst point of contact for victims.

Even  where  services  are  not  integrated,  the 
police, hospital staff, and other providers need 
training in how to support victims, the services 
available, and the relevant laws. Spain required 
such training as part of its Law on Comprehen-
sive Protection Measures against Gender-Based 
Violence.  The  law’s  implementation  includes 
awareness  and  communications  campaigns, 
hotlines for victims, advice services for men, and 
training for judges and other judicial personnel 
(on domestic violence awareness, treatment of 
victims, and features of the law). Police ofﬁ cers 
and  medical  staff  were  also  trained,  the  latter 
in a specialized health protocol on how to treat 
victims  of  violence  under  the  national  health 
system. 

But  the  systematic  criminalization  of  vio-
lence  can  backﬁ re.  Not  all  women  want  their 
partners to be convicted (especially when he is 
the main source of the family’s livelihood), and 
many reject systems that force them toward a 
punitive course of action.96 Many women per-
ceive protective orders to be more helpful. For 
instance, data from the United States show that 
such  orders  reduce  repeat  violence  and  that 
women  report  feeling  safer  with  them,  even 
though  the  orders  are  often  violated.97  Many 
countries,  such  as  Bulgaria,  offer  temporary 

protection  orders  and  temporary  custody  of 
children.98  And  some  have  eased  procedures 
for issuing temporary restraining orders (at the 
local level) to respond faster to crisis situations. 
In  the  Philippines,  Panang  Barangay  (village 
ofﬁ cials)  have  the  power  to  grant  protection 
orders that remain in place for 15 days, giving 
women  and  children  time  to  travel  to  seek  a 
court order. The police can also issue tempo-
rary restraining orders.99 

Making rights effective—Increasing women’s 
access to justice
Besides  improving  the  substance  of  the  law, 
measures also need to be taken not only to em-
power  women  to  demand  that  their  rights  are 
effective but also to make justice systems more 
responsive  to  women’s  needs.  Actions  in  three 
areas are needed. 

First,  women  need  to  be  better  represented 
within  the  organizations  charged  with  formu-
lating, implementing, and enforcing these laws, 
and the voices of female clients and stakehold-
ers  must  be  better  reﬂ ected  in  the  justice  sys-
tem.  Greater  representation  has  been  achieved 
in some countries by setting quotas for female 
judges,  police  ofﬁ cers,  and  ofﬁ cials  who  im-
plement laws and regulations for property, but 
 evidence on the impact of these changes is lim-
ited. In Papua New Guinea, female local magis-
trates have helped raise awareness among their 
male counterparts of the need to adopt gender-
sensitive approaches to the cases that come be-
fore them.100 In Ethiopia, local land committees 
must have at least one female member, increas-
ing  knowledge  of  land  issues  among  women 
and their participation in the land registration 
process.101  Government-sponsored  policy  dis-
cussions  in  Rwanda  on  changes  in  land  laws 
in Rwanda that engaged civil society, including 
women’s  groups,  not  only  helped  reﬁ ne  these 
policies but also made individuals aware of their 
rights. And, in Pakistan, female paralegals con-
duct consultations and synthesize women’s con-
cerns into policy reports, shaping the discourse 
and inﬂ uencing policy makers.102 

In addition to helping women access the jus-
tice  system,  technology  also  can  play  a  role  in 
making sure that women’s views are represented 
in the setting of legal policy. In Kosovo, following 
independence in 2008, the commission drafting 
the country’s constitution decided to allow rural 
women to participate provided they could reach 

 

Public action for gender equality 

313

the  city  where  the  drafting  was  taking  place 
within  48  hours.  Women  for  Women  Interna-
tional used mobile phones to mobilize 250 rural 
women to come to the city within this tight time 
frame  and  address  the  commission.  The  result 
was  a  constitution  with  provisions  for  female 
participation  in  political  institutions  as  well  as 
other guarantees related to gender equality.103 

Second,  women’s  rights  can  be  made  more 
effective when various parts of the justice system 
are made sensitive to the speciﬁ c needs of women 
or target women clients explicitly. In some coun-
tries where judicial delays in cases of domestic 
violence can be long, governments have set up 
special  courts,  as  Liberia  did  for  rape  cases,  or 
fast-track courts, as Nepal did for cases involving 
women and children. Service providers can also 
be made more aware of the relevant laws. The 
PEKKA  (Program  for Women  Headed  House-
holds) Women’s Legal Empowerment program 
in Indonesia provided training for village para-
legals  that  focused  on  domestic  violence  and 
family law. It also held district forums to bring 
together judges, prosecutors, police, NGOs, and 
government ofﬁ cials to raise awareness of gen-
der issues.104 In Spain, judges, magistrates, and 
others in law enforcement are required to attend 
speciﬁ c sessions on gender equality, nondiscrimi-
nation, and violence against women. Judges who 
have  taken  the  training  report  changing  their 
perceptions  on  violence  issues  and  providing 
foster  training  for  their  peers.  Where  women’s 
limited  literacy  is  a  constraint,  translating  laws 
into simpler language or local languages, as has 
been done in Botswana, can be helpful.

Targeting women also requires bringing ser-
vices  closer  to  women  to  deal  with  time  and 
mobility  constraints—for  example,  through 
providing  community  paralegals  and  mobile 
legal aid clinics for women to access the justice 
system. In Tamil Nadu in India, the introduction 
of  188  all-women  police  units,  covering  both 
rural  and  urban  areas  and  focusing  on  crimes 
against  women,  increased  women’s  comfort  in 
approaching the police, including reporting do-
mestic abuse.105 Female-run police stations and 
specialized services for women were ﬁ rst intro-
duced in Brazil and Peru, and they have resulted 
in  greater  access  for  women.106  Targeting  may 
also include cost considerations because women 
may  be  less  likely  to  have  the  funds  needed  to 
access  the  legal  system—particularly  where 
poverty compounds gender inequalities. In In-

donesia, the waiving of court fees for poor and 
marginalized groups has increased the ability of 
women to come before the courts.107 

Third,  data  have  to  be  collected  and  made 
public so that the problems of women’s access 
to justice are made more visible. Many countries 
still lack comprehensive data on issues around 
the type and quality of justice services available 
to women and the barriers that women face in 
engaging  with  judicial  institutions.  More  in-
formation in the public domain will add to the 
urgency  to  act  and  help  identify  bottlenecks 
and  improve  accountability  within  the  justice 
system,  establish  priority  areas  for  action,  and 
design interventions.

Increasing voice in fertility decisions 
The availability of family planning services re-
mains a constraint in some parts of the world. 
In some cases, the underserved population cov-
ers entire countries, but more often the under-
served  live  in  speciﬁ c  geographic  areas  within 
countries—for  example,  availability  is  more 
likely  to  be  a  problem  in  rural  than  urban  ar-
eas. In addition, certain subpopulations such as 
the poor may also face limited access. For these 
groups,  improved  delivery  of  family  planning 
services is a priority. 

Control over fertility decisions—the number 
and spacing of children—goes beyond the pro-
vision of reproductive health services, however. 
Thus, two additional areas of policy are critical 
to  increase  women’s  control  over  fertility.  The 
ﬁ rst involves boosting women’s ability to exert 
bargaining power within the household, allow-
ing them to act on their preferences about the 
number  of  children  the  couple  has,  and  over 
time to change the social norms that help deter-
mine these preferences. The second policy focus 
involves  improving  the  quality  of  family  plan-
ning services to excluded groups.

The relative bargaining power of a man and 
woman within a household plays an important 
role in determining their fertility outcomes. For 
example, when men inherit more land, the cou-
ple is likely to have the number of children that 
is closer to male rather than female preferenc-
es.108 Some policy options for increasing female 
bargaining power already have been discussed. 
These  include  building  up  women’s  assets  and 
increasing  their  income;  increasing  women’s 
exit options; and increasing women’s education 
and access to maternal healthcare. 

314 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

“

Education and awareness may be the 
right tools to make both men and 
women use more family planning 
services.

Young woman, Bhutan

”

Educating  men  on  the  beneﬁ ts  and  use  of 
contraception can help enhance women’s voice 
in  determining  their  own  fertility.  Contracep-
tion  uptake  is  higher  when  husbands  are  in-
cluded in family planning education, as was the 
case in Bangladesh and Ethiopia.109 Fewer chil-
dren are born as a result. For example, in China, 
pregnancy and abortion rates were lower when 
men were educated with their wives as part of a 
family planning program, in contrast to couples 
where only the woman was educated.110 But con-
text is important. Sometimes excluding the hus-
band altogether can lead to signiﬁ cant impacts. 
Evidence from Zambia showed that targeting a 
voucher for free contraception services to women 
alone, rather than to couples, led to signiﬁ cantly 
higher contraception use and a large reduction 
in unwanted births. While targeted couples also 
increased  their  use  of  contraception,  there  was 
no reduction in unwanted births.111

More generally, shifting role models regard-
ing family size and the resulting change in pref-
erences can lead to signiﬁ cant drops in fertility. 
For example, the spread of televised soap operas 
in Brazil, depicting smaller families, led to lower 
fertility,  especially  for  women  in  lower  socio-
economic groups.112 Evidence on which speciﬁ c 
government policies could change norms in this 
way  is  limited,  however.  One  example  comes 
from an evaluation of a government-sponsored 
radio soap opera in Tanzania, which found that 
the program worked by raising the discussion of 
contraception within families and the commu-
nity and increased contraceptive use.113

Improvements  in  family  planning  services 
should  focus  on  three  areas.  First,  a  sufﬁ cient 
range of contraceptive options needs to be pro-
vided, registered, and prequaliﬁ ed expeditiously, 
but policy makers must take into account service 
providers’ ability to keep the relevant contracep-
tives in stock. Efﬁ ciency improvements in sup-
ply chains may also be required because holding 
a large amount of reserves can be expensive (if 

the contraceptives are not sold or expire before 
they are sold, for example). 

Second, to make informed decisions, clients 
need  to  have  adequate  information  about  the 
available options, their side effects, and the ad-
vantages  and  limitations  of  different  methods. 
For  example,  only  about  half  of  the  clients  in 
the  Arab  Republic  of  Egypt,  Honduras,  Mal-
dives,  and  Niger  were  informed  about  poten-
tial side effects or problems with contraceptive 
methods.114 Third, services need to be provided 
in a manner that protects the individual’s or the 
couple’s  privacy.  That  requires  training  health 
care providers in protocols designed speciﬁ cally 
for  family  planning.  As  the  earlier  discussion 
of Zambia showed, very different outcomes can 
result  depending  on  whether  women  are  ap-
proached individually and in private or as part 
of a couple. 

AVOIDING THE REPRODUCTION OF 
GENDER INEQUALITIES ACROSS 
GENERATIONS FOR ADOLESCENTS 
AND YOUNG ADULTS 

The reproduction of speciﬁ c gender inequalities 
across generations gives rise to gender inequal-
ity traps, which are likely to most affect the poor 
and excluded in society. Some of these have been 
dealt with in earlier sections—reaching pockets 
of  remaining  disadvantage  in  education;  in-
creasing women’s voice and participation in so-
cietal institutions; and enhancing women’s voice 
within households. Here we examine measures 
to  address  gender  inequalities  that  emerge  in 
adolescence and early adulthood, a particularly 
critical  time  when  decisions  and  choices  are 
made that determine outcomes regarding skills, 
health, economic opportunities, and voice. The 
effects of these policies illustrate not only the im-
portance of intervening early but also the ways 
in which the realms of endowments, economic 
opportunities, and agency are interrelated. For 
example,  job  training  programs  can  improve 
employment prospects, but they also may delay 
pregnancy––shaping  the  future  human  capital 
and voice of these women.

Improving education and health outcomes
Evidence from careful impact evaluations across 
a broad range of countries at different income 
levels suggests that conditional cash transfers can 

 

Public action for gender equality 

315

be effective in keeping adolescent girls in school. 
The  positive  impacts  on  secondary  school  en-
rollment for girls are well documented in Latin 
America in countries such as in Colombia, Ec-
uador, Mexico, and Nicaragua.115 More recently, 
evidence from Africa is beginning to show simi-
lar results. In Malawi, fairly small cash transfers 
to girls increased their enrollment and reduced 
dropout rates.116 Moreover, while these transfers 
were  aimed  at  education,  they  had  beneﬁ ts  in 
other  realms:  those  who  received  the  transfers 
had one-third the rate of HIV infection of those 
who  did  not  receive  transfers,117  and  they  had 
better mental health.118 

Other  measures  also  appear  to  work  in 
helping adolescent girls stay in school. Provid-
ing  them  with  information  on  the  returns  to 
schooling is an example: in Madagascar, infor-
mation  on  earnings  for  primary  school  com-
pleters provided to boys and girls as well as to 
their  parents  increased  attendance  rates  by  3.5 
percentage points.119 In the Dominican Repub-
lic, a similar effort to provide accurate informa-
tion on returns to education to boys also had a 
positive  impact.120  And  incentives  such  as  the 
prospect of winning a scholarship or direct pay-
ments  for  performance  can  affect  self-efﬁ cacy 
and improve test scores.121

Beyond  providing  encouragement  for  ado-
lescent girls to stay in school, policies are needed 
to help them catch up when they have been de-
prived  of  the  opportunity—whether  through 
poor  decision  making  on  their  part  or  that  of 
others—to  accumulate  human  capital  earlier 
on  and  through  more  conventional  routes. 
Such  “second-chance”  programs  can  mitigate 
the risk of other bad outcomes later in the life 
cycle (such as reduced earnings and lower health 
status)  that  may  result  from  poor  educational 
outcomes early in life.122 Moreover, since health 
and education outcomes for mothers are posi-
tively  associated  with  those  of  children,  these 
programs can also reduce the intergenerational 
transmission of gender inequality. 

Second-chance  opportunities  in  education 
include programs intended for those currently 
in school who are falling behind (for example, 
remedial language instruction), as well as those 
designed to facilitate transition or reentry into 
mainstream systems (for example, equivalency 
and literacy programs). In designing these pro-
grams  to  reach  teenage  girls,  policy  makers 
should  target  those  most  at  risk  of  falling  be-
hind because of lack of money, domestic bur-
dens, and early marriage and pregnancy, all of 
which  are  typically  associated  with  low  socio-
economic status. 

Extensive analysis in the 2007 World Devel-
opment  Report  on  youth  points  to  the  need  to 
ensure  these  programs  are  tailored  speciﬁ cally 
to  these  groups  (and  are  well  targeted,  since 
they tend to be costly).123 Getting the curricula 
right and building in ﬂ exibility emerge as being 
of particular importance, although none of the 
programs  discussed  here  has  been  rigorously 
evaluated. Examples of promising interventions 
include  an  equivalency  program  in  Mexico 
allowing  choice  within  curricula  (including 
vocational  skills)  to  ensure  that  out-of-school 
teenagers receive training most relevant to their 
needs,  and  a  similar  program  in  Colombia  al-
lowing greater ﬂ exibility of schedule and pace of 
learning. Other interventions have attempted to 
integrate life-skills and vocational training into 
literacy or numeracy programs to increase rel-
evance for out-of-school adolescents. For exam-
ple, the Senegal Pilot Female Literacy Program 
combines  literacy  training  with  life-skills  pro-
grams that vary according to local needs, such as 
instruction in health, small-scale trades, or fruit 
and vegetable processing.124 

Programs to increase school enrollment (al-
though  not  typically  conceived  of  as  second- 
chance  programs),  such  as  cash  transfers  to 
girls,  may  be  particularly  effective  in  giving 
out-of-school  girls  incentives  to  resume  their 
studies in addition to reducing dropout rates. 
In Malawi, the effects of a small cash transfer 

“

Going to school has great importance. We will learn reading and writing and they 
will have a key impact on our future. If we don’t study at school, we will end up 
disappointed and we would not get a good job.

Young woman, Afghanistan

”

316 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

on  reenrollment  were  large,  with  the  reenroll-
ment rate for girls who had dropped out before 
the program increasing two and a half times.125 
In addition, a year after the program’s introduc-
tion, the probability of marriage for girls receiv-
ing transfers declined by more than 40 percent 
and the probability of pregnancy fell by 30 per-
cent.126 These results imply that small incentives 
can  bring  substantial  improvements  for  girls 
most  at  risk.  Nevertheless,  evidence  also  indi-
cates that the design of these transfer programs 
needs  to  take  into  account  intrahousehold  re-
source allocation to ensure they do not indirectly 
worsen schooling outcomes for adolescent girls. 
A conditional cash transfer program in Colom-
bia  that  increased  the  likelihood  of  attendance 
and  enrollment  in  secondary  school  for  both 
boys and girls also decreased attendance and in-
creased  work  hours  for  nonparticipating  sib-
lings—particularly sisters—of participants.127

Enhancing access to economic 
opportunities
The  transition  of  young  women  into  employ-
ment is a key moment to address the reproduc-
tion  of  gender  inequalities  across  generations, 
and  there  is  some  evidence  on  what  works  in 
this  regard.  Active  labor  market  policies,  dis-
cussed earlier, can help with this transition, and 
recent  impact  evaluations  suggest  two  ways  to 
make these programs more effective. First, addi-
tional subsidies to encourage the participation of 
young mothers can help them cover the costs of 
child care. One example comes from Programa 
Joven in Argentina, which targeted low-income 
men  and  women  under  the  age  of  35.  Besides 
providing extra subsidies for mothers, the pro-
gram  covered  training,  books,  material,  work 
clothing,  and  transport  expenses.  The  beneﬁ ts 
were particularly strong for women ages 21–35, 
who saw a signiﬁ cant increase in earnings and a 
9–12 percentage point increase in employment, 
as well as for men under age 21.128 

Second,  these  programs  can  be  targeted  on 
underlying problems of information in the labor 
market that may hinder young women’s partici-
pation. In Peru, the ProJoven program provided 
training for youth, including classroom training 
and internships plus a stipend. And, because it 
also explicitly targeted labor market segregation 
by training women in traditionally male occu-
pations, it was also potentially “transformative” 
in  changing  gender  roles.  On  a  range  of  mea-

sures,  women  did  better  than  men—indeed, 
after  18  months,  women  saw  an  increase  in 
labor  income  of  more  than  92  percent,  com-
pared  with  less  than  11  percent  for  men.  And 
occupational segregation was lower among pro-
gram beneﬁ ciaries.129 In Colombia, the Jovenes 
in  Accion  program  illustrates  another  way  to 
overcome  information  problems:  placing  the 
trainees  in  an  internship  with  additional-on-
the job training at the end of classroom training 
(this program also included additional stipends 
for  mothers).130  This  program,  which  targeted 
poor,  unemployed  18–25-year-olds,  increased 
women’s earnings more than men’s. It also in-
creased the likelihood that women had a formal 
sector job. And analysis shows that the training 
was more effective as the intensity of the on-the-
job training increased.131 

While these examples show the potential of 
these  programs  in  middle-income  countries, 
more evidence is needed on programs appropri-
ate  for  lower-income  settings.  Recent  evidence 
from  Kenya  shows  that  providing  informa-
tion to young girls about the higher returns to 
vocational training in male- relative to female-
dominated  industries  increased  girls’  enroll-
ment in trade school courses that prepared them 
for  these  male-dominated  trades.132  Given  the 
need for more robust evidence from a broader 
range of settings, the Adolescent Girls Initiative, 
a public-private partnership, is in the process of 
evaluating a number of interventions in several 
low- and middle-income and postconﬂ ict coun-
tries;  these  interventions  include  both  “hard 
skills,”  such  as  vocational  training,  and  “soft 
skills,” such as life-skills training and mentoring 
(box 7 in the Overview).

Helping adolescents make smart 
reproductive decisions
Adolescence is also the time of sexual debut for 
many  girls  and  boys.  Girls  tend  to  start  their 
sexual life in relations with older boys or men. 
This age difference and partners who are (often) 
more experienced reduce the voice and bargain-
ing  position  of  these  girls  when  deciding  on 
contraception  use.  Girls  are  also  underserved 
in  many  cases  by  reproductive  health  services 
or  lack  sufﬁ cient  information  regarding  their 
rights.  The  unintended  pregnancies  that  result 
can have a range of health and long-term eco-
nomic effects, including lower educational qual-
iﬁ cations and delayed entry into work. 

 

Public action for gender equality 

317

Helping adolescents reduce these risks is not 
simple. The promotion of contraception, when 
done in isolation, has not been shown to be an 
effective tool for reducing unintended pregnan-
cies  among  adolescents.  Similarly,  educational 
interventions alone have not yet been found to 
be broadly effective. However, interventions that 
combine  these  measures  with  other  interven-
tions such as skill building have been shown, in 
rigorous evaluations, to be effective in reducing 
unintended pregnancies among adolescents in a 
range of settings, although programs still need 
to be appropriately tailored to cultural and social 
settings.133 For example, a program for adoles-
cent girls in Uganda, which combined reproduc-
tive education, life-skills training, and livelihood 
training,  resulted  in  a  signiﬁ cant  increase  in 
condom  use  and  a  lower  number  of  children 
among the adolescent girls who participated.134 
Sometimes, economic empowerment alone can 
have a marked impact. A recent evaluation of a 
youth job-training program in the Dominican 
Republic, which included life-skills training plus 
apprenticeship  showed  a  signiﬁ cant  reduction 
in pregnancies among participants. 135

Aspirations
Adolescence is also the age when lifelong aspi-
rations are molded and when social norms and 
perceptions  really  start  to  bind  for  boys  and 
girls. Across countries and cultures, adolescence 
is a period where horizons for boys often expand 
while  those  for  girls  may  shrink,  especially  for 
poor girls or girls in rural areas where distance 
and norms around mobility can be a signiﬁ cant 
constraint. So, interventions in this area need to 
focus on building life skills, including social cap-
ital for adolescent girls, improving their aspira-
tions and agency, and reducing risky behavior.

Exposure to female role models whose posi-
tions of leadership or power contradict stereo-
types of women’s roles can reduce the intergen-
erational transmission of gender norms. A study 
of  political  reservation  for  women  in  India 
showed that teenage girls who had repeated ex-
posure to women leaders were more likely to ex-
press a desire to marry later, have fewer children, 
and obtain jobs requiring higher education—all 
aspirations that challenge traditional norms.136 
Increased  economic  opportunities  for  young 
girls  can  also  change  their  own  perceptions  of 
gender  roles  and  those  of  their  communities. 
A  program  in  Delhi  that  linked  communities 

to  recruiters  for  high-paying  telephone  work 
found that men and women in these communi-
ties were more likely to expect large dowries for 
their sons and to ﬁ nd it acceptable for women 
to live alone before marriage and to work before 
and after marriage or childbirth.137

Protecting the inheritance of daughters can 
also enhance their agency. In Cambodia, Colom-
bia, and Rwanda, intestate succession laws des-
ignate girls (as well as boys) to receive a share of 
their parents’ land. Although the writing of wills 
can also help direct assets toward daughters, pa-
rental  preferences  shaped  by  prevailing  norms 
may often discriminate against girls. In Mexico, 
although wives were selected nearly as often as 
sons to inherit property and women chose their 
daughters as sole heirs more often than men did, 
women still did not choose to leave equal shares 
to girls—both men and women preferred sons 
as sole heirs.138

One policy response is to circumscribe a frac-
tion of the property over which the will writer 
has  control,  reserving  the  remaining  fraction 
to  be  inherited  by  the  spouse  and  children.  In 
Rwanda,  this  policy  change,  enforced  through 
land  title  registration,  led  to  a  signiﬁ cant  in-
crease in inherited land designated for girls (as 
well  as  boys).139  In  India,  this  legal  reform  led 
not only to increased land inherited by girls but 
also to an increase in age at marriage and higher 
education levels.140 While these reforms in India 
were not sufﬁ cient to completely eliminate the 
male bias in inheritance patterns, they provide a 
powerful push to efforts to address gender gaps 
for the next generation.

MAKING GENDER-SMART 
POLICIES: FOCUSING “GENDER 
MAINSTREAMING” 

The  preceding  discussion  has  focused  on  tar-
geted interventions to address various facets of 
gender inequality. This section broadens the dis-
cussion to more general policies and asks how 
and  why  their  gender-differentiated  impacts 
should be taken into account systematically. The 
reason for considering these impacts is twofold, 
mirroring  the  motivation  of  the  Report.  First, 
lack of attention to gender issues can undermine 
the effectiveness even of policies whose objective 
has nothing to do with gender equality. Second, 
these effects matter because many policies can be 

318 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

implemented in a way that also improves gender 
equality. This discussion serves to focus “gender 
mainstreaming” in a more strategic way. 

How  can  gender  issues  undermine  policy 
effectiveness?  Throughout,  the  Report  has  dis-
cussed areas where gender inequalities are per-
sistent. Underlying this persistence are the work-
ings and interactions of markets and formal and 
informal institutions and the responses of house-
holds. These factors, in turn, affect how men and 
women respond to different policies. Failing to 
take  these  factors  into  account  can  mean  the 
policies will have unintended consequences—or 
simply not work––even when they have nothing 
to do with gender. 

Take relations within the household. The rela-
tive bargaining power of men and women affects 
how  the  household  responds  to  policy—and 
this bargaining process extends not only to what 
their options are outside of the household (for 
example, divorce laws, labor market opportuni-
ties) but also to how much information is shared 
with each of them. An experiment with married 
couples in the Philippines illustrates. When men 
were given an amount equal to one day’s wage, 
their response differed simply according to what 
their  spouses  knew—when  she  did  not  know, 
men chose to save the money, and when she did 
know, they chose to spend the money. And when 
spouses were able to discuss what to do, the men 
put the money into their wives’ accounts.141

Another  example  of  how  household  rela-
tions matters comes from Papua New Guinea. 
Gender  roles  in  harvesting  oil  palm  call  for 
men to climb the trees and harvest fruits, while 
women  collect  the  fruit  that  has  fallen  on  the 
ground.  When  the  oil  palm  industry  realized 
that 60–70 percent of the fruit on the ground 
was  not  being  collected,  it  tried  to  deal  with 
constraints women faced, such as giving them 
special nets and timing collection to coordinate 
with their care duties. Nothing worked—until, 
in the Mama Lus Frut scheme, women got their 
own harvest record cards and were paid directly 
into  their  personal  bank  accounts.  Yields  in-
creased signiﬁ cantly, as did female participation 
in oil palm harvesting.142 

These examples show why all policy makers 
need to consider the underlying causes of per-
sistence  of  gender  equality,  understand  which 
ones matter for the policy at hand, and then ﬁ g-
ure out how to make the policy more effective. 
This kind of analysis can also help policy makers 

ﬁ gure out what they might do to improve gen-
der equality at the same time, an issue to which 
we turn below. 

Dealing with gender-differentiated 
market failures

What you don’t know can hurt others: 
Problems of information
As  chapter  5  showed,  the  lack  of  good  infor-
mation on the part of employers and creditors 
makes it hard for women to break into new sec-
tors and get the ﬁ nancing they need. While the 
policies discussed earlier in this chapter can pro-
vide  some  ways  to  facilitate  this  ﬂ ow  of  infor-
mation, interventions in other areas also can be 
brought to bear. Take the case of banking super-
vision, where one of the central goals of policy 
interventions is to improve banks’ management 
of risk. One risk management tool is credit bu-
reaus, which collect information about the cred-
itworthiness of individuals for use by banks in 
making  their  lending  decisions. Women,  more 
likely to be concentrated in informal borrowing 
and microﬁ nance, are underrepresented in these 
databases, so a prospective formal sector lender 
faces  an  information  problem.  But  if  women’s 
credit  history  from  their  microﬁ nance  activity 
were in these databases, this information prob-
lem could be alleviated. Improving bank super-
vision policies in this way is also more likely to 
improve gender equality. 

For  Proyecto  Servir  in  Ecuador,  a  range  of 
government  actors,  international  agencies,  mi-
croﬁ nance  institutions,  and  private  credit  bu-
reaus  came  together  to  include  microﬁ nance 
data in the credit bureaus’ databases. The initial 
target was the data for two geographic areas and 
27  microﬁ nance  institutions,  but  demand  was 
so great that data for more than 180 institutions 
across the country were eventually put into the 
databases.  Not  only  will  this  intervention  help 
microﬁ nance  institutions  make  better  lending 
decisions, it will also help microﬁ nance clients—
mostly women—get formal sector credit. 

It’s not only who you know, it’s how many 
you know: Building women’s networks
Networks  that  form  with  a  critical  number  of 
individuals  of  one  sex  can  help  new  members 
decide to enter a sector or profession and pro-
vide information about how to succeed and the 
like. In this way, they can also exclude members 

 

Public action for gender equality 

319

of  the  other  sex,  which  can  perpetuate  gender 
inequalities. A rural road project in Peru sought 
to  overcome  this  problem.  The  project’s  main 
policy objective was to improve rural transport 
for  economic  integration,  but  in  pursuing  this 
objective,  gender  equality  was  also  considered, 
with a focus on increasing women’s representa-
tion in road maintenance. The project explicitly 
recruited women among the entrepreneurs who 
ran  the  microenterprises  responsible  for  road 
maintenance. A quota of 10 percent female par-
ticipation initially helped boost female engage-
ment from a baseline of 4 percent, and eventu-
ally 24 percent of the microentrepreneurs were 
female. Women engaged more in group activi-
ties, and road maintenance work became a more 
socially acceptable occupation for women. 

Leveling the playing ﬁ eld 

Addressing discrimination in laws and 
regulations
Looking for and ﬁ xing discrimination when re-
vising regulations for other reasons can improve 
gender equality. Take the case of tax policy. Taxes 
can explicitly discriminate against women when 
they face different tax rates for the same income 
or earnings as men. In Morocco, the tax allow-
ance  for  children  is  allocated  to  men  unless 
women can prove that their husband and chil-
dren depend on them ﬁ nancially.143 So men face 
a  lower  tax  burden  than  women.  Tax  reforms 
aimed at efﬁ ciency would try to equalize this tax 
rate so that women are not penalized for market 
work. These reforms would also enhance gender 
equality. In Uganda, inherited property not used 
for business, property, or employment income is 
exempt from taxation. Efﬁ ciency-enhancing tax 
reforms would reduce or eliminate this tax ex-
emption. And because men inherit much more 
than women, such a reform would also promote 
gender equality.144 

Making existing laws and regulations work 
better for women: Improving enforcement
Women often face more limited access to mech-
anisms of redress—whether complaint mecha-
nisms within a ﬁ rm or access to police and legal 
services. Improving women’s access to enforce-
ment  mechanisms  can  thus  improve  gender 
equality  in  a  range  of  interventions  involving 
ﬁ rms,  state-owned  enterprises,  and  govern-
ments.  In  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo, 

as part of a larger effort to restructure the trans-
port  sector,  the  National  Railway  Company, 
in  collaboration  with  the  unions,  has  set  aside 
earmarked  funding  to  compensate  surviving 
widows and orphans of employees who are due 
retiree beneﬁ ts. The funds will go directly to the 
beneﬁ ciaries and, where they cannot be imme-
diately found, be kept in a dedicated fund for fu-
ture claims. This approach was taken expressly 
because  widows  and  orphans  tend  to  be  less 
likely to either know about or assert their claim 
when their employed spouse or parent dies. 

Better access to services
Women use services in ways different from men, 
for reasons that range from the constrained mo-
bility of women to the attitude of service pro-
viders  toward  female  clients.  Policy  responses 
require  both  changes  in  client  orientation  and 
more fundamental structural changes. One ex-
ample of these kinds of issues comes from the 
prices charged for electricity. One recent study 
found that 14 of 15 electricity utilities in Latin 
America  charged  more  to  residential  electric-
ity  users  than  to  commercial  users.145  Because 
women are much more likely than men to run 
their  business  out  of  their  home,  this  pricing 
policy  increased  costs  for  women  who  own 
small businesses.

Paying attention to norms 

Recognizing women’s care duties
Women bear a disproportionate amount of the 
care duties within households and families. As 
we have seen, a wide range of policies have the 
potential  to  affect  this—ranging  from  infra-
structure  improvements  to  labor  regulations. 
Other policies can make a difference as well, in 
ways that may not be as obvious. One example 
is  the  approach  taken  in  Vietnam  to  calculat-
ing severance packages as part of restructuring 
public enterprises. The beneﬁ ts provided by the 
public sector (better maternity leave and ﬂ exible 
work arrangements) relative to the private sector 
meant that the average woman would lose more 
from  retrenchment  than  her  male  colleagues. 
So,  compensation  based  entirely  on  seniority 
would  effectively  penalize  women.146  The  gov-
ernment  took  this  into  account  by  combining 
a payment based on seniority with a signiﬁ cant 
lump-sum payment. The policy explicitly took 
into account women’s care duties, making them 

320 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

part of the calculation in compensating workers 
for their lost jobs.147 One year after separation, 
women were more likely than men to rate their 
well-being as better or the same.148 

Taking account of the allocation of resources 
within the household
As seen earlier in the Report, couples do not al-
ways (or even often) act as a single unit. They 
might have different preferences and might not 
completely share their income—and, in the end, 
their  different  bargaining  power  will  drive  the 
outcome of household decisions. Changing the 
bargaining power within households can result 
from a range of policies from direct transfers to 
changes in income-earning opportunities. How 
will  bargaining  power  change,  and  how  will 
that  affect  program  design?  A  female-targeted 
village  savings  and  loan  program  of  the  Inter-
national  Rescue  Committee  in  Burundi  aimed 
to increase women’s control over the resources 
that the program would bring into households. 
It  piloted  a  six-session  course  for  participants 
and their spouses analyzing household decision 
making. Women who participated in this course 
reported greater autonomy in decision making 
and less violence at home than those in the mi-
croﬁ nance program who did not get this addi-
tional course.

Thinking  on  this  type  of  policy  can  evolve. 
Initially,  many  conditional  cash  transfer  pro-
grams targeted women, in part because women 
were  likely  to  spend  more  of  the  transfer  on 
children’s  endowments.  However,  these  trans-
fers  themselves  changed  bargaining  power 
within the household and, in some cases, such 
as  Mexico,  resulted  in  short-term  increases  in 
domestic violence.149 While this effect can dis-
appear or change in the longer term, a number 
of these transfer programs took proactive action 
to tackle domestic violence and broader issues 
within household relations by including condi-
tions  to  discourage  domestic  violence  (Brazil), 
training and awareness of these issues for moth-
ers  and  families  (Colombia,  Peru),  and  even 
dedicated social workers (Chile).150

WANTED: BETTER EVIDENCE

To better understand whether policies to address 
gender inequalities are working, two actions are 
needed. First, programs and projects need to put 

in place effective monitoring systems to capture 
the gender dimensions of the problems they are 
addressing and the effects of their activities. This 
step requires, among other things, not only clear 
sex-disaggregated  data  from  baseline  surveys 
but also attention in those surveys to the causes 
of gender inequality that may matter for project 
design  (for  example,  barriers  in  accessing  ser-
vices the project provides). As the project pro-
gresses, sex-disaggregated data on beneﬁ ciaries 
can help monitor progress and identify the need 
for mid-course corrections.

Second, there needs to be a focus on under-
standing  whether  speciﬁ c  interventions  work. 
Evaluations are the only way this question can 
be answered. Different types of evaluations will 
provide  answers  to  different  questions.  Well-
designed  impact  evaluations  can  be  especially 
helpful because they use a well-deﬁ ned compar-
ison  group  to  measure  the  effects  on  program 
beneﬁ ciaries.  In  this  regard,  much  remains  to 
be done. For example, in the realm of economic 
opportunity,  the  effects  of  active  labor  market 
policies  have  been  subject  to  impact  evalua-
tions. But very little is known about policies to 
improve  women’s  networks. And  while  a  lot  is 
known  from  impact  evaluations  about  the  ef-
fects of conditional cash transfers on a host of 
outcomes, less rigorous evidence is available on 
the effects of such programs that address mater-
nal mortality. Finally, while the effects of political 
reservations in local governments in India have 
been well studied, there is less evidence about the 
effects of reservations for parliamentary seats or 
on the impacts of improving women’s access to 
justice.

The  good  news  is  that  more  evidence  of 
this type is available today than existed even 10 
years  ago.  But  more  needs  to  be  done.  Evalu-
ations  need  to  be  built  into  projects  as  they 
are designed, which means planning for them. 
And additional resources will be needed. While 
knowledge gaps in individual areas are evident, 
two  overarching  themes  deserve  particular  at-
tention. First, efforts should focus on contrast-
ing  the  impact  of  incremental  interventions 
(those that work within existing gender norms) 
and  transformative  interventions  (those  that 
seek  to  transform  gender  roles),  particularly 
when they focus on the same policy area, as in 
vocational education. Second, given that mul-
tiple constraints underlie many “sticky” gender 
gaps, emphasis should be placed on evaluating 

 

Public action for gender equality 

321

combinations of interventions (such as the pro-
vision of credit and training for entrepreneurs) 
against individual interventions to understand 
which  constraints  bind  in  different  situations 
and  which  package  is  the  most  effective.  This 
evidence  will  focus  policy  makers’  attention 
on  interventions  that  are  proven  to  work  and 
demonstrate the returns to investing in efforts 
to reduce gender inequality. 

NOTES

    1.  World Bank 2003b.
    2.  Waddington and others 2009.
    3.  Tadesse and others 2010. 
    4.  Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky 2005.
    5.  Foster and Briceño-Garmendia 2010.
    6.  Foster and Briceño-Garmendia 2010.
    7.  United Nations 2011.
    8.  Bartlett and others 2005.
    9.  Bang and others 1999.
  10.  Ensor and others 2008.
  11.  World Bank 2005a.
  12.  Bhushan, Keller, and Schwartz 2002.
  13.  Björkman and Svensson 2009.
  14.  Cotlear 2006.
  15.  Lim  and  others  2010.  JSY  also  had  signiﬁ cant 
impacts  on  perinatal  and  neonatal  deaths, 
which  declined  by  3.7  deaths  per  1,000  preg-
nancies and by 2.5 deaths per 1,000 live births, 
respectively. The study was unable to detect an 
effect on maternal mortality; however, perhaps 
because maternal death is a relatively rare event, 
the study only had a sufﬁ cient sample size to de-
tect very large effects. 

  16.  Witter  2011.  As  with  the  study  of  JSY,  these 
analyses  were  not  able  to  ﬁ nd  an  impact  on 
 maternal mortality.

  17.  Prata and others 2010.
  18.  Prata and others 2010.
  19.  Ibid.; WHO and others 2010.
  20.  Burde and Linden 2010. 
  21.  Jacoby and Mansuri 2011.
  22.  This  compares  all  married  individuals  aged 
18–65  with  children  under  17  years  old  using 
time use surveys from different countries.

  23.  Attanasio and Vera-Hernandez 2004.
  24.  Berlinski  and  Galiani  2007;  Berlinski,  Galiani, 

and McEwan 2009.

  25.  Paes de Barros and others, forthcoming.
  26.  Havnes and Mogstad 2009.
  27.  Medrano 2009.
  28.  Cascio 2006.
  29.  Ibid.
  30.  Havnes and Mogstad, forthcoming.
  31.  http://www.mobilecreches.org.

  32.  SEWA Academy 2007.
  33.  Cassirer and Addati 2007.
  34.  Schlosser 2007.
  35.  Cassirer and Addati 2007.
  36.  Gornick and Hegewisch 2010.
  37.  Time use surveys, various countries and years.
  38.  This section draws on a background paper pre-
pared by Clancy and others (2011), and a paper 
prepared  by  Köhlin  and  others  (2011)  for  the 
World  Bank  environment  strategy.  The  initial 
discussion  of  the  evidence  relies  heavily  on 
Köhlin and others (2011).

  39.  Dinkelman 2010; Grogan and Sadanand 2011.
  40.  Asian  Development  Bank  2010;  Barkat  and 

 others 2002.
  41.  Massé 2003.
  42.  Ilahi and Grimard 2000. 
  43.  Koolwal and van de Walle 2010.
  44.  Zwane and others 2011.
  45.  World Bank 2005b.
  46.  Khandker, Bakht, and Koolwal 2006. 
  47.   FAO 2003.
  48.  This review draws on Todd (2010). 
  49.  Galasso, Ravallion, and Salvia 2001.
  50.  Revenga, Riboud, and Tan 1994.
  51.  Holzer and Neumark 2000; Leonard 1989.
  52.  Holzer and Neumark 2000.
  53.  Frisancho, Karlan, and Valdivia 2008.
  54.  de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2011.
  55.  Bosch and Maloney 2010.
  56.  Bardasi and Gornick 2008.
  57.  For details and analysis of these and other legal 
reforms  that  affect  women’s  economic  oppor-
tunities in countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, see 
Hallward-Driemeier (2011).

  58.  This reform also removed the ability of the wife 
to  deny  the  husband  permission  to  work  out-
side of the home. 

  59.  Gajigo and Hallward-Driemeier 2011.
  60.  Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan 2010.
  61.  Deininger, Ali, and Zevenbergen 2008.
  62.  Swanson and Rajalahti 2010.
  63.  Cotula 2002.
  64.  Ibid.
  65.  Agarwal 2003.
  66.  Kumar and Quisumbing 2010.
  67.  See,  for  example,  the  discussion  of  the  lack  of 

evidence in Meinzen-Dick and others (2010). 

  68.  Data from the Quota Project, http://www.quota

project.org. 

  69.  Esteve-Volart and Bagues 2010.
  70.  Beaman  and  others,  forthcoming;  Bhavnani 

2009.

  71.  Beaman and others, forthcoming.
  72.  Krook 2009, 78–79; Rudman and Fairchild 2004.
  73.  Ban  and  Rao  2009;  Beaman  and  others, 

forthcoming.

322 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

  74.  Chattopadhyay and Duﬂ o 2004.
  75.  Iyer and others 2010.
  76.  Type  of  entities  covered  (for  example,  pub-
lic  limited,  state-owned,  local  governments) 
by  these  quota  laws  vary  across  countries.  For 
instance,  Denmark,  Finland,  Iceland,  Ireland, 
Israel,  South  Africa,  and  Switzerland  have  in-
troduced  quotas  for  state-owned  enterprises, 
while  Norway  has  imposed  a  mandatory  40 
percent  quota  on  public  limited,  state-owned 
and inter-municipal companies. See Pande and 
Ford (2011) for a list of countries with corpo-
rate quotas by type and quota targets and dates.

  77.  Pande and Ford 2011.
  78.  Matsa and Miller, forthcoming.
  79.  Bilimoria 2006.
  80.  McKinsey & Company Inc. 2007.
  81.  See Pande and Ford (2011) for a review of these 

correlational studies.

  82.  Ahern  and  Dittmar  2011;  Matsa  and  Miller 
2011.  Slightly  less  rigorous  evidence  from  the 
United States shows also that on average, ﬁ rms 
with  more  gender-diverse  boards  have  worse 
 ﬁ nancial performance.

  83.  Ahern and Dittmar 2011.
  84.  Gajigo and Hallward-Driemeier 2011.
  85.  Here we refer to partial community of property 
regimes  where  the  assets  accumulated  during 
marriage are equally divided and those accumu-
lated before marriage revert to the person who 
owned them at the time of marriage.

  86.  See  case  of  Echaria  v  Echaria  (2007)  KECA  1 
and  earlier  cases  of  Kivuitu  v  Kivuitu  (1991), 
and Karanja v Karanja (1976) 1 KLR 389.

  87.  Deere and León 2005.
  88.  Usdin and others 2005.
  89.  Jewkes and others 2008.
  90.  See, for example, Rodríguez and others (2006).
  91.  Adi  and  others  2007;  Finkelhor  2009;  Mikton 

and Butchart 2009.

  92.  Programs are “Safe dates,” “The Fourth R: skills 
for  youth  relationships,”  and “Youth  Relation-
ship  Project.”  Foshee  and  others  1998;  Foshee 
and others 2000; Foshee and others 2004; Fos-
hee  and  others  2005;  Wolfe  and  others  2003; 
Wolfe and others 2009.

  93.  Agarwal and Panda 2007.
  94.  Stevenson and Wolfers 2006.
  95.  Morrison, Ellsberg, and Bott 2007.
  96.  See, for instance, Guedes, Bott, and Cuca 2002; 
Larraín  1999;  and  Parenzee  2001,  in  Bott, 
Morrison, and Ellsberg 2005. 

  97.  Carlson,  Harris,  and  Holden  1999;  Holt  and 
others  2003;  Logan  and  Walker  2010;  McFar-
lane and others 2004; Spitzberg 2002. 

  98.  Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, State 

Gazette, No. 27, §1 2005. 

  99.  Lawyers  Collective  Women’s  Rights  Initiative 

2009.

100.  Unpublished studies on Papua New Guinea lo-

cal magistrates.

101.  Kumar and Quisumbing 2010.
102.  Warraich 2010; UNIFEM 2010.
103.  GSMA Development Fund 2010.
104.  Sumner, Zurstrassen, and Lister 2011.
105.  Natarajan 2005.
106.  Jubb and Pasinato Izumino 2003.
107.  Sumner, Zurstrassen, and Lister 2011.
108.  Rasul 2008.
109.  Becker 1996; Green and others 1972; Terefe and 

Larson 1993.

110.  Wang, Vittinghoff, and Rong 1996.
111.  Ashraf, Field, and Lee 2010.
112.  La Ferrara, Chong, and Duryea 2008.
113.  Rogers and others 1999.
114.  Demographic and Health Survey Data, various 

years.

115.  See Rawlings and Rubio (2003) for Mexico and 
Nicaragua,  Barrera-Osorio  and  others  (2008) 
for  Colombia,  and  Schady  and  Araujo  (2006) 
for Ecuador.

116.  Baird and others 2009.
117.  Baird, McIntosh, and Özler 2010.
118.  Baird, de Hoop, and Özler 2011.
119.  Nguyen 2008.
120.  Jensen 2010b.
121.  Angrist  and  Lavy  2009;  Kremer,  Miguel,  and 

Thornton 2009.

122.  World Bank 2006.
123.  Ibid.
124.  World Bank 2004.
125.  Baird, McIntosh, and Özler 2011.
126.  Baird and others 2009.
127.  Barrera-Osorio and others 2008. 
128.  Aedo and Nuñez 2004.
129.  Ñopo, Robles, and Saavedra 2007.
130.  This feature can be found in a number of other 

programs as well.

131.  Attanasio, Kugler, and Meghir 2008.
132.  Hjort and others 2010.
133.  Bearinger and others 2007; Gilliam 2010.
134.  Bandiera and others 2011. 
135.  Martinez and others 2011. 
136.  Beaman and others 2009.
137.  Jensen 2010a.
138.  Deere and León 2003.
139.  Ali, Deininger, and Goldstein 2011.
140.  Deininger,  Goyal,  and  Nagarajan  2010;  Roy 

2011.

141.  Ashraf, Field, and Lee 2009.
142.  This example comes from FAO 2011, 47.
143.  Grown and Valodia 2010. This book provides a 
comprehensive discussion of both explicit and 

 

Public action for gender equality 

323

implicit  tax  discrimination  and  analysis  for 
eight countries.

144.  Ssewanyana and others 2010.
145.  Komives and others 2005.
146.  Rama 2002.
147.  While this was used for a period of signiﬁ cant 
retrenchment,  the  lump  sum  component  of 
this payment was eventually eliminated by the 
government.

148.  World Bank 2003a, page 90. 
149.  Bobonis and Castro 2010.
150.  Lindert and others 2007. 

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

Adi, Yaser, Amanda Killoran, Kulsum Janmohamed, 
and  Sarah  Stewart-Brown.  2007.  “Systematic 
Review  of  the  Effectiveness  of  Interventions  to 
Promote  Mental  Wellbeing  in  Children  in  Pri-
mary Education. Report 1: Universal Approaches 
Which  Do  Not  Focus  on Violence  or  Bullying.” 
National  Institute  of  Health  and  Clinical  Excel-
lence, London.

Aedo, Cristián, and Sergio Nuñez. 2004. “The Impact 
of Training Policies in Latin America and the Ca-
ribbean: The Case of Programa Joven.” Working 
Paper  483,  Inter-American  Development  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Agarwal,  Bina.  2003. “Gender  and  Land  Rights  Re-
visited:  Exploring  New  Prospects  via  the  State, 
Family  and  Market.”  Journal  of Agrarian  Change 
3 (1–2): 184–224.

Agarwal,  Bina,  and  Pradeep  Panda.  2007.  “Toward 
Freedom from Domestic Violence: The Neglected 
Obvious.” Journal of Human Development and Ca-
pabilities 8 (3): 359–88.

Ahern, Kenneth R., and Amy K. Dittmar. 2011. “The 
Changing  of  the  Boards:  The  Impact  on  Firm 
Valuation of Mandated Female Board Represen-
tation.”  University  of  Michigan,  Ross  School  of 
Business, Anne Harbor, MI. Processed.

Ali,  Daniel  Ayalew,  Klaus  Deininger,  and  Markus 
Goldstein.  2011.  “The  Impacts  of  Land  Title 
Registration:  Evidence  from  a  Pilot  Program 
in  Rwanda.”  World  Bank,  Washington,  DC. 
Processed.

Anderlini,  Sanam  Naraghi.  2007.  Women  Building 
Peace.  What  They  Do,  Why  It  Matters.  Boulder, 
CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers.

———.  2010.  “WDR  Gender  Background  Paper.” 
Background  Paper  for  the  2011 World  Develop-
ment Report.

Angrist, Joshua, and Victor Lavy. 2009. “The Effects of 
High  Stakes  High  School  Achievements  Awards: 
Evidence  from  a  Randomized  Trial.” American 
Economic Review 99 (4): 1384–414.

Ashraf,  Nava.  2009.  “Spousal  Control  and  Intra-
Household  Decision  Making:  An  Experimental 
Study in the Philippines.” American Economic Re-
view 99 (4): 1245–77.

Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, and Jean Lee. 2010. “House-
hold Bargaining and Excess Fertility: An Experi-
mental  Study  in  Zambia.”  Harvard  University, 
Cambridge, MA. Processed.

Asian Development Bank. 2010. “Asian Development 
Bank’s Assistance for Rual Electriﬁ cation in Bhu-
tan:  Does  Electriﬁ cation  Improve  the  Quality  of 
Rural Life?” Asian Development Bank, Manila.

Attanasio,  Orazio,  Adriana.  Kugler,  and  Costas 
Meghir.  2008.  “Training  Disadvantaged  Youth 
in  Latin America:  Evidence  from  a  Randomized 
Trial.” Working Paper Series 13931, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Attanasio, Orazio, and Marcos Vera-Hernandez. 2004. 
“Medium- and Long-Run Effects of Nutrition and 
Child Care: Evaluation of a Community Nursery 
Programme  in  Rural  Colombia.” Working  Paper 
Series, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.

Baird, Sarah, Ephraim Chirwa, Craig McIntosh, and 
Berk  Özler.  2009. “The  Short-term  Impacts  of  a 
Schooling Conditional Cash Transfer Program on 
the Sexual Behavior of Young Women.” Policy Re-
search Working Paper Series, World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.

Baird, Sarah, Jacobus de Hoop, and Berk Özler. 2011. 
“Income Shocks and Adolescent Mental Health.” 
Policy Research Working Paper Series 5644, World 
Bank,Washington, DC.

Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler. 2010. 
“Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash Trans-
fer Program.” Policy Research Working Paper Se-
ries, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Ban,  Radu,  and Vijayendra  Rao.  2009. “Is  Delibera-
tion Equitable? Evidence from Transcripts of Vil-
lage  Meetings  in  South  India.”  Working  Paper 
 Series 4928, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Bandiera,  Oriana,  Niklas  Buehren,  Robin  Burguess, 
Markus  Goldstein,  Selim  Gulesci,  Imran  Rasul, 
and Munshi Sulaiman. 2011. “Economic Empow-
erment  of  Female  Adolescents:  Evidence  from 
Uganda.” Powerpoint presentation. American Ag-
ricultural Economics Associates, Pittsburgh. 

Bang, Abhay T., Rani A. Bang, Sanjay B. Baitule, M. 
Hanimi Reddy, and Mahesh D. Deshmukh. 1999. 
“Effect of Home-Based Neonatal Care and Man-
agement  of  Sepsis  on  Neonatal  Mortality:  Field 
Trial in Rural India.” Lancet 354 (9194): 1955–61.
Bardasi,  Elena,  and  Janet  C.  Gornick.  2008. “Work-
ing for Less? Women’s Part-Time Wage Penalties 

324 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

across  Countries.”  Feminist  Economics  14  (1): 
37–72.

Barkat, Abul, S. H. Khan, M. Rahman, S. Zaman, A. 
Poddar, S. Halim, N. H. Ratna, M. Majid, A. K. M. 
Maksud, A. Karim, and S. Islam. 2002. “Economic 
and Social Impact Evaluation Study of the Rural 
Electriﬁ cation  Program  in  Bangladesh.”  Human 
Development Research Centre, Dhaka.

Barrera-Osorio,  Felipe,  Marianne  Bertrand,  Leight 
Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle. 2008. “Condi-
tional  Cash  Transfers  in  Education:  Design  Fea-
tures,  Peer  and  Sibling  Effects.  Evidence  from  a 
Randomized Experiment in Colombia.” Working 
Paper Series 13890, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.

Bartlett,  Linda  A.,  Shairose  Mawji,  Sara  Whitehead, 
Chadd Crouse, Suraya Dalil, Denisa Ionete, Peter 
Salama, and Afghan Maternal Study Team. 2005. 
“Where Giving Birth Is a Forecast of Death: Ma-
ternal Mortality in Four Districts of Afghanistan, 
1999–2002.” Lancet 365 (9462): 864–70.

Beaman,  Lori,  Raghabendra  Chattopadhyay,  Esther 
Duﬂ o,  Rohini  Pande,  and  Petia  Topalova.  2009. 
“Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias?” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1497–540.
Beaman,  Lori,  Esther  Duﬂ o,  Rohini  Pande,  and  Pe-
tia Topalova. Forthcoming. “Political Reservation 
and  Substantive  Representation:  Evidence  from 
Indian  Village  Councils.”  In  India  Policy  Forum 
2010. Washington, DC, and New Delhi: Brookings 
Institution Press and National Council of Applied 
Economic Research.

Bearinger, Linda H., Renee E. Sieving, Jane Ferguson, 
and Vinit Sharma. 2007. “Global Perspectives on 
the  Sexual  and  Reproductive  Health  of  Adoles-
cents: Patterns, Prevention, and Potential.” Lancet 
369 (9568): 1220–31.

Becker,  Gary  S.  1996.  “Couples  and  Reproductive 
Health: A Review of Couple Studies.” Studies in 
Family Planning 27 (6): 291–306.

Berlinski, Samuel, and Sebastian Galiani. 2007. “The 
Effect of a Large Expansion of Pre-Primary School 
Facilities on Preschool Attendance and Maternal 
Employment.” Labour Economics 14 (3): 665–80.

Berlinski,  Samuel,  Sebastian  Galiani,  and  Patrick  J. 
McEwan.  2009.  “Preschool  and  Maternal  Labor 
Market  Outcomes:  Evidence  from  a  Regression 
Discontinuity  Design.”  Economic  Development 
and Cultural Change 59 (2): 313–44.

Bhavnani, Rikhil R. 2009. “Do Electoral Quotas Work 
after They Are Withdrawn? Evidence from a Nat-
ural Experiment in India.” American Political Sci-
ence Review 103 (1): 23–35.

Bhushan,  Indu,  Sheryl  Keller,  and  Brad  Schwartz. 
2002. “Achieving the Twin Objectives of Efﬁ ciency 
and Equity: Contracting Health Services in Cam-
bodia.”  ERC  Policy  Brief  Series,  Asian  Develop-
ment Bank, Manila.

Bilimoria,  Diana.  2006.  “The  Relationship  between 
Women Corporate Directors and Women Corpo-
rate Ofﬁ cers.” Journal of Managerial Issues 18 (1): 
47–61.

Björkman, Martina, and Jacob Svensson. 2009. “Power 
to the People: Evidence from a Randomized Field 
Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in 
Uganda.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2): 
735–69.

Bobonis, Gustavo J., and Roberto Castro. 2010. “The 
Role  of  Conditional  Cash  Transfers  in  Reducing 
Spousal Abuse  in  Mexico:  Short-Term  vs.  Long-
Term  Effects.”  University  of  Toronto,  Toronto. 
Processed.

Bosch,  Mariano,  and  William  F.  Maloney.  2010. 
“Comparative Analysis of Labor Market Dynam-
ics  Using  Markov  Processes:  An  Application  to 
 Informality.” Labour Economics 17 (4): 621–31.

Bott,  Sarah,  Andrew  Morrison,  and  Mary  Ellsberg. 
2005.  “Preventing  and  Responding  to  Gender-
Based  Violence  in  Middle  and  Low-Income 
Countries: A Global Review and Analysis.” Policy 
Research Working Paper Series 3618, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Burde, Dana, and Leigh L. Linden. 2010. “The Effect 
of  Village-Based  Schools:  Evidence  from  a  Ran-
domized Control Trial in Afghanistan.” New York 
University  and  Columbia  University,  New  York. 
Processed.

Carlson, Matthew J., Susan D. Harris, and George W. 
Holden.  1999. “Protective  Orders  and  Domestic 
Violence:  Risk  Factors  for  Re-Abuse.”  Journal  of 
Family Violence 14 (2): 205–26.

Cascio, Elizabeth. 2006. “Public Preschool and Mater-
nal Labor Supply: Evidence from the Introduction 
of Kindergartens into American Public Schools.” 
Working Paper Series 12179, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Cassirer, Naomi, and Laura Addati. 2007. “Expanding 
Women’s  Employment  Opportunities:  Informal 
Economy  Workers  and  the  Need  for  Childcare.” 
International Labor Organization, Geneva.

Chattopadhyay,  Raghabendra,  and  Esther  Duﬂ o. 
2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a 
Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econo-
metrica 72 (5): 1409–43.

Clancy, Joy, Tanja Winther, Margaret N. Matinga, and 
Sheila Oparaocha. 2011. “Gender Equity in Access 
to  and  Beneﬁ ts  from  Modern  Energy  and  Im-
proved Energy Technologies.” Background paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Cotlear,  Daniel,  ed.  2006.  A  New  Social  Contract  for 
Peru: An Agenda for Improving Education, Health 
Care,  and  the  Social  Safety  Net.  Country  Study. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Cotula,  Lorenzo.  2002. “Gender  and  Law;  Women’s 
Rights in Agriculture.” Legislative Study 76, Rev. 1, 
Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome.

 

Public action for gender equality 

325

de  Mel,  Suresh,  David  McKenzie,  and  Christopher 
Woodruff.  2011. “Business  Training  and  Female 
Enterprise  Start-up  and  Growth  in  Sri  Lanka.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Magdalena  León.  2001. 
“Who Owns the Land? Gender and Land-Titling 
Programmes in Latin America.” Journal of Agrar-
ian Change 1 (3): 440–67.

———.  2005.  “Liberalism  and  Married  Women’s 
Property  Rights  in  Nineteenth-Century  Latin 
America.” Hispanic American Historical Review 85 
(4): 627–78.

Deininger,  Klaus,  Daniel  Ayalew  Ali,  Holden  Stein, 
and Jaap Zevenbergen. 2008. “Rural Land Certi-
ﬁ cation  in  Ethiopia:  Process,  Initial  Impact,  and 
Implications for other African Countries.” World 
Development 36 (10): 1786–812.

Deininger,  Klaus,  and  Hari  Nagarajan.  2010.  “Law 
Reform and Women’s Access to Capital: Evidence 
from  India’s  Hindu  Succession  Act.”  Policy  Re-
search  Working  Paper  Series  5338,  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Dinkelman, Taryn. 2010. “The Effects of Rural Elec-
triﬁ cation  on  Employment:  New  Evidence  from 
South Africa.” Working Paper 272, Woodrow Wil-
son School of Public and International Affairs, Re-
search Program in Development Studies, Prince-
ton University, Princeton, NJ.

Ensor,  Tim,  Mardiati  Nadjib,  Zahid  Quayyum, 
and  Amila  Megraini.  2008.  “Public  Funding  for 
Community-Based Skilled Delivery Care in Indo-
nesia: To What Extent Are the Poor Beneﬁ ting?” Eu-
ropean Journal of Health Economics 9 (4): 385–92.

Esteve-Volart, Berta, and Manuel F. Bagues. 2010. “Are 
Women  Pawns  in  the  Political  Game?  Evidence 
from  Elections  to  the  Spanish  Senate.”  Working 
Paper  Series  200–30,  Fundación  de  Estudios  de 
Economía Aplicada, Madrid.

Finkelhor,  David.  2009.  “The  Prevention  of  Child-
hood  Sexual  Abuse.”  Future  of  Children  19  (2): 
169–94.

Fisas, Vincenc. 2008. “Annuario 2008 de Procesos de 

Paz.” Icaria Editorial, Barcelona.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization).  2003. 
“Revisiting the ‘Magic Box’. ” Case Studies in Local 
Appropiation  of  Information  and  Communica-
tion Technologies, FAO, Rome.

———.  2011.  “The  State  of  Food  and  Agriculture 
2010–11. Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gen-
der Gap for Development.” FAO, Rome.

Foshee, Vangie, A., Karl E. Bauman, Ximena B. Arri-
aga, Russell W. Helms, Gary G. Koch, and George F. 
Linder.  1998.  “An  Evaluation  of  Safe  Dates,  an 
Adolescent Dating Violence Prevention Program.” 
American Journal of Public Health 88 (1): 45–50.

Foshee, Vangie A., Karl E. Bauman, Susan T. Ennett, 
George  F.  Linder,  Thas  Beneﬁ eld,  and  Chirayath 
Suchindran.  2004. “Assessing  the  Long-Term  Ef-

fects of the Safe Dates Program and a Booster in 
Preventing and Reducing Adolescent Dating Vio-
lence Victimization  and  Perpetration.”  American 
Journal of Public Health 94 (4): 619–24.

Foshee,  Vangie  A.,  Karl  E.  Bauman,  Susan  T.  En-
nett,  Chirayath  Suchindran,  Thas  Beneﬁ eld,  and 
George F. Linder. 2005. “Assessing the Effect of the 
Dating Violence Program ‘Safe Dates’ using Ran-
dom  Coefﬁ cient  Regression  Modeling.”  Preven-
tion Science 6: 245–58.

Foshee, Vangie A., Karl E. Bauman, W. F. Greene, Gary 
G. Koch, George F. Linder, and James E. MacDou-
gall. 2000. “The Safe Dates Program: 1-Year Fol-
low Up Results.” American Journal of Public Health 
90 (10): 1619–22.

Foster, Vivien,  and  Cecilia  Briceño-Garmendia,  eds. 
2011. Africa’s Infrastructure: A Time for Transfor-
mation.  Washington,  DC:  Agence  Francaise  de 
Développement and World Bank. 

Frisancho, Verónica, Dean S. Karlan, and Martín Val-
divia.  2008. “Business  Training  for  Microﬁ nance 
Clients: How It Matters and for Whom?” Work-
ing Paper 2008–11, Poverty and Economic Policy 
(PEP), Research Network, Lima, Peru.

Gajigo,  Ousman,  and  Mary  Hallward-Driemeier. 
2011.  “Constraints  and  Opportunities  for  New 
Entrepreneurs  in Africa.” World  Bank, Washing-
ton, DC. Processed.

Galasso,  Emanuela,  Martin  Ravallion,  and  Agustin 
Salvia. 2001. “Assisting the Transition from Work-
fare to Work: A Randomized Experiment.” Policy 
Research Working Paper Series 2738, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Galiani,  Sebastian,  Paul  Gertler,  and  Ernesto  Schar-
grodsky. 2005. “Water for Life: The Impact of the 
Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortal-
ity.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 83–120.
Gilliam, Melissa L. 2010. “Interventions for Prevent-
ing Unintended Pregnancies among Adolescents.” 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 115 (1): 171–2.

Gornick, Janet C., and Ariane Hegewisch. 2010. “The 
Impact of ‘Family Friendly Policies’ on Women’s 
Employment  Outcomes  and  on  the  Costs  and 
Beneﬁ ts of Doing Business.” World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC. Processed.

Green, Lawrence, Harold C. Gustafson, William Grif-
ﬁ ths,  and  David  Y.  Raukey.  1972.  “The  Dacca 
Family  Planning  Experiment:  A  Comparative 
Evaluation of Programs Directed at Males and at 
Females.” University of California, Berkeley, CA.

Grogan, Louise, and Asha Sadanand. 2011. “Electri-
ﬁ cation and Labour Supply in Poor Households.” 
University  of  Guelph,  Economics  Department, 
Guelph, Ontario. Processed.

Grown, Caren, and Imraan Valodia, eds. 2010. Taxa-
tion and Gender Equity: A Comparative Analysis of 
Direct and Indirect Taxes in Developing and Devel-
oped Countries. London: Routledge. 

326 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

GSMA Development Fund. 2010. Women and Mobile: 
A Global Opportunity: A Study on the Mobile Phone 
Gender Gap in Low and Middle Income Countries. 
London: GSMA and the Cherie Blair Foundation 
for Women.

Guedes,  Alessandra,  Sarah  Bott,  and  Yvette  Cuca. 
2002.  “Integrating  Systematic  Screening 
for 
Gender-based Violence  into  Sexual  and  Reprod-
uctive Health Services: Results of a Baseline Study 
by the International Planned Parenthood Federa-
tion, Western Hemisphere Region.” International 
Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics 78: S57–63.

Hallward-Driemeier,  Mary.  2011.  “Improving  the 
Legal  Investment  Climate  for  Women  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Havnes,  Tarjei,  and  Magne  Mogstad.  Forthcom-
ing. “Money  for  Nothing?  Universal  Child  Care 
and  Maternal  Employment.”  Journal  of  Public 
 Economics.

Hjort,  Jonas,  Michael  Kremer,  Isaac  Mbiti,  and 
Edward  Miguel.  2010.  “Vocational  Education 
Vouchers and Labor Market Returns: A Random-
ized  Evaluation  among  Kenyan  Youth.”  Harvard 
University  and  Southern  Methodist  University, 
Berkeley, CA. Processed.

Holt, Victoria, Mary A. Kernic, Marsha E. Wolf, and 
Frederick P. Rivara. 2003. “Do Protection Orders 
Affect the Likelihood of Future Partner Violence 
and Injury?” American Journal of Preventive Medi-
cine 24 (1): 16–21.

Holzer, Harry J., and David Neumark. 2000. “Assess-
ing Afﬁ rmative Action.” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 38 (3): 483–568.

Ilahi, Nadeem, and Franque Grimard. 2000. “Public 
Infrastructure  and  Private  Costs:  Water  Supply 
and  Time  Allocation  of  Women  in  Rural  Paki-
stan.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 
49 (1): 45–75.

Iyer, Lakshmi, Anandi Mani, Prachi Mishra, and Pe-
tia Topalova. 2010. “Political Representation and 
Crime:  Evidence  from  India’s  Panchayati  Raj.” 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Washington,  DC. 
Processed.

Jacoby, Hanan G., and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Cross-
ing  Boundaries:  Gender,  Caste,  and  Schooling 
in Rural Pakistan.” Policy Research Working Paper 
 Series 5710, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Jensen, Robert. 2010a. “Economic Opportunities and 
Gender  Differences  in  Human  Capital:  Experi-
mental Evidence for India.” Working Paper Series 
16021,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
Cambridge, MA.

———. 2010b. “The (Perceived) Returns to Educa-
tion  and  the  Demand  for  Schooling.”  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 125 (2): 515–48.

Jewkes,  Rachel,  Mzikazi  Nduna,  Jonathan  Levin, 
Nwabisa Jama, Kristin Dunkle, Adrian Puren, and 
Nata  Duwury.  2008. “Impact  of  Stepping  Stones 

on Incidence of HIV and HSV-2 and Sexual Be-
haviour in Rural South Africa: A Cluster Random-
ized Controlled Trial.” British Medical Journal 337: 
383–98.

Jubb,  Nadine,  and  Wânia  Pasinato  Izumino.  2003. 
“Women  and  Policing  in  Latin  America:  A  Re-
vised Background Paper.” Paper presented at the 
Meeting  of  the  Latin American  Studies Associa-
tion. Dallas, March 27.

Khandker,  Shahidur  R.,  Zaid  Bakht,  and  Gayatri 
Koolwal.  2006.  “The  Poverty  Impact  of  Rural 
Roads:  Evidence  from  Bangladesh.”  Policy  Re-
search  Working  Paper  Series  3875,  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Köhlin,  Gunnar,  Subhrendu  K.  Pattanayak,  Erin  O. 
Sills,  and  Christopher  Wilfong.  2011.  “Energy, 
Gender  and  Development:  Welfare  Implications 
of  Interventions  and  Future  Options.”  Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2012.

Komives,  Kristin,  Vivien  Foster,  Jonathan  Halpern, 
Quentin Wodon, and Roohi Abdullah. 2005. “Wa-
ter,  Electricity  and  the  Poor: Who  Beneﬁ ts  from 
Utility Subsidies?” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Koolwal, Gayatri, and Dominique van de Walle. 2010. 
“Access to Water, Women’s Work and Child Out-
comes.”  Policy  Research  Working  Paper  Series 
5302, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kremer,  Michael,  Edward  Miguel,  and  Rebecca 
Thornton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.” Review of 
Economics and Statistics 91 (3): 437–56.

Krook, Mona Lena. 2009. “The Diffusion of Electoral 
Reform:  Gender  Quotas  in  Global  Perspective.” 
Paper presented at the European Consortium for 
Political Research, Lisbon, April 14.

Kumar, Neha, and Agnes R. Quisumbing. 2010. “Pol-
icy Reform towards Gender Equality in Ethiopia: 
Little  by  Little  the  Egg  Begins  to  Walk.”  Insti-
tute  for  Food  Policy  Research,  Washington,  DC. 
Processed.

La  Ferrara,  Eliana,  Alberto  Chong,  and  Suzanne 
Duryea. 2008. “Soap Operas and Fertility: Evidence 
from  Brazil.”  Working  Paper  Series  633,  Inter-
American Development Bank, Washington, DC.

Larraín, Soledad. 1999. “Curbing Domestic Violence: 
Two Decades of Actions.” In  Too Close to Home: 
Domestic Violence in the Americas, ed. Andrew R. 
Morrison  and  María  Loreto  Biehl.  Washington, 
DC: Inter-American Development Bank.

Leonard, Jonathan S. 1989. “Women and Afﬁ rmative 
Action.”  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  3  (1): 
61–75.

Lim, Stephen S., Lalit Dandona, Joseph A. Hoisington, 
Spencer  L.  James,  Margaret  C.  Hogan,  and  Em-
manuela Gakidou. 2010. “India’s Janani Suraksha 
Yojana, A Conditional Cash Transfer Programme 
to Increase Births in Health Facilities: An Impact 
Evaluation.” Lancet 375 (9730): 2009–23.

 

Public action for gender equality 

327

Lindert, Kathy, Anja Linder, Jason Hobbs, and Béné-
dicte  de  la  Brière.  2007. “The  Nuts  and  Bolts  of 
Brazil’s  Bolsa  Família  Program:  Implementing 
Conditional  Cash  Transfers  in  a  Decentralized 
Context.” Social Protection Discussion Paper Se-
ries 0709, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Logan, T. K., and Robert T. Walker. 2010. “Civil Pro-
tective Order Effectiveness: Justice or Just a Piece 
of Paper?” Violence and Victims 25 (3): 332–48.

Martinez, Sebastian, and others. 2011. “Hard Skills or 
Soft Skills.” Powerpoint presentation. World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Massé, René. 2003. Energy, Poverty, and Gender: Im-
pacts of Rural Electriﬁ cation on Poverty and Gender 
in Sri Lanka. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Matsa, David A., and Amalia R. Miller. 2011. “A Fe-
male  Style  in  Corporate  Leadership?  Evidence 
from  Quotas.”  Northwestern  University,  Evans-
ton, IL; and University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
VA. Processed.

———.  Forthcoming. “Chipping Away  at  the  Glass 
Ceiling:  Gender  Spillovers  in  Corporate  Lead-
ership.”  American  Economic  Review:  Papers  & 
Proceedings. 

McFarlane,  Judith,  Ann  Malecha,  Julia  Gist,  Kathy 
Watson,  Elizabeth  Batten,  Iva  Hall,  and  Sheila 
Smith.  2004.  “Protection  Orders  and  Intimate 
Partner  Violence:  An  18  Month  Study  of  Black, 
Hispanic,  and White Women.”  American  Journal 
of Public Health 94 (4): 613–8.

McKinsey  &  Company  Inc.  2007.  “Women  Mat-
ter.  Gender  Diversity,  A  Corporate  Performance 
Driver.” McKinsey & Company Inc., London.

Medrano, Patricia. 2009. “Public Day Care and Female 
Labor Force Participation: Evidence from Chile.” 
Department of Economics, Working Paper Series 
306, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile.

Meinzen-Dick, Ruth, Agnes Quisumbing, Julia Behr-
man,  Patricia  Biermayr-Jenzano,  Vicki  Wilde, 
Marco Noordeloos, Catherine Ragasa, and Nienke 
Beintema.  2010.  “Engendering  Agricultural  Re-
search.”  Discussion  Paper  Series  00973,  Interna-
tional  Food  Policy  Research  Institute,  Washing-
ton, DC.

Mikton, Christopher, and Alexander Butchart. 2009. 
“Child  Maltreatment  Prevention:  A  Systematic 
Review of Reviews.” Bulletin of the World Health 
Organization 87 (5): 353–56

Morrison,  Andrew,  Mary  Ellsberg,  and  Sarah  Bott. 
2007.  “Addressing  Gender-Based  Violence:  A 
Critical Review of Interventions.” World Bank Re-
search Observer 22 (1): 25–51.

Natarajan, Mangai. 2005. “Status of Women Police in 
Asia: An Agenda for Future Research.” Journal for 
Women and Policing 17: 45–47.

Nguyen, Trang. 2008. “Information, Role Models and 
Perceived Returns to Education: Experimental Ev-

idence from Madagascar.” Working Paper, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Ñopo,  Hugo,  Miguel  Robles,  and  Jaime  Saavedra. 
2007. “Occupational  Training  to  Reduce  Gender 
Segretation:  The  Impacts  of  ProJoven.”  Research 
Department  Working  Paper  Series  623,  Inter-
American Development Bank, Washington, DC.

Paes  de  Barros,  Ricardo,  Pedro  Olinto,  Mirela  De 
Carvalho,  Trine  Lunde,  Norbert  Schady,  Samuel 
Santos, and Andrezza Rosalem. 2010. “Impact of 
Free Childcare on Women’s Labor Market Behav-
ior:  Evidence  from  Low-Income  Neighborhoods 
in Rio de Janeiro.” Paper presented at the World 
Bank’s Gender Action Plan (GAP) Workshop, Re-
gional Study on Gender Issues in LAC, Washing-
ton, DC, June 14.

Pande,  Rohini,  and  Deanna  Ford.  2011.  “Gender 
Quota  and  Female  Leadership.”  Background  pa-
per for the WDR 2012.

Parenzee, Penny. 2001. “While Women Wait . . . Moni-
toring  the  Domestic Violence Act.”  Nedbank  ISS 
Crime Index 5 (3): 10–13.

Pathmanathan, Indra, Jerker Liljestrand, Jo M. Mar-
tins,  Lalini  C.  Rajapaksa,  Craig  Lissner,  Amalia 
de  Silva,  Swarna  Selvaraju,  and  Prabha  Joginder 
Singh. 2003. “Investing in Maternal Health Learn-
ing  from  Malaysia  and  Sri  Lanka.”  World  Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Prata,  Ndola,  Paige  Passano,  Amita  Sreenivas,  and 
Caitlin Elisabeth Gerdts. 2010. “Maternal Mortal-
ity in Developing Countries: Challenges in Scal-
ing-up Priority Interventions.” Women’s Health 6 
(2): 311–27.

Rama,  Martin.  2002.  “The  Gender  Implications  of 
Public Sector Downsizing: The Reform Program 
of Vietnam.” World Bank Research Observer 17 (2): 
167–89.

Rasul, Imran. 2008. “Household Bargaining over Fer-
tility: Theory and Evidence from Malaysia.” Jour-
nal of Development Economics 86 (2): 215–41.

Rawlings, Laura B., and Gloria M. Rubio. 2003. “Eval-
uating  the  Impact  of  Conditional  Cash  Transfer 
Programs:  Lessons  from  Latin  America.”  Policy 
Research Working Paper Series 3119, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Revenga, Ana, Michelle Riboud, and Hong Tan. 1994. 
“The Impact of Mexico’s Retraining Program on 
Employment  and  Wages.”  World  Bank  Economic 
Review 8 (2): 247–77.

Rodríguez, Jorge M., Edgar Muñoz, Andres Fandiño-
Losada, and María I. Gutiérrez. 2006. “Evaluación 
de la Estrategia de Comunicación ‘Mejor Hable-
mos’  para  Promover  la  Convivencia  Paciﬁ ca  en 
Cali,  1996-2000.”  Revista  de  Salud  Pública  8  (3): 
168–84.

Rogers,  Everett  M.,  Peter  W.  Vaughan,  Ramadhan 
M. A. Swalehe, Nagesh Rao, Peer Svenkerud, and 

328 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Suruchi Sood. 1999. “Effects of an Entertainment-
Education Radio Soap Opera on Family Planning 
Behavior in Tanzania.” Studies in Family Planning 
30 (3): 193–211.

Roy,  Sanchari.  2011. “Empowering  Women:  Inheri -
tance Rights and Female Education in India.” Uni-
versity of Warwick, Warwick, U.K.  Processed.

Rudman,  Laurie  A.,  and  Kimberly  Fairchild.  2004. 
“Reactions  to  Counterstereotypic  Behavior:  The 
Role of Backlash in Cultural Stereotype Mainte-
nance.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
87 (2): 157–76.

Schady,  Norbert,  and  Maria  Caridad  Araujo.  2006. 
“Cash Transfers, Conditions, School Enrollment, 
and  Child  Work:  Evidence  from  a  Randomized 
Experiment in Ecuador.” Policy Research Working 
Paper Series 3930, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Schlosser,  Analía.  2007.  “Public  Preschool  and  the 
Labor Supply of Arab Mothers: Evidence from a 
Natural  Experiment.”  Department  of  Econom-
ics,  Hebrew  University  of  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem. 
 Processed.

SEWA  (Self-Employed Women’s Association) Acad-
emy. 2007. “Taking Care of Our Children: Ensur-
ing  Long  Term  Impact  (Balwadi  Study).”  SEWA 
Academy Research Unit, Ahmedabad, India.

Spitzberg, Brian H. 2002. “The Tactical Topography 
of  Stalking  Victimization  and  Management.” 
Trauma, Violence and Abuse 3 (4): 261–88.

Ssewanyana, Sarah, Lawrence Bategeka, Madina Gu-
loba,  and  Julius  Kiiza.  2010.  “Gender  Equality 
and Taxation in Uganda.” In Taxation and Gender 
Equality:  A  Comparative  Analysis  of  Direct  and 
Indirect Taxes in Developing and Developed Coun-
tries, ed. Caren Grown and Imraan Valodia. Lon-
don and New York: Routledge.

Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2006. “Bargain-
ing in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce Laws and 
Family  Distress.”  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics 
121 (1): 267–88.

Sumner, Cate, Matthew Zurstrassen, and Leisha Lister. 
2011. “Increasing Access to Justice for Women, the 
Poor and Those Living in Remote Areas: An Indo-
nesian  Case  Study.”  Justice  for  the  Poor  Brieﬁ ng 
Note 6(2), World Bank, Washington, DC.

Swanson,  Burton  E.,  and  Riikka  Rajalahti.  2010. 
“Strengthening  Agricultural  Extension  and  Ad-
visory  Systems:  Procedures  for  Assessing,  Trans-
forming and Evaluating Extension Systems.” Agri-
culture and Rural Development Discussion Paper 
Series 45, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Tadesse, Dagnew, Assefa Desta, Aberra Geyid, Wolde-
mariam  Girma,  Solomon  Fisseha,  and  Oliver 
Schmoll.  2010. “Rapid  Assessment  of  Drinking-
Water Quality in the Federal Democratic Republic 
of Ethiopia: Country Report of the Pilot Project 
Implementation  2004–2005.”  World  Health  Or-

ganization  and  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund, 
Geneva.

Terefe, Almas, and Charles P. Larson. 1993. “Modern 
Contraception  Use  in  Ethiopia:  Does  Involving 
Husbands Make a Difference?” American Journal 
of Public Health 83 (11): 1567–71.

Todd,  Petra  E.  2010. “Effectiveness  of  Interventions 
Aimed at Improving Women’s Employability and 
Quality of Work: A Critical Review.” University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Processed.

UN (United Nations). 2011. The Millennium Devel-
opment Goal Report, Addendum 2, Goal 5: Improve 
Maternal Health. New York: UN.

UNIFEM  (United  Nations  Development  Fund  for 
Women). 2010. “Women’s Participation in Peace 
Negotiations: Connections Between Presence and 
Inﬂ uence.” UNIFEM, Washington, DC.

Usdin, Shereen, Esla Scheepers, Susan Goldstein, and 
Garth Japhet. 2005. “Achieving Social Change on 
Gender-Based Violence: A Report on the Impact 
Evaluation of Soul City’s Fourth Series.” Social Sci-
ence & Medicine 61 (11): 2434–45.

Waddington,  Hugh,  Birte  Snilstveit,  Howard White, 
and Lorna Fewtrell. 2009. “Water, Sanitation and 
Hygiene  Interventions  to  Combat  Childhood 
Diarrhoea in Developing Countries.” International 
Initiative for Impact Evaluation 31E, Synthetic Re-
view, New Delhi, London, and Washington, DC.

Wang, C. E., L. S. Vittinghoff, and Z. M. Rong. 1996. 
“Effects of Family Planning with Husband Partici-
pation on Pregnancy and Induced Abortion.” Pa-
per presented at the Annual Meeting of the Amer-
ican Public Health Association. New York, NY,

Warraich,  Sohail.  2010.  “Shirkat  Gah  Women’s  Re-
source Centre, Lahore (Pakistan). Legal Conscious-
ness Training and Experience of Trainings of Mar-
riage Registrars.” Background note for Progress of 
the World’s Women 2011–2012, New York. 

WHO (World Health Organization), UNICEF  (United 
Nations  Children’s  Fund),  UNFPA   (United  Na-
tions  Population  Fund),  and  World  Bank.  2010. 
Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 to 2008. Wash-
ington,  DC,  and  New  York:  WHO,  UNICEF, 
 UNFPA, and World Bank.

Witter,  Sophie.  2011.  “Demand-Side  Financing  for 
Strengthening Delivery of Sexual and Reproduc-
tive Health Services: An Evidence Synthesis Paper.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Wolfe,  David  A.,  Claire  Crooks,  Peter  Jaffe,  Debbie 
Chiodo, Ray Hughes, Wendy Ellis, Larry Stitt, and 
Allan  Donner.  2009.  “A  School-Based  Program 
to Prevent Adolescent Dating Violence: A Cluster 
Randomized Trial.” Archives of Pediatrics & Ado-
lescent Medicine 163 (8): 692–99.

Wolfe,  David  A.,  Christine  Wekerle,  Katreena  Scott, 
Anna-Lee Straatman, Carolyn Grasley, and Debo-
rah Reitzel-Jaffe. 2003. “Dating Violence Preven-

 

Public action for gender equality 

329

tion  with  At-risk Youth:  A  Controlled  Outcome 
Evaluation.”  Journal  of  Consulting  and  Clinical 
Psychology 71 (2): 279–91.

World  Bank.  2003a.  Vietnam  Development  Report 

2004: Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———.  2003b.  World  Development  Report  2004: 
Making Services Work for Poor People. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———.  2004.  Senegal  Pilot  Female  Literacy  Project. 
ICRR 27399. Vol 1. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———.  2005a.  Engendering  Information  and  Com-
munication Technologies: Ensuring Gender Equal-
ity  in  ICT  for  Development.  Washington,  DC: 
World Bank.

———.  2005b.  Making  Rural  Roads  Work  for  Both 
Men  and  Women:  Promising  Approaches  to  En-
gendering  Development.  Washington,  DC:  World 
Bank.

———.  2006.  World  Development  Report  2007:  De-
velopment and the Next Generation. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———. 2011. World Development Report 2011: Con-
ﬂ ict, Security and Development. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

Zwane,  Alix  Peterson,  Jonathan  Zinman,  Eric  Van 
Dusen,  William  Pariente,  Clair  Null,  Edward 
Miguel, Michael Kremer, Dean S. Karlan, Richard 
Hornbeck,  Xavier  Giné,  Esther  Duﬂ o,  Florencia 
Devoto, Bruno Crepon, and Abhijit Vinayak Ba-
nerjee. 2011. “Being Surveyed Can Change Later 
Behavior and Related Parameter Estimates.” Pro-
ceedings of the National Academies of Sciences of the 
United States (PNAS) 108 (5): 1821–26.

8CHAPTER

The political economy 
of gender reform

Progress toward gender equality entails 

shifts toward a new equilibrium where 
women  have  access  to  more  endow-
ments, more economic opportunities, 
and  more  ways  to  exercise  their  agency—and 
where this new arrangement becomes the domi-
nant order. Schooling for girls and women’s suf-
frage are widely accepted in most countries to-
day, but that once was not so. The changes were 
shaped  by  interactions  between  households, 
markets, formal institutions, and informal insti-
tutions. And each of these interactions affected 
markets, formal institutions, and informal insti-
tutions in a continuous feedback loop.

Chapter  7  discussed  policy  interventions  to 
correct speciﬁ c market failures, and institutional 
or  normative  constraints  that  underlie  gen-
der gaps. But whether these policies are put in 
place or not, and whether they will work or not, 
depends also on the political economy context. 
A  successful  policy  in  one  country  may  not  
necessarily transfer to another. The context de-
termines  how  the  ﬁ ndings  from  one  country 
are relevant or replicable in another.1 

So, policy design and implementation must 
be attuned to the societal actors and the policy 
environment.  Successful  interventions  and  les-
sons  from  one  country  must  be  adapted  and 
attuned to the social circumstances of another. 
Following our conceptual framework, this chap-
ter describes the role of societal actors and their 
interventions in:
•  Informal 

institutions—through  collective 

action

•  Markets—through ﬁ rm behavior 

•  Formal  institutions—through  state  actions 
and structures that evaluate, advocate, design, 
implement, or enforce gender equality poli-
cies and laws (ﬁ gure 8.1)

Collective  action  through  social  networks 
and civil society groups has been a formidable 
force  in  advancing  gender  equality.  Policy  re-
forms arise from a political process where state 
and nonstate societal actors vie to shape their en-
vironment. Their interests and spheres of inﬂ u-
ence determine the power dynamics that fashion 
policy  reform  in  relation  to  the  trade-offs  and 
costs in the short and long term. Policies require 
trade-offs in allocating resources to competing 
priorities  within  given  budget  constraints  and 
ﬁ nancial  and  political  costs.  For  instance,  im-
proving  maternal  care  and  delivery  in  remote 
areas may conﬂ ict with expanding hospital ser-
vices for the broader population. Opposition to 
any given reform may come from societal actors 
who do not want (or cannot afford) to bear the 
related costs or prefer a competing agenda.

Given multiple and diverging societal actors, 
coalitions are indispensable for building support 
and countering resistance from inﬂ uential inter-
est groups. After the demise of General Augusto 
Pinochet’s regime, centrist and center-left gov-
ernments in Chile failed for nearly 15 years to 
legalize  divorce,  despite  large  popular  support. 
The Catholic Church was among the most vocal 
opponents of liberalizing family laws. Eighteen 
bills  were  rejected  before  Congress,  with  the 
support of a large coalition of political parties, 
approved a divorce law in 2004.

Markets too have a role to play: ﬁ rms—big 
and  small—have  articulated  a  business  case 

The political economy of gender reform

331

FIGURE 8.1   Social actors and their interactions shape the role of markets, formal and informal 

institutions in advancing gender equality 

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S
I N F O R M A L  
  n e t w o r k s
S o c i a l
i v e
a n d   c o l
a c t

l e c t
i o n

E N D E R EQUALITY

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

M A

S

R

T
E
K
F ir m s

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS
Gender machineries and
other state agencies

R

O

G

WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

for  gender  equality.  In  a  fast-changing  global 
economy the demand for skills has swelled, so 
ﬁ rms have sought to expand their talent pool. 
Diverse opinions may enrich decision making 
and  stimulate  ingenuity.  And  gender  equality 
has  become  a  desirable  trait  that  customers 
and  investors  look  for.  Corporate  social  re-
sponsibility is an avenue for ﬁ rms to enhance 
competitiveness  by  differentiating  products 
and capturing the loyalty of women’s growing 
market share. 

Attracting  and  retaining  female  talent  and 
customer  loyalty  requires  an  organizational 
shift.  Corporate  culture  must  accommodate 
the many demands of work and home for men 
and  women.  Career  mentoring  and  advance-
ment are also central in realizing the beneﬁ ts of 
gender  diversity.  Much  remains  to  be  done  in 
these domains. In the United States, for exam-
ple,  even  though  half  of  law  school  graduates 
are women and 90 percent of law ﬁ rms have a 
diversity program, only 15 percent of partners 

in  law  ﬁ rms—those  who  hold  an  ownership 
interest—are women.2

Finally,  state  action  is  at  the  epicenter  of 
gender-progressive  policy  making  and  imple-
mentation.  The  social  contract  determines  the 
form, timing, and legitimacy of state regulation 
and intervention in markets, formal institutions, 
and  social  norms.  In  Scandinavian  countries, 
the state explicitly pursues policies to strengthen 
women’s  position  in  society,  in  what  might  be 
called a “gender contract.” In the Philippines, the 
2009 “Magna Carta of Women” afﬁ rms the role 
of  the  state  to  “provide  the  necessary  mecha-
nisms to enforce and guarantee the realization 
of women’s rights as well as adopt and under-
take steps to include temporary special measures 
which  encompass  a  wide  variety  of  legislative, 
executive,  administrative  and  other  regulatory 
instruments, policies and practices aimed at ac-
celerating the equal participation of women in 
the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or 
any other ﬁ eld.”3

332 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 8.1   Georgia—Evolving gender roles in a new society

Georgia’s independence in 1991 led to a deep economic downturn. Households 
had to fi nd novel ways to earn incomes. Adapting to the new political and eco-
nomic realities proved transformative for gender roles.

Widespread  closures  of  fi rms  and  industries  after  the  dissolution  of  the 
Soviet  Union  left  thousands  in  Georgia  unemployed.  Many  women  became 
breadwinners and sole providers for their households. They realized long before 
men  that  there  was  no  return  to  secure  state  employment,  and  they  proved 
more fl exible in adjusting to occupational change. They often took jobs below 
their qualifi cations, opting to be unskilled workers in informal activities such as 
street  vendors,  running  shuttle  services  to  Turkey,  sitting  babies,  or  cleaning 
houses. Petty trade remains the largest arena of self-employment for women, 
who were ready to “downgrade” their work to provide for their families, while 
their husbands and other men remained at home and refused to take jobs that 
did not match their status and educational training.

Horizontal gender segregation of employment also contributed to women’s 
greater economic independence. The “female sectors”—teachers, nurses, and 
doctors—remained largely unperturbed, while traditionally male occupations 
were less in demand. In 2007, women made up 89 percent of university aca-
demic staff  and 69 percent of medical doctors. 

The absence of jobs led many men and women to migrate. Their remittances 
reach 1 in 10 people in Georgia, and those from female migrants are on average 
$40 higher than remittances from male migrants.

The rise of female involvement in formal and informal economic activities 
has  been  paired  with  a  generational  shift  in  values.  Today,  men  have  grown 
more involved in family life, child care, and domestic work. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that more men are taking parental leave from work. These changes in 
gender roles and norms were fueled not by policy interventions but by a drastic 
deterioration in the economic environment that challenged the traditional dis-
tribution of labor.

Source: Sumbadze 2011.

Politicians  and  policy  makers  negotiate  the 
design,  approval,  and  implementation  of  state 
policies.  “Gender  machineries”  are  specialized 
state  structures  to  deliver  on  speciﬁ c  gender 
equality  goals.  They  can  involve  institutions 
that monitor the social conditions of men and 
women,  generate  knowledge,  provide  opera-
tional  support  for  gender  reforms,  or  ensure 
their enforcement. Other state structures—such 
as the justice system—are also critical as agents 
of social change. 

Cutting across these actors, economic growth, 
technological development, globalization, natu-
ral disasters, and postconﬂ ict reconstruction all 
spur waves of policy change as households adapt 
to new realities (box 8.1). Social actors can seize 
these  emerging  windows  of  opportunities  to 
catalyze and realize gains in gender equality.

The  path  of  reform  also  matters.  Govern-
ments often follow society’s cues for reform. Pol-
icy change captures the collective aspirations and 

will of social actors, opening new opportunities. 
When policy formulation and implementation 
follow cues from ongoing shifts in markets and 
social  norms,  convergence  and  alignment  can 
fuel sustainable change. But such “incremental” 
reforms  may  not  be  enough  to  overcome  the 
path dependence and institutional rigidities that 
result in persistent gender inequality. Bold gov-
ernment  action  with “transformative”  reforms 
can  alter  social  dynamics  and  move  countries 
and  societies  to  a  more  equitable  equilibrium. 
In  these  circumstances,  policy  implementation 
and  enforcement  must  follow  through  to  pro-
duce sustainable behavioral changes. 

Women  and  men  are  partners  in  realizing 
gender  equality.  Effective  government  action 
demands  the  building  of  broad-based  coali-
tions with local, national, and international ac-
tors to advocate for and produce reform. It also 
demands  adopting  a  cross-cutting  gender  lens 
to  assess  outcomes  and  implications,  building 
sound institutional structures for implementa-
tion  and  enforcement,  seizing  windows  of  op-
portunity  to  engender  change,  and  balancing 
the pace of change with the risk of backlash. 

INFORMAL INSTITUTIONS—SOCIAL 
NETWORKS AS AGENTS OF CHANGE

Societal actors have a direct hand in shaping the 
policy  and  institutional  environment—by  ad-
vocating  policies,  designing  interventions,  and 
implementing  programs.  Individuals  can  in-
ﬂ uence government policy through voting and 
public opinion. 

Individuals  can  also  organize  collectively 
into social networks and civil society groups to 
realize  common  political  or  social  goals.  Col-
lective agency can shape community and indi-
vidual outcomes. And social organizations and 
cooperatives can pool risks and investments in 
community driven-development, microﬁ nance, 
child care, and other programs to realize bigger 
beneﬁ ts.  These  social  networks  and  organiza-
tions can also diffuse information, such as shar-
ing knowledge on technological innovations to 
enhance agricultural productivity.4 

Participation in social networks and groups 
can  build  capacity  and  serve  as  a  springboard 
for  collective  action  in  other  spheres,  such  as 
exercising political voice in local government. A 
social movement can grow as more supporters 

The political economy of gender reform

333

FIGURE 8.2   Social networks can engage public opinion, mobilize support, and inspire change

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S
I N F O R M A L  
  n e t w o r k s
S o c i a l
i v e
a n d   c o l
a c t

l e c t
i o n

E N D E R EQUALITY

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

R

O

G

WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

adopt its point of view. As coordination mecha-
nisms, groups can inspire individuals to take ac-
tion, transforming passive stakeholders into so-
cietal actors (ﬁ gure 8.2).5 Women workers have 
been more willing to challenge their employers 
and the state through such organizations as the 
Self  Employed  Women’s  Association  and  Ma-
hila Samakhya in India and Kormojibi Nari and 
Nijera Kori in Bangladesh.6 

Collective action: In numbers there 
is power
Over the past 250 years, women’s rights groups, 
political parties, trade unions, faith-based orga-
nizations,  state-sponsored  mass  organizations, 
and civil society groups have all championed the 
cause of gender equality. Women’s organizations 
have been central in standing against gender in-
equality and acting as a force for change in the 
international, national, and local arenas on mat-
ters such as reproductive rights, equal opportu-

nity labor legislation, and family law (box 8.2).7
Globalization  and  new  communication  tech-
nologies have created new opportunities to raise 
awareness, create networks, generate debate, and 
mobilize stakeholders against inequalities.

Reforms usually create winners and losers, so 
understanding the political realities and trade-
offs that shape the incentives for key stakehold-
ers  in  a  program  or  policy  is  vital  to  building 
coalitions and securing consensus. Society’s ac-
tors can drive policy reform, or they can block, 
neglect, or reverse it in accord with their inter-
ests  and  motives.  Shaping  their  relative  power 
are the resources they can allocate to defending 
(or  resisting)  policy  positions  and  the  impor-
tance,  or  salience,  they  attach  to  reform  out-
comes.  Their  visibility,  legitimacy,  constituen-
cies, social standing, social networks, and ability 
to access information channels determine their 
spheres of inﬂ uence and the efﬁ cacy of their ac-
tions within them. 

334 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 8.2   Feminism in perspective

Women’s  movements  have  long  been  a  driving  force  for  social 
change. They have given voice to the cause of gender equality, cre-
ating a space for public debate and setting the stage for change 
and reform. 

Women mobilize as political actors and social agents for a wide 
variety  of  causes—social,  political,  economic,  environmental.  For 
example, the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo in Argentina—mothers 
demanding the safe return of their children who disappeared dur-
ing the military dictatorship—are organized around a nongender 
equality issue. 

Feminism (and the women’s movement associated with it) refers 
to  groups  organized  around  women’s  inequalities  and  disadvan-
tages deriving from their gender. The feminist movement is a politi-
cal movement concerned with changing social conditions. Aware-
ness of disadvantage and rejection of the prevalent social order is a 
central pillar of its politics. The feminist movement is made up of 
several  groups  and  strands  with  a  common  concern—women’s 
position  in  society—but  with  diff erent  priorities,  identities,  and 
strategies for action. So as a movement, it does not contain a set of 
fi xed common objectives, continuity, unity, and coordination—as 
some other social movements do. 

Feminism as a social movement began in the early 1920s—the 
“fi rst  wave”  in  the  United  States  and  Europe—seeking  to  reform 
specifi c  laws  perceived  as  holding  women  in  a  subordinate  posi-
tion. Focusing on suff rage, the right to own property, and access to 
the justice system, it engaged women politically, won legal recogni-
tion of women, and challenged legal barriers to gender equality. 

The second wave, radical feminism, recognized that legal equal-
ity was not enough to change women’s subordination in society. 
Organized  around  the  slogan,  “the  personal  is  political,”  a  new 
agenda  aimed  at  transforming  the  social  and  economic  status  of 
women. Focal areas included control over women’s own bodies—
particularly  reproduction—equal  pay  claims,  and  domestic  vio-

lence. The  emphasis  on  subordination  and  diff erence  was  articu-
lated around “intersectionality” and the interrelations among sex, 
race, and class oppression. 

The third wave, postfeminism, shifts attention from legal rights 
and  group  identity  to  emphasize  (and  act  on)  a  new  concept  of 
equality that disregards all fundamental diff erences between men 
and women. Rejecting all possible factors that unite women as a 
class or a group, as well as all homogenizing defi nitions and gener-
alizations, postfeminism focuses instead on cultural and individual 
rights.

Perspectives and points of public action have shifted over time, 
but the women’s movement has solidifi ed, nationally and interna-
tionally.  The  international,  or  global,  women’s  movement  can  be 
derived from the national organizations that came together around 
the 1975 declaration of the Decade of Women by the United Nations 
and its four international conferences—Mexico City (1975), Copen-
hagen (1980), Nairobi (1985), and Beijing (1995). These conferences 
were  the  fi rst  to  bring  together  women  from  developed  and  de-
veloping  countries,  creating  common  interests  and  strategies  for 
action the world over. 

The number of women’s international nongovernmental orga-
nizations (WINGOs) has swelled, with more than 300 new groups 
founded each year around the world. They espouse a broad variety 
of goals but share a commitment to advancing women’s concerns 
in  society.  Their  focus,  priorities,  and  means  of  action  have  also 
shifted from one decade to another, building on past successes and 
responding to new social realities. 

Two forces are at constant play: controversy and coalition. Coali-
tion  has  given  the  movement  strength  in  the  international  and 
national  sphere  when  it  has  managed  to  bring  women  together 
around a common topic. Controversy—as the recognition of diff er-
ences within the movement—gives the movement life.

Sources: Andreasen and others 1991; Antrobus 2004; Basu 1995; Hooks 2000; Marx Ferree and Hess 2000; Paxton and Hughes 2007; Whelehan 1995.

Political  economy  structures  and  dynamics 
can make the difference between a well-designed 
and sustainable intervention that mobilizes sup-
port and a failed initiative that alienates crucial 
constituencies.  For  instance,  redistributing  po-
litical power to women through parliamentary 
quotas may increase women’s voice but be con-

sidered a threat by castes, ethnic minorities, or 
religious interest groups that stand to lose some 
of their limited inﬂ uence (box 8.3).

Those who beneﬁ t from the status quo will 
likely resist changes that they perceive as dimin-
ishing their returns. They can increase the trans-
action costs for other stakeholders, making a re-

“

Ten years ago women were not involved; but women hold positions of authority now. 
People attend community meetings and women are very much involved. Ten years 
ago women were subject to men. Our level of development is enhanced by women’s 
participation.

Adult woman, Liberia

”

 

The political economy of gender reform 

335

form initiative less accessible or even regressive. 
When costs are perceived to be too high, poten-
tial losers may jeopardize the policy process or 
hinder  its  implementation.  For  instance,  some 
men feel threatened by policy change, whether 
in  their  economic  or  social  roles,  so  they  may 
lash out and look for ways to return to “the old 
ways.”  In  India,  the  response  by  some  men  to 
legislation to protect women’s status and well-
being  has  been  to  call  for  a  return  to  a  tradi-
tional equilibrium.8 The Protection of Women 
from  Domestic Violence Act  of  2005  has  been 
actively  fought  by  organizations  such  as “Save 
Indian  Family,”  while  the  Dowry  Prohibition 
Act of 1986 has been resisted by “Men against 
Dowry Act Misuse” organizations.9 

Even so, political activism and social organi-
zation have gone hand in hand with important 
social gains. In the political sphere, constitutional 
reform has been a focal concern of women’s re-
cent mobilization. Women’s organizations have 
sought  to  repeal  any  bias  in  civil  and  political 
rights (box 8.4). There is a positive and signiﬁ -
cant relationship between the global rise of the 
women’s  international  movement—measured 
by  the  number  of  women’s  organizations  and 
international  treaties  or  conventions  dedicated 
to women—and the achievement of milestones 
in women’s political participation in 151 coun-
tries.  Examples  include  attaining  female  suf-
frage, electing the ﬁ rst female parliamentarian, 
and  women  progressively  reaching  10,  20,  and 
30 percent of the seats in national legislatures.10 
Collective action has drawn “private life” into 
the  public  arena,  identifying  and  addressing 
gender  bias  in  statutory,  religious,  or  custom-

BOX 8.3    Competing interests—Caste, ethnic, and religious 

politics and gender

In India, a constitutional amendment to set aside 33 percent of parliamentary 
seats for women has been under discussion since 1996. Supported by many 
women’s groups, it has failed to pass. Why?

In India’s fragmented political landscape, small ethnic and caste-based par-
ties in the states are central in building coalitions to constitute a government. 
Some of these parties oppose the proposed amendment on the grounds that 
lower-caste men will be displaced by upper-caste women. They contend that 
the current version of the reservation bill does not provide special allotments 
to  lower-caste  women  (or  possibly  Muslim  women)  within  the  33  percent 
quota.  In  turn,  political  parties  and  women’s  organizations  that  support  the 
existing legislation reject a “quota within quota” system. The politics of gender 
and the politics of caste in this arena have been gridlocked ever since. 

In contrast, after the fall of Saddam Hussein the Iraqi Governing Council was 
constituted  to  ensure  adequate  representation  from  ethnic  and  religious 
groups—Shi’as,  Sunnis,  Kurds,  Turkomans,  and  Assyrian  Christians—leaving 
women’s  political  participation  in  the  transitional  government  largely  rele-
gated  in  importance.  U.S.  offi  cials  emphasized  that  there  were  “no  plans  for 
[female]  quotas.”  When  the  Iraqi  constitution  was  drafted,  however,  power-
sharing notions among ethnic and religious groups had been abandoned and 
replaced  by  provisions  on  decentralization,  federalism,  and  majoritarianism. 
The  voices  of  women  actors  and  women’s  groups,  by  contrast,  had  grown 
louder in favor of female parliamentary quotas. Article 47 established an expec-
tation of 25 percent female representation in the National Assembly. Later, the 
new electoral law established that one of the fi rst three candidates on the bal-
lot list must be a woman.

Sources: Krook and O’Brien 2010; Menon 2009; UNRISD 2005.

ary family law.11 It has also reduced the hold of 
social  norms  blocking  greater  gender  equality. 
During the debate in Cambodia leading to the 
2005 Law on Prevention of Domestic Violence 
and  Protection  of  Victims,  the  draft  law  was 
 denounced for being antagonistic to Khmer cul-

BOX 8.4   More women in public ofﬁ ce—The Namibian Women’s Manifesto 

Network 

The  Namibian  Women’s  Manifesto  Network, 
launched  in  1999  as  a  coalition  of  more  than  30 
groups, strives for greater women’s political repre-
sentation. In the 50/50 campaign, the main objec-
tive has been to promote party candidate lists with 
50 percent quotas for women, structured in “zebra” 
fashion, alternating men and women on the lists. 
The South West Africa People’s Organization (the 
majority  political  party)  placed  28  percent  of 
women candidates on the party list that year, and 

female  representation  in  the  National  Assembly 
jumped to 26 percent. 

Today,  Namibia  ranks  42nd  in  the  world  for 
women representatives in parliament. Nineteen of 
78  National  Assembly  members  are  women.  The 
Network  continues  to  promote  gender  parity  in 
politics. Its regional and local facilitators hold work-
shops across the country. It has also promoted the 
appointment  of  gender  focal  points  and  gender 
budgeting approaches to planning. 

Sources: Geisler 2004; Mensah-Williams 2010.

336 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 8.5    Differences among women about their right to 

vote—The case of Switzerland 

Swiss women gained the right to vote in federal elections and to run for politi-
cal offi  ce after a national referendum in 1971. Eleven women (5.5 percent) were 
even elected as members of parliament. But some women had been a major 
factor in blocking passage of those rights in an earlier referendum.  

The Federation of Swiss Women against Women’s Right to Vote, founded in 
1959, opposed women’s suff rage, arguing that women’s duties lie in the house-
hold.  German-speaking  cantons  abided  by  cultural  perceptions  of  women’s 
role  in  society  as  bound  to  Kinder,  Kirche,  und  Küche  (Children,  Church,  and 
Kitchen): Men operated in the public space, and women in the private sphere. 
“Look what female suff rage has done to other countries: Everywhere the 
so-called equality of women has resulted in women losing their natural privi-
leges and suff ering through having to compete with men on their own ground. 
A woman’s place is in the home, not in the political arena. To make political 
decisions, you must read newspapers, and a woman who does her housework 
and  looks  after  her  children  has  no  time  to  read  newspapers,”  said  Gertrud 
Haldimann, the president of the federation. 

The 1959 national referendum resulted in a resounding no. Sixty-seven per-
cent of voters opposed women voting. In the canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden, 
an overwhelming 95 percent opposed the extension of the franchise.

Source: The Spokesman-Review, October 25, 1959, p. 12.

ture. Parliamentarians criticized it for “provid-
ing women with too many freedoms and rights, 
which will cause them to be so happy with their 
freedom that they do not respect ancient Cam-
bodian  customs.  .  .  .  A  cake  cannot  be  bigger 
than the cake pan.”12 The Cambodia Committee 
of Women, a coalition of 32 nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs), persistently lobbied the 
government  and  the  Ministry  of Women’s Af-
fairs to secure the legislation’s passage. 

Women are a heterogeneous group
Women  differ  not  only  in  their  endowments 
and  access  to  opportunities  but  also  in  their 
values and ideology. They typically have differ-
ing  deﬁ nitions  of  sexuality,  family,  and  desir-
able state intervention.13 The interests of some 
women may be directly opposed to the interests 
of other women. Women in Switzerland stood 
against universal suffrage (box 8.5). Women in 
the United States are divided on issues of abor-
tion rights, maternity leave, and afﬁ rmative ac-
tion  policies.14  Some  women  ﬁ ght  to  prohibit 
the use of the veil in France—others stand for 
their right to wear it. While female genital cut-
ting  has  signiﬁ cant  physical  and  psychological 
consequences, the beliefs and traditions around 

it are so powerful that many African women are 
strong advocates for its continuance.15

Race,  religion,  sexuality,  ethnicity,  and  class 
identity coexist with gender (or “intersect” with 
gender,  where  their  interactions  create  speciﬁ c 
effects). As a result, different groups of women 
differ  in  their  needs,  experiences,  and  percep-
tions of social, economic, and political reality; in 
turn,  those  differences  inﬂ uence  their  political 
preferences and interpretation of policy options. 
In Brazil and the United Kingdom, black women 
complained that gender equality advocacy was 
blind to their particular needs.16 Other groups 
have established their own identity groups and 
identity  politics  to  make  their  speciﬁ c  claims 
heard (box 8.6). 

When these intersections are not recognized 
or are rendered invisible, they can stand between 
effective cooperation and advocacy—and in the 
way  of  realizing  common  goals  for  women’s 
well-being. The term “violence against women” 
emerged  in  the  global  arena  in  the  1970s,  but 
it  took  more  than  two  decades  for  the  Decla-
ration  on  the  Elimination  of  Violence  against 
Women, the ﬁ rst international statement in this 
area, to become a reality in 1993. The UN World 
Conferences  on Women  in  Mexico  (1975)  and 
Nairobi  (1985)  saw  little  progress  in  articulat-
ing  an  overarching  framework  to  ﬁ ght  gender 
violence.  Women’s  advocates  actively  disagreed 
over priorities and avenues for remediation. The 
global movement against gender-based violence 
reached a turning point only after it developed 
explicit  norms  to  acknowledge  differences  and 
promote  inclusiveness.  Consensus  on  a  frame-
work  for  dealing  with  gender-based  violence 
emerged through a commitment to incorporate 
marginalized  groups  and  institute  avenues  to 
voice dissent.17

Men as allies toward gender equality
The transition toward a more egalitarian society 
has required the contribution and commitment 
of  male  actors. As  heads  of  states  and  govern-
ment ministers, as leaders of religious and faith-
based institutions, as judges, as heads of armies, 
as employers and business managers, as village 
heads, and indeed as husbands and fathers, men 
have held and continue to hold signiﬁ cant power 
over  many  aspects  of  women’s  lives.  Men’s  at-
titudes and behaviors are crucial in the debate 
and in the design of gender-related policies.18

 

The political economy of gender reform 

337

BOX 8.6  Domestic workers in Brazil 

The organization of women domestic workers in Brazil challenges 
universalizing  notions  of  women.  Domestic  workers  constitute  7 
percent of the labor force, and black women make up 60 percent of 
all  domestic  workers.  Domestic  workers  face  diff erences  in  social 
class and race in relation to their predominantly middle- and upper-
class white female employers, who benefi t from low-cost domestic 
help.  

Legal provisions for domestic workers include a minimum sal-
ary, paid leave, maternity or paternity leave, and a right to unem-
ployment  compensation.  Yet  28  percent  of  domestic  workers 
receive half the minimum salary, and 41 percent receive something 
between half and full minimum salary. 

Supported  by  the  National  Federation  of  Domestic  Workers 
(FENATRAD), founded in 1997, a proposal for constitutional reform 
is under discussion to improve enforcement of these rights as well 

as to equalize domestic workers’ rights with workers’ rights in gen-
eral, including family allowances, overtime payment, and accident 
insurance. The proposal has met signifi cant resistance from employ-
ers: the Employers Union president in São Paulo state warned that 
the  approval  of  domestic  workers  rights  in  the  Federal  Congress 
would make labor costs unsustainable. 

In  2003,  the  government  established  a  permanent  table  for 
negotiations with FENATRAD, leading to programs such as “Citizen 
Domestic Worker” to strengthen the voice of domestic workers. The 
program off ers education and public awareness campaigns on such 
topics as violence against women, the eradication of domestic child 
labor, and the right to housing, health, work, and social security as 
well  as  tips  on  organizing  trade  unions  for  domestic  workers  in 
seven cities across Brazil. 

Sources: Gonçalves 2010; Moreira Gomes and Martins Bertolin 2011.

The  reforms  of  child  custody  and  marital 
property laws in 19th-century England and the 
United  States  preceded  the  granting  of  wom-
en’s  political  rights.  These  early  expansions  in 
women’s  rights  were  passed  by  all-male  legis-
latures accountable only to all male voters.19 It 
happened  because  as  development  proceeded, 
rising  capital  accumulation,  declining  fertility, 
and  growing  demand  for  human  capital  gave 
fathers  the  incentives  to  accord  rights  to  their 
daughters.20 

The extension of the franchise to women in 
the  United  States  occurred  eventually  in  great 
part from the vigorous advocacy of women’s or-
ganizations. But in its early stages, the strength of 
the suffrage movement increased the likelihood 
of a suffrage bill’s introduction, not its passage. 
For instance, Wyoming was the ﬁ rst state to enact 
universal suffrage in 1890 even though it lacked 
a  strong  organized  suffrage  movement.  Early 
adoption in western states is partly explained by 
a  rising  number  of  educated  professional  and 
progressive middle-class men. Other contribut-
ing  factors  included  intense  political  competi-

For a good future, men must 
change.

“ ”

Adult man, Peru

tion between Republicans and Democrats—and 
their desire to expand the universe of voters who 
might support their policies—as well as the en-
actment of suffrage in neighboring states.21 

The UN Conference on Women in Beijing in 
1995  sought  to “encourage  men  to  participate 
fully in all actions towards gender equality”—in 
education,  socializing  children,  child  care  and 
housework, sexual health, and violence against 
women.  Men’s  organizations  have  rallied  in 
support  of  gender  equality.  One  example  is 
the  Rwanda  Men’s  Resources  Centre,  an  NGO 
founded  in  October  2006  to  engage  men  and 
boys in the ﬁ ght against gender-based violence. 
The  MenEngage  Alliance  is  a  global  network 
of  NGOs  and  UN  partners  working  to  en -
gage men and boys in efforts for greater gender 
equality. The alliance has more than 400 NGO 
members  working  in  more  than  70  countries, 
ranging  from  small  programs  to  larger  advo-
cacy  efforts.  Most  members  work  in  collab-
oration  or  are  associated  with  women’s  rights 
organizations.22

A consensus is growing that it is necessary to 
work with both men and women to break harm-
ful gender norms. As two researchers put it, 

Gender  roles  are  constructed  and  recon-
structed—and  must  be  questioned—by 
both  men  and  women.  Girls  and  women 
can contribute to traditional, harmful ver-
sions of manhood, just as boys and men can 

338 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

contribute to traditional, restrictive versions 
of womanhood. True and lasting changes in 
gender  norms  will  only  be  achieved  when 
it is widely recognized that gender is rela-
tional, that it is short-sighted to seek to em-
power women without engaging men, and 
that is difﬁ cult if not impossible to change 
what manhood means without also engag-
ing young women.23

Public  policies  that  incorporate  men  and 
boys  have  been  the  exception.  Sexual  and  re-
productive  health  initiatives  should  consider 
that women’s knowledge and access to contra-
ception is higher when men’s knowledge is also 
increased.24  Microcredit  programs  cannot  ig-
nore how they challenge gender and household 
norms for men and women. A household sur-
vey in rural Bangladesh found that 78 percent of 
women said they had at some point been forced 
to cede money to their husbands, and 56 percent 
said that their husbands had forced them not to 
work outside the home.25

Most policy initiatives that do call on men to 
support gender equality are small, often lacking 
a strategic vision for scaling up and encourag-
ing broader social change. A notable exception 
is Scandinavia, where paternity leave provisions 
promote changes in gender norms and encour-
age men to partake in child care. Although re-

FIGURE 8.3   Men around the world support women’s rights and 

policies 

88

90

90

74

72

71

66

65

64

87

80

77

71

47

43

38

35

41

39

39

t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
o
h
w
%

 

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30

20
10
0

Brazil

Chile

Croatia

India

Mexico

supports women’s rights: “men don’t lose out”
supports quota: fixed proportion of places in government
supports quota: fixed places in universities
supports quota: fixed proportion of executive positions

Source: Barker and others 2011.

sponsibility for care still lies largely with women, 
the policies have had fairly high acceptance. In 
2003, Swedish fathers took 18 percent of paren-
tal leave days.26

In  Brazil,  Chile,  Croatia,  and  Mexico,  adult 
men overwhelmingly express that “men do not 
lose  out  when  women’s  rights  are  promoted” 
(an exception is India) (ﬁ gure 8.3). Support for 
female quotas in executive positions, university 
enrollments, and public ofﬁ ce also run relatively 
high. Even in India, where survey data suggest 
men are considerably less supportive of gender 
equality  overall,  the  support  for  some  speciﬁ c 
policies is broadly based.27

The  inclusion  of  men  can  convey  the  idea 
that  gender  equality  is  a  public  good  beneﬁ t-
ing all. Using local data, research, and testimo-
nials  in  mass  media  and  advocacy  campaigns 
can facilitate policy dialogue and frame gender 
equality—in  relationships,  in  households,  and 
in communities—as a public good for everyone. 
Engaging with youth can shape lasting social at-
titudes toward gender roles and gender justice.28

Broadening coalitions
Society’s  actors  can  create  political  space  for 
reform  by  building  coalitions  to  increase  the 
demand  for  change.  Social  mobilization  and 
awareness-raising  efforts  can  widen  the  plat-
form of support and the range of policy options. 
Coalitions can change the net political returns 
of a given policy alternative. 

The  strength  of  supporting  and  opposing 
forces  surrounding  a  divisive  policy  change 
depends  on  the  national  political  context  and 
the  openness  to  international  inﬂ uences.  In 
functioning democracies, politicians, civil soci-
ety,  women’s  organizations,  labor  unions,  and 
religious  groups  openly  debate  the  merits  or 
consequences  of  policy  change.  Naturally,  the 
speciﬁ c issue at hand matters. The range of sup-
porting  and  opposing  actors  varies  depending 
on whether the subject is gender-based violence, 
political  quotas,  labor  laws  relating  to  child 
care, or reproductive health. The fault lines are 
shaped by the intersection of gender with race, 
social class, or doctrinal beliefs. 

Gender-based violence is generally the least 
polarizing  of  these  issues—men  and  women 
from  different  economic  or  ideological  back-
grounds  tend  to  regard  domestic  or  gender-
based violence as intrinsically wrong. But each 
domain  has  a  different  resonance  for  different 

 

The political economy of gender reform 

339

constituencies. Women  and  men  in  higher-in-
come groups may be opposed to state or private 
subsidized maternity leave or child-care provi-
sions because of higher taxes or higher costs of 
employing workers. Abortion legislation attracts 
opposition from conservative religious groups.

Which side will ultimately “win” depends on 
political  alliances.  Left-leaning  governments  in 
Sweden, supported by labor unions and wom-
en’s  groups,  championed  maternity  and  child-
care legislation in the 1970s. But existing power 
coalitions could not reform the family code in 
Mali to deﬁ ne marriage as a secular institution, 
raise the minimum age of marriage, and extend 
inheritance  rights  to  women.  Religious  groups 
have continued to directly contest these efforts. 
Despite parliamentary approval in August 2009, 
President  Amadou  Toure  recently  announced 
that “after extensive consultations with the vari-
ous state institutions, with civil society, with the 
religious community and the legal profession, I 
have taken this decision to send the family code 
for a second reading to ensure calm and a peace-
ful society, and to obtain the support and under-
standing of our fellow citizens.”29 

Whether  a  proposed  policy  reform  aimed 
at gender equality is perceived as a beneﬁ t or a 
threat to the social order and political alliances 
is  also  determined  by  factors  unique  to  each 
country. In Latin America, government alliances 
with religious groups have obstructed abortion 
legislation. Abortion may, therefore, be a doctri-
nal issue in Chile, but it raises no controversy in 
China, where it has been accepted in reinforcing 
the one-child policy.

Unleashing the power of information
Political support stems from information, inter-
ests,  and  perceptions.  Transparency  and  stra-
tegic communication reduce information asym-
metries, promote a more effective public debate, 
and enable the exploration of public policy is-
sues from multiple perspectives. 

Media exposure can engage stakeholders di-
rectly and inﬂ uence their private beliefs. Popu-
lar  culture  and  information  campaigns  can 
contribute  to  changes  in  social  norms,  values, 
or preferences (box 8.7). Consider how new me-
dia outreach across Latin America is taking on 
machismo. Reacciona Ecuador, a public aware-
ness  television  campaign  with  support  from 
several government agencies, calls into question 
traditional notions of masculinity and feminin-

BOX 8.7   How popular culture can change social attitudes

In the 18th and 19th centuries, those campaigning to end slavery knew that 
sustained success required bringing about widespread societal changes in how 
people, especially infl uential elites, understood the practice. Pioneering meth-
ods  of  public  persuasion  that  remain  commonplace  today,  the  abolitionists 
invented  campaign  buttons,  testimonials  from  recent  “converts,”  endorse-
ments from sympathetic public fi gures and celebrities, mass-produced posters, 
and community drama. 

The women’s movement subsequently adopted many of these tools as it 
undertook campaigns for suff rage, equal pay, and reproductive health rights, 
and against domestic violence. It recognized that mainstreaming feminist prin-
ciples required changing how women and men everywhere understood these 
issues, which in turn required deploying modes of communication familiar to 
diff erent social groups, whether poems, novels, and plays for elites or street 
theater and popular songs for everyday citizens.

An  example  is  the  work  of  Sor  Juana  Inés  de  la  Cruz,  a  poet  in  the  Vice-
Royalty  of  New  Spain,  now  Mexico.  The  17th-century  writings  of  this  Tenth 
Muse, as she was known, were widely read by elites (those who were literate 
and could aff ord books) not only in the Americas but also in Spain.  Her work 
was published by the fi rst printing press in New Spain.  She provided lyrical 
accounts of the constraints on women’s freedoms and articulated the hypoc-
risy of prevalent societal values that held men and women to diff erent stan-
dards: “Who sins more, she who sins for pay? Or he who pays for sin?”

Between the 1740s and 1760s, three famous novels by men about young 
women—Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s Lisa and Samuel Richardson’s Clarissa and 
Pamela—also embodied and promulgated a wholesale change in understand-
ing gender relations. At that time, the novel was a new form of mass communi-
cation,  transporting  readers  into  new  worlds  of  emotion  and  imagination, 
presenting  alternative  but  visceral  renderings  of  women’s  experiences  and 
responses to crushing social conventions. 

The novels were best-sellers across Europe and eagerly translated. For mid-
18th-century readers, it was a revelation that men could write movingly and 
sympathetically about the plight of vibrant young women who, through the 
binding  powers  of  social  norms,  were  trapped  in  loveless  relationships  and 
unable to pursue their desires, talents, and aspirations. Yet it was an even big-
ger revelation that these women then summoned the courage to defy expecta-
tions and laws, to leave unhappy circumstances, and to strike out on their own. 
Ibsen’s A Doll’s House revisited this theme a century later, as did the novels of 
George Elliot and the Brontë sisters. Before gender policy changes could be 
articulated, campaigned for, and enacted, the very possibility of such changes 
fi rst had to be revealed. Put more generally, changing what is thinkable often 
precedes changing what is sayable and then doable.

Sources: Hunt 2007; Hochschild 2005; Smith and Carroll 2000.

ity, linking machismo to a form of violence.30 “I 
wash, iron, and cook . . . and so what?” contends 
a man looking straight into a television camera 
while tending to a toddler. 

Media outreach can also serve broader edu-
cational  purposes.  The  Soul  City  Institute  in 
South Africa uses radio, television, and newspa-
pers  to  disseminate  information  and  promote 
reﬂ ection  on  pressing  health  and  social  issues. 
Love Stories in a Time of HIV and AIDS is a series 

340 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

of  10  short  ﬁ lms  for  television  from  10  coun-
tries  in  southern Africa  that  challenges  people 
to think differently about their sexual lives and 
to debate and discuss cultural and social norms 
that put them at risk. Umtshatho (The Wedding) 
is set in a village in the Eastern Cape in South 
Africa, where Nomandla discovers on the day of 
her traditional Xhosa wedding that her ﬁ ancée 
is cheating on her and that she needs to make 
some difﬁ cult choices.31 In Vietnam, the Popu-
lation  Media  Center  uses  radio  as  a  means  to 
address  stigma  and  discrimination.  Khat  Vong 
Song is a radio serial drama starring Suu and her 
eldest daughter Mo. Suu is verbally and physi-
cally abused by her husband Tuat, the head of 
a clan in his village. Having three daughters al-
ready, Tuat desperately wants a son.32

Information  also  raises  awareness,  shapes 
public  opinion,  builds  a  constituency,  and 
serves as a call to action. Gender inequality in 
education garnered the spotlight in the United 
States in a 1992 report, How Schools Shortchange 
Girls, by the American Association of University 
Women. The report and its related media out-
reach  articulated  how  schooling  marginalized 
girls  in  science  and  mathematics.  It  described 
how teachers bestowed preferential attention to 
boys, while girls’ grades and self-esteem ﬂ oun-
dered. Its impact on national policy and pub-
lic opinion was swift and signiﬁ cant. The 1994 
Gender Equity in Education Act in the United 
States identiﬁ ed girls as a disadvantaged group 
and set aside federal ﬁ nancing for a wide range 
of  interventions  meant  to  boost  girls’  self-
conﬁ dence  and  participation  in  science,  en-
gineering,  and  mathematics—from  science 
camps  for  girls  to  teacher  training  programs 
in classroom equality, and from gender-fair in-
structional  materials  to  a  new  writing  section 
to  the  Scholastic  Achievement  Test,  a  domain 
where girls excel, in part to increase scores on 
this high-stakes test. 

The  pendulum  has  now  swung  in  the  op-
posite  direction  in  the  United  States.  Many 
scholars  have  argued  that  schools  are  failing 
boys—particularly  African-American  boys. 
Boys  have  lower  literacy,  lower  school  grades, 
lower  engagement  in  school,  higher  dropout 
from  school,  higher  repetition  rates,  higher 
placement in special education, higher rates of 
suspensions and expulsions, and lower rates of 
postsecondary enrollment and graduation. So 
far,  however,  boys’  educational  underperfor-

mance has failed to elicit an equivalent federal 
response.33 

In the 21st century’s communication revolu-
tion, social media—blogs and social networking 
sites like Facebook—have opened new and in-
creasingly popular channels for social and polit-
ical participation. Unlike other media channels, 
social  media  are  two-way  and  interactive,  so 
people can now collaborate and share informa-
tion in fresh ways (chapter 6). Social networking 
websites  have  become  platforms  for  awareness 
raising, social mobilization, political discussion, 
and  fundraising.  The  opportunity  to  “invite” 
others  to  join  discussion  boards  in  social  net-
working sites has heightened their potential for 
grassroots activism.34 For example, HarrassMap 
is an Egyptian NGO that compiles information 
from individual women reporting cases of sex-
ual assault using a web-based software mapping 
platform.35

INCLUSIVE MARKETS

Before World War II, many ﬁ rms in the United 
States were reluctant to hire women, especially 
in  the  defense  industry.  Necessity  changed  all 
that. An example is the Fairchild Aircraft plant 
in  Hagerstown,  Maryland,  which  employed 
10,000  workers.  The  composition  of  its  work-
force jumped from 20 percent female at the be-
ginning of the war to almost 70 percent in 1945. 
Overall,  women  held  four  of  ﬁ ve  defense  jobs 
in Maryland.36 In developing countries, formal 
wage  employment  usually  is  a  much  smaller 
fraction of total employment, but necessity can 
play  a  role  here  as  well.  In  Nepal,  war-related 
displacement of men as a result of the Maoist-
led insurgency led to a large increase in women’s 
labor force participation.37

Today,  workforce  diversiﬁ cation  is  driven 
by different circumstances. The private sector’s 
embrace of gender equality in the workplace re-
sponds to four emerging trends (ﬁ gure 8.4). First, 
in an increasingly globalized economy, skills are 
in  high  demand  (chapter  6).  Tapping  the  full 
 talent  pool  can  reap  signiﬁ cant  economic  re-
wards.  Second,  diversity  is  considered  a  path-
way  to  better  corporate  decision  making  and 
inno vation. Third, women represent a growing 
market, and there is a desire to attune products 
and  cater  services  to  their  needs.  Fourth,  gen-
der equality is a valued attribute in the market-

The political economy of gender reform

341

FIGURE 8.4   Economic and political economy considerations have prodded ﬁ rms to promote gender 

equality policies

E N D E R EQUALITY

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

policies

M A

S

R

T
E
K
F ir m s

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS

R

O

G

WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

place—for  potential  employees,  for  investors, 
and for customers.

Attracting and retaining talent
Public and private enterprises look to attract the 
best  possible  talent.  Women  make  up  half  the 
population and, in a majority of countries, the 
majority of university graduates (chapter 1). 

Although  female  labor  force  participation 
surged  in  past  decades,  it  remains  constrained 
(chapter 5). Women still do the majority of par-
enting around the world. And care responsibili-
ties  pose  a  signiﬁ cant  burden  to  entering  and 
staying in the labor market for many women—
their  aspirations  stopped  short  not  necessarily 
by a glass ceiling but rather a “maternal wall.”38
So,  women  have  concentrated  in  selected  seg-
ments  of  the  economy—such  as  teaching  or 
public  sector  employment—that  allow  them 
to  reconcile  work  and  home  responsibilities. 

Women  also  tend  to  have  higher  job  attrition 
and turnover rates than men.39 

Businesses  have  increasingly  sought  to  at-
tract, recruit, and retain female talent (box 8.8), 
for high staff turnover comes at a price. Some 
analysts  suggest  that  staff  replacement  costs 
range between 0.25 to 2.0 times the salary of the 
departing individual (depending on whether all 
costs  are  recognized).40  For  instance,  the  costs 
of  hiring  and  training  a  new  nurse  has  been 
estimated at 1.3 times the salary of a departing 
nurse.41 

Work-life  balance  schemes  strive  to  accom-
modate the dual demands of jobs and parenting 
to encourage staff loyalty and retention. As chap-
ter 7 discussed, part-time employment, extended 
family  leave  beneﬁ ts,  and  subsidized  child  care 
have  opened  new  job  opportunities  for  work-
ing parents. The Sainsbury’s supermarket chain 
in  the  United  Kingdom  offers  policies  to  en-

342 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 8.8   Four good practices for greater gender diversity

McKinsey and Company interviewed a dozen companies notable for increasing 
women’s  participation  in  their  workforces,  managements,  and  boardrooms. 
Four practices stand out in promoting gender diversity:

Create  transparency  through  gender  diversity,  knowledge,  and  perfor-
mance indicators. The main indicators included the proportion of women in 
the company’s various business lines, at each level of management, and among 
new recruits; pay levels and attrition rates between men and women with simi-
lar functions; and the ratio of women promoted to women eligible for promo-
tion. Monitoring these indicators should raise awareness about the magnitude 
of the gaps to be closed within the organization.

Implement  measures  to  facilitate  work-life  balance.  Two  elements  are 
important  here.  The  fi rst  is  workplace  fl exibility  (telecommuting,  part-time 
work, fl exible hours). Flexibility is not a woman-only policy. It should be part of 
the general development of a company’s business model, requiring the adap-
tation of organization and culture. The second is career fl exibility and support 
during career breaks. That women tend to take career breaks needs to be taken 
into  account  to  prevent  any  negative  impacts  on  their  career  paths  or  pay. 
Companies  that  manage  maternity  leave  best  retain  contact  through  this 
period, have one-on-one meetings before and after to ensure their employees 
are properly reintegrated, and keep a watch on pay raises and bonuses in the 
years following the return to ensure equal treatment.

Adapt the human resource management process. Companies must ensure 
that their recruitment, appraisal, and career management systems do not hold 
women  back  in  their  professional  development.  And  to  the  extent  possible, 
companies should off er personalized career paths to retain the best talent.

Help women master the dominant social codes and nurture their ambi-
tion.  Coaching,  network-building,  and  mentoring  programs  can  be  highly 
eff ective in raising women’s awareness and enabling them to respond to male-
centric corporate environments. Setting up women’s networks within compa-
nies creates opportunities for broader professional exposure while also raising 
the profi le of female leaders in the organization.

Source: McKinsey & Company Inc. 2007.

hance  work-life  balance,  including  part-time 
work,  ﬂ exible  contracts,  job  sharing,  extended 
maternity leave and pay, paternity leave, parental 
leave, career breaks of up to ﬁ ve years for child 
care, and special leave of up to one year for per-
sonal development or care responsibilities.42

Information technologies have enabled tele-
commuting or teleworking, making it easier for 
women  and  men  to  work  from  home  (chap-
ter 6). Telework is a core strategy for expanding 
female  labor  force  participation  in  Malaysia’s 
formal  and  informal  sectors.  The  Ministry  of 
Women, Family and Community Development 
and the Ministry of Science, Technology and the 
Environment ﬁ nanced an “eHomemakers net-

work” in 2001 to promote online sales of home-
produced merchandise.43 T-Center is an Inter-
net portal for teleworkers to offer their services 
and for employers to advertise online work op-
portunities.  Sponsored  by  the  National  Infor-
mation Technology Council in 2002, T-Center 
was designed to “empower women, youth and 
pensioners as an important economic factor in 
the family, community and the nation.”44

Employers have also looked to ease the rein-
tegration of new mothers into the workplace. In 
its efforts to increase the number of female pro-
fessors, Queen’s University Belfast gives women 
returning  from  maternity  leave  a  semester  for 
research,  rather  than  the  typical  teaching  and 
administration  workload.45  Working  mothers’ 
pre-  and  postmaternity  medical  needs  at  Sa-
faricom  Ltd.,  a  Kenya-based  communications 
provider, are fully covered by insurance. Human 
resource policies at the company include three 
months of paid maternity leave. Work shifts are 
adjusted to accommodate breast-feeding moth-
ers for up to seven months, and lactation rooms 
and child-care facilities are available onsite.46 

A representative survey of 1,001 companies 
in  Germany  found  that  family-friendly  ﬁ rms 
receive  31  percent  more  applications  for  staff 
openings  and  retained  employees  14  percent 
longer  than  other  ﬁ rms.  Staff  members  were 
also 22 percent more likely to return following 
parental leave, and their absence was 8 percent 
shorter.47

But family-friendly work arrangements entail 
certain possible hazards. First, they can increase 
some  costs  of  doing  business  for  ﬁ rms.  Thus, 
 on-site  child-care  requirements  or  generous 
maternity leave policies can reduce incentives to 
hire women. Second, such arrangements also can 
reinforce existing social norms for gender roles 
in  productive  and  reproductive  activities.  De-
loitte & Touche estimated that its ﬂ exible work 
arrangements saved $13 million in reduced attri-
tion in 1997. Yet, employees who exercised ﬂ exi-
ble work beneﬁ ts were perceived as less dedicated 
or  reliable,  dampening  their  chances  for  career 
advancement and promotion. Male accountants 
equated  commitment  with  long  hours,  assum-
ing  that  those  working  ﬂ exibly  were  less  com-
mitted.48  Fathers  who  wish  to  take  advantage 
of family-friendly beneﬁ ts to be more active in 
child-care  responsibilities  can  face  even  higher 
barriers  than  mothers,  whose  nurturing  role  is 
more culturally accepted.

 

The political economy of gender reform 

343

Diversity for better decision making
Gender  diversity  practices  have  been  espoused 
as a means to achieve greater organizational ef-
fectiveness. Indeed, staff diversity can spur cre-
ativity  and  innovation  by  enriching  business 
decision making through multiple perspectives. 
Data from a national sample of for-proﬁ t busi-
ness  organizations  in  the  United  States  found 
that gender diversity was associated with higher 
sales revenue, more customers, and greater prof-
its.49 But diversity has also been linked to more 
conﬂ ict  and  less  cohesion.  Diverse  groups  or 
business units do not necessarily function better 
or experience higher levels of satisfaction.50 

Similarly,  international  evidence  on  the  ef-
fect of gender diversity in corporate boards, as 
measured by various indicators of ﬁ rm perfor-
mance,  is  mixed  (chapter  5).  Disparate  results 
reﬂ ect different economic environments, regu-
latory structures, company types, and ﬁ nancial 
performance.  Diversity  may  also  affect  differ-
ent corporate board functions in unique ways, 
making it difﬁ cult to generalize about the links 
between  board  composition  and  overall  ﬁ rm 
performance.51  For  68  Spanish  ﬁ rms,  the  ra-
tio of men to women on corporate boards has 
a signiﬁ cant effect on ﬁ rm value,52 but for 443 
Danish corporations, there was no relationship 
between female board representation and orga-
nizational performance.53 

The relationship between diversity and per-
formance  reﬂ ects  the  organizational  culture. 
Changing that culture requires moving beyond 
“tokenism” and achieving a critical mass of staff 
diversity  at  different  organizational  levels.  In 
some cases, as ﬁ rms become more diverse, they 
must  contend  with  entrenched  organizational 
contexts  that  may  be  inhospitable  to  women. 
Managers  and  staff  alike  must  value  diversity. 
Avenues for communication and problem solv-
ing  must  be  ﬂ uid  so  that  dissent  can  give  way 
to consensus building. Creating an enabling en-
vironment  for  high  performance  may  require 
changing  attitudes  and  eliminating  behaviors 
that reﬂ ect both subtle and overt gender bias.

The  Gender  Equity  Model  Egypt  (GEME) 
is  a  certiﬁ cation  program  to  promote  labor 
practices that foster gender equity and improve 
women’s equal access to jobs and opportunities 
in private ﬁ rms. One GEME goal is to optimize 
human resources to increase organizational ef-
ﬁ ciency  and  competitiveness.  The  second  is  to 
promote positive interpersonal relationships in 

the workplace to enable men and women with 
different skills, perspectives, and working styles 
to  contribute  to  meeting  organizational  goals 
and  employees’  professional  needs.  The  third 
is  to  engender  greater  staff  commitment  and 
loyalty. And the fourth is to allow the public to 
associate  a  ﬁ rm’s  products  and  services  with  a 
commitment to gender equity in the workplace 
through a Gender Equity Seal. Firms use a self-
diagnostic  tool  to  analyze  their  policies  and 
practices  for  gender  equity  and  identify  pos-
sible  biases.  Capacity-building  opportunities 
include training in the practical importance of 
gender equity for ﬁ rms, staff recruitment, train-
ing and career development, and in preventing 
sexual  harassment.  Audits,  conducted  by  an 
independent agency, determine whether a ﬁ rm 
has reached its established gender equity goals. 
Successful ﬁ rms receive a Gender Equity Seal in 
recognition of their commitment to gender eq-
uity in human resource management. 

Arafa Holding, a textile and apparel ﬁ rm par-
ticipating in GEME, offers incentives to women 
to retain them as valuable employees. Married 
women  are  at  times  exempted  from  working 
longer hours so they may satisfy family respon-
sibilities. Housing is also provided for married 
couples  working  in  the  company.  Company 
transportation is available free of charge to em-
ployees who live in distant areas. Special time al-
lowance is given to mothers to visit their young 
children at day care.54 

Female  Future,  a  gender  equality  initiative 
launched  in  March  2003  by  the  Confederation 
of Norwegian Enterprises (Næringslivets Hove-
dorganisasjon, or NHO), is a national organiza-
tion for employers and a leading business lobby-
ist. Its primary goal is to assist NHO members 
to identify female talent for leadership positions, 
thus bringing new perspectives to management. 
Firms identify potential candidates for executive 
and board posts and sign a binding agreement 
to  increase  gender  diversity  within  two  years. 
Female Future runs leadership and networking 
programs for prospective candidates for mana-
gerial  positions.  More  than  1,000  women  have 
participated in the program, and about 62 per-
cent of them have advanced their careers. Austria, 
Japan, and Uganda have similar initiatives.55

Women as customers and employees
Women,  a  growing  market  segment,  make  up 
a formidable share of shoppers in much of the 

344 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

world—accounting for an estimated 83 percent 
of all consumer purchases in the United States 
and 70 percent in Europe.56 Understanding and 
targeting  this  base  can  be  critical  for  business 
success.

Many  private  ﬁ rms  have  expanded  their 
female  workforce  and  managerial  staff  to  cre-
ate  a  more  business-friendly  environment  for 
women customers. Best Buy is a $12 billion con-
sumer  electronics  company  headquartered  in 
the United States. “We’re not known for being 
a destination for women,” a spokesman attested. 
“We need to change that. And if we’re going to 
grow market share, we need to make sure that 
Best Buy is a great place for women to work.”57 
In  recent  years,  the  ﬁ rm  has  hired  additional 
women  sales  managers,  lowered  the  turnover 
rate for  female staff, and attracted more women 
customers.

Women  have  also  made  enormous  strides 
in  nurturing  small  and  medium  enterprises 
(SMEs),  spurring  local  development  and  gen-
erating new employment opportunities. In East 
Asia, 35 percent of SMEs are women-owned—
more than 500,000 in Indonesia alone. Women-
owned  businesses  account  for  48  percent  of 
all  micro,  small,  and  medium  enterprises  in 
Kenya—producing around 20 percent of GDP. 
In  Vietnam,  the  number  of  SMEs  headed  by 
women grew 43 percent annually between 2000 
and 2004; in Morocco, 8 percent between 2000 
and 2007.58 

Some  private  banks  have  begun  to  respond 
to women’s good credit and loan repayment re-
cords,  easing  traditional  credit  constraints  (see 
box 7.5). Founded in 2000, the Global Banking 
Alliance  for  Women  includes  25  members—
including NBS Bank in Malawi, Access Bank in 
Nigeria, First National Bank of South Africa, and 
Selﬁ na in Tanzania. Promoting ﬁ nancial services 
to women, its goal is to accelerate the growth of 
women  in  business,  while  supporting  superior 
business  outcomes  for  member  ﬁ nancial  insti-
tutions.  Through  a  collaborative  network  for 
 exchanging  best  practices  and  research,  mem-
bers  provide  access  to  capital,  markets,  educa-
tion,  and  training  to  increase  the  likelihood  of 
success for women‘s businesses.59 

Gender equality to beneﬁ t the corporate 
image and the bottom line
Gender equality is now used in assessing whether 
an  enterprise  is  committed  to  corporate  so-
cial responsibility (while maximizing value for 

shareholders).  Gender  equality  can  thus  en-
hance  the  corporate  image.  And  equal  oppor-
tunity  or  family-friendly  policies  can  boost  a 
ﬁ rm’s reputation, with beneﬁ ts accruing in staff 
recruitment,  media  interest,  public  attention, 
and customer loyalty. 

Financial  incentives  for  gender  sensitivity 
and diversity targets can be consequential. Some 
investment funds (CalPERS in the United States, 
Amazone  in  Europe)  include  gender  equality 
among their investment criteria, and some rat-
ing agencies (Core Rating, Innovest, Vigeo) are 
developing tools to measure gender diversity.60

Since 2001, Better Factories Cambodia uses 
national  and  international  standards  in  moni-
toring  and  reporting  on  working  conditions 
in  more  than  300  Cambodian  garment  facto-
ries (where the workforce is primarily female). 
Under  a  trade  agreement,  the  United  States 
gives  Cambodia  better  access  to  U.S.  markets 
in  exchange  for  better  working  conditions  in 
the  garment  sector.  Participation,  a  condition 
for export licensing in Cambodia, represents a 
convergence  of  common  interests  of  the  gar-
ment  industry,  international  buyers,  and  the 
expectation of American and Western European 
consumers  for  sweatshop-free  products.  Better 
Factories Cambodia is managed by the Interna-
tional Labor Organization and ﬁ nanced by the 
U.S. Department of Labor, U.S. Agency for In-
ternational  Development,  Agence  Française  de 
Developpement,  the  Garment  Manufacturers’ 
Association  in  Cambodia,  the  Royal  Govern-
ment of Cambodia, and international buyers.61

Sri  Lanka’s  Apparel  Association  Forum,  an 
umbrella group representing the $3.5 billion gar-
ment industry, launched the “Garments without 
Guilt” program in 2006 to create “garments with 
conscience and care.”62 As in Cambodia, a media 
campaign has sought to portray Sri Lanka’s ap-
parel factories—mainly employing women—as 
ethical businesses so that its products will stand 
out  in  a  competitive  international  market.  For 
example, MAS Holdings has established a state-
of-art  factory  in  Thulhiriya,  brandishing  the 
country’s social responsibility credentials.63 But 
working  conditions  are  varied.  Some  factories 
require six days a week with mandatory overtime 
and work on successive shifts without a break; 
some  also  ﬁ ne  workers  for  lateness,  talking,  or 
going on toilet breaks. These factories are more 
likely  to  be  older,  smaller,  and  not  owned  by 
companies incorporated in high-income coun-
tries.64 There are thus limits to the effectiveness 

The political economy of gender reform

345

of external standards when they are not socially 
embedded in the local milieu. And in a highly 
competitive  commercial  environment,  the  un-
certainty of returns relative to the costs of com-
pliance makes ethical concerns vulnerable.65

Nonetheless, claims of corporate misbehav-
ior, discrimination, or sexual harassment can di-
minish a company’s attractiveness to consumers 
and  investors.  In  July  2009,  the  Dell  computer 
company agreed to pay $9.1 million to settle a 
class-action suit claiming it had not given its fe-
male employees equal training, pay, or promo-
tions.66  In  response,  the  ﬁ rm  has  reviewed  its 
diversity  and  inclusion  practices,  and  formed 
a Global Diversity Council to review corporate 
policies, action plans, and progress.67

BRINGING GENDER INTO FORMAL 
INSTITUTIONS AND POLICIES

While  collective  action  and  social  movements 
often catalyze state action, governments typically 

initiate and promote policies that reduce or elim-
inate gender inequalities directly (ﬁ gure 8.5). 

A ﬁ rst step in bringing gender into the policy 
process is to understand the gender dimensions 
of policy design and enforcement. A gender lens 
should thus be a feature in all state agencies. Such 
a lens, for example, could reveal the existence of 
court procedures that restrict women’s access to 
justice, or statistical data collection systems that 
do  not  allow  for  assessing  the  impact  of  gov-
ernment policies on men and women (chapter 
9).  Governments  can  also  set  up  specialized 
agencies, often termed gender machineries, spe-
ciﬁ cally to promote women’s rights.

Advances  in  gender  equality  do  not  always 
require wholesale action. Gender-neutral inter-
ventions can become more strategic and effec-
tive when gender considerations are taken into 
account. For example, a land titling program in 
Peru increased joint ownership rates by including 
provisions to lift constraints women faced (box 
8.9). It also increased mothers’ participation in 
the labor market and decreased fertility.68

FIGURE 8.5  State action is central for the design and adoption of gender-progressive policies

policies

I N S T I T U T I O N S

I N F O R M A L  

E N D E R EQUALITY

G

ECONOMIC

OPPORTUNITIES

S

T

E

K

R

M A

HOUSEHOLDS

AGENCY

ENDOWMENTS

FORMAL INSTITUTIONS
Gender machineries and
other state agencies

R

O

G

WTH

Source: WDR 2012 team.

346 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 8.9    Land titling in Peru—Using a gender lens for a 

gender-neutral program

The Peruvian government launched a Special Land Titling and Cadastre Project 
(PETT, in Spanish) in 1992 to increase land tenure security and enhance agri-
cultural  productivity  and  production.  The  project  has  been  categorized  as 
gender-neutral  because  it  did  not  adopt  any  gender-specifi c  regulations  for 
implementation. The government’s rationale was that no extra measures were 
needed because there was no overt discrimination against women. 

But rural women suff er from higher illiteracy rates and are more likely to be 
monolingual than men. Women in consensual unions were also vulnerable to 
exclusion. A lack of identifi cation papers was another problem, because proof 
of identifi cation was necessary for land registration.

The  NGO  Red  Nacional  de  la  Mujer  Rural,  organized  by  the  Peruvian 
Women’s Center Flora Tristán, led a nationwide awareness campaign to sup-
port women’s rights, reinforcing government eff orts. In 1998, it lobbied PETT 
offi  cials for clarifi cation of the land rights of women in consensual unions, argu-
ing  that  such  women  should  be  recognized  as  co-owners.  The  NGO  drafted 
widely circulated administrative guidelines with a gender perspective. It also 
conducted gender-sensitivity training for PETT offi  cials.

PETT improved the distribution of land ownership. Fifty-six percent of plots 
in male-headed households were jointly titled in 2004, up from 49 percent of 
households in a control group that had not received PETT titles. More remark-
ably, joint ownership rates jumped from 13 percent of households in 2000 to 43 
percent in 2004.

Sources: Deere and León 2003; Orge Fuentes and Wiig 2009.

State structures promoting gender equality
In the past few decades, gender machineries—
formal  government  structures  that  promote 
gender  equality  and  improve  the  status  and 
rights of women—have proliferated in response 
to demands from women’s organizations and an 
international consensus for governmental lead-
ership and more decisive action toward gender 
equality.69  They  provide  gender-disaggregated 
policy  analysis  and  support  state  institutions 
in designing and carrying out gender-sensitive 
policies. Assessing the implications of proposed 
policy actions for women and men can produce 
beneﬁ ts for all, reducing disparities.

Gender machineries range from formal min-
istries to executive and parliamentary commis-
sions, to advisory boards, to institutes, to ombuds 
ofﬁ ces. They may be established by formal stat-
ute, executive decree, or bureaucratic rules. New 
forms  include  gender “focal  points”  and “desk 
ofﬁ ces” in some Sub-Saharan African countries 
and the Ofﬁ ces of Plenipotentiary in Poland. 

Gender machineries can have different mis-
sions.  Some  focus  on  speciﬁ c  gender  equal-
ity policies, such as those outlined in the UN’s 

Beijing Platform of Action. Others work to in-
sert  gender  perspectives  into  all  areas  of  gov-
erning through “gender mainstreaming.” Their 
approaches include promoting policy adoption 
and  implementation,  conducting  assessments, 
delivering services, raising awareness, and sup-
porting NGOs.

No single organizational form has been con-
sistently  more  successful  than  others,  whether 
statutory,  centralized,  or  generously  funded. 
Some  countries  have  a  central  executive  com-
mission,  others  a  ministry  or  bureaucratic  of-
ﬁ ce. Some have all three, and still others, a range 
of single issue agencies—for labor, health, and 
education.  Machineries  can  be  more  active  in 
regional and local governments than at the cen-
tral level. 

But  in  some  instances,  gender  machineries 
are  more “modern”  window  dressing  than  au-
thoritative channels for gender equality within 
the  state.  They  can  thus  be  weak  institutions 
with few staff, threadbare resources, and limited 
leverage to inﬂ uence policy decisions (box 8.10).
Six organizational features are critical to the 
success of state institutions for gender equality:70 
•   Clarity of mission and an explicit understand-

ing of expected functions are essential.

•   Organizational  structure  must  be  aligned  to 
expected functions. For example, the United 
States  has  espoused  a  model  of  multiple 
single-issue  administrative  ofﬁ ces  to  focus 
deeply on speciﬁ c policy areas such as labor 
(the Women’s  Bureau  in  the  Department  of 
Labor)  or  health  (the  Maternal  and  Child 
Health Bureau in the Department of Health 
and Human Services).

•   The statutory authority to propose policy and 
proximity  to  executive  or  central  adminis-
tration  increase  the  likelihood  of  policy 
adoption. 

•   Resourceful  leadership  that  is  committed  to 
gender equality goals and has political stand-
ing in relation to decision makers and poten-
tial allies. 

•   Discretion  over  ﬁ nancial  resources  is  essen-
tial  to  perform  (including  budgets  to  sup-
port  NGOs  in  areas  not  reached  by  policy 
decisions).

•   Strategic partnerships with civil society groups 
can  foster  coordinated  action  and  advocacy. 

 

The political economy of gender reform 

347

BOX 8.10   Gender machineries in practice

Finland.  Since  the  1970s,  the  Council  for  Equality  between  Men 
and Women in Finland, an executive commission of political nomi-
nees from diff erent parties, has had few resources—and nothing 
more than a small staff , from fi ve to eight employees. In the 1970s 
it  was  primarily  symbolic,  limited  to  debates  on  job  training.  In 
the 1980s it was relocated from the Prime Minister’s offi  ce to the 
Ministry  of  Social  Aff airs  and  Health,  more  distant  from  central 
power  but  inside  one  of  the  main  arenas  for  policy  making  on 
social issues. It also received statutory responsibility for proposing 
reforms  on  gender  equality.  Under  its  new  confi guration,  the 
council registered more success in debates about prostitution, job 
training,  and  political  representation.  Under  new  leadership  in 
1995,  it  promoted  parliamentary  gender  quotas.  Its  success 
stemmed from its statutory responsibility for gender issues, pro-
posal powers, proximity to systems for social policy, assertive lead-
ership, and allies in parliament. 

Spain. The Institute for Women was established in 1983 as an admin-
istrative offi  ce in the Ministry of Culture and was later moved to the 
Ministry of Social Aff airs. The institute has always had the power to 
recommend and enforce actions to deal with discrimination com-
plaints as well as to design, promote and evaluate the four national 
gender equality plans implemented between 1988 and 2006. But it 

Sources: McBride and Mazur 2011; World Bank, IADB, and SERNAM 2007.

was  hampered  in  performing  these  roles  by  its  lack  of  statutory 
authority for making policy proposals and its distance from centers 
of political power. To increase its eff ectiveness, it became part of 
the broader General Secretary of Equality Policies within the Minis-
try of Labor and Social Aff airs in 2004 and in 2008 became part of 
the  Ministry  of  Equality  when  that  was  created.  The  institute  has 
been most successful in mainstreaming gender issues during the 
debate on abortion legislation in 1986, and more recently for laws 
against  gender-based  violence  and  the  law  on  equality  between 
men and women.

Chile. The National Service for Women, SERNAM, focuses on main-
streaming gender in sector ministries, with a limited mandate for 
project implementation. Its chair now has ministerial status and is a 
member  of  the  Cabinet,  a  status  that  considerably  improves  its 
capacity  to  infl uence  the  intersectoral  policy  dialogue  with  line 
ministries.  It  also  has  an  independent  budget.  But  its  human 
resource structure, with just 10 percent of its 270 total staff  under 
permanent contracts, and its lack of specialized personnel constrain 
its  organizational  capacity.  Reorganizations  following  changes  in 
political  administration  have  further  debilitated  the  institution, 
leading to the discontinuation of important lines of work.

Additionally, these partnerships can increase 
legitimacy  to  speak  on  behalf  of  women’s 
 issues.

Gender progressiveness in the application 
of the law
The role of the judiciary is to make an authori-
tative  determination  on  any  persistent  dispute 
in a manner that is impartial, ﬁ nal, and likely to 
be enforced. Courts of justice that operate with 
integrity can thus be powerful agents for social 
change when they work without gender bias or 
any other kind of prejudice. 

Why  is  the  judiciary  important?  Although 
only  a  small  percentage  of  people  directly  use 
courts in any country, the judiciary’s inﬂ uence 
goes beyond those who come into direct contact 
with it. Courts that consistently and reliably en-
force the law through their decisions will affect 
the future behavior of most citizens and institu-
tions. In communities where courts issue con-
sistent, predictable decisions, community mem-
bers will normally seek to avoid behaviors that 
the courts are likely to punish or invalidate. 

The judiciary itself can be a driver of gender-
progressive change, or it can be a tool of the state 
in  bringing  about  change.  Country  dynamics 
and speciﬁ cities inﬂ uence how and how much a 
court can contribute to change—the judiciary’s 
relationship to other state structures, the legiti-
macy  of  court  authority,  the  independence  of 
the courts themselves, and the existence of ex-
plicit laws that recognize gender equality as an 
enforceable right all inﬂ uence the scope of the 
judiciary for action.

Courts typically have the exclusive right to in-
terpret the constitution and laws (box 8.11). For 
example, the Botswana High Court and Court of 
Appeals interpreted the country’s constitution as 
prohibiting sex discrimination, even though such 
discrimination  was  not  explicitly  identiﬁ ed  as 
being unconstitutional.71 Courts have also been 
instrumental  in  striking  down  legal  provisions 
and state actions that discriminate on the basis 
of gender, such as unequal inheritance rights in 
Nepal.72 In Bahrain, a court case is pending that 
addresses the inability of women to transmit na-
tionality to their children. Previous court action 

348 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 8.11    Courts and constitutional challenges in Uganda’s 

divorce law

In  2003,  in  the  Constitutional  Court  of  Uganda,  the  Uganda  Association  of 
Women Lawyers successfully challenged discriminatory divorce laws as uncon-
stitutional.  Under  an  1857  version  of  an  English  Marriage  Act—which  still 
applied in Uganda but had long since been reformed in the United Kingdom—
husbands were allowed to obtain a divorce on the grounds of adultery; yet a 
wife had to prove aggravated adultery (adultery plus another off ense such as 
incest, bigamy, cruelty, or desertion) to obtain a divorce. The judge held that 
this diff erent treatment refl ected pre-20th-century English perceptions that a 
man was superior to a woman, which was impossible to reconcile with modern 
concepts of equality and nondiscrimination between the sexes as embedded 
in the 1995 Ugandan constitution.

Source: Uganda Association of Women Lawyers v Attorney General (Constitutional Petition No. 2 of 2003) 
UGCC1.

led the government to waive government fees for 
public services to children of Bahraini mothers 
married to foreign nationals.73 

In some countries, courts lay down directives 
and guidelines in the absence of laws. The Su-
preme Court in India, in addition to declaring 
sexual harassment unlawful under the constitu-
tion  and  international  conventions,  provided 
guidelines for observance at all workplaces and 
other institutions, public or private, applicable 
until  legislation  is  passed  by  parliament.74  In 
another case, it provided directions to improve 
various government schemes for maternal and 
infant mortality.75

Special courts (such as family courts or courts 
for rape and sexual offenses) or speciﬁ c regimes 
(family matters reserved to religious or custom-
ary  courts)  can  inﬂ uence  outcomes  and  shape 
the content of rights. These alternative mecha-
nisms,  as  well  as  gender  units  in  the  judiciary, 
can  support  a  gender-responsive  environment 
for the application of law. For example, as noted 
in chapter 4, even where women have access to 
justice, their ability to navigate the judicial sys-
tem  might  be  impaired  by  gender  norms  and 
sensitivities. Women subjected to sexual violence 
may be reticent to testify publicly, so allowing tes-
timony in private chambers may facilitate more 
sexual assault cases to be prosecuted in court.

SEIZING WINDOWS OF 
OPPORTUNITIES

Windows  of  opportunity  for  gender  policy 
sometimes  stem  from  unpredictable  circum-

stances, such as a national disaster. Others arise 
from  shifts  in  the  political  or  economic  land-
scape. And yet others emerge from the advocacy 
of transnational agencies and role modeling in 
the global arena.

Responding to local dislocations
An isolated event can be a catalyst to generate 
change. In Nicaragua in 1998, Hurricane Mitch 
created  the  conditions  for  a  national  dialogue 
on domestic violence. The NGO Puntos de En-
cuentro developed a campaign with the slogan, 
“Violence against women is a disaster that men 
can prevent,” building on the need for solidarity 
that Hurricane Mitch left in its wake.76 

Political transitions can provide the space for 
broader transformative reforms. General Fran-
co’s death in Spain in 1975 opened the door to 
a dramatic shift in the social landscape. During 
Franco’s  years,  contraception  was  prohibited, 
and  married  women  needed  their  husbands’ 
permission  to  engage  in  economic  opportuni-
ties, own property, or travel. Democracy allowed 
for a rapid transformation in the prevailing legal 
code to catch up with social expectations. The 
marital permit was abolished in 1975. Adultery 
laws and the ban on the sale of contraceptives 
were repealed in 1978. Divorce was legalized in 
1981. Legalized abortion in speciﬁ c cases—rape, 
malformed fetus, or to save the mother’s life—
followed  in  1985;  public  opinion  remained 
largely opposed to abortion on demand. There 
has since been a large decline in the gender gap 
in employment as women, particularly married 
women, entered the labor force.77 

Transitions can, however, risk a reversal. The 
collapse of the Iron Curtain meant that Eastern 
European women lost some of the gains in gen-
der  equality  made  under  communism.  In  the 
1980s, about 90 percent of women in Bulgaria, 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Poland were em-
ployed.  Women  enjoyed  free  health  care,  long 
maternity leave, and state-sponsored child care. 
They  also  beneﬁ ted  from  parliamentary  quo-
tas  that  gave  them  some  voice  in  the  political 
system.  But  in  the  Russian  Federation,  female 
parliamentary  representation  dropped  from 
35  percent  in  1987  to  10  percent  in  1999,  and 
in Slovakia, from 30 percent to 13 percent. For-
mal employment recruitment heavily preferred 
men. Half of the day-care centers in Lithuania 
and Poland closed between 1992 and 1994. And 
Bulgarian slogans to increase birth rates urged 
women to go “back to home and family.”78 The 

 

The political economy of gender reform 

349

rise  of  capitalism  and  a  new  political  order  in 
Eastern Europe thus set women back on some 
aspects of endowments, agency, and economic 
opportunities.

Even  without  social,  political,  or  economic 
change, shifts in the relative political power of 
various  actors  can  open  room  for  reform.  In 
Morocco,  after  more  than  10  years  of  efforts 
by women’s groups, a new family code was en-
dorsed  by  the  king  and  unanimously  adopted 
by  parliament  in  2004  in  response  to  popular 
support.79 The legislation raised the minimum 
age of marriage to 18 for women, controlled po-
lygamy, allowed women to initiate divorce pro-
ceedings,  enabled  women  to  retain  custody  of 
children, and improved inheritance rights.80

Riding on transnational efforts
Transnational  networks  have  driven  the  dif-
fusion  of  gender  issues  around  the  globe  as 
has  international  role  modeling  (chapter  6). 
Reform-oriented  policy  makers  are  attuned  to 
the  successes  and  failures  in  nations  near  and 
afar.  Policy  shifts  beyond  a  nation’s  borders 
can increase their receptivity and legitimacy at 
home, as the vertiginous speed and deep pene-
tration of mass media and telecommunications 
facilitate the spread of new ideas.

Between 1930 and 1990, about 20 countries 
adopted  quotas  to  increase  female  representa-
tion in political ofﬁ ce. In the 1990s, gender quo-
tas expanded to 50 more countries, and an addi-
tional 50 approved quota systems in the 2000s.81 
In  November  1997,  the  heads  of  governments 
of  the  Southern  African  Development  Com-
munity adopted the Declaration on Gender and 
Development, committing to 30 percent repre-
sentation  of  women  in  decision-making  posts 
by 2005. In 2005, they boosted the goal for 2015 
to 50 percent.82

Much of the force of transnational networks 
emanates  from  international  women’s  organi-
zations,  the  United  Nations,  and  international 
development  and  cooperation  agencies.  The 
Inter-American  Commission  of  Women,  es-
tablished in 1928 as an ofﬁ cial forum for debat-
ing  and  formulating  gender  equality  policies 
in the Americas, was the ﬁ rst intergovernmen-
tal agency to ensure recognition of the human 
rights of women.

International NGOs and networks of wom-
en’s groups can be allies in spurring and moni-
toring  reform. Working  locally,  regionally,  and 
nationally,  with  a  strong  ﬁ eld  presence  and 

deep  knowledge  of  local  conditions,  these  or-
ganizations can assist governments in assessing 
gender-differentiated impacts of various policy 
responses and lobby for policy change in prior-
ity  areas.  International  development  partners 
have  also  been  repositories  of  ideas  for  policy 
innovation to create lasting economic and social 
change. They are vocal advocates and sponsors 
of promising approaches to address gender in-
equality, offering tools for mainstreaming gen-
der  issues  in  speciﬁ c  sectors,  and  conducting 
training  to  increase  awareness  of  gender  and 
development (chapter 9).

The  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All 
Forms  of  Discrimination  against  Women 
 (CEDAW) and other international treaties pro-
vide an umbrella framework delineating inter-
national norms for gender equality—an inter-
national  code  of  conduct.  CEDAW  facilitates 
consultations,  provides  models  of  good  prac-
tice,  and  stimulates  cooperation  on  technical 
assistance. It has been a channel for gender re-
form in many countries (box 8.12), even if some 
do  not  always  uphold  their  commitments. 
Oversight and regular monitoring by the Com-
mittee  on  the  Elimination  of  Discrimination 
against Women provide occasions for national 
governments to reﬂ ect on their record and draw 

BOX 8.12    Fiji: International norms as a driver of gender 

equality in family law

Fiji’s ratifi cation of CEDAW and its constitutional commitment to adhere to the 
convention were critical for its adoption of a new egalitarian family law in 2003. 
Principles of equal partnership and unpaid contributions to property had 
not been recognized, divorce was diffi  cult to obtain, women could be excluded 
from  the  home,  and  postdivorce  maintenance  was  limited  and  not  reliably 
enforceable. Family law reform started in 1995, when Fiji acceded to the con-
vention,  but  was  stalled  by  a  civilian  uprising  in  2000.  When  calm  returned, 
reform was fi ercely resisted. Imrana Jalal, the Family Law Reform Commissioner 
in the mid-1990s, credits the state’s ratifi cation of CEDAW and the 2002 CEDAW 
review as signifi cant in overcoming opposition. Supporters were bolstered by 
the constitution then in force, which specifi cally prohibited discrimination on 
the basis of gender. 

The  new  family  law  noted  that  several  specifi c  provisions  meet  CEDAW 
norms: fi nancial and nonfi nancial contributions taken into account in property 
division; presumption of equal contribution; and enforceable postmarital main-
tenance from either spouse, depending on the circumstances. In addition, the 
age of marriage was raised to 18 years for both men and women in 2009. 

In  its  2010  review,  the  Committee  on  the  Elimination  of  Discrimination 
against Women commended the state for adopting family laws in compliance 
with the convention but noted that inheritance practices remain a problem. 

Source: Byrnes and Freeman 2011.

350 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

possible  options  for  action  from  the  commit-
tee’s recommendations.

The UN World Conferences on Women held 
in  1975,  1980,  1985,  and  1995  also  galvanized 
national and international support for improv-
ing the political, economic, and social status of 
women—as  did  the  UN  Population  Confer-
ences, particularly the 1994 conference in Cairo. 
These international conferences opened politi-
cal space for national governments and societal 
actors  to  raise  concerns,  generate  awareness, 
learn  about  cross-national  experiences,  gener-
ate momentum, and apply pressure to advance 
a  gender  equality  agenda  nationally.83  Ratiﬁ -
cations  of  women’s  rights  conventions,  such 
as  CEDAW,  have  been  clustered  around  these 
major  international  human  rights  conferences 
(ﬁ gure 8.6).84

Synergies  are  strong  between  national  gov-
ernments,  nonstate  actors,  and  the  interna-
tional development community. First, CEDAW 
and  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  of-
fer  a  framework  for  mutual  accountability,  by 
delineating gender equity goals tied to speciﬁ c 
targets and deadlines. Both have rallied national 
governments and international stakeholders to 
take time-bound actions to achieve precise ob-
jectives. Second, NGOs and international part-
ners have been pivotal in the effectiveness of the 
international  women’s  rights  regime,  buttress-
ing  its  mutual  accountability  framework.  For 
instance, the monitoring and advocacy by Co-
lombian  local  women’s  groups  under  CEDAW 

FIGURE 8.6   Progress toward increasing women’s rights is 
clustered around major international human 
rights conferences

1980 Copenhagen Second World Conference on Women 

1985 Nairobi Third World Conference on Women 

1993 Vienna World Conference on Human Rights

1994 Cairo International 
Conference on Population and 
Development and 1995 Beijing 
Fourth World Conference on 
Women 

 

W
A
D
E
C
o
t
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
t
a
r
 
y
r
t
n
u
o
c
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

25 

20 

15 

10 

5 

0 

1980 

1985 

1990 

1995 

2000 

2005 

2010 

year of ratification

Source: Byrnes and Freeman 2011.

informed the expansion of reproductive health 
guarantees  in  the  Colombian  Consitution,  ad-
opted  in  1990,  and  facilitated  greater  access  to 
contraception.85 

Trade  and  economic  cooperation  agree-
ments, through antidiscriminatory clauses and 
minimum  standards,  are  another  channel  for 
widening  gender  reform.  In  September  1999, 
for  example,  the Asia  Paciﬁ c  Economic  Coop-
eration ministers endorsed a Framework for the 
Integration  of  Women  and  established  an  Ad 
Hoc Advisory Group on Gender Integration to 
ensure its effective implementation.86

Under  many  of  these  agreements,  noncom-
pliance  may  result  in  a  reduction  of  economic 
beneﬁ ts or the application of sanctions. Breaches 
of  labor  standards  in  a  side  agreement  to  the 
North American Agreement on Labor Coopera-
tion  have  led  to  transnational  legal  action  and 
social mobilization. Female employees of a U.S.-
owned vehicle parts plant based in Mexico ﬁ led 
a  sexual  harassment  complaint  with  Mexican 
authorities.  During  the  investigation,  the  par-
ent  company—American  United  Global—shut 
down the plant and ﬁ red the women. A sexual 
harassment suit was then ﬁ led in Los Angeles Su-
perior Court, claiming severance pay owed to the 
women under Mexican law. With assistance from 
the  California-based  Support  Committee  for 
Maquiladora Workers, the United Auto Workers 
sought to enforce a clause in their contracts with 
Chrysler,  Ford,  and  General  Motors  not  to  use 
parts made under unfair labor conditions. After 
eight months of legal wrangling and community 
activism, the case was settled out of court.87 

PATHWAYS TO CHANGE

There is no single path to greater gender equal-
ity, for policy change is an adaptive and complex 
process.  Progress  in  advanced  and  developing 
economies  has  come  through  different  routes, 
and public action has varied. Governments have 
espoused a wide range of gender-equalizing pol-
icies through changes in family laws and prop-
erty rights, antidiscrimination statutes in labor 
markets, and more targeted interventions. Some 
have  subsidized  girls’  education  and  women’s 
wage  employment.  Others  have  experimented 
with  cash  beneﬁ ts  for  child  care  and  parental 
work  leave  provisions  for  new  fathers.  The  se-
quencing  of  reforms  has  also  differed  across 
countries,  as  have  the  pace  and  depth  of  their 

 

The political economy of gender reform 

351

impacts  on  gender  outcomes  and  opportuni-
ties. Even in rich countries, the goal of gender 
equality remains a work in progress—even after 
many decades of campaigning and reform.

This  range  of  experiences  reﬂ ects  an  ongo-
ing  call  to  policy  action,  both  nationally  and 
globally.  Leadership,  civic  activism,  policy  ne-
gotiation,  and  effective  implementation  man-
agement  are  essential  to  support  and  promote 
greater gender equality—especially in domains 
seemingly resistant to change, such as domestic 
violence.

Considered here are two possible pathways to 
policy reform, already introduced in chapter 7. 
Gender policies can be “incremental,” working 
within prevailing social norms or responding to 
emerging social demands and reﬂ ecting changes 
in the broader institutional and normative envi-
ronment. Alternatively, government action can 
be “transformative” and strive to induce change 
in existing gender dynamics. In practice, incre-
mental  policies  can  become  transformative  in 
nature;  while  transformative  policies  can  and 
often fail or achieve more modest results.

Incremental change—Responding to 
emerging social demands
Many policy reforms follow shifts in the existing 
economic and social environment. Social norms 
can  be  remarkably  stable,  and  their  longevity 
can  further  buttress  their  resilience.  But  social 
norms  are  not  immutable.  Shifts  in  attitudes 
can occur quite rapidly, literally reaching a tip-
ping point when isolated or individual behavior 
garners critical mass appeal.88

Policy change happens as a means to resolve 
internal tensions between markets and formal, 
and informal institutions. In other words, gov-
ernment action responds to emerging or estab-
lished social demands. Indeed, bringing about 
such  change—whether  directly,  through  mak-
ing explicit demands of governments, or indi-
rectly,  by  seeking  to  alter  broader  societal  un-
derstandings—is precisely the objective of most 
social movements and international campaigns 
(box 8.13).

Policy  formulation  and  enactment  are  less 
likely to be contested or to encounter political 
resistance if a basis for consensus already exists. 
In  1906,  The  Englishwoman’s  Review  reported 
the extension of voting rights in Finland: 

The miracle has happened . . . Our victory 
is in all cases great and the more so as the 

proposal has been adopted almost without 
opposition. The gratitude which we women 
feel is mingled with the knowledge that we 
are  much  less  worthy  of  this  great  success 
than the women of England and America, 
who have struggled so long and so faithfully, 
with  much  more  energy  and  perseverance 
than we.89

Similarly,  granting  voting  rights  to  women 
in postcolonial Africa was little contested. Uni-
versal suffrage was enmeshed with the struggle 
for  independence.  A  gendered  concept  of  citi-
zenship  would  have  been  widely  repudiated 
because it was inconsistent with the prevailing 
belief in equal voice.

The  Republic  of  Korea  is  the  only  Asian 
country that has reversed rising male-female sex 
ratios at birth. Despite rapid economic growth, 
greater  female  labor  force  participation,  and 
better women’s education, a preference for sons 
persisted  there  through  the  mid-1990s.  Earlier 
policy  interventions  reinforced  Confucian  tra-
ditions  to  channel  resources  toward  rapid  de-
velopment. The 1990 reform of the Family Law 
upheld  the  male  family  headship,  along  with 
patrilineal inheritance. Children belonged to the 
father’s lineage after a divorce. But industrializa-
tion and urbanization fueled normative changes 
in  society  that  quickly  led  to  a  turnaround  in 
 attitudes.  Civil  society  began  to  pressure  gov-
ernment to change laws upholding the margin-
alization of women in their domestic and pub-
lic lives. In 2005, the Supreme Court ruled that 
women  could  remain  members  of  their  birth 
household  after  marriage—and  that  women 
and men have equal rights and responsibilities 
to  care  for  their  ancestors.90  These  changes  in 
the value and status of daughters in turn pro-
gressively weakened the preference for sons. 

When  gender  policy  follows  societal  cues, 
an  alignment  between  social  expectations  and 
policy  design  usually  eases  the  convergence  of 
policy’s intentions and outcomes. Several waves 
of policy reform in Tunisia increased social pres-
sure and consensus to liberalize family law. Later 
reforms  stood  on  the  successes  and  perceived 
beneﬁ ts of earlier efforts (box 8.14).

But  gender  reform  can  also  inspire  spirited 
resistance to sway public opinion. In Ireland in 
May  1995,  when  the  vote  to  remove  the  con-
stitutional  ban  on  divorce  through  a  national 
referendum  was  announced,  69  percent  of  the 
electorate said they would support it. Yet, by the 

352 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

BOX 8.13   Changing social norms from the bottom up 

Female foot binding, a painful and dangerous practice, lasted 1,000 
years in China but ended in a single generation in the early 20th 
century. Female genital cutting can be traced to the 2nd century 
B.C. (to Red Sea tribes) but was abandoned within a single genera-
tion in parts of Senegal. 

The persistence of such practices can be attributed to the beliefs 
held by members of an intermarrying group. Households comply 
with  prevailing  social  norms  because  they  do  not  want  to  be 
shunned by society or placed at a severe disadvantage in the mar-
riage market. Another contributing factor is the general acceptance 
of the status quo as the only possible alternative. Interviews with 
women in Tanzania indicate that many had never thought that not 
being  cut  was  an  option.  Similarly,  “when  fi rst-contact  foreigners 
asked Chinese why they bound their women’s feet, their response 
was astonishment that not everyone in the world engaged in the 
practice.” Because the conventions of foot binding and female gen-
ital cutting regulate access to marriage, noncomplying families are 
unlikely  to  reproduce.  This  makes  it  diffi  cult  for  variation  in  the 
practice within the community to take root.

What explains the rapid abandonment of these practices after a 

long history of adherence?  

Modernization appears to have had little to do with it. Instead 
what  occurred  was  a  grassroots  social  restructuring  of  beliefs.  In 
China, a series of activist groups (the Anti-Foot Binding Society and 
the Natural Foot Society) emerged in the late 19th century. Their 
strategy involved pledging members of the community not to bind 
their  daughters  and  not  to  let  their  sons  marry  bound  women. 
These groups advertised the disadvantages of foot binding in Chi-
nese cultural terms, promoted pledge associations, and subtly con-
veyed international disapproval of the custom. As public support to 
end  the  practice  grew,  a  political  ban  was  instituted  in  the  early 
20th century, cementing the earlier eff ort of mass mobilization and 
education.

Tostan,  an  NGO  based  in  Senegal,  espoused  an  analogous 
model in the 1990s to eradicate female genital cutting in parts of 
Senegal: 

•   Education. An innovative 30-month education program, known 
as  the  Community  Empowerment  Program,  included  modules 
on  human  rights,  hygiene  and  health,  literacy,  and  project 
management.

•   Public  discussion.  These  modules  were  then  discussed  in  small 
group settings. In these meetings, women and men deliberated 
their aspirations for themselves, their families, and their commu-
nity. Refl ection on individual and societal needs led individuals to 
revise their beliefs about existing cultural practices.

•   Public  declaration  and  organized  diff usion.  Acting  on  their  new 
established  ideals,  communities  coordinated  the  abandonment 
of female genital cutting through public declaration or pledging 
and urging neighboring communities to do the same.

Initially,  Tostan  did  not  state  whether  female  genital  cutting 
was right or wrong. It was women’s decision to reject the practice. 
Women  in  Malicounda  Bambara  (population  3,000)  mobilized  to 
raise  awareness  among  their  fellow  villagers  about  the  harmful 
health eff ects of the practice.  Then these women traveled to Ngerin 
Bambara to spread the word. Their eff orts continued to grow, even-
tually leading to the Diabougou Declaration, in which 50 represen-
tatives  of  8,000  villagers  from  13  communities  in  the  regions  of 
Thies and Fatick publicly decided to abandon female genital cut-
ting. A law passed in January 1999 made it a criminal act in Senegal 
punishable by a sentence of one to fi ve years in prison.

These  histories  are  similar,  suggesting  that  community  action 
led to widespread individual self-realization that then shifted the 
social norm. 

Sources: Mackie and LeJeune 2009; U.S. Department of State 2001; http://www.tostan.org.

“

Even though we have been told several times that female 
circumcision is bad (and I agree with them), there are still 
beliefs that it is good. That is why in a hidden manner, there are 
women who take their children for circumcision; or they do it 
themselves when a kid is still small.

Adult woman, Tanzania

”

time of the vote in November, a concerted cam-
paign  against  divorce  had  shrunk  public  sup -
port  to  49  percent.  The  “yes”  vote  eventually 
won by a narrow 0.6 point margin.91 

Policy  intentions  and  actions  also  can  have 
unintended spillovers that give rise to new social 
dynamics and processes of change. For example, 

divorce  laws  protect  the  interests  of  different 
parties  in  a  terminated  marriage,  specifying 
property  splits,  child  custody,  and  entitled  ali-
mony.  But  divorce  laws  also  inﬂ uence  the  be-
havior of married couples by shifting bargaining 
positions between husbands and wives. 

In  Ireland,  the  legalization  of  divorce—and 
concomitant  risk  of  marital  dissolution—
increased  female 
labor  force  participation. 
The  participation  rate  of  nonreligious  mar-
ried  women  increased  by  around  10  percent-
age  points  (a  25  percent  increase)  relative  to 
religious married women.92 The legalization of 
divorce  also  increased  savings  by  married  in-
dividuals.93  And  in  Chile,  divorce  legislation 
 increased  school  investments  for  children  of 
married couples.94

 

The political economy of gender reform 

353

Gradually phasing in reforms can bring about 
change in ways that generate less resistance, and 
spillover effects may be better managed. Policy 
action can begin where popular social attitudes 
provide a foothold. A recent survey in Bangla-
desh suggests that two-thirds of household heads 
(mostly  men)  believe  that  daughters  and  sons 
should  have  similar  rights  to  inherit  property, 
despite existing legal provisions that daughters 
inherit half as much as sons.95

Transformative change—Inducing greater 
gender equality
In some instances, governments propose social 
policy  programs  or  agendas  to  induce  a  more 
gender-equalizing equilibrium. These efforts can 
be  transformative  in  the  sense  that  they  pre-
cede a social consensus or challenge prevailing 
social norms. State policies can signal appropri-
ate behavior, providing incentives for behavioral 
change  and  thus  affecting  the  structure  of  re-
wards and costs. Such policies may come from 
an  ambitious  social  policy  vision  and  strong 
political will to reform. Or they may cover as-
pects that matter relatively little to most of the 
population. 

Transformative change usually seeks to cata-
lyze progress in “sticky” domains. Scandinavian 
states, for example, are at the forefront of pro-

BOX 8.14   Tunisia—Women’s voice and women’s rights

Since Tunisia won its independence in 1956, several reform waves have been 
enacted to promote equality between men and women. The Tunisian Code of 
Personal  Status  reformed  laws  on  marriage  (including  imposing  a  ban  on 
polygamy), divorce, custody, and, to some extent, inheritance. In the 1960s, fur-
ther reforms introduced wage equality, mandatory schooling for boys and girls, 
and  widely  available  contraception.  These  reforms  could  be  labeled  as  top-
down, imposed by a state that was trying to modernize at a fast pace.

Beginning in the 1970s and increasingly in the 1980s, a women’s movement 
developed,  building  on  this  fi rst  wave  of  progress.  Women’s  associations—
such  as  the  Club  Taher  al  Haddad,  the  Association  des  Femmes  Tunisiennes 
pour  la  Recherche  et  le  Développment,  and  the  National  Union  of  Tunisian 
Women—emerged,  and  feminist  discourse  came  to  the  forefront  of  public 
debates by highlighting women’s rights and issues. 

In  1993,  new  legislation  secured  additional  rights  for  women,  such  as 
nationality rights (for the fi rst time a Tunisian woman could pass her nationality 
to a child born abroad, regardless of the nationality of the child’s father), and 
protections  against  domestic  violence  and  workplace  discrimination  were 
adopted. In 1997, the government enacted new social policies to support low-
income working women and divorced women and their children.

Sources: Baliamount-Lutz 2011; Moghadam 2007.

viding public child care and granting generous 
parental  leave.  In  1995,  Sweden  reserved  one 
month  of  paid  parental  leave  for  the  father,  a 
“daddy quota” that cannot be transferred to the 
mother (box 8.15) even though mothers spent 

BOX 8.15  Sweden—Encouraging an involved fatherhood

When  Olof  Palme,  the  Swedish  prime  minister,  made  a  speech  in 
1970 for a women’s organization in the United States, he surprised 
the audience by not speaking about women but about men. The 
title  of  his  lecture  was  “The  Emancipation  of  Man,”  and  Palme 
argued  that  only  if  both  women  and  men  share  a  dual  role—at 
home and at work—can any substantial change take place. That is, 
men should be given the same rights and duties as women in their 
parental capacity. 

The  transformation  of  maternity  leave  into  parental  leave 
encourages Swedish men to take an active part in parenthood. This 
change took place in 1974 and meant that the leave following the 
birth of a child was no longer reserved for the mother but could 
also be used by the father. Over time, parental leave was extended 
from 6 months in 1974 to 16 months today. 

The  share  of  fathers  taking  parental  leave  grew  slowly  and  in 
small  numbers.  Some  argued  that  there  should  be  an  obligatory 
division of the entitlement between parents. A heated debate on 
parental “freedom to choose” ensued. Since then, numerous gov-
ernmental  and  nongovernmental  campaigns  have  encouraged 
fathers to use parental leave.

In 1995, a one-month “daddy quota” was adopted to encourage 
fathers to take parental leave and stimulate gender equality; that is, 
one month of the parental leave could no longer be transferred to 
the  other  parent.  In  2002,  the  “daddy  quota”  was  increased  by 
another month.

Of the claimants to parental leave in 2007, fathers accounted for 
44 percent. Around 49 percent of fathers of children born in 1993, 
before the introduction of the father’s months, did not use a single 
day of the parental leave allowance. Two years later, only 19 percent 
of  fathers  did  not  take  parental  leave;  while  the  proportion  that 
took 30 days or more increased from 33 percent to 53 percent. 

There is still a way to go, though. In 2007, a mere 5 percent of 
fathers and mothers shared their parental allowance days equally 
(40–60 percent). In July 2008, a gender equality bonus was intro-
duced as an incentive to share the parental allowance more equally. 
The parent with the lower income (usually the mother) receives a 
tax deduction of at most €300 for going back to work full-time while 
the other parent (usually the father) takes parental leave.

Source: Nyberg 2011.

354 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

much more time on caring for young children 
than  did  fathers.96  Germany  also  recently  in-
troduced a similar nontransferable two-month 
parental leave allowance. The proportion of fa-
thers taking up parental leave increased from 3.5 
percent in 2006 to 16 percent in 2009. And more 
than a third of fathers take more than the two 
months of parental leave reserved for them.

The  introduction  of  transformative  change 
without enabling conditions, such as new legis-
lation, can decouple policy intentions and out-
comes, calling into question the sustainability of 
reform.  Strong  enforcement  mechanisms  may 
be  required  for  behavioral  change.  The  risk  of 
reversal—especially if enforcement is relaxed—
threatens this new equilibrium. 

For  example,  the  Marriage  Law  of  1950  in 
China sought to eliminate arranged marriages, 
authorize divorce, and establish rights for women 
to  inherit  property  and  have  control  of  their 
children. Female cadres attached to the Women’s 
Federation  were  charged  with  implementing 
these policies in villages and households. But the 
law  met  deep-seated  resistance  from  men  and 
older women, both standing to lose control over 
their  young  daughters  and  daughters-in-law.97 
Although  the  Marriage  Law  reduced  the  inci-
dence of arranged marriages, increased the age 
of ﬁ rst marriage, and incorporated the option of 
divorce into family law, its enforcement tapered 
off when it began to threaten the family system 
and generate political disaffection.98

Enforcing policy change is shaped by the ca-
pacity of the state machinery to follow through 
and by the extent to which the wider commu-
nity accepts reforms. New laws may reﬂ ect pre-
vailing  traditions  or  social  norms.  But  if  they 
conﬂ ict  with  local  attitudes  or  customs,  they 
may be simply ignored or not widely dissemi-
nated.  So,  simply  legislating  policy  change  is 
not  enough.  Financing,  implementation,  pub-
lic  awareness  campaigns,  and  enforcement  all 
need  to  support  the  intended  policy  changes. 
In Norway, the government introduced volun-
tary quotas to increase female representation on 
corporate boards in 2003. After ﬁ rms failed to 
take action, a mandatory quota was instituted. 
In 2006, Norway required that the boards of di-
rectors of public limited companies have at least 
40  percent  female  members  within  two  years. 
By 2009, the average female share on boards of 
directors among affected ﬁ rms had almost tri-
pled.99 Success relied heavily on tough sanctions, 
including  the  forced  dissolution  of  noncom-

pliant  companies.  However,  some  companies 
changed their legal status from public to private 
limited companies to avoid gender representa-
tion rules.100

Transformative  change  can  also  open  new 
dynamics in economic and social relationships. 
Governments can legislate new rights and enact 
new policies, some enforceable and others sym-
bolic. In Brazil electoral list quotas for women 
have had limited impact.101 In Afghanistan, par-
liamentary  seats  reserved  for  women  allowed 
more women to participate in politics.102 Female 
quotas have also induced political parties to in-
vest in training a new generation of female po-
litical cadres—sooner rather than later. Women 
can  bring  new  perspectives  and  new  priorities 
to  the  policy  realm.  Indeed,  female  legislators 
in Argentina, Colombia, and Costa Rica initiate 
more  legislation  on  women’s,  family  and  chil-
dren’s issues than their male counterparts.103

It has been argued that when 5 percent of a 
society—innovators—accept  a  new  idea,  it  be-
comes “embedded.” And  that  normally  half  of 
the  population  must  be “aware”  of  the  idea  in 
order to reach the 5 percent who will adopt it. 
When  20  percent—early  adopters—espouse  it, 
the new idea becomes “unstoppable.” Transfor-
mative change comes from systematically locat-
ing innovators and early adopters.104 

NOTES

    1.  Bourguignon, Ferreira, and Walzer 2007.
    2.  NAWL and NAWL Foundation 2011.
    3.  Phillipines House of Representatives 2008.
    4.  Pandofelli, Meinzen-Dick, and Dohrn 2008.
    5.  Ray 2003.
    6.  Kabeer 2005.
    7.  Lind and Bruzy 2008.
    8.  Gangopadhyay 2010.
    9.  Gupta 2009.
  10.  Paxton, Hughes, and Green 2006.
  11.  UNRISD 2005.
  12.  As cited in Frieson (2011).
  13.  Young 1990.
  14.  Lind and Bruzy 2008.
  15.  Masho and Matthews 2009.
  16.  Lerner 1990.
  17.  Weldon 2006.
  18.  Farré 2011. 
  19.  Doepke and Doepke 2009.
  20.  Fernández 2010.
  21.  Munshi forthcoming.
  22.  http://www.menengage.org.
  23.  Barker and Ricardo 2005, p. 13.

 

The political economy of gender reform 

355

  24.  Greene, Robles, and Maciej Pawlak 2011.
  25.  Pitt, Khandker, and Cartwright 2006.
  26.  Morgan 2009.
  27.  Barker and others 2011.
  28.  ICRW and Instituto Promundo 2010.
  29.  As quoted by the BBC, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/

hi/8223736.stm.

  30.  Porras Serrano 2011.
  31.  http://www.soulcity.org.za.
  32.  http://www.populationmedia.org/where/ 
vietnam/c%E1%BA%A1m-ba%E1%BB%
B9-tune-in.

  33.  Kleinfeld 2009.
  34.  Gueorguieva 2008.
  35.  Belyea 2011.
  36.  http://www.mpt.org/thewar/maryland/work-

force.html.

  37.  Menon and Rodgers 2011.
  38.  This phrase was coined by Joan Williams (2000) 
to  describe  the  obstacles  that  women  face  as 
working mothers. 

  39.  See, for instance, Hom, Roberson, and Ellis 2008.
  40.  Silva and Toledo 2006.
  41.  Jones and Gates 2007.
  42.  ILO 2004.
  43.  Elias 2009.
  44.  http://www.tcenter.com.my.
  45.  The Times Top 50 Employers for Women, http://
www.ri5.co.uk/resources/digitaleditions/ Top50 
EmployersForWomen.htm.

  46.  UNIFEM 2010.
  47.  Warth 2009.
  48.  Porter 2006.
  49.  Herring 2009.
  50.  Kochan and others 2002.
  51.  Rhode and Packet 2010.
  52.  Campbell and Minguez-Vera 2008.
  53.  Rose 2007.
  54.  UNIFEM 2010.
  55.  Maeland 2007; http://www.nho.no.
  56.  McKinsey & Company Inc. 2007.
  57.  Best  Buy  seeking  women  as  customers  and 
execs,  http://www.startribune.com/business/ 
45872412.html.

  58.  MasterCard Worldwide 2010.
  59.  Hallward-Driemeier  2011;  http://www.gbafor 

women.org.

  60.  McKinsey & Company Inc. 2007.
  61.  http://www.betterfactories.org/ILO/aboutBFC.

aspx?z=2&c=1.

  62.  http://www.garmentswithoutguilt.com/.
  63.  http://www.economist.com/node/11455047? 

story_id=E1_TTQVVDQS.

  64.  Middleton and Hancock 2009.
  65.  Ruwanpura and Wrigley 2010.
  66.  Hubley,  et  al.  v.  Dell  Inc.,  No.  1:08-cv-00804-

JRN, Texas, U.S. 

  67.  http://content.dell.com/us/en/corp/d/corp-

comm/cr-diversity-mission.aspx.

  68.  Field 2007.
  69.  McBride and Mazur 2010.
  70.  McBride and Mazur 2011. 
  71.  Attorney General of the Republic of Botswana v 

Unity Dow, AHRLR 99 (BwCA 1992).

  72.  Dhungana  v  Nepal,  Supreme  Court  of  Nepal, 

Writ No. 3392 of 1993, August 2, 1995.

  73.  Kelly and Breslin 2010. 
  74.  Vishaka and Others v. State of Rajasthan, (1997) 

3 S.C.R. 404 (India).

  75.  Laxmi Mandal v Deen Dayal Hospital, W.P.(C) 

Nos. 8853 of 2008 (India).

  76.  http://www.nicaraguasc.org.uk/archive/

violence%20ag%20women/cvaw.htm.

  77.  Gunner, Kaya, and Sánchez-Marcos 2011.
  78.  LaFont 2001.
  79.  Sadiqi 2008.
  80.  United Nations Committee on the Elimination 

of Discrimination Against Women 2006.

  81.  Krook 2009.
  82.  Tripp and Kang 2008.
  83.  True and Mintrom 2001.
  84.  Wotipka and Ramírez 2007.
  85.  Simmons 2009.
  86.  Cagatay 2001.
  87.  Bayes  and  Kelly  2001;  Fontana,  Joekes,  and 

Masika 1998.
  88.  Young 2007. 
  89.  As  quoted  in  Ramirez,  Soysal,  and  Shanahan 

1997.

  90.  Das Gupta, Chung, and Shuzhuo 2009.
  91.  Burley and Regan 2002. 
  92.  Bargain and Keane 2010.
  93.  González and Özcan 2008.
  94.  Heggeness 2010.
  95.  Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action at MIT 2010.
  96.  Borchorst and Siim 2008.
  97.  Engel 1984.
  98.  Diamant 2000.
  99.  Matsa and Miller 2011.
100.  Storvik and Teigen 2010.
101.  Araújo 2010.
102.  Krook 2009.
103.  Schwindt-Bayer 2006.
104.  Rogers 1983.

REFERENCES

The word processed describes informally reproduced 
works that may not be commonly available through 
libraries.

Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action at MIT. 2010. Em-
powering Young Women: What Do We Know about 
Creating the Girl Effect? Cambridge, MA: Massa-
chusetts  Institute of Technology.

Andreasen, Tavo, Anette Borchorst, Drude Dahlerup, 
and Eva Lous, eds. 1991. Moving On: New Perspec-

356 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

tives  on  the  Women’s  Movement.  Aarhus:  Aarhus 
University Press.

Antrobus,  Peggy.  2004.  The  Global  Women’s  Move-
ment: Origins, Issues and Strategies. New York: Zed 
Books.

Araújo, Clara. 2010. “The Limits of Women’s Quotas 

in Brazil.” IDS Bulletin 41 (5): 17–24.

Baliamoune, E. Mina. 2011. “The Making of Gender 
Equality in Tunisia and Implications for Develop-
ment.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Bargain, Olivier, Libertad González, Claire Keane, and 
Berkay Özcan. 2010. “Female Labour Supply and 
Divorce: New Evidence from Ireland.” Discussion 
Paper Series 4959, Institute for the Study of Labor, 
Bonn. 

Barker,  Gary,  Manuel  Contreras,  Brian  Heilman, 
Ajay  Singh,  Ravi  Verman,  and  Marcos  Nasci-
mento. 2011. “Evolving Men: Initial Results from 
the International Men and Gender Equality Sur-
vey (IMAGES).” Men and Gender Quality Policy 
Project Coordinated by the International Center 
for Research on Women and Instituto Promundo, 
Washington, DC.

Barker,  Gary,  and  Christine  Ricardo.  2005.  “Young 
Men and the Construction of Masculinity in Sub-
Saharan  Africa:  Implicaciones  for  HIV/AIDS, 
Conﬂ ict,  and Violence.”  Social  Development  Pa-
pers 26, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Basu, Amrita, and C. Elizabeth McGregory, eds. 1995. 
The Challenge of Local Feminisms: Women’s Move-
ments  in  Global  Perspective.  Boulder,  CO:  West-
view Press.

Bayes,  Jane  H.,  and  Rita  Mae  Kelly.  2001. “Political 
Spaces,  Gender  and  NAFTA.”  In Gender,  Global-
ization  and  Democratization,  ed.  Rita  Mae  Kelly, 
Jane H. Bayes, Mary E. Hawkesworth, and Brigitte 
Young.  Lanham,  MD:  Rowman  and  Littleﬁ eld 
Publishers.

Belyea,  Ashley.  2011.  “Thinking  Outside  the  Blog: 
Women’s Voice  and  a  New  Generation  of  Com-
munications Technology.” Yale Journal of Interna-
tional Affairs 6 (1) (Winter): 53–63.

Borchorst,  Anette,  and  Birte  Siim.  2008.  “Woman-
Friendly Policies and State Feminism: Theorizing 
Scandinavian Gender Equality.” Feminist Theory 9 
(2): 207–24.

Bourguignon, Francois, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, and 
Michael Walton. 2007. “Equity, Efﬁ ciency and In-
equality Traps: A Research Agenda.” Economic In-
equality 5 (2): 235–56.

Burley,  Jenny,  and  Francis  Regan.  2002. “Divorce  in 
Ireland: The Fear, the Floodgates and the Reality.” 
International Journal of Law, Policy and Family 16 
(2): 202–22.

Byrnes, Andrew, and Marsha A. Freeman. 2011. “The 
Impact  of  the  CEDAW  Conventions:  Paths  to 
Equality.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Cagatay, Nilufer. 2001. “Trade, Gender and Poverty.” 
United  Nations  Development  Programme,  New 
York. Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Campbell, Kevin, and Antonio Mínguez-Vera. 2008. 
“Diversity in the Boardroom and Firm Financial 
Performance.”  Journal  of  Business  Ethics  83  (3): 
435–51.

Das Gupta, Monica, Woojin Chung, and Li Shuzhuo. 
2009. “Evidence for an Incipient Decline in Num-
bers of Missing Girls in China and India.” Popula-
tion and Development Review 35 (2): 401–16.

Deere,  Carmen  Diana,  and  Magdalena  León.  2001. 
“Who Owns the Land? Gender and Land-Titling 
Programmes in Latin America.” Journal of Agrar-
ian Change 1 (3): 440–67.

Diamant,  Neil  T.  2000.  “Re-Examining  the  Impact 
of  the  1950  Marriage  Law:  State  Improvisation, 
Local Initiative and Rural Family Change.” China 
Quarterly 161 (2000): 171–98.

Doepke, Michèle, and Matthias Doepke. 2009. “Wom-
en’s Liberation: What’s in It for Men?” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1541–91.

Elias,  Juanita.  2009.  “Gendering  Liberalisation  and 
Labour  Reform  in  Malaysia:  Fostering  ‘Com-
petitiveness’  in  the  Productive  and  Reproduc-
tive  Economies.”  Third  World  Quarterly  30  (3): 
469–83.

Engel,  John  W.  1984. “Marriage  in  the  People’s  Re-
public of China: Analysis of a New Law.” Journal 
of Marriage and Family 46 (4): 955–61.

Farré, Lídia. 2011. “The Role of Men in Gender Equal-

ity.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Fernández, Raquel. 2010. “Women’s Rights and De-
velopment.”  Research Working  Paper  Series  446, 
Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, Milan.

Ferree,  Myra  Marx,  and  Beth  B.  Hess.  2000.  Con-
troversy  and  Coalition:  The  New  Feminist  Move-
ment  across  Four  Decades  of  Change.  New  York: 
Routledge.

Field, Erica. 2007. “Entitled to Work: Urban Property 
Rights and Labor Supply in Peru.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 122 (4): 1561–602.

Fontana,  Marzia,  Susan  Joekes,  and  Rachel  Masika. 
1998.  Global Trade  Expansion  and  Liberalisation: 
Gender Issues and Impacts. BRIDGE Report 42, In-
stitute of Development Studies, Brighton, U.K.

Frieson,  Kate.  2011. “Cambodia  Case  Study:  Evolu-
tion toward Gender Equality.” Background paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Gangopadhyay,  Monalisa.  2010.  “Hindutva  Meets 
Globalization: The Impact on Hindu Urban Me-
dia  Women.”  PhD  thesis,  Florida  International 
University, Miami.

Geisler,  Gisela.  2004.  Women  and  the  Remaking  of 
Politics in Southern Africa: Negotiating Autonomy, 
Incorporation and Representation. Vizcaya, Spain: 
Graﬁ lur Artes Gráﬁ cas.

 

The political economy of gender reform 

357

Goncalves, Terezinha. 2010. “Crossroads of Empow-
erment:  The  Organisation  of  Women  Domestic 
Workers in Brazil.” IDS Bulletin 41 (2): 62–9.

González,  Libertad,  and  Berkay  Özcan.  2008.  “The 
Risk of Divorce and Household Saving Behavior.” 
Discussion  Paper  Series  3726,  Institute  for  the 
Study of Labor, Bonn.

Greene,  Margaret  E.,  Omar  Robles,  and  Piotr  M. 
 Maciej  Pawlak.  2011.  “Masculinities,  Social 
Change  and  Development.”  Background  paper 
for the WDR 2012.

Gueorguieva, Vassia. 2008. “Voters, MySpace and You-
Tube: The Impact of Alternative Communication 
Channels on the 2006 Election Cycle and Beyond.” 
Social Science Computer Review 26 (3): 288–300.

Gunner,  Nezih,  Ezgi  Kaya,  and  Virginia  Sánchez-
Marcos.  2011.  “Gender  Gaps  in  Spain:  Policies 
and  Outcomes  over  the  Last  Three  Decades.” 
Universidad Autónoma  de  Barcelona,  Barcelona. 
Processed.

Gupta, Monobina. 2009. “Marching Together: Resist-

ing Dowry in India.” JAGORY, New Delhi.

Hallward-Driemeier,  Mary.  2011.  “Improving  the 
Legal  Investment  Climate  for  Women  in  Sub-
Saharan  Africa.”  Policy  Research  Working  Paper 
5571, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Hancock, Peter. 2009. “Gender, Status and Empower-
ment: A Study among Women Who Work in a Sri 
Lankan’s Export Processing Zone (EPZ).” Journal 
of Developing Societes 25 (4): 393–420.

Heggeness,  Misty  L.  2010. “How  does  the  Right  to 
Divorce Affect Resource Allocation within House-
holds? The Case of Chile.” Minnesota Population 
Center,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis. 
Processed.

Herring,  Cedric.  2009.  “Does  Diversity  Pay?  Race, 
Gender,  and  the  Business  Case  for  Diversity.” 
Amercian Sociological Review 74 (2): 208–24.

Hochschild,  Adam.  2005.  Bury  the  Chains:  Prophets 
and Rebels in the Fight to Free an Empire’s Slaves. 
New York: Houghton Mifﬂ in.

Hom, Peter W., Loriann Roberson, and Aimee D. Ellis. 
2008. “Challenging Conventional Wisdom about 
Who Quits: Revelations from Corporate America.” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 93 (1): 1–34.

Hooks, Bell. 2000. Feminist Theory: From Margin to 

Center, 2d ed. Cambridge: South End Press.

Hunt, Lynn. 2007. Inventing Human Rights: A History. 

New York: Norton.

ICRW (International Center for Research on Women), 
and Instituto Promundo. 2010. “What Men Have 
to Do with It: Public Policies to Promote Gender 
Equality.” ICRW, Washington, DC.

ILO (International Labor Organization). 2004. “Gen-
der Equality and Decent Work: Good Practices at 
the Workplace.” ILO, Geneva.

Jones, Cheryl Bland, and Michael Gates. 2007. “The 
Costs  and  Beneﬁ ts  of  Nurse  Turnover:  A  Busi-

ness Case for Nurse Retention.” OJIN: The Online 
Journal of Issues in Nursing 12 (3), manuscript 4, 
September 30.

Kabeer, Naila. 2005. “Gender Equality and Women’s 
Empowerment:  A  Critical  Analysis  of  the  Third 
Millenium  Development  Goal.”  Gender  and  De-
velopment 13 (1): 13–24.

Kelly,  Sanja,  and  Julia  Breslin,  eds.  2010.  Women’s 
Rights in the Middle East and North Africa: Progress 
and Resistance. New York: Freedom House.

Kleinfeld, Judith. 2009. “The State of American Boy-

hood.” Gender Issues 26 (2): 113–29.

Kochan,  Thomas,  Katerina  Bezrukova,  Robin  Ely, 
Susan  Jackson,  Aparna  Joshi,  Karen  Jehn,  Jona-
than Leonard, David Levine, and David Thomas. 
2003.  “The  Effects  of  Diversity  on  Business 
Performance:  Report  of  the  Diversity  Research 
Network.” Human Resources Management 42 (1): 
3–21.

Krook, Mona Lena. 2009. “The Diffusion of Electoral 
Reform:  Gender  Quotas  in  Global  Perspective.” 
Paper presented at the European Consortium for 
Political Research, Lisbon, April 14.

Krook, Mona Lena, and Diana Z. O’Brien. 2010. “The 
Politics  of  Group  Representation:  Quotas  for 
Women and Minorities Worldwide.” Comparative 
Politics 42 (3): 253–72.

LaFont, Suzanne. 2001. “One Step Forward, Two Steps 
Back:  Women  in  the  Post-Communist  States.” 
Communist  and  Post-Communist  Studies  34  (2): 
203–20.

Lerner,  Gerda.  1990. “Reconceptualizing  Differences 
among Women.” Journal of Women’s History 1 (3): 
106–22.

Lind, Amy,  and  Stephanie  Brzuzy,  eds.  2008. Battle-
ground: Women, Gender and Sexuality. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press. 

Mackie, Gerry, and John LeJeune. 2009. “Social Dy-
namics  of  Abandonment  of  Harmful  Practices: 
A  New  Look  at  the  Theory.”  Working  Paper 
2009–06,  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund  Inno-
centi Research Centre, Florence.

Maeland, Kari. 2007. “Female Future: Mobilizing Tal-
ents:  A  Business  Perspective.”  Norwegian  Enter-
prise Organization, Oslo.

Masho, Saba W., and Lindsey Matthews. 2009. “Fac-
tors Determining whether Ethiopian Women Sup-
port Continuation of Female Genital Mutilation.” 
International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics 
107 (3): 232–35.

MasterCard  Worldwide.  2010.  “Women-Owned 
SMEs  in  Asia/Paciﬁ c,  Middle  East,  and  Africa: 
An  Assessment  of  the  Business  Environment.” 
MasterCard  Worldwide  Purchase,  NY.  http://
www.masterintelligence.com/upload/251/178/
MC84-WomenSME-S.pdf. 

Matsa,  David  A.,  and  Amalia  R.  Miller.  2011.  “A 
Female  Style  in  Corporate  Leadership?  Evidence 

358 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

from Quotas.” Northwestern University, Evanston, 
IL; and University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA. 
Processed.

McBride, Dorothy E., and Amy G. Mazur. 2010. The 
Politics of State Feminism: Innovations in Compar-
ative  Research.  Philadelphia:  Temple  University 
Press.

———.  2011.  “Gender  Machineries  Worldwide.” 

Background paper for the WDR 2012.

McKinsey  &  Company  Inc.  2007.  “Women  Mat-
ter.  Gender  Diversity,  A  Corporate  Performance 
Driver.” McKinsey & Company Inc., London.

Menon,  Nivedita.  2009.  “Sexuality,  Caste,  Govern-
mentality: Contests over ‘Gender’ in India.” Femi-
nist Review 91 (1): 94–112.

Menon,  Nidhiya,  and Yana  van  der  Meulen  Rodger. 
2011.  “War  and  Women’s  Work:  Evidence  from 
the  Conﬂ ict  in  Nepal.”  Brandeis  University, 
Waltham, MA. Processed.

Mensah-Williams,  Margaret.  2010.  “The  Evolving 
Status  and  Role  of  National  Mechanisms  for 
Gender  Equality;  Parliamentary  Mechanisms 
for  Gender  Equality  and  the  Empowerment  of 
Women,  and  Collaboration  with  Other  Stake-
holders at the National Level.” 54th session, United 
Nations,  Commission  for  the  Status  of  Women, 
New York, March 1–2.

Moghadam, Valentine M. 2007. “Globalization, States, 
and Social Rights: Negotiating Women’s Economic 
Citizenship in the Magreb.” International Journal 
of Comparative Sociology 33: 77–104.

Moreira  Gomes,  Ana  Virgínia,  and  Patrícia  Tuma 
Martins  Bertolin.  2010.  “Regulatory  Challenges 
of Domestic Work: The Case of Brazil.” Working 
Paper Series 3, Labour Law and Development Re-
search Laboratory, Montreal.

Morgan, Kimberly J. 2009. “Caring Time Policies in 
Western Europe: Trends and Implications.” Com-
parative European Politics 7 (1): 37–55.

Munshi, Soumyanetra. Forthcoming. “Partisan Com-
petition  and  Women’s  Suffrage  in  the  United 
States.” Historial Social Research. 

Nyberg,  Anita.  2011. “Country  Case  Study  of  Swe-

den.” Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Orge Fuentes, Daniela, and Henrik Wiig. 2010. “Clos-
ing  the  Gender  Land  Gap:  The  Effects  of  Land-
Titling for Women in Peru.” Working Paper 120, 
Norwegian Institute for Urban and Regional Re-
search, Oslo.

Pandolfelli, Lauren, Ruth Meinzen-Dick, and Stephan 
Dohrn.  2008.  “Gender  and  Collective  Action: 
Motivations, Effectiveness, and Impact.” Journal of 
 International Development 20 (1): 1–11.

Paxton,  Pamela,  and  Melanie  M.  Hughes.  2007. 
Women,  Politics  and  Power: A  Global  Perspective. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.

Paxton, Pamela, Melanie M. Hughes, and Jennifer L. 
Green. 2006. “The International Women’s Move-

ment  and  Women’s  Political  Representation: 
1893–2003.” American Sociological Review 71 (6): 
898–920.

Philippines  House  of  Representatives.  2008.  An  Act 
Providing for the Magna Carta of Women. House 
Bill  No.  164,  introduced  by  representatives  Juan 
Edgardo M. Angara, Mary Ann L.  Susano, Monica 
Louise Prieto-Teodoro, Raul V. Del Mar, Amelita 
C. Villarosa, and Judy J. Syjuco. House of Repre-
sentatives, Manila. 

Pitt,  Mark  M.,  Shahidur  R.  Khandker,  and  Jennifer 
Cartwright. 2006. “Empowering Women with Mi-
cro Finance: Evidence from Bangladesh.” Economic 
Development and Cultural Change 54 (4): 791–831.
Porras Serrano, Maria Fernanda. 2011. “Expert Group 
Meeting  on  Good  Practices  in  National  Action 
Plans on Violence against Women, United Nations 
Economic Commission for Latin America/Subre-
gional Headquarters for the Caribbean.” Ministry 
of Interior, National Action Plan for the Elimina-
tion of Gender-based Violence, Quito.

Porter, Nicole Buonocore. 2006. “Re-Deﬁ ning Super-
woman: An  Essay  on  Overcoming  the ‘Maternal 
Wall’  in  the  Legal  Workplace.”  Duke  Journal  of 
Gender Law and Policy 13: 55–84.

Ramirez, Francisco O., Yasemin Soysal, and Suzanne 
Shanahan.  1997.  “The  Changing  Logic  of  Po-
litical Citizenship: Cross-National Acquisition of 
Women’s Suffrage Rights, 1890 to 1990.” American 
Sociological Review 62 (5): 735–45.

Ray,  Debraj.  2003.  “Aspirations,  Poverty,  and  Eco-
nomic  Change.”  Paper  presented  at  the  World 
Bank’s Conference on Culture and Development, 
Washington, DC, June 22. 

Rhode,  Deborah  L.,  and  Amanda  K.  Packel.  2010. 
“Diversity on Corporate Boards: How Much Dif-
ference  Does  Difference  Make?”  Working  Paper 
Series 89, Rock Center for Corporate Governance, 
Standord, CA.

Rogers,  Everett  M.  1962.  Diffusion  of  Innovations. 

New York: Free Press.

Rose,  Caspar.  2007. “Does  Female  Board  Represen-
tation  Inﬂ uence  Firm  Performance?  The  Danish 
Evidence.” Corporate Governance: An International 
Review 15 (2): 404–13.

Ruwanpura,  Kanchana  N.,  and  Neil  Wrigley.  2010. 
“The Costs of Compliance? Views of Sri Lankan 
Apparel  Manufacturers  in  Times  of  Global  Eco-
nomic Crisis.” Journal of Economic Geography 10: 
1–9.

Sadiqi, Fatima. 2008. “The Central Role of the Family 
Law in the Moroccan Feminist Movement.” British 
Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 35 (3): 325–37.

Scharf, Stephanie, and Barbara M. Flom. 2010. Report 
of the Fifth Annual National Survey on Retention 
and Promotion of Women in Law Firms. Chicago, 
IL: National Association of Women Lawyers and 
the NAWL Foundation.

 

The political economy of gender reform 

359

Schwindt-Bayer,  Leslie  A.  2006. “Still  Supermadres? 
Gender and the Policy Priorities of Latin Ameri-
can Legislators.” American Journal of Political Sci-
ence 50 (3): 570–85.

Silva,  José  Ignacio,  and  Manuel  E.  Toledo.  2009. 
 “Labor Turnover Costs and Behavior of Vacancies 
and  Unemployment.”  Macroeconomics  Dynamics 
13 (S1): 76–96.

Simmons, Beth A. 2009. Mobilizing for Human Rights: 
International Law in Domestic Politics. Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Smith,  Hilda  L.,  and  Berenice A.  Carroll,  eds.  2000. 
Women’s Political and Social Thought: An Anthol-
ogy. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Storvik, Aagoth, and Mari Teigen. 2010. “Women on 
Board:  The  Norwegian  Experience.”  Friedrich-
Ebert-Stiftung, Bonn.

Sumbadze,  Nana.  2011. “Gender  Equality:  Georgia.” 

Background paper for the WDR 2012.

Tripp, Aili Mari, and Alice Kang. 2008. “The Global 
Impact of Quotas: On the Fast Track to Increased 
Female  Legislative  Representation.”  Comparative 
Political Studies 41 (3): 338–61.

True, Jacqui, and Michael Mintrom. 2001. “Transna-
tional  Networks  and  Policy  Diffusion:  The  Case 
of  Gender  Mainstreaming.”  International  Studies 
Quarterly 45 (1): 27–57.

UNCEDAW  (United  Nations  Committee  on  the 
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women). 
2006.  “Consideration  of  Reports  Submitted  by 
States Parties under Article 18 of the Convention 
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
Against  Women:  Combined  Third  and  Fourth 
 Periodic  Report  of  States  Parties.  Morocco.” 
UNCEDAW, New York.

UNIFEM  (United  Nations  Development  Fund  for 
Women).  2010.  “Companies  Leading  the  Way: 
Putting  the  Principles  into  Practice.”  UNIFEM, 
New York.

UNRISD (United Nations Research Institute for So-
cial Development). 2005. “Women Mobilizing to 

Reshape Democracy.” In Gender Equality: Striving 
for Justice in an Unequal World, ed. UNRISD. Ge-
neva: United Nations.

U.S.  Department  of  State.  2001.  “Senegal:  Report 
on Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) or Female 
Genital Cutting (FGC).” U.S. Department of State, 
Washington, DC.

Warth,  Lisa.  2009.  “Gender  Equality  and  the  Cor-
porate  Sector.”  Discussion  Paper  Series  2009/4. 
United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for  Eu-
rope, Geneva.

Weldon,  S.  Laurel.  2006. “Inclusion,  Solidarity,  and 
Social Movements: The Global Movement against 
Gender  Violence.”  Perspectives  on  Politics  4  (1): 
55–74.

Whelehan,  Imelda.  1995.  Modern  Feminist Thought: 
From  the  Second  Wave  to  ‘Post-Feminism’.  Edin-
burgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Williams, Joan. 2000. Unbending Gender: Why Family 
and Work Conﬂ ict and What to Do about It. New 
York: Oxford University Press.

World  Bank,  IADB  (Inter-American  Development 
Bank),  and  SERNAM  (Servicio  Nacional  de  la 
Mujer). 2006. “Chile Country Gender Assessment: 
Expanding  Women’s  Work  Choices  to  Enhance 
Chile’s  Economic  Potential.”  World  Bank  and 
IADB, Washington, DC.

Wotipka,  Christine  Min,  and  Francisco  O.  Ramírez. 
2007. “World Society and Human Rights: An Event 
History Analysis of the Convention on the Elimi-
nation  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination  Against 
Women.” In The Global Diffusion of Markets and 
Democracy, ed. Beth Simmon, Frank Dobbin, and 
Geoffrey Garrett. Cambridge, U.K., and New York: 
Cambridge University Press.

Young,  H.  Peyton.  2007.  “Social  Norms.”  Working 
Paper  Series  307,  University  of  Oxford,  Depart-
ment of Economics, Oxford, U.K.

Young,  Iris  Marion.  1990.  Justice  and  the  Politics  of 
Difference.  Princeton,  NJ:  Princeton  University 
Press.

9CHAPTER

A global agenda for greater 
gender equality

Domestic action is central to reducing 

gender  inequalities,  and  global  ac-
tion—by governments, people, and 
organizations in developed and de-
veloping countries, and by international institu-
tions—cannot substitute for equitable and efﬁ -
cient  domestic  polices  and  institutions.  But 
global action can complement domestic policies 
by strengthening their impact and ultimately by 
inﬂ uencing  whether  greater  global  integration 
brings about greater gender equality and better 
lives for all women, or just for some.

This chapter discusses how the World Bank, 
international partners, and civil society can sup-
port countries in their efforts to promote gen-
der equality and proposes an agenda for global 
action  by  the  international  development  com-
munity that is complementary to the domestic 
public agenda for action presented in chapter 7. 
The  agenda  calls  for  action  by  the  interna-
tional  development  community  in  ﬁ ve  areas. 
These include the four priority areas identiﬁ ed 
in this Report (reducing gender gaps in health 
and  education—particularly  among  severely 
disadvantaged populations, promoting access to 
economic opportunities among women, closing 
gender gaps in voice and agency, and prevent-
ing  the  intergenerational  reproduction  of  gen-
der inequality)—plus a ﬁ fth cross-cutting area, 
deploying  data  and  knowledge  as  pillars  for 
evidence-based public action. The agenda iden-
tiﬁ es those initiatives within each priority area 
where the rationale for global action is strongest 
and where the international development com-
munity has a comparative advantage.

RATIONALE FOR AND FOCUS 
OF A GLOBAL AGENDA 

The  motivation  for  an  agenda  for  global  ac-
tion is threefold. First, progress on some fronts 
requires  channeling  more  resources  from  rich 
to  developing  countries  (for  example,  to  cre-
ate greater equity in human endowments or to 
tackle the root causes of excess female mortal-
ity around the world). Second, effective action 
sometimes hinges on producing a public good, 
such  as  generating  new  global  information  or 
knowledge.  And  third,  when  the  impact  of  a 
particular policy cuts across borders, coordina-
tion among a large number of countries and in-
stitutions can enhance its effectiveness, not least 
by building momentum and pressure for action 
at the domestic level.

Based  on  these  criteria,  initiatives  included 
in the proposed agenda for global action can be 
grouped into three types of activities:
•   Providing ﬁ nancial support. Improvements in 
the delivery of clean water and sanitation or 
better health services, such as the ones needed 
to bring down excess female mortality among 
girls and mothers in the developing world, will 
require  signiﬁ cant  resources—often  beyond 
the means of individual governments, partic-
ularly those of relatively poor countries. The
international  development  community  can 
ﬁ nancially support countries willing and able 
to  undertake  such  reforms  in  a  coordinated 
manner through speciﬁ c initiatives or fund-
ing facilities to ensure maximum impact and 
minimize duplication.

 

A global agenda for greater gender equality 

361

•   Fostering  innovation  and  learning.  A  great 
deal has been learned about what works and 
what  does  not  when  it  comes  to  promoting 
greater gender equality, yet progress is often 
held back by the lack of data or adequate so-
lutions to “sticky” problems. That is the case, 
for example, regarding gender differences in 
time use patterns and the norms around care 
that foster these differences. The development 
community  could  promote  innovation  and 
learning through experimentation and evalu-
ation in ways that pay attention to results and 
process, as well as to context, and could facili-
tate scaling up of successful experiences.

•   Leveraging effective partnerships. As chapter 8 
makes clear, successful reform often requires 
coalitions or partnerships that can act within 
and across borders. Such partnerships could 
be  built  among  those  in  the  international 
development community around funding is-
sues, with academia and think tanks for the 
purpose  of  experimentation  and  learning, 

and,  more  broadly,  with  the  private  sector 
in increasing access to economic opportuni-
ties.  Together,  they  could  support  countries 
in  leveraging  the  resources  and  information 
needed to successfully promote gender equal-
ity in today’s globalized world.

The relative importance of these three activi-
ties  will  obviously  vary  across  countries.  Table 
9.1  provides  a  bird’s-eye  view  of  the  proposed 
agenda  for  global  action.  Within  each  priority 
area, the table identiﬁ es new or additional initia-
tives  requiring  support  from  the  international 
development  community,  as  well  as  in  some 
cases existing initiatives where a refocus is called 
for (all marked with a check). For instance, ex-
panding access to clean water requires new in-
vestments,  as  well  as  a  redeﬁ nition  of  existing 
service delivery models that better takes into ac-
count health impacts. In all cases, the initiatives 
are consistent with and complementary to those 
presented in chapter 7 and satisfy the criteria for 
global  action  discussed  above.  Of  course,  im-

TABLE 9.1  The agenda for global action at a glance

Priority area

New/additional initiatives 

that need support

Providing ﬁ nancial

support

Fostering innovation

and learning

Leveraging partnerships

Directions for the global development community

Increasing access to education 
among disadvantaged groups

Increasing access to 

clean water

Increasing access to 

specialized maternal services

Strengthening support for 
prevention and treatment of 

HIV/AIDS

Increasing access to child 
care and early childhood 

development

Investing in rural women

Increasing women’s access to 

the justice system

Shifting norms regarding 
violence against women

Investing in adolescent girls 

and boys

Generating new information

Facilitating knowledge sharing 

and learning

Closing gender gaps in 
human endowments

Promoting women’s access to 
economic opportunities

Closing gender gaps in voice 
and agency

Preventing intergenerational 
reproduction of gender 
inequality

Supporting evidence-based 
public action

Source: WDR 2012 team.

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

362 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

portant ongoing efforts occur in the unchecked 
areas as well—for instance, innovation around 
the delivery models for the prevention of HIV/
AIDS,  or  partnerships  focused  on  adolescents. 
In  these  unchecked  areas,  the  focus  should  be 
on sustaining ongoing efforts and partnerships 
and on meeting commitments.

Finally,  the  framework  and  analysis  pre-
sented in the Report provide four general prin-
ciples for policy and program design that can 
enhance the impact and effectiveness of global 
action  across  all  priority  areas  and  initiatives. 
These principles are
•   Comprehensive gender diagnostics as the basis 
for policy and program design. Gender dispari-
ties persist for multiple reasons: there may be 
a single institutional or policy “ﬁ x” that is dif-
ﬁ cult and easily blocked; there may be multi-
ple reinforcing constraints in markets, formal 
institutions, and households that combine to 
block progress; or there may be deeply rooted 
gender roles or social norms that evolve only 
slowly. Effective policy design requires a good 
understanding  of  which  of  these  situations 
prevails, and of where and what are the bind-
ing  constraints.  To  be  useful,  this  diagnostic 
must drill down into what happens in house-
holds, markets, and formal institutions, their 
interactions and how they are shaped by so-
cial norms.

•   Targeting  determinants  versus  targeting  out-
comes. In choosing and designing policies, it 
is necessary to identify and target the market 
and institutional constraints that generate ex-
isting  gender  gaps,  rather  than  targeting  the 
outcomes themselves. These constraints may 
be multiple and are often outside the domain 
where the outcome is observed.

•   “Upstreaming”  and  strategic  mainstreaming. 
Because  gender  gaps  often  result  from  mul-
tiple and mutually reinforcing market and in-
stitutional constraints, effective policy action 
may require coordinated multisectoral inter-
ventions or sequential interventions. In many 
instances,  such  interventions  can  take  the 
form of general policies that are made “gen-
der  smart”  by  incorporating  gender-related 
issues into their design and implementation. 
To maximize impact, it is thus necessary for 
gender issues to be upstreamed from speciﬁ c 
sector products and projects to country and 

sector programs. This will allow for strategic 
gender mainstreaming. 

•   No  size  ﬁ ts  all.  The  nature,  structure,  and 
functioning of markets and institutions varies 
widely across countries as do norms and cul-
tures, and, as a result, so do household and in-
dividual behavior. Depending on the context, 
the same policy can have very different results. 
And, as the discussion in chapter 8 made clear, 
there are multiple paths to reform. Policy de-
sign and implementation must be attuned to 
societal  actors  and  the  political  economy  of 
reform. Action (both global and domestic) is 
most likely to succeed when it has broad-based 
support, but political will and leadership from 
the top can be an engine of change.

WHAT TO DO AND HOW TO DO IT

Priority 1: Closing gender gaps in human 
endowments

●  Increasing access to education among 

severely disadvantaged populations

THE FAC TS
Gender  issues  in  schooling  are  now  increas-
ingly  concentrated  in  severely  disadvantaged 
populations:

➜  In Vietnam, about 30 percent of ethnic mi-
nority women older than 15 years have never 
gone  to  school—this  is  three  times  more 
likely than ethnic majority women and twice 
more likely than ethnic minority men.

➜  In India, the median boy in the poorest ﬁ fth 
of  the  population  reaches  grade  6;  the  me-
dian girl only reaches grade 1.

➜  In 2008 in the Sub-Saharan African countries 
of Benin, Chad, the Central African Republic, 
the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  Niger, 
and  Togo,  the  primary  completion  rate  for 
girls  was  75  percent  or  lower  than  that  for 
boys.

➜  In Lesotho, educational gender gaps are re-
versed. While 70 percent of girls ages 15–19 
years complete grade 7, merely 40 percent of 
boys do so. 

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 3)
(cid:129)  Tremendous progress has been made in clos-

ing education gaps around the world.

 

 

  At  the  same  time,  in  poor  and  socially 
excluded  populations  or  in  countries  with 
poor  economic  opportunities,  low  levels  of 
schooling remain a problem. Education can 
increase  women’s  and  men’s  access  to  eco-
nomic  opportunities  and  productivity  and 
strengthen their voice and agency. Efforts at 
leveling the playing ﬁ eld for primary and sec-
ondary education have to focus on severely 
disadvantaged  populations,  be  they  girls  or 
boys, to ensure that they are not left behind 
in a globalized world.

What to do?

(cid:129)  Providing  ﬁ nancial  resources.  Existing 
funding commitments need to be sustained 
and increased to bring in girls who are cur-
rently out of school. In some places, these 
out-of-school girls appear similar to those 
who  are  in  school,  suggesting  that  supply-
side  initiatives  may  increase  their  enroll-
ment and completion rates. Building schools 
is the ﬁ rst step on the supply side, but it is 
not enough. To ensure that there are enough 
teachers, it is important to build up cohorts 
who are educated beyond the levels they are 
expected  to  teach.  Financing  should  also 
support  reforms  to  strengthen  the  gover-
nance, accountability, and information ﬂ ows 
that ensure that schools and teachers are as 
effective as possible in raising learning and 
keeping children in school. In other places, 
where the supply is already in place, it may 
be  low  household  incomes  and  poor  re-
turns to education that keep children out of 
school—whether these are boys or girls de-
pends  on  what  other  opportunities  there 
are for children. In such situations, demand-
side  interventions—such  as  conditional 
cash  transfers  that  give  households  incen-
tives to keep their children in school when 
times  are  bad—have  proven  successful  in 
increasing  enrollment  in  many  countries 
around the world.

(cid:129)  Leveraging partnerships. The Education for 
All  Fast  Track  Initiative—together  with  in-
ternational  partners  and  civil  society—pro-
vides a strong, partnership-based framework 
for  action.  Efforts  to  mobilize  external  re-
sources  toward  meeting  the  education  Mil-
lennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  war-
rant  urgent  attention.  While  the  plight  of 

A global agenda for greater gender equality 

363

out-of-school girls continues to be an inter-
national priority, in many developing coun-
tries  it  is  now  boys  who  are  falling  further 
and further behind in secondary school par-
ticipation, and a lack of international action 
to  reverse  this  trend  poses  signiﬁ cant  risks. 
School  dropout  and  underperformance  are 
often associated with increasing likelihood of 
engaging in risky behaviors, crime and vio-
lence, or unsafe sexual behavior (see priority 
4 below).

 ●  Improving public health: Clean water, 
sanitation, waste removal, and vector 
control

THE FAC TS
➜  Every year, 1.5 billion episodes of acute diar-
rhea occur among children under ﬁ ve, killing 
2 million children.

➜  Reducing  infectious  diseases  reduces  child 
mortality—more so for girls. Between 1900 
and 1930 large-scale public health, clean wa-
ter, and sanitation campaigns wiped out his-
torical patterns of excess female mortality in 
today’s  rich  countries.  In  the  United  States, 
these  campaigns  accounted  for  virtually  all 
the  decline  in  child  mortality  during  this 
period.

➜  The biggest impacts come from clean water 
at the point of use because considerable con-
tamination  occurs  between  source  and  use: 
Contamination  of  samples  from  improved 
water  sources  increased  from  12  percent  at 
source to 41 percent in household storage to 
51 percent in drinking cups.

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 3)
(cid:129)  Private solutions can go only so far in reduc-
ing the burden of infectious diseases. Public 
investments  are  required  both  because  of 
“externalities”—people  with  infectious  dis-
eases infect others—and because of the dif-
ﬁ culties  in  learning  about  the  causal  path-
ways from actions to consequences.

(cid:129)  These investments will beneﬁ t both boys and 
girls—but  especially  girls.  The  provision  of 
clean  water,  sanitation,  vector  control,  and 
waste disposal used to be a standard part of 
public health packages in most countries, but 
their  importance  in  health  budgets  has  de-
clined over the past three decades. It is time 
to reverse that trend.

364 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

What to do?
(cid:129)  Providing ﬁ nancial resources. A simple goal 
needs  to  be  adopted:  clean  water  for  every 
household and a clean environment for chil-
dren  to  grow  up  in.  Reaching  this  goal 
 requires  substantive  funding  to  build  and 
maintain  systems.  Funding  is  needed  not 
only  for  infrastructure  improvements  but 
also  for  systems  of  accountability  that  can 
ensure the continuation and sustainability of 
these  services.  In  Sub-Saharan  Africa  alone 
the estimated costs of clean water run to $11 
billion a year. Large in absolute funding, this 
amount is small relative to the beneﬁ ts: in the 
United States, the beneﬁ t-cost ratio of clean 
water in the early 20th century was 23 to 1.

(cid:129)  Promoting  innovation  and  learning.  Two 
areas  need  urgent  attention.  First,  little  sys-
tematic  information  is  available  on  water 
contamination  and  even  less  on  sanitation. 
Collecting  and  disseminating  such  data 
would help the global community to under-
stand the scale of the problem and to moni-
tor the impact of policies. Second, pharma-
ceutical innovations that provide immediate 
feedback  on  water  quality  to  households 
would engender informed decisions. For in-
stance,  contaminated  water  usually  looks 
clean,  but  a  pill  that  changes  water  color 
when it is contaminated, together with point-
of-use  treatments  like  chlorine  pills,  could 
lead to immediate improvements even while 
better delivery systems are being developed.

 ●  Increasing access to specialized maternal 

services

THE FAC TS

➜  For every woman who dies during childbirth 
in  Sweden,  1,000  women  die  during  child-
birth in Afghanistan, 815 women in Somalia, 
495 in Nigeria, and 122 in Pakistan.

➜  Excess female mortality in low-income coun-
tries  is  tied  to  maternal  mortality,  as  it  was 
historically in rich countries. In Afghanistan, 
1 out of every 11 women dies in childbirth, 
and  many  more  face  severe  functional  dis-
abilities from associated risks like ﬁ stula and 
anemia.

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 3)
(cid:129)  Reductions  in  maternal  mortality  can  in-
crease female education because families in-

vest  more  in  girls  with  a  higher  chance  of 
survival in adulthood.

(cid:129)  Reductions  in  maternal  mortality  also  re-
duce  maternal  morbidity,  allowing  women 
to  lead  more  productive  and  healthy  lives. 
Female labor force participation will also in-
crease as lifelong disabilities associated with 
childbirth decline. Almost all the increase in 
labor force participation of married women 
between  1920  and  1950  in  countries  for 
which data are available can be attributed to 
reductions in maternal morbidity.

(cid:129)  And reductions are possible: when countries 
put  their  minds  to  it,  maternal  mortality 
has  been  brought  down  in  a  surprisingly 
short time.

What to do?
(cid:129)  Providing ﬁ nancial support. Many maternal 
deaths can be avoided if mothers give birth in 
institutions,  but  the  institutions  need  to 
function well, with trained staff and surgeons 
and regular supplies. Providers need to be ac-
countable to local communities—all too of-
ten  critical  health  providers  are “missing  in 
action.” More funding could help establish a 
network  of  facilities  dedicated  to  maternal 
and child care. These facilities could also en-
gage in valuable outreach to provide prenatal 
care to expecting mothers.1 

(cid:129)  Promoting  innovation  and  learning.  In 
many countries, little is known about mater-
nal  mortality  and  still  less  about  maternal 
morbidity.  And  because  poor  data  systems 
and  bad  health  go  together,  these  are  coun-
tries where the problem is worse. Investing in 
better vital registration data is an important 
step. New technology opens up new opportu-
nities.  For  instance,  increased  mobile  tele-
phony would allow users to report any mater-
nal death in any part of the world to a central 
global and open database. These reports could 
trigger a “maternal audit” so that every mater-
nal death is recorded and publicized. The em-
phasis on every single death was a key part of 
successful campaigns to lower maternal mor-
tality in countries like Turkey and Honduras.
(cid:129)  Leveraging  partnerships.  A  renewed  em-
phasis on maternal mortality has led to the 
creation  of  a  partnership,  the  Grand  Chal-
lenge  for  Development,  between  bilateral 

 

A global agenda for greater gender equality 

365

and  multilateral  agencies  and  private  foun-
dations.  This  partnership  is  key  to  moni-
toring and building accountability and shar-
ing knowledge. Further partnerships include 
South-South knowledge exchange programs 
where countries such as Malaysia, Sri Lanka, 
Maldives,  Turkey,  and  Honduras—which 
sharply  decreased  maternal  mortality  in  a 
short time—participate on a global platform 
to share their experiences.

 ●  Strengthening support for the 

prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS

THE FAC TS

➜  In countries with high HIV/AIDS prevalence 
in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  excess  mortality 
among women under age 60 increased close 
to 10-fold between 1990 and 2008.

➜  Adult mortality rates in some southern Afri-
can countries increased 5-fold between 1980 
and  2008  and  approached  those  seen  in 
Rwanda and Cambodia in genocide years.

➜  An enormous global effort has led to better 
treatment  and  better  availability  of  treat-
ment. Innumerable lives are now being saved 
every day around the world.

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 3)
(cid:129)  The HIV/AIDS epidemic has hit women in 
Sub-Saharan Africa particularly hard. Greater 
availability  of  treatment  is  saving  lives  of 
those  affected  with  HIV  around  the  world. 
But much remains to be done. 

What to do?
(cid:129)  Providing  ﬁ nancial  support.  Increasing 
funding  and  sustaining  existing  efforts  can 
ensure  universal  access  to  HIV  prevention, 
treatment, care, and support by 2015. A new 
strategic investment framework suggests that 
investments  need  to  increase  from  the  cur-
rent $16 billion a year to $22 billion a year by 
2015. After 2015, resource needs will decline 
as  coverage  reaches  target  rates,  efﬁ ciency 
gains from scaling up are realized, and new 
infections start to decline. 

(cid:129)  Leveraging partnerships. The existing part-
nerships  through  the  Global  Fund  to  Fight 
AIDS,  Tuberculosis  and  Malaria  and  the 
President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
(PEPFAR) are shining examples of interna-

tional coordination that need to be sustained 
and scaled up.2

Priority 2: Promoting women’s access to 
economic opportunities

 ●  Increasing access to child care and early 

childhood development programs 

THE FAC TS

➜  Married women with children under age six 
spend  14  to  42  percent  of  their  nonleisure 
time  on  child  care,  compared  with  1  to  20 
percent for married men.

➜  In 62 countries, of 113 with data, the avail-
ability of child care—both formal and infor-
mal—is limited or very limited as a result of 
high costs, insufﬁ cient supply, or both. And 
in  most  countries  where  child  care  is  avail-
able,  it  is  informally  provided  by  extended 
family members.

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 5)
(cid:129)  Gender differences in care (and housework) 
responsibilities  imply  that  women  face  im-
portant  ﬁ xed  costs  associated  with  market 
work. They are also more likely to value ﬂ ex-
ible work arrangements and to supply fewer 
hours of work than men, with a potential risk 
of being channeled into lower-quality, lower-
pay jobs.

(cid:129)  Access to (subsidized) child care is associated 
with increases in the number of hours spent 
in market work and, in developing countries, 
with  access  to  formal  employment.  Where 
care options are not available, the opposite is 
true—for instance, in Botswana, Guatemala, 
Mexico, and Vietnam, the lack of child care 
pushes mothers into informal employment.
(cid:129)  (Subsidized) child care can provide an effec-
tive platform for the delivery of developmen-
tal  and  nutritional  interventions  for  small 
children, particularly in low-income settings 
and among poor households.

What to do?
(cid:129)  Providing ﬁ nancial support. Increasing ac-
cess to quality child care for those who cur-
rently do not have access or who rely on in-
formal arrangements will require additional 
resources—often beyond the means of inter-
ested  governments.  These  resources  can  be 

366 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

used to directly ﬁ nance the provision of ser-
vices or to subsidize the use of existing ser-
vices, where affordability—rather than sup-
ply—is the main constraint. 

(cid:129)  Fostering  innovation  and  learning.  Most 
successful  child-care  delivery  models  have 
been  tested  and  evaluated  in  urban  (often 
middle-income)  settings;  however,  signiﬁ -
cantly  less  is  known  about  what  works  and 
what does not in rural areas or for transient 
populations. The international development 
community  could  support  experimentation 
in this area with a focus on delivery models 
that address the needs of the poor, who are 
most likely to use informal care arrangements 
with  potentially  negative  consequences  for 
children and for those providing the care—
frequently older sisters. Attention should also 
be paid to the possibility of using the provi-
sion of child care as an opportunity to create 
employment locally, while ensuring caregiv-
ers are adequately trained. Successful experi-
ences  could  then  be  scaled  up  through  the 
funding window.

●  Investing in rural women

THE FAC TS

➜  Women  represent  43  percent  of  the  rural 

workforce.

➜  For those developing countries for which data 
is  available,  women  represent  only  10  to  20 
percent  of  landholders,  and  farms  operated 
by female-headed households are smaller in 
almost all countries. Female farmers and rural 
entrepreneurs—particularly  those  running 
small  businesses—are  less  likely  to  receive 
(formal) credit than their male counterparts.
➜  Women are not worse farmers than men, but 
lower access to productive inputs and tech-
nology  means  that  the  average  agricultural 
productivity among female farmers is 20 to 
30  percent  lower  than  that  of  their  male 
counterparts.

➜  A woman is still 21 percent less likely to own 
a mobile phone than a man; that rate is 23 
percent  in Africa,  24  percent  in  the  Middle 
East,  and  37  percent  in  South  Asia.  Nearly 
half a billion women in the developing world 
have access to a mobile phone only by bor-
rowing it. 

Why do we care? A recap (chapters 5 and 6)
(cid:129)  According to the Food and Agriculture Orga-
nization, equalizing access to productive re-
sources  between  female  and  male  farmers 
could increase agricultural output in devel-
oping countries by 2.5 to 4 percent.

(cid:129)  Cell phone access and use can alleviate time 
and  mobility  constraints  for  women—par-
ticularly  those  in  rural  areas—by  cutting 
down the physical labor or travel required to 
get information, reducing the costs of money 
transfers,  and  increasing  women’s  ability  to 
balance family and work life. Over 40 percent 
of rural women in Bolivia, the Arab Republic 
of  Egypt,  India,  and  Kenya  declared  that 
owning a mobile phone had increased their 
access  to  economic  opportunities  and  their 
income, with higher impacts among female 
entrepreneurs.

(cid:129)  Putting money in the hands of rural women 
will  empower  them  in  and  outside  their 
households  and  will  also  beneﬁ t  others  in 
their families.

What to do?
(cid:129)  Fostering innovation and learning. Few ﬁ -
nancial  institutions  offer  products  speciﬁ -
cally tailored to the needs of female farmers 
and  entrepreneurs.  Access  to  extension  ser-
vices  and  farmer  ﬁ eld  schools  is  still  very 
low, and the information and resources they 
provide  are  not  always  relevant  for  female 
farmers. Mobile phones can provide an effec-
tive platform for the delivery of information 
and services to rural populations, but exist-
ing gender gaps in access can translate into 
limited  beneﬁ ts  for  women.  The  interna-
tional development community can support 
experimentation in three key areas: access to 
formal credit, access to agricultural technol-
ogy and knowledge, and access to informa-
tion  and  communication  technologies—
particularly mobile phones. The focus should 
be  on  testing  and  evaluating  new  business 
and delivery models that effectively respond 
to women’s needs within local contexts.

•  Leveraging partnerships. The international 
development  community  can  partner  with 
the private sector to ensure that successful in-
novations  grow  into  new  services  for  rural 

 

A global agenda for greater gender equality 

367

women, and with academic institutions, civil 
society, and think tanks to adequately evalu-
ate the impact of these models.

Priority 3: Closing gender gaps in voice 
and agency

●  Increasing women’s access to justice

THE FAC TS

➜  187  countries  have  ratiﬁ ed  the  Convention 
on  the  Elimination  of  All  Discrimination 
against  Women,  but  such  rights  have  not 
necessarily become effective because women 
have  limited  mechanisms  to  demand  that 
their rights be enforced and to seek redress.

➜  In  many  situations  lack  of  awareness  of 
rights,  high  direct  costs,  and  mobility  con-
straints  prevent  women  from  actively  de-
manding enforcement.

➜  In 9 countries from different regions, only 10 
percent of women who had been physically 
abused reported the event or sought services.
➜  In  Indonesia,  the  average  cost  of  a  divorce 
case  was  $220—around  10  times  a  poor 
woman’s monthly income. Fee waivers have 
led to increased access.

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 4)
(cid:129)  Effective rights matter for women. Improve-
ment  in  the  legal  status  of  girls  can,  by 
i ncreasing their value, induce other changes: 
investments in girls’ education may increase, 
ages  at  marriage  may  increase,  and  child-
bearing  may  be  delayed.  Laws  that  increase 
control over income and assets can improve 
women’s  position  within  their  own  house-
holds, and laws that allow or facilitate divorce 
can increase women’s ability to choose.

(cid:129)  For laws to be effective, enforcement needs to 
be  improved  and  women’s  access  to  justice 
increased.

What to do?
(cid:129)  Promoting  innovation  and  learning.  Im-
proving  women’s  access  to  justice  requires 
collection  and  publication  of  gender- 
disaggregated  data  on  access  and  use;  an 
 increase  in  women’s  representation  in  the 
organizations  charged  with  the  formula-

tion,  implementation,  and  enforcement  of 
the law; and the raising of awareness in dif-
ferent  elements  of  the  justice  systems  to 
make them more sensitive to women’s needs. 
The international development community 
can support the implementation and evalu-
ation  of  innovative  approaches  in  these 
three  areas,  as  well  as  the  evaluation  of 
promising ongoing initiatives. In doing so, 
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  role  that 
technology, particularly mobile phones, can 
play in fostering the dissemination of data 
and other information, as well as in enhanc-
ing the accountability of legal institutions.

●  Shifting norms regarding domestic 

violence

THE FAC TS
➜  Domestic violence statistics around the world 

are horrifying:
(cid:129)  At least 1 of every 10 ever-partnered women 
is  physically  or  sexually  assaulted  by  an 
intimate partner or someone she knows at 
some point in her life.

(cid:129)  Even a seemingly low domestic abuse inci-
dence  rate  of  3  percent  in  Poland  trans-
lates into 1,465 women being abused each 
day.

(cid:129)  14  million,  or  81  percent  of,  Ethiopian 
women ages 15–49 think being beaten by 
their husbands for disagreeing with him, 
burning the food, or refusing to have sex 
is justiﬁ able.

➜  The  prevalence  of  domestic  violence  varies 
greatly  across  countries  with  no  clear  rela-
tionship  to  incomes,  but  violence  against 
women is higher in societies with higher gen-
der inequality.

➜  Increased  women’s  education  has  a  pro-
tective inﬂ uence by altering population atti-
tudes toward lower acceptability of violence. 
Women’s asset ownership is associated with 
lower violence incidence in Colombia, India, 
South Africa, and Uganda.

 Why do we care? A recap (chapter 4)
(cid:129)  Violence is the opposite of freedom—an ex-
treme form of coercion that is by deﬁ nition 
the  negation  of  agency.  Women  are  at  far 
greater  risk  of  violence  from  an  intimate 

368 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

partner or somebody they know than from 
violence  by  other  people.  And  women  are 
more likely than men to be killed, seriously 
injured,  or  victims  of  sexual  violence  from 
intimate partners.

(cid:129)  The  threat  of  violence  can  affect  women’s 
ability to freely choose and to take advantage 
of endowments and opportunities.

(cid:129)  Domestic  violence  has  also  been  associated 
with  long-term  health  outcomes,  negative 
health  outcomes  among  the  children  of 
abused  women,  and  the  intergenerational 
 reproduction of the acceptance of violence.

What to do?
(cid:129)  Promoting  innovation  and  learning.  The 
international development community can 
support innovation and learning in three dif-
ferent ways. First, it can invest in rigorously 
evaluating ongoing initiatives and improv-
ing the quality of existing data. Second, it can 
help  scale  up  those  innovations  that  have 
worked.  And,  third,  it  can  help  test  new 
 approaches  aimed  at  shifting  norms  re-
garding violence against women. Two types 
of  programs  hold  promise  for  testing  new 
approaches: education and awareness cam-
paigns  (targeted  to  couples),  and  inter-
ven tions  that  increase  women’s  bargaining 
power within the household. In both cases 
a broad focus is needed to account for some 
higher-level  determinants,  such  as  norms 
on  income  generation  and  asset  owner-
ship and control, legal frameworks on mar-
riage, and divorce and child custody. Finally, 
bringing  service  providers—police  and  ju-
diciary,  health,  and  social  services—closer 
to  women  to  deal  with  time  and  mobility 
constraints  can  not  only  help  victims  but 
also  contribute  to  changing  norms  in  the 
community.  Experimentation  can  focus, 
among other things, on access to paralegals 
and  mobile  legal  aid  clinics  for  women  to 
use the justice system.

(cid:129)  Leveraging partnerships. The international 
development  community  should  continue 
to  support  initiatives  such  as  the  United 
Nations  (UN)  Trust  Fund  to  End  Violence 
against Women,  which  provides  funding  to 
grassroots organizations devoted to the pre-

vention  of  violence  against  women,  includ-
ing those in remote or excluded populations.

Priority 4: Preventing the 
intergenerational reproduction of 
gender inequality

 ●  Investing in adolescent boys and girls

THE FAC TS

➜  The  number  of  adolescents,  boys  and  girls, 
who  are  out  of  school  is  similar  to  that  of 
children of primary school age who are out 
of school (70 million versus 69 million); yet 
the  problem  has  received  limited  attention. 
Some of them have not completed primary 
schooling, but a large fraction simply dropped 
out of secondary school. Teenage pregnancy, 
risky behaviors, and the need to work (either 
at home or in the market) account for a sig-
niﬁ cant share of dropouts.

➜  Approximately 16 million girls, ages 15−19, 
become mothers every year, with 95 percent 
of  these  births  happening  in  developing 
countries.  This  makes  up  11  percent  of  all 
births worldwide.

➜  Young  men  are  overwhelmingly  the  perpe-
trators  and  the  victims  of  violent  crime.  In 
South Africa, between 1982 and 1990, mur-
der caused close to half of all deaths of young 
men between the ages of 16 and 30—the pri-
mary cause of death in this age group.

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 3, 4, and 5)
(cid:129)  The “stickiest” aspect of gender outcomes is 
the way patterns of gender inequality are re-
produced  over  time,  and  adolescence  is  a 
particularly important period in this regard. 
Gender norms and roles become more bind-
ing,  and  the  prevalence  of  risky  social  and 
sexual behaviors increases. In addition, ado-
lescents are underserved by existing institu-
tions,  including  health  systems  and  labor 
markets, have limited control over assets, and 
have lower access to networks.
In  a  world  where  education  and  skills  are 
 becoming  increasingly  important,  keeping 
young  girls  and  boys  in  school  (and  out 
of  trouble)  and  helping  them  transition 
smoothly  into  the  labor  market  can  have 

(cid:129) 

 

A global agenda for greater gender equality 

369

large payoffs both in improved gender out-
comes and in economic efﬁ ciency.

What to do?
(cid:129)  Promoting innovation and learning. Young 
girls and boys can beneﬁ t from access to a net-
work of peers with shared values and aspira-
tions; they can learn from and be inspired by 
others. The international development com-
munity can support experimentation around 
programs that focus on the creation of “safe 
spaces”—through  support  to  networks  of 
adolescents with common objectives and ex-
pectations—and the promotion of role mod-
els. Those transitioning into the labor market 
can also beneﬁ t from interventions that help 
them overcome information and other con-
straints that may be particularly binding for 
new market entrants. In this respect, experi-
mentation  with  active  labor  market  policies 
targeted  to  youth,  including  placement  and 
apprenticeship  programs,  wage  subsidies, 
and training hold signiﬁ cant promise, as does 
experimentation  with  second- chance  pro-
grams. Innovative approaches in these three 
areas  have  been  piloted  and,  in  some  cases, 
evaluated under the Adolescent Girls Initia-
tive, and could be taken to scale and adapted 
to different contexts.

Priority 5: Supporting evidence-based 
public action

 ●  Generating new information

THE FAC TS
➜  Only  8  of  65  surveys  examined  (including 
national household and labor force surveys, 
and specialized surveys covering rural areas) 
contain  information  on  land  ownership  at 
the individual level; information on owner-
ship  of  consumer  and  productive  durables, 
livestock, and other assets is more limited (in 
most cases 1 survey of 65). And information 
on decision making within the household is 
also scarce, with questions being asked only 
in  specialized  surveys  (such  as  the  Demo-
graphic and Health Surveys) and often only 
of women.

➜  The coverage and reliability of vital statistics 
on births, marriages, divorces, deaths (and its 

causes), and other important life events re-
main a challenge in most of the world. The 
same is true of property registries, including 
those for land and real estate.

Why do we care? A recap (chapters 3, 4, and 7)
(cid:129)  A key challenge for advances in gender equal-
ity is the availability of gender-relevant data.
(cid:129)  Gender  analyses  of  social  conditions  and 
the incidence of poverty often rely on com-
parisons between male- and female-headed 
households.  Still,  measuring  gender  gaps 
based on characteristics of household heads 
is based on the underlying assumption that 
households  are  undifferentiated  units,  that 
resources  are  evenly  shared,  and  that  no 
 intrahousehold  inequality  exists—assump-
tions the evidence contradicts.

(cid:129)  Knowledge  about  what  happens  within 
households continues to be, at best, insufﬁ -
cient and, at worst, nonexistent. This knowl-
edge, however, is key to understanding and 
tackling many of the gender gaps identiﬁ ed 
in this Report. Information about who con-
trols  and  has  access  to  different  resources, 
who  makes  decisions  and  how  those  deci-
sions  take  into  account  or  reﬂ ect  the  views 
and interests of others within the household, 
and what factors shape the available options 
can  help  identify  the  most  binding  con-
straints  behind  speciﬁ c  gaps  and  hence  in-
form the design and implementation of pub-
lic policy.

(cid:129)  Accurate recording of life events and prop-
erty are essential to ensure adequate enforce-
ment of existing laws and to ﬁ ll in important 
knowledge gaps (for instance, about cause of 
death).

What to do?
(cid:129)  Providing  ﬁ nancial  support.  The  interna-
tional development community can provide 
resources  for  the  improvement  of  existing 
surveys  and  country  information  systems. 
New survey modules can be developed that 
include questions on assets (ownership, use, 
registration  status  when  relevant,  and  path 
to accumulation), family businesses (owner-
ship and decision-making capacity, employ-
ment of household members), time use, and 

370 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

individual  consumption.  Clear  entry  points 
could be the Living Standards Measurement 
Study,  Demographic  and  Health  Surveys, 
and  other  cross-country  survey  platforms. 
Resources  are  also  needed  to  strengthen 
country information systems by simplifying 
administrative  and  registration  procedures 
and computerizing database management to 
increase the coverage and accuracy of exist-
ing records. Emphasis should be put on mov-
ing from one-off efforts to sustained action 
on gender-relevant data collection to provide 
opportunities for longitudinal trend analyses 
and  overcome  the  paucity  of  reliable,  high-
quality information.

(cid:129)  Leveraging partnerships. UN Women—the 
United  Nations  organization  dedicated  to 
gender  equality  and  the  empowerment  of 
women—can  play  a  leadership  role  in  this 
area.  The  international  development  com-
munity should continue to support existing 
initiatives, such as the World Bank Statistical 
Capacity  Building  program,  in  these  areas 
and  to  help  forge  effective  partnerships  to 
promote sharing of information, knowledge, 
and experiences.

 ●  Facilitating knowledge sharing and 

learning

THE FAC TS
➜  There  is  limited  research  on  low-income 
countries, and this knowledge is hard to ﬁ nd 
and access. 

➜  A survey of the top 202 economics journals 
between 1985 and 2004 found seven papers 
published on Afghanistan, one on Chad, two 
on the Democratic Republic of Congo, and 
four on Eritrea. These were on all topics.

➜  There is no systematic way to search for in-
formation  on  gender,  parse  out  the  high-
quality work, and obtain information on lo-
cal initiatives that work. 

Why do we care? A recap (chapter 7)
(cid:129) 

Information  and  knowledge  are  crucial  to 
adequately diagnose existing problems, iden-
tify relevant constraints, and design effective 
policy responses.

(cid:129)  Every year, knowledge is lost because entre-
preneurs  and  organizations  working  at  the 

frontiers of program design and implemen-
tation have no systematic way of moving that 
knowledge “up” the global chain.

What to do?
(cid:129)  Promoting innovation and learning. There 
is no global repository of knowledge on gen-
der issues. A global repository would serve as 
a  single  source  for  knowledge  and  infor-
mation  about  gender  issues,  but  that  is  not 
enough.  New  technological  advances  could 
be used to create a more democratic and open 
data system that allows us to learn from the 
best examples around the world. One part of 
such  a  global  repository  would  systematize 
existing information on gender from reports, 
research, and evaluations of programs. This 
indexed  and  searchable  database  would  be-
come a “one-stop shop” for stakeholders and 
individuals to obtain more information about 
gender  issues.  User  feedback  and  reviews 
would allow for an interactive site that ﬁ lters 
high-quality  knowledge  and  points  to  the 
global gaps in our understanding. 

A  second  part  of  the  global  repository 
would  use  new  technology  to  democratize 
knowledge  about  gender  issues  in  an  open 
submission system. The Internet and mobile 
telephony  could  be  used  to “crowd-source” 
information about new initiatives, even at a 
very small scale, much like in systems such as 
Ushahidi, an open source project that allows 
users  to  crowd-source  crisis  information  to 
be sent via mobile phone. Allowing those at 
the  front  lines  to  provide  information  and 
feedback  on  gender  initiatives  can  increase 
knowledge and recognition of gender activi-
ties around the world, and this information 
can  feedback  into  the  global  community’s 
understanding of what works and what does 
not. A global repository could capitalize on 
ongoing initiatives, such as the World Bank 
Open  Data  Initiative,  but  will  still  require 
committed funding to set up and maintain.

NOTES

1.   High Level Taskforce on International Innovative 
Financing  for  Health  Systems  2009.  The  Techni-
cal Working Group 1 of this taskforce argued that 
strengthening  health  systems  is  key  to  reducing 

 

A global agenda for greater gender equality 

371

maternal mortality. Their costing exercise suggests 
that the health MDGs could be achieved with an 
additional cost by 2015 of $36 billion—$45 billion 
a year.

2.  Schwartländer and others 2011.

REFERENCES

High  Level  Taskforce  on  International  Innovative 
Financing for Health Systems. 2009. “Constraints 
to  Scaling  Up  and  Costs.”  International  Health 

Partnership,  Working  Group  1,  World  Health 
Organization, Geneva.

Schwartländer,  Bernhard,  John  Stover,  Timothy 
Hallett, Rifat Atun, Carlos Avila, Eleanor Gouws, 
Michael Bartos, Peter D. Ghys, Marjorie Opuni, 
David Barr, Ramzi Alsallaq, Lori Bollinger, Mar-
celo  de  Freitas,  Geoffrey  Garnett,  Charles  Hol-
mes, Ken Legins, Yogan Pillay, Anderson Eduardo 
Stanciole,  Craig  McClure,  Gottfried  Hirnschall, 
Marie  Laga,  and  Nancy  Pedian.  2011. “Towards 
an Improved Investment Approach for an Effec-
tive Response to HIV/AIDS.” Lancet 377 (9782): 
2031–41.

Bibliographical Note

This Report draws on a wide range of World Bank documents and on numerous outside 
sources. Background papers and notes were prepared by Ernesto Aguayo-Téllez, Richard 
Akresh, Stefania Albanesi, Rabia Ali, Diego Amador, Brindusa Anghel, Mina Baliamoune, 
Oriana Bandiera, Sushenjit Bandyopadhyay, Gary Barker, Kathleen Beegle, Julia A. Behrman, 
Cory Belden, Raquel Bernal, María Inés Berniell, Eric Bettinger, Mariano Bosch, Lynn Brown, 
Maurizio  Bussolo,  Andrew  Byrnes,  Laura  Chioda,  Rea  Chiongson,  Joy  Clancy,  Manuel 
Contreras,  Maria  Correia,  Rita  Costa, Andre  Croppenstedt,  David  Cuberes,  Jishnu  Das, 
Nancy Daza, Alan de Brauw, Sara de la Rica, Damien de Walque, Stefan Dercon, Deval Desai, 
Quy-Toan Do, Juan J. Dolado, Cheryl Doss, Lídia Farré, Luca Flabbi, Deanna Ford, Marsha 
Freeman, Samuel Freije, Kate Frieson, John Giles, Markus Goldstein, Margaret E. Greene, 
Nezih Guner, Brian Heilman, Lori Heise, Karla Hoff, Naomi Therese Hossain, Alejandro 
Hoyos,  Mala  Htun,  Jikun  Huang,  Gulnara  Ibraeva, Vegard  Iversen,  Joyce  Jacobsen,  Riva 
Kantowitz, Harounan Kazianga, Gunnar Köhlin, Michael Kremer, Maurice Kugler, Neha 
Kumar, Gunnar Larson, Kenneth L. Leonard, Andrei Levchenko, Mattias Lundberg, William 
F. Maloney, Ghazala Mansuri, Teresa Marchiori, Margaret N. Matinga, Amy Mazur, Dorothy 
McBride, Keiko Mizuno, Anara Moldosheva, Urvashi Narain, Ambar Narayan, Ashwini Natraj, 
Anara Niyazova, Anita Nyberg, Hugo Ñopo, Keiichi Ogawa, Sheila Oparaocha, Mari Osawa, 
Caglar Ozden, Robert Palacios, Rohini Pande, Subhrendu K. Pattanayak, Piotr Pawlak, Eija 
Pehu, Ximena Peña, David Peters, Joseﬁ na Posadas, Agnes Quisumbing, Claudio Raddatz, 
Johanna Ramos, Nitya Rao, Michelle Rendall, Bob Rijkers, Omar Robles, Nina Rosas, Scott 
Rozelle, Mihoko Sakai, Virginia Sánchez Marcos, Carolina Sánchez-Páramo, Saskia Sassen, 
Mine Sato, Manisha Shah, Erin O. Sills, Emmanuel Skouﬁ as, Marc-François Smitz, Nana 
Sumbadze, Marc Teignier-Baqué, Inge Tevden, Zaﬁ ris Tzannatos, Tanu Priya Uteng, Limin 
Wang, Laurel Weldon, Henrik Wiig, Christopher Wilfong, Tanja Winther, Firman Witoelar 
Kartaadipoetra, Michael Woolcock, Kohei Yoshida, Takako Yuki, and Linxiu Zhang.

Background papers for the Report are available either on the World Wide Web http://
www.worldbank.org/wdr2012 or through the World Development Report ofﬁ ce. The views 
expressed in these papers are not necessarily those of the World Bank or of this Report.

The “Deﬁ ning Gender in the 21st Century Talking with Women and Men around the 
World,  A  Multi-Country  Qualitative  Study  of  Gender  and  Economic  Choice”  included 
national teams around the world led by Chona Echavez and Pierre Fallavier (Afghanistan); 
Ugyen Lhamo (Bhutan); Jean-François Kobiané (Burkina Faso); Magaly Pineda and Sergia 
Galvan (the Dominican Republic); Priya Chattier (Fiji); Sanjeev Sasmal (India); Rizki Fillaili 
(Indonesia); Gwendolyn Heaner (Liberia); Dumitru Slonovschi (Moldova); Patricia Zárate 
(Peru); Samia M. Al-Botmeh (West Bank and Gaza); Marjorie Andrew and Almah Tararia 
(Papua New Guinea); Greta Gober (Poland); Hana Baronijan and Sasa Jovancevic (Serbia); 
Imraan Valodia and Kruschen Govender (South Africa); Mohamed Braima (North Sudan); 
Adalbertus Kamanzi (Tanzania); Hhuat Tha Hong (Vietnam); and Ramzia Aleryani, Sabria 
Al-Thwar, and Mai Abdulmalik (the Republic of Yemen). Paula Barros and Rudy Herrera 

373

374 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Marmol, and the Institute for Women’s Policy Research (IWPR) team led by Jane Henrici and 
Allison Helmuth, helped with the analysis. Amanda Lubold and Charles Ragin contributed 
with the qualitative comparative analysis.

Many people inside and outside the World Bank gave comments to the team. Valuable 
comments, guidance, and contributions were provided by James Adams, Theodore Ahlers, 
Nilufar  Ahmad,  Ahmad  Ahsan,  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Aysegul  Akin-Karasapan,  Harold 
Alderman, Inger Andersen, Caroline Anstey, Tamar Manuelyan Atinc, Julie Babinard, Reena 
Badiani, Shaida Badiee, Cristian Baeza, Svetlana Bagaudinova, Radu Ban, Elena Bardasi, Julie 
Barmeier, Antonella Bassani, Kathleen Beegle, Isabel Beltran, Rui Benﬁ ca, Bhuvan Bhatnagar, 
Nina  Bhatt,  Benu  Bidani,  Christina  Biebesheimer,  Dan  Biller,  Regina  Birner,  Gustavo 
Bobonis, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Eduard Bos, Maya Brahman, Milan Brahmbhatt, Mathieu 
Brossard, Judith Bruce, Helle Buchhave, Eduardo Bustillo, Mark Cackler, Shubha Chakravarty, 
Nadereh Chamlou, Meera Chatterjee, Laura Chioda, Yoonyoung Cho, Sadia Chowdhury, Luc 
Christiaensen, Shelley Clark, Rui Coutinho, Pamela Cox, Jose Cuesta Leiva, Facundo Cuevas, 
Maitreyi Das, Monica Das Gupta, Marieme Esther Dassanou, Ximena del Carpio, Gustavo 
Demarco, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Jacqueline Devine, Quy-Toan Do, Doerte Doemeland, Jane 
Doogan, Nora Dudwick, Rosamund Ebdon, Adriana Eftimie, Cho Eiichiro, Kofﬁ  Ekouevi, 
Mary Ellsberg, Kene Ezemanari, Shahrokh Fardoust, Juan Feng, Patricia Fernandes, Deon 
Filmer, Nancy Folbre, Vivien Foster, Samuel Freije-Rodriguez, Caroline Freund, Jed Friedman, 
Elisa Gamberoni, John Garrison, Roberta Gatti, Varun Gauri, Hope Gerochi, Sudeshna Ghosh 
Banerjee, Marcelo Giugale, Anne-Marie Goetz, Pablo Gottret, Duncan Greene, Caren Grown, 
Rebekka E. Grun, Hans Jurgen Gruss, Kelly Hallman, Trina S. Haque, Lori Heise, Katherine 
Heller, Cesar Hidalgo, Karla Hoff, Vivian Hon, Fabrice Houdart, Alejandro Hoyos, Mala Htun, 
Elisabeth Huybens, Vegard Iversen, Diane Jacovella, Willem Janssen, Emmanuel Jimenez, 
Johannes Jutting, Abdalwahab Khatib, Stuti Khemani, Florian Kitt, Leora Klapper, Stephan 
Klasen, Renate Kloppinger-Todd, Jeni Klugman, Kalpana Kochhar, Florence Kondylis, Kees 
Kostermans, Apichoke Kotikula, Nandini Krishnan, Stephanie Kutner, Rachel Kyte, Somik 
Lall, Pete Lanjouw, Gunar Larson, Philippe H. Le Houerou, Marcus Lee, Xavier Legrain, Anne-
Marie Leroy, Maureen Lewis, Audrey Liounis, Vanessa Almeida Lopes, Gladys Lopez-Acevedo, 
Thomas Losse-Muller, Inessa Love, Laszlo Lovei, John Mackedon, Megumi Makisaka, Hazel 
Jean Malapit, Alexandre Marc, Michel Matera, Robin Mearns, Samia Melhm, Taye Mengistae, 
Nicholas Menzies, E. Richard Mills, Maxine Molyneaux, Andrew Morrison, Janine Moussa, 
Masud Mozammel, Mamta Murthi, Raj Nallari, Kumari Navaratne, Reema Nayar, Vikram 
Nehru,  David  Newhouse,  Trang  Nguyen,  Carmen  Niethammer,  Akihiko  Nishio,  Sina 
Odugbemi, Waafas Ofosu-Amaah, Maria Beatriz Orlando, Julie Oyegun, Juan Caglar Ozden, 
Berk Ozler, Vincent Palmade, Kiran Pandey, Sheoli Pargal, Carlos Parra Osorio, Katherine 
Patrick, Eija Pehu, Joseﬁ na Posadas, Carlos Felipe Prada, Giovanna Prennushi, Lant Pritchett, 
Monika Queisser, Agnes Quisumbing, Mohammad Zia M. Qureshi, Ismail Radwan, Martin 
Rama, Rita Ramalho, Aruna Rao, Biju Rao, Martin Ravallion, Hilde Refstie, Ritva Reinikka, 
Jose  Guilherme  Reis,  Doug  Rendall,  David  Rosenblatt,  Jaime  Saavedra,  Sebastián  Sáez, 
Amparita Santamaria, Cristina Santos, Paromita Sanyal, Jeea Saraswati, Sarosh Sattar, Claudia 
Sepulveda, Carlos Silva-Jauregui, Sevi Simavi, Nistha Sinha, Ines Smyth, Sari Söderström, 
Jennifer  Solotaroff,  Cornelia  Staritz,  Mattea  Stein,  Zoe  Stephenson,  Paula  Suarez,  Sonia 
Sultan, Kazushige Taniguchi, Marcela Tarazona, David Theis, Harsha Thirumurthy, Keiichi 
Tsunekawa, Zaﬁ ris Tzannatos, Caroline van den Berg, Anna van der Wouden, Dominique 
Van De Walle, Linda Van Gelder, Axel van Trotsenburg, Marilou Uy, Paolo Verne, Joachim von 
Amsberg, Wendy Wakeman, Jan Walliser, Jill Watkins, Monica Weber-Fahr, Laurel Weldon, 
Debbie Wetzel, Alys Willman, Michael Woolcock, Tevﬁ k Yaprak, Zouera Youssoufou, and 
Hassan Zaman. 

 

Bibliographical Note 

375

We are also grateful to many people around the world who participated in consultations 
and discussion workshops held during the drafting stage of the report. We would especially 
like to thank the people who helped us organize these events: Ansohn Albrecht and Sebastian 
Herold from InWent-GTZ, Orazio Attanassio from the Institute of Fiscal Studies, Belkys 
Mones from the Inter-American Commission of Women at the Organization of American 
States, Sylvia Chant from the LSE Gender Institute, Hege Sorreime and Per Bastoe from 
NORAD, Liz Fabjer from DFID, and Caren Grown from USAID. We would also like to 
acknowledge with thanks the support we received in setting up consultations from the staff 
in the World Bank’s ofﬁ ces in Burkina Faso, Colombia, Georgia, Indonesia, India, Japan, 
Lebanon, Morocco, Mexico, Tanzania, Thailand, Turkey, UN-New York, and Vietnam.

Johan  Mistiaen,  Masako  Hiraga,  and  Sulekha  Patel  of  the  Data  Development  Group 
provided inputs and help with data harmonization, along with Camilo José Pecha Garzón 
and Melissa Rodriguez. Speciﬁ c data inputs were provided by the Gender Law Library team 
Nayda Almodovar Reteguis, Yasmin Klaudia Bin Humam, Sarah Iqbal, Thibault Meilland, 
Rita Ramalho, and Paula Tavare. Jeffrey Lecksell prepared the maps for this report. Additional 
data sources were made available by IWPR and IFES (SWMENA database), FAO, and the 
Gallup Survey. 

Despite efforts to compile a comprehensive list, some who contributed may have been 
inadvertently omitted. The team apologizes for any oversights and reiterates its gratitude to 
all who contributed to this Report.

Background Papers and Notes

Aguayo-Téllez,  Ernesto.  2011. “The  Impact  of  Trade  Liberalization  Policies  and  FDI  on  Gender 

Inequality: A Literature Review.” 

Akresh, Richard, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga. 2011. “Gender and Conditionality: 

Cash Transfers and Children’s Schooling.” 

Albanesi, Stefania. 2011. “Maternal Health and Fertility: An International Perspective.” 
Ali, Rabia, Jishnu Das, Damien de Walque, Kenneth L. Leonard, Mattias Lundberg, and David Peters. 

2011. “Patterns of Health Care Interactions in Seven Low and Middle-Income Countries.”

Amador,  Diego,  Raquel  Bernal,  and  Ximena  Peña.  2011.  “The  Rise  in  Female  Participation  in 

Colombia: Children, Education of Marital Status?”

Anghel, Brindusa, Sara de la Rica, and Juan J. Dolado. 2011. “The Effect of Public Sector Employment 
on Women’s Labor Market Outcomes.” Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Background Paper for the WDR 2012.

Baliamoune,  Mina.  2011.  “The  Making  of  Gender  Equality  in  Tunisia  and  Implications  for 

Development.” 

Bandiera, Oriana and Ashwini Natraj. 2011. “Does Gender Inequality Hinder Growth? The Evidence 

and its Policy Implications.”

Bandyopadhyay, Sushenjit, Urvashi Narain, and Limin Wang. 2011. “Common Property Resources, 

Economic Opportunities and Gender Disparities.”

Beegle, Kathleen, Markus Goldstein, and Nina Rosas. 2011. “A Review of Gender and the Distribution 

of Household Assets.”

Belden,  Cory,  Lynn  Brown,  Gunnar  Larson,  and  Eija  Pehu.  2011.  “Gender,  Agriculture  and 
Rural  Development.”  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  Department  Background  Paper 
for WDR 2012.

Berniell, María Inés, and Carolina Sánchez-Páramo. 2011. “Closing the Access Gap: Recent Advances 

in Female Labor Force Participation.” 

———. 2011. “Overview of Time Use Data Used for the Analysis of Gender Differences in Time Use 

Patterns.” 

Bosch, Mariano, and William Maloney. 2011. “Sectoral Choice and Family Formation: Evidence from 

Labor Market Transitions in Ghana, Mexico, Serbia, and Thailand.” 

Byrnes,  Andrew,  and  Marsha  Freeman.  2011. “The  Impact  of  the  CEDAW  Convention:  Paths  to 

Equality.” 

Chioda, Laura. 2011. “Key Factors Explaining Female Labor Force Participation Dynamics.”
Chiongson, Rea Abada, Deval Desai, Teresa Marchiori, and Michael Woolcock. 2011. “Role of Law 

and Justice in Achieving Gender Equality.”

Clancy Joy, Tanja Winther, Margaret N. Matinga, and Sheila Oparaocha. 2011. “Gender Equity in 
Access to and Beneﬁ ts from Modern Energy and Improved Energy Technologies.” ETC/ENERGIA 
in association with Nord/Sør-konsulentene.

Costa, Rita, and Bob Rijkers. 2011. “Gender and Rural Non-Farm Entrepreneurship.” 
Croppenstedt, Andre, Markus Goldstein, and Nina Rosas. 2011. “Gender and Agriculture: Inefﬁ ciencies, 

Segregation and Low Productivity Traps.”

Cuberes, David, and Marc Teignier-Baqué. 2011. “Gender Inequality and Economic Growth.” 
de Brauw, Alan, Jikun Huang, Linxiu Zhang, and Scott Rozelle. 2011. “The Feminization of Agriculture 

with Chinese Characteristics.”

377

378 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

de Walque, Damien, and Deon Filmer. 2011. “Trends and Socio-economic Gradients in Adult Mortality 

around the Developing World.”

Dercon,  Stefan.  2011. “Young  Lives: Are  There  Gender  Differences  in  Children’s  Outcomes?”  U.K. 
Department for International Development Report and World Bank Background Paper for the WDR 
2012.

Do, Quy-Toan, Andrei Levchenko, and Claudio Raddatz. 2011. “Engendering Trade.” 
Doss, Cheryl. 2011. “Intrahousehold Bargaining and Resource Allocation in Developing Countries.” 
U.K. Department for International Development Report and World Bank Background Paper for 
the WDR 2012.

Farré, Lídia. 2011. “The Role of Men for Gender Equality.” 
Flabbi, Luca. 2011. “Gender Differences in Education, Career Choices and Labor Market Outcomes 
on a Sample of OECD Countries.” Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Background Paper for the WDR 2012.

Freije, Samuel, and Maurizio Bussolo. 2011. “Gender, Crisis and Trade Openness in Dominican Republic 

and Latin American Countries.” 

Frieson, Kate. 2011. “Cambodia Case Study: Evolution Towards Gender Equality.”
Giles,  John,  and  Firman  Witoelar  Kartaadipoetra.  2011. “Indonesia:  Education  and  Occupational 

Segregation.” 

Greene,  Margaret  E.,  Omar  Robles,  and  Piotr  Pawlak.  2011.  “Masculinities,  Social  Change,  and 

Development.” 

Guner, Nezih, Ezgi Kaya, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos. 2011. “Spain Country Case Study.” 
Heise, Lori. 2011. “Determinants of Domestic Violence. An Ecological Approach.” U.K. Department for 

International Development Report and World Bank Background Paper for the WDR 2012.

Hoff,  Karla  and  Ghazala  Mansuri.  2011. “Gender  Inequality  beyond  the  Law:  Causes  and  Policy 

Implications.”

Hossain,  Naomi  Therese.  2011. “Exports,  Equity,  and  Empowerment:  The  Effects  of  Readymade 

Garments Manufacturing Employment on Gender Equality in Bangladesh.” 

Hoyos, Alejandro, and Ambar Narayan. 2011. “Inequalities of Opportunities among Children: How 

Much Does Gender Matter?”

Htun,  Mala,  and  Laurel Weldon.  2011. “Sex  Equality  in  Family  Law:  Historical  Legacies,  Feminist 

Activism, and Religious Power in 70 Countries.”

Ibraeva, Gulnara, Anara Moldosheva, and Anara Niyazova. 2011. “Kyrgyz Country Case Study.” 
Iversen, Vegard, and Nitya Rao. 2011. “India Country Case Study.”
Jacobsen, Joyce. 2011. “The Role of Technological Change in Increasing Gender Equity with a Focus on 

Information and Communications Technology.” 

Kantowitz, Riva. 2011. “Domestic Violence and Links to Other Forms of Violence.” Social Development 

Department Background Paper for the WDR 2012.

Köhlin, Gunnar, Subhrendu K. Pattanayak, Erin O. Sills, and Christopher Wilfong. 2011. “Energy, Gender 
and Development: Welfare Implications of Interventions and Future Options.” Background Paper for 
the World Bank Energy Strategy and for the WDR 2012.

Kugler, Maurice, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. 2011. “Gender Differences in Employment and 

Returns to Education.” 

McBride, Dorothy, and Amy Mazur. 2011. “Gender Machineries Worldwide.” 
Ñopo, Hugo, Nancy Daza, and Johanna Ramos. 2011. “Gender Earnings Gaps in the World.” 
Nyberg, Anita. 2011. “Sweden Country Case Study.” 
Osawa, Mari. 2011. “Gender-Equality and the Revitalization of Japan’s Society and Economy Under 

Globalization.” Japan International Cooperation Agency Background Paper for the WDR 2012.

Ozden, Caglar. 2011. “Migration: An International Overview of Migrant Stocks and Flows.” 
Pande, Rohini, and Deanna Ford. 2011. “Gender Quotas and Female Leadership.” 
Posadas, Joseﬁ na, and Marc Smitz. 2011. “Work Decisions for Men and Women: A Household Approach 

for Indonesia and Peru.”

Quisumbing, Agnes, Neha Kumar, and Julia Behrman. 2011. “Do Shocks Affect Men’s and Women’s Assets 
Differently? A Review of Literature and New Evidence for Bangladesh and Uganda.” International 
Food Policy Research Institute and World Bank Background Paper for the WDR 2012.

 

Background Papers and Notes 

379

Rendall,  Michelle.  2011. “Technical  Change  in  Developing  Countries:  Has  It  Decreased  Gender 

Inequality?” 

Sassen, Saskia. 2011. “Digital Technology and Gender.” 
Sato, Mine. 2011. “Promoting Gender Equality by Facilitating Women’s Collective Problem-Solving 
Capacity Development: Japanese Experience with the Post-War Life Improvement Program and 
its Application to Contemporary Developing Countries.” Japan International Cooperation Agency 
Background Paper for the WDR 2012. 

Skouﬁ as, Emmanuel. 2011. “Gender Impacts of Climate Change.” 
Smitz, François. 2011. “Input paper—Diversiﬁ cation of Activities by the Household.” 
Sumbadze, Nana. 2011. “Georgia Country Case Study.”
Tevden, Inge. 2011. “Mozambique Country Case Study.”
Tzannatos, Zaﬁ ris. 2011. “Dissecting the Increase in Female Relative to Male Pay Over Time: A Reduction 

in Discrimination or a Race to the Bottom?”

Uteng, Tanu Priya. 2011. “Gender and Mobility in the Developing World.” 
World Bank, Social Protection Department. 2011. “Critical (literature) Review on Gender-Differentiated 

Access to Pension and other Insurance Mechanisms.”

Wiig, Henrik. 2011. “Gender Experiments in Peru.” 
Yoshida, Kohei. 2011. “Gender Perceptions in Southeast Asian Countries: Findings from JICA-RI Value 

Surveys.” Japan International Cooperation Agency Background Paper for the WDR 2012.

Yuki,  Takako,  Keiko  Mizuno,  Keiichi  Ogawa,  and  Mihoko  Sakai.  2011. “Promoting  Gender  Parity 
Lessons from Yemen: A JICA Technical Cooperation Project in Basic Education.” Japan International 
Cooperation Agency Background Paper for the WDR 2012. 

Selected Indicators

Table A1  Participation in education
Table A2  Health
Table A3  Employment by economic activity and political participation

Selected world development indicators

Introduction
Classiﬁ cation of economies by region and income, FY2012
Table 1  Key indicators of development
Table 2  Poverty
Table 3  Millennium Development Goals: Eradicating poverty and improving lives
Table 4  Economic activity
Table 5  Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance
Table 6  Key indicators for other economies
Technical notes

382 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table A1  Participation in education

Primary

Male

Female

1991

2009

1991

Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Angola 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bangladesh 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Benin 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
  Hong Kong SAR, China 
Colombia 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Congo, Rep. 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
El Salvador 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Finland 
France 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Rep. 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Korea, Rep. 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Lao PDR 
Lebanon 
Liberia 
Libya 
Lithuania 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Mali 
Mauritania 
Mexico 

37 
101 
103 
79 
.. 
.. 
107 
101 
111 
78 
96 
99 
80 
110 
.. 
130 
95 
41 
78 
119 
101 
105 
80 
70 
105 
132 
.. 
105 
83 
125 
103 
77 
82 
96 
98 
.. 
123 
96 
97 
20 
39 
99 
109 
97 
98 
84 
99 
86 
48 
47 
106 
90 
105 
119 
114 
115 
102 
96 
99 
100 
107 
.. 
100 
108 
109 
111 
98 
.. 
.. 
95 
105 
78 
93 
36 
56 
115 

123 
121 
111 
141 
117 
97 
107 
99 
96 
93 
98a 
104 
129 
108 
108 
132 
102 
83a 
149 
120 
122 
99 
107a 
105 
109 
111 
103 
120 
98 
123 
110 
81 
95 
104 
98 
114 
117 
103 
117 
53 
107 
98 
109 
108 
104 
106 
101 
117 
97 
.. 
116 
100 
115 
123 
103 
111 
104 
110 
104 
102 
97 
109a 
114 
105 
95 
117 
104 
96 
.. 
98 
162 
118 
95 
105a 
101 
117 

20 
103 
88 
72 
.. 
.. 
107 
101 
110 
66 
96 
101 
41 
102 
.. 
129 
93 
26 
65 
96 
87 
103 
51 
31 
103 
121 
.. 
107 
62 
115 
102 
55 
82 
97 
98 
.. 
122 
80 
96 
19 
26 
99 
108 
97 
99 
72 
98 
75 
23 
45 
107 
90 
80 
116 
103 
97 
103 
99 
99 
100 
106 
.. 
97 
109 
111 
88 
95 
.. 
.. 
89 
102 
69 
93 
21 
43 
112 

Gross enrollment ratio

          % of relevant age group

Secondary

Tertiary

2009

83 
117 
104 
114 
116 
100 
106 
98 
95 
97 
100a 
103 
114 
107 
110 
123 
101 
75a 
144 
113 
106 
98 
76a 
74 
104 
115 
105 
120 
83 
116 
109 
66 
95 
103 
99 
98 
118 
99 
113 
44 
98 
97 
108 
108 
103 
105 
101 
110 
83 
.. 
116 
99 
111 
119 
102 
94 
105 
112 
103 
102 
97 
109a 
111 
103 
95 
106 
102 
86 
.. 
96 
158 
121 
94 
89a 
108 
116 

Male

1991

21 
92 
67 
.. 
.. 
.. 
132 
106 
87 
24 
96 
101 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
98 
.. 
7 
.. 
31 
101 
16 
11 
96 
46 
.. 
48 
29 
54 
43 
.. 
81 
93 
109 
.. 
54 
77 
36 
12 
16 
106 
98 
96 
101 
42 
95 
26 
16 
.. 
30 
86 
47 
50 
61 
54 
96 
90 
80 
96 
80 
94 
.. 
93 
99 
28 
59 
.. 
.. 
86 
19 
21 
56 
10 
18 
54 

2009

58 
72 
96 
.. 
80 
92 
135 
103 
98 
40 
89a 
109 
.. 
82 
90 
96 
89 
24a 
25 
44 
45 
103 
16a 
34 
89 
76 
81 
90 
47 
.. 
93 
.. 
94 
94 
117 
72 
74 
68 
63 
37 
39 
106 
113 
92 
104 
61 
104 
58 
46 
.. 
57 
99 
64 
80 
85 
59 
115 
88 
101 
101 
87 
100a 
62 
99 
84 
48 
78 
.. 
.. 
99 
32 
31 
66 
49a 
26 
87 

Female

1991

11 
85 
53 
.. 
.. 
.. 
132 
97 
88 
12 
100 
102 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
98 
.. 
4 
.. 
22 
101 
7 
2 
98 
35 
.. 
57 
14 
41 
46 
.. 
84 
90 
110 
.. 
56 
61 
40 
11 
12 
127 
103 
94 
99 
28 
93 
23 
5 
.. 
36 
87 
27 
42 
46 
35 
105 
95 
79 
98 
83 
96 
.. 
90 
101 
19 
63 
.. 
.. 
83 
18 
13 
58 
5 
9 
53 

2009

28 
73 
97 
.. 
91 
94 
130 
98 
101 
45 
91a 
106 
.. 
80 
92 
106 
86 
19a 
18 
36 
38 
101 
9a 
14 
92 
81 
83 
99 
26 
.. 
99 
.. 
97 
96 
120 
82 
77 
66 
64 
26 
30 
112 
113 
88 
99 
54 
99 
55 
27 
.. 
72 
98 
56 
79 
81 
44 
121 
90 
100 
101 
90 
97a 
56 
95 
85 
39 
87 
.. 
.. 
99 
31 
28 
71 
34a 
23 
93 

Male

1991

3 
7 
.. 
1 
.. 
.. 
35 
37 
28 
7 
.. 
40 
4 
.. 
.. 
11 
30 
1 
1 
2 
.. 
85 
3 
.. 
29 
.. 
23 
14 
.. 
8 
.. 
.. 
26 
18 
34 
.. 
.. 
15 
.. 
.. 
1 
46 
37 
38 
40 
1 
25 
.. 
2 
.. 
10 
14 
8 
12 
8 
14 
31 
34 
33 
36 
22 
.. 
.. 
51 
20 
2 
29 
.. 
17 
39 
4 
1 
.. 
1 
5 
15 

2009

6 
.. 
25 
.. 
55 
44 
71 
54 
19 
10 
63 
59 
.. 
42 
32 
30 
46 
5 
.. 
9 
10 
.. 
3 
3 
54 
24 
56 
36 
8 
11 
.. 
11 
43 
51 
63 
.. 
39 
.. 
23 
3a 
5 
82 
49 
23 
.. 
11 
87 
18 
14 
.. 
15 
53 
16 
24 
35 
.. 
55 
54 
56 
62 
39 
32 
5 
117 
44 
15 
48 
.. 
.. 
63 
4 
1 
32 
9 
5 
28 

    Female

1991

   2009

1 
7 
.. 
0 
.. 
.. 
42 
32 
19 
1 
.. 
39 
1 
.. 
.. 
12 
33 
0 
0 
0 
.. 
105 
0 
.. 
25 
.. 
16 
15 
.. 
2 
.. 
.. 
25 
14 
39 
.. 
.. 
9 
.. 
.. 
0 
52 
43 
35 
30 
0 
26 
.. 
0 
.. 
8 
15 
4 
8 
3 
9 
28 
35 
31 
23 
24 
.. 
.. 
25 
26 
1 
27 
.. 
14 
27 
3 
0 
.. 
0 
1 
12 

1
..
36
..
84
57
94
64
19
6
91
74
..
35
42
39
61
2
..
5
8
..
1
1
56
25
58
38
3
2
..
6
55
71
92
..
45
..
26
1a
2
101
62
28
..
7
95
18
5
..
22
72
11
23
38
..
66
71
79
55
43
47a
3
82
58
12
57
..
..
96
3
0
41
3
2
28

 

Selected Indicators 

383

Table A1  Participation in education (continued)

Primary

Male

1991

2009

93 
Moldova 
76 
Morocco 
69 
Mozambique 
108 
Myanmar 
135 
Nepal 
101 
Netherlands 
104 
New Zealand 
88 
Nicaragua 
33 
Niger 
93 
Nigeria 
100 
Norway 
62 
Pakistan 
109 
Panama 
70 
Papua New Guinea 
107 
Paraguay 
119 
Peru 
109 
Philippines 
99 
Poland 
122 
Portugal 
88 
Romania 
109 
Russian Federation 
79 
Rwanda 
.. 
Saudi Arabia 
64 
Senegal 
.. 
Serbia 
57 
Sierra Leone 
.. 
Singapore 
101 
Slovak Republic 
.. 
Somalia 
110 
South Africa 
107 
Spain 
115 
Sri Lanka 
53 
Sudan 
100 
Sweden 
90 
Switzerland 
106 
Syrian Arab Republic 
92 
Tajikistan 
71 
Tanzania 
102 
Thailand 
115 
Togo 
120 
Tunisia 
102 
Turkey 
.. 
Turkmenistan 
75 
Uganda 
107 
Ukraine 
116 
United Arab Emirates 
105 
United Kingdom 
105 
United States 
108 
Uruguay 
112 
Uzbekistan 
109 
Venezuela, RB 
.. 
Vietnam 
.. 
West Bank and Gaza 
.. 
Yemen, Rep. 
.. 
Zambia 
108 
Zimbabwe 
105 w 
World 
81 
Low income 
110 
Middle income 
110 
  Lower middle income 
112 
  Upper middle income 
105 
Low and middle income 
123 
  East Asia & Paciﬁ c 
  Europe & Central Asia 
99 
  Latin America & the Caribbean  114 
106 
  Middle East & North Africa 
98 
  South Asia 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
78 
High income 
103 
a. Data are for 2010.

94 
112 
122a 
117 
.. 
108 
101 
118 
73a 
95 
99 
92 
111 
.. 
101 
109 
111 
97 
114 
100 
97 
150 
101 
82 
98 
.. 
.. 
102 
42 
103 
108 
97 
78 
97 
104 
125 
104 
105 
92 
119 
109 
101 
.. 
121 
97 
106 
106 
98 
115 
93 
105 
.. 
79 
94 
113 
.. 

109 w 
108 
110 
110 
111 
110 
111 
99 
119 
106 
113 
104 
 102 

Gross enrollment ratio

         % of relevant age group

Secondary

Tertiary

Female

Male

Female

Male

    Female

1991

93 
52 
51 
103 
85 
104 
102 
93 
20 
73 
100 
32 
104 
60 
104 
116 
108 
97 
116 
89 
109 
78 
.. 
47 
.. 
38 
.. 
100 
.. 
108 
106 
111 
41 
100 
91 
96 
90 
69 
100 
75 
107 
95 
.. 
64 
107 
113 
105 
103 
107 
110 
108 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
104 
93 w 
67 
97 
94 
109 
91 
115 
97 
113 
87 
74 
65 
 102 

2009

93 
103 
110a 
115 
.. 
106 
102 
116 
60a 
84 
99 
77 
107 
.. 
98 
109 
109 
97 
111 
99 
97 
151 
97 
85 
97 
.. 
.. 
102 
23 
99 
107 
97 
70 
96 
103 
120 
100 
105 
90 
111 
107 
98 
.. 
122 
98 
105 
106 
99 
112 
91 
102 
.. 
79 
76 
112 
.. 

105 w 
101 
107 
104 
111 
106 
112 
98 
115 
98 
107 
95 
 101 

1991

87 
41 
9 
23 
46 
124 
92 
25 
10 
28 
101 
31 
59 
14 
30 
69 
70 
86 
62 
93 
94 
20 
.. 
20 
.. 
21 
.. 
86 
.. 
64 
102 
69 
22 
88 
101 
56 
.. 
6 
31 
30 
50 
59 
.. 
14 
92 
63 
85 
91 
.. 
.. 
50 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
54 
54 w 
30 
52 
48 
68 
49 
46 
86 
56 
61 
47 
25 
 91 

2009

88 
60 
28a 
53 
.. 
122 
124 
64 
16a 
34 
112 
37 
70 
.. 
65 
89 
79 
99 
105 
94 
86 
27 
104 
34 
90 
.. 
.. 
92 
11 
92 
118 
.. 
40 
103 
98 
75 
90 
31 
74a 
54 
87 
87 
.. 
30 
95 
95 
98 
93 
82 
104 
79 
.. 
84 
.. 
53 
.. 
69 w 
42 
70 
61 
81 
65 
74 
91 
86 
75 
58 
40 
 100 

1991

94 
30 
5 
22 
21 
115 
93 
41 
4 
21 
105 
15 
63 
9 
32 
65 
72 
89 
71 
92 
96 
16 
.. 
10 
.. 
12 
.. 
90 
.. 
75 
108 
75 
18 
92 
95 
41 
.. 
5 
31 
10 
39 
37 
.. 
8 
96 
73 
88 
92 
.. 
.. 
62 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
43 
45 w 
22 
42 
35 
67 
38 
37 
84 
57 
46 
27 
19 
 92 

2009

90 
51 
23a 
54 
.. 
120 
129 
72 
11a 
27 
109 
29 
76 
.. 
68 
89 
86 
99 
109 
93 
84 
26 
90 
27 
93 
.. 
.. 
92 
5 
96 
124 
.. 
36 
102 
94 
74 
78 
24 
80a 
28 
94 
77 
.. 
25 
93 
96 
100 
94 
94 
103 
86 
.. 
90 
.. 
44 
.. 
67 w 
36 
68 
55 
86 
63 
78 
87 
93 
69 
51 
32 
 100 

1991

2009

1991

   2009

.. 
14 
1 
4 
8 
43 
43 
8 
2 
.. 
39 
4 
.. 
.. 
9 
.. 
21 
19 
20 
10 
47 
1 
11 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
16 
.. 
14 
36 
4 
3 
29 
35 
22 
.. 
1 
18 
4 
10 
17 
.. 
2 
.. 
4 
30 
66 
.. 
.. 
28 
.. 
.. 
7 
3 
8 
..  w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
16 
.. 
.. 
 .. 

32 
14 
.. 
9 
.. 
58 
68 
.. 
2a 
.. 
56 
6 
36 
.. 
30 
.. 
26 
59 
56 
58 
66 
6 
29 
10 
44 
.. 
.. 
43 
.. 
.. 
66 
.. 
.. 
56 
51 
.. 
28 
.. 
39a 
.. 
27 
43 
.. 
5 
72 
22 
50 
72 
48 
11 
59 
.. 
40 
14 
.. 
4 
26 w 
8 
24 
17 
30 
21 
24 
50 
33 
28 
13 
8 
 63 

.. 
8 
0 
5 
3 
36 
48 
7 
0 
.. 
46 
2 
.. 
.. 
8 
.. 
30 
25 
26 
9 
58 
0 
10 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
16 
.. 
11 
39 
2 
2 
35 
19 
14 
.. 
0 
21 
1 
7 
9 
.. 
1 
.. 
14 
29 
82 
.. 
.. 
25 
.. 
.. 
2 
1 
4 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
9 
.. 
.. 
 .. 

45
12
..
12
..
65
99
..
1a
..
92
5
55
..
43
..
32
84
67
77
89
4
36
6
56
..
..
69
..
..
82
..
..
88
52
..
12
..
51a
..
42
34
..
4
91
41
69
101
83
8
99
..
52
6
..
3
28 w
5
25
14
36
22
26
61
41
27
9
5
 77

384 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table A2  Health

 

 

 
 

 

Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Angola 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bangladesh 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Benin 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
  Hong Kong SAR, China 
Colombia 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Congo, Rep. 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
El Salvador 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Finland 
France 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Rep. 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Korea, Rep. 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Lao PDR 
Lebanon 
Liberia 
Libya 
Lithuania 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Mali 
Mauritania 

Life expectancy at birth 

years 

Child mortality rate 

per 1,000 

 

Male 

 

Female 

 

Male 

 

Female 

1990 

2009 

1990 

2009 

1990 

2004–09a 

1990 

2004–09a 

National
estimates 
2004–09a 

41 
69 
66 
40 
68 
65 
74 
72 
61 
53 
66 
73 
53 
57 
62 
63 
68 
47 
45 
53 
53 
74 
47 
49 
71 
67 
75 
64 
46 
57 
73 
56 
69 
68 
72 
65 
66 
62 
61 
46 
45 
71 
73 
67 
72 
56 
75 
59 
47 
54 
64 
65 
58 
60 
64 
58 
72 
75 
74 
76 
65 
64 
58 
67 
64 
53 
66 
47 
66 
66 
50 
48 
68 
43 
54 

44 
74 
71 
46 
72 
71 
79 
77 
68 
66 
65 
78 
61 
64 
73 
69 
70 
52 
49 
60 
51 
79 
46 
48 
76 
72 
80 
70 
46 
53 
77 
57 
73 
74 
77 
70 
72 
69 
67 
58 
54 
77 
78 
68 
77 
56 
78 
67 
56 
60 
70 
70 
63 
69 
70 
65 
77 
80 
79 
80 
71 
64 
54 
77 
62 
64 
70 
57 
72 
68 
59 
53 
72 
48 
55 

41 
75 
68 
44 
75 
71 
80 
79 
70 
55 
76 
79 
55 
61 
74 
70 
75 
48 
48 
57 
57 
81 
52 
53 
77 
70 
80 
72 
50 
61 
78 
60 
76 
75 
78 
70 
71 
64 
71 
50 
48 
79 
81 
74 
79 
58 
80 
65 
50 
56 
69 
74 
58 
63 
66 
72 
77 
78 
80 
82 
69 
73 
62 
76 
73 
56 
71 
50 
70 
76 
52 
50 
72 
43 
57 

44 
80 
74 
50 
79 
77 
84 
83 
73 
68 
76 
84 
63 
68 
78 
76 
77 
55 
52 
63 
52 
84 
49 
50 
82 
75 
86 
77 
49 
55 
82 
59 
80 
80 
81 
76 
78 
72 
76 
62 
57 
83 
85 
75 
83 
58 
83 
74 
60 
63 
75 
78 
66 
73 
73 
72 
82 
84 
84 
86 
75 
74 
55 
84 
72 
67 
74 
60 
77 
79 
62 
55 
77 
50 
59 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
51 
.. 
17 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
64 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
11 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
18 
.. 
38 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
78 
.. 
.. 
122 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
36 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
6 
.. 
35 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
85 
126 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
3 
.. 
.. 
.. 
8 
.. 
.. 
9 
16 
.. 
.. 
64 
18 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
65 
20 
73 
.. 
74 
96 
.. 
.. 
.. 
4 
70 
49 
.. 
.. 
1 
.. 
.. 
6 
5 
5 
.. 
.. 
56 
.. 
.. 
5 
.. 
38 
.. 
.. 
89 
33 
8 
.. 
9 
13 
.. 
6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
3 
5 
27 
.. 
8 
.. 
.. 
62 
.. 
.. 
30 
52 
.. 
117 
53 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
51 
.. 
20 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
75 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
20 
.. 
46 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
79 
.. 
.. 
112 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
35 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
6 
.. 
33 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
82 
114 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
1 
.. 
.. 
.. 
3 
.. 
.. 
5 
20 
.. 
.. 
65 
20 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
65 
20 
72 
.. 
82 
101 
.. 
.. 
.. 
3 
64 
43 
.. 
.. 
1 
.. 
.. 
4 
5 
5 
.. 
.. 
56 
.. 
.. 
4 
.. 
28 
.. 
.. 
86 
36 
9 
.. 
12 
12 
.. 
7 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
7 
4 
25 
.. 
4 
.. 
.. 
64 
.. 
.. 
31 
54 
.. 
114 
44 

.. 
21 
.. 
.. 
40 
27 
.. 
.. 
26 
348 
3 
.. 
397 
310 
3 
75 
6 
307 
615 
461 
669 
.. 
543 
1,099 
18 
34 
.. 
76 
549 
781 
27 
543 
13b 
6 
.. 
159 
60 
55 
59 
.. 
673 
.. 
.. 
14 
.. 
451 
.. 
133 
980 
630 
.. 
17 
254 
228 
25 
84 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
19 
37 
488 
.. 
55 
405 
.. 
994 
.. 
9 
498 
807 
29 
464 
686 

Maternal mortality ratio

per 100,000 live births

Modeled estimates

1990 

1,700 
48 
250 
1,000 
72 
51 
10 
10 
64 
870 
37 
7 
790 
510 
18 
120 
24 
770 
1,200 
690 
680 
6 
880 
1,300 
56 
110 
.. 
140 
900 
460 
35 
690 
8 
15 
7 
220 
230 
220 
200 
930 
990 
7 
13 
58 
13 
630 
6 
140 
1,200 
670 
210 
23 
570 
620 
150 
93 
6 
12 
10 
12 
110 
78 
380 
18 
77 
1,200 
52 
1,100 
100 
34 
710 
910 
56 
1,200 
780 

2008

1,400
31
120
610
70
29
8
5
38
340
15
5
410
180
9
58
13
560
970
290
600
12
850
1,200
26
38
..
85
670
580
44
470
14
8
5
100
140
82
110
280
470
8
8
48
7
350
2
110
680
300
110
13
230
240
30
75
3
7
5
6
59
45
530
18
81
580
26
990
64
13
440
510
31
830
550

 

Selected Indicators 

385

Table A2  Health (continued)

 

 

 
 

 

Life expectancy at birth 

years 

Child mortality rate 

per 1,000 

 

Male 

 

Female 

1990 

2009 

1990 

2009 

Mexico 
Moldova 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Norway 
Pakistan 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Rwanda 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia 
Sierra Leone 
Singapore 
Slovak Republic 
Somalia 
South Africa 
Spain 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania 
Thailand 
Togo 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Uganda 
Ukraine 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan 
Venezuela, RB 
Vietnam 
West Bank and Gaza 
Yemen, Rep. 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
World 
Low income 
Middle income 
  Lower middle income 
  Upper middle income 
Low and middle income 
  East Asia & Paciﬁ c 
  Europe & Central Asia 
  Latin America & the Caribbean 
  Middle East & North Africa 
  South Asia 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
High income 
a. Data are for the most recent year available. b. Data are for 2010.

73 
65 
69 
47 
60 
66 
79 
78 
70 
51 
48 
79 
67 
73 
59 
70 
71 
70 
72 
76 
70 
63 
49 
73 
54 
71 
47 
79 
71 
49 
50 
79 
71 
57 
79 
80 
73 
64 
56 
66 
61 
73 
70 
61 
53 
64 
77 
78 
76 
73 
65 
71 
73 
72 
62 
46 
45 
67 w 
56 
67 
63 
70 
65 
71 
66 
71 
69 
63 
51 
77 

68 
64 
62 
42 
57 
54 
74 
73 
61 
41 
43 
73 
60 
70 
52 
66 
63 
63 
67 
70 
67 
64 
31 
66 
51 
69 
38 
72 
67 
43 
58 
73 
66 
51 
75 
74 
66 
60 
49 
66 
56 
69 
62 
59 
46 
66 
71 
73 
72 
69 
64 
68 
64 
67 
54 
49 
57 
63 w 
51 
62 
58 
66 
61 
65 
64 
65 
63 
58 
48 
72 

74 
71 
66 
45 
61 
54 
80 
78 
67 
42 
46 
80 
61 
75 
58 
70 
68 
68 
76 
77 
73 
74 
35 
70 
53 
74 
42 
77 
75 
46 
65 
81 
73 
54 
80 
81 
70 
66 
53 
73 
60 
72 
67 
66 
50 
75 
75 
79 
79 
76 
70 
74 
67 
70 
55 
53 
64 
67 w 
53 
66 
61 
70 
64 
68 
73 
72 
66 
58 
52 
79 

78 
72 
74 
49 
64 
68 
83 
82 
77 
53 
49 
83 
67 
79 
64 
74 
76 
74 
80 
82 
77 
75 
52 
74 
57 
76 
49 
84 
79 
52 
53 
85 
78 
60 
83 
84 
76 
70 
57 
72 
65 
77 
75 
69 
54 
75 
79 
82 
81 
80 
71 
77 
77 
75 
65 
47 
46 
71 w 
59 
71 
67 
75 
69 
74 
75 
77 
73 
66 
54 
83 

 

Male 

2004–09a 

.. 
7 
9 
.. 
.. 
21 
.. 
.. 
.. 
138 
91 
.. 
14 
.. 
.. 
.. 
13 
10 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
69 
3 
43 
4 
67 
.. 
.. 
53 
.. 
.. 
.. 
38 
.. 
.. 
5 
18 
56 
.. 
55 
.. 
6 
.. 
75 
4 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
11 
.. 
5 
3 
10 
66 
21 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
9 
.. 
.. 

1990 

.. 
.. 
21 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
212 
118 
.. 
22 
.. 
.. 
10 
29 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
87 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
62 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
63 
.. 
75 
19 
.. 
.. 
97 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
41 
30 
.. 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

1990 

.. 
.. 
24 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
232 
102 
.. 
37 
.. 
.. 
12 
31 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
73 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
63 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
57 
.. 
90 
19 
.. 
.. 
86 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
47 
33 
.. 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 

Female 

2004–09a 

National
estimates 
2004–09a 

.. 
4 
11 
.. 
.. 
18 
.. 
.. 
.. 
135 
93 
.. 
22 
.. 
.. 
.. 
4 
9 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
55 
4 
39 
3 
61 
.. 
.. 
54 
.. 
.. 
.. 
30 
.. 
.. 
3 
13 
52 
.. 
43 
.. 
6 
.. 
62 
1 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
7 
.. 
4 
3 
11 
55 
21 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
13 
.. 
.. 

63 
38 
132 
.. 
316 
281 
.. 
.. 
77 
648 
545 
.. 
276 
60 
733 
118 
.. 
162 
5 
.. 
14 
32b 
750 
14 
401 
6 
857 
.. 
4 
1,044 
.. 
.. 
39 
1,107 
.. 
.. 
.. 
38 
578 
12 
.. 
.. 
29 
15 
435 
16 
.. 
.. 
13 
34 
21 
61 
75 
.. 
.. 
591 
555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Maternal mortality ratio

per 100,000 live births

Modeled estimates

1990 

93 
62 
270 
1,000 
420 
870 
10 
18 
190 
1,400 
1,100 
9 
490 
86 
340 
130 
250 
180 
17 
15 
170 
74 
1,100 
41 
750 
13 
1,300 
6 
15 
1,100 
230 
7 
91 
830 
7 
8 
120 
120 
880 
50 
650 
130 
68 
91 
670 
49 
28 
10 
12 
39 
53 
84 
170 
.. 
540 
390 
390 
400 w 
860 
350 
540 
110 
440 
200 
69 
140 
210 
610 
870 
15 

 

2008

85
32
110
550
240
380
9
14
100
820
840
7
260
71
250
95
98
94
6
7
27
39
540
24
410
8
970
9
6
1,200
410
6
39
750
5
10
46
64
790
48
350
60
23
77
430
26
10
12
24
27
30
68
56
..
210
470
790
260 w
590
210
300
60
290
89
34
86
88
290
650
15

386 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table A3  Employment by economic activity and political participation

 

 

 
 
 
 

Agriculture 

Industry 

Service

Employment by economic activity 

 

Male 

% of male 
employment 

2006–09a 

Female 

% of female 
employment 

2006–09a 

Male 

% of male 
employment 

2006–09a 

Female 

% of female 
employment 

2006–09a 

Male 

% of male 
employment 

2006–09a 

Female

% of female
employment 

2006–09a 

Women in parliaments

% of total seats

1990 

2010

Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Angola 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bangladesh 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Benin 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
  Hong Kong SAR, China 
Colombia 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Congo, Rep. 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
El Salvador 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Finland 
France 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Rep. 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Korea, Rep. 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Lao PDR 
Lebanon 
Liberia 
Libya 
Lithuania 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Mali 
Mauritania 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
2c 
39 
4 
5 
37 
.. 
15 
2 
.. 
34 
.. 
21 
9 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
3c 
.. 
.. 
15 
.. 
0b,c 
27 
.. 
.. 
17 
.. 
13 
4 
4 
21 
34 
28 
28 
.. 
9c 
6 
4 
51 
2 
.. 
12 
44 
.. 
.. 
48 
6 
.. 
40 
19 
17 
8 
3 
4 
4 
3 
31 
.. 
7 
37 
.. 
.. 
47 
.. 
12 
.. 
.. 
17 
68 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0b,c 
49 
2 
5 
40 
.. 
9 
1 
.. 
38 
 .. 
12 
5 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1c 
.. 
.. 
6 
.. 
0b,c 
6 
.. 
.. 
4 
.. 
15 
2 
1 
2 
23 
46 
4 
.. 
10c 
3 
2 
57 
1 
.. 
12 
16 
.. 
.. 
10 
3 
.. 
39 
31 
51 
1 
1 
3 
4 
2 
29 
.. 
8 
35 
.. 
.. 
49 
.. 
7 
.. 
.. 
9 
64 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
33c 
25 
32 
37 
18 
.. 
33 
35 
.. 
28 
.. 
29 
43 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
32c 
.. 
.. 
31 
.. 
19c 
22 
.. 
.. 
27 
.. 
39 
49 
29 
26 
24 
27 
26 
.. 
25c 
37 
34 
17 
41 
.. 
30 
24 
.. 
.. 
22 
41 
.. 
21 
33 
22 
31 
30 
39 
35 
21 
26 
.. 
32 
26 
.. 
.. 
4 
.. 
37 
.. 
.. 
32 
8 
.. 

..  
.. 
.. 
.. 
10c 
8 
9 
11 
7 
.. 
24 
10 
.. 
9 
.. 
13 
27 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
10c 
.. 
.. 
11 
.. 
4c 
16 
.. 
.. 
13 
.. 
16 
24 
10 
14 
11 
6 
20 
.. 
20c 
10 
10 
4 
15 
.. 
9 
21 
.. 
.. 
22 
19 
.. 
15 
27 
4 
9 
10 
15 
17 
10 
12 
.. 
15 
11 
.. 
.. 
1 
.. 
18 
.. 
.. 
23 
3 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
65c 
35 
64 
58 
45 
.. 
37 
63 
.. 
38 
.. 
50 
49 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
65c 
.. 
.. 
54 
.. 
80c 
51 
.. 
.. 
56 
.. 
47 
47 
66 
53 
43 
44 
46 
.. 
76c 
56 
62 
33 
57 
.. 
59 
32 
.. 
.. 
30 
52 
.. 
39 
47 
61 
60 
67 
57 
60 
75 
43 
.. 
61 
37 
.. 
.. 
17 
.. 
51 
.. 
.. 
51 
24 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
89c 
43 
88 
83 
53 
.. 
64 
88 
.. 
52 
.. 
75 
67 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
89c 
.. 
.. 
83 
.. 
96c 
78 
.. 
.. 
82 
.. 
68 
74 
89 
84 
66 
49 
76 
.. 
64c 
87 
87 
39 
84 
.. 
79 
63 
.. 
.. 
68 
78 
.. 
46 
42 
46 
89 
89 
82 
78 
88 
59 
.. 
77 
54 
.. 
.. 
13 
.. 
75 
.. 
.. 
68 
33 
.. 

4 
29 
2 
15 
6 
36 
6 
12 
.. 
10 
.. 
9 
3 
9 
.. 
5 
21 
.. 
.. 
.. 
14 
13 
4 
.. 
.. 
21 
.. 
5 
5 
14 
11 
6 
.. 
.. 
31 
8 
5 
4 
12 
.. 
.. 
32 
7 
.. 
.. 
.. 
7 
7 
.. 
.. 
10 
21 
5 
12 
2 
11 
8 
7 
13 
1 
0 
.. 
1 
2 
.. 
6 
0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
7 
10 
5 
.. 
.. 

28
16
8
39
39
9
25
28
11
19
35
39
11
25
19
9
21
15
32
21
14
22
10
5
14
21
..
8
8
7
39
9
24
22
38
21
32
2
19
22
28
40
19 
7
33
8
17
12
19
4
18
9
11
18
3
25
14
18
21
11
6
18
10
15
26
25
3
13
8
19
8
21
10
10
22

 

Selected Indicators 

387

Table A3  Employment by economic activity and political participation (continued)

Employment by economic activity 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

Agriculture 

Industry 

Service

Male 

% of male 
employment 

2006–09a 

Female 

% of female 
employment 

2006–09a 

Male 

% of male 
employment 

2006–09a 

Female 

% of female 
employment 

2006–09a 

Male 

% of male 
employment 

2006–09a 

Female

% of female
employment 

2006–09a 

Mexico 
Moldova 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Norway 
Pakistan 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Rwanda 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia 
Sierra Leone 
Singapore 
Slovak Republic 
Somalia 
South Africa 
Spain 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania 
Thailand 
Togo 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Uganda 
Ukraine 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan 
Venezuela, RB 
Vietnam 
West Bank and Gaza 
Yemen, Rep. 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
World 
Low income 
Middle income 
  Lower middle income 
  Upper middle income 
Low and middle income 
  East Asia & Paciﬁ c 
  Europe & Central Asia 
  Latin America & the Caribbean 
  Middle East & North Africa 
  South Asia 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
High income 

19 
34 
34 
.. 
.. 
.. 
3 
9 
42 
.. 
.. 
4 
37 
20 
.. 
31 
10c 
42 
13 
11 
28 
11 
.. 
5 
34 
25 
.. 
2 
5 
.. 
6 
6 
30c 
.. 
3 
4 
18 
.. 
71 
44 
61 
.. 
17 
.. 
.. 
.. 
5 
2 
2 
16c 
.. 
13 
50 
10 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
16 
18 
25 
.. 
.. 
4 

4 
28 
59 
.. 
.. 
.. 
2 
4 
8 
.. 
.. 
1 
75 
4 
.. 
19 
6c 
24 
13 
12 
31 
7 
.. 
0b 
33 
23 
.. 
1 
2 
.. 
4 
3 
37c 
.. 
1 
2 
26 
.. 
78 
39 
48 
.. 
38 
.. 
.. 
.. 
0b 
1 
1 
5c 
.. 
2 
54 
28 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
15 
9 
42 
.. 
.. 
3 

30 
26 
24 
.. 
.. 
.. 
25 
31 
21 
.. 
.. 
32 
22 
26 
.. 
25 
28c 
18 
43 
39 
37 
38 
.. 
23 
20 
32 
.. 
26 
50 
.. 
35 
36 
25c 
.. 
31 
30 
32 
.. 
7 
21 
10 
.. 
29 
.. 
.. 
.. 
28 
30 
30 
29c 
.. 
31 
24 
29 
.. 
.. 
.. 
..  w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
35 
29 
28 
.. 
.. 
34 

18 
14 
15 
.. 
.. 
.. 
7 
10 
19 
.. 
.. 
7 
12 
9 
.. 
10 
13c 
10 
17 
16 
22 
19 
.. 
2 
5 
16 
.. 
17 
22 
.. 
13 
10 
25c 
.. 
8 
10 
8 
.. 
3 
18 
4 
.. 
15 
.. 
.. 
.. 
7 
8 
9 
13c 
.. 
11 
16 
11 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
18 
14 
17 
.. 
.. 
12 

50 
41 
42 
.. 
.. 
.. 
63 
61 
37 
.. 
.. 
64 
41 
55 
.. 
44 
62c 
40 
44 
50 
36 
51 
.. 
72 
33 
43 
.. 
73 
45 
.. 
59 
59 
27c 
.. 
65 
61 
50 
.. 
22 
35 
29 
.. 
54 
.. 
.. 
.. 
66 
68 
68 
56c 
.. 
57 
26 
60 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
49 
52 
47 
.. 
.. 
62 

77 
58 
25 
.. 
.. 
.. 
85 
86 
72 
.. 
.. 
92 
13 
87 
.. 
71 
82  
66 
70 
72 
47 
74 
.. 
98 
42 
61 
.. 
83 
76 
.. 
83 
88 
27c 
.. 
91 
81 
66 
.. 
19 
43 
46 
.. 
47 
.. 
.. 
.. 
92 
91 
90 
83c 
.. 
87 
30 
60 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
66 
77 
42 
.. 
.. 
85 

Note: Data on employment by economic activity may not sum to 100 percent because of workers not classiﬁ ed by sector.
a. Data are for the most recent year available. b. Less than 0.5. c. Limited coverage.
 

Women in parliaments

% of total seats

1990 

12 
.. 
0 
16 
.. 
6 
21 
14 
15 
5 
.. 
36 
10 
8 
0 
6 
6 
9 
14 
8 
34 
.. 
17 
.. 
13 
.. 
.. 
5 
.. 
4 
3 
15 
5 
.. 
38 
14 
9 
.. 
.. 
3 
5 
4 
1 
26 
12 
.. 
0 
6 
7 
6 
.. 
10 
18 
.. 
4 
7 
11 
13 w 
.. 
13 
11 
14 
13 
17 
.. 
12 
4 
6 
.. 
12 

2010

26
24
11
39
..
33
41
34
21
12
7
40
22
9
1
13
28
21
20
27
11
14
56
0
23
22
13
23
15
7
45
37
5
26
45
29
12
19
31
13
11
28
9
17
32
8
23
22
17
15
22
19
26
..
0
14
15
19 w
20
17
15
20
18
19
15
24
9
19
20
23

388 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table A1. Participation in education
Gross  enrollment  ratio  is  the  ratio  of  total  enrollment, 
regardless  of  age,  to  the  population  of  the  age  group  that 
ofﬁ cially  corresponds  to  the  level  of  education  shown. 
(Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics)

Primary education  (International  Standard  Classiﬁ cation  of 
Education [ISCED] 1) refers to programs normally designed 
to give students a sound basic education in reading, writing, 
and  mathematics  along  with  an  elementary  understanding 
of  other  subjects  such  as  history,  geography,  natural  science, 
social science, art, and music. Religious instruction may also be 
featured. It is sometimes called ele mentary education. (Source: 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics)

Secondary education refers to programs of lower (ISCED 2) 
and upper (ISCED 3) secondary education. Lower secondary 
education continues the basic programs of the primary level, 
but the teaching is typically more subject focused, requiring 
more  specialized  teachers  for  each  subject  area.  In  upper 
secondary  education,  instruction  is  often  organized  even 
more along subject lines, and teachers typically need a higher 
or  more  subject-speciﬁ c  qualiﬁ cation.  (Source:  UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics)

Tertiary education refers to a wide range of programs with 
more advanced educational content. The ﬁ rst stage of tertiary 
education  (ISCE  5)  refers  to  theoretically  based  programs 
intended to provide sufﬁ cient qualiﬁ cations to enter advanced 
research programs or professions to enter advanced research 
programs  or  professions  with  high-skill  requirements  and 
programs  that  are  practical,  technical,  or  occupationally 
speciﬁ c.  The  second  stage  of  tertiary  education  (ISCED  6) 
refers  to  programs  devoted  to  advanced  study  and  original 
research  and  leading  to  the  award  of  an  advanced  research 
qualiﬁ cation. (Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics)

Table A2. Health
Life expectancy at birth is the number of years a newborn 
infant  would  live  if  prevailing  patterns  of  mortality  at  the 
time  of  its  birth  were  to  stay  the  same  throughout  its  life. 
(Source: World Bank)

Child  mortality  rate  is  the  probability  per  1,000  of  dying 
between ages 1 and 5—that is, the probability of a 1-year-

old dying before reaching age 5—if subject to current age-
speciﬁ c  mortality  rates.  (Source:  Macro  International  and 
World Bank)

Maternal  mortality  ratio  is  the  number  of  women  who 
die  from  pregnancy-related  causes  during  pregnancy  and 
childbirth  per  100,000  live  births.  National  estimates  are 
reported based on national surveys, vital registration records, 
and  surveillance  data  or  are  derived  from  community  and 
hospital  records.  (Source:  UNICEF)  Modeled  estimates 
are  derived  based  on  an  exercise  by  the  World  Health 
Organization,  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund,  United 
Nations  Population  Fund,  and  World  Bank.  For  countries 
with  good  attribution  of  cause  of  death,  the  data  are  used 
to  directly  estimate  maternal  mortality.  For  countries 
without  complete  registration  data  but  with  other  types 
of  data  and  for  countries  with  no  empirical  national  data, 
maternal mortality is estimated with a multilevel regression 
model  using  available  national-level  model  using  available 
national-level  maternal  mortality  data  and  socioeconomic 
information  including  fertility,  birth  attendants  and  GDP. 
(WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, and World Bank)

Table A3. Employment by economic activity and 
political participation
Employment in agriculture corresponds to division 1 (ISIC 
revision 2) or tabulation categories A and B (ISIC revision 3) 
and includes hunting, forestry, and ﬁ shing. (Source: ILO)

Employment in industry corresponds to divisions 2-5 (ISIC 
revision 2) or tabulation categories C-F (ISIC revision 3) and 
includes mining and quarrying (including oil production), 
manufacturing, construction, and public utilities (electricity, 
gas, and water). (Source: ILO)

Employment in services corresponds to divisions 6-9 (ISIC 
revision  2)  or  tabulation  categories  G-P  (ISIC  revision  3) 
and includes wholesale and retail trade and restaurants and 
hotels;  transport,  storage,  and  communications;  ﬁ nancing, 
insurance, real estate, and business services; and community, 
social, and personal services. (Source: ILO)

Women in parliaments are the percentage of parliamentary 
seats in a single or lower chamber held by women. (Source: 
IPU)

Selected World Development 
Indicators 2012

In this year’s edition, development data are in six tables 

presenting  comparative  socioeconomic  data  for  132 
economies for the most recent year for which data are 
available and, for some indicators, for an earlier year. An 
additional table presents basic indicators for 84 economies 
with sparse data or with populations of less than 3 million.

The  indicators  presented  here  are  from  more  than  800 
included  in  World  Development  Indicators  2011.  Published 
annually,  World  Development  Indicators  (WDI)  reﬂ ects  a 
comprehensive  view  of  the  development  process.  WDI’s 
six  sections  recognize  the  contribution  of  a  wide  range  of 
factors:  progress  on  the  Millennium  Development  Goals 
(MDGs)  and  human  capital  development,  environmental 
sustainability,  macroeconomic  performance,  private  sector 
development and the investment climate, and the global links 
that inﬂ uence the external environment for development.

WDI is complemented by a separately published database 
that  gives  access  to  more  than  1,000  time-series  indicators 
for 240 economies and regions. This database is available at 
the Open Data website (http://data.worldbank.org).

Data sources and methodology
Socioeconomic  and  environmental  data  presented  here 
are  drawn  from  several  sources:  primary  data  collected  by 
the  World  Bank,  member  country  statistical  publications, 
research  institutes,  and  international  organizations  such  as 
the  United  Nations  (UN)  and  its  specialized  agencies,  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (See 
the data sources in the technical notes following the tables 
for  a  complete  listing.)  Although  international  standards 
of  coverage,  deﬁ nition,  and  classiﬁ cation  apply  to  most 
statistics  reported  by  countries  and  international  agencies, 
inevitable differences in timeliness and reliability arise from 
differences in the capabilities and resources devoted to basic 
data collection and compilation. For some topics, competing 
sources  of  data  require  review  by  the  World  Bank  staff  to 
ensure that the most reliable data available are presented. In 
some  instances,  where  available  data  are  deemed  too  weak 
to provide reliable measures of levels and trends or do not 
adequately  adhere  to  international  standards,  the  data  are 
not shown.

The data presented are generally consistent with those in 
World Development Indicators 2011. However, data have been 
revised and updated wherever new information has become 
available. Differences may also reﬂ ect revisions to historical 
series and changes in methodology. Thus, data of different 
vintages  may  be  published  in  different  editions  of  World 
Bank publications. Readers are advised not to compile data 
series from different publications or different editions of the 
same  publication.  Consistent  time-series  data  are  available 
on the Open Data website (http://data.worldbank.org).

All  dollar  ﬁ gures  are  in  current  U.S.  dollars  unless 
otherwise stated. The various methods used to convert from 
national currency ﬁ gures are described in the technical notes 
following the tables.

Because the World Bank’s primary business is providing 
lending  and  policy  advice  to  its  low-  and  middle-income 
members, the issues covered in these tables focus mainly on 
those economies. Where available, information on the high-
income economies is also provided for comparison. Readers 
may  wish  to  refer  to  national  statistical  publications  and 
publications of the OECD and the European Union (EU) for 
more information on the high-income economies.

Classification of economies and 
summary measures
The summary measures at the bottom of most tables include 
economies  classiﬁ ed  by  income  per  capita  and  by  region. 
Gross national income (GNI) per capita is used to determine 
the following income classiﬁ cations: low income, US$1,005 
or  less  in  2010;  middle  income,  US$1,006—$12,275;  and 
high income, US$12,276 and above. A further division at GNI 
per capita US$3,975 is made between lower-middle-income 
and upper-middle-income economies. The classiﬁ cation of 
economies based on per capita income occurs annually, so 
the country composition of the income groups may change 
annually. When these changes in classiﬁ cation are made on 
the basis of the most recent estimates, aggregates based on 
the  new  income  classiﬁ cations  are  recalculated  for  all  past 
periods to ensure that a consistent time series is maintained. 
See  the  classiﬁ cation  of  economies  at  the  end  of  this 
discussion for a list of economies in each group (including 
those with populations of less than 3 million).

389

390 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Summary  measures  are  either  totals  (indicated  by  a  t 
if  the  aggregates  include  estimates  for  missing  data  and 
nonreporting  countries,  or  by  an  s  for  simple  sums  of  the 
data available), weighted averages (w), or median values (m) 
calculated for groups of economies. Data for the countries 
excluded from the main tables (those presented in table 6) 
have  been  included  in  the  summary  measures,  where  data 
are  available;  otherwise,  it  is  assumed  that  they  follow  the 
trend  of  reporting  countries.  This  approach  gives  a  more 
consistent  aggregated  measure  by  standardizing  country 
coverage for each period shown. Where missing information 
accounts for a third or more of the overall estimate, however, 
the group measure is reported as not available. The section 
on  statistical  methods  in  the  technical  notes  provides  fur-
ther information on aggregation methods. Weights used to 
construct the aggregates are listed in the technical notes for 
each table.

Terminology and country coverage
The  term  country  does  not  imply  political  independence 
but  may  refer  to  any  territory  for  which  authorities  report 
separate  social  or  economic  statistics.  Data  are  shown  for 
economies  as  they  were  constituted  in  2010,  and  historical 
data  are  revised  to  reﬂ ect  current  political  arrangements. 
Throughout  the  tables,  exceptions  are  noted.  Unless 
otherwise noted, data for China do not include data for Hong 
Kong  SAR,  China;  Macao  SAR,  China;  or  Taiwan,  China. 
Data for Indonesia include Timor-Leste through 1999 unless 
otherwise  noted.  Montenegro  declared  independence  from 
Serbia  and  Montenegro  on  June  3,  2006.  When  available, 
data  for  each  country  are  shown  separately.  However, 
some  indicators  for  Serbia  continue  to  include  data  for 
Montenegro through 2005; these data are footnoted in the 
tables. Moreover, data for most indicators from 1999 onward 
for Serbia exclude data for Kosovo, which in 1999 became a 
territory under international administration pursuant to UN 

Security Council Resolution 1244 (1999); any exceptions are 
noted.  Kosovo  became  a World  Bank  member  on  June  29, 
2009, and its data are shown in the tables where available.

Technical notes
Because data quality and intercountry comparisons are often 
problematic, readers are encouraged to consult the technical 
notes that follow the tables, the list of classiﬁ cation of econo-
mies by region and income that follows this discussion, and 
the footnotes to the tables. For more extensive documenta-
tion, see WDI 2011.

Symbols
.. 

 means that data are not available or that aggregates cannot 
be calculated because of missing data in the years shown.
0  or 0.0 means zero or small enough that the number would 
round to zero at the displayed number of decimal places.
in  dates,  as  in  2003/04,  means  that  the  period  of  time, 
usually 12 months, straddles two calendar years and refers 
to a crop year, a survey year, or a ﬁ scal year.

/ 

$   means current U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted.
>   means more than.
<   means less than.

Readers may ﬁ nd more information in WDI 2010, and orders 
can be made online, by phone, or fax as follows:

For  more  information  and  to  order  online:  http://data
.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.

To order by phone: 1-800-645-7247

To order by fax: 1-703-661-1501

To order by mail: The World Bank, P.O. Box 960, Herndon,
VA 20172-0960, USA

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

391

Classiﬁ cation of economies by region and income, FY2012

  
UMC 
LIC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LIC 
LMC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LIC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
 
  
UMC 
LMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LMC 
LIC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
LMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
LIC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LMC 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
LIC 
LIC 
LMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LIC 
LMC 
LMC 
  
  
LMC 
LIC 
UMC 
LIC 
LIC 
LMC 
LMC 
LIC 
LIC 
LIC 
LIC 
LMC 
LMC 
LIC 
LIC 
UMC 
LIC 
LMC 
LIC 
LIC 
LIC 
LMC 
LIC 
LIC 
LIC 
LIC 
LMC 
UMC 
UMC 
LIC 
UMC 
LIC 
LMC 
LIC 
LMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LIC 
LIC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LIC 
LIC 
LIC 
LMC 
LIC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

High-income OECD
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Other high income
Andorra
Aruba
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Barbados
Bermuda
Brunei Darussalam
Cayman Islands
Channel Islands
Croatia
Curaçao
Cyprus
Equatorial Guinea
Faeroe Islands
French Polynesia
Gibraltar
Greenland
Guam
Hong Kong SAR, China
Isle of Man
Kuwait
Liechtenstein
Macao SAR, China
Malta
Monaco
New Caledonia
Northern Mariana Islands
Oman
Puerto Rico
Qatar
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sint Maarten (Dutch part)
St. Martin (French part)
Taiwan, China
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United Arab Emirates
Virgin Islands (U.S.)

East Asia and Paciﬁ c  
American Samoa 
Cambodia 
China 
Fiji 
Indonesia 
Kiribati 
Korea, Dem. Rep. 
Lao PDR 
Malaysia 
Marshall Islands 
Micronesia, Fed. Sts. 
Mongolia 
Myanmar 
Palau 
Papua New Guinea 
Philippines 
Samoa 
Solomon Islands 
Thailand 
Timor-Leste 
Tonga 
Tuvalu 
Vanuatu 
Vietnam 
  
Europe and Central Asia  
Albania 
Armenia 
Azerbaijan 
Belarus 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Bulgaria 
Georgia 
Kazakhstan 
Kosovo 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Latvia 
Lithuania 
Macedonia, FYR 
Moldova 
Montenegro 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Serbia 
Tajikistan 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Ukraine 
Uzbekistan 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Source: World Bank data. 
This table classiﬁ es all World Bank member economies, and all other economies with populations of more than 30,000. Economies are divided among income groups according to 2010 GNI per 
capita, calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. The groups are: low income (LIC), $1,005 or less; lower middle income (LMC), $1,006–$3,975; upper middle income (UMC), $3,976–$12,275; 
and high income, $12,276 or more.

Latin America and the Caribbean 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Argentina 
Belize 
Bolivia 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Costa Rica 
Cuba 
Dominica 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
El Salvador 
Grenada 
Guatemala 
Guyana 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Jamaica 
Mexico 
Nicaragua 
Panama 
Paraguay 
Peru 
St. Kitts and Nevis 
St. Lucia 
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines 
Suriname 
Uruguay 
Venezuela, RB 
 
Middle East and North Africa 
Algeria 
Djibouti 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
Iran, Islamic Rep. 
Iraq 
Jordan 
Lebanon 
Libya 
Morocco 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tunisia 
West Bank and Gaza 
Yemen, Rep. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

South Asia  
Afghanistan 
Bangladesh 
Bhutan 
India 
Maldives 
Nepal 
Pakistan 
Sri Lanka 
 
Sub-Saharan Africa  
Angola 
Benin 
Botswana 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cameroon 
Cape Verde 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Comoros 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Congo, Rep. 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Gabon 
Gambia, The 
Ghana 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Kenya 
Lesotho 
Liberia 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Mali 
Mauritania 
Mauritius 
Mayotte 
Mozambique 
Namibia 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Rwanda 
São Tomé and Principe 
Senegal 
Seychelles 
Sierra Leone 
Somalia 
South Africa 
Sudan 
Swaziland 
Tanzania 
Togo 
Uganda 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
UMC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
LIC 
LMC 
UMC 
UMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
  
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
  
 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LMC 
UMC 
UMC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
UMC 
LMC 
LMC 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

392 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table 1.   Key indicators of development

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Afghanistan 
 Albania 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Argentina 
 Armenia 
 Australia 
 Austria 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bangladesh 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Benin 
 Bolivia 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Brazil 
 Bulgaria 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cambodia 
 Cameroon 
 Canada 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Chile 
 China 
  Hong Kong SAR, China 
 Colombia 
 Congo, Dem. Rep. 
 Congo, Rep. 
 Costa Rica 
 Côte d’Ivoire 
 Croatia 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Dominican Republic 
 Ecuador 
 Egypt, Arab Rep. 
 El Salvador 
 Eritrea 
 Ethiopia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Georgia 
 Germany 
 Ghana 
 Greece 
 Guatemala 
 Guinea 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Hungary 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran, Islamic Rep. 
 Iraq 
 Ireland 
 Israel 
 Italy 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 Kenya 
 Korea, Rep. 
 Kyrgyz Republic 
 Lao PDR 
 Lebanon 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Lithuania 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Malaysia 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 

 
 
 
 
 

millions 

2010 
31 
3 
35 
19 
41 
3 
22 
8 
9 
164 
10 
11 
9 
10 
4 
195 
8 
16 
9 
14 
20 
34 
5 
12 
17 
1,338 
7 
46 
68 
4 
5 
22 
4 
11 
6 
10 
14 
84 
6 
5 
85 
5 
65 
4e 
82 
24 
11 
14 
10 
10 
8 
10 
1,171 
233 
74 
32 
4 
8 
61 
127 
6 
16 
41 
49 
5 
6 
4 
4 
7 
3 
20 
15 
28 
15 
3 

 

 

 
Population
Average 
annual 
% growth 
2000–10 
2.6 
0.3 
1.5 
2.9 
1.0 
0.0 
1.5 
0.5 
1.0 
1.6 
–0.4 
0.6 
3.2 
1.9 
0.2 
1.1 
–0.6 
3.3 
2.7 
1.3 
2.3 
1.0 
1.8 
3.1 
1.1 
0.6 
0.5 
1.5 
2.9 
2.1 
1.7 
2.2 
0.0 
0.3 
0.4 
1.5 
1.1 
1.9 
0.4 
3.6 
2.6 
0.4 
0.7 
0.1e 
–0.1 
2.2 
0.4 
2.5 
2.1 
1.4 
2.0 
–0.2 
1.4 
1.2 
1.4 
2.5 
1.6 
1.9 
0.6 
0.0 
2.4 
0.9 
2.6 
0.4 
0.9 
1.7 
1.2 
3.7 
2.0 
–0.5 
2.8 
2.8 
1.8 
3.1 
2.6 

 

 
 

Density 
people 

per sq. km 

2009 
46 
115 
15 
15 
15 
108 
3 
101 
106 
1,246 
48 
356 
81 
9 
74 
23 
70 
58 
323 
79 
41 
4 
7 
9 
23 
143 
6,721 
41 
29 
11 
90 
66 
79 
136 
130 
209 
55 
83 
297 
50 
83 
18 
118 
77e 
235 
105 
88 
131 
41 
364 
67 
112 
389 
127 
45 
72 
65 
344 
205 
350 
67 
6 
70 
503 
28 
27 
413 
41 
4 
53 
34 
154 
84 
12 
3 

Population 
composition 

age 

% 

Ages 
0–14 
2010 
46 
23 
27 
45 
25 
20 
19 
15 
24 
31 
15 
17 
43 
36 
15 
25 
14 
46 
38 
33 
41 
16 
40 
46 
22 
20 
12 
29 
46 
40 
25 
40 
15 
14 
18 
31 
31 
32 
32 
42 
43 
17 
18 
17 
13 
38 
14 
42 
43 
36 
37 
15 
31 
27 
24 
41 
21 
28 
14 
13 
34 
24 
43 
16 
29 
37 
25 
42 
30 
15 
43 
46 
29 
44 
39 

2010 
.. 
12.7 
157.9 
75.2 
343.6 
9.6 
956.9 
391.5 
46.0 
104.5 
58.2 
493.5 
6.9 
18.0 
18.0 
1,830.4 
47.2 
9.0 
1.4 
10.7 
23.2 
1,415.4 
2.1 
6.9 
170.3 
5,700.0 
231.7 
255.3 
12.0 
8.7 
30.5 
23.0 
61.0 
188.3 
328.3 
49.7 
62.1 
197.9 
20.8 
1.8 
32.4 
253.0 
2,749.8 
12.0e 
3,537.2 
30.1 
308.6 
39.3 
4.0 
6.5 
14.3 
129.9 
1,566.6 
599.1 
330.4 
74.9 
182.5 
207.2 
2,125.8 
5,369.1 
26.5 
121.4 
31.8 
972.3 
4.7 
6.5 
38.4 
0.8 
77.1 
37.8 
8.8 
4.9 
220.4 
9.1 
3.6 

2010 
.. 
28.0 
288.0d 
103.1 
616.1 
16.8 
842.4 
330.3 
81.9 
267.2 
135.2 
411.2 
13.9 
45.7 
33.7 
2,129.0 
99.9 
20.5 
3.4 
28.9 
43.7 
1,257.7 
3.4 
13.6 
238.0 
10,132.3 
333.1 
416.5 
21.2 
12.3 
50.5d 
35.5 
82.9 
248.8 
223.4 
88.9d 
127.8 
499.3 
39.6d 
2.8d 
85.4 
199.4 
2,234.2 
22.1e 
3,116.1 
39.0 
309.9 
66.2d 
10.1 
11.1d 
28.4d 
192.8 
4,170.9 
1,000.7 
832.6 
107.3 
145.7 
210.7 
1,883.0 
4,432.1 
35.1 
173.1 
65.9 
1,417.9 
11.7 
14.8 
60.3 
1.4 
104.8d 
59.4 
19.7 
12.7 
400.7 
15.6 
6.7 

..c 
4,000 
4,460 
3,960 
8,450 
3,090 
43,740 
46,710 
5,180 
640 
6,030 
45,420 
750 
1,790 
4,790 
9,390 
6,240 
550 
160 
760 
1,160 
41,950 
460 
600 
9,940 
4,260 
32,900 
5,510 
180 
2,310 
6,580 
1,070 
13,760 
17,870 
58,980 
4,860 
4,510 
2,340 
3,360 
340 
380 
47,170 
42,390 
2,690e 
43,330 
1,240 
27,240 
2,740 
380 
650 
1,880 
12,990 
1,340 
2,580 
4,530 
2,320 
40,990 
27,340 
35,090 
42,150 
4,350 
7,440 
780 
19,890 
880 
1,010 
9,020 
190 
12,020 
11,400 
440 
330 
7,900 
600 
1,060 

 

Gross national 
income (GNI)a 
$ 
 
$ 
per 

capita 
2010 

billions 

billions 

PPP 

gross national 
income (GNI)b 
$ 
 
$ 
per 

Life

expectancy 

at birth 

 

 
Gross 
domestic 
product 
per capita 
% growth 
2009–10 

.. 
3.0 
1.5 
–0.4 
8.1 
0.7 
.. 
1.7 
3.8 
4.4 
7.8 
1.4 
–0.1 
2.5 
1.0 
6.8 
0.5 
5.7 
1.3 
5.5 
0.4 
1.8 
1.4 
1.6 
4.2 
9.7 
6.4 
2.9 
4.4 
6.6 
2.1 
0.6 
–1.1 
1.9 
1.4 
6.3 
2.5 
3.3 
0.5 
–0.7 
7.3 
2.7 
1.0 
5.4e 
3.9 
4.4 
–4.9 
0.1 
–0.6 
–4.3 
0.6 
1.3 
8.3 
4.9 
.. 
–1.7 
–1.1 
2.8 
0.7 
5.3 
0.7 
4.4 
2.6 
5.9 
–2.2 
6.5 
6.2 
1.7 
.. 
2.0 
–1.1 
3.8 
5.4 
1.4 
2.7 

capita 
2010 
.. 
8,840 
8,130d 
5,430 
15,150 
5,450 
38,510 
39,410 
9,220 
1,620 
14,020 
37,840 
1,510 
4,560 
8,970 
10,920 
13,210 
1,260 
390 
2,040 
2,190 
37,280 
760 
1,180 
13,890 
7,570 
47,300 
9,000 
310 
3,280 
10,880d 
1,650 
18,710 
23,620 
40,140 
8,700d 
9,270 
5,910 
6,390d 
540d 
1,010 
37,180 
34,440 
4,960e 
38,170 
1,600 
27,360 
4,610d 
980 
1,110d 
3,730d 
19,280 
3,560 
4,300 
11,420 
3,320 
32,740 
27,800 
31,090 
34,790 
5,770 
10,610 
1,610 
29,010 
2,180 
2,300 
14,170 
330 
16,330 d 
17,880 
980 
850 
14,360 
1,020 
2,000 

Adult
literacy
rate

Female  % ages 15
and older
Years 
2009 
2005–09
44 
80 
74 
50 
79 
77 
84 
83 
73 
68 
76 
84 
63 
68 
78 
76 
77 
55 
52 
63 
52 
84 
49 
50 
82 
75 
86 
77 
49 
55 
82 
59 
80 
80 
81 
76 
78 
72 
76 
62 
57 
83 
85 
75 
83 
58 
83 
74 
60 
63 
75 
78 
66 
73 
73 
72 
82 
84 
84 
86 
75 
74 
55 
84 
72 
67 
74 
60 
77 
79 
62 
55 
77 
50 
59 

..
96
73
70
98
100
..
..
100
56
100
..
42
91
98
90
98
29
67
78
71
..
55
34
99
94
..
93
67
..
96
55
99
..
..
88
84
66
84
67
30
..
..
100
..
67
97
74
39
49
84
99
63
92
85
78
..
..
99
..
92
100
87
..
99
73
90
59
89
100
64
74
92
26
57

 

Male 
Years 
2009 
44 
74 
71 
46 
72 
71 
79 
77 
68 
66 
65 
78 
61 
64 
73 
69 
70 
52 
49 
60 
51 
79 
46 
48 
76 
72 
80 
70 
46 
53 
77 
57 
73 
74 
77 
70 
72 
69 
67 
58 
54 
77 
78 
68 
77 
56 
78 
67 
56 
60 
70 
70 
63 
69 
70 
65 
77 
80 
79 
80 
71 
64 
54 
77 
62 
64 
70 
57 
72 
68 
59 
53 
72 
48 
55 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

393

Table 1.   Key indicators of development (continued)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Population 

 

composition 

 
 
 
 
 

millions 

PPP 

gross national 
income (GNI)b 
$ 
 
$ 
per 

 
Gross 

domestic 
product 
per capita 
% growth 
2009–10 

Life

expectancy 

at birth 

 

 

Adult
literacy
rate

billions 

billions 

 
 

Density 
people 

per sq. km 

Gross national 
income (GNI)a 
$ 
 
$ 
per 

age 

% 

Ages 
0–14 
2010 
28 
17 
28 
44 
27 
36 
18 
20 
35 
50 
42 
19 
37 
29 
39 
34 
30 
33 
15 
15 
15 
15 
42 
32 
43 
18 
43 
16 
15 
45 
30 
15 
24 
39 
16 
15 
35 
36 
45 
21 
40 
23 
26 
29 
49 
14 
19 
17 
20 
23 
29 
29 
25 
44 
43 
46 
39 
27w 
39 
27 
32 
22 
29 
22 
19 

 

Population
Average 
annual 
% growth 
2000–10 
1.0 
–0.2f 
1.2 
2.5 
0.8 
2.0 
0.4 
1.2 
1.3 
3.7 
2.4 
0.8 
2.3 
1.7 
2.5 
1.9 
1.3 
1.9 
–0.1 
0.4 
–0.5 
–0.3 
2.6 
2.3 
2.6 
–0.3 
3.2 
2.4 
0.1 
2.4 
1.3 
1.4 
0.9 
2.4 
0.6 
0.8 
2.7 
1.4 
2.8 
0.9 
2.6 
1.0 
1.3 
1.4 
3.2 
–0.7 
3.7 
0.6 
0.9 
0.2 
1.3 
1.7 
1.3 
3.2 
2.9 
2.4 
0.2 
1.2w 
2.2 
1.2 
1.6 
0.7 
1.3 
0.8 
0.2 

2010 
109 
 4f 
32 
23 
50 
30 
17 
4 
6 
16 
158 
5 
173 
4 
7 
6 
29 
94 
38 
11 
21 
142 
10 
26 
13 
7 
6 
5 
5 
9 
50 
46 
20 
44 
9 
8 
22 
7 
45 
68 
7 
11 
76 
5 
34 
46 
5 
62 
310 
3 
28 
29 
88 
4 
24 
13 
13 
6,855s 
817 
4,915 
2,467 
2,449 
5,732 
1,957 
408 

capita 
2010 
15,010 
3,340f 
4,560g 
920 
.. 
1,200 
42,590 
28,050 
2,610d 
700 
2,160 
57,130 
2,780 
12,940d 
2,390d  
5,430 
8,940 
3,930 
19,020 
24,710 
14,050 
19,190 
1,180 
23,900 
1,850 
11,230 
830 
54,700 
23,140 
.. 
10,280 
31,550 
5,070 
2,020 
39,600 
49,180 
4,870 
2,060 
1,420h 
8,240 
790 
8,140 
14,580 
7,160d 
1,230 
6,580 
.. 
36,580 
47,020 
13,890 
3,090d 
11,950 
2,910 
.. 
2,320 
1,370 
.. 

capita 
2010 
9,330 
1,810f 
2,850g 
440 
..c 
490 
49,720 
29,050 
1,080 
360 
1,180 
85,380 
1,050 
6,990 
1,300 
2,940 
4,710 
2,050 
12,420 
21,860 
7,840 
9,910 
540 
17,200 
1,050 
5,820 
340 
40,920 
16,220 
..c 
6,100 
31,650 
2,290 
1,270 
49,930 
70,350 
2,640 
780 
530h 
4,210 
440 
4,070 
9,500 
3,700 
490 
3,010 
..i 
38,540 
47,140 
10,590 
1,280 
11,59 0 
1,100 
..j 
1,060 
1,070 
460 

2009 
55 
124f 
72 
29 
77 
205 
490 
16 
48 
12 
170 
16 
220 
46 
15 
16 
23 
308 
125 
116 
93 
9 
405 
13 
65 
83 
80 
7,125 
113 
15 
41 
92 
324 
18 
23 
193 
115 
50 
49 
133 
122 
67 
97 
11 
166 
79 
55 
256 
34 
19 
65 
32 
281 
672 
45 
17 
32 
52w 
53 
60 
107 
42 
59 
123 
18 

 Mexico 
 Moldova 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Myanmar 
 Nepal 
 Netherlands 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaragua 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Norway 
 Pakistan 
 Panama 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Philippines 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Russian Federation 
 Rwanda 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Senegal 
 Serbia 
 Sierra Leone 
 Singapore 
 Slovak Republic 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 Spain 
 Sri Lanka 
 Sudan 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Syrian Arab Republic 
 Tajikistan 
 Tanzania 
 Thailand 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 Uganda 
 Ukraine 
 United Arab Emirates 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 Uruguay 
 Uzbekistan 
 Venezuela, RB 
 Vietnam 
 West Bank and Gaza 
 Yemen, Rep. 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
World 
Low income 
Middle income 
  Lower middle income 
  Upper middle income 
Low and middle income 
  East Asia & Paciﬁ c 
  Europe & Central Asia 
  Latin America & 
 
the Caribbean 
  Middle East & North Africa 
  South Asia 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
High income 
a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method.  b. PPP is purchasing power parity; see Technical notes.  c. Estimated to be low income ($1,005 or less). d. The estimate is based on 
regression; others are extrapolated from the 2005 International Comparison Program benchmark estimates.  e. Excludes Abkhazia and South Ossetia.  f. Excludes Transnistria.  g. Includes 
Former Spanish Sahara.  h. Covers mainland Tanzania only.  i. Estimated to be high income ($12,276 or more).  j. Estimated to be lower middle income ($1,006–$3,975).

2010 
1,629.2 
11.9f 
150.1g 
21.5 
.. 
35.9 
707.9 
121.0 
15.2d 
11.1 
341.7 
279.0 
482.3 
45.4d 
16.4d 
35.1 
263.7 
368.0 
726.1 
262.9 
301.4 
2,720.5 
12.2 
607.0 
23.7 
81.9 
4.8 
281.1 
125.6 
.. 
513.8 
1,458.2 
103.8 
87.9 
372.0 
383.1 
105.3 
14.6 
62.1h 
561.5 
5.4 
85.8 
1,104.1 
37.1d 
41.5 
301.1 
.. 
2,276.9 
14,561.7 
46.6 
87.1d 
344.5 
257.2 
.. 
54.7 
17.7 
.. 
9,097w  75,803.5t 
1,018.1 
33,326.1 
9,128.1 
24,254.3 
34,344.5 
12,961.6 
5,388.5 

2010 
1,012.3 
6.5f 
94.1g 
10.3 
.. 
14.5 
826.5 
125.4 
6.3 
5.7 
186.4 
416.9 
182.5 
24.5 
8.9 
19.0 
139.0 
192.2 
474.0 
232.6 
168.2 
1,404.2 
5.5 
436.6 
13.5 
42.4 
2.0 
210.3 
88.1 
.. 
304.6 
1,462.9 
46.7 
55.3 
469.0 
548.0 
57.0 
5.5 
23.4h 
286.7 
3.0 
42.8 
719.4 
19.2 
16.6 
137.9 
.. 
2,399.3 
14,600.8 
35.6 
36.1 
334.1 
96.9 
.. 
25.0 
13.8 
5.8 
62,364.1t 
416.8 
18,503.1 
4,090.2 
14,410.0 
18,939.8 
7,223.3 
2,944.8 

Female  % ages 15
and older
Years 
2009 
2005–09
78 
72 
74 
49 
64 
68 
83 
82 
77 
53 
49 
83 
67 
79 
64 
74 
76 
74 
80 
82 
77 
75 
52 
74 
57 
76 
49 
84 
79 
52 
53 
85 
78 
60 
83 
84 
76 
70 
57 
72 
65 
77 
75 
69 
54 
75 
79 
82 
81 
80 
71 
77 
77 
75 
65 
47 
46 
71w 
59 
71 
67 
75 
69 
74 
75 

93
98
56
55
92
59
..
..
78
29
61
..
56
94
60
95
90
95
100
95
98
100
71
86
50
..
41
95
..
..
89
98
91
70
..
..
84
100
73
94
57
78
91
100
73
100
90
..
..
98
99
95
93
95
62
71
92
84w
61
83
71
93
80
94
98

Male 
Years 
2009 
73 
65 
69 
47 
60 
66 
79 
78 
70 
51 
48 
79 
67 
73 
59 
70 
71 
70 
72 
76 
70 
63 
49 
73 
54 
71 
47 
79 
71 
49 
50 
79 
71 
57 
79 
80 
73 
64 
56 
66 
61 
73 
70 
61 
53 
64 
77 
78 
76 
73 
65 
71 
73 
72 
62 
46 
45 
67w 
56 
67 
63 
70 
65 
71 
66 

4.4 
7.0f 
2.0g 
4.9 
.. 
2.7 
1.2 
1.2 
3.1 
4.7 
5.4 
–0.7 
2.1 
5.8 
5.6 
13.3 
7.6 
5.8 
3.7 
1.2 
1.1 
4.1 
4.6 
.. 
1.5 
2.2 
2.4 
11.1 
0.3 
.. 
1.5 
–0.7 
7.2 
1.9 
4.5 
1.8 
0.7 
2.0 
3.9h 
7.2 
0.9 
2.7 
7.7 
6.7 
1.8 
4.8 
.. 
0.6 
2.0 
8.1 
7.0 
–3.4 
5.5 
.. 
.. 
5.9 
8.0 
3.0w 
3.6 
6.5 
5.7 
7.0 
6.3 
8.8 
5.2 

510 
3,764 
1,658 
5,884 
3,304 
3,691 
7,214 

7,802 
3,839 
1,213 
1,165 
38,658 

11,058w 
1,246 
6,780 
3,701 
9,904 
5,991 
6,623 
13,200 

4,509.7 
1,293.0 
1,929.8 
1,003.6 
43,412.3 

6,329.6 
2,598.0 
5,103.4 
1,816.6 
41,755.9 

578 
337 
1,591 
862 
1,123 

1.2 
1.8 
1.5 
2.5 
0.7 

10,951 
7,851 
3,208 
2,108 
37,183 

5.1 
..  
7.3 
2.3 
2.5 

28 
38 
329 
36 
33 

71 
69 
63 
51 
77 

77 
73 
66 
54 
83 

91
74
61
62
98

28 
31 
32 
42 
17 

394 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table 2.  Poverty

 
 
 
 
 
 

Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Angola 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bangladesh 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Benin 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
  Hong Kong SAR, China 
Colombia 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Congo, Rep. 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
El Salvador 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Finland 
France 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Rep. 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Korea, Rep. 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Lao PDR 
Lebanon 
Liberia 
Libya 
Lithuania 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Mali 
Mauritania 
Mexico 

Population below national poverty linea 

Population below international poverty linea

 
 
 

Survey 
yearc 
 
2005 
 
 
 
2008 
 
 
2001 
2000 
2008 
 
 
2006g 
2004 
2008g 
1997 
 
 
2004 
 
 
 
 
2006g 
 
 
2008g 
 
 
2008g 
 
2002 
 
 
2005g 
2008g 
2005 
2007g,k 
 
2000 
 
 
 
 
1998 
 
2000g 
 
 
2008g,k 
 
1994 
2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2002 
2001 
 
 
2003 
2002 
 
 
 
 
2004 
1998 
2007 
 
 
2006g 

National 

 
 
 

% 
.. 
18.5e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
23.5e 
.. 
.. 
49.6e 
48.9 
6.1 
.. 
.. 
59.9 
17.7e 
22.6 
36.0e 
.. 
.. 
34.7e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
13.7 
.. 
.. 
46.0 
.. 
.. 
20.7 
.. 
11.2 
.. 
.. 
53.5 
35.1 
19.6 
34.6 
.. 
44.2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
39.5 
.. 
56.2 
.. 
.. 
59.6 
.. 
36.0 
14.2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
14.2 
17.6e 
.. 
.. 
49.9e 
33.5e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
72.1 
54.1 
3.6e 
.. 
.. 
42.6 

 
 
 

Survey 
yearc 
2008d 
2008 
 
 
 
2009 
 
 
2008 
2005 
2009 
 
2003d 
2007g 
2007 
2009g 
2001 
2003d 
2006d 
2007 
2007d 
 
2008d 
2003d 
2009g 
 
 
2009g 
2005 
2005 
2009g 
 
2004 
 
 
2006g 
2009g 
2008 
2008g,k 
 
2005 
 
 
2007 
 
2006 
 
2006g 
2007d 
2001g 
2009g,k 
 
2005 
2010 
 
2007 
 
 
 
 
2006 
2002 
2005d 
 
2005 
2008 
 
2007 
 
 
2005 
2004 
2009 
2006d 
2000d 
2008g 

National 

 
 
 

% 
36.0e 
12.4e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
26.5e 
.. 
.. 
15.8e 
40.0 
5.4 
.. 
39.0 
60.1 
14.0e 
21.4 
12.8e 
46.4 
66.9 
30.1e 
39.9 
.. 
62.0 
55.0 
15.1 
.. 
.. 
45.5 
71.3 
50.1 
21.7 
.. 
11.1 
.. 
.. 
49.4 
36.0 
22.0 
40.0 
.. 
38.9 
.. 
.. 
23.6e 
.. 
28.5 
.. 
51.0 
53.0 
77.0 
58.8 
.. 
27.5 
13.3 
.. 
22.9 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
13.0 
15.4e 
45.9 
.. 
43.1e 
27.6e 
.. 
63.8e 
.. 
.. 
68.7 
52.4 
3.8e 
47.4 
46.3 
47.4 

 
 
 

Survey 
yearc 
 
2005 
1988 
 
2006f,h 
2003 
 
 
2005 
2000i 
2005 
 
 
2005h 
2004 
2008h 
2003 
1998 
1998 
2004 
2001 
 
1993 
 
2006h 
2002j 
 
2003h 
 
 
2005h 
 
2005 
1993h 
 
2006h 
2007h 
2000 
2005h 
 
2000 
 
 
2005 
 
1998 
 
2002h 
2003 
 
2006h 
2004 
1994j 
2005j 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 
2003 
1997 
 
2004 
2002 
 
 
 
2004 
2001 
1998 
2004h 
2001 
1996 
2006 

Population 

below 
$1.25 
a day 

% 
.. 
<2 
6.6 
.. 
2.8 
10.6 
.. 
.. 
<2 
57.8 
<2 
.. 
.. 
19.6 
<2 
4.3 
<2 
70.0 
86.4 
40.2 
32.8 
.. 
82.8 
.. 
<2 
28.4 
.. 
15.4 
.. 
.. 
2.4 
.. 
<2 
<2 
.. 
4.0 
4.7 
<2 
11.0 
.. 
55.6 
.. 
.. 
13.4 
.. 
39.1 
.. 
16.9 
70.1 
.. 
18.2 
<2 
49.4 
21.4 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<2 
3.1 
19.6 
.. 
21.8 
44.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<2 
76.3 
83.1 
<2 
61.2 
23.4 
<2 

Poverty 
gap at 
$1.25 
a day 

% 
.. 
<0.5 
1.8 
.. 
0.6 
1.9 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
17.3 
<0.5 
.. 
.. 
9.7 
<0.5 
1.4 
<0.5 
30.2 
47.3 
11.3 
10.2 
.. 
57.0 
.. 
<0.5 
8.7 
.. 
6.1 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
.. 
<0.5 
<0.5 
.. 
0.7 
1.2 
<0.5 
4.8 
.. 
16.2 
.. 
.. 
4.4 
.. 
14.4 
.. 
6.5 
32.2 
.. 
8.2 
<0.5 
13.6 
4.6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
<0.5 
4.6 
.. 
4.4 
12.1 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
41.4 
46.0 
<0.5 
25.8 
7.1 
<0.5 

 

Population 

below 

$2.00 a day 

% 
.. 
7.9 
23.8 
.. 
8.0 
43.5 
.. 
.. 
<2 
85.4 
<2 
.. 
.. 
30.4 
<2 
10.4 
2.4 
87.6 
95.4 
68.2 
57.7 
.. 
90.8 
.. 
2.4 
51.1 
.. 
26.3 
.. 
.. 
8.6 
.. 
<2 
<2 
.. 
13.5 
12.8 
19.4 
20.5 
.. 
86.4 
.. 
.. 
30.4 
.. 
63.3 
.. 
29.8 
87.2 
.. 
29.7 
<2 
81.7 
53.8 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
11.0 
17.2 
42.7 
.. 
51.9 
76.9 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<2 
88.8 
93.5 
7.8 
82.0 
48.3 
4.8 

 
 
 

Survey 
yearc 
 
2008 
1995 
2000f 
2009f,h 
2008 
 
 
2008 
2005i 
2008 
 
2003 
2007h 
2007 
2009h 
2007 
2003 
2006 
2007 
2007 
 
2003 
2003 
2009h 
2005j 
 
2006h 
2006 
2005 
2009h 
 
2008 
1996h 
 
2007h 
2009h 
2005 
2008h 
 
2005 
 
 
2008 
 
2006 
 
2006h 
2007 
2001h 
2007h 
2007 
2005j 
2009j 
 
2007 
 
 
 
 
2006 
2007 
2005 
 
2007 
2008 
 
2007 
 
2008 
2005 
2004 
2009h 
2006 
2000 
2008 

Population 

below 
$1.25 
a day 

% 
.. 
<2 
6.8 
54.3 
<2 
<2 
.. 
.. 
<2 
49.6 
<2 
.. 
47.3 
14.0 
<2 
3.8 
<2 
56.5 
81.3 
28.3 
9.6 
.. 
62.4 
61.9 
<2 
15.9 
.. 
16.0 
59.2 
54.1 
<2 
.. 
<2 
<2 
.. 
4.3 
5.1 
<2 
5.1 
.. 
39.0 
.. 
.. 
14.7 
.. 
30.0 
.. 
12.7 
43.8 
54.9 
23.2 
<2 
41.6 
18.7 
.. 
4.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<2 
<2 
19.7 
.. 
<2 
33.9 
.. 
83.7 
.. 
<2 
67.8 
73.9 
<2 
51.4 
21.2 
<2 

Poverty
gap at 
$1.25 
a day 

% 
.. 
<0.5 
1.4 
29.9 
<0.5 
<0.5 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
13.1 
<0.5 
.. 
15.7 
5.8 
<0.5 
1.1 
<0.5 
20.3 
36.4 
6.1 
1.2 
.. 
28.3 
25.6 
<0.5 
4.0 
.. 
5.7 
25.3 
22.8 
<0.5 
.. 
<0.5 
<0.5 
.. 
0.9 
1.6 
<0.5 
1.1 
.. 
9.6 
.. 
.. 
4.6 
.. 
10.5 
.. 
3.8 
15.2 
28.2 
11.3 
<0.5 
10.5 
3.6 
.. 
0.6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
<0.5 
6.1 
.. 
<0.5 
9.0 
.. 
40.8 
.. 
<0.5 
26.5 
32.3 
<0.5 
18.8 
5.7 
<0.5 

Population

below

$2.00 a day

%

..
4.3
23.6
70.2
<2
12.4
..
..
7.8
81.3
<2
..
75.3
24.7
<2
9.9
7.3
81.2
93.5
56.5
30.8
..
81.9
83.3
<2
36.3
..
27.9
79.6
74.4
4.8
..
<2
<2
..
13.6
13.4
18.5
15.2
..
77.6
..
..
32.6
..
53.6
..
25.7
70.0
72.2
35.6
<2
75.6
50.7
..
25.3
..
..
..
..
3.5
<2
39.9
..
29.4
66.0
..
94.8
..
<2
89.6
90.5
<2
77.1
44.1
8.6

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Population 

below 
$1.25 
a day 

Poverty 
gap at 
$1.25 
a day 

 

Population 

below 

$2.00 a day 

 
 
 

Population 

below 
$1.25 
a day 

Poverty
gap at 
$1.25 
a day 

Population

below

$2.00 a day

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

395

Table 2.  Poverty   (continued)

Population below national poverty linea 

Population below international poverty linea

National 

National 

Survey 
yearc 
2004 
 
2003 
 
1996 
 
 
2001g 
 
 
 
2005 
2003 
 
2008g 
2008 
2006 
2001 
 
2005 
2005 
 
 
 
2006 
 
 
 
 
2000 
 
2002 
 
 
 
 
2007 
2000 
2008 
 
 
2008 
 
2005 
2004 
 
 
 
2007g 
 
2008g 
2006 
2007 
1998 
2004 
 

% 
26.5e 
.. 
54.1 
.. 
41.8 
.. 
.. 
45.8 
.. 
.. 
.. 
23.9 
36.8 
.. 
37.9 
36.2 
26.4 
15.6e 
.. 
15.1e 
11.9e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
9.0e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
38.0 
.. 
22.7 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
53.1e 
35.6 
9.0 
.. 
.. 
17.1 
.. 
31.1 
14.0e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
26.0 
.. 
32.6 
16.0 
31.2 
40.1 
58.4 
.. 

%
12.5
Moldova 
14.0
Morocco 
81.6
Mozambique 
..
Myanmar 
77.6
Nepal 
..
Netherlands 
..
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
31.9
Niger 
75.9
Nigeria 
83.9
..
Norway 
61.0
Pakistan 
Panama 
9.5
57.4
Papua New Guinea 
Paraguay 
13.2
Peru 
14.7
45.0
Philippines 
Poland 
<2
..
Portugal 
Romania 
<2
Russian Federation 
<2
Rwanda 
89.6
..
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
60.4
Serbia 
<2
Sierra Leone 
76.1
..
Singapore 
Slovak Republic 
<2
..
Somalia 
42.9
South Africa 
..
Spain 
29.1
Sri Lanka 
..
Sudan 
..
Sweden 
..
Switzerland 
16.9
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tajikistan 
50.9
87.9
Tanzania 
26.5
Thailand 
69.3
Togo 
12.8
Tunisia 
..
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
49.7
64.5
Uganda 
Ukraine 
<2
..
United Arab Emirates 
..
United Kingdom 
..
United States 
Uruguay 
<2
76.7
Uzbekistan 
Venezuela, RB 
10.2
38.4
Vietnam 
..
West Bank and Gaza 
46.6
Yemen, Rep. 
81.5
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
..
a. Based on per capita consumption estimated from household survey data, unless otherwise noted. b. Based on nominal per capita consumption averages and distributions estimated from 
household survey data, unless otherwise noted.  c. Refers to the year in which the underlying household survey data were collected and, in cases for which the data collection period bridged 
two calender years, the year in which most of the data were collected is reported. d. Estimates based on survey data from earlier year(s) are available, but are not comparable with the most 
recent year reported here; these are available online via data.worldbank.org. e. World Bank estimates. f. Covers urban areas only. g. Based on income per capita estimated from household 
survey data. h. Based on per capita income averages and distribution data estimated from household survey data. i. Adjusted by spatial consumer price index data. j. Population weighted 
average of urban and rural estimates. k. Measured as share of households.

% 
29.0e 
15.3 
54.7 
.. 
30.9 
.. 
.. 
46.2 
59.5 
54.7 
.. 
22.3 
32.7 
.. 
35.1 
34.8 
26.5 
16.6e 
.. 
13.8e 
11.1e 
58.5 
.. 
50.8e 
6.6e 
66.4 
.. 
.. 
.. 
23.0 
.. 
15.2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
47.2e 
33.4 
8.1 
61.7 
.. 
18.1 
.. 
24.5 
7.9e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
20.5 
.. 
29.0 
14.5 
21.9 
34.8 
59.3 
72.0 

% 
<0.5 
0.5 
25.2 
.. 
19.7 
.. 
.. 
5.2 
11.9 
29.6 
.. 
4.1 
<0.5 
12.3 
1.5 
1.4 
5.5 
<0.5 
.. 
<0.5 
<0.5 
40.9 
.. 
10.8 
<0.5 
20.3 
.. 
<0.5 
.. 
8.2 
.. 
1.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
5.1 
28.1 
2.4 
11.4 
<0.5 
.. 
7.0 
12.1 
<0.5 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
15.0 
1.1 
2.3 
.. 
4.2 
32.8 
.. 

% 
1.7 
0.9 
35.4 
.. 
26.7 
.. 
.. 
6.7 
28.1 
32.1 
.. 
4.4 
3.1 
.. 
2.7 
1.9 
5.5 
<0.5 
.. 
<0.5 
<0.5 
38.2 
.. 
14.3 
.. 
44.8 
.. 
<0.5 
.. 
5.2 
.. 
2.6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
10.3 
46.8 
<0.5 
.. 
1.3 
.. 
25.8 
19.1 
<0.5 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<0.5 
12.4 
4.5 
4.6 
.. 
3.0 
27.1 
.. 

% 
<2 
2.5 
60.0 
.. 
55.1 
.. 
.. 
15.8 
43.1 
64.4 
.. 
22.6 
2.4 
35.8 
5.1 
5.9 
22.6 
<2 
.. 
<2 
<2 
76.8 
.. 
33.5 
<2 
53.4 
.. 
<2 
.. 
26.2 
.. 
7.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<2 
21.5 
67.9 
12.8 
38.7 
2.6 
.. 
24.8 
37.7 
<2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<2 
46.3 
3.5 
13.1 
.. 
17.5 
64.3 
.. 

% 
29.0 
24.3 
90.0 
.. 
88.1 
.. 
.. 
37.5 
85.6 
86.4 
.. 
60.3 
17.9 
.. 
14.2 
18.5 
43.8 
<2 
.. 
3.4 
<2 
90.3 
.. 
71.3 
.. 
75.0 
.. 
<2 
.. 
39.9 
.. 
39.7 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
68.8 
96.6 
11.5 
.. 
20.4 
.. 
85.7 
75.6 
<2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
4.2 
75.6 
19.8 
48.4 
.. 
36.4 
85.2 
.. 

% 
8.1 
6.3 
74.7 
.. 
68.4 
.. 
.. 
19.4 
65.9 
68.5 
.. 
22.6 
9.5 
.. 
6.5 
7.9 
22.0 
<2 
.. 
<2 
<2 
76.6 
.. 
44.2 
.. 
62.8 
.. 
<2 
.. 
21.4 
.. 
14.0 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
36.3 
88.5 
<2 
.. 
6.5 
.. 
63.5 
51.5 
<2 
.. 
.. 
.. 
<2 
42.3 
10.0 
21.5 
.. 
12.9 
64.6 
.. 

Survey 
yearc 
2004 
2001 
2003 
 
1996 
 
 
2001h 
2005 
1996 
 
2005 
2006h 
 
2007h 
2006h 
2003 
2005 
 
2005 
2005 
2000 
 
2001 
 
1990 
 
1992h 
 
1995 
 
2002 
 
 
 
 
2003 
2000 
2004 
 
1995 
 
1993h 
2005 
2005 
 
 
 
2006h 
2002 
2005h 
2006 
 
1998 
2003 
 

Survey 
yearc 
2008 
2007 
2008 
 
2004 
 
 
2005h 
2007 
2004 
 
2006 
2009h 
1996 
2008h 
2009h 
2006 
2008 
 
2008 
2008 
2006 
 
2005 
2008 
2003 
 
1996h 
 
2000 
 
2007 
 
 
 
2004 
2004 
2007 
2009 
2006 
2000 
 
1998 
2009 
2008 
 
 
 
2009h 
2003 
2006h 
2008 
 
2005 
2004 
 

Survey 
yearc 
2005 
2001 
2008 
 
2004 
 
   
2005g 
2007d 
2004d 
     
2006 
2008 
   
2009g 
2009 
2009 
2002 
 
2006 
2006 
2006d 
 
2005d 
2007 
2003d 
   
 
 
2005 
 
2007 
 
 
 
 
2009 
2007 
2009 
2006 
 
2009 
 
2009 
2005 
 
 
 

2008g 

 

2009g 
2008 
2009 
2005 
2006 
2003d 

396 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table 3.  Millennium Development Goals: Eradicating poverty and improving lives

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 
Share of  
poorest 
quintile 

of child 

Prevalence 

Vulnerable  malnutrition 
employment  

% of 

 
 

in national 
consumption 
or income % 
1995–2009b 

% of 

employment 

 
 
 

2009 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
20f 
38 
9 
9 
55 
.  
.. 
10 
.. 
57 
.. 
25 
9 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
25 
.. 
7f 
48 
.. 
.. 
20 
.. 
17 
13 
5 
42 
42f 
27 
37 
.. 
.. 
10 
7 
63 
7 
.. 
27 
.. 
.. 
.. 
50 
7 
.. 
64 
42 
.. 
12 
7 
18 
10 
10 
32 
.. 
24 
.. 
.. 
28 
80 
.. 
10 
.. 
.. 
22 
.. 
.. 

Achieve 
universal 
primary 
education 

 
 
 

 

Promote 
gender 
equality 
Ratio of 

girls to boys 
enrollments  
in primary 

Primary  

completion  and secondary 

rate % 

school % 

Reduce 
child 

mortality 

 

 
 

Under ﬁ ve 
mortality 

rate 

per 1,000 

2009 
.. 
90 
91 
.. 
105 
98 
.. 
97 
92 
61 
96 
87 
62 
99 
.. 
.. 
94 
47h 
52 
79 
73 
.. 
40h 
33 
95 
.. 
93 
115 
56 
74 
96 
46 
97 
99 
97 
90 
106 
96 
89 
48 
55 
97 
.. 
107 
104 
83 
101 
80 
62 
.. 
90 
95 
95 
109 
101 
64 
.. 
102 
104 
102 
99 
108h 
.. 
101 
94 
75 
85 
58 
.. 
96 
79 
59 
97 
64h 
64 

2009 
62 
100 
98 
.. 
105 
103 
98 
97 
102 
108 
102h 
98 
.. 
99 
102 
103 
97 
88h 
93 
90 
86 
99 
69h 
64 
99 
105 
102 
105 
77 
.. 
102 
.. 
102 
101 
102 
97 
102 
96 
98 
77 
88 
102 
100 
96 
96 
95 
97 
94 
77 
.. 
107 
99 
92 
98 
97 
81 
103 
102 
99 
100 
102 
99h 
95 
97 
101 
87 
104 
.. 
.. 
99 
97 
100 
103 
80h 
103 

2009 
199 
15 
32 
161 
14 
22 
5 
4 
34 
52 
12 
5 
118 
51 
14 
21 
10 
166 
166 
88 
154 
6 
171 
209 
9 
19 
.. 
19 
199 
128 
11 
119 
5 
4 
4 
32 
24 
21 
17 
55 
104 
3 
4 
29 
4 
69 
3 
40 
142 
87 
30 
6 
66 
39 
31 
44 
4 
4 
4 
3 
25 
29 
84 
5 
37 
59 
12 
112 
19 
6 
58 
110 
6 
191 
117 

 

Improve 
maternal 
health 

 

Maternal 
mortality 
ratio per 
100,000 
live births 

2008 
1,400 
31 
120 
610 
70 
29 
8 
5 
38 
340 
15 
5 
410 
180 
9 
58 
13 
560 
970 
290 
600 
12 
850 
1,200 
26 
38 
.. 
85 
670 
580 
44 
470 
14 
8 
5 
100 
140 
82 
110 
280 
470 
8 
8 
48 
7 
350 
2 
110 
680 
300 
110 
13 
230 
240 
30 
75 
3 
7 
5 
6 
59 
45 
530 
18 
81 
580 
26 
990 
64 
13 
440 
510 
31 
830 
550 

 
 

Combat HIV/AIDS 
and other diseaes 

 
 

Ensure environmental 

sustainability 

 

HIV 

prevalence 

% of 

population 
ages 15–49 

of 

Incidence 

Carbon 
dioxide 
tuberculosis   emissions 
per capita 

per 

100,000 
people 

metric 
tons 

Access to 
improved 
sanitation 
facilities 

% of 

population 

Develop
a global

partnership for
development

Internet
users
per 100
peoplea

2009 
.. 
.. 
0.1 
2.0 
0.5 
0.1 
0.1 
0.3 
0.1 
<0.1 
0.3 
0.2 
1.2 
0.2 
.. 
.. 
0.1 
1.2 
3.3 
0.5 
5.3 
0.2 
4.7 
3.4 
0.4 
0.1g 
.. 
0.5 
.. 
3.4 
0.3 
3.4 
<0.1 
<0.1 
0.2 
0.9 
0.4 
<0.1 
0.8 
0.8 
.. 
0.1 
0.4 
0.1 
0.1 
1.8 
0.1 
0.8 
1.3 
1.9 
0.8 
<0.1 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
.. 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
<0.1 
.. 
0.1 
6.3 
<0.1 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
1.5 
.. 
0.1 
0.2 
11.0 
0.5 
1.0 
0.7 

2009 
189 
15 
59 
298 
28 
73 
6 
11 
110 
225 
39 
9 
93 
140 
50 
45 
41 
215 
348 
442 
182 
5 
327 
283 
11 
96 
82 
35 
372 
382 
10 
399 
25 
9 
7 
70 
68 
19 
30 
99 
359 
9 
6 
107 
5 
201 
5 
62 
318 
238 
58 
16 
168 
189 
19 
64 
9 
5 
6 
21 
6 
163 
305 
90 
159 
89 
15 
288 
40 
71 
261 
304 
83 
324 
330 

2007 
0.0 
1.4 
4.1 
1.4 
4.6 
1.6 
17.7 
8.3 
3.7 
0.3 
6.9 
9.7 
0.5 
1.4 
7.7 
1.9 
6.8 
0.1 
0.0 
0.3 
0.3 
16.9 
0.1 
0.0 
4.3 
5.0 
5.8 
1.4 
0.0 
0.4 
1.8 
0.3 
5.6 
12.1 
9.1 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
1.1 
0.1 
0.1 
12.1 
6.0 
1.4 
9.6 
0.4 
8.8 
1.0 
0.1 
0.2 
1.2 
5.6 
1.4 
1.8 
7.0 
3.3 
10.2 
9.3 
7.7 
9.8 
3.8 
14.7 
0.3 
10.4 
1.2 
0.3 
3.2 
0.2 
9.3 
4.5 
0.1 
0.1 
7.3 
0.0 
0.6 

2008 
37 
98 
95 
57 
90 
90 
100 
100 
45 
53 
93 
100 
12 
25 
95 
80 
100 
11 
46 
29 
47 
100 
34 
9 
96 
55 
.. 
74 
23 
30 
95 
23 
99 
98 
100 
83 
92 
94 
87 
14 
12 
100 
100 
95 
100 
13 
98 
81 
19 
17 
71 
100 
31 
52 
.. 
73 
99 
100 
.. 
100 
98 
97 
31 
100 
93 
53 
.. 
17 
97 
.. 
11 
56 
96 
36 
26 

2009
3.4
41.2
13.5
3.3
30.4
6.8
72.0
73.5
42.0
0.4
45.9
75.2
2.2
11.2
37.7
39.2
44.8
1.1
0.8
0.5
3.8
77.7
0.5
1.7
34.0
28.8
61.4
45.5
0.6
6.7
34.5
4.6
50.4
63.7
85.9
26.8
15.1
20.0
14.4
4.9
0.5
83.9
71.3
30.5
79.5
5.4
44.1
16.3
0.9
10.0
9.8
61.6
5.3
8.7
38.3
1.0
68.4
49.7
48.5
77.7
29.3
33.4
10.0
80.9
41.2
4.7
23.7
0.5
5.5
58.8
1.6
4.7
57.6
1.9
2.3

children 
under 5 
2004–09b 
32.9 
6.6 
3.7 
.. 
2.3 
4.2 
.. 
.. 
8.4 
41.3 
1.3 
.. 
20.2 
4.5 
1.6 
2.2 
1.6 
26.0 
.. 
28.8 
16.6 
.. 
.. 
33.9 
0.5 
4.5 
.. 
5.1 
28.2 
11.8 
.. 
16.7 
1.0 
.. 
.. 
3.4 
6.2 
6.8 
.. 
.. 
34.6 
.. 
.. 
2.3 
1.1 
14.3 
.. 
.. 
20.8 
18.9 
8.6 
.. 
43.5 
17.5h 
.. 
7.1 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1.9 
4.9 
16.4 
.. 
2.7 
31.6 
4.2 
20.4 
5.6 
.. 
36.8 
15.5 
.. 
27.9 
16.7 

Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Angola 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bangladesh 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Benin 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
  Hong Kong SAR, China 
Colombia 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Congo, Rep. 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
El Salvador 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Finland 
France 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Rep. 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Korea, Rep. 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Lao PDR 
Lebanon 
Liberia 
Libya 
Lithuania 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Mali 
Mauritania 

9.0c 
8.1c 
6.9c 
2.0c,d 
4.1d,e 
8.8c 
.. 
8.6e 
8.0c 
9.4c 
9.2c 
8.5e 
6.9c 
2.8e 
6.7c 
3.3e 
5.0c 
7.0c 
9.0c 
6.6c 
5.6c 
7.2e 
5.2c 
6.3c 
4.1e 
5.7e 
5.3e 
2.5e 
5.5c 
5.0c 
4.2e 
5.6c 
8.1c 
10.2e 
8.3e 
4.4e 
4.2e 
9.0c 
4.3e 
.. 
9.3c 
9.6e 
7.2e 
5.3c 
8.5e 
5.2c 
6.7e 
3.4e 
6.4c 
2.5e 
2.0e 
8.4c 
8.1c 
7.6c 
6.4c 
.. 
7.4e 
5.7e 
6.5e 
.. 
7.2c 
8.7c 
4.7c 
7.9e 
8.8c 
7.6c 
.. 
6.4c 
.. 
6.6c 
6.2c 
7.0c 
4.5e 
6.5c 
6.2c 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

397

Table 3.  Millennium Development Goals: Eradicating poverty and improving lives (continued)

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 
Share of  
poorest 
quintile 

of child 

Prevalence 

Vulnerable  malnutrition 
employment  

% of 

 
 

in national 
consumption 
or income % 
1995–2009b 

% of 

employment 

children 
under 5 
2004–09b 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3.9e 
6.8c 
6.5c 
5.2c 
.. 
6.1c 
7.6e 
6.4e 
3.8e 
8.3c 
5.1c 
9.6e 
9.0c  
3.6e 
4.5c 
3.8e 
3.9e 
5.6c 
7.6c 
5.8e 
8.1c 
6.0c 
4.2c 
.. 
6.2c 
9.1c 
6.1c 
5.0e 
8.8e 
.. 
3.1c 
7.0e 
6.9c 
.. 
9.1e 
7.6e 
7.7c 
9.3c 
6.8c 
3.9c 
5.4c 
5.9c 
5.7c 
6.0c 
5.8c 
9.4c 
.. 
6.1e 
5.4e 
5.6e 
7.1c 
4.9e 
7.3c 
.. 
7.2c 
3.6c 
4.6c 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Mexico 
Moldova 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Norway 
Pakistan 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Rwanda 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia 
Sierra Leone 
Singapore 
Slovak Republic 
Somalia 
South Africa 
Spain 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania 
Thailand 
Togo 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Uganda 
Ukraine 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan 
Venezuela, RB 
Vietnam 
West Bank and Gaza 
Yemen, Rep. 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
World 
Low income 
Middle income 
  Lower middle income 
  Upper middle income 
Low and middle income 
  East Asia & Paciﬁ c 
  Europe & Central Asia 
  Latin America & 
 
the Caribbean 
  Middle East & North Africa 
  South Asia 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
High income 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

2009 
30 
29 
51 
.. 
.. 
.. 
10 
11 
45 
.. 
.. 
6 
63 
27 
.. 
45 
40 f 
44 f 
19 
18 
31 
6 
.. 
.. 
.. 
28 
.. 
10 
12 
.. 
10 
11 
40f 
.. 
7 
9 
38 
.. 
.. 
53 
.. 
.. 
34 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1 
11 
.. 
25 f 
.. 
31 
..  
27 
.. 
.. 
.. 
..w 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
18 

30 
37 
.. 
.. 
.. 

Achieve 
universal 
primary 
education 

 
 
 

 

Promote 
gender 
equality 
Ratio of 

girls to boys 
enrollments  
in primary 

Primary  

completion  and secondary 

rate % 

school % 

Reduce 
child 

mortality 

 

 
 

Under ﬁ ve 
mortality 

rate 

per 1,000 

2009 
104 
93 
80 
61h 
99 
.. 
.. 
.. 
75 
41h 
79 
100 
61 
102 
.. 
93 
101 
94 
95 
.. 
96 
95 
54 
88 
57 
96 
88 
.. 
97 
.. 
93 
103 
97 
57 
95 
96 
112 
98 
102 
.. 
61 
90 
93 
.. 
73 
95 
99 
.. 
96 
106 
92 
95 
.. 
82 
61 
87 
.. 
88w 
65 
92 
88 
98 
87 
97 
95 

102 
88 
86 
67 
97 

2009 
102 
101 
88 
89h 
100 
.. 
99 
102 
102 
78h 
85 
99 
82 
101 
.. 
100 
99 
102 
100 
101 
99 
98 
100 
91 
95 
101 
.. 
.. 
101 
53 
99 
102 
.. 
89 
99 
98 
97 
91 
96 
103 
75 
103 
93 
.. 
99 
99 
100 
101 
101 
104 
99 
102 
.. 
104 
.. 
96 
.. 
96w 
91 
97 
93 
103 
96 
103 
97 

102 
93 
92 
89 
100 

2009 
17 
17 
38 
142 
71 
48 
4 
6 
26 
160 
138 
3 
87 
23 
68 
23 
21 
33 
7 
4 
12 
12 
111 
21 
93 
7 
192 
3 
7 
180 
62 
4 
15 
108 
3 
4 
16 
61 
108 
14 
98 
21 
20 
45 
128 
15 
7 
6 
8 
13 
36 
18 
24 
30 
66 
141 
90 
61w 
119 
52 
71 
21 
66 
26 
21 

23 
33 
71 
130 
7 

 

Improve 
maternal 
health 

 

Maternal 
mortality 
ratio per 
100,000 
live births 

2008 
85 
32 
110 
550 
240 
380 
9 
14 
100 
820 
840 
7 
260 
71 
250 
95 
98 
94 
6 
7 
27 
39 
540 
24 
410 
8 
970 
9 
6 
1,200 
410 
6 
39 
750 
5 
10 
46 
64 
790 
48 
350 
60 
23 
77 
430 
26 
10 
12 
24 
27 
30 
68 
56 
.. 
210 
470 
790 
260w 
590 
210 
300 
60 
290 
89 
34 

86 
88 
290 
650 
15 

 
 

Combat HIV/AIDS 
and other diseaes 

 
 

Ensure environmental 

sustainability 

 

HIV 

prevalence 

% of 

population 
ages 15–49 

of 

Incidence 

Carbon 
dioxide 
tuberculosis   emissions 
per capita 

per 

100,000 
people 

metric 
tons 

Access to 
improved 
sanitation 
facilities 

% of 

population 

Develop
a global

partnership for
development

Internet
users
per 100
peoplea

2009 
0.3 
0.4 
0.1 
11.5 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.1 
0.2 
0.8 
3.6 
0.1 
0.1 
0.9 
0.9 
0.3 
0.4 
<0.1 
0.1 
0.6 
0.1 
1.0 
2.9 
.. 
0.9 
0.1 
1.6 
0.1 
<0.1 
0.7 
17.8 
0.4 
<0.1 
1.1 
0.1 
0.4 
.. 
0.2 
5.6 
1.3 
3.2 
<0.1 
<0.1 
.. 
6.5 
1.1 
.. 
0.2 
0.6 
0.5 
0.1 
.. 
0.4 
.. 
.. 
13.5 
14.3 
0.8w 
2.6 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.9 
0.2 
0.6 

0.5 
0.1 
0.3 
5.5 
0.3 

2009 
17 
178 
92 
409 
404 
163 
8 
8 
44 
181 
295 
6 
231 
48 
250 
47 
113 
280 
24 
30 
125 
106 
376 
18 
282 
21 
644 
36 
9 
285 
971 
17 
66 
119 
6 
5 
21 
202 
183 
137 
446 
24 
29 
67 
293 
101 
4 
12 
4 
22 
128 
33 
200 
19 
54 
433 
742 
137w 
296 
139 
179 
99 
161 
136 
89 

45 
39 
180 
342 
14 

2007 
4.5 
1.3 
1.5 
0.1 
0.3 
0.1 
10.6 
7.7 
0.8 
0.1 
0.6 
9.1 
1.0 
2.2 
0.5 
0.7 
1.5 
0.8 
8.3 
5.5 
4.4 
10.8 
0.1 
16.6 
0.5 
.. 
0.2 
11.8 
6.8 
0.1 
9.0 
8.0 
0.6 
0.3 
5.4 
5.0 
3.5 
1.1 
0.1 
4.1 
0.2 
2.3 
4.0 
9.2 
0.1 
6.8 
31.0 
8.8 
19.3 
1.9 
4.3 
6.0 
1.3 
0.6 
1.0 
0.2 
0.8 
4.6w,i 
0.3 
3.3 
1.5 
5.0 
2.9 
4.0 
7.2 

2.7 
3.7 
1.2 
0.8 
12.5 

2008 
85 
79 
69 
17 
81 
31 
100 
.. 
52 
9 
32 
100 
45 
69 
45 
70 
68 
76 
90 
100 
72 
87 
54 
.. 
51 
92 
13 
100 
100 
23 
77 
100 
91 
34 
100 
100 
96 
94 
24 
96 
12 
85 
90 
98 
48 
95 
97 
100 
100 
100 
100 
.. 
75 
89 
52 
49 
44 
61w 
36 
56 
46 
68 
54 
59 
89 

79 
84 
36 
31 
100 

2009
26.5
35.9
32.2
2.7
0.2
2.1
90.0
83.4
3.5
0.8
28.4
91.8
12.0
27.8
1.9
15.8
27.7
6.5
58.8
48.6
36.2
42.1
4.5
38.6
7.4
56.1
0.3
73.3
75.0
1.2
9.0
61.2
8.7
9.9
90.3
70.9
18.7
10.1
1.5
25.8
5.4
33.5
35.3
1.6
9.8
33.3
82.2
83.2
78.1
55.5
16.9
31.2
27.5
8.8
1.8
6.3
11.4
27.1
2.6
20.7
10.3
31.1
18.2
24.1
36.6

31.5
21.5
5.5
8.8
72.3

3.4 
3.2 
9.9 
.. 
.. 
38.8 
.. 
.. 
4.3 
39.9 
26.7 
.. 
.. 
.. 
18.1 
.. 
5.4 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
18.0 
5.3 
14.5 
1.8 
21.3 
.. 
.. 
32.8 
.. 
.. 
21.6 
31.7 
.. 
.. 
10.0 
14.9 
16.7 
7.0 
22.3 
3.3 
3.5 
.. 
16.4 
.. 
.. 
.. 
1.3 
6.0 
4.4 
3.7 
20.2 
2.2 
.. 
14.9 
14.0 
21.3w 
27.7 
20.8 
24.0 
.. 
22.4 
8.8 
.. 

3.8 
6.8 
42.5 
24.7 
.. 

a. Data are from the International Telecommunication Union’s (ITU) World Telecommunication Development Report database. Please cite ITU for third-party use of these data. b. Data are for 
the most recent year available.  b. Data are for the most recent year available. c. Refers to expenditure shares by percentiles of population, ranked by per capita expenditure. d. Urban data. 
e. Refers to income shares by percentiles of population, ranked by per capita income. f. Limited coverage. g. Includes Hong Kong SAR, China. h. Data are for 2010. i. Includes emissions not 
allocated to speciﬁ c countries.

398 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table 4.  Economic activity

Gross domestic 

product 

 

 

 

 
 
$ 

Average 
annual 
millions  % growth 
2000–10 

 

 

Agricultural 
productivity 

Agricultural 
value added 
per worker 

2000 $ 

 

ﬁ nal 

 
 

Household 

government 

consumption  consumption 
expenditure  expenditure 

General

ﬁ nal 

 

 
 

GDP

Gross 
capital 
formation 

External 
balance of 
goods and 
services 

implicit
deﬂ ator
Average
annual
% of GDP  % of GDP  % of GDP  % growth
2000–10

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Afghanistan 
 Albania 
 Algeria 
 Angola 
 Argentina 
 Armenia 
 Australia 
 Austria 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bangladesh 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Benin 
 Bolivia 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Brazil 
 Bulgaria 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cambodia 
 Cameroon 
 Canada 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Chile 
 China 
   Hong Kong SAR, China 
 Colombia 
 Congo, Dem. Rep. 
 Congo, Rep. 
 Costa Rica 
 Côte d’Ivoire 
 Croatia 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Dominican Republic 
 Ecuador 
 Egypt, Arab Rep. 
 El Salvador 
 Eritrea 
 Ethiopia 
 Finland 
 France 
 Georgiab 
 Germany 
 Ghana 
 Greece 
 Guatemala 
 Guinea 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Hungary 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iran, Islamic Rep. 
 Iraq 
 Ireland 
 Israel 
 Italy 
 Japan 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 Kenya 
 Korea, Rep. 
 Kyrgyz Republic 
 Lao PDR 
 Lebanon 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Lithuania 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Malaysia 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 

2010 
11,757 
11,786 
159,426 
84,391 
368,712 
9,265 
924,843 
376,162 
51,092 
100,076 
54,713 
467,472 
6,633 
19,786 
16,888 
2,087,890 
47,714 
8,820 
1,611 
11,343 
22,394 
1,574,052 
2,013 
7,588 
203,443 
5,878,629 
224,458 
288,189 
13,145 
11,898 
34,564 
22,780 
60,852 
192,152 
310,405 
51,577 
58,910 
218,912 
21,796 
2,117 
29,717 
238,801 
2,560,002 
11,667 
3,309,669 
31,306 
304,865 
41,190 
4,511 
6,710 
15,400 
130,419 
1,729,010 
706,558 
331,015 
82,150 
203,892 
217,334 
2,051,412 
5,497,813 
27,574 
142,987 
31,409 
1,014,483 
4,616 
7,491 
39,155 
986 
62,360 
36,306 
8,721 
5,106 
237,804 
9,251 
3,636 

.. 
5.4 
3.8 
12.9 
5.6 
9.1 
3.3 
1.9 
17.1 
5.9 
8.2 
1.6 
4.0 
4.1 
4.6 
3.7 
4.8 
5.5 
3.2 
8.5 
3.2 
2.0 
1.0 
9.0 
4.0 
10.8 
4.6 
4.5 
5.3 
4.3 
4.8 
1.1 
3.2 
3.8 
0.9 
5.6 
4.8 
5.3 
2.3 
0.2 
8.8 
2.2 
1.3 
6.9 
1.0 
5.9 
2.9 
3.6 
2.9 
0.6 
4.6 
1.9 
8.0 
5.3 
5.4 
0.4 
3.0 
3.6 
0.3 
0.9 
6.7 
8.3 
4.3 
4.1 
4.4 
7.1 
4.9 
0.9 
5.4 
5.3 
3.4 
5.2 
5.0 
5.2 
4.4 

  Value added as % of GDP   
 
 
 
 

 
 

Agricultural 

Industry 

Services  % of GDP 

1990–92 

.. 
837 
1,823 
176 
6,919 
1,607a 
20,676 
13,607 
1,000a  
255 
2,042a 
.. 
429 
703 
.. 
1,611 
4,396 
126 
117 
.. 
409 
28,542 
322 
209 
3,618 
269 
.. 
3,123 
209 
.. 
3,158 
652 
5,546a 
.. 
15,190 
2,055 
1,801 
1,826 
1,774 
.. 
.. 
17,520 
22,126 
2,359a 
13,863 
.. 
7,668 
2,304 
156 
.. 
1,227 
3,943 
359 
519 
2,042 
.. 
.. 
.. 
11,714 
20,350 
2,348 
1,781a 
379 
5,804 
684a 
382 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
210 
86 
3,984 
405 
671 

2005–07 
.. 
1,663 
2,232 
222 
11,192 
4,510 
30,830 
20,508 
1,198 
387 
4,007 
38,913 
661 
732 
10,352 
3,310 
8,204 
182 
70 
366 
703 
46,233 
404 
.. 
6,145 
459 
.. 
2,781 
162 
.. 
5,132 
875 
11,701 
5,945 
36,627 
3,829 
1,879 
2,758 
2,389 
118 
187 
34,349 
47,910 
1,871 
27,598 
388 
8,980 
2,736 
311 
.. 
1,841 
8,136 
459 
657 
2,931 
.. 
12,247 
.. 
26,843 
41,492 
2,443 
1,730 
367 
14,501 
1,018 
495 
31,477 
.. 
.. 
4,683 
182 
133 
5,807 
515 
392 

2009 
29 
21 
12 
10 
8 
21 
3 
2 
8 
19 
10 
1 
.. 
14 
8 
6 
6 
33 
.. 
35 
19 
2 
56 
14 
3 
10 
0 
7 
43 
5 
7 
25 
7 
2 
1 
6 
7 
14 
12 
15 
51 
3 
2 
10 
1 
32 
3 
12 
17 
.. 
12 
4 
18 
15 
10 
.. 
1 
.. 
2 
1 
3 
6 
23 
3 
29 
34 
5 
61 
2 
3 
29 
31 
10 
37 
21 

2009 
26 
20 
55 
59 
32 
35 
29 
29 
60 
29 
42 
22 
.. 
36 
28 
25 
30 
22 
.. 
23 
31 
32 
15 
49 
43 
46 
7 
34 
24 
71 
27 
25 
27 
37 
23 
32 
26 
37 
27 
22 
11 
28 
19 
21 
26 
19 
18 
28 
52 
.. 
27 
29 
27 
48 
44 
.. 
32 
.. 
25 
28 
32 
40 
15 
36 
19 
27 
17 
17 
78 
27 
16 
16 
44 
24 
35 

2009 
45 
60 
34 
31 
61 
45 
68 
69 
32 
53 
48 
78 
.. 
50 
64 
69 
64 
44 
.. 
42 
50 
67 
29 
38 
54 
43 
93 
58 
33 
24 
66 
50 
66 
60 
77 
61 
67 
49 
60 
63 
38 
69 
79 
69 
73 
49 
79 
59 
31 
.. 
60 
66 
55 
33 
45 
.. 
67 
.. 
73 
71 
65 
53 
62 
61 
51 
39 
78 
22 
20 
70 
55 
53 
46 
39 
45 

2009 
88 
87 
41 
.. 
59 
82 
57 
54 
37 
77 
57 
52 
.. 
66 
80 
62 
66 
75 
91 
74 
72 
59 
93 
79 
59 
35 
62 
64 
75 
42 
62 
72 
57 
51 
49 
85 
66 
76 
92 
86 
88 
54 
58 
83 
59 
82 
75 
87 
76 
92 
80 
67 
56 
57 
45 
.. 
51 
57 
60 
59 
83 
50 
76 
54 
86 
43 
79 
202 
23 
69 
79 
62 
50 
77 
72 

2009 
9 
10 
14 
.. 
15 
11 
17 
20 
14 
5 
17 
25 
.. 
15 
23 
22 
16 
22 
29 
8 
9 
22 
5 
16 
14 
13 
9 
16 
8 
12 
17 
9 
20 
22 
30 
8 
11 
11 
10 
33 
8 
25 
25 
24 
20 
10 
19 
10 
8 
9 
19 
9 
12 
10 
11 
.. 
19 
24 
22 
20 
24 
12 
16 
16 
22 
5 
15 
19 
9 
22 
12 
21 
14 
10 
21 

2009 
25 
29 
41 
15 
21 
32 
28 
21 
22 
24 
38 
20 
25 
17 
22 
17 
26 
18 
16 
21 
18 
21 
11 
34 
19 
48 
21 
22 
29 
25 
20 
11 
27 
22 
17 
15 
35 
19 
13 
11 
22 
18 
19 
12 
16 
20 
16 
13 
21 
27 
20 
22 
36 
31 
33 
.. 
14 
16 
19 
21 
15 
30 
21 
26 
22 
28 
30 
20 
28 
11 
33 
25 
14 
22 
25 

2009 
–32 
–26 
4 
6 
5 
–25 
–2 
5 
28 
–7 
–11 
3 
–14 
3 
–25 
0 
–8 
–15 
–36 
–3 
–4 
–2 
–8 
–28 
8 
4 
7 
–2 
–12 
21 
1 
8 
–3 
6 
4 
–8 
–12 
–7 
–15 
–16 
–18 
2 
–2 
–19 
5 
–11 
–11 
–10 
–5 
–30 
–19 
1 
–4 
3 
11 
.. 
15 
2 
0 
0 
–21 
8 
–13 
4 
–30 
–13 
–24 
–142 
40 
–1 
–24 
–8 
22 
–9 
–18 

8.3
3.3
8.3
36.1
13.0
0.5
4.0
1.7
9.5
5.4
21.4
2.1
3.3
6.9
3.9
8.0
5.9
2.7
10.7
5.1
2.1
2.5
2.8
5.4
6.2
4.4
–1.1
5.9
26.6
7.4
9.9
3.2
3.9
2.0
2.3
12.6
8.0
8.5
3.5
16.7
11.5
1.2
1.9
6.9
1.0
26.2
3.0
5.5
16.2
14.2
6.3
5.2
5.9
11.1
16.4
11.1
1.5
1.4
2.4
–1.1
6.5
14.9
6.1
2.3
8.6
8.7
3.1
10.3
17.9
3.9
10.9
15.8
3.8
4.5
10.7

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

399

Table 4.  Economic activity (continued)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Gross domestic 

product 

 

 

 

 
 
$ 

Average 
annual 
millions  % growth 
2000–10 

2010 

 

 

Agricultural 
productivity 

Agricultural 
value added 
per worker 

2000 $ 

  Value added as % of GDP   
 
 
 
 

 
 

Agricultural 

Industry 

Services  % of GDP 

 

ﬁ nal 

 
 

Household 

government 

 

consumption  consumption 
expenditure  expenditure 

General

ﬁ nal 

GDP

Gross 
capital 
formation 

External 
balance of 
goods and 
services 

implicit
deﬂ ator
Average
annual
% of GDP  % of GDP  % of GDP  % growth
2000–10

 
 

 
 

 
 

2009 
12 
22 
18 
13 
.. 
11 
28 
20 
12 
.. 
.. 
22 
8 
11 
11 
12 
10 
10 
19 
21 
15 
20 
15 
25 
9 
20 
14 
10 
20 
.. 
21 
21 
18 
14 
28 
11 
13 
28 
20 
13 
9 
12 
15 
11 
12 
19 
10 
23 
17 
13 
18 
13 
6 
.. 
.. 
13 
13 
19w 
10 
15 
12 
15 
15 
13 
18 

7.4
10.7
2.1
8.2
..
7.2
2.0
2.7
8.2
3.3
13.7
4.5
9.2
2.3
6.2
9.6
3.3
4.7
2.7
2.5
14.7
15.1
10.4
7.6
2.7
15.1
9.6
1.1
3.3
..
7.2
3.4
10.6
10.6
1.7
1.1
7.4
19.7
7.4
3.2
2.4
4.2
14.1
13.0
5.9
16.7
10.2
2.7
2.5
8.1
24.0
25.2
8.7
3.4
13.0
15.9
5.1

2009 
22 
27 
36 
20 
.. 
29 
18 
18 
23 
.. 
.. 
20 
19 
25 
20 
16 
23 
17 
20 
20 
31 
19 
22 
26 
28 
25 
15 
29 
38 
.. 
20 
24 
24 
25 
17 
20 
16 
22 
30 
21 
.. 
24 
15 
12 
24 
17 
20 
14 
14 
18 
26 
25 
38 
.. 
.. 
22 
2 
19w 
24 
28 
28 
28 
28 
40 
19 

2009 
–1 
–36 
–11 
–18 
.. 
–21 
7 
2 
–26 
.. 
9 
15 
–8 
16 
1 
–5 
4 
–1 
0 
–8 
–7 
7 
–17 
11 
–20 
–17 
–13 
18 
–4 
.. 
–1 
–2 
–6 
–6 
7 
11 
–2 
–43 
–12 
11 
–20 
–3 
–1 
32 
–11 
–2 
23 
–2 
–3 
1 
0 
–2 
–10 
.. 
.. 
3 
–28 

–13 
1 
–4 
2 
1 
5 
1 

0w 

2005–07 
3,025 
1,301 
2,306 
174 
.. 
241 
40,365 
26,315 
2,334 
.. 
.. 
37,855 
890 
3,996 
643 
2,136 
1,390 
1,078 
2,629 
6,203 
6,179 
2,607 
.. 
17,419 
223 
.. 
.. 
50,828 
8,149 
.. 
3,149 
18,603 
823 
844 
43,543 
23,373 
4,479 
501 
271 
653 
394 
3,424 
3,223 
2,087 
210 
2,010 
29,465 
27,715 
44,041 
8,535 
2,231 
7,386 
335 
.. 
.. 
227 
202 

1990–92 
2,274 
1,349a 
1,788 
117 
.. 
245 
24,752 
19,148 
.. 
242 
.. 
19,077 
765 
2,341 
555 
1,648 
879 
839 
1,605 
4,789 
2,129 
1,917a 
193 
8,476 
251 
.. 
.. 
22,695 
.. 
.. 
2,149 
9,583 
697 
526 
23,318 
19,369 
2,778 
370a 
219 
480 
345 
2,975 
2,198 
1,272a 
186 
1,232a 
10,414 
23,020 
19,714 
5,720 
1,427a 
4,584 
229 
.. 
412 
189 
245 
809w 
233 
501 
485 
512 
471 
318 
2,061 

2.2 
5.2 
4.9 
7.8 
.. 
3.8 
1.6 
2.6 
3.1 
4.2 
6.7 
1.8 
5.1 
7.0 
3.8 
3.8 
6.1 
4.9 
4.3 
0.7 
5.0 
5.4 
7.6 
3.8 
4.2 
4.6 
8.8 
6.6 
5.2 
.. 
3.9 
2.4 
5.6 
6.7 
2.2 
1.9 
4.9 
8.6 
7.1 
4.5 
2.7 
4.8 
4.7 
13.1 
7.7 
4.8 
7.0 
1.6 
1.9 
3.9 
7.1 
4.5 
7.5 
–0.9 
3.9 
5.6 
–6.0 
2.8w 
5.5 
6.4 
6.3 
6.5 
6.4 
9.4 
5.4 

1,039,662 
5,809 
91,196 
9,586 
.. 
15,701 
783,413 
126,679 
6,551 
5,549 
193,669 
414,462 
174,799 
26,777 
9,480 
18,475 
153,845 
199,589 
468,585 
228,538 
161,624 
1,479,819 
5,628 
375,766 
12,954 
39,128 
1,905 
222,699 
89,034 
.. 
363,704 
1,407,405 
49,552 
62,046 
458,004 
523,772 
59,103 
5,640 
23,057 
318,847 
3,153 
44,291 
735,264 
21,074 
17,011 
137,929 
230,252 
2,246,079 
14,582,400 
40,265 
38,982 
387,852 
103,572 
.. 
26,365 
16,193 
7,474 
63,048,802t 
413,913 
19,561,744 
4,312,196 
15,246,704 
19,997,455 
7,579,386 
3,055,026 

 Mexico 
 Moldovac 
 Moroccod 
 Mozambique 
 Myanmar 
 Nepal 
 Netherlands 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaragua 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Norway 
 Pakistan 
 Panama 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Philippines 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Romania 
 Russian Federation 
 Rwanda 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Senegal 
 Serbia 
 Sierra Leone 
 Singapore 
 Slovak Republic 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 Spain 
 Sri Lanka 
 Sudan 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Syrian Arab Republic 
 Tajikistan 
 Tanzaniae 
 Thailand 
 Togo 
 Tunisia 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 Uganda 
 Ukraine 
 United Arab Emirates 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 Uruguay 
 Uzbekistan 
 Venezuela, RB 
 Vietnam 
 West Bank and Gaza 
 Yemen, Rep. 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 
 World 
 Low income 
 Middle income 
 
 Lower middle income 
   Upper middle income 
 Low and middle income 
   East Asia & Paciﬁ c 
   Europe & Central Asia 
   Latin America & 
 
the Caribbean 
   Middle East & 
  North Africa 
 
  South Asia 
 
 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
 High income 
a. Data for all three years are not available. 
b. Excludes Abkhazia and South Ossetia. c. Excludes Transnistria.  d. Includes Former Spanish Sahara.  e. Covers mainland Tanzania only.

2009 
68 
87 
57 
85 
.. 
81 
46 
60 
91 
.. 
.. 
43 
80 
47 
69 
78 
63 
75 
61 
67 
61 
53 
81 
38 
83 
73 
84 
43 
47 
.. 
60 
57 
64 
67 
48 
58 
73 
93 
62 
55 
.. 
67 
72 
53 
76 
65 
46 
65 
71 
68 
56 
64 
66 
.. 
.. 
61 
113 
62w 
79 
57 
64 
55 
57 
42 
62 

2009 
34 
13 
29 
24 
.. 
15 
24 
25 
29 
.. 
41 
40 
24 
18 
45 
21 
35 
32 
30 
23 
26 
33 
14 
60 
22 
28 
23 
26 
35 
.. 
31 
26 
30 
26 
25 
27 
34 
24 
24 
43 
.. 
27 
26 
54 
26 
29 
61 
21 
21 
26 
33 
.. 
40 
.. 
.. 
34 
29 
27w 
24 
35 
31 
36 
35 
45 
30 

2009 
61 
77 
55 
45 
.. 
52 
74 
69 
52 
.. 
27 
58 
54 
76 
20 
59 
57 
55 
66 
75 
67 
62 
52 
37 
62 
59 
25 
74 
63 
.. 
66 
71 
58 
44 
73 
72 
45 
54 
47 
45 
.. 
66 
65 
34 
50 
62 
38 
78 
77 
64 
47 
.. 
39 
.. 
.. 
44 
53 
70w 
50 
55 
51 
57 
55 
43 
62 

2009 
4 
10 
16 
31 
.. 
33 
2 
6 
19 
.. 
33 
1 
22 
6 
36 
19 
8 
13 
4 
2 
7 
5 
34 
3 
17 
13 
52 
.. 
3 
.. 
3 
3 
13 
30 
2 
1 
21 
22 
29 
11 
.. 
7 
9 
12 
25 
8 
2 
1 
1 
10 
20 
.. 
21 
.. 
.. 
22 
18 
3w 
26 
10 
17 
7 
10 
11 
7 

1,068,481 
2,088,236 
1,097,899 
43,002,153 

269 
730 
637 
797 
664 
504 
2,738 

2,824 
479 
316 
23,626 

1,846 
372 
299 
13,796 

3.8 

4.7 
7.4 
5.0 
1.8 

64 

55 
61 
67 
63 

63 

46 
55 
57 
73 

31 

43 
27 
30 
25 

6 

11 
18 
13 
1 

4,969,416 

1,029w 

3,246 

2,216 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16 

13 
11 
18 
20 

20 

28 
33 
21 
17 

0 

5 
–5 
–4 
0 

 

 

 

400 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Table 5.  Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance

 

Manufactured 

exports 
% of total 

High 

technology 
exports 
% of 

Foreign 
direct 

Net 

ofﬁ cial 

investment  development 
net inﬂ ows  assistance a 

 
 
 
 
External debt   
Total 

Present 
value 

 
Domestic
credit 
provided 
by banking 

millions 

millions 

exports 

exports 

merchandise  manufactured 

$ 

millions 

$ 

per capita 

$ 

millions 

sector 
% of GNI b  % of GDP 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Angola 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bangladesh 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Benin 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
  Hong Kong SAR, China 
Colombia 
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
Congo, Rep. 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 
El Salvador 
Eritrea 
Ethiopia 
Finland 
France 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Rep. 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Korea, Rep. 
Kyrgyz Republic 
Lao PDR 
Lebanon 
Liberia 
Libya 
Lithuania 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Mali 
Mauritania 
Mexico 

Merchandise trade 
exports 
imports 

 
 

$ 

 
 

$ 

2009 
560 
1,088 
45,194 
40,080 
55,668 
698 
154,234 
137,672 
21,097 
15,084 
21,283 
369,854 
1,000 
4,848 
3,929 
152,995 
16,455 
850 
64 
4,200 
3,000 
316,713 
120 
2,800 
53,735 
1,201,534 
329,422g 
32,853 
3,100 
5,600 
8,788 
8,900 
10,474 
113,437 
93,344 
5,463 
13,799 
23,062 
3,797 
15 
1,596 
62,798 
484,725 
1,135 
1,126,383 
5,500 
20,093 
7,214 
1,010 
576 
5,196 
83,778 
162,613 
119,481 
78,113 
39,500 
114,587 
47,935 
405,777 
580,719 
6,366 
43,196 
4,421 
363,534 
1,439 
940 
4,187 
150 
35,600 
16,452 
1,140 
920 
157,433 
2,100 
1,370 
229,637 

2009 
3,970 
4,548 
39,294 
17,000 
38,780 
3,304 
165,471 
143,382 
6,514 
21,833 
28,563 
351,945 
2,040 
4,410 
8,773 
133,669 
23,330 
2,083 
402 
6,200 
4,250 
329,904 
300 
1,950 
42,427 
1,005,688 
352,241 
32,898 
3,600 
2,900 
11,395 
6,050 
21,203 
105,179 
82,947 
12,283 
15,093 
44,946 
7,255 
540 
7,963 
60,753 
559,817 
4,378 
938,295 
8,140 
59,858 
11,531 
1,400 
2,050 
7,788 
78,175 
249,590 
91,749 
50,375 
37,000 
62,507 
49,278 
412,721 
551,960 
14,075 
28,409 
10,207 
323,085 
3,037 
1,260 
16,574 
552 
10,150 
18,234 
3,250 
1,700 
123,832 
2,644 
1,430 
241,515 

2009 
18 
70 
2 
.. 
33 
33 
19 
81 
3 
88 
48 
77d 
.. 
6 
61 
39 
53 
12 
21 
96 
.. 
50 
.. 
.. 
11 
94 
79g 
28 
.. 
.. 
47 
15 
66 
87 
65 
70 
9 
37 
72 
.. 
9 
77 
79 
55 
82 
19 
54 
43 
32 
.. 
35 
82 
67 
41 
.. 
0 
86 
94 
83 
88 
73 
14 
37 
90 
34 
.. 
72 
.. 
.. 
55 
57 
9 
70 
22 
0 
76 

2009 
.. 
1 
1 
.. 
9 
4 
13 
11 
1 
1 
3 
10 
.. 
5 
3 
14 
8 
1 
12 
0 
.. 
18 
.. 
.. 
4 
31 
31 
5 
.. 
.. 
41 
12 
11 
16 
18 
5 
4 
1 
5 
.. 
4 
18 
23 
3 
16 
1 
11 
5 
0 
.. 
1 
26 
9 
13 
.. 
0 
25 
23 
8 
20 
1 
30 
5 
32 
5 
.. 
7 
.. 
.. 
10 
2 
3 
47 
3 
.. 
22 

 

Current 
account 
balance 

$ 

millions 

2009 
.. 
–1,875 
.. 
–7,572 
8,632 
–1,369 
–47,786 
10,995 
10,178 
3,345 
–6,389 
3,522 
–536 
813 
–1,175 
–24,302 
–4,751 
–1,709 
–164 
–866 
–1,137 
–38,380 
.. 
.. 
4,217 
297,142 
17,418 
–5,001 
.. 
–2,181 
–537 
1,670 
–3,314 
–2,147 
11,222 
–2,159 
–268 
–3,349 
–373 
.. 
–2,191 
6,814 
–51,857 
–1,210 
165,471 
–1,198 
–35,913 
8 
–403 
–232 
–449 
–699 
–26,626 
10,743 
.. 
27,133 
–6,488 
7,592 
–66,199 
142,194 
–1,251 
–4,248 
–1,661 
42,668 
–102 
9 
–7,555 
–277 
9,381 
1,646 
.. 
.. 
31,801 
–1,066 
.. 
–6,228 

2009 
185 
978 
2,847 
2,205 
3,902 
777 
22,572 
8,714 
473 
674 
1,884 
–38,860 
93 
423 
235 
25,949 
4,595 
171 
0 
530 
340 
19,898 
42 
462 
12,7022 
78,193 
52,395 
7,207 
951 
2,083 
1,347 
381 
2,951 
2,666 
2,905 
2,067 
316 
6,712 
431 
0 
221 
60 
59,989 
658 
39,153 
1,685 
2,419 
600 
50 
38 
500 
2,783 
34,577 
4,877 
3,016 
1,070 
25,233 
3,894 
28,976 
11,834 
2,382 
13,619 
141 
1,506 
189 
319 
4,804 
218 
1,711 
230 
543 
60 
1,387 
109 
–38 
14,462 

2009 
204 
113 
9 
13 
3 
171 
.. 
.. 
26 
8 
10 
.. 
76 
74 
110 
2 
.. 
69 
66 
49 
33 
.. 
54 
50 
5 
1 
.. 
23 
36 
77 
24 
112 
38 
.. 
.. 
12 
15 
11 
45 
29 
46 
.. 
.. 
213 
.. 
66 
.. 
27 
21 
112 
61 
.. 
2 
5 
1 
89 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
128 
19 
45 
.. 
59 
66 
152 
128 
6 
.. 
23 
51 
5 
76 
87 
2 

2009 
2,328 
4,719 
5,345 
16,715 
120,183 
4,935 
.. 
.. 
4,865 
23,820 
17,158 
.. 
1,073 
5,745 
9,583 
276,932 
40,582 
1,835 
518 
4,364 
2,941 
.. 
396 
1,743 
71,646 
428,442 
.. 
52,223 
12,183 
5,041 
8,070 
11,701 
.. 
.. 
.. 
11,003 
12,930 
33,257 
11,384 
1,019 
5,025 
.. 
.. 
4,231 
.. 
5,720 
.. 
13,801 
2,926 
1,244 
3,675 
.. 
237,692 
157,517 
13,435 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
6,615 
109,873 
8,005 
.. 
2,900 
5,539 
24,864 
1,660 
.. 
31,717 
2,213 
1,093 
66,390 
2,667 
2,029 
192,008 

2009 
5 
31 
3 
24 
41 
36 
.. 
.. 
10 
17 
30 
.. 
12e 
16e 
45 
17 
85 
17e 
13e 
38 
4e 
.. 
12e 
22e 
43 
9 
.. 
20 
24e 
20e 
27 
46e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
22 
23 
16 
49 
34e 
12e 
.. 
.. 
28 
.. 
27e 
.. 
33 
44e 
15e 
13e 
.. 
17 
30 
4 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
27 
96 
19 
.. 
36e 
78 
80 
316e 
.. 
72 
17e 
16e 
31 
14e 
83e 
18 

2009 
2 
68 
–9 
29 
28 
20 
144 
141 
23 
60 
34 
119 
19 
50 
58 
97 
70 
15 
36 
19 
7 
178 
17 
8 
100 
145 
168 
37 
7 
–16 
54 
23 
76 
62 
223 
41 
21 
75 
45 
113 
37 
99 
130 
33 
132 
28 
114 
37 
.. 
26 
54 
80 
69 
37 
37 
–16 
225 
78 
142 
323 
99 
55 
45 
112 
14 
10 
163 
149 
–66 
70 
12 
32 
137 
11 
.. 
44 

Net

migration
thousands
2005–10 c

1,000
–75
–140
80
30
–75
500
160
–50
–570
0
200
50
–100
–10
–229
–50
–65
323
–5
–19
1,050
5
–75
30
–1,731f
113
–120
–100
–50
30
–145
10
226
30
–140
–350
–340
–280
55
–300
55
500
–250
550
–51
150
–200
–300
–140
–100
75
–1,000
–730
–500
–577
200
85
1,650
150
250
–100
–189
–30
–75
–75
–13
248
20
–100
–5
–20
130
–202
10
–2,430

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

401

Table 5.  Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance  (continued)

Merchandise trade 
exports 
imports 

 
 

$ 

 

Manufactured 

exports 
% of total 

High 

technology 
exports 
% of 

merchandise  manufactured 

 
 

$ 

millions 

millions 

exports 

exports 

 

Current 
account 
balance 

$ 

millions 

Foreign 
direct 

Net 

ofﬁ cial 

investment  development 
net inﬂ ows  assistance a 

 
 
 
 
External debt   
Total 

Present 
value 

 
Domestic
credit 
provided 
by banking 

$ 

millions 

$ 

per capita 

$ 

millions 

sector 
% of GNI b  % of GDP 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Net

migration
thousands
2005–10 c 

2009 
41 
100 
22 
.. 
68 
224 
154 
67 
13 
37 
.. 
48 
84 
39 
25 
19 
47 
61 
195 
53 
34 
.. 
1 
27 
46 
11 
91 
54 
.. 
184 
228 
40 
20 
145 
191 
44 
27 
18 
137 
27 
68 
63 
.. 
11 
89 
115 
229 
232 
28 
.. 
20 
123 
.. 
19 
19 
.. 

2009 
5 
7 
10 
.. 
0 
24 
10 
6 
8 
3 
20 
2 
0 
.. 
11 
3 
66 
5 
4 
10 
9 
31 
0 
14 
.. 
.. 
49 
5 
.. 
6 
5 
1 
34 
17 
25 
2 
.. 
4 
26 
0 
6 
2 
.. 
1 
3 
3 
23 
23 
5 
.. 
4 
5 
.. 
0 
2 
1 
20w 
3 
20 
13 
21 
20 
32 
9 

2009 
23 
65 
12 
.. 
67 
56 
23 
10 
7 
4 
20 
76 
10 
.. 
11 
16 
86 
80 
72 
79 
17 
19 
8 
41 
66 
.. 
74g 
87 
.. 
47h 
73 
67 
0 
76 
90 
33 
.. 
25 
75 
62 
75 
80 
.. 
27 
63 
4 
72 
67 
26 
.. 
3 
55 
.. 
2 
8 
34 
70w 
56 
59 
48 
61 
59 
80 
37 

2009 
–465 
–4,971 
–1,171 
.. 
–10 
36,581 
–3,624 
–841 
–651 
21,659 
50,122 
–3,583 
–44 
–672 
86 
247 
8,552 
–9,598 
–23,952 
–7,298 
49,365 
–379 
22,765 
–1,884 
–2,412 
–193 
32,628 
–2,810 
.. 
–11,327 
–80,375 
–215 
–3,908 
31,460 
38,972 
66 
–180 
–1,816 
21,861 
–222 
–1,234 
–14,410 
.. 
–451 
–1,732 
.. 
–37,050 
–378,435 
215 
.. 
8,561 
–6,274 
535 
–2,565 
–406 
.. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2009 
3,278 
32,892 
3,764 
4,316 
4,392 
445,496 
25,545 
3,477 
1,500 
39,000 
69,292 
31,710 
7,801 
3,200 
6,940 
21,706 
45,878 
146,626 
69,844 
54,247 
191,803 
1,227 
95,567 
4,713 
15,582 
520 
245,785 
55,301 
.. 
73,172 
287,567 
10,207 
9,691 
119,839 
155,706 
16,300 
2,569 
6,347 
133,801 
1,500 
19,096 
140,921 
6,750 
4,310 
45,436 
140,000 
481,707 
1,605,296 
6,907 
9,023 
40,597 
69,949 
.. 
8,500 
3,793 
2,900 
12,592,947t 
112,493 
3,544,565 
865,722 
2,678,489 
3,656,996 
1,493,538 
636,419 

2009 
1,288 
13,863 
2,147 
6,710 
813 
498,330 
24,932 
1,391 
900 
52,500 
120,880 
17,680 
948 
4,328 
3,167 
26,885 
38,436 
134,466 
43,358 
40,633 
303,388 
193 
192,296 
2,180 
8,345 
231 
269,832g 
55,980 
.. 
62,603 
218,511 
7,345 
7,834 
131,243 
172,850 
10,400 
1,009 
3,096 
152,498 
800 
14,445 
102,129 
6,595 
2,478 
39,703 
175,000 
352,491 
1,056,043 
5,386 
10,735 
57,595 
57,096 
.. 
5,594 
4,312 
2,269 
12,491,383t 
63,864 
3,740,618 
724,117 
3,016,877 
3,804,486 
1,747,540 
657,956 

Moldova 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Norway 
Pakistan 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Rwanda 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia 
Sierra Leone 
Singapore 
Slovak Republic 
Somalia 
South Africa 
Spain 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania 
Thailand 
Togo 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Uganda 
Ukraine 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan 
Venezuela, RB 
Vietnam 
West Bank and Gaza 
Yemen, Rep. 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
World 
Low income 
Middle income 
  Lower middle income 
  Upper middle income 
Low and middle income 
  East Asia & Paciﬁ c 
  Europe & Central Asia 
  Latin America & 
 
the Caribbean 
  Middle East & 
 
  North Africa 
  South Asia 
  Sub-Saharan Africa 
High income 
a. Regional aggregates include data for economies not listed in the table. World and income group totals include aid not allocated by country or region. b. The numerator refers to 2009, 
whereas the denominator is a three-year average of 2007–09 data. c. Total for the ﬁ ve-year period. d. Includes Luxembourg. e. Data are from debt sustainability analysis for low–income 
countries. f. Includes Taiwan, China. g. Includes re-exports.  h. Data on total exports and imports refer to South Africa only. Data on export commodity shares refer to the South African Customs 
Union (Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and South Africa).  i. World total computed by the UN sums to zero, but because the aggregates shown here refer to World Bank deﬁ nitions, regional and 
income group totals do not equal zero.

–172
–425
–20
–500
–100
100
50
–200
–28
–300
135
–1,416
11
0
–40
–625
–900
–120
200
–200
250
15
150
–100
0
60
500
20
–250
700
1,750
–300
135
150
100
800
–200
–300
300
–5
–20
–44
–25
–135
–80
343
948
5,052
–50
–400
40
–200
–10
–135
–85
–700
.. is
–2,536
–13,415
–7,916
–5,499
–15,951
–3,781
–1,681

2009 
3,457 
23,752 
4,168 
8,186 
3,683 
.. 
.. 
4,420 
991 
7,846 
.. 
53,710 
12,418 
1,555 
4,323 
29,593 
62,911 
.. 
.. 
117,511 
381,339 
747 
.. 
3,503 
33,402 
444 
.. 
.. 
2,973 
42,101 
.. 
17,208 
20,139 
.. 
.. 
5,236 
2,514 
7,325 
58,755 
1,640 
21,709 
251,372 
576 
2,490 
93,153 
.. 
.. 
.. 
12,159 
4,109 
54,503 
28,674 
.. 
6,356 
3,049 
5,015 
..s 
119,100 
3,426,014 
904,779 
2,521,235 
3,545,114 
825,602 
1,126,252 

2009 
128 
1,970 
881 
323 
38 
33,287 
–1,259 
434 
739 
5,787 
11,271 
2,387 
1,773 
423 
205 
4,760 
1,948 
13,796 
2,808 
6,310 
36,751 
119 
10,499 
208 
1,921 
74 
16,809 
–31 
108 
5,354 
6,451 
404 
2,682 
11,538 
27,588 
1,434 
16 
415 
4,976 
50 
1,595 
8,403 
1,355 
604 
4,816 
.. 
72,924 
134,710 
1,262 
750 
–3,105 
7,600 
52 
129 
699 
60 
1,163,758s 
8,168 
351,327 
92,846 
258,481 
359,495 
101,428 
86,161 

2009 
68 
28 
88 
7 
29 
.. 
.. 
135 
31 
11 
.. 
16 
19 
61 
23 
15 
3 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
93 
–5 
81 
83 
77 
.. 
.. 
72 
22 
.. 
35 
54 
.. 
.. 
12 
59 
67 
–1 
75 
45 
18 
8 
55 
15 
.. 
.. 
.. 
15 
7 
2 
43 
748 
21 
98 
59 
19w 
45 
11 
17 
5 
22 
5 
20 

2009 
55 
23 
18e 
.. 
23 
.. 
.. 
36e 
13e 
4 
.. 
24 
54 
18 
26 
23 
35 
.. 
.. 
53 
26 
8e 
.. 
20e 
71 
20e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
15 
.. 
35 
73e 
.. 
.. 
9 
39 
13e 
22 
50e 
54 
35 
3 
8e 
62 
.. 
.. 
.. 
37 
12 
19 
27 
.. 
17 
10e 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

169w 
38 
89 
57 
98 
89 
134 
48 

276,399 
204,760 
242,566 
8,689,059 

289,612 
323,199 
253,161 
8,942,776 

–5,214

–1,089
–2,376
–1,810
15,895

912,980 

141,321 
339,983 
198,976 
.. 

27,766 
38,414 
29,096 
804,263 

677,205 

668,496 

67 

41 
66 
79 
203 

16 

41 
9 
53 
0 

13 

2 
8 
6 
19 

51 

.. 
68 
31 
73 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

76,629 

 

 
 
 
 

 

402 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

 

 
Population
Average 
annual 

growth 
2000–10 

 

%  

 
 
 
 
 
 

Thousands 

Table 6.  Key indicators for other economies
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
American Samoa 
Andorra 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Aruba 
Bahamas, The 
Bahrain 
Barbados 
Belize 
Bermuda 
Bhutan 
Botswana 
Brunei Darussalam 
Cape Verde 
Cayman Islands 
Channel Islands 
Comoros 
Cuba 
Curacao 
Cyprus 
Djibouti 
Dominica 
Equatorial Guinea 
Estonia 
Faeroe Islands 
Fiji 
French Polynesia 
Gabon 
Gambia, The 
Gibraltar 
Greenland 
Grenada 
Guam 
Guinea–Bissau 
Guyana 
Iceland 
Isle of Man 
Jamaica 
Kiribati 
Korea, Dem. Rep. 
Kosovo 
Kuwait 
Latvia 
Lesotho 
Liechtenstein 
Luxembourg 
Macao SAR, China 
Macedonia, FYR 
Maldives 
Malta 
Marshall Islands 
Mauritius 
Mayotte 
Micronesia, Fed. Sts. 
Monaco 
Mongolia 
Montenegro 
Namibia 
New Caledonia 
Northern Mariana Islands 
Oman 
Palau 
Puerto Rico 
Qatar 
Samoa 
San Marino 

2010 
68 
87 
89 
107 
346 
807 
257 
345 
65 
708 
1,978 
407 
513 
56 
150 
675 
11,204 
143 
880 
879 
74 
693 
1,340 
49 
854 
272 
1,501 
1,751 
31 
56 
104 
180 
1,647 
761 
318 
80 
2,712 
100 
23,991 
1,815 
2,863 
2,243 
2,084 
36 
507 
548 
2,061 
314 
418 
62 
1,282 
202 
111 
33 
2,701 
626 
2,212 
254 
88 
2,905 
21 
3,980 
1,508 
179 
32 

1.7 
2.2d 
1.4 
1.7 
1.3 
2.2 
0.2 
3.2 
0.4 
2.3 
1.4 
2.0 
1.6 
3.3 
0.2 
2.2 
0.1 
0.6 
1.1 
1.9 
0.4 
2.7 
–0.2 
0.6 
0.6 
1.4 
2.0 
3.0 
0.7 
–0.1 
0.3 
1.5 
2.3 
0.1 
1.3 
0.5 
0.5 
1.7 
0.5 
0.7 
2.7 
–0.6 
1.0 
1.0 
1.5 
2.2 
0.3 
1.4 
0.7 
2.0 
0.8 
2.3j 
0.4 
0.3 
1.2 
–0.5 
1.9 
1.7 
2.5 
1.9 
0.7 
0.4 
8.9 
0.1 
0.8d 

 
 
 

Density 
people 

per 

sq. km 
2009 
336 
181 
199 
592 
34 
1,041 
595 
15 
1,288 
18 
3 
76 
125 
229 
789 
354 
105 
321 
94 
37 
98 
24 
32 
35 
46 
74 
6 
171 
3,105 
0h 
306 
329 
57 
4 
3 
141 
249 
121 
199 
166 
157 
36 
68 
224 
192 
19,213 
82 
1,031 
1,297 
339 
628 
531 
158 
16,406 
2 
46 
3 
14 
189 
9 
44 
447 
122 
63 
524 

 
 

age 

% 

 
 
 
 
 
$ 

Population 

Gross national income

(GNI)a

composition 

Ages 0–14 

millions 

 
 
 
  
per 

capita 

$ 

PPP gross national 

 
 
 
 

 
  
 
income (GNI)b
 
 
$ 

per 

capita 

millions 

$ 

2010 
.. 
.. 
.. 
19 
25 
26 
17 
35 
.. 
30 
33 
26 
35 
.. 
15 
38 
17 
.. 
17 
36 
.. 
41 
15 
.. 
31 
26 
36 
42 
.. 
.. 
27 
27 
43 
29 
20 
.. 
29 
.. 
21 
.. 
23 
14 
39 
.. 
18 
12 
18 
27 
15 
.. 
22 
38 
37 
.. 
26 
19 
36 
25 
.. 
31 
.. 
20 
16 
39 
.. 

2010 
.. 
3,447 
939 
.. 
6,973 
19,714 
3,454 
1,288 
.. 
1,361 
13,633 
12,461 
1,620 
.. 
10,241 
550 
62,204 
.. 
24,383g 
1,105 
367 
10,182 
19,247 
.. 
3,085 
.. 
11,655 
770 
.. 
1,466 
580 
.. 
890 
2,491 
10,787 
3,972 
12,892 
200 
.. 
5,981 
116,970 
26,056 
2,248 
4,903 
40,281 
21,261 
9,319 
1,340 
7,616 
187 
9,925 
.. 
300 
6,479 
5,106 
4,183 
10,286 
.. 
.. 
49,840 
133 
.. 
.. 
524 
1,572 

2010 
..c 
41,130 
10,610 
..f
 
20,410 
25,420 
13,500  
3,740 
..f
 
1,920 
6,890 
31,180 
3,160 
..f
 
68,600 
820 
5,550 
..f
 
30,460g 
1,280 
4,960 
14,680 
14,360 
..f
 
3,610 
..f
 
7,760 
440 
..f
 
26,150 
5,560 
..f
 
540 
3,270 
33,870 
49,300 
4,750 
2,010 
..i
 
3,300 
43,920 
11,620 
1,080 
136,540 
79,510 
39,520 
4,520 
4,270 
18,350 
2,990 
7,740 
..c 
2,700 
197,460 
1,890 
6,690 
4,650 
..f
 
..f
 
17,890 
6,460 
..f
 
..f
 
2,930 
50,670 

 

2010 
.. 
.. 
1,362e
 
.. 
8,318 e
26,005 
5,137 e 
2,059e
 
.. 
3,596 
27,508 
19,488 
1,879 
.. 
.. 
796 
.. 
.. 
24,142g 
2,130 
635e
 
16,511 
26,136 
.. 
3,833 
.. 
19,804 
2,229 
.. 
.. 
789e
 
.. 
1,782 
2,689e
 
9,116 
.. 
20,139e
 
349e
 
.. 
.. 
142,827 
36,682 
3,986 
.. 
32,346 
30,729 
22,320 
1,721 
9,573 
.. 
17,519 
.. 
380e
 
.. 
10,001 
7,950 
14,559 
.. 
.. 
67,992 
221e
 
.. 
.. 
769e
 
.. 

 

2010 
.. 
.. 
15,380e
 
.. 
24,340 e
33,530 
20,080 e 
5,970e
 
.. 
5,070 
13,910 
48,760 
3,670 
.. 
.. 
1,180 
.. 
.. 
30,160g 
2,460 
8,580e
 
23,810 
19,500 
.. 
4,490 
.. 
13,190 
1,270 
.. 
.. 
7,560e
 
.. 
1,080 
3,530e
 
28,630 
.. 
7,430e
 
3,510e
 
.. 
.. 
53,630 
16,360 
1,910 
.. 
63,850 
57,120 
10,830 
5,480 
23,070 
.. 
13,670 
.. 
3,420e
 
.. 
3,700 
12,710 
6,580 
.. 
.. 
24,410 
10,760e
 
.. 
.. 
4,300e
 
.. 

 

Gross 

domestic 
product 

per 

capita 

% growth 
2009–10 

.. 
1.6 
–10.4 
.. 
–0.3 
4.1 
–5.5 
–1.4 
–8.4 
5.8 
5.7 
–3.6 
4.0 
.. 
5.7 
–0.3 
4.3 
.. 
–1.9g 
3.2 
1.1 
–1.5 
1.8 
.. 
–0.5 
.. 
3.8 
2.3 
.. 
–5.0 
–1.5 
.. 
1.2 
4.5 
–3.3 
7.4 
–1.0 
0.3 
.. 
3.4 
1.9 
0.2 
2.4 
–1.9 
1.7 
–0.9 
0.5 
3.3 
–2.8 
–1.7 
3.5 
.. 
0.1 
–2.9 
5.0 
0.9 
2.9 
.. 
.. 
10.4 
0.4 
.. 
–1.3 
0.9 
0.4 

Life expectancy

at birth

 
 
 
 
 

Male 
Years 
2009 
.. 
.. 
.. 
72 
71 
75 
75 
75 
76 
65 
55 
75 
69 
.. 
77 
64 
77 
.. 
77 
54 
.. 
49 
70 
77 
67 
72 
60 
55 
.. 
66 
74 
73 
47 
65 
80 
.. 
69 
.. 
65 
68 
76 
68 
45 
81 
78 
79 
72 
70 
78 
.. 
69 
72 
68 
.. 
64 
72 
61 
72 
.. 
75 
.. 
75 
75 
69 
80 

 
 
 
 
 

Female 
Years 
2009 
.. 
.. 
.. 
78 
77 
78 
80 
79 
82 
68 
55 
80 
74 
.. 
82 
68 
81 
.. 
82 
57 
.. 
52 
80 
82 
71 
77 
62 
58 
.. 
70 
77 
78 
50 
71 
83 
.. 
75 
.. 
70 
72 
80 
78 
46 
85 
83 
83 
77 
74 
82 
.. 
76 
80 
70 
.. 
70 
77 
62 
81 
.. 
78 
.. 
83 
77 
75 
86 

Adult
literacy

rate
%
ages
15 and
older
2005–09

..
..
99
98
..
91
..
..
..
53
84
95
85
99
..
74
100
..
98
..
..
93
100
..
..
..
88
46
..
..
..
..
52
..
..
..
86
..
100
..
94
100
90
..
..
93
97
98
92
..
88
..
..
..
97
..
89
96
..
87
..
90
95
99
..

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

 

 
 
 

%  

 
 
 
 
 
 

Thousands 

Density 
people 

per 

growth 
2000–10 

 

 
Population
Average 
annual 

Table 6.  Key indicators for other economies (continued)
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
São Tomé and Príncipe 
Seychelles 
Sint Maarten (Dutch part) 
Slovenia 
Solomon Islands 
St. Kitts and Nevis 
St. Lucia 
St. Martin (French part) 
St. Vincent and 
 
Suriname 
Swaziland 
Timor–Leste 
Tonga 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Turks and Caicos Islands 
Tuvalu 
Vanuatu 
Virgin Islands (U.S.) 

sq. km 
2009 
170 
191 
1,113 
101 
19 
191 
282 
556 

2010 
165 
89 
38 
2,065 
536 
50 
174 
30 

109 
524 
1,202 
1,124 
104 
1,344 
33 
10 
240 
110 

280 
3 
69 
74 
144 
261 
35 
327 
19 
314 

1.7 
0.9 
2.2 
0.4 
2.5 
1.2 
1.1 
0.6 

0.1 
1.2 
1.1 
3.0 
0.6 
0.4 
5.6 
0.4 
2.6 
0.1 

the Grenadines 

 
 

age 

% 

 
 
 
 
 
$ 

Population 

Gross national income

(GNI)a

composition 

Ages 0–14 

millions 

 
 
 
  
per 

capita 

$ 

PPP gross national 

 
 
 
 

 
  
 
income (GNI)b
 
 
$ 

per 

capita 

millions 

$ 

2010 
40 
.. 
.. 
14 
39 
.. 
26 
.. 

27 
29 
39 
45 
37 
21 
.. 
.. 
38 
21 

2010 
199 
845 
.. 
49,276 
552 
499 
865 
.. 

530 
3,076 
3,119 
2,493 
353 
20,664 
.. 
36 
662 
.. 

2010 
1,200 
9,490 
..f
 
23,860 
1,030 
9,980 
4,970 
..f
 

4,850 
5,920 
2,600 
2,220 
3,380 
15,380 
..f
 
3,700 
2,760 
..f
 

2010 
315 
1,821e
 
.. 
55,704 
1,183e
 
658e
 
1,482e
 
.. 

903e
 
3,955e
 
5,872 
4,016e
 
483e
 
32,243e
 
.. 
.. 
1,066e
 
.. 

2010 
1,910 
20,470e
 
.. 
26,970 
2,210e
 
13,170e
 
8,520e
 
.. 

8,260e
 
7,610e
 
4,890 
3,570e
 
4,630e
 
24,000e
 
.. 
.. 
4,450e
 
.. 

403

Adult
literacy

rate
%
ages
15 and
older
2005–09 

89
92
..
100
..
..
..
..

..
95
87
51
99
99
..
..
82
..

 

Gross 

domestic 
product 

per 

capita 

% growth 
2009–10 

2.8 
5.0 
.. 
0.1 
4.5 
–3.2 
–3.3 
.. 

–6.8 
2.2 
–0.3 
5.1 
–0.6 
–0.3 
.. 
0.0 
0.5 
.. 

Life expectancy

at birth

 
 
 
 
 

Male 
Years 
2009 
64 
68 
.. 
76 
66 
.. 
.. 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 

Female 
Years 
2009 
68 
79 
.. 
82 
68 
.. 
.. 
.. 

70 
66 
47 
61 
69 
66 
.. 
.. 
69 
76 

74 
73 
46 
63 
75 
73 
.. 
.. 
73 
83 

a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. b. PPP is purchasing power parity; see Technical notes. c. Estimated to be upper middle income ($3,976–$12,275). d. Data are for 2004–10. 
e. The estimate is based on regression; others are extrapolated from the 2005 International Comparison Program benchmark estimates. f. Estimated to be high income ($12,276 or more).  
g. Data are for the area controlled by the government of the Republic of Cyprus. h. Less than 0.5. i. Estimated to be low income ($1,005 or less).  j. Data are for 2002–10.  

404 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Technical notes
These technical notes discuss the sources and methods used 
to compile the indicators included in this edition of Selected 
World Development Indicators. The notes follow the order 
in which the indicators appear in the tables.

Sources
The data published in the Selected World Development Indi-
cators  are  taken  from  World  Development  Indicators  2011. 
Where possible, however, revisions reported since the clos-
ing date of that edition have been incorporated. In addition, 
newly  released  estimates  of  population  and  gross  national 
income (GNI) per capita for 2010 are included in table 1 and 
table 6.

The World Bank draws on a variety of sources for the sta-
tistics published in the World Development Indicators. Data on 
external debt for developing countries are reported directly 
to the World Bank by developing member countries through 
the Debtor Reporting System. Other data are drawn mainly 
from the United Nations and its specialized agencies, from 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and from country 
reports to the World Bank. Bank staff estimates are also used 
to improve currentness or consistency. For most countries, 
national accounts estimates are obtained from member gov-
ernments through World Bank economic missions. In some 
instances  these  are  adjusted  by  staff  to  ensure  conformity 
with international deﬁ nitions and concepts. Most social data 
from national sources are drawn from regular administrative 
ﬁ les, special surveys, or periodic censuses.

For more detailed notes about the data, please refer to the 

World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2011.

Data consistency and reliability
Considerable effort has been made to standardize the data, 
but  full  comparability  cannot  be  ensured,  and  care  must 
be taken in interpreting the indicators. Many factors affect 
data availability, comparability, and reliability: statistical sys-
tems in many developing economies are still weak; statistical 
methods,  coverage,  practices,  and  deﬁ nitions  differ  widely; 
and  cross-country  and  intertemporal  comparisons  involve 
complex technical and conceptual problems that cannot be 
unequivocally resolved. Data coverage may not be complete 
because of special circumstances or for economies experienc-
ing problems (such as those stemming from conﬂ icts) affect-
ing the collection and reporting of data. For these reasons, 
although the data are drawn from the sources thought to be 
most  authoritative,  they  should  be  construed  only  as  indi-
cating  trends  and  characterizing  major  differences  among 
economies  rather  than  offering  precise  quantitative  mea-
sures  of  those  differences.  Discrepancies  in  data  presented 
in  different  editions  reﬂ ect  updates  by  countries  as  well  as 
revisions  to  historical  series  and  changes  in  methodology. 
Thus readers are advised not to compare data series between 

editions or between different editions of World Bank publi-
cations. Consistent time series are available from the Open 
Data website (http://data.worldbank.org).

Ratios and growth rates
For ease of reference, the tables usually show ratios and rates 
of growth rather than the simple underlying values. Values 
in their original form are available from the Open Data web-
site  (http://data.worldbank.org).  Unless  otherwise  noted, 
growth  rates  are  computed  using  the  least-squares  regres-
sion method (see the section on “Statistical methods” later in 
this discussion). Because this method takes into account all 
available observations during a period, the resulting growth 
rates reﬂ ect general trends that are not unduly inﬂ uenced by 
exceptional  values.  Constant  price  economic  indicators  are 
used to exclude the effects of inﬂ ation in calculating growth 
rates. Data in italics are for a year or period other than that 
speciﬁ ed in the column heading—up to two years before or 
after for economic indicators and up to three years for social 
indicators, because the latter tend to be collected less regu-
larly and change less dramatically over short periods.

Constant price series
An  economy’s  growth  is  measured  by  the  increase  in  value 
added produced by the individuals and enterprises operating 
in that economy. Thus, measuring real growth requires esti-
mates of gross domestic product (GDP) and its components 
valued in constant prices. The World Bank collects constant 
price national accounts series in national currencies that are 
recorded in the country’s original base year. To obtain com-
parable series of constant price data, it rescales GDP and value 
added by industrial origin to a common reference year, 2000 
in the current version of the WDI. This process gives rise to a 
discrepancy between the rescaled GDP and the sum of the res-
caled components. Because allocating the discrepancy would 
give rise to distortions in the growth rate, it is left unallocated.

Summary measures
The  summary  measures  for  regions  and  income  groups, 
presented at the end of most tables, are calculated by simple 
addition when they are expressed in levels. Aggregate growth 
rates and ratios are usually computed as weighted averages. 
The  summary  measures  for  social  indicators  are  usually 
weighted by population or by subgroups of population. See 
the notes on speciﬁ c indicators for more information.

For  summary  measures  that  cover  many  years,  calcula-
tions  are  based  on  a  uniform  group  of  economies  so  that 
the  composition  of  the  aggregate  does  not  change  over 
time.  Group  measures  are  compiled  only  if  the  data  avail-
able  for  a  given  year  account  for  at  least  two-thirds  of  the 
full group, as deﬁ ned for the 2000 benchmark year. As long 
as this criterion is met, economies for which data are miss-
ing are assumed to behave like those that provide estimates. 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

405

Readers  should  keep  in  mind  that  the  summary  measures 
are estimates of representative aggregates for each topic and 
that nothing meaningful can be deduced about behavior at 
the country level by working back from group indicators. In 
addition, the estimation process may result in discrepancies 
between subgroup and overall totals.

Table 1. Key indicators of development
Population is based on the de facto deﬁ nition, which counts 
all residents, regardless of legal status or citizenship—except 
for refugees not permanently settled in the country of asylum, 
who are generally considered part of the population of the 
country of origin. The values shown are midyear estimates.

Average  annual  population  growth  rate  is  the  expo-
nential change for the period (see the section on statistical 
methods).

Population  density  is  midyear  population  divided  by 
land area in square kilometers. Land area is a country’s total 
area, excluding area under inland water bodies.

Population age composition, ages 0–14 refers to the per-

centage of the total population that is ages 0–14.

Gross national income (GNI) is the broadest measure of 
national income. It measures total value added from domes-
tic and foreign sources claimed by residents. GNI comprises 
gross domestic product plus net receipts of primary income 
from foreign sources. Data are converted from national cur-
rency  to  current  U.S.  dollars  using  the  World  Bank  Atlas 
method. This approach involves using a three-year average of 
exchange rates to smooth the effects of transitory exchange 
rate ﬂ uctuations. (See the section on statistical methods for 
further discussion of the Atlas method.)

GNI per capita is GNI divided by midyear population. It 
is  converted  into  current  U.S.  dollars  by  the Atlas  method. 
The World Bank uses GNI per capita in U.S. dollars to clas-
sify  economies  for  analytical  purposes  and  to  determine 
borrowing eligibility.

PPP  GNI  is  GNI  converted  into  international  dollars 
using  purchasing  power  parity  (PPP)  conversion  factors. 
Because  exchange  rates  do  not  always  reﬂ ect  differences  in 
price levels between countries, this table converts GNI and 
GNI  per  capita  estimates  into  international  dollars  using 
PPP  rates.  PPP  rates  provide  a  standard  measure  allowing 
comparison of real levels of expenditure between countries, 
just as conventional price indexes allow comparison of real 
values over time. The PPP conversion factors used here are 
derived from the 2005 round of price surveys covering 146 
countries conducted by the International Comparison Pro-
gram. For OECD countries, data come from the most recent 
round  of  surveys,  completed  in  2005.  Estimates  for  coun-
tries not included in the surveys are derived from statistical 
models  using  available  data.  For  more  information  on  the 
2005 International Comparison Program, go to http://www.
worldbank.org/data/icp.

PPP  GNI  per  capita  is  PPP  GNI  divided  by  midyear 

population.

Gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  per  capita  growth  is 
based on GDP measured in constant prices. Growth in GDP 
is considered a broad measure of the growth of an economy. 
GDP in constant prices can be estimated by measuring the 
total  quantity  of  goods  and  services  produced  in  a  period, 
valuing them at an agreed set of base year prices, and sub-
tracting  the  cost  of  intermediate  inputs,  also  in  constant 
prices.  See  the  section  on  statistical  methods  for  details  of 
the least-squares growth rate.

Life expectancy at birth  is  the  number  of  years  a  new-
born infant would live if prevailing patterns of mortality at 
its birth were to stay the same throughout its life. 

Adult literacy rate  is  the  percentage  of  persons  ages  15 
and older who can, with understanding, both read and write 
a short, simple statement about their everyday life. In prac-
tice, literacy is difﬁ cult to measure. To estimate literacy using 
such  a  deﬁ nition  requires  census  or  survey  measurements 
under  controlled  conditions.  Many  countries  estimate  the 
number of literate people from self-reported data. Some use 
educational  attainment  data  as  a  proxy  but  apply  different 
lengths of school attendance or level of completion. Because 
deﬁ nition and methodologies of data collection differ across 
countries, data need to be used with caution.

Table 2. Poverty
The World Bank periodically prepares poverty assessments 
of countries in which it has an active program, in close col-
laboration  with  national  institutions,  other  development 
agencies,  and  civil  society  groups,  including  poor  people’s 
organizations.  Poverty  assessments  report  the  extent  and 
causes of poverty and propose strategies to reduce it. Since 
1992  the  World  Bank  has  conducted  about  200  poverty 
assessments, which are the main source of the poverty esti-
mates  using  national  poverty  lines  presented  in  the  table. 
Countries report similar assessments as part of their Poverty 
Reduction Strategies.

The  World  Bank  also  produces  poverty  estimates  using 
international  poverty  lines  to  monitor  progress  in  poverty 
reduction  globally.  The  ﬁ rst  global  poverty  estimates  for 
developing  countries  were  produced  for  World  Develop-
ment Report 1990: Poverty Using Household Survey Data for 
22 Countries (Ravallion, Datt, and van de Walle 1991). Since 
then, the number of countries that ﬁ eld household income 
and expenditure surveys has expanded considerably.

National and international poverty lines
National poverty lines are used to make estimates of poverty 
consistent  with  the  country’s  speciﬁ c  economic  and  social 
circumstances and are not intended for international com-
parisons  of  poverty  rates.  The  setting  of  national  poverty 
lines  reﬂ ects  local  perceptions  of  the  level  of  consumption 

406 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

or income needed not to be poor. The perceived boundary 
between  poor  and  not  poor  rises  with  the  average  income 
of  a  country  and  so  does  not  provide  a  uniform  measure 
for comparing poverty rates across countries. Nevertheless, 
national poverty estimates are clearly the appropriate mea-
sure for setting national policies for poverty reduction and 
for monitoring their results.

International  comparisons  of  poverty  estimates  entail 
both conceptual and practical problems. Countries have dif-
ferent  deﬁ nitions  of  poverty,  and  consistent  comparisons 
across countries can be difﬁ cult. Local poverty lines tend to 
have higher purchasing power in rich countries, where more 
generous standards are used, than in poor countries. Inter-
national poverty lines attempt to hold the real value of the 
poverty line constant across countries, as is done when mak-
ing comparisons over time, regardless of average income of 
countries.

Since the publication of World Development Report 1990, 
the  World  Bank  has  aimed  to  apply  a  common  standard 
in  measuring  extreme  poverty,  anchored  to  what  poverty 
means in the world’s poorest countries. The welfare of peo-
ple living in different countries can be measured on a com-
mon  scale  by  adjusting  for  differences  in  the  purchasing 
power of currencies. The commonly used $1 a day standard, 
measured in 1985 international prices and adjusted to local 
currency  using  purchasing  power  parities,  was  chosen  for 
World Development Report 1990 because it was typical of the 
poverty lines in low-income countries at the time. Later this 
$1-a-day line was  revised to $1.08 a day measured in 1993 
international prices. More recently, the international poverty 
lines were revised using the new data on PPPs compiled by 
the 2005 round of the International Comparison Program, 
along with data from an expanded set of household income 
and expenditure surveys. The new extreme poverty line is set 
at $1.25 a day in 2005 PPP terms, which represents the mean 
of the poverty lines found in the poorest 15 countries ranked 
by per capita consumption. The new poverty line maintains 
the  same  standard  for  extreme  poverty—the  poverty  line 
typical of the poorest countries in the world—but updates it 
using the latest information on the cost of living in develop-
ing countries.

Quality and availability of survey data 
Poverty estimates are derived using surveys ﬁ elded to collect, 
among other things, information on income or consumption 
from a sample of households. To be useful for poverty esti-
mates, surveys must be nationally representative and include 
sufﬁ cient information to compute a comprehensive estimate 
of total household consumption or income (including con-
sumption or income from own production), from which it 
is possible to construct a correctly weighted distribution of 
consumption or income per person. Over the past 20 years, 
the number of countries that ﬁ eld surveys and the frequency 

of  the  surveys  have  expanded  considerably.  The  quality  of 
data  has  improved  greatly  as  well.  The  World  Bank’s  pov-
erty monitoring database now includes more than 600 sur-
veys  representing  115  developing  countries.  More  than  1.2 
million randomly sampled households were interviewed in 
these surveys, representing 96 percent of the population of 
developing countries.

Measurement issues using survey data
Besides  the  frequency  and  timeliness  of  survey  data,  other 
data  issues  arise  in  measuring  household  living  standards. 
One  relates  to  the  choice  of  income  or  consumption  as  a 
welfare indicator. Income is generally more difﬁ cult to mea-
sure accurately, and consumption comes closer to the notion 
of standard of living. Also, income can vary over time even if 
the standard of living does not. However, consumption data 
are  not  always  available:  the  latest  estimates  reported  here 
use consumption for about two-thirds of countries. Another 
issue is that even similar surveys may not be strictly compa-
rable because of differences in number of consumer goods 
they  identify,  differences  in  the  length  of  the  period  over 
which respondents must recall their expenditures, or differ-
ences  in  the  quality  and  training  of  enumerators.  Selective 
nonresponses are also a concern in some surveys.

Comparisons of countries at different levels of develop-
ment also pose a potential problem because of differences in 
the  relative  importance  of  the  consumption  of  nonmarket 
goods.  The  local  market  value  of  all  consumption  in  kind 
(including own production, which is particularly important 
in underdeveloped rural economies) should be included in 
total consumption expenditure, but may not be. Surveys now 
routinely include imputed values for consumption in-kind 
from  own-farm  production.  Imputed  proﬁ t  from  the  pro-
duction of nonmarket goods should be included in income, 
but sometimes it is omitted (such omissions were a bigger 
problem in surveys before the 1980s). Most survey data now 
include  valuations  for  consumption  or  income  from  own 
production, but valuation methods vary.

Deﬁ nitions
Survey year  is  the  year  in  which  the  underlying  data  were 
collected.

Population  below  national  poverty  line,  national  is 
the  percentage  of  the  population  living  below  the  national 
poverty  line.  National  estimates  are  based  on  population-
weighted subgroup estimates from household surveys.

Population  below  $1.25  a  day  and  population  below 
$2.00 a day are the percentages of the population living on 
less than $1.25 a day and $2.00 a day at 2005 international 
prices. As a result of revisions in PPP exchange rates, poverty 
rates for individual countries cannot be compared with pov-
erty rates reported in earlier editions.

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

407

Poverty gap is the mean shortfall from the poverty line 
(counting the nonpoor as having zero shortfall), expressed 
as a percentage of the poverty line. This measure reﬂ ects the 
depth of poverty as well as its incidence.

Table 3. Millennium Development Goals: Eradicating 
poverty and improving lives
Share  of  poorest  quintile  in  national  consumption  or 
income is the share of the poorest 20 percent of the popula-
tion in consumption or, in some cases, income. It is a dis-
tributional  measure.  Countries  with  more  unequal  distri-
butions of consumption (or income) have a higher rate of 
poverty for a given average income. Data are from nation-
ally  representative  household  surveys.  Because  the  under-
lying household surveys differ in method and type of data 
collected, the distribution data are not strictly comparable 
across countries. The World Bank staff has made an effort to 
ensure that the data are as comparable as possible. Wherever 
possible, consumption has been used rather than income.

Vulnerable  employment  is  the  sum  of  unpaid  family 
workers  and  own-account  workers  as  a  percentage  of  total 
employment. The proportion of unpaid family workers and 
own-account workers in total employment is derived from 
information  on  status  in  employment.  Each  status  group 
faces  different  economic  risks,  and  unpaid  family  workers 
and  own-account  workers  are  the  most  vulnerable—and 
therefore  the  most  likely  to  fall  into  poverty.  They  are  the 
least likely to have formal work arrangements, are the least 
likely  to  have  social  protection  and  safety  nets  to  guard 
against economic shocks, and often are incapable of generat-
ing sufﬁ cient savings to offset these shocks.

Prevalence  of  child  malnutrition  is  the  percentage  of 
children  under  age  ﬁ ve  whose  weight  for  age  is  less  than 
minus  two  standard  deviations  from  the  median  for  the 
international  reference  population  ages  0–59  months.  The 
table  presents  data  based  on  the  child  growth  standards 
released by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2006. 
Primary  completion  rate  is  the  percentage  of  students 
completing  the  last  year  of  primary  school.  It  is  the  total 
number of new entrants in the last grade of primary educa-
tion, regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the pop-
ulation at the entrance age to the last grade of primary. The 
primary completion rate reﬂ ects the primary cycle as deﬁ ned 
by  the  International  Standard  Classiﬁ cation  of  Education 
Data  (ISCED)  limitation  preclude  adjusting  for  students 
who  drop  out  during  the  ﬁ nal  year  of  primary  education. 
Thus, this rate is a proxy that should be taken as an upper 
estimate of the actual primary completion rate.

Ratio of girls to boys enrolled in primary and secondary 
school is the ratio of the female gross enrollment rate in pri-
mary and secondary school to the male gross enrollment rate.
Under-ﬁ ve  mortality  rate  is  the  probability  per  1,000 
children  under  ﬁ ve  years  of  age  that  a  newborn  baby  will 

die before reaching age ﬁ ve, if subject to current age-speciﬁ c 
mortality rates. The main sources of mortality data are vital 
registration systems and direct or indirect estimates based on 
sample surveys or censuses. To make under-ﬁ ve mortality esti-
mates comparable and to ensure consistency across estimates 
by different agencies, Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality 
Estimation, comprising the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), the United Nations Population Division, WHO, 
the  World  Bank,  and  other  universities  and  research  insti-
tutes,  developed  and  adopted  a  statistical  method  that  uses 
all available information to reconcile differences. The method 
uses the weighted least squares to ﬁ t a regression line to the 
relationship between mortality rates and their reference dates 
and then extrapolate the trend to present.

Maternal mortality ratio is the number of women who 
die  from  pregnancy-related  causes  during  pregnancy  and 
childbirth,  per  100,000  live  births.  The  values  are  modeled 
estimates.  The  modeled  estimates  are  based  on  an  exercise 
by the WHO, UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA),  and  the  World  Bank.  For  countries  with  good 
attribution  of  cause  of  death,  the  data  are  used  to  directly 
estimate maternal mortality. For countries without complete 
registration data but with other types of data and for coun-
tries with no empirical national data, maternal mortality is 
estimated with a multilevel regression model using available 
national-level model using available national-level maternal 
mortality  data  and  socioeconomic  information  including 
fertility, birth attendants and GDP.

Prevalence of HIV is the percentage of people ages 15–49 
who  are  infected  with  HIV.  Low  national  prevalence  rates 
can be misleading, however. They often disguise serious epi-
demics that are initially concentrated in certain localities or 
among speciﬁ c population groups and threaten to spill over 
into  the  wider  population.  In  many  parts  of  the  develop-
ing world, most new infections occur in young adults, with 
young women especially vulnerable. 

Incidence  of  tuberculosis  is  the  number  of  new  and 

relapse tuberculosis cases (all types) per 100,000 people.

Carbon dioxide emissions are those stemming from the 
burning of fossil fuels and the manufacture of cement and 
include  carbon  dioxide  produced  during  consumption  of 
solid, liquid, and gas fuels and gas ﬂ aring divided by midyear 
population  (Carbon  Dioxide  Information  Analysis  Center, 
World Bank).

Access  to  improved  sanitation  facilities  is  the  percent-
age of the population with at least adequate access to excreta 
disposal facilities (private or shared, but not public) that can 
effectively  prevent  human,  animal,  and  insect  contact  with 
excreta. Facilities do not have to include treatment to render 
sewage outﬂ ows innocuous. Improved facilities range from 
simple but protected pit latrines to ﬂ ush toilets with a sewer-
age  connection.  To  be  effective,  facilities  must  be  correctly 
constructed and properly maintained.

408 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

Internet  users  are  people  with  access  to  the  worldwide 

network.

Table 4. Economic activity
Gross  domestic  product  is  gross  value  added,  at  purchas-
ers’  prices,  by  all  resident  producers  in  the  economy  plus 
any taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the value 
of  the  products.  It  is  calculated  without  deduction  for  the 
depreciation of fabricated assets or for the depletion or deg-
radation of natural resources. Value added is the net output 
of  an  industry  after  adding  up  all  outputs  and  subtracting 
intermediate inputs. The industrial origin of value added is 
determined by International Standard Industrial Classiﬁ ca-
tion (ISIC) revision 3. The World Bank conventionally uses 
the U.S. dollar and applies the average ofﬁ cial exchange rate 
reported by the IMF for the year shown. An alternative con-
version factor is applied if the ofﬁ cial exchange rate is judged 
to  diverge  by  an  exceptionally  large  margin  from  the  rate 
effectively applied to transactions in foreign currencies and 
traded products.

Gross domestic product average annual growth rate is 

calculated from constant price GDP data in local currency.

Agricultural  productivity  is  the  ratio  of  agricultural 
value added, measured in 2000 U.S. dollars, to the number of 
workers in agriculture. Agricultural productivity is measured 
by value added per unit of input. Agricultural value added 
includes that from forestry and ﬁ shing. Thus, interpretations 
of land productivity should be made with caution.

Value added is the net output of an industry after add-
ing up all outputs and subtracting intermediate inputs. The 
industrial  origin  of  value  added  is  determined  by  the  ISIC 
revision 3.

Agriculture  value  added  corresponds  to  ISIC  divisions 

1–5 and includes forestry and ﬁ shing.

Industry  value  added  comprises  mining,  manufactur-
ing, construction, electricity, water, and gas (ISIC divisions 
10–45).

Services value added correspond to ISIC divisions 50–99.
Household ﬁ nal consumption expenditure  is  the  mar-
ket value of all goods and services, including durable prod-
ucts (such as cars, washing machines, and home computers), 
purchased  by  households.  It  excludes  purchases  of  dwell-
ings  but  includes  imputed  rent  for  owner-occupied  dwell-
ings. It also includes payments and fees to governments to 
obtain permits and licenses. Here, household consumption 
expenditure  includes  the  expenditures  of  nonproﬁ t  insti-
tutions  serving  households,  even  when  reported  separately 
by the country. In practice, household consumption expen-
diture may include any statistical discrepancy in the use of 
resources relative to the supply of resources.

General  government  ﬁ nal  consumption  expenditure 
includes all government current expenditures for purchases 
of goods and services (including compensation of employ-

ees). It also includes most expenditures on national defense 
and security, but excludes government military expenditures 
that are part of government capital formation.

Gross capital formation consists of outlays on additions 
to  the  ﬁ xed  assets  of  the  economy  plus  net  changes  in  the 
level of inventories and valuables. Fixed assets include land 
improvements  (fences,  ditches,  drains,  and  so  on);  plant, 
machinery, and equipment purchases; and the construction 
of  buildings,  roads,  railways,  and  the  like,  including  com-
mercial  and  industrial  buildings,  ofﬁ ces,  schools,  hospitals, 
and private dwellings. Inventories are stocks of goods held 
by  ﬁ rms  to  meet  temporary  or  unexpected  ﬂ uctuations  in 
production or sales, and “work in progress.” According to the 
1993 System of National Accounts, net acquisitions of valu-
ables are also considered capital formation.

External  balance  of  goods  and  services  is  exports  of 
goods and services less imports of goods and services. Trade 
in  goods  and  services  comprise  all  transactions  between 
residents of a country and the rest of the world involving a 
change in ownership of general merchandise, goods sent for 
processing and repairs, nonmonetary gold, and services.

GDP implicit deﬂ ator reﬂ ects changes in prices for all ﬁ nal 
demand categories, such as government consumption, capital 
formation, and international trade, as well as the main com-
ponent,  private  ﬁ nal  consumption.  It  is  derived  as  the  ratio 
of current to constant price GDP. The GDP deﬂ ator may also 
be calculated explicitly as a Paasche price index in which the 
weights are the current period quantities of output.

National accounts indicators for most developing coun-
tries are collected from national statistical organizations and 
central banks by visiting and resident World Bank missions. 
Data for high-income economies come from the OECD.

Table 5. Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance
Merchandise exports show the free on board (f.o.b.) value 
of  goods  provided  to  the  rest  of  the  world  valued  in  U.S. 
dollars.

Merchandise imports show the c.i.f. value of goods (the 
cost of the goods including insurance and freight) purchased 
from  the  rest  of  the  world  valued  in  U.S.  dollars.  Data  on 
merchandise  trade  come  from  the  World  Trade  Organiza-
tion in its annual report.

Manufactured  exports  comprise  the  commodities  in 
Standard International Trade Classiﬁ cation (SITC) sections 
5  (chemicals),  6  (basic  manufactures),  7  (machinery  and 
transport  equipment),  and  8  (miscellaneous  manufactured 
goods), excluding division 68.

High-technology exports are products with high research 
and  development  intensity.  They  include  high-technology 
products  such  as  aerospace  products,  computers,  pharma-
ceuticals, scientiﬁ c instruments, and electrical machinery.

Current  account  balance  is  the  sum  of  net  exports  of 

goods and services, net income, and net current transfers.

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2012 

409

Foreign direct investment (FDI) is net inﬂ ows of invest-
ment to acquire a lasting management interest (10 percent 
or  more  of  voting  stock)  in  an  enterprise  operating  in  an 
economy  other  than  that  of  the  investor.  It  is  the  sum  of 
equity  capital,  reinvestment  of  earnings,  other  long-term 
capital,  and  short-term  capital,  as  shown  in  the  balance  of 
payments. Net inﬂ ows refer to new investments made dur-
ing the reporting period netted against disinvestments. Data 
on FDI are based on balance of payments data reported by 
the IMF, supplemented by World Bank staff estimates using 
data  reported  by  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade 
and Development and ofﬁ cial national sources.

Net  ofﬁ cial  development  assistance  (ODA)  comprises 
grants and loans, net of repayments, that meet the OECD’s 
Development  Assistance  Committee  (DAC)  deﬁ nition  of 
ODA and that are made to countries and territories on the 
DAC list of aid recipients. DAC has three criteria for ODA: 
it is undertaken by the ofﬁ cial sector; it promotes economic 
development or welfare as a main objective; and it is provided 
on concessional terms, with a grant element of at least 25 per-
cent on loans (calculated at a 10 percent discount rate). 

ODA from the high-income members of the OECD is the 
main source of ofﬁ cial external ﬁ nance for developing coun-
tries, but ODA is also disbursed by some important donor 
countries that are not members of the DAC. 

Total external debt  is  debt  owed  to  nonresidents  credi-
tors and repayable in foreign currencies, goods, or services 
by public and private entities in the country. It is the sum of 
long-term external, short-term debt, and use of IMF credit.

Short-term debt is debt owed to nonresidents having an 
original maturity of one year or less and interest in arrears 
on long-term debt and on the use of IMF credit.

Present value of debt is the sum of short-term external 
debt plus the discounted sum of total debt service payments 
due on public, publicly guaranteed, and private nonguaran-
teed long-term external debt over the life of existing loans. 

Data  on  external  debt  are  mainly  from  reports  to  the 
World  Bank  through  its  Debtor  Reporting  System  from 
member  countries  that  have  received  International  Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development loans or International 
Development Association credits, with additional informa-
tion from the ﬁ les of the World Bank, the IMF, the African 
Development  Bank  and  African  Development  Fund,  the 
Asian  Development  Bank  and  Asian  Development  Fund, 
and the Inter-American Development Bank. Summary tables 
of  the  external  debt  of  developing  countries  are  published 
annually in the World Bank’s Global Development Finance.

Domestic credit provided by banking sector includes all 
credit to various sectors on a gross basis, with the exception 
of credit to the central government, which is net. The banking 
sector  includes  monetary  authorities,  deposit  money  banks, 
and  other  banking  institutions  for  which  data  are  available 
(including institutions that do not accept transferable depos-

its but do incur such liabilities as time and savings deposits). 
Examples  of  other  banking  institutions  include  savings  and 
mortgage loan institutions and building and loan associations. 
Data are from the IMF’s International Finance Statistics.

Net  migration  is  the  net  total  of  migrants  during  the 
period.  It  is  the  total  number  of  immigrants  less  the  total 
number of emigrants, including both citizens and nonciti-
zens. Data are ﬁ ve-year estimates. Data are from the United 
Nations Population Division’s World Population Prospects: 
The 2008 Revision.

Table 6. Key indicators for other economies
See the technical notes for Table 1.

Statistical methods
This  section  describes  the  calculation  of  the  least-squares 
growth rate, the exponential (endpoint) growth rate, and the 
World Bank’s Atlas methodology for calculating the conver-
sion factor used to estimate GNI and GNI per capita in U.S. 
dollars.

Least-squares growth rate
Least-squares growth rates are used wherever there is a suf-
ﬁ ciently long time series to permit a reliable calculation. No 
growth rate is calculated if more than half the observations 
in a period are missing.

The least-squares growth rate, r, is estimated by ﬁ tting a 
linear regression trendline to the logarithmic annual values 
of the variable in the relevant period. The regression equa-
tion takes the form

ln Xt = a + bt,

which is equivalent to the logarithmic transformation of the 
compound growth equation,

Xt = Xo (1 + r)t.

In this equation, X is the variable, t is time, and a = log Xo 
and b = ln (1 + r ) are the parameters to be estimated. If b* 
is the least-squares estimate of b, the average annual growth 
rate, r, is obtained as [exp(b*)–1] and is multiplied by 100 to 
express it as a percentage.

The calculated growth rate is an average rate that is repre-
sentative of the available observations over the entire period. 
It does not necessarily match the actual growth rate between 
any two periods.

Exponential growth rate
The  growth  rate  between  two  points  in  time  for  certain 
demographic  data,  notably  labor  force  and  population,  is 
calculated from the equation

r = ln (pn /p1)/n,

410 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 2

where  pn  and  p1  are  the  last  and  ﬁ rst  observations  in  the 
period, n is the number of years in the period, and ln is the 
natural  logarithm  operator.  This  growth  rate  is  based  on 
a  model  of  continuous,  exponential  growth  between  two 
points in time. It does not take into account the intermediate 
values  of  the  series.  Note  also  that  the  exponential  growth 
rate does not correspond to the annual rate of change mea-
sured at a one year interval, which is given by

country’s GNI. The resulting GNI in U.S. dollars is divided 
by the midyear population to derive GNI per capita.

When ofﬁ cial exchange rates are deemed to be unreliable 
or  unrepresentative  of  the  effective  exchange  rate  during  a 
period, an alternative estimate of the exchange rate is used in 
the Atlas formula.

The  following  formulas  describe  the  calculation  of  the 

Atlas conversion factor for year t:

(pn – pn–1)/pn–1.

World Bank Atlas method
For certain operational purposes, the World Bank uses the 
Atlas conversion factor to calculate GNI and GNI per capita 
in  U.S.  dollars.  The  purpose  of  the Atlas  conversion  factor 
is to reduce the impact of exchange rate ﬂ uctuations in the 
cross-country  comparison  of  national  incomes.  The  Atlas 
conversion factor for any year is the average of a country’s 
exchange rate (or alternative conversion factor) for that year 
and its exchange rates for the two preceding years, adjusted 
for the difference between the rate of inﬂ ation in the country 
and  that  in  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United  States, 
and the Euro Area. A country’s inﬂ ation rate is measured by 
the change in its GDP deﬂ ator.

  The  inﬂ ation  rate  for  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom,  the 
United States, and the euro area, representing international 
inﬂ ation, is measured by the change in the SDR deﬂ ator. (Spe-
cial drawing rights, or SDRs, are the IMF’s unit of account.) 
The SDR deﬂ ator is calculated as a weighted average of these 
countries’ GDP deﬂ ators in SDR terms, the weights being the 
amount of each country’s currency in one SDR unit. Weights 
vary over time because both the composition of the SDR and 
the  relative  exchange  rates  for  each  currency  change.  The 
SDR deﬂ ator is calculated in SDR terms ﬁ rst and then con-
verted to U.S. dollars using the SDR to dollar Atlas conver-
sion factor. The Atlas conversion factor is then applied to a 

=

e

*
t

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

1
3

e

−

2

t

⎛
⎝⎜

p
t
p
t

−

2

/

$

S
p
t
S
$
p
−
2
t

⎞
⎠⎟ +

e

−
1

t

⎛
⎝⎜

p
t
p
t

−
11

/

$

S
p
t
S
$
p
−
t
1

⎞
⎠⎟ +

e

t

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

and the calculation of GNI per capita in U.S. dollars for year t :

Yt

$ = (Yt/Nt)/et*,

where et* is the Atlas conversion factor (national currency to 
the U.S. dollar) for year t, et is the average annual exchange 
rate (national currency to the U.S. dollar) for year t, pt is the 
GDP deﬂ ator for year t, pt S$ is the SDR deﬂ ator in U.S. dollar 
$ is the Atlas GNI per capita in U.S. dollars 
terms for year t, Yt
in year t, Yt is current GNI (local currency) for year t, and Nt 
is the midyear population for year t.

Alternative conversion factors
The World Bank systematically assesses the appropriateness 
of ofﬁ cial exchange rates as conversion factors. An alterna-
tive conversion factor is used when the ofﬁ cial exchange rate 
is judged to diverge by an exceptionally large margin from 
the rate effectively applied to domestic transactions of for-
eign currencies and traded products. This factor applies to 
only a small number of countries, as shown in the primary 
data  documentation  table  in World  Development  Indicators 
2010.  Alternative  conversion  factors  are  used  in  the  Atlas 
methodology and elsewhere in Selected World Development 
Indicators as single-year conversion factors.

Index

Boxes, ﬁ gures, notes, and tables are i by b, f, n, and t following page numbers.

A
Access Bank (Nigeria), 28, 303b
accountability. See transparency and accountability
adolescence and social norms of behavior, 176, 280–83, 281f, 283f, 

316–17

Adolescent Girls Initiative, 33, 34b, 316
afﬁ rmative action

in employment, 29–30, 231, 301
in political representation, 30

Afghanistan

child mortality in, 119
fertility rates in, 130
girls’ education in, 73, 111, 112
maternal mortality in, 15, 78, 106
mortality of girls in early childhood in, 125
political representation, policies to increase women in, 354
women’s empowerment in, 95

Africa. See also speciﬁ c regions and countries

cell phone usage in, 262f
children taken to work by mothers in, 222
educational policies in, 33, 107
employment permission required from husband in, 234
female government ofﬁ cials in, 85
female parliamentarians in, 84, 85
four Africas in terms of women’s health, 135b
land holdings by women in, 225
marriage and divorce laws in, 161
voting rights for women in postcolonial states, 351
water and sanitation in, 126–27, 290

African National Congress (ANC, South Africa), 180
African Union, 57
agency, 5, 55, 150–92, 153f. See also voice

collective agency of women, 6, 48, 151, 152, 176–82. See also 

collective action

corporate power. See corporate boards of directors, women’s 

presence on

divorce rights and, 160–64, 162b
earnings promoting, 153–55, 154f
economic development’s impact on, 150, 152–57, 181
importance of, 95, 151–52, 181
individual agency of women, 6, 48
informal groups and, 181–82
legal pluralism and, 164–65, 165b, 166m, 308–9
legal rights and, 157–65

marriage rights and, 160–64, 162b
persistence of gender inequality, 81–82, 181
policies to improve, 38t, 181, 305–14, 306f, 361t, 367
political representation and, 176–81, 177f. See also political 

representation

social norms and, 150–51, 168–76, 170f, 172b, 174b, 181
widows, 153b

agenda for change. See priorities for moving toward gender 

equality

agricultural extension services, 234
agricultural productivity, gender differences in, 4, 18, 20f, 201–4, 

202t, 207–8, 208f

access to credit, inputs, and equipment, 227–28f, 227–29
crop changes due to globalization, 258
information problems and, 302
ownership and operation of land, 28, 224–26, 226f

alcoholism, 86, 134
American United Global, 350
Angola

child mortality in, 119
maternal mortality in, 106

antiretroviral therapy (ART), 132
Apparel Association Forum (Sri Lanka), 344
apparel industry. See textile and apparel sector
Arafa Holding (textile and apparel ﬁ rm), 343
Argentina

child-care policies in, 26, 316
economic shock’s effect on education in, 87
inheritance laws in, 310
labor market transitions for women in, 220
labor participation of women in, 28–29, 66
part-time contracts in formal sector in, 30
political representation, policies to increase women in, 84, 354
wage subsidy vouchers in, 300
women’s movements in, 334b

Asia. See also speciﬁ c regions and countries

educational segregation by specialty in, 88
female mortality and missing women in, 14
female parliamentarians in, 84, 85
labor participation of women in, 65
lack of voice and control over resources in, 82
maternal mortality decline in, 63

Asia Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation, Framework for the 

Integration of Women, 350

411

412 

I N D E X

aspirations

of adolescents, 317
of parents for their children, 21, 116

BPO (business process outsourcing), 110
brain vs. brawn requirements in jobs, 61, 116, 259–61, 259b, 

260–61f

attitude changes and progress in gender equality, 21, 68f, 69, 204, 

Brazil

339b, 352b. See also social norms

B
Bahrain

corporate boards of directors, female representation on, 204b
nationality laws in, 347–48

Banco Sol (Bolivia), 28, 302
Bangladesh

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176
agency’s effects in, 6
electriﬁ cation in, 27, 299
excess female mortality, reduction of, 24
family-run businesses in, 222
female-owned vs. male-owned businesses in, 16–17, 201
girls’ education in, 74
male control of women’s work and money in, 338
maternal mortality in, 78, 294
men’s education about contraception in, 314
microcredit in, 28
preventive health services for girls in, 125
progress in gender equality in, 12, 59–60
property rights in, 353
social norms and employment in, 268
transport to markets, improvements in, 223, 300
wage gap in, 259
women worker associations in, 333

Bank Rakyat Indonesia, 28, 302
banks, 27, 28, 344. See also credit and ﬁ nance
Belcorp (cosmetics company), 238b
Belém do Pará Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, 

Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women 
(OAS), 57

Benin

girls’ education in, 74, 107
land holdings by women in, 225

Better Factories Cambodia, 344
Bhutan

electriﬁ cation in, 299
inheritance laws in, 159–60
women’s empowerment in, 95

Bidam Di Desa (Indonesian village midwife) program, 293
Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, 58
Bolivia

cell phone usage in, 262
credit, women’s access to, 28
home-based businesses of women in, 207
inheritance laws in, 310
labor participation of women in, 66
marriage, age of, 183n72
water supply in, 292

Botswana

ART coverage rates in, 132
child-care options limited in, 222
constitution prohibiting sex discrimination in, 347
inheritance laws in, 310

brain vs. brawn requirements in, 260–61, 261f
child-care policies in, 26, 297
child custody laws in, 164
child labor in, 111
control of resources beneﬁ ting children in, 151
domestic violence in, 20, 171
domestic workers in, 337b
employment patterns in terms of economic development in, 

212, 213f

girls’ education in, 74
health expenditures for women in, 64
height differences between men and women in, 63
inheritance laws in, 160
labor market transitions for women in, 220
men’s view of women’s rights in, 338
police force, women on, 168, 313
political representation, policies to increase women in, 181, 354
positive effect of women with own income in, 5
property ownership by women in, 18, 82
racial divide among women in, 336
social norms, change in, 175, 268

Burkina Faso

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176
child mortality in, 119
domestic violence in, 170
fertility decisions in, 157
girls’ education in, 112–13
land holdings by women in, 225, 237
resource allocation within household in, 230

Burundi

child mortality in, 119
mortality rates in, 119
peace and postconﬂ ict reconstruction in, 308b

business process outsourcing (BPO), 110
C
Cambodia

access to education in, 112
domestic violence in, 21
educational segregation by specialty in, 88
garment sector in, 344
household care and housework performed by women in, 

217

infrastructure improvements in, 24
inheritance laws in, 317
Law on Prevention of Domestic Violence and Protection of 

Victims of 2005, 335–36

maternal mortality in, 78, 293–94
trade liberalization in, 267, 267b
water and sanitation in, 291b, 292, 293

Cambodia Committee of Women, 336
Cameroon

land ownership in, 230
mortality rates in, 119
telecenters in, 263

 

Canada

domestic violence in, 311
unions, women-only committees in, 180

career mentoring, 331
cash transfer programs. See conditional cash transfers
caste, political roles and, 335b
CEDAW. See Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 

Discrimination against Women
cell phones, 255, 256f, 261–62, 262f, 264b
Central African Republic
adult mortality in, 119
child mortality in, 119
girls’ education in, 73
Central and West Africa

entrepreneur networks in, 233
girls’ education in, 112
HIV/AIDS in, 131
mortality rates in, 118, 135–36b
water and sanitation in, 126

Chad

child mortality in, 119
fertility rates in, 130
girls’ education in, 73, 107
maternal mortality in, 15, 78, 129

Index 

413

civil society groups, 332
clean water. See water and sanitation
climate change, 86b
collective action, 6, 30–31, 151, 152, 176–82, 330, 333–39
Colombia

child-care policies in, 26, 297
conditional cash transfers for school enrollment in, 316
constitutional guarantees of women’s rights in, 36, 350
domestic violence correlated with women’s property ownership 

and earnings in, 154

household decision making in, 21
inheritance laws in, 317
labor participation of women in, 28–29, 66
land titling program in, 230
marriage, age of, 183n72
political representation, policies to increase women in, 307, 354
progress in gender equality in, 12, 60
vocational training in, 33, 315

Commentaries on the Laws of England (Blackstone), 58
community of property regime, 161, 162b
conditional cash transfers

childbirth and maternal mortality and, 26, 294
education and, 10, 33, 34, 113, 295, 314–16
household bargaining power and, 320

change in one domain spurring change in other domains, 11–12, 

conﬂ ict

56, 66–69

childbirth, risk of dying in. See maternal mortality
child care

access to, 26, 38t, 222, 297–98, 316, 348, 361t
women performing in home. See household care and 

housework

child custody laws, 162, 164
child labor and school enrollment, 111
Chile

child-care policies in, 297
divorce law in, 330, 352
domestic violence in, 171
female government ofﬁ cials in, 85
labor participation of women in, 79
lack of voice and control over resources in, 309
men’s view of women’s rights in, 338
political representation, policies to increase women in, 181
state action in, 347b
water supply in, 292

China

economic growth enabling girls’ education in, 76
ethnic minorities and education in, 75
foot binding, end to practice of, 352b
Marriage Law of 1950, 254
“marriage squeeze” in, due to preference for males, 106
missing girls at birth, 15, 23, 77, 77t, 78, 105, 120–25, 122f

reduction of excess female mortality, 24
mortality of girls in early childhood in, 125
positive effect of women with own income in, 5
social norms, change in, 175
wages in export-oriented trade in, 258

citizenship. See nationality and citizenship laws
civil conﬂ ict. See conﬂ ict
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (U.S.), 58

effect on women’s lives in Africa, 135b
“missing” men and, 79
“missing” women in civil conﬂ ict, 16
mortality rates and, 118, 133
peace and postconﬂ ict reconstruction processes, women’s voice 

in, 308b

Congo, Democratic Republic of

child mortality in, 119
girls’ education in, 74
judicial proceedings in, 168
lack of voice and control over resources in, 82
widows’ beneﬁ ts in, 319

context-speciﬁ c solutions, 38, 362
contraception. See fertility rates
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 

against Women (CEDAW), 3, 36, 57, 159, 266, 266f, 
349, 350

corporate boards of directors, women’s presence on, 178, 204b, 

307–8, 322n76, 343, 354

corporate image and bottom line, impact of gender equality on, 

36, 344–45

corporate misbehavior, 345
corporate social responsibility, 36, 331
corruption, 6
Costa Rica

child custody laws in, 164
political representation, policies to increase women in, 354

Côte d’Ivoire

control of resources beneﬁ ting children in, 151
drought’s effect on school enrollment in, 111
economic shock’s effect on education in, 86–87
height differences between men and women in, 63
wage gaps in, 80

Council for Equality between Men and Women (Finland), 347b

414 

I N D E X

courts. See laws
credit and ﬁ nance

access to, gender differences in, 28, 155, 224–29, 227f, 239
credit bureaus and lack of information about women, 318
ﬁ nancial services to women, 344
innovative approaches to expand access to, 303b
mobile and ICT technology for access to, 264b

Croatia

domestic violence in, 171
educational segregation by specialty in, 88
men’s view of women’s rights in, 338

cultural beliefs. See social norms

D
day-care for children. See child care
Decade of Women, 334b
decision making, xx, 20–21, 30–31, 150, 343. See also household 

decision making; voice

Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, 58
Declaration on Gender and Development (Southern African 

Development Community), 349

Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, 336
De la Cruz, Sor Juana Inés, 339b
delivery of public services. See infrastructure
Dell computer company, 345
Deloitte & Touche, 342
Democratic Republic of Congo. See Congo, Democratic 

Republic of

Demographic and Health Surveys, 82, 83, 108
developed countries

domestic violence in, 164
globalization and, 259b
inheritance laws in, 159, 160f
Internet access in, 263f
labor participation of women in, 199–200b
maternal mortality in, 129
mortality rates in, 118, 130f
part-time work by women in, 220, 223
political ofﬁ ce, participation of women in, 85
wage gaps in, 205
women’s rights in, 57–59

development community’s role, xxiii, 37–38, 361
Development Finance Company of Uganda (DFCU), 28, 303b
dissolution of marriage. See divorce rights
diversity leading to better decision making, 343
divorce rights

agency and, 159, 160–64, 162b, 310
discriminatory laws, overturned, 348b
legalization of, 330, 352
property laws and, 28, 162b, 310

domestic violence

correlation with women’s property ownership and earnings, 88, 

154, 311

cultural resistance to laws against, 335–36
failure to seek help for, 167–68, 168f, 170, 171f
freedom from, 150
future effect on children from homes with, 5, 21, 151–52, 152f
lack of agency and, 20

laws covering, 164, 167, 311
patterns of, 3, 83–84, 84f
perception that wife-beating is justiﬁ able, 83, 83f, 170
policies to reduce, 31–32, 38t, 311–12, 361t, 367–68
social norms and, 21, 167, 168f, 170, 311
women’s movement seeking laws against, 335

domestic workers, 235, 337b
Dominican Republic

girls’ education in, 74
health expenditures for women in, 64
incentives for school enrollment in, 33, 315
women’s empowerment in, 95
youth job training program in, 33, 317

Dowry Prohibition Act of 1986 (India), 335

E
earnings. See labor and earnings
East Africa and HIV/AIDS, 131
East Asia

domestic violence in, 164
labor participation of women in, 199–200b

economic development

agency improved by, 150, 152–57, 181
globalization’s effect on. See globalization
improvements in economic opportunities, 4b, 26–30, 87, 258b
policies to improve economic opportunities, 296–305, 296f, 

316, 365–66

relationship with gender equality, xxi, 3–5, 47, 49b, 100–101
relationship with labor participation, 200b, 212, 214f, 258b
reversals in access to economic opportunities, 87
“sticky” domains, 87–88. See also “sticky” domains

economic opportunities. See economic development; labor and 

earnings

Ecuador

ﬂ ower industry in, 269
microcredit in, 35, 318

education, 106–17, 141. See also girls’ education; tertiary education

choice of ﬁ elds of study, 88, 104, 115–16, 115t
compared to health and gender parity, 116–17
compulsory education laws, 62, 158
disadvantage due to factors other than gender, 108–9, 108f
economic shock’s effect on, 86–87
enrollments, gender parity in, xx, 9, 10f, 107–9, 107f, 109f
free primary education, 62, 110, 110f
gender differences based on income levels, 13, 14f
gender differences translating into gender differences in 

employment and earnings, 67, 106, 115, 200b, 203, 216b

household constraints on enrollment, 111
intergenerational reproduction of inequalities, policies to avoid, 

314–17

investment in, 105–6
literacy promotion via ICTs, 264b
men’s underachievement in, 76
policies to reduce gaps in, xxii, 23, 38t, 141, 289–96, 290f, 

314–16, 361t

poor learning, 107, 113–15
proximity to school and increased enrollment, 110–11, 112
second-chance opportunities, 315

 

Index 

415

severely disadvantaged populations, 26, 112–13, 294–96, 362–63
social norms relaxed by, 169, 169f

Egypt

cell phone usage in, 262
contraceptive education and use in, 314
Gender Equity Model Egypt (GEME), 343
health expenditures for women in, 64
public sector employment in, 232, 232b
wage gap in, 206

electriﬁ cation services, 27, 155, 223, 299, 319
El Salvador, trade liberalization in, 267, 267b
employment. See labor and earnings
empowerment, 88, 94–97, 94f. See also voice
endowments. See education; health; land headings
England. See United Kingdom
The Englishwoman’s Review, on voting rights in Finland (1906), 

351
entrepreneurs

credit, access to, 18, 226, 302
deﬁ ned, 39n35, 240n4
family-run businesses, 222
female-owned vs. male-owned businesses, 16–17, 201, 203–4, 

207

formal vs. informal, 208f
marketing assistance programs for, 27
networks. See women’s networks, creation of

Equatorial Guinea

child mortality in, 119
maternal mortality in, 78

Eritrea

girls’ education in, 73
male mortality rates in, 119b, 133, 133f
missing men due to conﬂ ict in, 79

Ethiopia

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176
domestic violence in, 20, 83, 84, 170
economic shock’s effect on education in, 86
family law reform in, 31
family-run businesses in, 222
female-owned vs. male-owned businesses in, 16–17, 201
girls’ education in, 12
lack of voice and control over resources in, 309
land ownership in, 28, 31, 229, 312
men’s education about contraception in, 314
parental aspirations for their children in, 21
parental bias toward boys in, 116
water and sanitation in, 290
work restrictions on women’s ability to work outside home, 164

ethnic minorities

education and, 13, 75, 112
representation in government of, 335b

Europe

aging of workforce in, 238
domestic violence in, 164
excess female mortality in, 105
family-friendly jobs in, 342
feminism in, 334b
globalization and, 259b

labor participation of women in, 65, 199–200b
land pricing and gender discrimination in, 229
maternal mortality in, 16
mortality in early childhood in, 125
part-time work by women in, 220
pensions in, 156f
political representation, women in, 85, 177, 181
popular culture and changing social attitudes in, 339b
telework in, 263
wage gap in, 206

external shocks, reversals of gender gains due to, 73, 85–87, 296b

F
Fairchild Aircraft, 340
family formation. See household care and housework; household 

decision making; household income; marriage

family planning services. See fertility rates
family-run businesses, 222
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization), 5, 225
Federation of Swiss Women against Women’s Right to Vote, 336b
Female Future (gender equality initiative), 343
female genital cutting, end to practice of, 352b
feminism, 334b
fertility rates

adolescents’ reproductive decisions, 316–17
increasing women’s control over decisions, 32, 124, 156–57, 

171, 313–14

patterns of, 8, 9f, 11, 63, 64f, 74–75, 76f, 130
social norms and, 157, 158f
state urging increased birth rates, 348

Fiji, laws for women’s rights in, 349b
ﬁ nance, access to. See credit and ﬁ nance
ﬁ nancial support. See conditional cash transfers; investment
FINCA (Peru), 28, 302
Finland

educational segregation by specialty in, 88
female government ofﬁ cials in, 85
female parliamentarians in, 84
state action in, 347b
voting rights in, 351

ﬂ exible working arrangements, 222–24
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), 5, 225
foot binding, end to practice of, 352b
foreign direct investment (FDI), 255
formal institutions, xxi, 221–24, 229–30. See also laws

agency and voice and, 157–68
deﬁ ned, 8b
inertia of, 22
judicial application of law. See laws
policies for inclusion, 302–5, 345–48, 345f
public sector employment, 231, 232, 232b, 301
relationship with gender equality, 100, 101f, 302, 330–31, 331f

labor participation and, 200b

transnational efforts, 349–50

former Soviet states

inheritance laws in, 159
marriage and divorce laws in, 161
political representation, women in, 177

416 

I N D E X

former Soviet states (continued)

setbacks for women’s rights in, 348–49
women’s movements in, 182

Foundation of Occupational Development (Indian NGO), 27, 300
framework

application of, 101–2
explanation of, 7, 23, 99–100

France

girls’ education in, 76
heterogeneity of women in, 336
political representation, increase of women in, 85, 180
time use patterns for women in, 220f
women’s movements in, 182

French Revolution, 57–58

G
The Gambia, girls’ education in, 74
gender-based violence, 338–39. See also domestic violence
gender equality

business case for, 238b
deﬁ ned, 4b
economics and, 3–5, 49b. See also economic development

as focus of Report, 6–8, 48–49

future generations and, 5. See also intergenerational gender 

inequality

globalization and, 254–78. See also globalization
importance of, 2–6, 46–48
individual and collective agency of women, effects of, 6, 48. 

See also agency

priorities for moving toward, 22–23, 36–37, 38t. See also 

priorities for moving toward gender equality

progress in, 8–13, 56–71. See also progress in gender equality

Gender Equity in Education Act of 1994 (U.S.), 340
Gender Equity Model Egypt (GEME), 343
gender inequality. See persistence of gender inequality
“gender machineries,” 332, 346, 347b
gender-smart policies, 33–35, 317–20
Georgia, evolving gender roles in, 332b
Germany

brain vs. brawn requirements in jobs in, 260
parental leave in, 299, 354
women’s rights in, 58

Ghana

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176
agricultural extension services in, 234
agricultural productivity, access to inputs for, 237
health expenditures for women in, 64
household decision making, women’s voice in, 5
inheritance laws in, 310
labor market transitions for women in, 220
property ownership by women in, 18, 82, 230
time use patterns for women in, 220f
water supply in, 292

girls’ education

economic growth as result of, 62
enrollment rates, xx, 9, 10f, 12–13, 13f, 73f, 107–8, 107f, 109f
persistent inequality in, xxi, 13f, 73f, 111–12
policies to reduce gaps in, xxii, 86–87. See also education

positive effect on future generation, 5
poverty as factor, 74–75f
progress in, 8–9, 10f, 60–62, 63f
returns to, 109–10
reversals of gender gains in, 86–87

Global Banking Alliance for Women, 344
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, 233
globalization, xxi, 22, 254–78

adaptation, 264–67
agenda for gender equality, 36–38, 38t, 271–72, 360–71
collective action and, 330, 333–39
developed countries and, 259b
old problems, emerging risks, 7b, 269–71
peer pressure and international carrots and sticks, 22, 265–67
policy implications, 271–72
positive effect on gender equality, 102
productivity advantage from gender equality and, 5
recent trends and facts, 57–59, 255, 255f
rising costs of gender discrimination, 264–65
social norms and, 267–68, 271
trade openness and ICTs, 255–64
government. See formal institutions
Grameen Bank (Bangladesh), 28, 302
Grand Challenge for Development, 293
guardianship laws, 164
Guatemala

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176
agricultural businesses, access to inputs and equipment in, 227
child-care options limited in, 222
credit, access to, 226
ethnic minorities and education in, 75
export processing zones in, 269
illiteracy rate of indigenous women in, 13, 75
peace and postconﬂ ict reconstruction in, 308b

Guinea-Bissau

child mortality in, 119
maternal mortality in, 15

H
Haiti, domestic violence in, 21
HarrassMap (Egyptian NGO), 340
HDI (Human Development Index), 95
health, 117–38, 141. See also mortality rates of girls and women

compared to education and gender parity, 116–17
discrimination against girls in, 125
education programs, 33
fertility and. See fertility rates
intergenerational effects of improvements in, 5
lack of progress, effect for women on future generation, 88
maternal mortality. See maternal mortality
mortality rates. See mortality rates
policies to reduce gaps in, 23–26, 86–87, 141, 289–96, 290f, 

314–16

preventive health services, 64–65, 65f, 125, 126–27f
progress in gender equality, 62–65, 64–65f
reversals of gender gains in, 86–87
stunted, wasted, or underweight children, 63

heterogeneity of women, 336

 

Index 

417

higher education. See tertiary education
Hindustan Unilever, 238b
hiring discrimination, 205b
HIV/AIDS, 16, 38t, 78, 105, 117, 118, 128, 131–32, 132f, 135b, 

361t, 365

Hogares Comunitarios (Colombian child-care program), 297
home-based businesses, 207, 263
Honduras

contraceptive education and use in, 314
Internet usage in, 261
maternal mortality in, 294
wage gap in, 259

household care and housework

intrahousehold allocations and, 219, 230
nontraditional industries and aid of another female in 

household to cover, 269

persistence of gender inequality, 17, 19f, 26–27, 80–81, 81f, 217, 

219–21, 219f, 239

policies to address gender gap in, 319

household decision making

bargaining capacity and, 99, 318
capacity for change in, 101
female-headed vs. male-headed households, 225, 225b, 226–27f
impact of family decisions, 7, 151
persistence of gender inequality, 20–21, 82–83
policies to improve women’s voice in, xxii–xxiii, 5, 31–32, 

159–60, 309–10, 320. See also voice

scope of, 99–100
household income

agency improved by higher income, 152–53, 169
education differences based on income levels, 13, 14f, 111
housework time of women, decline as income increases, 218
social norms disapproving of higher income of women, 171

How Schools Shortchange Girls (American Association of 

University Women), 340

human capital endowments. See education; health
Human Development Index (HDI), 95
human rights conferences, 350f. See also United Nations
Hurricane Mitch (1998), 86b
hygiene. See water and sanitation

I
Iceland

female parliamentarians in, 84
Internet usage in, 261

ICTs. See information and communication technologies
IFC’s Women in Business programs, 302, 303b
ILO. See International Labour Organization
income shocks, 296b
India

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176, 317
agency’s effects in, 6, 184n99
agricultural extension services in, 234
brain vs. brawn requirements in, 260–61, 261f
business process outsourcing (BPO) in, 110
call centers in, 258
caste, ethnic, and religious politics and gender in, 335b
cell phone usage in, 262, 300

child-care policies in, 27, 298
domestic violence in, 32, 88, 171, 313, 335

correlated with women’s property ownership and earnings 

in, 154, 311

fertility rate decline in, 8, 63
girls’ enrollment rates, 12–13
height differences between men and women in, 63
household decision making, lack of women’s voice in, 20
Internet usage in, 300
Janani Suraksha Yojana program, 294, 321n15
“marriage squeeze” in, due to preference for males, 106
maternal mortality in, 15, 25, 78, 129, 293, 294
missing girls at birth, 15, 23, 77–79, 77t, 78, 105, 120–25, 122f

reversal of excess female mortality, 24

mortality of girls in early childhood in, 125
mortality rates in, 118
outsourcing in, 109–10
parental aspirations for their children in, 21
parental bias toward boys in, 116
police force, women on, 167
political representation, policies to increase women in, 6, 30, 

152, 307

positive effect of women with own income in, 5
preventive health services for girls in, 125
property ownership by women

effect on voice of women, 21, 88
inheritance laws, 27, 159, 317

Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act of 2005, 335
sexual harassment laws in, 348
telework in, 264
women’s networks, creation of, 30
women worker associations in, 35, 333
work restrictions on women’s ability to work outside home, 164

Indian Ocean Tsunami (2004), 85, 86b
individual agency of women, 6, 48
Indonesia

agricultural businesses, access to inputs and equipment in, 227
domestic violence in, 32
export-oriented factories in, 271
family-run businesses in, 222
female-owned vs. male-owned businesses in, 16–17, 201
girls’ education in, 86
maternal mortality in, 78, 293
trade liberalization in, 267b
water and sanitation in, 24, 293

infectious diseases, 125, 127, 136, 138
informal institutions, xxi, 230, 297–300

as agents of change, 95, 332–40
deﬁ ned, 8b
inertia of, 22
property distribution and, 230
relationship with gender equality, 100, 101f, 330–31, 331f

labor participation and, 200b
lifting constraints on women’s time, 297–99

information, power of, 37, 231–33, 339–40
information and communication technologies (ICTs)

access to services via, 264b
improvements, effect of, 27, 182

418 

I N D E X

information and communication technologies (ICTs) (continued)

labor issues, 300–302
positive effects of, 22, 254, 261–64, 264b
skills needed for, 270
telecenters, 262–63

information asymmetries and problems, 100, 102n2, 231, 300–302
infrastructure. See also electriﬁ cation services; water and 

sanitation

ﬁ nancial support for, 36–38, 360
improvements in, 27, 155–57
women’s agency and, 155

educational segregation by specialty in, 88
Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1985, 58
male as breadwinner, cultural norm of, 183n78

Joint Monitoring Programme of United Nation’s Children’s Fund 

and World Health Organization, 290

Jordan

corporate boards of directors, female representation on, 204b
female employment in, 29b, 301b
political representation, increase of women in, 307
wage gaps in, 80
wage subsidies and skills training programs in, 300

inheritance systems, 27–28, 159–60, 160f, 163b, 229, 230, 310, 317, 

Jordan New Opportunities for Women (Jordan NOW) program, 

319, 353

innovation and learning, policies to foster, 37, 38t, 361, 361t, 370
Institute for Women (Spain), 347b
Inter-American Commission of Women, 349
intergenerational gender inequality, xx, 21, 47–48

agency’s power to counter, 151
impact of changing, 68–69
inequality trap, 6
lack of progress in one domain affecting progress in other 

domains, 87–88

policies to avoid reproduction of, xxiii, 32–33, 38t, 314–17, 

361t, 368–69

International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Women in Business 

programs, 302, 303b

International Labour Organization (ILO), 264, 266, 267
International Men and Gender Equality Survey, 183n79
Internet access, 255, 256f, 261, 270

in developed vs. developing countries, 263f
public awareness about gender inequality and, 268

investment

in education and health, 104–6
for infrastructure delivery, 36–38, 360. See also infrastructure
women’s rights beneﬁ ted by, 12, 68

Investment Climate Surveys, 233
Iran

fertility rate decline in, 8, 64f
progress in gender equality in, 60

Iraq

constitution and rights of women in, 335b
ethnic and religious groups, representation in government of, 

335b

household care and housework performed by women in, 217
male mortality rates in, 119b

Ireland, legalization of divorce in, 352
Islamic law. See religious groups
Israel, child-care policies in, 298

J
Jamaica

data entry jobs in, 258
educational underachievement of boys in, 112, 113
male mortality rates in, 119b

Janani Suraksha Yojana program (India), 294, 321n15
Japan

corporate boards of directors, female representation on, 204b
domestic violence in, 84

29b, 30

Jovenes in Accion program (Colombia), 316
justice, access to. See laws

K
Kenya

ART coverage rates in, 132
banking programs in, 27
cell phone usage in, 262
child-care policies in, 298
constitutional reforms in, 31
credit and ﬁ nance, access to, 229
divorce laws in, 310
export trades in, 270
free primary education in, 110
land titling system in, 165
legal pluralism in, 165b
nondiscrimination exemption in, 309
nontraditional exports in, 269
property ownership by women in, 18, 82
vocational training in, 33, 316
water and sanitation in, 138
widows facing inequalities in, 161

Korea, Republic of

corporate boards of directors, female representation on, 204b
Family Law changes in, 351
male-female sex ratios in, 24, 79, 351
manufacturing sector in, 256
wage gap in, 259

Kormojibi Nari (Bangladesh), 333
Kuwait, age of marriage in, 183n72

L
labor and earnings, 198–253
afﬁ rmative action, 29–30
agency promoted by earnings opportunities of women, 153–55, 

154f

brain vs. brawn requirements in jobs, 61, 116, 259–61, 259b, 

260–61f

business-friendly environment for women customers, 36, 

343–44

career interruptions for raising children, 203, 220
change spurring change in other domains, 11–12, 67
child care access allowing women to work. See child care
child labor and school enrollment, 111
economic cost of gender inequality and, 4–5, 212f, 264–65

 

Index 

419

educational gender differences translating into gender 

differences in employment and earnings, 67, 106, 115, 
200b, 203, 216b

employment segregation by gender, 3, 16–18f, 16–20, 198, 

206–24, 217f, 239, 270–71

breaking out of productivity trap, 236–38
deﬁ ned, 206b
education trajectories shaping, 216b
feedback loops and mutually reinforcing constraints for, 

236, 237f

job assignments and promotions, 235
land and credit, access to and use of, 224–26
sector differences, 79–80, 80f, 88, 198, 209m, 266f
service sector, 214–15
time use, 26–27, 215–24, 218b, 221b, 297–99

ﬁ nancial crisis, effect on women workers, 87
ﬂ exible working arrangements, 222–24
good jobs vs. bad jobs, 210, 211b
hiring discrimination, 18–19, 205b
informal sector, women’s participation in, 79f, 87, 220
information problems, 300–301
labor laws, 30, 234–36, 303–4
labor movements not advancing women’s equality, 177
lack of information on women’s performance, effect of, 231
male as breadwinner, cultural norm of, 171, 183n78, 194–96, 

195–96f

occupational tasks and skill requirements, 259b
participation of women, xx–xxi, 9–10, 12f, 65–66, 66f, 199–

201b, 340–45, 341f

policies to promote gender equality, xxii, 28–30, 34b, 239, 342b
productivity and earnings differences, xx, 5, 198, 201–10, 202f, 

202t, 207–8f

globalized trade and, 258–59

progress in closing employment gap, 199–201b, 203, 238b
restrictions on women’s ability to work outside home, 164
returns to human capital, 203
skills training and wage subsidies, 28–29, 29b, 300–302
social norms for working women, 169, 224
telework, spread of, 263–64, 265f, 342
trade liberalization’s effect, 256–59, 265
working conditions and globalization, 267, 267b

land distribution programs, 28, 229–30
land ownership by women, 18, 27–28, 31, 82, 154, 155f, 226f, 

229–30, 239, 345, 346b

lack of progress, effect for women on future generation, 88
land titling system, 165
productivity and, 225

land pricing and gender discrimination, 229
Latin America. See also speciﬁ c countries

child-care policies in, 26
domestic violence in, 164
educational policies in, 33, 111, 315
electriﬁ cation costs in, 319
female government ofﬁ cials in, 85
inheritance laws in, 159
labor participation of women in, 65, 66, 79, 199–200b
land ownership by women in, 154, 155f, 225
land redistribution programs in, 229

male mortality in, 120
manufacturing jobs in, 258
marriage and divorce laws in, 161
peace and postconﬂ ict reconstruction in, 308b
political ofﬁ ce, participation of women in, 85
violent crime and male mortality rates in, 133–34
women’s movements in, 182
women’s rights laws in, 57

Latvia

unemployment, gender differences in, 87
wage gaps in, 80

laws

agency constraints on women from, 22, 157, 181
correcting discriminatory laws, 165, 302–4, 319, 351
customary laws in Sub-Saharan Africa, 83, 165b, 166m, 309, 310
against domestic violence, 164, 167, 311
formally granting women’s rights, 347–49, 349b
judicial system, access to, 31, 38t, 166–68, 312–13, 319, 347–48, 

361t, 367

labor laws, 30, 234–36, 303–4
legal pluralism, 164–65, 165b, 308–9, 348
sex selection techniques and, 23–24
tax laws discriminating against women, 35, 319

leasing as alternative to land ownership, 303b
Lesotho

free primary education in, 110
mortality rates in, 119

Liberia

child mortality in, 119
domestic violence in, 313
male mortality rates in, 119b
maternal mortality in, 15, 129
skills training for girls in, 34b

life expectancy, xx, 8, 62, 64f, 67, 86

M
Madagascar, incentives for school enrollment in, 33, 315
“Magna Carta of Women” (Philippines), 331
Mahila Samakhya (India), 333
mainstreaming, as priority, 38, 362
Malawi

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176
agricultural productivity, access to inputs for, 237
ART coverage rates in, 132
conditional cash transfers for school enrollment in, 315–16
domestic violence in, 170
farmers’ clubs in, 230
free primary education in, 110
household decision making, lack of women’s voice in, 20
incentives for school enrollment in, 33
inheritance laws in, 310
lack of voice and control over resources in, 82
mortality rates in, 119
social norms restricting women’s mobility in, 169

Malaysia

call centers in, 258
domestic violence crisis centers in, 32, 312
maternal mortality, reduction in, 25, 25b, 293, 294, 295b

420 

I N D E X

Malaysia (continued)

rural-urban linkages in, 269
telework in, 264

Maldives

contraceptive education and use in, 314
female mortality rates in, 119b

Mali

child mortality in, 119
domestic violence in, 170
girls’ education in, 12, 73
marriage law in, 339
maternal mortality in, 15

manufacturing sector, 256, 257f
Maputo Protocol (African Union), 57
markets, xxi, 221–24, 229

access to, 299–300
aggregate market and institutional failures, 230–36, 239
deﬁ ned, 8b
evolution of, 99
improving workings of, 300–302
inclusive markets, 340–42
relationship with gender equality, 100, 101f

labor participation and, 200b

role in advancing gender equality, 330–31, 331f

marriage

age of, 154f, 169–70, 170f, 183n72
arranged marriages, end of tradition of, 354
compulsory education laws, effect on age of marriage, 158–59
“good wife” and “good husband,” 172b
property laws and, 28, 58, 83, 162b, 229–30, 309, 337
registration, 309–10
religious groups’ view of, controlling state view, 339
time use after. See household care and housework
women’s agency and marriage rights, 160–64, 169–70, 170f

Married Women’s Property Act of 1882 (England), 58
masculinity, 134, 170–71, 172b, 173b, 339
maternal mortality, 39n60

decline in, 63, 128–31, 129f
differentiated from excess female mortality at other ages, 128
persistence of high rates in developing countries, 15, 78, 78f, 

106, 137

policies to address, 25, 25f, 38t, 138, 293–94, 295b, 361t, 364–65

maternity leave. See parental leave policies
Matrimonial Causes Act of 1857 (England), 58
McKinsey and Company, 342b
media, power of, 270, 339–40
men

domestic violence against, 84
education about contraception, 314
educational underachievement of, 76, 112
labor participation, choice of, 79
missing men due to conﬂ icts, 79
mortality rates of, 86, 119b, 132–34, 133f
part-time work by, 224
as political leaders, belief of superiority to female politicians, 

84–85, 85f

Men’s Resource Center (Rwanda), 35–36
Mexico

agency’s effects in, 6
brain vs. brawn requirements in, 260–61, 261f
child-care options limited in, 222
conditional cash transfers in, 34
domestic violence in, 21
home-based businesses of women in, 207
inheritance laws in, 230
labor market transitions for women in, 220, 222f
male mortality rates in, 133f
married women’s time use, 222f
men’s view of women’s rights, 338
political representation, increase of women in, 30, 307
property ownership by women

inheritance laws, 27

sexual harassment complaint against U.S. employers in, 350
time use patterns for women in, 220f
violent crime and male mortality rates in, 133
vocational training in, 300, 315
wage gap in, 258–59

microcredit schemes, 28, 35, 226, 232, 302, 318
Middle East and North Africa. See also speciﬁ c countries

corporate boards of directors, female representation on, 204b
domestic violence in, 31, 164
girls’ education in, 61
labor participation of women in, 65, 199–200b
lack of voice and control over resources in, 309
maternal mortality decline in, 63
political representation, women in, 177
social norms affecting women’s behavior in, 169

migration and social norms, 176
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 3, 4b, 57, 58b, 293, 350
missing girls at birth. See mortality rates of girls and women
Mobile Creches (Indian NGO), 27, 298
mobility and social norms, 168–70
Morocco

domestic violence in, 170
educational segregation by specialty in, 88
fertility rate decline in, 63
girls’ education in, 8, 10, 61
Internet sales in, 263
laws for women’s rights in, 31, 309, 349
political representation, increase of women in, 30, 307
sexual harassment in, 169
tax laws discriminating against women in, 35, 319
wage gap in, 259
water supply in, 299
widows facing inequalities in, 161

mortality rates

adult men, 86, 119b, 120, 132–34, 133f
adult mortality, 117–19, 119b, 119f
educational attainment linked to decreased infant mortality, 

106

HIV/AIDS as factor. See HIV/AIDS
rich vs. poor countries, 118

role in movement toward gender equality, 36, 336–38, 338f

mortality rates of girls and women. See also maternal mortality

MenEngage Alliance, 337

in low-income countries, 117–20

 

Index 

421

missing women and excess female deaths, xxi, 3, 14–16, 15f, 

77–79, 77t, 104–5, 120–21, 121f

in adulthood, 128–32, 131f
computing, 139–40f, 139–41
in early childhood, 24, 125–28, 126f, 128f
in four Africas, 135b
girls missing at birth, 23, 104, 120–25, 122f, 124f, 139–41
HIV/AIDS as factor. See HIV/AIDS
income growth, effect of, 123f

policies to address, xxii, 23–24, 23–26, 25f, 290–94

Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo (Argentina), 334b
Mozambique

correlation of low maternal education with health problems in, 

88

fertility decisions in, 157
globalization leaving undereducated women behind in, 269
land titling system in, 165
mortality rates in, 119
wage gaps in, 80

M-PESA (Kenya), 27, 264b
Multinational Time Use Study (MTUS), 218b

N
Namibia

educational segregation by specialty in, 88
political ofﬁ ce, women in, 335b

National Crime Victimization Survey (U.S.), 84
nationality and citizenship laws, 159, 161, 347–48
National Service for Women (SERNAM, Chile), 347b
Nepal

agency’s effects in, 6
inheritance laws in, 309
justice system in, 313
lack of voice and control over resources in, 82, 88
women’s labor force participation in, 340

Netherlands

female parliamentarians in, 84
part-time work for men in, 224
telework in, 263

Nicaragua

agricultural businesses, access to inputs and equipment in, 

227

domestic violence in, 36, 348
economic shock’s effect on education in, 87
Internet usage in, 261

Niger

child mortality in, 119
contraceptive education and use in, 314
domestic violence in, 170
fertility rates in, 130
girls’ education in, 107
maternal mortality in, 15

Nigeria

child mortality in, 119
credit, women’s access to, 28
fertility rates in, 75
inheritance laws in, 310
mortality rates in, 119

school enrollment in, 72
work restrictions on women’s ability to work outside home, 164

Nijera Kori (Bangladesh), 35, 333
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). See also development 

community’s role

role in international women’s rights, 334b, 350

North Africa. See Middle East and North Africa
North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation, 266, 350
Norway

child-care policies in, 297
corporate boards of directors, female representation on, 204b, 

308, 354

economic rights for women in, 58
educational segregation by specialty in, 88
political representation, increase of women in, 85, 180

O
occupational tasks and skill requirements, 259b
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

(OECD), 269

Organization of American States, 57
outsourcing, 109–10
ownership rights. See land ownership by women; property laws

P
Pakistan

agricultural businesses, access to inputs and equipment in, 227
children taken to work by mothers in, 222
girls’ education in, 12–13, 112, 295
household care and housework performed by women in, 217
justice, access to, 312
mortality of girls in early childhood in, 125
parent’s educational attainment, effect on their children in, 5, 

69, 106

political representation, policies to increase women in, 307
proximity to school and increased educational enrollment in, 

110–11, 112

wage gaps in, 80, 205
water and sanitation improvements in, 27, 299

Papua New Guinea

female magistrates in, 312
household relations in, 318
oil palm industry in, 34–35

Paraguay

credit, access to, 230
health expenditures for women in, 64
property ownership by women in, 82

parental aspirations for their children, 21, 116
parental leave policies, 27, 235, 298–99, 353–54, 353b
parent’s educational attainment, effect on their children, 5, 87–88, 

106

parliamentary representation of women, 348
partnerships

in development community, 37–38, 361
public-private, 346–47

part-time work, 30, 220, 223, 224
paternal leave. See parental leave policies
PEKKA Women’s Legal Empowerment (Indonesia), 32, 313

422 

I N D E X

pensions, 154–55, 156f
persistence of gender inequality, xxi, 13–22, 14f, 55, 72–73

agency and voice, 81–82, 181
agricultural productivity, 20f, 202t, 203–4, 208f
ethnic minorities and. See ethnic minorities
girls’ education, 13f, 73f
household care and housework, 19f, 26–27, 80–81
household decision making, 82–83
labor and earnings gaps, 16–18f, 16–20, 100
lessons learned from, 21–22
policy improvements, 22–35, 85–87. See also policy 

improvements

political ofﬁ ce, 84–85, 85f
reproducing across generations, 21, 32–33
scope of gender inequality, 4b
severely disadvantaged populations, 73–76
social norms, 172–73, 174b
“sticky” domains, 76–85. See also “sticky” domains

Peru

children taken to work by mothers in, 222
domestic violence in, 20, 84
health expenditures for women in, 64
land titling program in, 345, 346b
maternal mortality in, 294
microcredit in, 28
parental aspirations for their children in, 21
parental bias toward girls and their education in, 116
police force, women on, 168, 313
transport to markets, improvements in, 223, 300
vocational training in, 33, 302, 316
water supply in, 292
women’s employment in, 28–29

Philippines

data entry jobs in, 258
domestic violence in, 312
fertility decisions in, 157
girls’ education in, 74
household relations in, 318
land ownership in, 229
state action to enforce and protect women’s rights in, 331
water and sanitation improvements in, 24

PISA. See Program for International Student Assessment
police force, women on, 167, 168, 313
policy improvements, 22–35, 85–87

cross-generational policies to prevent reproduction of gender 

inequality, 32–33. See also intergenerational gender 
inequality

economic opportunities, 26–30, 87. See also economic 

development

evidence on effectiveness of, 320–21, 369–70
gender diagnostics as precondition for, 37, 362
health and education, 23–26, 86–87. See also education; health
labor force participation, 34b. See also labor and earnings
mortality, 23–26. See also mortality rates of girls and women
voice, 30–32. See also agency; voice

political economy of gender reform, 23, 35–36, 330–59

formal institutions and policies, 345–48, 345f
inclusive markets, 340–45
informal institutions and policies, 332–40

pathways to change, 9f, 94–97, 94f, 350–54. See also progress in 

gender equality

windows of opportunities, 332, 348–50

political representation

agency and, 176–81, 177f
lack of agency, effect on ability of women to participate in, 20
loss of female representation, 348
persistence of gender inequality, 81, 84–85, 85f, 180–81
policies to increase female political representation, 30–31, 225b, 

306–7, 354

political party membership of women, 179f, 180

the poor

educational inequalities and, 108–9
gender inequalities intensiﬁ ed among, 74–75f
popular culture’s effect on social attitudes, 339b
postfeminism, 334b
preventive health services, 64–65, 65f, 125, 126–27f
priorities for moving toward gender equality, xxii, 22–23, 36–37, 

38t, 360–71, 361t

PROBECAT program (Mexico), 300
Proempleo program (Argentina), 300
Programa Joven (Argentina), 316
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA 2009), 62, 

114f, 115

progress in gender equality, xx–xxi, 8–13, 56–71, 99

attitude changes, 69, 339b, 352b. See also social norms
change generating more change, 5, 9f, 56, 66–69
domains showing improved outcomes, 59–66
education, 60–62. See also education
global consensus for, 57–59, 58b
health, 62–65, 64–65f. See also health
incremental change, 351–53
intergenerational cycles, 68–69. See also intergenerational 

gender inequality

labor force participation, 65–66, 66f. See also labor and earnings
lack of progress in one domain affecting progress in other 

domains, 87–88

transformative change, 6, 36, 152, 353–54
voice, 68. See also agency; voice

property laws, 3, 159, 230, 304, 309, 310, 337. See also inheritance 

systems; land headings

Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act of 2005 (India), 

335

Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on 

the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol), 57

Proyecto Servir (Ecuador), 318
public action for gender equality, 271–72, 288–329. See also formal 

institutions

health and education, policies to reduce gaps in, 289–96, 290f

public institutions. See formal institutions
public-private partnerships, 34b, 346–47
Puntos de Encuentro (Nicaragua), 348

Q
Queen’s University Belfast, 342
quotas

in employment. See afﬁ rmative action
in political representation. See political representation

 

Index 

423

R
radical feminism, 334b
Red Nacional de la Mujer Rural (Peruvian NGO), 346b
REFLEX (Research into Employment and Professional Flexibility) 

study, 115

religious groups

inheritance law controlled by, 160
legal control by. See laws, subheading: legal pluralism
marriage and divorce law controlled by, 161, 339
representation in government, 335b

reproducing across generations. See intergenerational gender 

inequality

reproductive decisions. See fertility rates
Republic of Korea. See Korea, Republic of
retirement differential, 235
reversals of gender gains, 73, 85–87, 296b
roadmap to Report, 50–51
roads. See transport to markets, improvements in
role models for girls, 33, 151–52, 175, 301, 317
rural areas

cell phone usage in, 262
empowerment in, 95, 176, 312–13
investing in women in, 38t, 361t, 366–67
water and sanitation in, 292–93

Rural Extended Services and Care for Ultimate Emergency Relief 

program (Uganda), 293

Rural Income Generating Activities (RIGA) database, 240n36
Russian Federation

health reversals of men in, 86
inheritance laws in, 159
male mortality rates in, 133f, 134
mortality risks in, 105
parliamentary representation of women in, 348

Rwanda

domestic violence in, 170
female parliamentarians in, 84
inheritance laws in, 317
land laws in, 312
marriage registration in, 309

Rwanda Men’s Resources Centre, 337

S
Safaricom Ltd. (Kenya-based communications provider), 342
Sainsbury’s supermarket chain (UK), 341–42
sanitation. See water and sanitation
Scandinavia

educational segregation by specialty in, 88
parental leave in, 299
state action to enforce and protect women’s rights in, 331

schools and schooling. See education; girls’ education
Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA, India), 27, 30, 31, 35, 

298, 300, 333

self-employment, 79, 211, 212f, 220, 221, 226
Sen, Amartya, 3, 4b
Senegal

cell phone usage in, 262
export trades in, 270
female genital cutting, end to practice of, 352b

Pilot Female Literacy Program, 315
water and sanitation in, 291b

Serbia

domestic violence in, 20, 84
Internet usage in, 262
labor market transitions for women in, 220

Sero Lease and Finance Ltd. (Selﬁ na, Tanzania), 28, 303b
service sector, 214–15, 257f
severely disadvantaged populations
educational challenges, 112–13
education policy improvements, 26, 112–13, 294–96, 362–63
persistence of gender inequality, 12–13, 72, 73–76, 112–13

sex selection techniques, 23–24. See also mortality rates of girls 

and women

sexual harassment, 169, 295, 348, 350
Sheppard-Towner Maternity and Infancy Protection Act of 1921 

(U.S.), 68

Sierra Leone

child mortality in, 119
domestic violence in, 170
maternal mortality in, 15
police force, women on, 167

skills training, 28–29, 29b, 33, 34b, 300–302, 315
Slovakia, parliamentary representation of women in, 348
small and medium enterprises (SMEs), 206, 344. See also 

entrepreneurs

social institutions. See informal institutions
social media, 340
social networks, 30, 332–33, 333f
social norms

adolescence and, 176, 280–83, 281f, 283f, 316–17
agency and, 150–51, 168–76, 170f, 172b, 174b
beliefs regarding women’s abilities and gender roles, 67, 174–75, 

178–80, 300

collective action overcoming, 335–36
domestic violence and, 21, 167, 168f, 170, 311
employment and, 224
gender roles and, 33
globalization’s effect on, 267–68, 271
“good wife” and “good husband,” 172b
incremental change and, 174–76, 351, 352b
justice and, 168–69
male as breadwinner, 171, 183n78, 194–96, 195–96f
masculinity and. See masculinity
mobility and, 168–70
persistence of, 174b, 181
political representation of women and, 307
reproductive decisions and, 157, 158f
son preference, 24, 78–79, 106, 123–25, 124f
time use and gender differences, 221–24
work restrictions on women’s ability to work outside home, 164

Somalia

child mortality in, 119
fertility rates in, 130
maternal mortality in, 15, 78, 129

son preference, 24, 78–79, 106, 123–25, 124f
Soul City Institute (South Africa), 339
South Africa

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176

424 

I N D E X

South Africa (continued)

ART coverage rates in, 132
Communal Land Rights Act, 180
domestic violence in, 21, 31, 83, 311

correlated with women’s property ownership and earnings 

in, 154

electriﬁ cation in, 27, 155, 299
health expenditures for women in, 64
household decision making in, 21
marriage, age of, 183n72
marriage registration in, 309–10
mortality rates in, 119
peace and postconﬂ ict reconstruction in, 308b
political representation, policies to increase women in, 85, 181
transport systems’ effect on women’s ability for work in, 156
women’s empowerment in, 95

South Asia

domestic violence in, 31, 164
girls’ education in, 9, 61, 73, 74
labor participation of women in, 65, 199–200b
maternal mortality in, 15, 63, 78
persistence of gender inequality in, 12
social norms affecting women’s behavior in, 169

Southern African Development Community, 349
South West Africa People’s Organization (Namibia), 335b
Spain

domestic violence laws in, 312
employment permission required from husband in, 235
female government ofﬁ cials in, 85
justice, access to, 313
political representation, increase of women in, 30, 180, 181
state action in, 347b
transition to women’s rights in, 36, 348

Special Land Titling and Cadastre Project (PETT, Peru), 346b
Sri Lanka

electriﬁ cation in, 299
female-owned vs. male-owned businesses in, 16–17
garment sector in, 344
maternal mortality, reduction in, 25, 25b, 67, 293, 294, 295b
proﬁ tability differences between male-owned and female-

owned businesses in, 201

state action, 331, 345f. See also formal institutions
stereotypes, 175b, 235, 301. See also masculinity; social norms
“sticky” domains, xxi, 13, 37, 73, 76–85, 87–88, 288, 353. See also 

intergenerational gender inequality; persistence of 
gender inequality

Sub-Saharan Africa. See also speciﬁ c countries

adult and child mortality in, 118f
conﬂ ict in, 135b
customary laws in, 83, 165b, 166m, 309
domestic violence in, 31, 164
entrepreneur networks in, 233
female parliamentarians in, 84
fertility rates in, 130
free primary education in, 62, 110
girls’ education in, 9, 61, 73, 74, 107, 112
globalization leaving undereducated women behind in, 269
HIV/AIDS in, 131, 132f

inheritance rights in, 159
labor participation of women in, 65, 199–200b
lack of voice and control over resources in, 82, 309
legal pluralism in, 165b
maternal mortality in, 15, 25, 72, 78, 293
missing girls at birth, 77, 77t
mortality rates of girls and women in, 14, 105, 117, 118, 118f, 

120

persistence of gender inequality in, 12
progress in, 135b
water and sanitation in, 25, 291, 291b

suffrage. See voting rights for women
Swaziland

inheritance laws in, 310
mortality rates in, 119

Sweden

corporate boards of directors, female representation on, 204b
female government ofﬁ cials in, 85
female parliamentarians in, 84
gender equality in, 55
household care and housework performed by women in, 217
maternal mortality in, 106, 129
parental leave in, 353–54, 353b
police force, women on, 167

Switzerland

child mortality in, 68
female government ofﬁ cials in, 85
Internet usage in, 262
women’s right to vote in, 336b

T
Taiwan, educational attainment linked to decreased infant 

mortality in, 106

Tanzania

contraceptive education and use in, 314
credit, women’s access to, 28
employment patterns in terms of economic development, 212, 

213f

evolution of gender equality in, 2
health education programs in, 33
inheritance laws in, 309, 310
leasing program in, 303b
marriage, age of, 183n72
maternal mortality in, 78
mortality rates in, 119
wage gap in, 206
widows facing inequalities in, 161
women’s empowerment in, 95

tax laws discriminating against women, 35, 319
T-Center (Internet portal for teleworkers), 342
technological change, effect of, 272n30. See also information and 

communication technologies (ICTs)

telecenters, 262–63
telework, 263–64, 265f, 342
tertiary education, 9, 10f, 61, 61f, 88, 104, 106, 108, 115
textile and apparel sector, 263, 267, 267b, 268, 343, 344
Thailand

brain vs. brawn requirements in, 260–61, 261f

 

Index 

425

labor participation of women in, 79, 220, 222f
male mortality rates in, 133f, 134
married women’s time use, 222f

time use and constraints for women, 26–27, 179, 215–24, 218b, 

221b, 239, 297–99

Title VII of Civil Rights Act of 1964 (U.S.), 58
Togo

girls’ education in, 74, 107
inheritance laws in, 310

Tonga, female mortality rates in, 119b
Tostan (Senegalese NGO), 352b
trade

United Kingdom

control of resources beneﬁ ting children in, 151
domestic violence in, 84
globalization and, 259b
labor movements not advancing women’s equality in, 177
marital property laws in, 337
Married Women’s Property Act of 1882, 58
Matrimonial Causes Act of 1857, 58
racial divide among women in, 336
Representation of the People Act of 1928, 58
work-life balance in, 341–42

United Nations

antidiscriminatory clauses and minimum standards in 

CEDAW. See Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 

agreements, 350

Discrimination against Women

openness, positive effects of, 22, 254, 255–64, 255f

Development Programme’s Human Development Index (HDI), 

Trades Union Congress, 177
transnational formal efforts, 349–50
transparency and accountability, 167, 292, 294, 342b
transport to markets, improvements in, 27, 155–56, 223, 299–300, 

95

women’s rights, promotion of, 264
World Conferences on Women, 334b, 336, 337, 350, 350f

United States

319

Tunisia

girls’ education in, 61
voice and women’s rights, 353b
widows facing inequalities in, 161

Turkey

domestic violence law in, 57
educational segregation by specialty in, 88
education in, 62, 69, 111, 112, 158
girls’ education in, 111, 113, 295
Health Transformation Program, 294
household decision making, lack of women’s voice in, 20, 82
inheritance laws in, 159
Internet usage in, 262
maternal mortality in, 25–26, 294
political representation, policies to increase women in, 181
women’s rights law in, 57

U
Uganda

adolescence and social norms of behavior in, 176, 317
ART coverage rates in, 132
community system improvements in, 24
divorce law in, 348b
domestic violence correlated with women’s property ownership 

and earnings in, 154

fertility rates in, 130
free primary education in, 110
health education programs in, 33
inheritance laws in, 310
maternal mortality in, 293, 294
mortality rates in, 119
political representation, women in, 181
Rural Extended Services and Care for Ultimate Emergency 

Relief program, 293

tax laws discriminating against women in, 319

unemployment, gender differences in, 87, 235
UNIFEM (United Nations Development Fund for Women), 308b
unions, women in, 155, 177, 180

afﬁ rmative action in, 231, 301
brain vs. brawn requirements in jobs in, 260
child-care costs in, 222
child-care policies in, 297
credit, discrimination in access to, 234
domestic violence in, 84, 154, 171, 311, 312
feminism in, 334b
fertility rate decline in, 8, 63, 64f
gender equality in, 55
Gender Equity in Education Act of 1994, 340
girls’ education in, 8, 61, 340
globalization and, 259b
heterogeneity of women in, 336
hiring discrimination in, 205b
housework time of women, decline as income increases in, 218
labor force participation in, 233
marital property laws in, 58, 337
maternal mortality in, 16, 67, 68, 129
part-time work by women in, 220
pensions in, 156f
police force, women on, 167
political representation, women in, 177, 184n99
Sheppard-Towner Maternity and Infancy Protection Act of 

1921, 68

Title VII of Civil Rights Act of 1964, 58
voting rights for women in, 6
wage gap in, 206, 237
water and sanitation in, 126, 138
women’s movements in, 182

unpaid family workers, 207f, 221
upstreaming, as priority, 38, 362
urban areas

empowerment in, 95, 176
sanitation in, 292

V
vaccination. See preventive health services
Venezuela, República Bolivariana de

girls’ education in, 74

426 

I N D E X

Venezuela, República Bolivariana de (continued)

inheritance laws in, 310
marriage, age of, 183n72
violent crime and male mortality rates in, 134

Vietnam

agricultural extension services in, 234
child-care policies in, 222, 298
ethnic minorities and education in, 75
excess female mortality, reduction of, 24
height differences between men and women in, 63
parental aspirations for their children in, 21
parental bias toward girls and their education in, 116
sanitation improvements in, 24
severance beneﬁ ts in, 319
water and sanitation in, 293

violent crime and male mortality rates, 133
vocational training. See skills training
voice, 150, 157–68. See also collective action; political 

representation

constraints on, 8, 178, 178f
within households and control of resources, 20–21, 82–83, 82f, 
150, 152, 155f, 309–14, 320. See also household decision 
making

lack of voice, effect on future generation of women, 88
in peace and postconﬂ ict reconstruction processes, 308b
persistence of gender equality, xxi, 81–82
policies to enhance, xxii–xxiii, 30–32, 38t, 305–8, 361t, 367
progress in gender equality, 68

voting rights for women, 6, 58, 157, 336b, 337, 351
vulnerability to external shocks. See external shocks, reversals of 

gender gains due to

W
wages. See labor and earnings
water and sanitation, 24, 27, 37, 38t, 126, 138, 289, 290–93, 299, 

361t, 363–64

West Africa. See Central and West Africa
widows, 156f, 159, 161, 163b, 310–11, 319. See also inheritance 

systems

windows of opportunities, 332, 348–50
Women for Women International, 313
women’s empowerment. See empowerment
women’s international nongovernmental organizations 

(WINGOs), 334b

women’s movements, 35, 182, 334b, 335–38, 339b
women’s networks, creation of, 30, 175–76, 233, 318–19
work. See labor and earnings
working mothers, 341–42, 345. See also child care
work-life balance, 341–42, 342b
World Health Organization (WHO) estimates of mortality rates, 

118

World Values Survey, 69, 84
Wyoming and universal suffrage, 337

Y
Yemen, Republic of

girls’ education in, 73
sexual harassment in, 169
women’s empowerment in, 96

Young Lives study, 21, 116

Z
Zambia

ART coverage rates in, 132
fertility and contraception in, 32, 75, 171, 314
inheritance laws in, 310
mortality rates in, 119

Zimbabwe

ART coverage rates in, 132
mortality rates in, 119

ECO-AUDIT

Environmental Benefits Statement

The  World  Bank  is  committed  to  pre-
serving  endangered  forests  and  natural 
resources.  The  Office  of  the  Publisher 
has  chosen  to  print  World  Development 
Report  2012  on  recycled  paper  with  50 
percent  postconsumer  fiber  in  accordance 
with  the  recommended  standards  for  paper 
usage  set  by  the  Green  Press  Initiative,  a 
nonprofit  program  supporting  publishers 
in  using  fiber  that  is  not  sourced  from 
en dangered  forests.  For  more  information, 
visit www.greenpressinitiative.org.

Saved:
(cid:129) 278 trees
(cid:129)  132 million Btu of total 

energy

(cid:129)  28,227 pounds of net 

greenhouse gases
(cid:129) 127,284 gallons of 
   waste water
(cid:129) 8,069 pounds of 
   solid waste

F R E E   O N L I N E   R E S O U R C E !

the complete
world development reportportpor

online
All World Development Reports since 1978 in
one convenient, cross-searchable website.
Now you can …
■  Select chapters to create your own Custom 
eBook that you can save, print, download, 
and share

■  Find the critical WDR background papers 
for reports since 2005 – all in one place 

■  Bookmark and save content
■  Quickly see how development thinking has 

changed over the years

■  Access the data behind the reports
■  Read Shahid Yusuf’s perspective on the 

WDR in Development Economics through the 
Decades: A Critical Look at 30 Years of the 
World Development Report 

■  Bookmark and/or save your search results 

and selected content in your own 
“MyWDR” online account

Check out the new website today at 

http://wdronline.worldbank.org
For more information, contact onlineresources@worldbank.org

Free iPAD™ App!

World Development Report 2012 App for iPad
WDR 2012 App for iPad makes this key World Bank flagship on gender equality and 
development accessible and mobile. 
The App lets users easily find the analysis and policy recommendations of most interest 
throughout the report by key message, region, topic, or several dozen key words such 
as suffrage, household decision making, credit, and domestic violence. It also contains 
a complete PDF of the WDR for those who want to navigate by chapter. 
With sharing and saving features as well as a special section on the tabular data from 
the WDR, the WDR 2012 App for iPad enables development professionals, 
journalists, students, CSOs, researchers, and anyone interested in the 
state of women and girls around the world 
to get the most out of this year’s WDR.

F re e !

Key Features:
■  Access content from the WDR 2012 

in multiple ways 

■  Browse by key message 
■  Browse and search report content 

by topic, region, keyword, etc…

■  Access the report overview 

and key messages document, 
both available in 
7 languages

■  Share and save features 
■  View highlighted tabular 
data from the WDR 2012 

For more information visit 
bit.ly/wdr2012app or scan 
the QR code at the right with 
a bar-scanning app on your 
mobile device
Available in October, 2011

facebook.com/worldbankpublications 

twitter.com/WBPubs

The lives of women around the world have improved dramatically, at a pace and scope difﬁ cult to imagine 
even 25 years ago. Women have made unprecedented gains in rights, education, health, and access to jobs and 
livelihoods. More countries than ever guarantee equal rights in property, marriage, and other domains. Gender 
gaps in primary schooling have closed in many countries, while in a third of all countries girls now outnumber 
boys in secondary school. And more young women than men attend universities in 60 countries. Women are 
using their education to participate more in the labor force: they now make up for 40 percent of the global labor 
force and 43 percent of its farmers. Moreover, women now live longer than men in every region of the world.  
Despite the progress, gaps remain in many areas. Women are more likely to die—relative to males—in many 
low- and middle-income countries than their counterparts in rich countries—especially in childhood and 
during their reproductive years. Primary and secondary school enrollments for girls remain much lower than 
for boys in many Sub-Saharan African countries and some parts of South Asia, as well as among disadvantaged 
populations. Women are more likely than men to work as unpaid family laborers or in the informal sector, 
to farm smaller plots and grow less proﬁ table crops, operate in smaller ﬁ rms and less proﬁ table sectors, and 
generally earn less. Women—especially poor women—have less say over decisions and less control over 
household resources. And in most countries, fewer women participate in formal politics than men and are 
underrepresented in the upper echelons. 
The World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development argues that closing these persistent 
gender gaps matters. It matters because gender equality is a core development objective in its own right. But 
it is also smart economics. Greater gender equality can enhance productivity, improve development outcomes 
for the next generation, and make institutions more representative. 
Building on a growing body of knowledge on the economics of gender equality and development, the Report 
identiﬁ es the areas where gender gaps are most signiﬁ cant—both intrinsically and in terms of their potential 
development payoff—and where growth alone cannot solve the issues. It then sets forth four priorities for 
public action:

•  Reducing excess female mortality and closing education gaps where they remain 
•  Improving access to economic opportunities for women 
•  Increasing women’s voice and agency in the household and in society 
•  Limiting the reproduction of gender inequality across generations. 

Policies need to focus on the underlying determinants of gender gaps in each priority area. In some priority 
areas—such as excess female mortality in infancy and early childhood as well as in the reproductive years—
improving service delivery (especially of clean water and sanitation, and maternal care) is of primary importance. 
For other priority areas—such as gender gaps in earnings and productivity—policies need to tackle the multiple 
constraints that originate in the workings of markets and institutions to limit progress. Policy makers will need 
to prioritize these constraints and address them simultaneously or sequentially. 
While domestic policies are central to reducing gender inequalities, development partners should focus on 
complementing these efforts in each of the four priority areas, and on supporting evidence-based public 
action through better data, evaluation, and learning. This will require a mix of more funding, efforts to foster 
innovation and learning, and broader partnerships. The funding should be directed particularly to supporting 
the poorest countries in reducing excess female mortality and gender gaps in education. Investments are 
needed to improve the availability of better gender-disaggregated data and support more experimentation and 
systematic evaluation. And the partnerships should involve the private sector, development agencies, and civil 
society organizations.

ISBN 978-0-8213-8825-9

9 0 0 0 0

9 780821 388259
SKU 18825

