world development report

2011

Conflict, Security, and Development

2011

world development report
Conﬂ ict, Security, 
and Development

2011

world development report
Conﬂ ict, Security, 
and Development

© 2011 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

All rights reserved

1 2 3 4 13 12 11 10

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment / The World Bank. The ﬁ ndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this 
volume do not necessarily reﬂ ect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or 
the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The 
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work 
do not imply any judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any 
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all 
of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work 
and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with 
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Dan-
vers, MA 01923, USA; telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.
com.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed 
to the Ofﬁ ce of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, 
USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Softcover
ISBN: 978-0-8213-8439-8
ISSN: 0163-5085
eISBN: 978-0-8213-8440-4
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-8439-8

Hardcover
ISBN: 978-0-8213-8500-5
ISSN: 0163-5085
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-8500-5

Cover design: Heads of State

Photo credits: Overview Picasso/Corbis Images; Chapter 1 Thomas Dworzak/Magnum Pho-
tos; Chapter 2 Christopher Anderson/Magnum Photos; Chapter 3 Jonas Bendiksen/Magnum 
Photos; Chapter 4 Graeme Williams/Panos; Chapter 5 Christopher Furlong/Getty Images; 
Chapter 6 Gulbuddin Elham/Aina Photo; Chapter 7 Marco Vernaschi/Pulitzer Center; Chap-
ter 8 Ron Haviv/VII/Corbis; Chapter 9 Werner Bischof/Magnum Photos

Contents

  xi

Foreword 
Acknowledgments 
Glossary 
Methodological Note 
  xix 
Abbreviations and Data Notes 

  xiii

  xv

  xxiii

Overview  1

Preamble 

  1

Part 1: The Challenge of Repeated Cycles of Violence
21st-century conﬂ ict and violence are a development problem that does not ﬁ t the 
20th-century mold  
Vicious cycles of conﬂ ict: When security, justice, and employment stresses meet 
weak institutions 

  2

  6

Part 2:  A Roadmap for Breaking Cycles of Violence at the Country 

Level

Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming the institutions that provide citizen 
security, justice, and jobs 
Practical policy and program tools for country actors 

  16

  8

Part 3:  Reducing the Risks of Violence—Directions for 

International Policy

  28

Track 1: Providing specialized assistance for prevention through citizen security, 
justice, and jobs 
Track 2: Transforming procedures and risk and results management in 
international agencies 
Track 3: Acting regionally and globally to reduce external stresses on fragile 
states 
Track 4: Marshaling support from lower-, middle-, and higher-income countries 
and global and regional institutions to reﬂ ect the changing landscape of 
international policy and assistance  
Notes 

  34

  39

  31

  35

WDR Framework and Structure   45

v

vi 

C O N T E N T S

Part 1:   The Challenge  49

1  Repeated Violence Threatens Development 

  51

Interstate and civil wars have declined since peaking in the early 1990s 
Modern violence comes in various forms and repeated cycles 
The developmental consequences of violence are severe 
  58
Repeated violence is a shared challenge 
Notes 

  66

  68

  53

  51

2  Vulnerability to Violence 

  73
Multiple stresses raise the risks of violence  
The vicious cycle of weak institutional legitimacy and violence 
Notes 

  93

  73

  84

Part 2:   Lessons from National and International 

Responses 

  97

3  From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and 

transforming institutions  
  99
Why transforming institutions is so difﬁ cult 
Escaping violence, developing resilience 
Do not expect too much, too soon 
Adapt to different contexts  
  110
Notes 

  108

  116

  99

  103

4  Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink  

  119

Drawing on lessons from national reformers 
Inclusive-enough coalitions 
Delivering early results 
Notes 

  128

  139

  120

  119

5  Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, 

  148

  145

and jobs 
Pacing and sequencing institutional transformation  
Citizen security 
Justice  
  153
Jobs  
What to do systematically but gradually  
Institutional transformation as a continuous process 
Notes 

  174

  157

  164

  145

  170

 

6 

7 

Contents 

vii

  181

International support to building conﬁ dence and 
transforming institutions 
The promise and peril of outside support  
The evolving international architecture 
Building conﬁ dence 
Supporting institutional transformation 
Dual accountability and managing the risks of action 
Lessons of international engagement 
Notes 

  200

  181

  208

  193

  181

  205

  185

  218

International action to mitigate external stresses 
External security stresses 
External economic stresses 
Resource stresses 
Between the global and the national: Regional stresses, regional support 
Notes 

  229

  240

  226

  217

  233

Part 3:   Practical Options and Recommendations  

  245

8  Practical country directions and options 

  247

  247

Principles and options, not recipes  
Basic principles and country-speciﬁ c frameworks for sustained violence 
prevention and recovery 
Practical approaches to conﬁ dence-building 
Program approaches to link early results to transforming institutions  
External factors: Reducing external stresses and mobilizing external support 
Notes 

  266

  250

  247

  255

  262

9  New directions for international support 

  269

  276

  270

  281

Track 1: Preventing repeated cycles of violence by investing in citizen security, 
justice, and jobs 
Track 2: Reforming internal agency procedures 
Track 3: Reducing external stresses: New regional and global action 
Track 4: Marshaling support from lower-, middle-, and higher-income countries 
and from global and regional institutions 
A continuing global learning platform 
Notes 
Bibliographical Note 
References 
  297
Selected Indicators 
Selected World Development Indicators 
Index 

  335

  341

  295

  365

  291

  288

  286

C O N T E N T S

viii 

Boxes

  1.1  Interstate and civil war—1900 to the present 

  48

  4.9  Nepal: Bringing others in—supplementing government 

  1.2  Instability, political violence, and drug trafﬁ cking in 

West Africa 

  56

  1.3  Violent crime and insecurity exact high economic 

costs 

  65

  2.1  Economic and political theories of violence and this 

Report 

  75

  2.2  The stress posed by transnational organized crime and 

drug trafﬁ cking 

  76

  2.3  Spillover of conﬂ icts in Central Africa 

  77

  2.4  External stresses: The deportation of the maras 
  2.5  Does unemployment cause violence? Arguments for and 

  78

against 

  79

  2.6  Do similar economic factors create risks for political conﬂ ict 

and extreme levels of violent organized crime?  

80

  2.7  People expect fairness and punish inequity  
  2.8  Human rights abuses and future conﬂ ict risk 
  2.9  Quantitative research on institutions and violence risk  
  2.10  Fragility, weak institutions, governance, and violence  
  3.1  Unrealistic expectations in fragile states are hurdles to 

82
  82

85

87

progress 

  100

  3.2  Premature load-bearing 
  3.3  Violence can increase during fast institutional 

  101

transformations 

  102

  3.4  The WDR framework and theories of violence 

prevention  

  105

  3.5  “Best-ﬁ t” reforms 
  3.6  Fragile states and the long time to acquire threshold 

  107

institutional capability 

  109
  3.7  Optimism or wishful thinking?  
  3.8  Spectrum of situation-speciﬁ c challenges and 

110

opportunities  

  111

  3.9  Lessons of the South African transition: Restoring conﬁ dence 

and transforming institutions  
  122

115

  4.1  “All politics is local.” 
  4.2  Gang-related homicides in Los Angeles  
  4.3  Signals and commitments for economic management: 

123

GEMAP in Liberia  

126

  4.4  Pakistan: Using the budget to signal change  
128
  4.5  Building early conﬁ dence in Haiti—Challenges and 

reﬂ ections 

  129

capacity in education 

  135

  4.10  Nigeria: Strengths and risks of nongovernment capacity in 

the security sector—the Bakassi Boys 

  136

  5.1  China’s approach to gradually piloting economic 

reform 

  146

  5.2  It takes time to build institutions. First things ﬁ rst—citizen 

security, justice, and jobs 

  147

  5.3  Coordinated political, security, and development responses to 

violence—Lessons from urban, subnational, and organized 
criminal violence in Latin America 

  148

  5.4  Colombia’s establishment of civilian oversight and the 

Democratic Security Policy 

  150

  5.5  Reform of the Haiti police force, even in difﬁ cult 

circumstances 

  153

  5.6  Innovative court solutions in Latin America 
  5.7  Experiences in countering corruption  
  5.8  Value chain development in Kosovo and Rwanda 
  159
  5.9  Technically less than perfect, but robust to circumstances: 

  155

  158

Best-ﬁ t electricity provision in Lebanon 

  160

  5.10  Economic empowerment of women: Women’s 

Empowerment Program in Nepal 

  163

  5.11  Pacing institutional transformation 
  5.12  Devolution and decentralization can help manage conﬂ ict, 

  165

but are better done gradually 

  167

  5.13  Development approaches can empower women in the most 

fragile environments 

  170

  6.1  The beneﬁ ts of international support: Mozambique  
  6.2   Investing in long-term mediation as a cost-effective 

  182

approach to preventing and responding to 
violence 

  187

  6.3  Heading off escalation: Dialogue and compromise in Ghana 

in 2003–04 

  189

  6.4  International-national institutional partnerships—CICIG 

in Guatemala 

  190

  6.5  Quick action? Ghana helps restore electricity in 

Liberia 

  191

  6.6  The Aga Khan Development Network: Local knowledge, 

longevity, realistic expectations 

  194

  6.7  Stop-go aid: Volatility in selected fragile states 
  6.8  Publishing cost estimates as best practice? Trade-offs between 

  195

transparency and collusion  

198

  4.6  Only a few visible results are needed to restore conﬁ dence: 

  6.9  Multidonor trust funds: Afghanistan and Southern 

Examples from civil war, organized criminal, and subnational 
violence 

  130

  4.7  Different sectors, core goals   
  4.8  Community-driven development strengthens state-society 

132

relations in Afghanistan 

  133

Sudan 

  203

  6.10  Uneven international support to violence prevention and 

recovery in West Africa  

208

  7.1  The Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration 

Program: Addressing regional violence  

219

 

Contents 

ix

  7.2  The Kimberley Process for “conﬂ ict diamonds” 
  7.3  The economics of cocaine trafﬁ cking 
  7.4  Multiple interdiction efforts: Cocaine in the 

  222

Americas 

  223

  7.5  Expert viewpoints: For and against regulated drug 

legalization to reduce violence 

  224

  7.6  Partnering with client countries to curb corruption in 

World Bank–funded projects 

  227

  7.7  The Australian Crime Commission’s high-risk money 

movement strategy 

  229

  7.8  Growing regional and global approaches to food 

insecurity 

  230

  7.9  Global approaches to land 
  7.10  The role of regional institutions and initiatives in norm-

  232

setting and violence prevention 

  234

  7.11  Pooling services regionally 
  7.12  Early European measures to create shared economic interests 

  236

in peace 

  237

Features

  221

  8.1  Conﬁ dence-building in South Africa, 1990–94, and 

Colombia, 2002 onward 

  254

  8.2  Adapting community-level program design to country 
context: Afghanistan, Burundi, Cambodia, Colombia, 
Indonesia, Nepal, and Rwanda 

  261

  8.3  Anti-corruption approaches in Liberia and 

Mozambique 

  262

  8.4  Bilateral cooperation against corruption and money 

laundering in Haiti and Nigeria 

  264

  8.5  Phasing the transition from international humanitarian aid 
  266

to local institutions: Afghanistan and Timor-Leste 

  9.1  Preventing violence: Prioritizing investment in citizen 

security and justice reforms 

  273
  9.2  Flexible peacekeeping arrangements 
  9.3  Preventing violence: Prioritizing investment in citizen 

  281

security and justice reforms 

  282

  9.4  The role of regional institutions and initiatives in norm-

setting and violence prevention 

  289

Overview
 
 
 

1  How violence is changing 
2  High stresses and weak institutions = risks of violence 
3  Country experiences of conﬁ dence-building and 

  3

transforming institutions for citizen security, justice, and 
jobs 

  14
4  Core tools 
5  Adapting community-level program design to country 

  17

context 

  24

6  Patterns of international assistance to violence-affected 

countries 

  27

7  Internal agency reform 
8  Regional initiatives and norms and standards 

  32

  38

 
 

 

 
 

Chapters
 

1  The interlinked and evolving nature of modern organized 

  9

violence 

  67

 
 
 
 

 

 

2  Nepal: Stresses, institutions, violence, and legitimacy 
3  Restoring security in Colombia 
  113
4  Indonesia: Restoring conﬁ dence in Aceh 
5  Violence in Central America—Depth of institutional 

  137

  90

transformation matters 

  172

6  A tale of two assistance programs—Liberia and Guinea-

Bissau 

  206

7  Central Asia: External pressures and external 

assistance 

  238

Figures

 F1.1  Deaths from civil wars are declining 
 F1.2  Organized criminal violence threatens peace processes 
  4
 F1.3  The gap in poverty is widening between countries affected by 

  3

violence and others 

  4

 F2.1  What are citizens’ views on the drivers of conﬂ ict? 
  9
 F2.2  What drives people to join rebel movement and gangs? 
  9
  2.1  Moving from fragility and violence to institutional resilience 

in citizen security, justice, and jobs 

  12

 F6.2  Aid volatility increases with duration of violence 

  27

 F6.3  Stop-go aid: Volatility in selected fragile states 

  27

  3.2  Combined action across the security, development, and 

humanitarian spheres for external actors to support national 
institutional transformations 

  29

  1.1  Gangs and trafﬁ cking are global concerns  

  53

  1.2  Victims of terrorism  

  55

  1.3  Criminal violence in Central America is on the rise despite 

  3.1  The dual accountability dilemma for donors engaged in 

political peace  

  58

fragile and conﬂ ict environments 

  26

 F6.1  Uneven international support in West Africa—Post-conﬂ ict 

trumps prevention 

  27

  1.4  Violence creates suffering for families in myriad ways: 

Responses to survey on experiences of violence on immediate 
family member in last three years 

  59

x 

C O N T E N T S

  1.5  Widening gap in poverty between countries affected by 

  2.3  The vicious cycle of violence, elite pacts, weak institutions—

violence and those not experiencing violence 

  60

and vulnerability to repeated violence 

  89

  1.6  Violence is the main constraint to meeting the MDGs 
  62
  1.7  The widening gap in infant mortality rates between countries 

  3.1  WDR Framework: Repeated cycles of action to bolster 

institutional resilience 

  103

affected by violence and others 

  63

  6.1  Uneven international support in West Africa—Post-conﬂ ict 

  1.8  Effects of violence on growth are dramatic and long-

lasting 

  64

  2.1  What drives people to join ideological militant 

movements  

  83

  2.2  Food price protests and associated violence are concentrated 

in fragile states 

  86

trumps prevention 

  184

  6.2  International support to nation-states—The dual 

accountability dilemma 

  201

  9.1  Adapting the modality of assistance to risk 

  278

Maps

 

 

 

  Trafﬁ cking and violence during conﬂ icts in West Africa, 

 

  The current (fragmented) state of international cooperation 

1990–2009 

  56

against drugs in the Americas 

  223

  Cross-border political violence spreads across Central 

  7.1  Water availability, fragility, and the potential for riparian 

Africa 

  77

conﬂ ict in Africa 

  231

  The shifting epicenter of political violence in Nepal 

  91

  7.2  Sub-Saharan Africa’s regional infrastructure challenge in 

fragile states 

  235

Tables

 F1.1  Violence often recurs 
  1.1  Security, economic, and political stresses 
  2.1  Fastest progress in institutional transformation—An estimate 

  3

  7

of realistic ranges 

  11

  1.1  Country case examples of multiple forms of violence 
  1.2  Countries often relapse into conﬂ ict 
  1.3  The gender-disaggregated impacts of violent conﬂ ict 
 

2  Ofﬁ cer-level entry into Nepal government service by caste/

  54

  61

  58

ethnic group (percentages) 

  91

  2.1  Security, economic, and political stresses 
 

3  Nepal’s multiple forms of violence, 1960–present 

  74

  92

  7.1  To defeat trafﬁ cking in commodities, pay attention to 

physical and market characteristics of the products 

  220
  7.2  Shared administration can help fragile and conﬂ ict-affected 

states provide better quality public services 

  236

  8.1  Situation-speciﬁ c challenge and opportunities 
  8.2  Core tools for restoring conﬁ dence 
  9.1  International tools to link conﬁ dence-building and 

  251

  249

institutional transformation across the political, security, 
development, and humanitarian spheres 

  272

  9.2  Compelling and feasible short-term indicators 

  279

Foreword

In 1944, delegates from 45 countries gathered at Bretton Woods to consider the economic 
causes of the World War that was then still raging, and how to secure the peace. They agreed 
to create the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the original 
institution of what has become the World Bank Group. As the delegates noted, “Programs of 
reconstruction and development will speed economic progress everywhere, will aid political 
stability and foster peace.” The IBRD approved its ﬁ rst loan to France in 1947 to aid in the 
rebuilding of that country.

Over 60 years later, the “R” in IBRD has a new meaning: reconstructing Afghanistan, Bos-
nia, Haiti, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Southern Sudan, and other lands of conﬂ ict or 
broken states. Paul Collier’s book, The Bottom Billion, highlighted the recurrent cycles of weak 
governance, poverty, and violence that have plagued these lands. Not one low-income coun-
try coping with these problems has yet achieved a single Millennium Development Goal. 
And the problems of fragile states spread easily: They drag down neighbors with violence 
that overﬂ ows borders, because conﬂ icts feed on narcotics, piracy, and gender violence, and 
leave refugees and broken infrastructure in their wake. Their territories can become breeding 
grounds for far-reaching networks of violent radicals and organized crime.

In 2008, I gave a speech on “Securing Development” to the International Institute for Stra-
tegic Studies. I chose the forum to emphasize the interconnections among security, gover-
nance, and development, and to make the point that the separate disciplines are not well 
integrated to address the inter-related problems. I outlined the challenge: bringing security 
and development together to put down roots deep enough to break the cycles of fragility and 
conﬂ ict. 

As we are now seeing again in the Middle East and North Africa, violence in the 21st cen-
tury differs from 20th-century patterns of interstate conﬂ ict and methods of addressing them. 
Stove-piped government agencies have been ill-suited to cope, even when national interests or 
values prompt political leaders to act. Low incomes, poverty, unemployment, income shocks 
such as those sparked by volatility in food prices, rapid urbanization, and inequality between 
groups all increase the risks of violence. External stresses, such as trafﬁ cking and illicit ﬁ nan-
cial ﬂ ows, can add to these risks. 

The 2011 World Development Report looks across disciplines and experiences drawn from 
around the world to offer some ideas and practical recommendations on how to move beyond 
conﬂ ict and fragility and secure development. The key messages are important for all coun-
tries—low, middle, and high income—as well as for regional and global institutions: 

First, institutional legitimacy is the key to stability. When state institutions do not adequately 
protect citizens, guard against corruption, or provide access to justice; when markets do not 
provide job opportunities; or when communities have lost social cohesion—the likelihood 

xi

xii 

F O R E WO R D

of violent conﬂ ict increases. At the earliest stages, countries often need to restore public con-
ﬁ dence in basic collective action even before rudimentary institutions can be transformed. 
Early wins—actions that can generate quick, tangible results—are critical. 

Second, investing in citizen security, justice, and jobs is essential to reducing violence. But 
there are major structural gaps in our collective capabilities to support these areas. There 
are places where fragile states can seek help to build an army, but we do not yet have similar 
resources for building police forces or corrections systems. We need to put greater emphasis 
on early projects to create jobs, especially through the private sector. The Report provides 
insight into the importance of the involvement of women in political coalitions, security and 
justice reform, and economic empowerment. 

Third, confronting this challenge effectively means that institutions need to change. Interna-
tional agencies and partners from other countries must adapt procedures so they can respond 
with agility and speed, a longer-term perspective, and greater staying power. Assistance needs 
to be integrated and coordinated; multi-donor trust funds have proven useful in accomplish-
ing these aims while lessening the burdens of new governments with thin capacity. We need 
a better handoff between humanitarian and development agencies. And we need to accept a 
higher level of risk: If legislatures and inspectors expect only the upside, and just pillory the 
failures, institutions will steer away from the most difﬁ cult problems and strangle themselves 
with procedures and committees to avoid responsibility. This Report suggests some speciﬁ c 
actions and ways of measuring results.  

Fourth, we need to adopt a layered approach. Some problems can be addressed at the coun-
try level, but others need to be addressed at a regional level, such as developing markets that 
integrate insecure areas and pooling resources for building capacity. Some actions are needed 
at a global level, such as building new capacities to support justice reform and the creation of 
jobs; forging partnerships between producer and consumer countries to stem illegal trafﬁ ck-
ing; and acting to reduce the stresses caused by food price volatility. 

Fifth, in adopting these approaches, we need to be aware that the global landscape is chang-
ing. Regional institutions and middle income countries are playing a larger role. This means 
we should pay more attention to south-south and south-north exchanges, and to the recent 
transition experiences of middle income countries. 

The stakes are high. A civil conﬂ ict costs the average developing country roughly 30 years 
of GDP growth, and countries in protracted crisis can fall over 20 percentage points behind in 
overcoming poverty. Finding effective ways to help societies escape new outbursts or repeated 
cycles of violence is critical for global security and global development—but doing so requires 
a fundamental rethinking, including how we assess and manage risk. 

Any such changes must be based on a clear roadmap, and on strong incentives. I hope this 

Report will help others and ourselves in sketching such a roadmap. 

 
 
 

Robert B. Zoellick
President
The World Bank Group

Acknowledgments

This Report has been prepared by a core team led by Sarah Cliffe and Nigel Roberts and 
comprising Erik Alda, David Andersson, Kenneth Anye, Holly Benner, Natalia Cieslik, Ivan 
Crouzel, Markus Kostner, Daniel Maree, Nicholas Marwell, Gary Milante, Stephen Ndegwa, 
Kyle Peters, Nadia Selim, Pia Simonsen, Nicholas van Praag, Suranjan Weeraratne, and Niko-
las Win Myint. Bruce Jones served as a Senior External Advisor to the team and made major 
contributions as did James Fearon, Jack Goldstone, and Lant Pritchett. Markus Kostner acted 
as Co-Director during part of the Report’s preparation.

Bruce Ross-Larson was the principal editor.
World Development Report 2011 is co-sponsored by Development Economics (DEC) and 
the Operations Policy and Country Services (OPC). The work was conducted under the gen-
eral guidance of Justin Yifu Lin in DEC and Jeffrey Gutman and Joachim von Amsberg in 
OPC. Caroline Anstey, Paul Birmingham, Hassan Cisse, Shahrokh Fardoust, Varun Gauri, 
Faris Hadad-Zervos, Ann Harrison, Karla Hoff, Phillip Keefer, Anne-Marie Leroy, Rui Manuel 
De Almeida Coutinho, Alastair McKechnie, Vikram Raghavan, and Deborah Wetzel also pro-
vided valuable guidance. The WDR team extends a special thank you to the World Bank’s 
Fragile and Conﬂ ict-Affected Countries Group (OPCFC) and the Global Expert Team on 
Fragile and Conﬂ ict-Affected Countries (FCS GET) for their extensive inputs and feedback 
throughout the WDR development process.

An Advisory Council comprised of Madeleine Albright, Louise Arbour, Lakhdar Brahimi, 
Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Paul Collier, Nitin Desai, Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, Mar-
tin Grifﬁ ths, Mohamed “Mo” Ibrahim, H.E. Paul Kagame, Ramtane Lamamra, Shivshankar 
Menon, Louis Michel, Jorge Montaño, Jay Naidoo, Kenzo Oshima, Surin Pitsuwan, Zeid Ra’ad 
Al-Hussein, Marta Lucía Ramírez de Rincón, H.E. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Dmitri Trenin, Wu 
Jianmin, and George Yeo provided extensive and excellent advice.

World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick provided guidance and comments.
Many others inside and outside the World Bank contributed with comments and inputs. 
The Development Data Group contributed to the data appendix and was responsible for the 
Selected World Development Indicators.

The team beneﬁ tted greatly from a wide range of consultations. Meetings were held in 
Afghanistan, Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, China, Colombia, the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, 
Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali, Mexico, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Rwanda, 
Saudi Arabia,  South Africa,  Spain,  Sudan,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  Timor-Leste,  the  United 
Kingdom, the United States, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen. The team wishes to thank 
participants in these workshops, videoconferences, and online discussions, which included 
policy makers, government ofﬁ cials, and representatives of nongovernmental, civil society 
and private sector organizations.

The team would like to acknowledge the generous support of the African Union, the Asso-
ciation of Southeast Asian Nations, the European Union, the Government of Australia, the 

xiii

xiv 

AC K N OW L E D G M E N T S

Government of Canada, the Government of China, the Government of Denmark, the Gov-
ernment of Finland, the Government of Germany, the Government of Japan, the Government 
of Mexico, the Government of the Netherlands, the Government of Norway, the Government 
of Sweden, the Government of Switzerland, the Government of the United Kingdom, the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and the United Nations. 

The team also wishes to acknowledge the tireless support of the WDR Production Team: 
Jessica Ardinoto, Nga (Ty) Lopez, Bertha Medina, Brónagh Murphy, and Jason Victor. The 
resource management support of Irina Sergeeva and Sonia Joseph is also much appreci-
ated as well as the excellent production, publishing, translation, and dissemination support 
provided by the Ofﬁ ce of the Publisher and GSD Translation Services, with special thanks 
to  Mary  Fisk,  Stephen  McGroarty,  Nancy  Lammers,  Santiago  Pombo-Bejarano,  Denise 
Bergeron, Janet Sasser, Jose de Buerba, Mario Trubiano, Alison Reeves, Mayya Revzina, Cecile 
Jannotin,  and  Hector  Hernaez  for  their  contributions.  Debra  Naylor  and  Gerry  Quinn 
pro vided  design  and  graphics  expertise.  We  also  thank  Ivar  Cederholm,  Jean-Pierre 
Djomalieu,  Sharon  Faulkner, Vivian  Hon,  Gytis  Kanchas,  Rajvinder  (Dolly)  Kaur,  Alex-
ander  Kent,  Esabel  Khoury,  Nacer  Megherbi,  Thyra  Nast,  Jimmy  Olazo,  Nadia  Piffaretti, 
Carol  Pineau,  Jean  Gray  Ponchamni,  Swati  Priyadarshini,  Janice  Rowe-Barnwell,  Merrell 
Tuck-Primdahl, and Constance Wilhel for their kind support to the team. Many thanks as 
well to Jeffrey Lecksell for expert production of map graphics. We appreciate the efforts of 
the World Bank’s New York Ofﬁ ce, including Dominique Bichara and Tania Meyer, as well as 
colleagues who assisted with WDR consultations worldwide—including those in the World 
Bank ofﬁ ces in Afghanistan, Belgium, China, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Egypt, Ethiopia, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali, Mexico, Nepal, 
Pakistan, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sudan, Timor-Leste, West Bank and Gaza, 
and Yemen. 

  

Glossary

Organized  violence—the  use  or  threat  of  physical  force  by  groups.  Includes  state  actions 
against other states or against civilians, civil wars, electoral violence between opposing sides, 
communal conﬂ icts based on regional, ethnic, religious or other group identities or compet-
ing economic interests, gang-based violence and organized crime and international nonstate 
armed movements with ideological aims. While an important topic for development, we do 
not cover domestic or interpersonal violence. At times we refer to violence or conﬂ ict as a 
short-hand for organized violence, understood in these terms. Many countries address certain 
forms of violence, such as terrorist attacks by nonstate armed movements, as matters that are 
subject to their criminal laws. 

Repeated cycles of violence—Countries or subnational areas that have seen more than one 
episode of organized violence for 20–30 years.

Stresses—The political, social, security, or economic risks that correlate with organized vio-
lence. Violence is more likely when a combination of stresses operate in an environment 
characterized by weak institutions. Stresses can be internal—within the potential capacity of 
an individual state to control—or external, emanating from regional or global dynamics.

Conﬁ dence—Trust between groups of citizens who have been divided by violence, between 
citizens and the state, and between the state and other stakeholders (neighbors, international 
partners, investors).

Expectations—The way people make judgments about the future and how it will affect them, 
their families, and their communities. In situations where a track record of violence has cre-
ated low trust, both excessively low and excessively high expectations can create problems for 
government policy.

Elite pacts—Formal or informal agreements by the holders of political, military, or economic 
power. These agreements, often enforced through coercion and patronage, are typically “per-
sonalized,” based on individual agreements. Throughout history the key motivating factor in 
forming an elite pact has been the wish to contain violence and to secure the property and 
economic interests and opportunities of pact members. The Report argues that elite pacts 
can provide short term security but that violence often recurs unless the pact broadens and is 
accompanied by institutional transformation.

xv

xvi 

G LO S S A RY

Institutions—The formal and informal “rules of the game.” They include formal rules, written 
laws, organizations, informal norms of behavior and shared beliefs—and the organizational 
forms that exist to implement and enforce these norms (both state and nonstate organiza-
tions). Institutions shape the interests, incentives, and behaviors that can facilitate violence. 
Unlike elite pacts, institutions are impersonal—they continue to function irrespective of the 
presence of particular leaders, and thus provide greater guarantees of sustained resilience to 
violence. Institutions operate at all levels of society—local, national, regional, and global. 

Fragility and fragile situations—Periods when states or institutions lack the capacity, account-
ability, or legitimacy to mediate relations between citizen groups and between citizens and the 
state, making them vulnerable to violence. Research for the Report reinforces the close link 
between institutional fragility and the risk of conﬂ ict. 

Legitimacy—Normatively, this term denotes a broad-based belief that social, economic, or 
political arrangements and outcomes are proper and just. The concept is typically applied to 
institutions. Legitimacy is acquired by building trust and conﬁ dence among various parties. 
Forms of legitimacy include process legitimacy (which relates to the way in which decisions 
are made), performance legitimacy (which relates to action, including the delivery of public 
goods), and international legitimacy (which relates to the discharge of values and responsibili-
ties that international law view as the responsibility of states).

Capacity—The ability of institutions to carry out their core functions efﬁ ciently and effec-
tively. When states lack this capacity, they cannot mitigate stresses that might induce organized 
violence. 

Accountability—The ability of institutions to be responsive to citizens, including abiding by 
their aggregated preferences, disclosing necessary information, permitting citizen participa-
tion in decision-making, and allowing for citizen sanction of public ofﬁ cials on the basis of 
publicly recognized norms and procedures.

Citizen security—Both freedom from physical violence and freedom from fear of violence. 
Applied to the lives of all members of a society (whether nationals of the country or other-
wise), it encompasses security at home, in the workplace, and in political, social, and economic 
interactions with the state and other members of society. Similar to human security, “citizen 
security” places people at the center of efforts to prevent and recover from violence. 

Justice and inclusion—The Report uses justice in two ways. The ﬁ rst use refers to the broadly 
held notion of fairness. While this varies in different societies, it is a universally identiﬁ -
able concept and carries the notion of fair process and due outcomes in the distribution of 
political power, resources, opportunities, and sanctions. The second use is more speciﬁ c: the 
institutions that are central to resolving conﬂ icts arising over alleged violations or different 
interpretations of the rules that societies create to govern members’ behavior; and that, as 
a consequence, are central to strengthening the normative framework (laws and rules) that 
shapes public and private actions. This includes the elements of the justice system most critical 
to preventing or transitioning out of violence: core criminal justice functions—the ability of 
the police, courts, and penal system to fairly investigate, prosecute and punish acts linked to 
organized violence—and institutions required to address underlying disputes that contribute 
to violence (for example, institutions that deal with land and property dispute resolution). 

 

Glossary 

xvii

Transition moments—Events that make new efforts to prevent or recover from violence pos-
sible. These can involve space for deep and wide-ranging change (for example, the end of a 
war, a deep national crisis, a change in government after one party has been in power many 
years) or more limited change (a new governmental reform plan or shift in key appointments, 
negotiations or coalition-building between different actors in society, events that spur reﬂ ec-
tion in society such as riots, military defeats, natural disasters, or key political anniversaries). 

Collaborative, inclusive-enough coalitions—Unlike elite pacts, these coalitions involve broader 
segments of society—local governments, business, labor, civil society movements, in some 
cases opposition parties. Coalitions are “inclusive enough” when they involve the parties nec-
essary to restore conﬁ dence and transform institutions and help create continued momen-
tum for positive change; and when there is local legitimacy for excluding some groups—for 
example because of electoral gains, or because groups or individuals have been involved in 
abuses.

Signaling—Demonstrating an intention to break with past policies—in the context of this 
Report, policies that have increased violent risks. Signals are designed to mobilize coalitions 
of support, and can be made through announcements or through actions—for example, 
appointments and redeployments of security forces.

Commitment mechanisms—Ways to persuade stakeholders that intentions to break with past 
policies will not be reversed, including creating independent functions for implementing or 
monitoring agreements.

Early  results—Visible  improvements  to  security,  justice,  and  inclusion,  economic  oppor-
tunities, and services, delivered in the ﬁ rst 100 days and the ﬁ rst 12 months following an 
announced change in policy prevent or recover from violent crises.

Sequencing and prioritizing reforms—Deciding on the type and scope of changes societies will 
make ﬁ rst, those that will be addressed later, and the timeframes for achieving change.

Pragmatic, best-ﬁ t approaches—Programs, institutions and reforms that are not technically 
the lowest-cost option for achieving outcomes, but are adapted to local political, security, and 
institutional realities.

Transforming institutions—Developing over time “rules of the game” that increase resilience 
to risks of violence, including laws, organizations, norms of behavior, and shared beliefs that 
ensure that the beneﬁ ts from individuals choosing to act peacefully and lawfully exceed the 
costs.

Methodological Note

One of the greatest challenges in researching lessons on violence prevention and recovery 
is the lack of available quantitative and qualitative data, due to challenges of security and 
access, along with low statistical capacity. Even in the World Bank’s comprehensive data sets, 
countries most affected by violence often register empty data columns. Polling, household 
surveys, and evaluations of the impacts of policies and project interventions are also limited 
in violence-affected countries and regions. 

A growing body of literature on civil war focuses more on the causes of war than on the 
policies to prevent or recover from violence, and less analysis is available on organized crimi-
nal violence. Over the past decade, however, this Report has beneﬁ ted from a growing body 
of multi-disciplinary research (political science, economics, sociology, psychology, security 
studies) and policy papers on peacebuilding, statebuilding, conﬂ ict prevention, reconstruction 
and stabilization operations, peacekeeping, and conﬂ ict recovery, complemented by a large 
data set from multiple sources (the Uppsala Conﬂ ict Data Program, the International Peace 
Research Institute of Oslo, and Human Security Report Project, homicide data from national 
sources, United Nations Ofﬁ ce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the World Health Organization 
(WHO), geospatial coding of conﬂ ict events and data from the Armed Conﬂ ict Location and 
Event Database and polling from regional barometers as well as surveys conducted by Fafo).

 As the topics of violence and development transcend academic and policy disciplines, it has 
been crucial that a common understanding of key terms be developed and used for the report 
(see the glossary). For this project, background papers by respected academic researchers have 
produced signiﬁ cant new econometric work on the relationship between institutions and vio-
lence, further complemented by country and regional case study research and consultations. 

Learning from experience: Generating a global conversation
The WDR team sought to complement research by generating a global conversation with 
national reformers, civil society and private sector leaders, as well as regional and interna-
tional policymakers, grappling with violence in diverse regions worldwide. The team focused 
ex plicitly on moving this conversation beyond the ‘traditional’ Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) donors and multilateral partners for the World 
Bank, to engage with national reformers, middle income country policy makers, regional 
institutions and diplomatic and security partners, including: 

•  Consultations  and  multi-stakeholder  round-tables  with  government  leadership,  civil 
society, private sectors, media and international actors in some twenty low- and middle-
 income countries and regions that are presently affected by violent conﬂ ict, or have man-
aged to escape from it in recent years. Countries and regions visited included Afghanistan, 
Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, China, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, 
Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali, Mexico, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Rwanda, 

xix

xx 

M E T H O D O LO G I C A L   N O T E

Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, the United 
Kingdom, the United States, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen.

•  Regional discussions with policymakers and experts to explore diverse experiences and 
perspectives and the importance of regional action, including in two workshops in coop-
eration with the African Union and the UN Economic Commission for Africa in Addis 
Ababa, a session hosted by ASEAN in Jakarta, a regional workshop in Mexico City, a Mid-
dle East/North African regional workshop in Beirut, and sessions in Brussels in coopera-
tion with the European Union. 

•  Cooperation and exchanges with the United Nations system on the political, security, 
development, and humanitarian dynamics of the challenge. A number of exchanges have 
been held with the UN General Assembly, the UN Security Council, the UN Economic and 
Social Council (ECOSOC), the UN Secretariat and UN agencies, funds and programs. The 
team has also engaged with the International Dialogue for Peacebuilding and Statebuild-
ing, the OECD International Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragility, North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO), the African, Asian and Inter-American Development Banks. 

•  Consultations in capitals to generate lessons from policymakers, experts, nongovernmental 
organization (NGOs) and private sector representatives, including Berlin, Beijing, Berne, 
Cairo, Copenhagen, Delhi, the Hague, Helsinki, Jakarta, Jeddah, London, Mexico City, 
Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, Stockholm and Tokyo. 

•  The 2011WDR brought together an Advisory Council of high-level leaders and practitio-
ners as a sounding board for emerging thinking, and to offer practical advice on the reali-
ties of policy-making in countries affected by conﬂ ict (box 1).

•  WDR brainstorming sessions have also been held to tap the knowledge and experience of 
academics, policymakers and NGO Representatives, in partnership with other multilateral, 
think tank, academic, and regional institutions.

 

 

Methodological Note 

xxi

BOX 1  The 2011 WDR Advisory Council

The 2011 WDR Advisory Council was convened at the beginning of the WDR process to exchange with the team on the Report’s emerging 
messages and recommendations. Membership includes a diverse cross-section of national, regional, multilateral, and civil society leaders 
with deep experience in conﬂ ict prevention and recovery. The Advisory Council met three times during the Report development process: 
September 2009 in Washington DC; February 2010 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; and September 2010 in Beijing, China. AC Members also used 
their convening power to support WDR capital visits in regional consultations worldwide. Based on their reﬂ ections on WDR themes, the 
Report includes individual contributions from Advisory Council Members, which reﬂ ect their personal views. These boxes include lessons from 
AC Members’ own involvement in conﬂ ict settings or topical discussions based on their expertise.

Advisory Council Members

Madeleine Albright, Chair, Albright Stonebridge Group; former U.S. Secretary of State

Louise Arbour, President, International Crisis Group; former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights

Lakhdar Brahimi, Former United Nations Special Representative to the Secretary General for Afghanistan and Iraq

Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Secretary-General of the African, Caribbean and Paciﬁ c Group of Sates

Paul Collier, Professor of Economics, Oxford University

Nitin Desai, Former UN Under Secretary General for Social and Economic Aﬀ airs

Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, Former Force Commander of the United Nations Peacekeeping Mission in Haiti

Martin Griﬃ  ths, Former Director, Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue

Mohamed “Mo” Ibrahim, Founder, Mo Ibrahim Foundation and Founder, Celtel

H.E. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda

Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner, Peace and Security Council, African Union

Louis Michel, Member of the European Parliament

Jorge Montano, Director General, Asesoría y Análisis; former Ambassador of Mexico to the U.S.

Jay Naidoo, Chairman, Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition; former Chair, Development Bank of Southern Africa

Kenzo Oshima, Senior Vice President of Japan International Cooperation Agency
Surin Pitsuwan, Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations

Zeid Ra’ad Al-Hussein, Ambassador of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United Nations

Marta Lucía Ramirez de Rincón, Fundación Ciudadanía en Acción; former Minister of Defense—Colombia

 H.E. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia

Dmitri Trenin, Director, Moscow Center, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace

Wu Jianmin, Chairman of the Shanghai Center for International Studies

H.E. George Yeo, Minister of Foreign Aﬀ airs, Singapore

Fostering a continuing conversation
This WDR has laid a major emphasis on communication because, from the start, the aim was not just to inform but to reach 
out across multiple policy communities, to enhance understanding of trends in conﬂ ict, and to promote practical changes in the 
way we address conﬂ ict. This implied a longer term strategy than for previous reports to build momentum over time with the 
aim of clarifying the challenges, testing policy prescriptions and advocating concrete proposals. The extensive outreach program 
has both contributed to the substance of the report and initiated the communication process much earlier than previous WDRs. 
This WDR is also making extensive use of video, the web and social media to broaden the public discussion on fragility and 
conﬂ ict. An interactive website has been launched featuring data used in the report, thematic background papers, WDR conﬂ ict 
case studies, video material, blogs, and twitter feeds (the WDR blog at http://blogs.worldbank.org/conﬂ ict and our twitter site 
at http://twitter.com/wbConﬂ ict).

Abbreviations and Data Notes

Abbreviations
AC  
ACLED  
ADB  
AfDB  
AFSIS  
AKDN  
ANC  
ASEAN 
AU 
AUC 

AUPSC 
AusAID 
Austrac 
AZAPO 
BRA 
BRAVO 
CDC 
CCAI  
CDD 
CICIG  

CODESA  
CPA  
CPA  
CPIA  
CV 
DAC  
DDR  
DESEPAZ  
DfID  
ECOSOC  
ECOWAS  
ECSC  
EFCC  
EGSC  
EITI  
ELN  

Advisory Council, Word Development Report 2011
Armed Conﬂ ict Location and Event Database
Asian Development Bank
African Development Bank
ASEAN Food Security Information System
Aga Khan Development Network
African National Congress
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
African Union
Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia (United Self-Defense Forces of 
Colombia)
African Union Peace and Security Council
Australian Government Overseas Aid Program
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Center
Azanian People’s Organisation, South Africa
Badan Reintegrasi-Damai Aceh (Aceh Peace-Reintegration Board)
Birth Registration for All Versus Oblivion
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral (Colombia)
community driven development
Comisión Internacional Contra la Impunidad en Guatemala (International 
Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala)
Convention for a Democratic South Africa
Comprehensive Peace Agreement
Coalition Provisional Authority (Iraq)
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
coefﬁ cient of variance
Development Assistance Committee
Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration
Desarrollo, Seguridad y Paz
Department for International Development, UK
United Nations Economic and Social Council
Economic Community of West African States
European Coal and Steel Community
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission
Economic Governance Steering Committee
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
National Liberation Army (Colombia)

xxiii

xxiv 

A B B R E V I AT I O N S   A N D   DATA   N O T E S

ETA  
EU  
Fafo 

FAO  
FARC  

FATA  
FATF 
FDI 
FINCEN 
FINTRAC 
FIU 
FMLN  

Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (Spain)
European Union
Institutt for Anvendte Internasjonale Studier (Institute for Labor and Social 
Research, Norway)
Food and Agriculture Organization (United Nations)
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (Revolutionary Armed 
Forces of Colombia)
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (Pakistan)
Financial Action Task Force
foreign direct investment
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, U.S.
Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Center, Canada
ﬁ nancial intelligence unit
Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional (Farabundo Martí 
National Liberation Front) El Salvador
Frente de Libertação de Moçambique (Liberation Front)
Gerakan Aceh Merdeka (Free Aceh Movement)
gross domestic product
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program
Greater Mekong Sub-region 
geographic information system
gross national income
Haitian National Police (Police Nationale d‘Haïti)
Inter-American Development Bank
International Committee of the Red Cross
International Country Risk Guide
International Development Association
internally displaced persons
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation 
International Financial Institutions
International Monetary Fund
International Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragility
Irish Republican Army
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
Kecamatan Development Program (Indonesia)
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (province in Pakistan)
Millennium Development Goal
Multi-country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (Africa)
Multi-donor Trust Fund

FRELIMO  
GAM  
GDP  
GEMAP  
GMS 
GIS  
GNI  
HNP  
IADB  
ICRC 
ICRG 
IDA 
IDP  
IFAD  
IFC 
IFI  
IMF  
INCAF  
IRA  
ISAF  
KDP  
KP  
MDG  
MDRP  
MDTF  
MINUSTAH   United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
MONUC  

Mission de l’Organisation des Nations Unies en République Démocratique 
du Congo (United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo)
memorandum of understanding
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
National Conciliation Party (El Salvador)
nongovernmental organization
National Solidarity Program (Afghanistan)
National Transitional Government of Liberia
ofﬁ cial development assistance
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

MOU  
NATO  
NCP  
NGO  
NSP  
NTGL  
ODA  
OECD  

 

Abbreviations and Data Notes 

xxv

United Nations Operation in Mozambique
Pan Africanist Congress (South Africa)
Post Conﬂ ict Needs Assessment
Public Financial Management Review 
Peace Research Institute (Oslo)
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands
Resistência Nacional Moçambicana (Mozambique)
Southern African Development Community
small arms and light weapons
Serious Organized Crime Agency, U.K.
short message service
Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative
Stabilization and Reconstruction Task Force (Canada)
Statebuilding and Peacebuilding Fund (World Bank)
United Nations
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Department of Political Affairs
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
United Nations Ofﬁ ce of the High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Development Fund for Women

ONUMOZ  
PAC  
PCNA  
PFM 
PRIO  
RAMSI  
RENAMO  
SADC  
SALW  
SOCA 
SMS  
STAR  
START  
SPF 
UN  
UNCTAD  
UNDP  
UNDPA  
UNDPKO  
UNHCR  
UNICEF  
UNIFEM  
UNOHCHR   United Nations Ofﬁ ce of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
UNMIL  
UNODC  
UNOGBIS  
UNPBC 
UNPBF 
UNSC  
UNSCR  
USAID  
WDR  
WFP  
WGI 
WHO  

United Nations Mission in Liberia
United Nations Ofﬁ ce on Drugs and Crime
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Ofﬁ ce in Guinea Bissau
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund
United Nations Security Council
United Nations Security Council Resolution
United States Agency for International Development
World Development Report
World Food Programme
Worldwide Governance Indicators
World Health Organization

Definitions and data notes
The countries included in regional and income groupings in this Report are listed in the 
Classiﬁ cation of Economies table at the end of the Selected World Development Indicators. 
Income classiﬁ cations are based on GNP per capita; thresholds for income classiﬁ cations in 
this edition may be found in the Introduction to Selected World Development Indicators. 
Group averages reported in the ﬁ gures and tables are unweighted averages of the countries in 
the group, unless noted to the contrary.

The use of the countries to refer to economies implies no judgment by the World Bank 
about the legal or other status of territory. The term developing countries includes low- and 
middle-income economies and thus may include economies in transition from central plan-
ning, as a matter of convenience.

Dollar ﬁ gures are current U.S. dollars, unless otherwise speciﬁ ed. Billion means 1,000 mil-

lion; trillion means 1,000 billion. 

CITIZEN 
SECURITY,
JUSTICE, 
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

NS 

U

TIO

R

E

S

T

 
T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R

I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIO

NS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

Overview

Preamble

Efforts  to  maintain  collective  se-

curity  are  at  the  heart  of  human 
history:  from  the  earliest  times, 
the recognition that human safety 
depends  on  collaboration  has  been  a  mo-
tivating  factor  for  the  formation  of  village 
communities,  cities,  and  nation-states.  The 
20th  century  was  dominated  by  the  legacy 
of devastating global wars, colonial struggles, 
and  ideological  conﬂ icts,  and  by  efforts  to 
establish  international  systems  that  would 
foster global peace and prosperity. To some 
extent  these  systems  were  successful—wars 
between states are far less common than they 
were in the past, and civil wars are declining 
in number. 

Yet,  insecurity  not  only  remains,  it  has 
become  a  primary  development  challenge 
of  our  time.  One-and-a-half  billion  people 
live in areas affected by fragility, conﬂ ict, or 
large-scale, organized criminal violence, and 
no  low-income  fragile  or  conﬂ ict-affected 
country  has  yet  to  achieve  a  single  United 
Nations Millennium Development Goal (UN 
MDG).  New  threats—organized  crime  and 
trafﬁ cking, civil unrest due to global economic 
shocks, terrorism—have supplemented con-
tinued preoccupations with conventional war 
between and within countries. While much of 
the world has made rapid progress in reduc-

ing poverty in the past 60 years, areas char-
acterized  by  repeated  cycles  of  political  and 
criminal  violence  are  being  left  far  behind, 
their  economic  growth  compromised  and 
their human indicators stagnant. 

For  those  who  now  live  in  more  stable 
neighborhoods, it may seem incomprehensi-
ble how prosperity in high-income countries 
and a sophisticated global economy can coex-
ist with extreme violence and misery in other 
parts of the globe. The pirates operating off 
the coast of Somalia who prey on the ship-
ping through the Gulf of Aden illustrate the 
paradox  of  the  existing  global  system.  How 
is it that the combined prosperity and capa-
bility  of  the  world’s  modern  nation-states 
cannot  prevent  a  problem  from  antiquity? 
How is it that, almost a decade after renewed 
international engagement with Afghanistan, 
the prospects of peace seem distant? How is it 
that entire urban communities can be terror-
ized by drug trafﬁ ckers? How is it that coun-
tries  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa 
could face explosions of popular grievances 
despite, in some cases, sustained high growth 
and improvement in social indicators?

This  World  Development  Report  (WDR) 
asks what spurs risks of violence, why con-
ﬂ ict prevention and recovery have proven so 
difﬁ cult to address, and what can be done by 
national leaders and their development, secu-
rity, and diplomatic partners to help restore a 

2 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

stable development path in the world’s most 
fragile  and  violence-torn  areas.  The central 
message of the Report is that strengthening 
legitimate  institutions  and  governance  to 
provide citizen security, justice, and jobs is 
crucial to break cycles of violence.  Restor-
ing  conﬁ dence  and  transforming  security, 
justice, and economic institutions is possible 
within  a  generation,  even  in  countries  that 
have  experienced  severe  conﬂ ict.  But  that 
requires determined national leadership and 
an international system “reﬁ tted” to address 
21st-century  risks:  refocusing  assistance  on 
preventing  criminal  and  political  violence, 
reforming  the  procedures  of  international 
agencies, responding at a regional level, and 
renewing cooperative efforts among lower-, 
middle-,  and  higher-income  countries.  The 
Report  envisages  a  layered  approach  to  ef-
fective global action, with local, national, re-
gional, and international roles.

Because of the nature of the topic, this Re-
port has been developed in an unusual way—
drawing from the beginning on the knowledge 
of  national  reformers  and  working  closely 
with the United Nations and regional institu-
tions with expertise in political and security 
issues,  building  on  the  concept  of  human 
 security.  The  hope  is  that  this  partnership 
will spark an ongoing effort to jointly deepen 
our understanding of the links between secu-
rity and development, and will foster practical 
action on the Report’s ﬁ ndings.

PART 1: THE CHALLENGE 
OF REPEATED CYCLES OF 
VIOLENCE 

21st-century conflict and violence 
are a development problem that 
does not fit the 20th-century mold 

Global  systems  in  the  20th  century  were 
designed  to  address  interstate  tensions  and 
one-off  episodes  of  civil  war.  War  between 
nation-states and civil war have a given logic 
and sequence. The actors, sovereign states or 

clearly deﬁ ned rebel movements, are known. 
If a dispute escalates and full-scale hostilities 
ensue,  an  eventual  end  to  hostilities  (either 
through victory and defeat or through a ne-
gotiated  settlement)  is  followed  by  a  short 
“post-conﬂ ict”  phase  leading  back  to  peace. 
The global system is largely built around this 
paradigm of conﬂ ict, with clear roles for na-
tional and international actors in development 
in  promoting  the  prosperity  and  capability 
of the nation-state (but stepping out during 
active  conﬂ ict),  in  diplomacy  in  preventing 
and  mediating  disputes  between  states  and 
between government and rebel movements, 
in peacekeeping in the aftermath of conﬂ ict, 
and in humanitarianism in providing relief. 

21st-century  violence1  does  not  ﬁ t  the 
20th-century  mold.  Interstate  war  and  civil 
war are still threats in some regions, but they 
have declined over the last 25 years. Deaths 
from civil war, while still exacting an unac-
ceptable  toll,  are  one-quarter  of  what  they 
were  in  the  1980s  (Feature  1,  ﬁ gure  F1.1).2 
Violence  and  conﬂ ict  have  not  been  ban-
ished: one in four people on the planet, more 
than  1.5  billion,  live  in  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-
affected states or in countries with very high 
levels  of  criminal  violence.3  But  because  of 
the successes in reducing interstate war, the 
remaining forms of conﬂ ict and violence do 
not ﬁ t neatly either into “war” or “peace,” or 
into “criminal violence” or “political violence” 
(see Feature 1, F1.1–1.2 and table F1.1). 

Many countries and subnational areas now 
face  cycles  of  repeated  violence,  weak  gov-
ernance, and instability. First, conﬂ icts often 
are not one-off events, but are ongoing and 
repeated: 90 percent of the last decade’s civil 
wars occurred in countries that had already 
had a civil war in the last 30 years.4 Second, 
new forms of conﬂ ict and violence threaten 
development: many countries that have suc-
cessfully negotiated political and peace agree-
ments  after  violent  political  conﬂ icts,  such 
as El Salvador, Guatemala, and South Africa, 
now  face  high  levels  of  violent  crime,  con-
straining their development. Third, different 
forms  of  violence  are  linked  to  each  other. 
Political  movements  can  obtain  ﬁ nancing 

Overview

3

FEATURE 1  How violence is changing

FIGURE F1.1  Deaths from civil wars are declining

As the number of civil wars declined, the total annual deaths from these conﬂ icts (battle 
deaths) fell from more than 200,000 in 1988 to fewer than 50,000 in 2008.

 

300,000

250,000

s
r
a
w

 
l
i

200,000

i

v
c
n

 

i
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
l
t
t
a
B

 

150,000

100,000

50,000

0
1960

1968

1976

1984

1992

2000

Total battle deaths per annum in all civil wars (minor and major)
Total number of countries in civil war (minor and major)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
2008

r
a
w

 
l
i

i

v
c
n

 

i
 
s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
 
f

o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Sources: Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict dataset (Harbom and Wallensteen 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 
2005); Gleditsch and others 2002; Sundberg 2008; Gleditsch and Ward 1999; Human Security Report 
Project, forthcoming.
Note: Civil wars are classiﬁ ed by scale and type in the Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict dataset (Harbom and 
Wallensteen 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 2005). The minimum threshold for monitoring is a minor civil 
war with 25 or more battle deaths a year. Low, high, and best estimates of annual battle deaths per 
conﬂ ict are in Lacina and Gleditsch (2005, updated in 2009). Throughout this Report, best estimates are 
used, except when they are not available, in which case averages of the low and high estimates are used.

TA BL E F1.1   Violence oft en recurs

Few countries are truly “post-conﬂ ict.” The rate of violence onset in countries with a previous conﬂ ict has been 
increasing since the 1960s, and every civil war that began since 2003 was in a country that had a previous civil 
war.

Decade

Violence onsets in countries with 

no previous conﬂ ict (%)

Violence onsets in countries with 

a previous conﬂ ict (%)

Number of 

onsets

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

57

43

38

33

10

Sources: Walter 2010; WDR team calculations. 
Note: Previous conﬂ ict includes any major conﬂ ict since 1945.

43

57

62

67

90

35

44

39

81

39

(Feature continued on next page)

4 
4 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 1  How violence is changing (continued)

F I G UR E F1.2   Organized criminal violence threatens peace processes  

Homicides have increased in every country in Central America since 1999, including those that had made great 
progress in addressing political conﬂ ict—and this is not unique; countries such as South Africa face similar 
second generation challenges.

 

9
9
9
1
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
r

l

40

30

20

10

0

–10

i

e
t
a
r
 
e
d
c
m
o
h
n

 

i

i
 

 

e
g
n
a
h
c
e
t
u
o
s
b
A

l

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

El Salvador
Panama

Honduras
Nicaragua

Guatemala
Costa Rica

Belize

Sources: WDR team calculations based on UNODC 2007; UNODC and World Bank 2007; and national sources.
Note: Base year for homicide rate is 1999 = 0.

How violence disrupts development

F I G UR E F1.3   The gap in poverty is widening between countries affected by violence and others

New poverty data reveal that poverty is declining for much of the world, but countries aﬀ ected by violence are 
lagging behind. For every three years a country is aﬀ ected by major violence (battle deaths or excess deaths 
from homicides equivalent to a major war), poverty reduction lags behind by 2.7 percentage points.

t
n
u
o
c
d
a
e
h
y
t
r
e
v
o
P

 

 

.

l

 

)
y
a
d
a
5
2
1
$
w
o
e
b
g
n
v

 

 

i

i
l
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p

 
f

 

o
%

(

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

Countries aﬀecﬀﬀ ted by major violence
Countries aﬀecﬀﬀ ted by minor violence
Countries with negligible or no violence

Sources: WDR team calculations based on Chen, Ravallion, and Sangraula 2008 poverty data (available on POVCALNET 
(http://iresearch.worldbank.org)).
Note: Poverty is % of population living at less than US$1.25 per day.

 

Overview 

5

from criminal activities, as in the Democratic 
Republic  of  Congo  and  Northern  Ireland.5 
Criminal gangs can support political violence 
during  electoral  periods,  as  in  Jamaica  and 
Kenya.6 International ideological movements 
make common cause with local grievances, as 
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Thus, the large 
majority  of  countries  currently  facing  vio-
lence face it in multiple forms. Fourth, griev-
ances  can  escalate  into  acute  demands  for 
change—and the risks of violent conﬂ ict—in 
countries where political, social, or economic 
change  lags  behind  expectations,  as  in  the 
Middle East and North Africa.

Repeated  and  interlinked,  these  conﬂ icts 
have regional and global repercussions. The 
death,  destruction,  and  delayed  develop-
ment due to conﬂ ict are bad for the conﬂ ict-
affected  countries,  and  their  impacts  spill 
over  both  regionally  and  globally.  A  coun-
try  making  development  advances,  such  as 
Tanzania,  loses  an  estimated  0.7  percent  of 
GDP every year for each neighbor in conﬂ ict.7 
Refugees  and  internally  displaced  persons 
have increased threefold in the last 30 years.8 
Nearly 75 percent of the world’s refugees are 
hosted by neighboring countries.9 

The  new  forms  of  violence  interlinking 
local  political  conﬂ icts,  organized  crime, 
and  internationalized  disputes  mean  that 
violence is a problem for both the rich and 
the poor: more than 80 percent of fatalities 
from  terrorist  attacks  over  the  last  decade 
were  in  nonwestern  targets,10  but  a  study 
of 18 Western European countries revealed 
that each additional transnational terrorist 
incident reduced their economic growth by 
0.4  of  a  percentage  point  a  year.11  Attacks 
in one region can impose costs all through 
global  markets—one  attack  in  the  Niger 
Delta can cost global consumers of oil bil-
lions in increased prices.12 In the four weeks 
following  the  beginning  of  the  uprising  in 
Libya,  oil  prices  increased  by  15  percent.13 
The  interdiction  of  cocaine  shipments  to 
Europe has increased fourfold since 2003,14 
with even areas such as West Africa now se-
riously affected by drug-related violence.15

Attempts  to  contain  violence  are  also 
extremely  costly.  For  example,  the  naval 
operation to counter piracy in the Horn of 
Africa and the Indian Ocean is estimated to 
cost US$1.3–$2 billion annually, plus addi-
tional costs incurred by rerouting ships and 
increasing insurance premiums.16 Efforts by 
households and ﬁ rms to protect themselves 
against long-duration violence impose heavy 
economic  burdens:  35  percent  of  ﬁ rms  in 
Latin America, 30 percent in Africa, and 27 
percent in Eastern Europe and Central Asia 
identify  crime  as  the  major  problem  for 
their business activities. The burden is high-
est on those least able to bear the cost: ﬁ rms 
in Sub-Saharan Africa lose a higher percent-
age of sales to crime and spend a higher per-
centage of sales on security than any other 
region.17

No low-income fragile or conﬂ ict-affected 
country  has  yet  achieved  a  single  MDG. 
People  in  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected  states 
are  more  than  twice  as  likely  to  be  under-
nourished as those in other developing coun-
tries, more than three times as likely to be un-
able to send their children to school, twice as 
likely to see their children die before age ﬁ ve, 
and  more  than  twice  as  likely  to  lack  clean 
water. On average, a country that experienced 
major violence over the period from 1981 to 
2005 has a poverty rate 21 percentage points 
higher  than  a  country  that  saw  no  violence 
(Feature  1,  ﬁ gure  F1.3).18  A  similar  picture 
emerges for subnational areas affected by vi-
olence in richer and more stable countries—
areas where development lags behind.19 

These  repeated  cycles  of  conﬂ ict  and 
violence exact other human, social, and eco-
nomic  costs  that  last  for  generations.  High 
levels  of  organized  criminal  violence  hold 
back economic development. In Guatemala, 
violence cost the country more than 7 percent 
of GDP in 2005, more than twice the damage 
by  Hurricane  Stan  in  the  same  year—and 
more  than  twice  the  combined  budget  for 
agriculture, health, and education.20 The av-
erage cost of civil war is equivalent to more 
than 30 years of GDP growth for a medium-

6 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

size  developing  country.21  Trade  levels  after 
major  episodes  of  violence  take  20  years  to 
recover.22  In  other  words,  a  major  episode 
of  violence,  unlike  natural  disasters  or  eco-
nomic cycles, can wipe out an entire genera-
tion of economic progress. 

These  numbers  have  human  conse-
quences.  In  highly  violent  societies,  many 
people  experience  the  death  of  a  son  or 
daughter before their time: when children are 
late coming home, a parent has good reason 
to fear for their lives and physical safety. Ev-
eryday experiences, such as going to school, 
to work, or to market, become occasions for 
fear. People hesitate to build houses or invest 
in small businesses because these can be de-
stroyed  in  a  moment.  The  direct  impact  of 
violence falls primarily on young males—the 
majority  of  ﬁ ghting  forces  and  gang  mem-
bers—but women and children often suffer 
disproportionately from the indirect effects.23 
Men make up 96 percent of detainees and 90 
percent of the missing; women and children 
are close to 80 percent of refugees and those 
internally  displaced.24  And  violence  begets 
violence:  male  children  who  witness  abuses 
have a higher tendency to perpetrate violence 
later in life.25

Yet when security is reestablished and sus-
tained, these areas of the world can make the 
greatest development gains. Several countries 
emerging from long legacies of both political 
and criminal violence have been among the 
fastest making progress on the MDGs:26 

•  Ethiopia  more  than  quadrupled  access 
to  improved  water,  from  13  percent  of 
the population in 1990 to 66 percent in 
2009–10. 

•  Mozambique more than tripled its pri mary 
completion  rate  in  just  eight  years,  from 
14 percent in 1999 to 46 percent in 2007. 

•  Rwanda cut the prevalence of undernutri-
tion from 56 percent of the population in 
1997 to 40 percent in 2005. 

•  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  between  1995 
and  2007,  increased  measles  immuniza-
tions  from  53  percent  to  96  percent  for 
children aged 12–23 months. 

Vicious cycles of conflict: When 
security, justice, and employment 
stresses meet weak institutions

Internal causes of conﬂ ict arise from politi-
cal, security, and economic dynamics.27 Yet it 
is  difﬁ cult  to  disentangle  causes  and  effects 
of violence. Lower GDP per capita is robustly 
associated  with  both  large-scale  political 
conﬂ ict and high rates of homicide.28 Youth 
unemployment  is  consistently  cited  in  citi-
zen perception surveys as a motive for join-
ing both rebel movements and urban gangs 
(Feature 2, ﬁ gure F2.2).29 Feeling more secure 
and  powerful  is  also  cited  as  an  important 
motivator across countries, conﬁ rming exist-
ing research that shows that employment dy-
namics have to do not only with income but 
also with respect and status, involving social 
cohesion  as  well  as  economic  opportunity. 
Political  exclusion  and  inequality  affecting 
regional, religious, or ethnic groups are asso-
ciated with higher risks of civil war,30 (and are 
also cited in citizen surveys as a key driver of 
conﬂ ict alongside poverty—see ﬁ gure F2.1) 
while  inequality  between  richer  and  poorer 
households is closely associated with higher 
risks of violent crime (table 1.1). 

External factors can heighten the risks of 
violence.  Major  external  security  pressures, 
as with new patterns of drug trafﬁ cking, can 
overwhelm institutional capacities (see Fea-
ture 2). Income shocks can also increase risks 
of violence. Work on rainfall shocks in Sub-
Saharan  Africa  concludes  that  civil  conﬂ ict 
is  more  likely  following  years  of  poor  rain-
fall.  Using  rainfall  variation  as  a  proxy  for 
income  shocks  in  41  African  countries  be-
tween 1981 and 1999, Satyanath, Miguel, and 
Sergenti  found  that  a  decline  in  economic 
growth  of  5  percent  increased  the  likeli-
hood of conﬂ ict by half the following year.31 
Corruption—which  generally  has  interna-
tional links through illicit trafﬁ cking, money 
laundering, and the extraction of rents from 
sales  of  national  resources  or  international 
contracts and concessions—has doubly per-
nicious impacts on the risks of violence, by 
fueling  grievances  and  by  undermining  the 
effectiveness of national institutions and so-

 

Overview 

7

TA BL E 1.1   Security, economic, and political stresses

Internal

External

Legacies of violence and trauma

Stresses

Security 

Economic 

• 

• 

Low income levels, low opportunity 
cost of rebellion

•  Youth unemployment
•  Natural resource wealth
• 
Severe corruption
•  Rapid urbanization
• 

Justice

Ethnic, religious, or regional 
competition

•  Real or perceived discrimination
•  Human rights abuses

Invasion, occupation
External support for domestic rebels

• 
• 
•  Cross-border conﬂ ict spillovers
• 
• 

Transnational terrorism
International criminal networks

•  Price shocks
•  Climate change

•  Perceived global inequity and 

injustice in the treatment of ethnic or 
religious groups

Source: WDR team.
Note: This table, although not exhaustive, captures major factors in the academic literature on the causes and correlates of 
conﬂ ict and raised in the WDR consultations and surveys.33

cial  norms.32  New  external  pressures  from 
climate change and natural resource compe-
tition could heighten all these risks.34

However,  many  countries  face  high  un-
employment,  economic  inequality,  or  pres-
sure  from  organized  crime  networks  but 
do  not  repeatedly  succumb  to  widespread 
violence,  and  instead  contain  it.  The  WDR 
approach emphasizes that risk of conﬂ ict and 
violence in any society (national or regional) 
is the combination of the exposure to inter-
nal and external stresses and the strength of 
the “immune system,” or the social capability 
for coping with stress embodied in legitimate 
institutions.35 Both state and nonstate institu-
tions are important. Institutions include so-
cial norms and behaviors—such as the ability 
of leaders to transcend sectarian and politi-
cal differences and develop bargains, and of 
civil society to advocate for greater national 
and political cohesion—as well as rules, laws, 
and  organizations.36  Where  states,  markets, 
and  social  institutions  fail  to  provide  basic 
security, justice, and economic opportunities 
for citizens, conﬂ ict can escalate.

In  short,  countries  and  subnational  ar-
eas with the weakest institutional legitimacy 
and  governance  are  the  most  vulnerable  to 
violence  and  instability  and  the  least  able 
to respond to internal and external stresses. 

Institutional capacity and accountability are 
important  for  both  political  and  criminal 
violence (see Feature 2).37 

• 

In  some  areas—as  in  the  peripheral  re-
gions of Colombia before the turn of the 
21st century38 or the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo39 today—the state is all but 
absent  from  many  parts  of  the  country, 
and violent armed groups dominate local 
contests over power and resources. 

•  Most areas affected by violence face deﬁ -
cits  in  their  collaborative  capacities40  to 
mediate conﬂ ict peacefully. In some coun-
tries,  institutions  do  not  span  ethnic,  re-
gional, or religious divides, and state insti-
tutions have been viewed as partisan—just 
as they were for decades prior to the peace 
agreement in Northern Ireland.41 In some 
communities,  social  divisions  have  con-
strained  effective  collaboration  between 
elite dominated states and poor commu-
nities to address sources of violence. 

•  Rapid  urbanization,  as  occurred  earlier 
in Latin America and today in Asia and 
Africa,  weakens  social  cohesion.42  Un-
employment, structural inequalities, and 
greater  access  to  markets  for  ﬁ rearms 
and illicit drugs break down social cohe-
sion  and  increase  the  vulnerability  to 
criminal networks and gangs.

8 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

•  Countries with weak institutional capacity 
were more likely to suffer violent social un-
rest during the food shocks of 2008–09.43

•  Some states have tried to maintain stability 
through coercion and patronage networks, 
but  those  with  high  levels  of  corruption 
and  human  rights  abuses  increase  their 
risks of violence breaking out in the future 
(see Feature 2).

Weak  institutions  are  particularly  im-
portant  in  explaining  why  violence  repeats 
in different forms in the same countries or 
subnational  regions.  Even  societies  with 
the weakest institutions have periodic out-
breaks of peace. South-central Somalia has 
had  interludes  of  low  conﬂ ict  over  the  last 
30 years based on agreements by small num-
bers  of  elites.44  But  temporary  elite  pacts, 
in  Somalia  and  elsewhere,  do  not  provide 
the grounds for sustained security and de-
velopment  unless  they  are  followed  by  the 
development of legitimate state and society 
institutions.45 They are generally short-lived 
because they are too personalized and nar-
row to accommodate stresses and adjust to 
change.  New  internal  and  external  stresses 
arise—a  leader’s  death,  economic  shocks, 
the  entry  of  organized  criminal  trafﬁ cking 
networks,  new  opportunities  or  rents,  or 
external  security  interference—and  there 
is  no  sustained  ability  to  respond.46  So  the 
violence recurs. 

A  focus  on  legitimate  institutions  does 
not mean converging on Western institutions. 
History provides many examples of foreign 
institutional  models  that  have  proven  less 
than  useful  to  national  development,  par-
ticularly through colonial legacies,47 because 
they focused on form rather than function. 
The same is true today. In Iraq, the Coalition 
Provisional  Authority  established  commis-
sions  on  every  subject  from  tourism  to  the 
environment in parallel with struggling line 
ministries, and model laws were passed that 
had little relationship to national social and 
political realities.48 Even transfers of organiza-
tional forms between countries in the South 
can be unproductive if not adapted to local 

conditions—the  truth  and  reconciliation, 
anti-corruption, and human rights commis-
sions that delivered so marvelously in some 
countries have not always worked in others. 
There are gains from sharing knowledge, as 
the Report makes clear—but only if adapted 
to local conditions. “Best-ﬁ t” institutions are 
central to the Report. 

PART 2: A ROADMAP 
FOR BREAKING CYCLES 
OF VIOLENCE AT THE 
COUNTRY LEVEL

Restoring confidence and 
transforming the institutions that 
provide citizen security, justice, 
and jobs

To break cycles of insecurity and reduce the 
risk  of  their  recurrence,  national  reformers 
and their international partners need to build 
the legitimate institutions that can provide a 
sustained level of citizen security, justice, and 
jobs—offering  a  stake  in  society  to  groups 
that may otherwise receive more respect and 
recognition from engaging in armed violence 
than  in  lawful  activities,  and  punishing  in-
fractions capably and fairly. 

But  transforming  institutions—always 
tough—is particularly difﬁ cult in fragile situ-
ations. First, in countries with a track record 
of  violence  and  mistrust,  expectations  are 
 either too low, so that no government prom-
ises  are  believed,  making  cooperative  action 
impossible—or too high, so that transitional 
moments  produce  expectations  of  rapid 
change  that  cannot  be  delivered  by  existing 
institutions.49  Second,  many 
institutional 
changes  that  could  produce  greater  long-
term  resilience  against  violence  frequently 
carry short-term risks. Any important shift—
holding elections, dismantling patronage net-
works,  giving  new  roles  to  security  services, 
decentralizing decision-making, empowering 
disadvantaged groups—creates both winners 
and  losers.  Losers  are  often  well  organized 

Overview
Overview

9
9

FEATURE 2  High stresses and weak institutions = risks of violence

Justice, jobs, and violence

F I G UR E F2.1   What are citizens’ views on the drivers of conﬂ ict?

In surveys conducted in six countries and territories aﬀ ected by violence, involving a mix of nationally 
representative samples and subregions, citizens raised issues linked to individual economic welfare 
(poverty, unemployment) and injustice (including inequality and corruption) as the primary drivers of conﬂ ict.

g
n
i
r
e
w
s
n
a
 
s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
y
e
v
r
u
s
 
%

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Poverty/

poor education

Conﬂict over
resources/

scarce resources

External

aggression

Ethnic conﬂict/

religion

Injustice/
inequality/
corruption

Other

Source: Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010. 

F I G UR E F2.2   What drives people to join rebel movement and gangs?

The same surveys found that the main reasons cited for why young people become 
rebels or gang members are very similar—unemployment predominates for both. 
This is not necessarily the case for militant ideological recruitment (chapter 2).

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 

%

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

39.5%

46%

15%

13%

13%

8%

Rebel participation

Gang participation

Unemployment/Idleness
Feel more secure/Powerful
Belief in the cause/Revenge/Injustice

Source: Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010. 

10 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

 

   Jorge Montaño, Member, International Narcotics Control Board; former Ambassador of Mexico to the 
United States; WDR Advisory Council Member 

The role of external stresses

Drug and human traﬃ  cking, money laundering, illegal exploitation of natural resources and wildlife, counterfeiting, and viola-
tions of intellectual property rights are lucrative criminal activities, which facilitate the penetration by organized crime of the 
already vulnerable sociopolitical, judicial, and security structures in developing countries. 

In Central America, for example, several countries that regained political stability two decades ago are now facing the decay 
of the state, whose institutions lack the strength to face this onslaught. Transnational organized crime has converted some Carib-
bean countries into corridors for the movement of illegal drugs and persons toward Europe and North America. Bolivia, Colom-
bia, and Peru, continue to be the main global cocaine producers, while Mexico is facing an unprecedented wave of violence given 
its border with the largest immigrant, drug consumption, and arms producing market. West Africa has become the newest pas-
sage of drugs coming from South America and destined for Europe. Several African countries suﬀ er the illegal exploitation of 
their natural resources, while Asia is a hub for tons of opiates originating from Afghanistan. The unprecedented progression of 
organized crime could spell the collapse of many weak states as their institutions fall prey to the associated violence. The precari-
ous economic development observed in many regions of the world provides a stimulus for consolidating these illegal activities, 
which will continue to thrive as a consequence of the impunity they encounter in developing countries.

WDR Note: Weak institutions are a common factor in explaining repeated cycles of violence

Building on previous work by Collier, Fearon, Goldstone, North, Wallis, and Weingast, and others, political scientists Jim Fearon 
and Barbara Walter used econometric techniques for the WDR to test whether general rule of law and government eﬀ ective-
ness, low corruption, and strong protection of human rights correlate with a lower risk of the onset and recurrence of civil war 
and of high homicides from criminal violence. Fearon ﬁ nds that countries with above average governance indicators for their 
income level have a signiﬁ cantly lower risk of the outbreak of civil conﬂ ict within the next 5 to 10 years—between 30 to 45 per-
cent lower—and that the relationship also holds true for countries with high homicides. This work conﬁ rms earlier directions in 
the policy community, such as the International Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragility’s emphasis on the links between peacebuild-
ing and state-building.

Measures of accountability are as important as measures of capacity in this calculation. Fearon ﬁ nds that high levels of polit-
ical  terror  in  past  periods  increase  the  chances  of  current  conﬂ ict.  Walter  ﬁ nds  that  signiﬁ cant  reductions  in  the  number  of 
political prisoners and extrajudicial killings make the renewal of civil war between two and three times less likely than in coun-
tries with higher levels of human rights abuses. She notes, “A reasonable interpretation of these results is that greater repression 
and abuse by a government creates both grievances and signals that those governments (sic) are not dependable negotiating 
partners; suggesting that less coercive and more accountable approaches signiﬁ cantly decrease the risk of civil conﬂ ict.” Other 
measures  of  accountability  also  matter:  measures  of  rule  of  law  and  corruption  are  as  or  more  important  than  measures  of 
bureaucratic quality.

and resist change. Third, external stresses can 
derail progress. 

Creating  the  legitimate  institutions  that 
can prevent repeated violence is, in plain lan-
guage,  slow.  It  takes  a  generation.  Even  the 
fastest-transforming  countries  have  taken 
between 15 and 30 years to raise their institu-
tional performance from that of a fragile state 
today—Haiti,  say—to  that  of  a  functioning 
institutionalized state, such as Ghana (table 
2.1).50 The good news is that this process of 

transforming institutions accelerated consid-
erably in the late 20th century, with increases 
in citizen demands for good governance and 
in the technologies that can help supply it. In-
deed, making progress in a generation is ac-
tually quite fast: progress at this speed would 
represent  immense  development  gains  for 
countries such as Afghanistan, Haiti, Liberia, 
and Timor-Leste today.

The basic framework of the WDR focuses 
on what we have learned about the dynam-

 

Overview 

11

TABLE 2.1   Fastest progress in institutional transformation—An estimate of 

realistic ranges

The table shows the historical range of timings that the fastest reformers in the 20th century 
took to achieve basic governance transformations.

Indicator

Bureaucratic quality (0–4)

Corruption (0–6)

Military in politics (0–6)

Government eﬀ ectiveness

Control of corruption

Rule of law

Years to threshold at pace of:

Fastest 20

Fastest over the threshold

20

27

17

36

27

41

12

14

10

13

16

17

Source: Pritchett and de Weijer 2010.

ics of action to prevent repeated cycles of vi-
olence—both in the short term and over the 
time needed to reach a sustained level of resil-
ience. Our knowledge of how to break these 
cycles  is  partial:  the  Report  lays  out  lessons 
drawn from existing research, country stud-
ies, and consultations with national reformers. 
Experiences  from  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, 
Chile,  Colombia,  Ghana,  Indonesia,  Liberia, 
Mozambique, Northern Ireland, Sierra Leone, 
South Africa, and Timor-Leste amongst others, 
are drawn on frequently in the Report because, 
while all of these areas still face challenges and 
risks,  these  societies  have  achieved  consider-
able  successes  in  preventing  violence  from 
escalating  or  recovering  from  its  aftermath. 
These and the other experiences in the Report 
also  span  a  range  of  high-income,  middle-
 income and lower-income countries, a range 
of  threats  of  political  and  criminal  violence, 
and  differing  institutional  contexts,  rang-
ing from situations where strong institutions 
faced  legitimacy  challenges  due  to  problems 
of  inclusion  and  accountability  to  situations 
where weak capacity was a major constraint.

There  are  some  fundamental  differences 
between  fragile  and  violent  situations  and 
stable developing environments. First is the 
need to  restore conﬁ dence in collective ac-
tion before embarking on wider institutional 

focused—transforming 

transformation.  Second  is  the  priority  of 
transforming institutions that provide citi-
zen security, justice, and jobs.  Third  is  the 
role  of  regional  and  international  action  to 
contain external stresses. Fourth is the spe-
cialized nature of external support needed. 
Institutional  transformation  and  good 
governance, central to these processes, work 
differently  in  fragile  situations.  The  goal  is 
more 
institutions 
that deliver citizen security, justice, and  jobs. 
When facing the risk of conﬂ ict and violence, 
citizen  security,  justice  and  jobs  are  the  key 
elements of protection to achieve human se-
curity.51 The dynamics of institutional change 
are also different. A good analogy is a ﬁ nan-
cial crisis caused by a combination of external 
stresses and weaknesses in institutional checks 
and balances. In such a situation, exceptional 
efforts  are  needed  to  restore  conﬁ dence  in 
national leaders’ ability to manage the crisis—
through actions that signal a real break with 
the past and through locking in these actions 
and showing that they will not be reversed.

Conﬁ dence-building—a concept used in 
political  mediation  and  ﬁ nancial  crises  but 
rarely in development circles52—is a prelude 
to  more  permanent  institutional  change  in 
the face of violence. Why? Because low trust 
means  that  stakeholders  who  need  to  con-

12 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

F I G UR E 2.1    Moving from fragility and violence to institutional resilience in citizen 

security, justice, and jobs

CITIZEN 
SECURITY,
JUSTICE, 
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

NS 

U

TIO

R

E

S

T

 
T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R

I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIO

NS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

Source: WDR team. 

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

tribute  political,  ﬁ nancial,  or  technical  sup-
port  will  not  collaborate  until  they  believe 
that  a  positive  outcome  is  possible.53  But 
conﬁ dence-building  is  not  an  end  in  itself. 
Just as in a ﬁ nancial crisis, progress will not 
be sustained unless the institutions that pro-
vide citizen security, justice, and an economic 
stake in society are transformed to prevent a 
recurrence of violence. 

Just  as  violence  repeats,  efforts  to  build 
conﬁ dence  and  transform  institutions  typi-
cally follow a repeated spiral. Countries that 
moved  away  from  fragility  and  conﬂ ict  of-
ten do so not through one decisive “make or 
break”  moment—but  through  many  transi-
tion  moments,  as  the  spiral  path  in  ﬁ gure 
2.1  illustrates.  National  leaders  had  to  build 
conﬁ dence in the state and to transform in-
stitutions over time, as with the Republic of 
Korea’s  transitions  in  the  security,  political, 
and economic spheres after the Korean War, 
or  Ghana,  Chile  and  Argentina’s  transitions 
from  military  rule,  which  included  repeated 
internal  contests  over  the  norms  and  gover-

nance of society.54 A repeated process enables 
space for collaborative norms and capacities to 
develop, and for success to build on successes 
in a virtuous cycle. For each loop of the spi-
ral, the same two phases recur: building con-
ﬁ dence that positive chance is possible, prior 
to deepening the institutional transformation 
and strengthening governance outcomes.

Conﬁ dence-building—Inclusive-
enough coalitions and early results

The  state  cannot  restore  conﬁ dence  alone. 
Conﬁ dence-building in situations of violence 
and fragility requires deliberate effort to build 
inclusive-enough coalitions, as Indonesia did in 
addressing violence in Aceh or Timor-Leste in 
its recovery after the renewed violence in 2006 
or Chile in its political transition. Coalitions 
are “inclusive-enough” when they include the 
parties necessary for implementing the initial 
stages of conﬁ dence-building and institutional 
transformation. They need not be “all-inclu-
sive.”55  Inclusive-enough  coalitions  work  in 

 

Overview 

13

two ways: (1) at a broad level, by building na-
tional support for change and bringing in the 
relevant  stakeholders,  through  collaboration 
between the government and other sectors of 
society—as  well  as  with  regional  neighbors, 
donors, or investors, and (2) at a local level, by 
promoting outreach to community leaders to 
identify priorities and deliver programs. Inclu-
sive-enough coalitions apply just as much to 
criminal as to political violence, through col-
laboration with community leaders, business, 
and civil society in areas affected by criminal 
violence.  Civil  society—including  women’s 
organizations—often  plays  important  roles 
in  restoring  conﬁ dence  and  sustaining  the 
momentum for recovery and transformation, 
as  demonstrated  by  the  role  of  the  Liberian 
Women’s Initiative in pressing for continued 
progress in the peace agreement.56 

Persuading  stakeholders  to  work  collab-
oratively requires signals of a real break with 
the past—for example, ending the political or 
economic exclusion of marginalized groups, 
corruption, or human rights abuses—as well 
as  mechanisms  to  “lock-in”  these  changes 
and show that they will not be reversed. In 
moments  of  opportunity  or  crisis,  fast  and 
visible  results  also  help  restore  conﬁ dence 
in  the  government’s  ability  to  deal  with 
violent  threats  and  implement  institutional 
and  social  change.  State-community,  state-
nongovernmental organization (NGO), state-
international,  and  state-private-sector  part-
nerships  can  extend  the  state’s  capacity  to 
deliver.  Actions  in  one  domain  can  support 
results  in  another.  Security  operations  can 
facilitate safe trade and transit, and the eco-
nomic activity that creates jobs. Services deliv-
ered to marginalized groups can support per-
ceptions of justice. More detailed approaches 
to  support  inclusive-enough  coalitions  are 
described in the section on practical policies 
and programs for country actors below.

Transforming institutions that deliver 
citizen security, justice, and jobs 

There is a limit to the amount of change soci-
eties can absorb at any one time, and in frag-

ile  situations,  many  reforms  need  a  build-
up of trust and capacity before they can be 
successfully  implemented.  Getting  the  bal-
ance right between “too fast” and “too slow” 
transformative  action  is  crucial,  and  some 
basic lessons emerge from successful country 
transitions.

First, prioritizing early action to reform the 
institutions  responsible  for  citizen  security, 
justice,  and  jobs  is  crucial,  as  in  Singapore’s 
post-independence  development  (see  Fea-
ture 3). Stemming illegal ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows from 
the  public  purse  or  from  natural  resource 
trafﬁ cking  is  important  to  underpin  these 
initiatives.  Pragmatic,  “best-ﬁ t”  approaches 
adapted  to  local  conditions  will  be  needed. 
For example, Lebanon restored the electricity 
needed for economic recovery during the civil 
war through small private-sector networks of 
providers,  albeit  at  high  unit  costs.57  Haiti’s 
successful police reforms in 2004 to 2009 fo-
cused on ousting abusers from the force and 
restoring very basic work discipline.58

Second,  focusing  on  citizen  security,  jus-
tice, and jobs means that most other reforms 
will  need  to  be  sequenced  and  paced  over 
time,  including  political  reform,  decentral-
ization,  privatization,  and  shifting  attitudes 
toward  marginalized  groups.  Systematically 
implementing  these  reforms  requires  a  web 
of institutions (democratization, for example, 
requires  many  institutional  checks  and  bal-
ances beyond elections) and changes in social 
attitudes.  Several  successful  political  transi-
tions, such as the devolution that underpins 
peace  in  Northern  Ireland  and  democratic 
transitions  in  Chile,  Indonesia,  or  Portugal, 
have taken place through a series of steps over 
a decade or more. 

There  are  exceptions—where  the  exclu-
sion of groups from democratic participation 
has been a clear overriding source of griev-
ance, rapid action on elections makes sense; 
and where interests that previously blocked 
reform  have  diminished,  as  with  post-war 
Japanese or Republic of Korea land reform,59 
fast action can take advantage of a window of 
opportunity. But in most situations, system-
atic and gradual action appears to work best. 

14 
14 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

FE ATU R E 3   Country experiences of conﬁ dence-building and transforming institutions for 

 

 

 

 

 

 

citizen security, justice, and jobs

Confidence building in South Africa 

   Jay Naidoo, Chairman of Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition; Former General Secretary, 
Congress of South African Trade Unions; Former Minister of Reconstruction and Development, South 
Africa; and Former Chairman of the Development Bank of Southern Africa; WDR Advisory Council 
Member

(Abbreviated from WDR 2011, chapter 3)

In South Africa, the “moment” of transition in 1994 was pre-
ceded  by  multiple  transition  points  which  required  eﬀ orts 
from the protagonists to shift the debate and that gave cred-
ibility to the process. On the African National Congress (ANC) 
Alliance side, this included the shift to a broader, more inclu-
sive  approach,  and  the  realization  of  the  need  to  ensure 
incentives for the National Party and the white population. 
On the National Party side, this included the shift from think-
ing in terms of group rights and protection of minorities to 
thinking in terms of individual rights and majority rule. Cer-
tain signals which were perceived as irreversible (notably the 
unconditional  release  of  Nelson  Mandela  and  the  suspen-
sion of the ANC’s armed struggle) were critical in maintain-
ing trust between parties. After the 1994 elections, deliver-
ing  a  few  early  results—including  maternal  and  infant 
healthcare  and  using  community  structures  to  improve 
water  supply—were  important  to  maintain  conﬁ dence  in 
our new government.

In addition to successes, there were opportunities missed 
which  may  be  of  use  when  other  countries  consider  South 
Africa’s  experiences.  This  included  too  little  attention  to  job 
creation for youth and risks of criminal violence. It meant that 
we did not fully address the critical need to ensure that the new 
generation who had not lived through the apartheid struggle 
as  adults  were  provided  with  a  strong  stake—and  economic 
opportunities—in the new democratic state.

There  was  also  too  much  of  an  assumption  that  1994 
marked  the  culmination  of  a  process  of  democratization  and 
reconciliation. Relatively little attention was given to what was 
meant by the transformation to a constitutional state; the con-
tinued role of civil society in deepening not just democratiza-
tion and accountability but also delivery. And there was a need 
for  a  deeper  and  more  thorough  ongoing  debate  on  racism, 
inequality, and social exclusion.

All politics is local and early attention to security, justice, and jobs

  George Yeo, Minister of Foreign Affairs for Singapore; WDR Advisory Council Member

(Abbreviated from WDR 2011, chapters 4 and 5)

Successful  eﬀ orts  must  begin  at  the  local  level.  Without 
emphasis  on  local  results,  citizens  lose  conﬁ dence  in  their 
government’s  ability  to  provide  a  better  life.  Actions  to 
restore  security,  create  trust,  generate  employment,  and 
provide services in local communities lay the foundation for 
national progress. It is not enough to deliver results in big 
cities.  In  cases  of  ethnic  and  religious  strife,  where  mutual 
insecurity can feed on itself, a local authority that is seen to 
be  fair  and  impartial  by  all  groups  is  absolutely  essential 
before the process of healing and recovery can take place. 
This was Singapore’s experience when we had race riots in 
the 1960s. A trusted leader can make a decisive diﬀ erence.

It  takes  time  to  build  institutions.  Getting  the  urgent 
things done ﬁ rst, especially improving security and provid-
ing jobs, helps people to feel more hopeful about the future. 
Success then creates the condition for further success. With-

out a practical approach, new institutions cannot take root in 
the hearts and minds of ordinary people. For Singapore in the 
early  years,  the  priority  was  on  security,  law  and  order,  and 
creating  favorable  conditions  for  investment  and  economic 
growth. Conﬁ dence was everything. National Service was intro-
duced within a year. Secret societies and other criminal activi-
ties were suppressed. Corruption was progressively rooted out. 
To promote investment and job creation, labor and land acqui-
sition laws were reformed early. Against conventional wisdom 
in many developing countries at that time, we eschewed pro-
tectionism and encouraged multinationals to invest. Managing 
the politics of change was always a challenge. 

The  key  was  winning  the  trust  of  the  people.  Institutions 
which endure are sustained by the respect and aﬀ ection of the 
population. It is a process which takes at least a generation. 

 

Overview 

15

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

FE ATU R E 3   Country experiences of conﬁ dence-building and transforming institutions for 

citizen security, justice, and jobs (continued)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Colombia’s restoration of confidence in safe transit

   Marta Lucía Ramirez de Rincón, Director, Fundación Ciudadanía en Acción; former Senator and Chair of 
Security Commission, Colombia; former Defense Minister and former Foreign Trade Minister, Colombia; 
WDR Advisory Council Member

(Abbreviated from WDR 2011, chapter 5)

The  challenge  we  faced  in  2002  was  preventing  Colombia 
from becoming a failed state. This meant shielding our citi-
zens from kidnapping and terrorism. It also meant protect-
ing  our  infrastructure,  roads,  and  democratic  institutions 
against attacks by the guerrillas, the paramilitaries, and drug 
traﬃ  ckers. These groups hijacked cars and kidnapped peo-
ple as they travelled across the country. Since this problem 
had worsened in the years ahead of the 2002 elections, the 
government  set  the  restoration  of  security  in  roads  and 
highways  as  a  key  priority  on  their  agenda.  It  devised  the 
Meteoro  program  widely  known  as,  “Live  Colombia,  travel 
across it” (“Vive Colombia, Viaja por ella”). 

Meteoro aimed at restoring control of the roads and high-
ways  across  the  country  back  from  the  illegitimate  hand  of 
armed groups that inﬂ icted fear in the population. The govern-
ment invited the Colombian population to drive their cars and 
travel  across  the  country  without  intimidation,  while  at  the 
same time launching a major military, intelligence, and police 
operation  to  protect  the  roads  and  ensure  the  safety  of  the 
population. Through this plan, the government sought to give 
people back their country and to reactivate trade and tourism. 
Above all, this plan, implemented at the very early stage of the 
new government, brought about a breakthrough in the resto-
ration of trust and hope in the Colombian society. 

Do not confuse speed with haste in political processes 

   Lakhdar Brahimi, former UN Special Representative of the Secretary General to Iraq and Afghanistan; 
WDR Advisory Council Member

(Abbreviated from WDR 2011, chapter 5)

It is important not to confuse speed with haste in political 
processes: too hasty approaches can precipitate the oppo-
site  eﬀ ect  from  the  one  we  seek  to  support.  The  interna-
tional community’s high hopes for Iraq’s 2005 experiment in 
proportional  electoral  democracy  produced  a  contest  for 
power  which  increased  rather  than  allayed  sectarian  vio-
lence and the constitution hastily produced later is proving 
diﬃ  cult  to  implement.  Similarly,  the  2009  election  in  Af -
ghanistan proved to challenge rather than bolster perceptions 
of institutional legitimacy in the immediate aftermath.

The  options  are  not  mutually  exclusive—there  is  great 
worldwide  demand  for  more  inclusive  and  responsive  gover-
nance, and elections can be a crucial means to provide this. But 
their  timing  requires  careful  attention.  Democratic  traditions 
have developed in most countries over a considerable period. 
Democratization  eﬀ orts  today,  similarly,  require  attention  to 
historical heritages and existing political cleavages, and must 
be seen as an ongoing process of social transformation and the 
development  of  a  broad  range  of  institutions  that  provide 
checks and balances rather than an identiﬁ able “event.” Democ-
ratization does not start or end with elections.

Addressing external stresses and 
mobilizing international support 

External  stresses,  such  as  the  inﬁ ltration  of 
organized  crime  and  trafﬁ cking  networks, 
spillovers  from  neighboring  conﬂ icts,  and 
economic  shocks,  are  important  factors  in 
increasing the risk of violence. In fragile situ-
ations, many of these external pressures will 

already be present and the institutions to re-
spond to them are generally weak. If they are 
not addressed, or if they increase, they can de-
rail efforts at violence prevention and recov-
ery. Far more so than in stable development 
environments,  addressing  external  stresses 
therefore needs to be a core part of national 
strategies  and  international  supporting  ef-
forts for violence prevention and recovery.

16 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

International  assistance  needs  also  differ 
in fragile situations. The requirement to gen-
erate rapid conﬁ dence-building results puts 
a  particular  premium  on  speed.  The  focus 
on  building  collaborative,  inclusive-enough 
coalitions  and  on  citizen  security,  justice, 
and  jobs  draws  together  a  wider  range  of 
international  capacities  that  need  to  work 
in concert—for example, for mediation, hu-
man rights, and security assistance, as well as 
humanitarian  and  development  aid.  Where 
the political situation is fragile and the capac-
ity of local systems to ensure accountability 
is  weak,  international  incentives—such  as 
recognition and sanction mechanisms—also 
play a signiﬁ cant role. Take one of the smaller 
West  African  countries  that  have  recently 
had  coups  d’état.  Local  mechanisms  to  re-
solve the situation peacefully are limited, and 
African  Union  (AU)  and  Economic  Com-
munity  of  West  African  States  (ECOWAS) 
pressure to return to a constitutional path is 
critical.  So  regional  and  global  recognition 
for responsible leadership can play a role in 
strengthening  incentives  and  accountability 
systems at a national level. 

Practical policy and program tools 
for country actors

The WDR lays out a different way of thinking 
about approaches to violence prevention and 
recovery in fragile situations. It does not aim 
to be a “cookbook” that prescribes recipes—
each  country’s  political  context  differs,  and 
there are no one-size-ﬁ ts-all solutions. While 
the  choice  of  conﬁ dence-building  measures 
and  institution-building  approaches  needs 
to be adapted to each country, a set of basic 
tools  emerging  from  experience  can  be  the 
basis  for  that  adaptation.  These  core  tools 
include  the  options  for  signals  and  com-
mitment  mechanisms  to  build  collabora-
tive  coalitions,  demonstrating  a  break  from 
the past and building conﬁ dence in positive 
outcomes. They also include a description of 
the  programs  that  can  deliver  quick  results 
and  longer-term  institutional  provision  of 

citizen security, justice, and jobs. The Report 
ﬁ rst presents the basic tools and then looks at 
how to differentiate strategies and program-
ming to different country circumstances, us-
ing country-speciﬁ c assessments of risks and 
opportunities. 

Political and policy signals to build 
collaborative, inclusive-enough 
coalitions

There  is  a  surprising  commonality  across 
countries in the signals that most frequently 
build  conﬁ dence  and  collaborative  coali-
tions (see Feature 4). They can include im-
mediate actions in credible national or local 
appointments, in transparency, and in some 
cases,  the  removal  of  factors  seen  as  nega-
tive,  such  as  discriminatory  laws.  Security 
forces can be redeployed as a positive signal 
of attention to insecure areas, but also as a 
sign  that  the  government  recognizes  where 
particular units have a record of distrust or 
abuse with communities and replaces them. 
Measures to improve transparency of infor-
mation  and  decision-making  processes  can 
be important in building conﬁ dence, as well 
as laying the basis for sustained institutional 
transformation. 

Signals can also be announcements of fu-
ture  actions—the  selection  of  two  or  three 
key  early  results;  the  focus  of  military  and 
police  planning  on  citizen  security  goals; 
or  setting  approaches  and  timelines  toward 
political  reform,  decentralization,  or  tran-
sitional  justice.  Ensuring  that  political  and 
policy signals are realistic in scope and tim-
ing  and  can  be  delivered  is  important  in 
managing expectations—by anchoring them 
in  national  planning  and  budget  processes 
and discussing any external support needed 
in advance with international partners.

When signals relate to future action, their 
credibility will be increased by commitment 
mechanisms that persuade stakeholders that 
they  will  actually  be  implemented  and  not 
reversed. Examples are Colombia’s and Indo-
nesia’s independent, multisectoral executing 
agencies  and  third-party  monitors,  such  as 

 

Overview 

17

EXTERNAL
STRESS

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT

UTIONS 

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

I

 
 

C

N

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

EXTERNAL
STRESS

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT

UTIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

Feature 4 Core Tools

RESTORING CONFIDENCE

Signals: Future  
policy and priorities  

Signals:  
Immediate actions  

Commitment 
mechanisms  

Supporting
actions 

•  Citizen security goals 
•  Key principles and 

realistic timelines for 
political reform, 
decentralization, 
corruption, transi-
tional justice

•  Mix of state, commu-

nity, NGO, and interna-
tional capacity

•  Participatory processes
•  Local security, justice, 

and development results

•  Credible appointments
•  Transparency in 

expenditures

•  Redeployment of 

security forces

•  Removal of discrimina-

tory policies 

TRANSFORMING INSTITUTIONS 

Citizen security  
Foundational reforms and ”best-fi t” approaches

Justice  

•  Independence of 

executing agencies

•  Independent third-party 

monitoring

•  Dual-key national-

international systems

•  International execution 

of one or more key 
functions 

•  Risk and priority 

assessments

•  Communicating costs 

of inaction

•  Simple plans and 

progress measures on 
2–3 early results

•  Strategic 

communication 

Jobs and associated services 

Security sector reform: 
•  Designed to deliver citizen 

security benefi ts

•  Capacity increases linked 

to repeated realistic 
performance outcomes 
and justice functions
•  Dismantling criminal 

networks through civilian 
oversight, vetting and 
budget expenditure 
transparency

•  Use of low-capital systems 

for rural and community 
policing

Justice sector reform: 
independence and link to 
security reforms; strengthening 
basic caseload processing; 
extending justice services, 
drawing on traditional/
community mechanisms
Phasing anti-corruption 
measures: demonstrate 
national resources can be 
used for public good before 
dismantling rent systems; 
control capture of rents and 
use social accountability 
mechanisms

Multisectoral community empowerment 
programs: combining citizen security, employ-
ment, justice, education, and infrastructure
Employment programs: regulatory simplifi cation 
and infrastructure recovery for private-sector job 
creation, long-term public programs, asset 
expansion, value chain programs, informal sec-
tor support, labor migration, women’s economic 
empowerment, and asset expansion
Humanitarian delivery and social protection: 
with planned transition from international 
provision
Macroeconomic policy: focus on consumer price 
volatility and employment 

Gradual, systematic programs 

•  Phased capacity and 

accountability in special-
ized security functions 

•  Political and electoral reform
•  Decentralization
•  Transitional justice
•  Comprehensive anti-
corruption reforms 

•  Structural economic reforms such as 

privatization

•  Education and health reforms
•  Inclusion of marginalized groups 

EXTERNAL
STRESS

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

NATIONAL ACTION TO ADDRESS EXTERNAL STRESS 

Citizen security  

Justice  

Jobs and associated services 

•  Border cooperation
•  Military, police, and fi nan-

cial intelligence 

•  Coordinate supply and 
demand-side responses

•  Joint investigations and pros-
ecutions across jurisdictions 

•  Building links between 
formal/informal systems

•  Pooled supplementary administrative capacity
•  Cross-border development programming 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

FEASIBLE RESULTS INDICATORS TO DEMONSTRATE OVERALL PROGRESS

Citizen security  

Justice  

Short
term

•  Violent deaths
•  Perception survey 
data on increases/
decreases in security 

Longer
term

•  Victim surveys

•  Perception surveys by groups (eth-

nic, geographical, religious, class) on 
whether their welfare is increasing 
over time and in relation to others

•  Perception survey on trust in national 

institutions and on corruption 

•  Governance indicators refocused on 

outcomes and degree of progress 
within historically realistic timeframes 

•  Household survey data on vertical 

and horizontal inequalities and access 
to justice services 

Jobs and associated services 

•  Perceptions of whether 

employment 
opportunities are increasing
•  Price surveys (for real income 

implications)

•  Household data on 

employment and labor force 
participation

18 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

the joint ASEAN-EU (Association of South-
east  Asian  Nations–European  Union)  Aceh 
monitoring mission.60 Sole or “dual-key” au-
thority over one or more functions involving 
international  agencies—as  with  the  jointly 
run  Governance  and  Economic  Manage-
ment  Assistance  Program  in  Liberia,61  the 
International Commission Against Impunity 
(CICIG) in Guatemala,62 or when UN peace-
keeping  missions  have  executive  responsi-
bility  for  policing—is  also  a  commitment 
mechanism when institutional capacity and 
accountability are low.

Strong strategic communication on these 
signals  of  change  are  always  important—
actions and policy changes cannot inﬂ uence 
behaviors  unless  people  know  they  have 
taken place and how they ﬁ t into a broader 
vision. Where the risks of crisis escalation are 
not  fully  recognized  by  all  national  leaders, 
providing an accurate and compelling mes-
sage  on  the  consequences  of  inaction  can 
help galvanize momentum for progress. Eco-
nomic  and  social  analyses  can  support  this 
narrative—by  showing  how  rising  violence 
and failing institutions are causing national 
or  subnational  areas  to  lag  far  behind  their 
neighbors  in  development  progress;  or  by 
showing how other countries that have failed 
to address rising threats have faced severe and 
long-lasting development consequences. The 
WDR analysis provides some clear messages:

•  No country or region can afford to ignore 
areas  where  repeated  cycles  of  violence 
ﬂ ourish and citizens are disengaged from 
the state.

•  Unemployment,  corruption,  and  exclu-
sion  increase  the  risks  of  violence—and 
legitimate institutions and governance that 
give everyone a stake in national prosper-
ity  are  the  immune  system  that  protects 
from different types of violence.

•  Citizen  security  is  a  preeminent  goal  in 
fragile  situations,  underpinned  by  justice 
and jobs.

•  Leaders need to seize opportunities before 

violence escalates or recurs. 

National program design to restore 
conﬁ dence and transform institutions

The  core  program  tools  that  emerge  from 
different  country  experiences  are  deliber-
ately kept small in number to reﬂ ect country 
lessons  on  focus  and  priorities.  They  are  all 
designed to be delivered at scale, in large na-
tional  or  subnational  programs  rather  than 
small  projects.  They  include  multisectoral 
programs linking community structures with 
the  state;  security  sector  reform;  justice  re-
form; national employment policy and pro-
grams;  associated  services  that  support  citi-
zen security, justice, and job creation, such as 
electricity and social protection; and phased 
approaches to corruption. They also include 
programs  that  can  be  crucial  for  sustained 
violence prevention: political reform, decen-
tralization, transitional justice, and education 
reform where systematic attention is needed 
once early reforms in citizen security, justice, 
and jobs have started to make progress. 

The top ﬁ ve lessons of what works in pro-

gram design are:

•  Programs  that  support  bottom-up  state-
society  relations  in  insecure  areas.  These 
include  community-based  programs  for 
violence prevention, employment, and as-
sociated service delivery, and access to local 
justice  and  dispute  resolution.  Examples 
are community policing in a wide range of 
higher-, middle-, and lower-income coun-
tries,  the  Afghanistan  National  Solidarity 
Program,  and  Latin  American  multisec-
toral violence prevention programs.63

•  Complementary  programs  for  institu-
tional  transformation  in  the  priority  ar-
eas  of  security  and  justice.  Early  reform 
programs  should  focus  on  simple  basic 
func tions (such as criminal caseload pro-
cessing, adequate basic investigation, and 
arrest  procedures);  include  civilian  over-
sight, vetting, and budget and expenditure 
transparency to dismantle covert or crimi-
nal networks; and link the pace of reform 
between the police and civilian justice sys-
tems to avoid situations where increasing 

 

Overview 

19

police capacity results in prolonged deten-
tions or the release of offenders back into 
the community without due process. 

•  “Back  to  basics” 

job  creation  pro-
grams. These programs include large-scale 
community-based  public  works,  such  as 
those India and Indonesia use throughout 
the country, including in marginalized and 
 violence-affected  communities;  private-
sector  regulatory  simpliﬁ cation  and  ad-
dressing  of  infrastructure  bottlenecks  (in 
particular, electricity, which is the number 
one constraint for businesses in fragile and 
violent  areas);  and  access  to  ﬁ nance  and 
investments to bring producers and mar-
kets together, as in Kosovo’s and Rwanda’s 
coffee, dairy, and tourism initiatives.64 

•  The  involvement  of  women  in  security, 
justice, and economic empowerment pro-
grams, such as the Nicaragua, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone reforms to introduce female 
stafﬁ ng and gender-speciﬁ c service in the 
police force; and economic empowerment 
initiatives in Nepal, which addressed issues 
of  gender  roles  that  had  previously  been 
divisive in insecure areas through the pro-
vision of ﬁ nance and business training to 
women’s groups.65 

•  Focused  anticorruption  initiatives  that 
demonstrate  that  new  initiatives  can  be 
well  governed.  Tools  have  included  the 
use of private-sector capacity to monitor 
functions vulnerable to grand corruption, 
as  with  Liberia’s  forestry  inspection  and 
Mozambique’s  customs  collection,  com-
bined  with  social  accountability  mecha-
nisms that use transparent publication of 
expenditure and community/civil-society 
monitoring  to  ensure  funds  reach  their 
intended targets.66 

Some of the early conﬁ dence-building re-
sults that can be targeted through these pro-
grams include freedom of movement along 
transit routes, electricity coverage, number of 
businesses  registered  and  employment  days 
created, processing of judicial caseloads, and 

reduction  of  impunity  through  vetting  or 
prosecutions. What is crucial here is that early 
results generate improvements in the morale 
of national institutions and set the right in-
centives for later institution-building. 

For  example,  if  security  forces  are  set 
targets  based  on  the  number  of  rebel  com-
batants  killed  or  captured  or  criminals  ar-
rested,  they  may  rely  primarily  on  coercive 
approaches,  with  no  incentive  to  build  the 
longer-term  trust  with  communities  that 
will prevent violence from recurring. Targets 
based on citizen security (freedom of move-
ment and so on), in contrast, create longer-
term  incentives  for  the  role  of  the  security 
forces  in  underpinning  national  unity  and 
effective  state-society  relations.  Similarly,  if 
services and public works are delivered only 
through top-down national programs, there 
will be few incentives for communities to take 
responsibility for violence prevention or for 
national institutions to undertake responsi-
bility to protect all vulnerable citizens, men 
and women. A mixture of state and nonstate, 
bottom-up  and  top-down  approaches  is  a 
better underpinning for longer-term institu-
tional transformation. 

Phasing  transitions  from  humanitarian 
aid is also an important part of transform-
ing  institutions.  In  countries  where  current 
stresses overwhelm national institutional ca-
pacity by a large margin, national reformers 
often  draw  on  international  humanitarian 
capacity  to  deliver  early  results.  These  pro-
grams can be effective in saving lives, building 
conﬁ dence, and extending national capacity. 
But  a  difﬁ cult  trade-off  occurs  in  deciding 
on the time needed to shift these functions 
to national institutions. For food programs, 
this  generally  means  phasing  down  deliver-
ies  before  local  harvests  and  moving  from 
general  distribution  to  targeted  programs, 
in coordination with government social pro-
tection  agencies  where  possible.  For  health, 
education,  water,  and  sanitation,  it  means 
reducing  international  roles  step-by-step 
over time as the capacity of national or local 
institutions  increases—as  in  the  transition 

20 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

from  international  to  national  health  pro-
vision  in  Timor-Leste,  which  moved  from 
international execution to government con-
tracting of international NGOs and then to 
government management.67 

Regional and cross-border initiatives

Societies  do  not  have  the  luxury  of  trans-
forming their institutions in isolation—they 
need  at  the  same  time  to  manage  external 
pressures,  whether  from  economic  shocks 
or  trafﬁ cking  and  international  corruption. 
Many of these issues are beyond the control 
of each nation-state to address, and the last 
section of the Report considers international 
policy to diminish external stresses. National 
leaders may play a signiﬁ cant role in galva-
nizing broad regional or global cooperation 
on issues such as trafﬁ cking, as well as bilat-
eral cooperation. Possible initiatives include:

•  Openness to discuss both security and de-
velopment  cooperation  across  insecure 
border  regions,  based  on  shared  goals  of 
citizen  security,  justice,  and  jobs  rather 
than purely on military operations. Cross-
border development programming could 
simply  involve  special  arrangements  to 
share  lessons.  But  it  could  also  move  to-
ward formal joint arrangements to design 
and  monitor  development  programs  in 
insecure  border  areas  and  move  toward 
speciﬁ c provisions to help insecure land-
locked areas gain access to markets. 

• 

Joint  processes  to  investigate  and  prose-
cute incidents of corruption that can fuel 
 violence, as Haiti and Nigeria have done 
(with  the  United  States  and  the  United 
Kingdom)  to  combat  corruption  and 
money-laundering.68 These can build ca-
pacity in weaker jurisdictions and deliver 
results that could not be achieved by one 
jurisdiction alone.

Mobilizing international support 

Some  constraints  in  international  support 
come from policies and systems established 

in the headquarters of multilateral agencies 
and donor countries. Actions on these issues 
are discussed in Part 3 under Directions for 
International  Policy.  National  leaders  and 
their partners on the ground cannot individ-
ually determine these broader changes to the 
international system, but they can maximize 
the beneﬁ ts of existing support.

It  helps  when  national  leaders  and  their 
international  partners  in  the  ﬁ eld  lay  out 
clear program priorities across the security, 
justice, and development domains. Country 
experiences indicate that efforts need to fo-
cus on only two or three rapid results to build 
conﬁ dence, and on narrowly and realistically 
deﬁ ned  institution-building.  Priorities  are 
better laid out in a very limited number of 
clear programs—such as community-based 
interventions in insecure areas, security and 
freedom of movement on key roads—as in 
Liberia69  after  the  civil  war  and  in  Colom-
bia70 in the face of criminal violence in 2002. 
Using the national budget process to decide 
on  priority  programs  coordinates  messages 
and  develops  cooperation  in  implementa-
tion between the security and development 
ministries.

National  leaders  can  also  produce  bet-
ter results from external assistance by being 
alert  to  the  needs  of  international  partners 
to  show  results  and  manage  risks.  Interna-
tional  partners  have  their  own  domestic 
pressures—to demonstrate that assistance is 
not misused and to attribute results to their 
endeavors. A frank exchange on risks and re-
sults helps to ﬁ nd ways to bridge differences. 
In Indonesia in the aftermath of the Tsunami 
and Aceh peace agreement, for example, the 
government agreed with donors that incom-
ing assistance would be “jointly branded” by 
the Indonesian Reconstruction Agency and 
donors, with special transparency measures 
in place to enable both sides to show visible 
results  and  manage  risks  while  bolstering 
the  legitimacy  of  state-society  relations  in 
the aftermath of crisis. A “double compact” 
between governments and their citizens and 
between states and their international part-
ners,  ﬁ rst  proposed  by  Ashraf  Ghani  and 

 

Overview 

21

Clare Lockhart, is another way of managing 
different  perspectives  on  risk,  the  speed  of 
response,  and  long-term  engagement  with 
national  institutions—by  making  dual  ac-
countability of donor funds explicit.71

Monitoring results

To  evaluate  the  success  of  programs  and 
adapt  them  when  problems  arise,  national 
reformers and their international partners in 
country also need information on overall re-
sults in reducing violence, and on citizen con-
ﬁ dence in security, justice, and employment 
goals at regular intervals. For most develop-
ing  countries,  the  MDGs  and  their  associ-
ated targets and indicators are the dominant 
international  framework.  The  MDGs  have 
raised the proﬁ le of broad-based human de-
velopment and remain important long-term 
goals  for  countries  facing  fragility  and  vio-
lence. But they have drawbacks in their direct 
relevance to progress in violence prevention 
and recovery. They do not cover citizen secu-
rity and justice. They move slowly, so they do 
not provide national reformers or their inter-
national partners with rapid feedback loops 
that  can  demonstrate  areas  of  progress  and 
identify new or remaining risks. 

A useful supplement to the MDGs would 
be  indicators  that  more  directly  measure 
violence  reduction,  conﬁ dence-building  and 
citizen security and justice (Feature 4). Citi-
zen  polling  data,  glaringly  absent  in  many 
fragile and conﬂ ict-affected countries, could 
help  ﬁ ll  this  role.72  Middle-  and  higher-
income  countries  use  polling  all  the  time 
to  provide  governments  with  feedback  on 
progress and risks, but it is little used in low-

income,  fragile  countries.  Direct  measure-
ment of security improvements can also show 
rapid  progress,  but  while  data  on  violent 
deaths are fairly easy to collect, they are not 
available for the countries that would beneﬁ t 
most  from  them:  low-income,  fragile  states. 
Employment data also need to be upgraded.

Differentiating strategy and programs 
to country context

While  there  is  a  basic  set  of  tools  emerging 
from experience, each country needs to assess 
its circumstances and adapt lessons from oth-
ers to the local political context. Each country 
faces different stresses, different institutional 
challenges,  different  stakeholders  who  need 
to be involved to make a difference, and dif-
ferent types of transition opportunities. The 
differences are not black and white but occur 
across  a  spectrum—each  country  will  have 
different manifestations of violence, different 
combinations of internal or external stresses, 
and  different  institutional  challenges—and 
these  factors  will  change  over  time.  But  all 
countries face some aspects of this mix. The 
Report  covers  some  of  the  most  important 
differences in country circumstances through 
the simple differentiation shown below. 

National  reformers  and  their  country 
counterparts need to take two types of deci-
sions  in  each  phase  of  conﬁ dence-building 
and institutional reform, taking into account 
the  local  political  context.  First  is  to  decide 
the types of signals—both immediate actions 
and  announcements  on  early  results  and 
longer-term  policies—that  can  help  build 
“inclusive-enough”  collaborative  coalitions 
for change. Second is to decide on the design 

Spectra of situation-speciﬁ c challenges and opportunities
Types of violence:  Civil and/or criminal and/or cross-border and/or sub-national and/or ideological

Transition opportunity:  Gradual/limited to 
immediate/major space for change

Key stakeholders:  Internal versus external 
stakeholders; state versus nonstate stakeholders; 
low-income versus middle-high income 
stakeholders

Key stresses:  Internal versus external stresses; 
high versus low level of divisions among groups

Institutional challenges:  Degree of capacity, 
accountability, and inclusion

22 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

of  priority  programs  to  launch  for  institu-
tional transformation.

In differentiating political and policy sig-
nals, the type of stresses faced and the stake-
holders  whose  support  is  most  needed  for 
effective  action  make  a  difference.  Where 
ethnic, geographical, or religious divides have 
been associated with conﬂ ict, and the coop-
eration of these groups is critical to progress, 
the credibility of appointments may rest on 
whether individuals command respect across 
group divides. Where corruption has been a 
severe  stress,  the  credibility  of  key  appoint-
ments may rest on individuals’ reputation for 
integrity. 

The type of transition moment also makes 
a difference. At the end of the wars in Japan 
and the Republic of Korea, the birth of the 
new  nation  of  Timor-Leste,  Liberia’s  ﬁ rst 
post-war  election,  military  victory  in  Nica-
ragua, and in the aftermath of the Rwandan 
genocide,  there  was  greater  space  for  rapid 
announcements  of  long-term  political,  so-
cial, and institutional change than exists to-
day for the coalition government in Kenya or 
other situations of negotiated reform. 

Institutional  capacity,  accountability,  and 
trust among groups also affect the choices and 
timetable of early policy announcements. In 
countries with institutions that are strong but 
have been viewed as illegitimate because they 
are exclusive, abusive, or unaccountable (as in 
some transitions from authoritarian rule), ac-
tion on transparency, participation, and jus-
tice  may  be  more  important  for  short-term 
conﬁ dence-building  than  delivering  goods 
and  services.  Where  social  cohesion  is  fac-
tionalized, time may be needed to build trust 
between  groups  before  wider  reform  is  at-
tempted. In South Africa, for example, leaders 
wisely allowed time for constitutional reform 
and the development of trust between groups 
before the ﬁ rst post-Apartheid election.73 And 
in Northern Ireland the devolution of secu-
rity and justice functions were delayed until 
trust and accountability increased.74

A  core  message  is  that  the  particular 
manifestation  of  violence  at  any  one  time 
is  less  important  than  the  underlying  insti-

tutional  deﬁ cits  that  permit  repeated  cycles 
of violence—and that successful approaches 
to  address  political,  communal,  and  crimi-
nal violence have much in common. But the 
mix of different types of violence does affect 
strategy. Inequality among ethnic, religious, 
or  geographical  groups  is  important  as  a 
risk for civil conﬂ ict—employment programs 
and  services  would  thus  target  equity  and 
bridging opportunities among these groups. 
But for organized criminal violence, inequal-
ity between rich and poor matters more (ir-
respective  of  ethnic  or  religious  identities). 
Violence  with  strong  international  links—
organized  crime,  international  recruitment 
into ideological movements—requires great-
er international cooperation. 

Country circumstances also make a differ-
ence for program design, requiring the “best-
ﬁ t”  to  local  political  conditions.  For  exam-
ple,  multisectoral  community  approaches 
can  be  effective  in  contexts  as  different  as 
Côte  d’Ivoire,  Guatemala,  and  Northern 
Ireland—but more care would be needed in 
Côte d’Ivoire and Northern Ireland to ensure 
that  these  approaches  were  not  seen  as  tar-
geted to one ethnic or religious group but, in-
stead, as building bonds among groups. Both 
Colombia and Haiti are considering reform 
in  the  justice  sector,  but  accountability  and 
capacity  problems  are  a  bigger  challenge  in 
Haiti, and reforms would have to be designed 
accordingly.75  For  middle-income  countries 
with strong institutions facing challenges of 
exclusion and accountability, lessons on pro-
gram  design,  successes,  and  missed  oppor-
tunities  will  come  primarily  from  countries 
that have faced similar circumstances, such as 
the democratic transitions in Latin America, 
Indonesia,  Eastern  Europe,  or  South Africa. 
So national reformers and their international 
partners need to think through the political 
economy  for  interventions  and  adapt  pro-
gram design to that context (Feature 5). 

Each  country  needs  its  own  assessment 
of  risks  and  priorities  to  design  the  best-ﬁ t 
strategy  and  programs  for  its  political  con-
text. International assessment tools, such as 
post-conﬂ ict/post-crisis  needs  assessments, 

 

Overview 

23

can identify the risks and priorities. These as-
sessments could be strengthened by: 

•  Adapting  assessments  regularly  and  fre-
quently  at  different  transition  moments, 
including  when  risks  are  increasing,  not 
only after a crisis.

• 

• 

Identifying  the  speciﬁ c  characteristics  of 
transition  opportunities,  stresses,  institu-
tional  challenges,  stakeholders,  and  the 
institutions  that  provide  citizen  security, 
justice, and jobs. 

Identifying  priorities  from  a  citizen  and 
stakeholder  perspective  through  focus 
groups or polling surveys, as South Africa 
did in developing its reconstruction priori-
ties  or  as  Pakistan  did  in  assessing  the 
sources of violence in the border regions.76

•  Considering explicitly the history of past 
efforts, as Colombia did in reviewing the 
strengths  and  weaknesses  of  previous  ef-
forts  to  address  violence  in  the  early 
2000s.77

•  Being  more  realistic  about  the  num-
ber  of  priorities  identiﬁ ed  and  the  time-
lines,  as  with  the  changes  recommended 
to  the 
joint  United  Nations–World 
Bank–European Union post-crisis needs 
assessment.

PART 3: REDUCING THE 
RISKS OF VIOLENCE—
DIRECTIONS FOR 
INTERNATIONAL POLICY 

International action has delivered great ben-
eﬁ ts  in  improved  security  and  prosperity. 
It  is  difﬁ cult  to  imagine  how  committed 
leaders  in  post–World  War  II  Europe,  In-
donesia,  the  Republic  of  Korea,  Liberia, 
Mozambique,  Northern  Ireland,  or  Timor-
Leste  would  have  stabilized  their  countries 
or regions without help from abroad. Many 
individuals  working  on  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-
affected  states  are  dedicated  professionals 
attempting  to  support  national  efforts.  But 

they  are  held  back  by  structures,  tools,  and 
processes designed for different contexts and 
purposes.  Speciﬁ cally,  while  processes  exist 
to  provide  the  kind  of  post-war  assistance 
typical  of  20th-century  paradigms,  there 
is  little  attention  to  helping  countries  that 
struggle  with  prevention  of  repeated  cycles 
of political and criminal violence (Feature 6, 
ﬁ gure  6.1)  and  with  the  challenges  involved 
in  transforming  institutions  to  provide  citi-
zen security, justice, and jobs. Internal inter-
national  agency  processes  are  too  slow,  too 
fragmented,  too  reliant  on  parallel  systems, 
and too quick to exit, and there are signiﬁ cant 
divisions among international actors.

The range of preventive tools in the inter-
national system has improved, with increases 
in  global  and  regional  mediation  capacity78 
and  in  programs  that  support  both  local 
and national collaborative efforts to mediate 
violence. Examples include the Ghana peace 
committees  supported  by  the  UN  Devel-
opment  Programme  (UNDP)  and  the  UN 
Department  of  Political  Affairs  (UNDPA)79 
and  the  Inter-American  Development  Bank 
(IADB)  community  projects  for  citizen  se-
curity.  Such  programs  do  often  support  ac-
tivities relating to citizen security, justice, and 
jobs,  but  they  are  not  in  the  mainstream  of 
diplomatic,  security,  or  development  think-
ing. UN, regional, and NGO-sponsored me-
diation has played a signiﬁ cant role in a range 
of cases—from AU-UN-ECOWAS mediation 
in West Africa to UN facilitation of Afghani-
stan’s Bonn Agreement to nongovernmental 
efforts such as the Centre for Humanitarian 
Dialogue and the Crisis Management Initia-
tive in Aceh.80 

But these programs are still not delivered 
to scale. It is much harder for countries to get 
international  assistance  to  support  develop-
ment  of  their  police  forces  and  judiciaries 
than their militaries. International economic 
development assistance is easier to obtain for 
macroeconomic policy, health, or education 
capacities  than  for  job  creation.  UN  police 
capacity, doctrinal development, and training 
have increased, but are not fully linked to jus-
tice capacities. While some bilateral agencies 

24 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 5  Adapting community-level program design to country context

Countries: Afghanistan, Burundi, Cambodia, 
Colombia, Indonesia, Nepal, Rwanda

The basic elements of a post-conﬂ ict community develop-

ment program are simple and can be adapted to a broad 
range  of  country  contexts.  All  community  programs  under 
state  auspices  consist,  essentially,  of  a  community  decision-
making mechanisms to determine priorities and the provision 
of funds and technical help to implement them. Within this 
model is a great deal of variance that can be adapted to dif-
ferent types of stresses and institutional capacities as well as 
to  different  opportunities  for  transition.  Three  important 
sources of variance are in how community decision-making is 
done,  who  controls  the  funds,  and  where  programs  reside 
within the government. 

Different stresses and institutional capacity and account-
ability affect community decision-making. In many violent 
areas, preexisting community councils either have been de-
stroyed  or  were  already  discredited.  A  critical  ﬁ rst  step  is 
to reestablish credible participatory forms of representation. 
In Burundi, for example, a local NGO organized elections for 
representative  community  development  committees  in  the 
participating communes that cut across ethnic divides. Simi-
larly, Afghanistan’s National Solidarity Program began with 
village-wide elections for a community development coun-
cil. But Indonesia’s programs for the conﬂ ict-affected areas 
of Aceh, Maluku, Sulawesi, and Kalimantan did not hold new 
community elections. Community councils were largely in-
tact, and national laws already provided for local, demo cratic, 
village elections. Indonesia also experimented with separat-
ing grants to Muslim and Christian villages to minimize in-
tercommunal tensions, but eventually used common funds 
and councils to bridge divides between these communities.

Different institutional challenges also affect who holds the 
funds.  Programs  must  weigh  the  trade-offs  between  a  ﬁ rst 
 objective of building trust with the risks of money going miss-
ing or the elite capture of resources, as shown in the following 
examples:

• 

In Indonesia, where local capacity was fairly strong, subdis-
trict councils established ﬁ nancial management units that 
are routinely audited but have full responsibility for all as-
pects of ﬁ nancial performance. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

In Burundi, a lack of progress in overall decentralization and 
difﬁ culties in monitoring funds through community struc-
tures meant responsibility for managing the funds remained 
with NGO partners.

In Afghanistan’s National Solidarity Program, NGOs also 
took  on  the  initial  responsibility  for  managing  the  funds 
while  councils  were  trained  in  bookkeeping,  but  within 
a  year  block  grants  were  being  transferred  directly  to  the 
councils. 

In  Colombia,  where  the  primary  institutional  challenges 
were to bring the state closer to communities and overcome 
 distrust between security and civilian government agencies, 
funds are held by individual government ministries but ap-
provals for activities are made by multisectoral teams in ﬁ eld 
ofﬁ ces. 

In Nepal, community programs show the full range: some 
programs give primary responsibility for fund oversight to 
partner  NGOs;  in  other  programs,  such  as  the  country’s 
large-scale village school program, community school com-
mittees are the legal owners of school facilities and can use 
government funds to hire and train their staff. 

The  type  of  transition  moment  affects  how  community 
decision-making structures align with the formal government 
administration.  Many  countries  emerging  from  conﬂ ict  will 
also undergo major constitutional and administrative reforms 
just  as  the  early  response  community  programs  are  being 
launched.  Aligning  community  councils  with  the  emergent 
structures  of  government  can  be  difﬁ cult.  In  Afghanistan’s 
National  Solidarity  Program,  for  example,  the  Community 
Development Councils, though constituted under a 2007 vice-
presidential  bylaw,  are  still  under  review  for  formal  integra-
tion into the national administrative structure. In Cambodia’s 
Seila Program, councils were launched under United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) auspices and then moved 
into the government’s newly formed commune structure. In 
Rwanda, greater space for change after the genocide meant the 
councils could be integrated into the government’s decentral-
ization plans from the start.

Source: Guggenheim 2011.

 

Overview 

25

provide specialized assistance for security and 
justice  reform,  their  capacities  are  relatively 
new and underdeveloped in comparison with 
other  areas.  International  ﬁ nancial  institu-
tions and bilateral economic assistance tends 
to focus primarily on growth rather than em-
ployment. Citizen security and justice are not 
mentioned in the MDGs.

The programs described above all require 
linked  action  by  diplomatic,  security,  and 
development—and  sometimes  humanitar-
ian—actors. Yet these actors generally assess 
priorities  and  develop  their  programs  sepa-
rately, with efforts to help national reformers 
build uniﬁ ed programs the exception rather 
than the rule. UN “integrated missions” and 
various  bilateral  and  regional  “whole-of-
government”  and “whole-of-systems”  initia-
tives  have  emerged  to  address  the  challenge 
of  merging  development,  diplomatic,  and 
security strategies and operations.81 But dif-
ferent  disciplines  bring  with  them  different 
goals, planning timeframes, decision-making 
processes, funding streams and types of risk 
calculus.82 

Assistance  is  often  slow  to  arrive  despite 
efforts  of  the  UN,  the  international  ﬁ nan-
cial  institutions,  and  bilateral  donors  to  es-
tablish  quick-disbursing  and  rapid  deploy-
ment facilities. Aid is fragmented into small 
projects, making it difﬁ cult for governments 
to  concentrate  efforts  on  a  few  key  results. 
In  11  fragile  countries  the  Organisation 
for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Develop-
ment  (OECD)  surveyed  in  2004,  there  was 
an  average  of  38  activities  per  donor,  with 
each  project  an  average  size  of  just  US$1.1 
million—too small for the most part to have 
an impact on the challenges of institutional 
transformation.83  Aid  donors  often  operate 
in fragile countries through systems parallel 
to national institutions—with separate proj-
ect units for development aid and with hu-
manitarian programs implemented through 
international NGOs. Despite progress in ex-
tending  the  time  horizons  of  peacekeeping 
missions and some types of donor assistance, 
the system is constrained by a short-term fo-
cus on post-conﬂ ict opportunities and high 
volatility in assistance.84 In a recent European 

Commission survey of assistance to Cambo-
dia, more than 35 percent of all projects were 
less than one year in duration, and 66 percent 
were less than three years. Despite the need 
for more consistent and sustained assistance, 
aid  to  fragile  states  is  much  more  volatile 
than that to nonfragile states—indeed, more 
than twice as volatile, with an estimated loss 
in efﬁ ciency of 2.5 percent of GDP for recipi-
ent states (Feature 6, ﬁ gures F6.2 and F6.3).85
Regional  and  global  action  on  exter-
nal  stresses  is  a  key  part  of  risk  reduction, 
but  assistance  is  still  focused  primarily  at 
the  individual  country  level.  Some  innova-
tive  processes  against  trafﬁ cking  combine 
demand-side and supply-side incentives and 
the  efforts  of  multiple  stakeholders  in  de-
veloped  and  developing  countries86—one  is 
the Kimberley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme 
to stem the sale of conﬂ ict diamonds.87 Yet a 
general  principle  of  co-responsibility,  com-
bining demand-side and supply-side actions 
and cooperation between developed and de-
veloping  regions,  is  lacking.  Existing  efforts 
suffer  from  weakness  and  fragmentation 
in  the  ﬁ nancial  systems  used  to “follow  the 
money”  ﬂ owing  from  corrupt  transactions. 
And  they  are  constrained  by  a  multiplica-
tion  of  weak  and  overlapping  multicoun-
try  endeavors  rather  than  strong  and  well-
resourced regional approaches. Despite some 
exceptions—the  Asian  Development  Bank 
and European Union long-standing regional 
programs,  the  UN  Department  of  Political 
Affairs regional ofﬁ ces, and recent increases 
in  regional  lending  by  the  World  Bank—
most  development  donors  focus  primarily 
on national rather than regional support.

The  international  landscape  is  becoming 
more complex. The end of the Cold War had 
the potential to usher in a new age of consen-
sus in international support to violence and 
conﬂ ict-affected areas. In fact, the last decade 
has seen an increase in complexity and con-
tinued coordination problems. The political, 
security, humanitarian, and development ac-
tors  present  in  each  country  situation  have 
become  more  numerous.  Legal  agreements 
that  set  standards  for  responsible  national 
leadership  have  become  more  complicated 

26 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

over time: the 1948 UN Convention Against 
Genocide  has  17  operative  paragraphs;  the 
2003  Convention  Against  Corruption  has 
455.  Within  OECD  countries,  there  are  di-
vided views over the relative role of security 
and  development  assistance  and  over  aid 
through  national  institutions.  The  increase 
in assistance from middle-income countries, 
with a history of solidarity support, not only 
brings  valuable  new  energy,  resources,  and 
ideas,  but  also  new  challenges  in  the  differ-
ing  views  of  international  partners.  WDR 
consultations  frequently  revealed  divided 
views  among  national  actors,  regional  bod-
ies,  middle-income  countries,  and  OECD 
donors  over  what  is  realistic  to  expect  from 
national leadership in improving governance, 
over what time period, and over the “forms” 
versus  the  “functions”  of  good  governance 
(elections  versus  broader  democratic  prac-
tices and processes; minimizing corruption in 
practice versus establishing procurement laws 
and anticorruption commissions). 

Dual accountability is at the heart of in-
ternational  behavior.  International  actors 
know  that  faster,  smarter,  longer-term  en-
gagement  through  national  and  regional 
institutions  is  needed  to  help  societies  exit 
fragility.  But  as  highlighted  by  the  OECD 
International Network on Conﬂ ict and Fra-
gility,88 they are also acutely sensitive to the 
risks  of  domestic  criticism  of  waste,  abuse, 

corruption,  and  a  lack  of  results  in  donor 
programs.  International  actors  need  to  be 
 accountable to their citizens and taxpayers as 
well  as  to  partner  country  needs,  and  these 
expectations can be at odds (ﬁ gure 3.1). 

The slow progress in changing donor be-
havior  comes  from  these  underlying  incen-
tives.  For  example,  undertaking  small  proj-
ects through parallel systems, focusing on the 
“form rather than function” of change (with 
an emphasis on elections, model procurement 
laws, and anti-corruption and human rights 
commissions), and avoiding engagements in 
riskier institution-building—all help donors 
to  manage  domestic  expectations  of  results 
and criticism of failure. In today’s tight ﬁ scal 
environment for many donors, the dilemma 
is  becoming  more  prominent,  not  less.  Do-
mestic pressures also contribute to divisions 
among  donors,  since  some  donors  face  far 
more domestic pressure than others on cor-
ruption, gender equity, or the need to show 
economic beneﬁ ts at home from aid overseas. 
Accountability to taxpayers is a desirable facet 
of donor aid—but the challenge is to make 
domestic expectations ﬁ t with the needs and 
realities of assistance on the ground. 

Multilateral responses are also constrained 
by  historical  arrangements  suited  to  more 
stable environments. For example, the inter-
national  ﬁ nancial  institutions’  procurement 
procedures were based on the assumption of 

F I G UR E 3.1   The dual accountability dilemma for donors 
engaged in fragile and conﬂ ict environments

National
actors

A
c
c
o
u
n
t
a
b

i
l
i
t
y

Accountability

Accountability

International

actors

Different perspectives of

risks and results

A
c
c
o
u
n
t
a
b

i
l
i
t
y

Domestic constituencies

Source: WDR team. 

Domestic constituencies
and governing boards

Overview

27

FEATURE 6  Patterns of international assistance to violence-affected countries

F I G UR E F6.1   Uneven international support in West Africa—Post-conﬂ ict trumps prevention

A one-oﬀ  concept of progress and the diﬃ  culties of prevention have led to an excessive focus on post-conﬂ ict transitions. 
The amount of aid and peacekeeping assistance going to countries after civil war has ended greatly exceeds what is provided 
to countries struggling to prevent an escalation of conﬂ ict. 

)
$
S
U

 
t
n
e
r
r
u
c
(
 
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

i

 

e
r
u
t
i
d
n
e
p
x
e
g
n
p
e
e
k
e
c
a
e
p
d
n
a
d
a

 

 

i

 
l

a
t
o
T

Liberia

(highlighted
period 2004

to 2008)

Sierra Leone
(highlighted
period 2000

to 2003)

Guinea

(highlighted
period 2008)

Guinea-Bissau
(highlighted
period 2002

to 2005)

TogoTT

(highlighted
period 2005

to 2008)

Global

average for
low-income
countries

West Africa, selected countries (2000 to 2008)

Source: WDR team calculations based on OECD 2010d.

F I G UR E F6.2   Aid volatility increases with duration of 

F I G UR E F6.3   Stop-go aid: Volatility in selected fragile 

violence

states

Over the last 20 years, countries that experienced longer periods of 
 fragility, violence, or conﬂ ict experienced more volatility in their aid. 
Figure 6.2 shows that the coeﬃ  cient of variance of net oﬃ  cial  develop-
ment assistance (ODA), excluding debt relief, is higher for countries that 
have experienced prolonged violence since 1990. This relationship, 
reﬂ ected by the upward trend line, is statistically signiﬁ cant and sug-
gests that, on average, a country that experienced 20 years of violence 
experienced twice the volatility in aid of a country that did not experi-
ence violence. Volatility of revenues has considerable costs for all 
governments, but particularly so in fragile situations where it may 
derail reform eﬀ orts and disrupt institution-building.

,

A
D
O

 
t
e
n

 
f

 

o
e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v
 
f

i

o
 
t
n
e
c
ﬃ
e
o
C

f
e

i
l

 

e
r
 
t
b
e
d
g
n
d
u
c
x
e

l

i

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Number of years of high homicides, conﬂict, and fragility

Low-income countries

Linear (Low-income countries)

Source: WDR team calculations based on OECD 2010d.

The four countries below provide an illustration. It was not uncommon 
for total aid to Burundi, the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau, 
and Haiti to drop by 20 or 30 percent in one year and increase by up to 
50 percent the following year (humanitarian aid and debt relief, 
excluded from these statistics, would further increase the volatility). 

a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
d
a
n

 

 

i

i
 

e
g
n
a
h
c
%

 

 
l

a
u
n
n
A

150

100

50

0

–50

–100

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Burundi
Guinea-Bissau

Central African Republic
Haiti

Source: WDR team calculations based on OECD 2010d.

28 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

ongoing  security,  a  reasonable  level  of  state 
institutional  capacity,  and  competitive  mar-
kets.  They  thus  have  difﬁ culty  adapting  to 
situations  where  security  conditions  change 
between the design and tendering of a proj-
ect, where a small number of qualiﬁ ed gov-
ernment  counterparts  struggle  to  manage 
complex  procurement  documentation,  and 
where  the  number  of  qualiﬁ ed  contractors 
prepared to compete and mobilize is very lim-
ited. Similarly, the UN Secretariat originally 
developed procurement systems designed for 
its function as a headquarters-based advisory 
service and secretariat to the General Assem-
bly. But when peacekeeping operations were 
launched, these systems were extended with 
relatively little adaptation, despite the differ-
ence in contexts and objectives.

To achieve real change in approaches that 
can restore conﬁ dence and prevent risks from 
recurring,  international  actors  could  con-
sider four tracks to improve global responses 
for security and development as follows: 

•  Track  1:  Provide  more,  and  more  inte-
grated,  specialized  assistance  for  citizen 
security, justice, and jobs—targeting pre-
vention  in  both  immediate  post-conﬂ ict 
and rising risk situations.

•  Track 2: Reform internal agency systems 
to  provide  rapid  action  to  restore  conﬁ -
dence and promote long-term institution-
building, in support of national efforts.

•  Track  3:  Act  regionally  and  globally  on 

external stresses.

•  Track  4:  Marshal  support  from  lower-, 
middle-,  and  higher-income  countries, 
and global and regional institutions, to re-
ﬂ ect  the  changing  landscape  of  interna-
tional policy and assistance. 

Track 1: Providing specialized 
assistance for prevention through 
citizen security, justice, and jobs

Security-development  linkages  apply  in  all 
areas  struggling  to  prevent  large-scale  po-
litical or criminal violence. Both political and 

criminal  violence  require  “outside  the  box” 
thinking, outside the traditional development 
paradigm.  Issues  of  citizen  security  and  of 
grievances  over  justice  and  jobs  are  not  pe-
ripheral to “mainstream” development. They 
are in varying forms a problem for larger and 
more prosperous countries facing subnational 
urban or rural violence, for countries emerg-
ing from conﬂ ict and fragility that need to pre-
vent recurrence, and for areas facing new or 
resurgent threats of social protest and instabil-
ity. Strengthening the institutions that provide 
citizen security, justice, and jobs is crucial to 
prevention of violence and instability—such 
action is not a “magic bullet” that can prevent 
every episode of violence with certainty, but it 
is crucial to changing the probabilities of vio-
lence, and to continuous risk reduction.

A  key  lesson  of  successful  violence  pre-
vention and recovery is that security, justice, 
and economic stresses are linked: approaches 
that try to solve them through military-only, 
justice-only, or development-only solutions 
will  falter.  A  specialized  suite  of  programs 
is needed in fragile environments, combin-
ing  elements  of  security,  justice,  and  eco-
nomic  transformation.  But  because  these 
areas are covered by different international 
agencies, both bilaterally and multilaterally, 
combined  action  under  one  overall  pro-
gram framework is rare. A specialized suite 
of  combined  security-justice-development 
programs needs to aim at a catalytic effect, 
supporting national collaborative efforts to 
address  these  challenges.  Changes  in  inter-
national agency approaches to support such 
programs would include (ﬁ gure 3.2).

•  Moving  from  sporadic  early  warning  to 
continued risk assessment wherever weak 
institutional  legitimacy,  and  internal  or 
external stresses indicate a need for atten-
tion  to  prevention  and  to  capacities  for 
peaceful reform processes.

•  Simplifying current assessment and plan-
ning  mechanisms  to  provide  countries 
with  one  process  supporting  national 
planning that covers the political, justice, 
 security, humanitarian, and developmen-
tal areas. 

 

Overview 

29

F I G UR E 3.2   Combined action across the security, development, and humanitarian spheres for external actors to 

support national institutional transformations

EXTERNAL
STRESS

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

I

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

diplomatic

development

security

humanitarian

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

RE
S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

A NEW WAY OF DOING BUSINESS

Moving from early warning to continuous 
risk assessment
On budget support and technical assistance 
for citizen security and justice in joint teams
Financing in support of collaborative, mediated 
agreements
Unified planning processes
State-community, state-NGO, state-private sector 
programs for service delivery and multi-sectoral 
violence prevention
Humanitarian support for state protection systems

Source: WDR team. 

•  Shifting from the rhetoric of coordination 
to supporting combined programs for se-
curity, justice, and local jobs and associated 
services, each within their respective man-
dates  and  expertise.  Two  priorities  for 
combined programs are—

➢ Technical  assistance  and  ﬁ nancing 
for  security  and  justice  reforms  sup-
ported  by  combined  teams.  Develop-
ment  agencies,  for  example,  can  sup-
port  measures  to  address  budget  and 
expenditure  processes  in  security  and 
justice  functions,  while  partners  with 
security and justice expertise can con-
tribute to technical capacity-building, 
as was done in Timor-Leste in the run-
up to independence.89

➢ Multisectoral  community  programs 
that involve policing and justice as well 
as  development  activities,  such  as  the 
initiatives in Latin America to provide 

local  dispute  resolution  and  justice 
services,  community  policing,  em-
ployment and training, safe public and 
trading spaces, and social and cultural 
programs that promote tolerance.

•  Establishing  facilities  for  mediators  and 
special envoys (internal and international) 
to  draw  on  greater  seconded  expertise 
from  international  agencies,  both  to  in-
form transition arrangements and to gal-
vanize  resources  for  integrated  activities 
identiﬁ ed collaboratively by the different 
parties to a conﬂ ict situation. This should 
include  speciﬁ c  efforts  to  support  the 
growing role of regional and subregional 
institutions, such as AU and ECOWAS, by 
providing them with speciﬁ c links to de-
velopment expertise. 

•  Considering  when  humanitarian  aid 
can  be  integrated  into  national  systems 
without  compromising  humanitarian 

30 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

principles—building  on  existing  good 
practice by UNDP, UN Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF),  World  Health  Organization 
(WHO), World Food Programme (WFP),  
and  others  in  combining  humanitarian 
delivery  with  capacity-building,  using 
local  personnel  and  community  struc-
tures, and purchasing food locally.

Implementing  these  programs  would  re-
quire systemic changes in international capac-
ity.  Citizen  security  and  justice  require  new 
and interlinked capacities to address repeated 
waves of political and criminal violence. The 
starting point for deeper capacity in this area 
is  government  investment  in  standby,  pre-
trained personnel for a range of executive and 
advisory police, corrections, and justice func-
tions.  States  will  need  police  and  justice  re-
serves to respond effectively to contemporary 
violence, drawing on retired personnel, active 
service volunteers, and formed police units in 
some countries. Second, these capacities must 
be trained, and able to deploy, under shared 
doctrine to address the challenges of coher-
ence presented by different national policing 
models.  Increased  investment  through  the 
UN and regional centers in the development 
of joint doctrine and pretraining of govern-
ment  capacities  would  increase  effectiveness 
and reduce incoherence.

Third, linking military and policing assis-
tance  with  justice  assistance  is  crucial,  since 
disconnects  have  been  a  pervasive  source 
of  problems  in  fragile  situations.  So  is  link-
ing  criminal  justice  assistance  with  help  for 
local justice services such as land and prop-
erty  disputes.90  Fourth,  it  is  important  that 
new capacities provide a full range of services 
to  countries  facing  challenges—from  co-
 responsibility for policing or justice functions 
authorized by the UN Security Council or re-
gional institutions, to police units and judicial 
personnel provided at the request of govern-
ments but without a corresponding intrusive 
mandate from global or regional institutions, 
to advisory, ﬁ nancing, and training services. 

Last,  ownership  for  justice  reform  work 
should be clariﬁ ed in the international struc-
ture to enable multilateral and bilateral agen-

cies to invest in developing the requisite capac-
ity and expertise. There are areas where, at the 
request of government, the World Bank and 
other institutional ﬁ nancial institutions (IFIs) 
could consider playing a greater role in sup-
porting the developmental underpinnings of 
violence prevention within their mandates—
such  as  the  links  between  public  ﬁ nancial 
management and security sector reform and 
institution-building, legal administration, jus-
tice  systems  development  and  multisectoral 
approaches at the community level that com-
bine community policing and justice services 
with social cohesion, developmental and em-
ployment creation programs. But the IFIs are 
not equipped to lead specialized international 
support in these areas. A clear lead within the 
UN system would help this effort.

Agencies  with  economic  expertise  need 
to  pay  more  attention  to  jobs.  National 
community-based  public  works  programs 
should receive greater and longer-term sup-
port in fragile situations, in recognition of the 
time required for the private sector to absorb 
youth  unemployment.  Other  priority  pro-
grams for job creation include investments in 
supporting infrastructure, in particular, elec-
tricity and transit. A third program cluster is 
those that invest in skills and work experience; 
develop links between producers, traders, and 
consumers;  and  expand  access  to  ﬁ nance 
and assets, for example, through low-income 
housing.  Current  international  ﬁ nancial  in-
stitutions and UN initiatives focused on em-
ployment  creation  should  explicitly  address 
the speciﬁ c needs of areas affected by fragility, 
conﬂ ict,  and  violence,  recognizing  that  job 
creation  in  these  situations  may  go  beyond 
material  beneﬁ ts  by  providing  a  productive 
role  and  occupation  for  youth,  and  evalu-
ating  and  expanding  the  examples  of  best-
ﬁ t  employment  policies  in  fragile  situations 
presented in this Report. Global employment 
work should include re-focusing on the risks 
posed by youth employment.

These  approaches  would  help.  But  there 
is likely to be continued pressure from large 
youth unemployed populations unless a more 
signiﬁ cant  international  effort  is  launched. 

 

Overview 

31

A  bolder  approach  could  draw  together  ca-
pacities from development agencies, the pri-
vate sector, foundations, and NGOs in a new 
global  partnership  to  galvanize  investments 
in  countries  and  communities  where  high 
unemployment  and  social  disengagement 
contribute  to  the  risks  of  conﬂ ict.  Focusing 
primarily on job creation through project ﬁ -
nance, advisory support to small and medium 
businesses, training and work placement, and 
guarantees, the initiative could also support 
social  and  cultural  initiatives  that  promote 
good governance, collaborative capacities in 
communities,  social  tolerance,  and  recogni-
tion  of  young  people’s  social  and  economic 
roles.  Private-sector  capacities  to  draw  on 
would include large companies that trade and 
invest  in  insecure  areas  (creating  links  with 
local  entrepreneurs),  as  well  as  technology 
companies  that  can  assist  with  connectivity 
and training in remote insecure areas.

Track 2: Transforming procedures 
and risk and results management 
in international agencies

To  implement  rapid,  sustained,  and  inte-
grated programs for citizen security, justice, 
and  jobs, international  agencies  need  inter-
nal reforms. For the g7+ group of leaders of 
conﬂ ict-affected and fragile states who have 
begun  to  meet  regularly  as  part  of  the  In-
ternational  Dialogue  on  Peacebuilding  and 
Statebuilding,  reforming 
internal  agency 
procedures, particularly procurement proce-
dures, was the number one suggestion for in-
ternational  reform.91  International  agencies 
cannot respond quickly to restore conﬁ dence 
or provide deep institutional support if their 
budget,  stafﬁ ng,  approval,  and  contracting 
procedures  take  months  and  set  unrealistic 
prerequisites  for  recipient  institutional  ca-
pacity.  International  agency  systems  would 
require  fundamental  changes  to  implement 
these programs effectively, based on the fol-
lowing four principles (how to approach im-
plementing these is covered in Feature 7): 

•  Accept the links between security and de-

velopment outcomes.

•  Base ﬁ duciary processes on the real world 
in fragile and violence-affected situations: 
insecurity,  lack  of  competitive  markets, 
and weak institutions. 

•  Balance the risks of action with the risks of 

inaction. 

•  Expect a degree of failure in programs that 
require innovation and engagement with 
weak  institutions  in  risky  environments, 
and adapt accordingly.

Donor  risk  management  also  relies  pri-
marily on headquarters controls rather than 
“best-ﬁ t”  delivery  mechanisms  adapted  to 
local  conditions.  This  approach  may  man-
age donor risk, but it constrains real progress 
in  institution-building  on  the  ground.  An 
alternative  is  to  embrace  faster  engagement 
through  national  institutions,  but  vary  the 
ways aid is delivered to manage risks and re-
sults. Some donors have a higher risk toler-
ance and will be able to choose modes that go 
more directly through national budgets and 
institutions;  others  will  need  greater  over-
sight  or  nonstate  involvement  in  delivery. 
Three complementary options: 

•  Vary  the  oversight  and  delivery  mecha-
nisms  when  engaging  through  national 
institutions.  Oversight  mechanisms  to 
adapt to risk include shifting from bud-
get  support  to  “tracked”  expenditure 
through government systems,92 and from 
regular  reporting  and  internal  control 
mechanisms  to  independent  ﬁ nancial 
monitoring  agents,  independent  moni-
toring  of  complaints,  and  independent 
technical  agents.  Variations  in  delivery 
mechanisms  include  community  struc-
tures, civil society, the private sector, the 
UN,  and  other  international  executing 
agencies  in  delivering  programs  jointly 
with state institutions.

• 

In situations of more extreme risk, where 
donors  would  normally  disengage,  have 
 executive  capacity  supplement  national 
control systems, as with “dual key” mech-
anisms, where international line manage-

32 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

FE ATU R E 7   Internal agency reform

 

 

Quick action? Ghana helps restore electricity in Liberia

  Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia; WDR Advisory Council Member 

After  the  2005  election  in  Liberia,  the  new  government 
announced a 100-day plan that included the restoration of 
electricity  to  certain  areas  of  the  capital  to  help  restore 
conﬁ dence in the state and jumpstart recovery in economic 
activities  and  basic  services.  With  ECOWAS  support,  the 
Liberian  government  approached  various  donors  to  help, 
since  the  new  government  lacked  resources  and  institu-
tional capacity for implementation. None of the traditional 
donors, which included the United Nations, the World Bank, 
the  African  Development  Bank,  the  European  Union,  and 
USAID, were able to provide the generators needed for this 
endeavor within the desired timeframe under their regular 
systems. The Liberian government was eventually success-
ful in securing help from the Government of Ghana, which 

provided  two  generators  that  helped  restore  electricity  in 
some urban areas.

The Liberian experience points to two key lessons. First is 
the need for early consultation between national governments 
and international partners on realism in delivering quick results 
and demonstrating progress to local populations. Second is the 
challenge of rigidities in donor systems unable to provide par-
ticular types of assistance fast. In fact, the EU, USAID, and the 
World Bank were able to provide other types of support (fuel, 
transmission line restoration) for the electricity system within 
the  100  days,  but  none  of  the  donors  were  able  to  cover  the 
speciﬁ c need for generators. Indeed, there is a need to rethink 
existing policies and processes, to modify what I call procedural 
conformism for countries in crisis situations. 

WDR Note: Options for applying the WDR principles for internal agency reform in 
different contexts

Accepting the 
links between 
security and 
development 
outcomes

Base budget 
and ﬁ duciary 
processes on 
the real world: 
insecurity, lack 
of perfectly 
competitive 
markets, and 
weak institutions

Balance risks of 
action with risks 
of inaction

Economic and social interventions in situations of insecurity can justiﬁ ably be designed to contribute 
to citizen security and justice outcomes (in the Liberia electricity program above, an increase in 
citizen trust in government would have been an appropriate measure of program success, rather 
than the sustainability of the electricity provision). Security programs can also be designed to 
contribute to development outcomes (an increase in trade, for example). This would require agencies 
to use outcome measure outside their traditional “technical” domains and work together within the 
combined program frameworks described above.

When insecurity is high, both the costs and beneﬁ ts of interventions may change dramatically over 
a short period. This argues for greater ﬂ exibility in administrative budget and staﬀ  planning. In 
program budgets, it implies careful sequencing wherein some programs will be more beneﬁ cial at a 
later date, but also placing high weight on speed (over some cost-eﬃ  ciency and quality concerns) in 
contracting where beneﬁ ts to fast action are high. Where competitive markets are very thin and not 
transparent, diﬀ erent procurement controls—such as pre-tendering internationally under variable 
quantity contracts, or contracting processes that allow direct negotiations with knowledge of regional 
markets—can be appropriate. Where institutional capacity is insuﬃ  cient, procedures need to be 
distilled to the simplest level of due process, together with ﬂ exible mechanisms to execute some 
activities on behalf of recipient institutions.

Outside the realm of natural disasters, international actors often tend to be more sensitive to the 
risk that their support will backﬁ re into criticisms of wastage or abuses than to the risk that delays in 
their support will increase the potential for violence or derail promising reform eﬀ orts. Decentralizing 
greater responsibility and accountability to international staﬀ  on the ground can increase 
responsiveness to the risks of inaction. Transparent publication of achievements against target 
timelines for donor funds release and activities—and reasons for delays—would also help.

Expect a degree 
of failure in 
programs in risky 
environments, 
and adapt 
accordingly

Because returns to successful programs are high, international assistance can aﬀ ord a higher failure 
rate in violent situations. This is not how most assistance works, however: donors expect the same 
degree of success in risky environments as in secure ones. A better approach is to adapt private-sector 
principles for venture capital investment to support for fragile and violence-aﬀ ected situations: pilot 
many diﬀ erent types of approaches to see which work best; accept a higher failure rate; evaluate 
rigorously and adapt quickly; and scale up approaches that are working.

 

• 

ment  capacity  works  alongside  national 
actors and agency processes governed by 
joint  national  and  international  boards. 
Not all governments will wish to take up 
these options. Where they do not, using 
local  personnel  and  community  struc-
tures  for  delivering  humanitarian,  eco-
nomic,  and  social  programs  still  main-
tains  some  focus  on  local  institutional 
capacity, mitigating the brain-drain of lo-
cal skills overseas.

Increase  the  contingencies  in  budgets, 
under  transparent  planning  assumptions. 
Where governance is volatile, development 
program budgets, as well as the budgets for 
political and peacekeeping missions, would 
beneﬁ t from greater contingency measures 
so that activities and delivery mechanisms 
can be adjusted when new risks and oppor-
tunities emerge without disrupting overall 
support.  The  planning  assumptions  for 
such contingencies—for example, that ad-
ditional oversight mechanisms will be ad-
opted if certain agreed measures of gover-
nance deteriorate—should be transparent 
to both recipient governments and the gov-
erning bodies of international agencies.

To achieve results at scale, pooling funds in 
multidonor trust funds is also an effective op-
tion, since it provides recipient governments 
with larger single programs and international 
partners with a way to support programs that 
greatly  exceed  their  own  national  contribu-
tion.  It  can  also  be  an  effective  way  to  pool 
risks,  shifting  the  burden  of  responsibility 
for risks of waste, abuse, or corruption from 
the shoulders of each individual donor to the 
multilateral  system.  Multidonor  trust  funds 
have delivered excellent results in some situa-
tions—funding, for example, a range of high-
impact  programs  in  Afghanistan  through 
the  Afghanistan  Reconstruction  Trust  Fund 
(ARTF) and the Law and Order Trust Fund 
for Afghanistan (LOTFA), supporting essen-
tial  start-up  and  system  maintenance  costs 
for  the  nascent  Palestinian  Authority  under 
the  Holst  Fund  in  the  mid-1990s  in  West 
Bank Gaza, or serving as catalytic funding in 

Overview 

33

Nepal under the auspices of the Peacebuild-
ing  Commission.93  But  the  performance  of 
multidonor  trust  funds  is  mixed,  with  criti-
cisms ranging from slowness to a lack of ex-
pectation  management  and  mixed  success 
in  working  through  national  systems.94  The 
combined security-justice-development pro-
grams and internal agency reforms described 
above would help to mitigate this risk.

International agencies need to think care-
fully about how to lengthen the duration of 
assistance to meet the realities of institutional 
transformation  over  a  generation  without 
raising costs. For humanitarian programs in 
prolonged crises, building on existing initia-
tives to support local stafﬁ ng, local purchases, 
and community-based delivery can increase 
the impact on institution-building and lower 
unit costs. For peacekeeping, there is potential 
for greater use of more ﬂ exible arrangements, 
including over-the-horizon security guaran-
tees, where external forces outside the coun-
try either supplement forces on the ground 
during tense periods or extend the leverage 
of  external  peacekeeping  after  missions  are 
drawn down—as suggested in inputs to this 
Report from the AU and the UN Department 
of Peacekeeping Operations. Better resourc-
ing for mediation and diplomatic facilitation 
is also an easy win, since it is low cost and can 
reduce the probabilities of conﬂ ict. 

For  development  agencies,  reducing  the 
volatility of ﬂ ows to programs delivering re-
sults in citizen security, justice, and jobs—or 
simply preserving social cohesion and human 
and institutional capacity—can increase im-
pact without increasing the overall cost. As al-
ready described, volatility greatly reduces aid 
effectiveness, and it is twice as high for fragile 
and  conﬂ ict-affected  countries  as  for  other 
developing  countries,  despite  their  greater 
need  for  persistence  in  building  social  and 
state  institutions.  There  are  options  for  re-
ducing volatility, including providing thresh-
old  amounts  of  aid  based  on  appropriate 
modalities (as described by Advisory Council 
member  Paul  Collier  in  chapter  9),  topping 
up  aid  allocations  to  the  most  fragile  states 
when speciﬁ c types of programs have demon-

34 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

strated the ability to deliver effectively and at 
scale (as proposed in a recent working paper 
by the Centre for Global Development),95 and 
dedicating  a  target  percentage  of  assistance 
to larger and longer-term programs in fragile 
and conﬂ ict-affected states under the Devel-
opment Assistance Committee framework.

To  close  the  loop  on  internal  agency  re-
forms,  results  indicators  should  be  more 
closely  geared  to  priorities  in  fragile  and 
violence-affected  situations.  The  core  tools 
for  national  actors  and  their  international 
counterparts  include  proposed  indicators  to 
better  capture  both  short-  and  longer-term 
progress, supplementing the MDGs (see Fea-
ture 4). The use of these indicators by inter-
national  agencies—across  the  diplomatic, 
security, and aid divides—would increase the 
incentives for more integrated responses.

Track 3: Acting regionally and 
globally to reduce external stresses 
on fragile states

Effective  action  against  illegal  trafﬁ cking 
requires co-responsibility by producing and 
consuming  countries.  To  stem  the  far-
reaching impact of illegal trafﬁ cking, it must 
be  recognized  that  effective  action  by  one 
country alone will simply push the problem 
to  other  countries,  and  that  regional  and 
global approaches are needed. For trafﬁ ck-
ing  where  the  supply,  processing,  or  retail 
markets are concentrated and easily moni-
tored—such as diamond trafﬁ cking—inter-
diction  efforts  combined  with  multistake-
holder  producer  and  consumer  campaigns 
can be effective. In addition to the Kimber-
ley Process for diamonds and the Extractive 
Industries  Transparency  Initiative, the  new 
Natural  Resource  Charter  and  a  recent 
World Bank/UN Conference on Trade and 
Development  (UNCTAD)/Food  and  Agri-
culture  Organization  (FAO)  initiative  on 
standards  for  in ternational  land  purchases 
have similar potential. For drug trafﬁ cking, 
the situation is complicated by highly frag-
mented illegal production sites and process-
ing  facilities.  Supply-side  and  interdiction 

actions  alone  are  constrained  in  these  cir-
cumstances, and competition between gangs 
and cartels produces high levels of violence 
in production and transit countries. Explor-
ing the costs and beneﬁ ts of different com-
binations of demand- and supply-side mea-
sures would be a ﬁ rst step to underpinning 
more decisive demand-side actions. 

Following  the  money—tracking  illicit 
ﬁ nancial  ﬂ ows—is  at  the  heart  of  action 
against  the  illegal  trafﬁ cking  of  drugs  and 
natural resources. For areas seriously affected 
by  illegal  trafﬁ cking  and  corruption,  such 
as  Central  America  and  West  Africa,  most 
countries  have  nothing  approaching  the 
national capacity needed to gather and pro-
cess  information  on  sophisticated  ﬁ nancial 
transactions, or to investigate and prosecute 
offenders. Along with initiatives that help to 
support a global community to address cor-
ruption issues, such as the International Cor-
ruption Hunters Alliance and the Stolen As-
set Recovery Initiative (StAR), the following 
two key measures could help in this effort:

•  Strengthen the capacity to conduct strate-
gic analysis of these ﬂ ows in a critical mass 
of countries with the majority of global ﬁ -
nancial transfers. About 15 major ﬁ nancial 
markets and hubs play this role. Concerted 
efforts  to  strengthen  the  openness  of  ﬁ -
nancial  centers  and  ﬁ nancial  intelligence 
unit  capacities,  as  well  as  to  proactively 
analyze suspicious ﬂ ows, and exchange in-
formation could greatly increase the global 
ability to detect illicit ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows and to 
recover stolen assets. Global ﬁ nancial insti-
tutions could also perform strategic analy-
sis and make it available to affected coun-
tries. To respect privacy, this could be based 
on shifts in aggregate ﬂ ows rather than in-
dividual account information. 

•  Expand  commitments  from  developed 
states and ﬁ nancial centers to joint investi-
gations  with  law  enforcement  authorities 
in fragile and violence-affected countries. 
As  part  of  this  commitment,  they  could 
also undertake capacity-building programs 
with law enforcement authorities in fragile 

 

Overview 

35

states—as with the U.K.-Nigeria and U.S.-
Haiti examples above.96 

Regional  action  can  also  target  positive 
opportunities.  Donors  could  increase  their 
ﬁ nancial  and  technical  support  for  cross-
border  and  regional  infrastructure—and 
various  forms  of  regional  administrative 
and economic cooperation—giving priority 
to  violence-affected  regions.  Such  support 
could take the following forms:

•  Cross-border development programming. 
International  actors  could  support  more 
closely opportunities for cross-border ac-
tivities  that  integrate  action  on  citizen 
security,  justice,  and  jobs.  Even  where 
regional or cross-border political collabo-
ration is less well established, international 
support  for  cross-border  programming 
may still be able to support and respond to 
bilateral government efforts, using devel-
opment  issues  such  as  trade  and  transit 
infrastructure or cross-border health pro-
grams  to  support  a  gradual  increase  in 
trust. Special ﬁ nancial provision for access 
of  fragile  landlocked  regions  to  markets, 
as  has  recently  been  agreed  upon  by  the 
World Bank’s governing structures, is an-
other  way  to  encourage  developmental 
cooperation across borders.

•  Shared regional administrative capacity. 
Pooling subregional administrative capac-
ities  can  allow  states  to  develop  institu-
tional capabilities they could not manage 
on their own. There are already good ex-
amples of shared courts in the Caribbean 
and  shared  central  banking  capacity  in 
West Africa.97 While  these  initiatives  take 
time to establish, they supplement difﬁ cult 
national institutional transformations and 
merit assistance from regional and inter-
national development institutions.

legitimacy  of  regional  institutions,  in  com-
bination with the technical and ﬁ nancial ca-
pacity of global agencies. Delivered through 
regional  institutions  in  collaboration  with 
global  agencies,  such  an  effort  could  adapt 
lessons  from  those  initiatives  that  have  al-
ready successfully pooled regional capacity. It 
could also draw lessons from existing cross-
border cooperation, such as the Greater Me-
kong subregion,98 West Africa’s initiatives on 
trafﬁ cking  and  economic  integration,99  and 
the  European  Union’s  programs100  for  pre-
viously  conﬂ ict-affected  border  regions.  It 
would support political initiatives of regional 
institutions  (such  as  the  African  Union’s 
 Border Program101 and ASEAN’s subregional 
initiatives),102  with  ﬁ nancial  and  technical 
 expertise from global partners. 

Further research is also needed to track the 
impacts of climate change on weather, land 
availability  and  food  prices,  each  of  which 
can impact in turn on conﬂ ict risk. Current 
research does not suggest that climate change 
itself will drive conﬂ ict, except perhaps where 
rapidly  deteriorating  water  availability  cuts 
across existing tensions and weak institutions. 
But a series of inter-linked problems—chang-
ing global patterns of consumption of energy 
and scarce resources, increasing demand for 
food imports (which draw on land, water and 
energy inputs), and the repurposing of land 
for climate adaptation—are increasing pres-
sures on fragile states. These warrant further 
research and policy attention. 

Track 4: Marshaling support from 
lower-, middle-, and higher-income 
countries and global and regional 
institutions, to reflect the changing 
landscape of international policy 
and assistance 

Rather  than  these  somewhat  incremen-
tal  approaches  to  speciﬁ c  cross-border  ini-
tiatives,  international  donors  could  take  a 
larger  step  to  ﬁ nance  regional  approaches. 
The principle of such an initiative would be 
to build on the local political knowledge and 

The landscape of international assistance in 
fragile  and  violence-affected  countries  has 
changed in the last 20 years, with more aid 
and policy input from middle-income coun-
tries  with  a  history  of  solidarity  support. 
Several regional institutions are also playing 

36 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

a  greater  role  in  security  and  development 
issues. Yet, discussions of global conﬂ ict and 
violence, the norms of responsible leadership 
to  respond  to  it,  and  the  shape  of  interna-
tional  assistance  have  been  driven  more  by 
northern than southern actors. The Interna-
tional Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-
building has been created to help address this 
deﬁ cit. 

The WDR team conducted wide-ranging 
consultations  with  violence-affected  coun-
tries,  regional  policy  makers,  and  regional 
institutions,  as  well  as  with  traditional  do-
nor partners. It found many areas of agree-
ment—such  as  the  focus  on  institution-
building  and  governance  and  on  citizen 
security,  justice,  and  jobs—but  also  some 
areas of difference. As described earlier, these 
differences  included  what  it  is  realistic  to 
expect in terms of responsible national lead-
ership  in  improving  governance,  and  over 
what time period, and over the “forms” ver-
sus the “functions” of good governance. Per-
ceived double standards were also criticized 
by WDR interlocutors, who reﬂ ected a senti-
ment that donor countries and organizations 
that  have  faced  their  own  internal  gover-
nance challenges could approach shortcom-
ings  in  fragile  developing  states  with  more 
humility.  Developed  countries  are  not  im-
mune to corruption, bribery, human rights 
abuses, or failures to account adequately for 
public ﬁ nances. So effective implementation 
of  standards  of  good  governance  is  also  a 
challenge in advanced countries, even more 
so  when  the  international  community  has 
played an executive government or security 
role in violence-affected areas.

Lack of concerted support for the norms 
of  responsible  leadership  is  a  concern,  be-
cause progress in global norms is crucial for 
reducing  the  risk  of  violence.  Regional  and 
global standards, as well as recognition and 
sanction  mechanisms  in  constitutionality, 
human  rights,  and  corruption,  have  pro-
vided  support  and  incentives  for  national 
reformers,  particularly  where  the  capacity 
of  the  domestic  system  to  provide  rewards 
and accountability is weak. For example, the 

Lomé Declaration in 2000, which established 
African  standards  and  a  regional  response 
mechanism  to  unconstitutional  changes  in 
government,  has  been  associated  with  a  re-
duction in coups d’état from 15 in the 1990s 
to 5 in the 2000s;103 and, despite an increase 
in coups in the last ﬁ ve years, continental ac-
tion to restore constitutional government has 
been consistently strong. 

Some  modest  actions  could  strengthen 
collaboration  among  higher-,  middle-,  and 
lower-income countries on shared problems 
of  violence  and  development,  both  global 
and local, as follows:

•  Increase  both  South-South  and  South-
North exchanges. South-South exchanges 
have enormous potential to provide rele-
vant capacity and lessons in current fragile 
and  violence-affected  situations.104  Low- 
and  middle-income  countries  that  have 
gone  through  their  own  recent  experi-
ences of transition have much to offer to 
their  counterparts—as  demonstrated  in 
this Report, where Latin American coun-
tries  offered  perspectives  on  urban  vio-
lence prevention and security and justice 
reforms, China on job creation, India on 
local public works and democratic prac-
tices,  and  Southeast  Asian  and  African 
countries on community driven develop-
ment  in  conﬂ ict  areas.  Yet  South-North 
exchanges are also important. While insti-
tutional  capacities  differ,  many  northern 
and  southern  countries,  provinces,  and 
cities face some similar stresses. Program 
approaches—such as addressing trafﬁ ck-
ing,  reintegrating  ex-gang  members  and 
disengaged  young  people,  and  fostering 
tolerance  and  social  bonds  among  com-
munities that are ethnically or religiously 
divided—will  have  lessons  relevant  for 
others.  Such  exchanges  would  increase 
understanding that the challenges of vio-
lence are not unique to developing coun-
tries and that developing countries are not 
alone in struggling to ﬁ nd solutions. 

•  Better align international assistance be-
hind  regional  governance  efforts.  When 

 

Overview 

37

regional  institutions  take  the  initiative, 
as  with  the  AU  on  constitutionality  or 
ASEAN in certain conﬂ ict and natural di-
saster  situations  (Feature  8),  they  have 
great  comparative  advantage  in  traction 
with  their  member  states.  The  potential 
convening role of regional institutions was 
also widely recognized in WDR consulta-
tions  by  higher-,  middle-,  and  lower- 
income  country  interlocutors  alike.  Sup-
porting regional platforms to discuss the 
application of governance norms is an ef-
fective way to increase ownership. Adopt-
ing clearer structures to discuss responses 
to major improvements or deteriorations 
in  governance  (such  as  coups  d’états) 
among  bi lateral  and  multilateral  actors 
would  also  improve  information-sharing 
and the potential for coordinated respons-
es, without creating unacceptable binding 
obligations on international actors.105

•  Expand initiatives to recognize responsi-
ble leadership. While there is always a role 
for  frank  and  transparent  criticism,  ap-
proaches from the North that are seen as 
disproportionately  focused  on  criticism 
in fragile situations can be divisive. Initia-
tives such as the Ibrahim Prize for African 
leadership could be emulated to recognize 
leaders  in  different  roles  (for  example, 
ministers  who  have  a  lasting  impact  on 
corruption  or  military  leaders  who  im-
plement successful security sector reform). 
Multistakeholder  initiatives  such  as  the 
Extractive Industries Transparency Initia-
tive  could  consider  provisions  to  recog-
nize  individual 
leadership 
teams  who  have  improved  the  transpar-
ency  of  resource  revenues  and  expendi-
tures, whether in governments, civil soci-
ety, or companies. 

leaders  or 

More focused and realistic expectations of 
the timetables for governance improvements 
would also help bridge gaps in perspectives 
among countries receiving international as-
sistance,  their  middle-  and  higher-income 
international  partners,  and  global  and  re-
gional  institutions.  This  is  particularly  cru-

cial  in  light  of  recent  social  protests  that 
demonstrate  strong  grievances  and  expec-
tations  over  governance  change—that  were 
not picked up by standard analyses of secu-
rity and of development progress. Indicators 
are needed that focus on whether countries 
are on track to make institutional and gov-
ernance  improvements  within  the  realistic 
generational  timeframes  that  the  faster  re-
formers  have  achieved,  and  how  citizens 
perceive  trends  in  the  legitimacy  and  per-
formance of national institutions across the 
political security and development domains. 
The indicators presented in Feature 4 would 
be  a  simple  way,  as  Louise Arbour  suggests 
(Feature  8),  to  compare  progress,  stagna-
tion  or  deterioration.  Ensuring  that  such 
indicators  measure  outcomes  rather  than 
just  the  form  of  institutions  (laws  passed, 
anti-corruption  commissions  formed)  is 
also  important  to  ensure  that  they  encour-
age rather than suppress innovative national 
action  and  that  they  foster  learning  among 
low-,  middle-,  and  high-income  country 
institutions.  The  UN  Peacebuilding  Com-
mission, which brings together fragile states, 
donors,  troop-contributing  countries,  and 
regional  bodies,  has  unexploited  potential 
to advise on better tracking of progress and 
risks,  and  realistic  timelines  for  governance 
transformation. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  overview,  we 
asked how piracy in Somalia, continuing vio-
lence in Afghanistan, new threats from drug 
trafﬁ cking in the Americas, or conﬂ ict aris-
ing from social protests in North Africa can 
happen  in  today’s  world.  The  short  answer 
is  that  such  violence  cannot  be  contained 
by short-term solutions that fail to generate 
the institutions capable of providing people 
with a stake in security, in justice, and in eco-
nomic prospects. Socie ties cannot be trans-
formed  from  the  outside,  and  they  cannot 
be  transformed  overnight.  But  progress  is 
possible with consistent and concerted effort 
by  national  leaders  and  their  international 
partners  to  strengthen  the  local,  national, 
and  global  institutions  that  support  citizen 
security, justice, and jobs.

38 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

FE ATU R E 8   Regional initiatives and norms and standards

 

 

ASEAN experience in crisis prevention and recovery

  Surin Pitsuwan, Secretary-General ASEAN; WDR Advisory Council Member

There are many conﬂ icts simmering in the ASEAN landscape. 
But  the  region  is  not  totally  without  its  own  experiences 
in mediation and conﬂ ict resolution. ASEAN has played an 
important role in endeavors. The ASEAN Troika in the Cam-
bodian conﬂ ict of 1997–99, the Timor-Leste peace-keeping 
operation of 1999 onward, the Aceh Reconciliation of 2005, 
and the Myanmese Cyclone Nargis catastrophe of May 2008 
were cases of mediation and eventual resolution where the 
regions  and  some  ASEAN  member  states  have  made  valu-
able contributions and learned lessons from the process. It 
has  always  been  like  putting  pieces  of  a  diplomatic  jigsaw 
together,  weaving  tapestry  of  peace,  improvising  the  best 
modality and pattern from the available and suitable materi-
als at hand.

One important lesson for us is that our ASEAN structures 
can play an important political convening role when there 
are sensitivities with member states. There was a higher level 
of mutual conﬁ dence between Indonesia and of the ASEAN 
states  participating  in  the  Timor-Leste  operation.  We  got 
around the rigid principle of “non-interference” by oﬀ ering 
troops  under  a  joint-command  with  an  “ASEAN”  military 
leader taking an active leadership role. And Indonesia made 
it  easier  for  all  ASEAN  Partners  by  issuing  an  invitation  to 
come and assist. In Myanmar, ASEAN played a central role in 
the  dialogue  with  the  Government  after  Cyclone  Nargis, 
helping to open up the aﬀ ected areas, where over 130,000 
men, women and children had died and many more faced 
traumatic conditions, to international aid. 

A second lesson is that we can ﬁ nd useful combinations 
of capacity between our local knowledge and political con-

vening role, and the technical capacities of other partners. Our 
work  in  support  of  recovery  after  Cyclone  Narghis  was  sup-
ported by technical teams from the World Bank, and performed 
in conjunction with the United Nations. In the Aceh Monitoring 
Mission, we worked jointly with colleagues from the European 
Union who brought valuable technical knowledge. 

The third is that the more operations of this type that we 
undertake, the more our capacity builds. In Timor-Leste, long 
years of joint-military training and exercises between the Phil-
ippines, the Republic of Korea, and Thailand, and supported by 
partners outside the region such as the US, paid oﬀ . The troops 
on  the  ground  could  communicate,  cooperate,  and  conduct 
joint operations without any delay—but their experiences in 
Timor-Leste also added to their capacity. In Myanmar, ASEAN’s 
role meant drawing on personnel from many of our member 
states, such as Indonesia, Singapore, and Thailand, who have 
extensive experience of managing post-disaster recovery, and 
also building capacity within our Secretariat. Linked to long-
term  programs  of  capacity-building  with  some  of  our  donor 
partners, these experiences make us more ready to face new 
challenges in future. The cumulative results of these eﬀ orts in 
managing  political  conﬂ icts  and  natural  disaster  relief  have 
helped  ASEAN  in  enhancing  its  capacity  to  coordinate  our 
development cooperation strategies. We have learned to con-
tain sporadic violence and tension in the region and would not 
allow them to derail our community development eﬀ orts aim-
ing  at  common  security  and  sustainable  prosperity  for  our 
people.

All  the  recommendations  of  this  Report 
have at their heart the concept of shared global 
risk. Risks are evolving, with new threats to 
stability arising from international organized 
crime  and  global  economic  instability.  The 
landscape  of  international  power  relations 
is also changing, as low- and middle-income 
countries increase their share of global eco-
nomic  inﬂ uence  and  their  contributions  to 
global  policy  thinking.  This  shift  requires  a 
fundamental  rethink  of  the  approaches  of 
 international  actors  to  manage  global  risks 

collectively—and  as  equal  partners.  Real 
change requires a strong rationale. But a dual 
rationale  exists:  fragility  and  violence  are 
major obstacles to development and are no 
longer  conﬁ ned  to  poor  and  remote  areas 
or cityscapes. This past decade has seen the 
increasing penetration of instability in global 
life—in terrorism, an expanding drug trade, 
impact on commodity prices, and the rising 
numbers of internationally mobile refugees. 
Breaking  cycles  of  repeated  violence  is  thus 
a shared challenge demanding urgent action. 

 

Overview 

39

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

Reaffirming consensus on international norms and standards—the role of 
regional organizations 

Louise Arbour, President, International Crisis Group; former UN High Commissioner for 
Human Rights; WDR Advisory Council Member

Whether based on universal values, such as the sanctity of 
human  life,  or  on  international  legal  rules,  there  are  some 
universally accepted norms—reﬂ ected in the Charter of the 
United Nations and other international instruments. 

These  norms  are  not  self-implementing,  and,  because 
they include the right to cultural diversity, their interpreta-
tion must reﬂ ect local, national, and regional diversity. The 
resistance to the exportation of “Western values” might be 
no more than the rejection of a foreign way of expressing a 
particular norm, rather than a rejection of the norm itself. 

Regional  institutions  can  bridge  the  distance  between 
universal norms and local customs. Those customs or prac-
tices must conform, in substance, to the core international 
principles from which the international community derives 
its  cohesion.  Otherwise  cultural  diversity  can  simply  over-
ride, and undermine, the international framework.

In the justice sector, for instance, uniformity of institutional 
models and procedures may obscure radical diﬀ erences in the 
actual  delivery  of  justice.  But  the  adjudication  of  disputes 
based  on  principles  of  fairness,  impartiality,  transparency, 
integrity, compassion, and, ultimately, accountability can take 
many forms. 

In  their  assistance  to  development,  international  actors 
must resist the exportation of form over substance and accept 
the regionalization of norms that enhance, rather than impede, 
their true universal character. In the same spirit, regional actors 
must translate, in a culturally relevant way, international norms 
and repudiate nonconforming practices. 

And  all  must  concede  that  the  standards  set  by  universal 
norms are aspirations. Measures of performance should reﬂ ect 
either  progress,  stagnation  or  regression,  in  a  given  country, 
toward a common, universal ideal.

Notes

1.   The  World  Development  Report  2011  deﬁ nes  organized  violence  as  the  use  or  threat  of  physical 
force by groups, including state actions against other states or against civilians, civil wars, electoral 
violence between opposing sides, communal conﬂ icts based on regional, ethnic, religious, or other 
group identities or competing economic interests, gang-based violence and organized crime, and 
international, nonstate, armed movements with ideological aims. Although these are also impor-
tant topics for development, the WDR does not cover domestic or interpersonal violence. At times, 
violence or conﬂ ict are used as shorthand for organized violence, understood in these terms. Many 
countries address certain forms of violence, such as terrorist attacks by nonstate armed movements, 
as matters that are subject to their criminal laws.

2.   Uppsala/PRIO Armed  Conﬂ ict  Database  (Harbom  and Wallensteen  2010;  Lacina  and  Gleditsch 
2005); Sundberg 2008; Gleditsch and Ward 1999; Human Security Report Project, forthcoming; 
Gleditsch and others 2002.

3.   Countries affected by fragility, conﬂ ict, and violence include those countries with: (1) homicide 
rates greater than 10 per 100,000 population per year; (2) major civil conﬂ ict (battle deaths greater 
than 1,000 per year (as deﬁ ned in the from 2006 to 2009), (3) UN or regionally mandated peace-
building  or  peacekeeping  missions;  and  (4)  low-income  countries  with  institutional  levels  in 
2006–09 (World Bank’s CPIA less than 3.2), correlated with high risks of violence and conﬂ ict. See 
Uppsala/PRIO Armed  Conﬂ ict  Database  (Lacina  and  Gleditsch  2005;  Harbom  and Wallensteen 
2010); UNDPKO 2010b; UNDP 2010c; World Bank 2010e.

4.   For discussions of the trends in civil war onset and termination see Hewitt, Wilkenfeld, and Gurr 

2010; Sambanis 2004; Elbadawi, Hegre, and Milante 2008; Collier and others 2003. 

5.   Demombynes 2010; UNODC 2010a. 

40 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

6.   Leslie 2010; Harriott 2004, 2008; International Crisis Group 2008b; Ashforth 2009.
7.   Bayer and Rupert 2004. While Baker and others 2002 found that the effect of conﬂ ict is equivalent 
to a 33 percent tariff barrier. For an updated discussion of the methodology for determining growth 
effects of conﬂ ict and theory and new analysis based on primary and secondary neighbors, see De 
Groot 2010; Murdoch and Sandler 2002.

8.   U.S.  Committee  for  Refugees  and  Immigrants  2009;  Internal  Displacement  Monitoring  Centre 

2008.

9.   Gomez and Christensen 2010; Harild and Christensen 2010.
10.   Global  Terrorism  Database  2010;  National  Counter  Terrorism  Center  2010;  WDR  team 

 calculations.

11.   Gaibulloev and Sandler 2008.
12.   Davies, von Kemedi, and Drennan 2005.
13.   WDR team calculations based on Europe Brent spot price FOB (dollars per barrel) reported by the 

U.S. Energy Information Administration 2011.

14.   UNODC 2010b.
15.   UNODC 2010b.
16.   Hanson 2010; Bowden 2010.
17.   World Bank 2010d.
18.   WDR staff calculations based on Chen, Ravallion, and Sangraula 2008 poverty data (available on 

POVCALNET, http://iresearch.worldbank.org).

19.   Narayan and Petesch 2010.
20.   UNDP 2006.
21.   For an overview of costs of conﬂ ict and violence, see Skaperdas and others 2009. Speciﬁ c estimates 
of the economic costs associated with conﬂ ict are found in Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010; 
Collier and Hoefﬂ er 1998; Cerra and Saxena 2008; Collier, Chauvet, and Hegre 2007; Riascos and 
Vargas 2004; UNDP 2006.

22.   Martin, Mayer, and Thoenig 2008.
23.   UNICEF 2004; UNFPA 2002; Anderlini 2010a.
24.   Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 1995; Women’s Refugee Commission 2009; UNICEF 

2004. 

25.   American Psychological Association 1996; Dahlberg 1998; Verdú and others 2008.
26.   WDR team calculations.
27.   Theories of the causes of conﬂ ict are explored in chapter 2 of the main text. Of the literature dis-
cussed there, selected recommended readings include: Gurr 1970; Hirshleifer 1995; Skaperdas 1996; 
Grossman  1991;  Fearon  1995;  Collier  and  Hoefﬂ er  2004;  Satyanath,  Miguel,  and  Sergenti  2004; 
Blattman and Miguel 2010; Keefer 2008; Besley and Persson 2009, 2010; Toft 2003; Murshed and 
Tadjoeddin 2007; Arnson and Zartman 2005. The linkages among political, security, and economic 
dynamics are also recognized in the policy circle. See Zoellick 2010b.

28.   For relationship between income inequality and the risk of civil conﬂ ict see Fearon 2010a. For re-
lationship between income inequality and criminal violence see Loayza, Fajnzylber, and Lederman 
2002a, 2002b; Messner, Raffalovich, and Shrock 2002. 

29.   Fearon 2010b; Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010; Neumayer 2003; Loayza, Fajnzylber, and Lederman 

2002a, 2002b; Messner, Raffalovich, and Shrock 2002; WDR team calculations.

30.   Stewart 2010.
31.   Satyanath, Miguel, and Sergenti 2004.
32.   For the relationship between institutional weakness and violence conﬂ ict, see Fearon 2010a, 2010b; 

Johnston 2010; Walter 2010.

33.   In addition, there are structural and incremental factors that increase conﬂ ict risk. Among these 
are features of the physical terrain that make rebellion easier. These features do not cause war 
in the common sense of the word, they simply make it more possible. Mountainous terrain has 
been shown to increase risks, by increasing the feasibility of rebellion. Neighborhood matters 
too: there are both negative effects from proximity to other wars or countries with high rates of 
violent crime and illicit trafﬁ cking and positive effects from being in a neighborhood largely at 
peace. See Buhaug and Gleditsch 2008; Gleditsch and Ward 2000; Salehyan and Gleditsch 2006; 

 

Overview 

41

Goldstone 2010. On the effects of neighborhood on civil wars, see Hegre and Sambanis 2006 and 
Gleditsch 2007.

34.   McNeish 2010; Ross 2003.
35.   This follows recent literature on statebuilding, notably North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009; Dobbins 
and others 2007; Fukuyama 2004; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001, 2005, 2006. This learn-
ing is reﬂ ected in recent policy documents as well: OECD 2010a, 2010g, 2011.

36.   Institutions are deﬁ ned in the WDR as the formal and informal “rules of the game,” which include 
formal rules, written laws, organizations, informal norms of behavior, and shared beliefs—as well 
as the organizational forms that exist to implement and enforce these norms (both state and non-
state organizations). Institutions shape the interests, incentives, and behaviors that can facilitate 
violence. Unlike elite pacts, institutions are impersonal—they continue to function irrespective of 
the presence of particular leaders, and therefore provide greater guarantees of sustained resilience to 
violence. Institutions operate at all levels of society—local, national, regional, and global. 

37.   Fearon 2010a, 2010b; Walter 2010.
38.   Arboleda  2010; WDR  team  consultations  with  government  ofﬁ cials,  civil  society  representatives 

and security personnel in Colombia, 2010.

39.   Gambino 2010.
40.   A 2010 meeting of Anglophone and Francophone delegates in Kenya, convened by UNDP, coined 
the phrase “collaborative capacities” and further deﬁ ned the institutions relevant to prevention and 
recovery from violence as “dynamic networks of interdependent structures, mechanisms, resources, 
values, and skills which, through dialogue and consultation, contribute to conﬂ ict prevention and 
peace-building in a society.” UN Interagency Framework for Coordination on Preventive Action 
2010, 1.

41.   Barron and others 2010.
42.   World Bank 2010m; Buhaug and Urdal 2010.
43.   See Schneider, Buehn, and Montenegro 2010. Food protests data are from news reports; governance 

effectiveness data are from Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi 2010a.

44.   Menkhaus 2006, 2010.
45.   For  the  role  of  institutions  in  economic  growth  and  development,  see Acemoglu,  Johnson,  and 

Robinson 2005. Also see Zoellick 2010b.

46.   North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009.
47.   For the impact of colonialism on the development of modern-day institutions in former colonized 

countries, see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001.
48.   Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 2009.
49.   According to Margaret Levi, “Trust is, in fact, a holding word for a variety of phenomena that enable 
individuals to take risks in dealing with others, solve collective action problems, or act in ways that 
seem contrary to standard deﬁ nitions of self-interest.” Furthermore, Levi notes that “At issue is a 
cooperative venture, which implies that the truster possesses a reasonable belief that well-placed trust 
will yield positive returns and is willing to act upon that belief.” Braithwaite and Levi 1998, 78.

50.   Pritchett and de Weijer 2010.
51.   The  interlink  between  security  and  development  has  been  debated  under  the  notion  of  human 
security, which encompasses freedom from fear, freedom from want and freedom to live in dignity.  
By putting the security and prosperity of human beings at the center, human security addresses 
wide range of threats, both from poverty and from violence, and their interactions. While acknowl-
edging the importance of human security and its emphasis on placing people at the center of focus, 
this Report uses the term “citizen security” more often to sharpen our focus more on freedom from 
physical violence and freedom from fear of violence. The hope is to complement the discussion on 
the aspect of freedom from fear in the human security concept. Building on the Commission on 
Human Security 2003 report, the importance of human security has been recognized in the UN 
General Assembly 2005 resolution adopted at the 2005 World Summit, the UN General Assembly 
2009 report, and UN General Assembly 2010 Resolution, as well as in other fora such as Asia-Paciﬁ c 
Economic Cooperation, G8, and World Economic Forum. See Commission on Human Security 
2003; UN General Assembly 2005b, 2009b, 2010.

52.   “Conﬁ dence-building” in mediation terminology means building trust between adversaries; in a 
ﬁ nancial context, the term “conﬁ dence” denotes trust by market actors that governments are adopt-

42 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

ing  sound  policies  and  will  be  capable  of  implementing  them.  The WDR  deﬁ nes  the  term  as 
building trust between groups of citizens who have been divided by violence, between citizens 
and the state, and between the state and other key stakeholders (neighbors, international part-
ners, investors) whose political, behavioral, or ﬁ nancial support is needed to deliver a positive 
outcome.

53.   On building trust and changing expectations, see Hoff and Stiglitz 2008.
54.   Bedeski 1994; Cumings 2005; Kang 2002; Chang and Lee 2006.
55.   See Stedman 1996; Nilsson and Jarstad 2008. On elite bargains, political settlements and inclusion, 

see Di John and Putzel 2009. 

56.   Anderlini 2000.
57.   World Bank 2008f, 2009d; Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Environment 1999.
58.   UNDPKO 2010a.
59.   For Japanese land reforms, see Kawagoe 1999; Tsunekawa and Yoshida 2010; For broader statebuild-
ing experience in Japan, see Tsunekawa and Yoshida 2010; For Korean land reforms, see Shin 2006.

60.   Braud and Grevi 2005.
61.   The  Governance  and  Economic  Management Assistance  Program  (GEMAP),  introduced  in  the 
run-up to the 2005 elections in Liberia, provides “dual key” authority in the areas of revenue earn-
ing and expenditure. Jointly managed by the government and the international community, it was 
designed speciﬁ cally to reassure a skeptical population and donors that years of ofﬁ cial looting and 
corruption were over and that services would be reliably delivered. Dwan and Bailey 2006; Govern-
ment of the Republic of  Liberia Executive Mansion 2009.

62.   To combat corruption and crime, Guatemala created the International Commission Against Im-
punity, known by its Spanish acronym, CICIG, through an agreement with the UN in 2007. Its 
mandate is to “support, strengthen, and assist institutions of the State of Guatemala responsible for 
investigating and prosecuting crimes allegedly committed in connection with the activities of illegal 
security forces and clandestine security organizations.” See UN 2006a. 

63.   For Afghanistan National Solidarity Program, see Beath and others 2010; Ashe and Parrott 2001; 
UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and UNOHCHR 2010. For Latin American multi-sectoral 
violence prevention programs, see Alvarado and Abizanda 2010; Beato 2005; Fabio 2007; Interna-
tional Centre for the Prevention of Crime 2005; Duailibi and others 2007; Peixoto, Andrade, and 
Azevedo 2007; Guerrero 2006; Llorente and Rivas 2005; Formisano 2002. 

64.   For India, see India Ministry of Rural Development 2005, 2010. For Indonesia, see Barron 2010; 
Guggenheim 2011. For Kosovo, see Grygiel 2007; Institute for State Effectiveness 2007. For Rwanda, 
see Boudreaux 2010. 

65.   For Nicaragua, see Bastick, Grimm, and Kunz 2007. For Nepal, see Ashe and Parrott 2001.
66.   For Liberia, see Blundell 2010. For Mozambique, see Crown Agents 2007.
67.   For the Timor-Leste health programs, see Rohland and Cliffe 2002; Baird 2010.  
68.   Messick 2011.
69.   Giovine and others 2010;
70.   Guerrero 2006; Mason 2003; Presidencia República de Colombia 2010.
71.   Ashraf Ghani and Clare Lockhart, in Fixing Failed States, analyze the issue of establishing legitimacy 
and closing the sovereignty gap in fragile and conﬂ ict-affected states through the lens of “double 
compact.” The double compact focuses on the “network of rights and obligations underpinning 
the state’s claim to sovereignty . . .” and refers ﬁ rst to the “compact . . . between a state and its citi-
zens . . . embedded in a coherent set of rules, and second, “between a state and the international 
community to ensure adherence to international norms and standards of accountability and trans-
parency.” Ghani and Lockhart 2008, 8. 

72.   Agoglia, Dziedzic, and Sotirin 2008.
73.   WDR consultation with former key negotiators from the ANC Alliance and the National Party in 

South Africa 2010.

74.   Barron and others 2010.
75.   WDR team consultation in Haiti, 2010; UNDPKO 2010a.
76.   For South Africa, see Kambuwa and Wallis 2002; WDR consultation with former key negotiators 
from the ANC Alliance and the National Party in South Africa 2010. For Pakistan: World Bank and 
ADB 2010.

 

Overview 

43

77.   WDR team consultations with government ofﬁ cials, civil society representatives and security per-

sonnel in Colombia 2010.

78.   These tools include UNDPA’s mediation unit; AU and other regional mediation capacity; “track II 

mediation,” such as the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue.

79.   Ojielo 2007; Odendaal 2010; UNDPA 2010a.
80.   Crisis Management Initiative (CMI), a Finnish independent nonproﬁ t organization, works to re-
solve conﬂ ict and to build sustainable peace. In 2005, CMI Chairman, former Finnish President 
Ahtisaari facilitated a peace agreement between the Government of the Republic of Indonesia and 
the Free Aceh Movement in Aceh, Indonesia. See Crisis Management Initiative 2011. 

81.   For UN “integrated missions,” see Eide and others 2005. For “whole-of-government” approaches, 
see  OECD-DAC  2006;  DFID  2009,  2010.  For “whole-of  systems”  approaches,  see  OECD-DAC 
2007a. For regional tools, see African Union 2006, 2007b.

82.   Stewart and Brown 2007.
83.   OECD-DAC 2008.
84.   OECD-DAC 2010a.
85.   A recent study examined the cost to countries of aid volatility, which induces volatility into govern-
ment revenues and development programs. The loss in efﬁ ciency from volatility of net ODA was 
more than twice as high for weak states than strong states, at 2.5 versus 1.2 percent of GDP (see 
Kharas 2008).

86.   Trafﬁ cking is intrinsically regional and global in nature, with knock-on impacts between produc-
ing, transit, and consuming countries. Colombia’s actions against drug cartels affect Central Amer-
ica, Mexico, and even West Africa; California’s recent policy debate on legalizing drugs potentially 
impacts producing countries. Similar effects happen with other commodities: restraints on logging 
in one country can increase demand in other countries that do not have similar policies, bringing 
with it increased vulnerability to corruption and violence. 

87.   The Kimberley Process is jointly undertaken by civil society groups, industry, and governments 
to stem the ﬂ ow of “conﬂ ict diamonds” used to fuel rebellions in countries like the Democratic 
Republic  of  Congo.  The  process  has  its  own  diamond  certiﬁ cation  scheme  imposing  extensive 
requirements on its 49 members (representing 75 countries) to ensure that the rough diamonds 
shipped have not funded violence. See Kimberley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme 2010. 

88.   OECD-DAC 2010a.
89.   WDR team consultation with country team in Timor-Leste in 2010.
90.   UNOHCHR 2006.
91.   The g7+ is an “independent and autonomous forum of fragile and conﬂ ict affected countries and 
regions that have united to form one collective voice on the global stage.” The g7+ was established in 
2008 and includes: Afghanistan, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo, Haiti, Liberia, Nepal, the Solomon Islands, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, 
and Timor-Leste. See International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding 2010. 

92.   A practical example of this type of shift is Ethiopia in 2005, when government and donors agreed to 
move from regular budget support to a program of transfers to local and municipal governments. 
The program included measures to ensure that all regions of the country, irrespective of how they 
had voted in elections, received continuing central government support. 

93.   See Garassi 2010. For Afghanistan, see Atos Consulting 2009. For West Bank and Gaza, see World 

Bank 1999a. For Nepal, see UNOHCHR 2010; Government of Nepal, UNDP, and UNDG 2010.

94.   See OECD 2010i; Scanteam 2010.
95.   Gelb 2010.
96.   Messick 2011.
97.   See Favaro 2008, 2010.
98.   The  Greater  Mekong  Subregion  (GMS)  countries  (Cambodia,  China,  Lao  People’s  Democratic 
Republic, Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam) have implemented a wide-ranging series of regional 
projects covering transport, power, telecommunications, environmental management, human re-
source development, tourism, trade, private sector investment, and agriculture. The GMS is rec-
ognized as having enhanced cross-border trade while reducing poverty levels and creating shared 
interests in economic stability and peace.

44 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

99.   West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI) is a joint program among the UNODC, UN Ofﬁ ce for West 
Africa, UN Department of Political Affairs, and INTERPOL to combat problems of illicit drug traf-
ﬁ cking, organized crime, and drug abuse in West Africa. The initiative comprises a comprehensive 
set of activities targeting capacity-building, at both national and regional level, in the areas of law 
enforcement,  forensics,  border  management,  anti-money-laundering,  and  the  strengthening  of 
criminal justice institutions, contributing to peacebuilding initiatives and security sector reforms. 

100.   The “Euroregion” began as an innovative form of transborder cooperation (between two or more 
states that share a common bordering region) in the late 1950s. With the purpose of stimulating 
cross border economic, sociocultural and leisure cooperation, the Euroregion model grew, and was 
boosted through the creation of a common European market and recent democratic transitions. 
There are currently more than one hundred Euroregions spread across Europe, and the model has 
in recent times been replicated in eastern and central European territories. Cooperation has not 
been  without  problems  in  areas  previously  affected  by  conﬂ ict,  but  there  are  good  examples  of 
cross-border developmental, social and security programs that involve areas where ethnic minori-
ties reside across several states or in areas that have suffered the trauma of interstate and civil war 
in the past. See Greta and Lewandowski 2010; Otocan 2010; Council of Europe 1995; Council of 
Europe and Institute of International Sociology of Gorizia 2003; Bilcik and others 2000.

101.   Recognizing that insecure borders have been recurrent hosts to conﬂ ict, the African Union estab-
lished the African Union Border Program in 2007 to delimit and demarcate sensitive border ar-
eas and promote cross-border cooperation and trade as a conﬂ ict prevention tool. The program 
consists of four components. First, it pursues both land and maritime border demarcation since 
less  than a quarter of Africa’s borders have been formally marked and agreed, and disputes are likely 
to continue with future discoveries of oil. Second, it promotes cross-border cooperation to deal 
with itinerant criminal activities. Third, it supports cross-border peacebuilding programs. Fourth, 
it consolidates gains in the economic integration through the regional economic communities. Its 
ﬁ rst pilot project was launched in the Sikasso region in Mali and in Bobo Dioualasso in Burkina 
Faso—bringing together local, private, and public actors to strengthen cooperation. See African 
Union 2007a.

102.   ASEAN has played an important role in mediation and conﬂ ict resolution in the Southeast Asia re-
gion. Examples include its assistance in the Cambodian conﬂ ict of 1997–99, the Timor-Leste peace-
keeping operation of 1999 onward, the Aceh Reconciliation of 2005, and the Myanmese Cyclone 
Nargis catastrophe of May 2008. 

103.   WDR team calculations based on dataset in Powell and Thyne 2011.
104.   Of the different forms that South-South cooperation has taken, technical assistance has been the 
most common. Although many technical assistance projects focus on economic and social devel-
opment, countries in the Global South have also developed specialized capacities in post-conﬂ ict 
peacebuilding. Examples include South Africa’s support to build structural capacities for public 
service through peer learning with Burundi, Rwanda, and Southern Sudan. Cooperation among 
45 municipalities in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras helps to manage regional public goods 
such as water in the Triﬁ nio region. The African Development Bank also has a speciﬁ c facility for 
South-South cooperation in fragile states. See also OECD 2010e. 

105.   In the West African countries that have recently experienced coups d’état, for example, the view 
of the African Union was that donor support to social and poverty reduction programs should 
continue in these countries, but that larger-scale support should be paced to support the return to a 
constitutional path. In practice, donors were divided between those that suspended assistance com-
pletely and those that continued assistance with no change. WDR team consultation with ofﬁ cials 
from African Union in Addis Ababa, 2010.

WDR Framework and Structure

The Report argues that the risk of violence increases when stresses—both internal and exter-
nal—combine with weak institutions. Given this challenge, how have countries prevented or 
escaped violence? The WDR framework (ﬁ gure 1) suggests that there is a need to ﬁ rst restore 
conﬁ dence and then to transform institutions that provide citizen security, justice, and jobs. 
The interlink between security and development has been debated under the notion of 
human security, which encompasses freedom from fear, freedom from want, and freedom to 
live in dignity.1 By putting the security and prosperity of human beings at the center, human 
security addresses wide range of threats, both from poverty and from violence, and their 
interactions. Building on the report by the Commission on Human Security in 2003, the 
importance of human security has been recognized in the United Nations General Asembly 
and other international fora. While acknowledging the importance of human security and its 
emphasis on placing people at the center of focus, this Report uses the term “citizen security” 
more often to sharpen our focus more on freedom from physical violence and freedom from 
fear of violence. Our hope is to complement the discussion on the aspect of freedom from 
fear in the human security concept.

F I G UR E 1  The 2011 WDR Framework—Building resilience to violence

CITIZEN 
SECURITY,
JUSTICE, 
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

NS 

U

TIO

R

E

S

T

 
T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R

I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIO

NS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

1   The importance of human security has been recognized in the UN General Assembly 2005 resolution adopted 
at the 2005 World Summit, the UN General Assembly 2009 report, and UN General Assembly 2010 resolu-
tion, as well as in other fora such as the Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation, G8, and World Economic Forum. 
See the Commission on Human Security 2003; UN General Assembly 2005b, 2009b, 2010.

45

46 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

This framework is graphically represented as a spiral, because these processes repeat over 
time as countries go through successive transition moments. Even as one set of immediate 
priorities is resolved, other risks and transition moments emerge and require a repeated cycle 
of action to bolster institutional resilience to stress. There is no “one path”, institutions do not 
need to converge on Western models to create sustained security—in fact, local adaptation is 
best. Additionally, progress can be made within a generation, but areas that have already seen 
repeated cycles of organized violence cannot create sustained security overnight. The arrow 
below the spiral shows that external support and incentives can help this nationally led pro-
cess, and the arrow above it shows that external stresses can derail it.

The WDR framework provides a roadmap for the nine chapters of the WDR, summarized 

in table 1.

Chapter 1, Repeated violence threatens development, explores the challenge: repeated 
cycles of organized criminal violence and civil conﬂ ict that threaten development locally 
and regionally and are responsible for much of the global deﬁ cit in meeting the Millennium 
Development Goals. 

Chapter 2, Vulnerability to violence, reviews the combination of internal and external stresses 
and institutional factors that lead to violence. It argues that capable, accountable, and legiti-
mate institutions are the common “missing factor” explaining why some societies are more 
resilient to violence than others. Without attention to institutional transformation, countries 
are susceptible to a vicious cycle of repeated violence.

TA BL E 1   Chapter structure

PART 1: THE CHALLENGE

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

Weak institutions
not transforming

Elite
pact

New
stresses

Violence

PART 2: LESSONS FROM NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL RESPONSES

CITIZEN 
SECURITY,
JUSTICE, 
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIO

NS 

R

E

S

T

 
T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

O

R

I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

TIT

U

TIO

NS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT

UTIONS 

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

I

 
 

C

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT
AND INCENTIVES

Chapter 3, From violence to resilience: Restoring confi dence and transforming institutions, 
presents the WDR framework, or “virtuous cycle.” It compiles research and case study experi-
ence to show how countries have successfully moved away from fragility and violence: by 
mobilizing coalitions in support of citizen security, justice, and jobs to restore conﬁ dence 
in the short term and by transforming national institutions over time. This is a repeated 
process that seizes multiple transition moments and builds cumulative progress. It takes a 
generation.

Chapter 4, Restoring confi dence: Moving away from the brink, reviews lessons from national 
experience in restoring conﬁ dence by mobilizing ‘inclusive-enough’ coalitions of stake-
holders and by delivering results. Collaborative coalitions often combine government and 
nongovernmental leadership to build national support for change and signal an irrevers-
ible break with the past. Restoring conﬁ dence in situations of low trust means delivering 
some fast results, since government announcements of change will not be credible without 
tangible action. 

 

Overview 

47

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

Chapter 5, Transforming institutions to deliver security, justice, and jobs, reviews national 
experience in prioritizing foundational reforms that provide citizen security, justice, and 
jobs—and stem the illegal ﬁ nancing of armed groups. In moving forward institutional trans-
formation in complex conﬂ ict settings, case studies emphasize that perfection should not be 
the enemy of progress—pragmatic, “best-ﬁ t” approaches should be used to address immedi-
ate challenges. 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

EXTERNAL
STRESS

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT

UTIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

Chapter 6, International support to building confi dence and transforming institutions, turns 
to lessons from international support to national processes. While registering some notable 
successes, it argues that international interventions are often fragmented, slow to enter, 
quick to exit, reliant on international technical assistance, and delivered through parallel 
systems. The chapter considers why international action has been slow to change. Interna-
tional actors have to respond to their own domestic pressures to avoid risk and deliver fast 
results. Diﬀ erent parts of the international system—middle-income versus OECD actors, for 
example—face diﬀ erent domestic pressures, undermining cohesive support.

EXTERNAL
STRESS

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

Chapter 7, International action to mitigate external stresses, provides lessons from inter-
national action to combat external security, economic, and resource stresses that increase 
conﬂ ict risk. The stresses range from traﬃ  cking in drugs and natural resources to food 
insecurity and other economic shocks. The chapter also addresses lessons from regional and 
cross-border initiatives to manage these threats. 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

PART 3: PRACTICAL OPTIONS AND RECOMMENDATION

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

Chapter 8, Practical country directions and options, provides practical options for national 
and international reformers to take advantage of multiple transition opportunities, restore 
conﬁ dence, and transform institutions in countries facing a range of institutional challenges, 
stresses, and forms of violence.

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

R

E

S

T

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT

UTIONS 

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

EXTERNAL
STRESS

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

Chapter 9, New directions for international support, identiﬁ es four tracks for international 
action. First, to invest in prevention through citizen security, justice and jobs. Second, internal 
agency reforms to provide faster assistance for conﬁ dence-building and longer term institu-
tional engagement. Third, acting at the regional level on external stresses. Fourth, marshal-
ling the knowledge and resources of low-, middle-, and high-income countries. 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

48 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

The dynamics of change are similar in countries facing violence of purely criminal origins and 
those facing political and civil conﬂ ict; in countries with different combinations of stresses 
and institutional characteristics; and in those at different incomes, including middle and high 
income countries facing subnational violence. This said, the Report’s framework must be 
applied contextually, taking into account the speciﬁ c features of the case in question. This dif-
ferentiation is explored throughout the Report. Lessons from country case studies in chapters 
4 to 8 include, for example, brief “differentiation tables” that summarize the relevant types of 
violence, transition opportunities, key stakeholders, key stresses, and institutional challenges 
faced (table 2). These tables provide a brief assessment of the critical dynamics that, based on 
experience, must be taken into account when designing an appropriate strategy to prevent, 
mitigate, or recover from violence.

TA BL E 2   Sample differentiation table

Types of violence:  Legacy of civil conﬂ ict, political, criminal and gang related violence, traﬃ  cking

Transition opportunities:  Moderate space for 
change, presidential elections, strong international 
support

Key stakeholders:  Government, investors, opposi-
tion parties, ex-combatants, victims, peacekeepers

Key stresses:  Legacy of violence and trauma, 
grievances and mistrust, deep-rooted corruption, 
unemployment

Institutional challenges:  Accountability and 
capacity constraints in economic, security, political 
spheres

PART I

The Challenge

T his chapter presents the development challenge of political 

and criminal violence. The eﬀ ects can be devastating. Violence 
kills and displaces people, destroys human and physical capi-
tal, stunts growth, and all too often spills across borders. More than 
1.5 billion people live in countries aﬀ ected by fragility, violence, or 
conﬂ ict. A child living in a conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected or fragile developing 
country is twice as likely to be undernourished as a child living in 
another developing country and nearly three times as likely to be out 
of school. No low-income fragile or conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected state has yet 
achieved a single Millennium Development Goal (MDG). There is 
hope, however. Countries that have managed to reduce violence 
have also produced some of the fastest development gains.

CHAPTER1

Repeated Violence Threatens 
Development

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

Interstate and civil wars have 
declined since peaking in the 
early 1990s

Wars  between  states  are  now 

relatively rare (compared with 
the large wars of the 20th cen-
tury).  Major  civil  wars,  after 
peaking in the early 1990s, have since declined 
(see  box  1.1).  The  annual  number  of  battle 
deaths  from  civil  war  fell  from  more  than 
160,000 a year in the 1980s to less than 50,000 
a year in the 2000s.1 Homicide rates in most 
regions  have  also  been  declining,  except  in 
Latin America and the Caribbean and possibly 
Sub-Saharan Africa.2 

The last two decades have also seen prog-
ress  in  developing  global  and  regional  stan-
dards to check the violent or coercive exercise 
of power. In Africa, the Lomé Declaration in 
2000,  which  established  standards  and  a  re-
gional  response  mechanism  to  unconstitu-
tional changes in government, has been asso-
ciated with a reduction in coups d’état from 
15 in the 1990s to 5 from 2000 to mid-2010.3 
And, despite an increase in coups in the last 
ﬁ ve years, continental action to restore consti-
tutionality  has  been  consistently  strong.  In 
1991,  the  Organization  of  American  States 
adopted  provisions  supporting  democratic 
and  constitutional  changes  of  government 
and laying out action in the event of a coup; a 

decision reinforced in the Democratic Char-
ter of 2001.4 The number of coups in Latin 
America fell from 30 between 1970 and 1989 
to 3 since 1990.5 New norms and associated 
sanctions to protect human rights have also 
made  it  possible  to  prosecute  leaders  for 
using extreme violence and coercion against 
their citizens: since 1990, 67 former heads of 
state have been prosecuted for serious human 
rights violations or economic crimes during 
their tenures.6

Countries emerging from severe violence 
have made striking development gains, often 
with strong assistance from the international 
community. Conﬂ ict-affected states often be - 
gin  their  recovery  from  lower  development 
levels  than  is  “natural,”  given  their  human 
and physical capital. This makes rapid strides 
in development possible, as shown in the fol-
lowing examples:7 

(cid:129)  Ethiopia  more  than  quadrupled  access 
to  improved  water,  from  13  percent  of
the  population  in  1990  to  66  percent  in 
2009–10. 

(cid:129)  Mozambique  more  than  tripled  its  pri-
mary school completion rate in just eight 
years, from 14 percent in 1999 to 46 per-
cent in 2007. 

(cid:129)  Rwanda cut the prevalence of undernour-
ishment  from  53  percent  of  the  popula-
tion in 1997 to 34 percent in 2007. 

52 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 1.1  Interstate and civil war—1900 to the present
Interstate war has declined dramatically since the two world wars of the ﬁ rst half of the 20th century. Major civil conﬂ icts (those with more 
than 1,000 battle deaths a year) increased during the postcolonial and Cold War era, peaking in the late 1980s and early 1990s (ﬁ gure a). 
Since 1991–92, when there were 21 active major civil wars, the number has steadily fallen to less than 10 each year since 2002.8

FI G U R E A  Civil wars peaked in the early 1990s and then declined

Major civil wars increased from 1960 through the late 1980s and have decreased since the early-1990s.

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

r
a
w

 
t
a
 
s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c

f

o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

 
)

d
e
k
c
a
t
s
(
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
C

l

1900 1906 1912 1918 1924 1930 1936 1942 1948 1954 1960 1966 1972 1978 1984 1990 1996 2002 2008

Countries involved in major civil war
Countries involved in both major interstate and major civil war
Countries involved in major interstate war

Sources: Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict dataset (Harbom and Wallensteen 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 2005).

The declines are all the more remarkable given the rising number of sovereign states—from around 50 in 1900 to more than 170 in 2008. 
Despite a tripling in the number of states and a doubling of population in the last 60 years, the percentage of countries involved in major con-
ﬂ icts (interstate or civil) has not increased, and there has been a decline since 1992.

In addition, civil wars have become less violent. Battle deaths have dropped from an average of 164,000 a year in the 1980s and 92,000 a 
year in the 1990s to 42,000 a year in the 2000s (ﬁ gure b). This is consistent with recent evidence of declines in the number of wars, human rights 
abuses, and fatalities in war—and in the indirect deaths associated with wars.9

FI G U R E B  Deaths from civil wars are also on the decline

As the number of civil wars declined, the total annual deaths from these conﬂ icts (battle 
deaths) fell from more than 200,000 in 1988 to less than 50,000 in 2008.

s
r
a
w

 
l
i

i

v
c
n

 

i
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
l
t
t
a
B

 

300,000

250,000

200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

0
1960

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1968

1976

1984

1992

2000

2008

Total battle deaths per annum in all civil wars (minor and major)
Total number of countries in civil war (minor and major)

r
a
w

 
l
i

i

v
c
n

 

i
 
s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
 
f

o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Sources: Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict dataset (Harbom and Wallenstein 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 2005); Gleditsch and others 2002; Sundberg 2008; 
Gleditsch and Ward 1999; Human Security Report Project, forthcoming.
Note: Civil wars are classiﬁ ed by scale and type in the Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict database (Harbom and Wallensteen 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 
2005). The minimum threshold for monitoring is a minor civil war with 25 or more battle deaths a year. Low, high, and best estimates of annual battle 
deaths per conﬂ ict are in Lacina and Gleditsch (2005, updated in 2009). Throughout this Report, best estimates are used, except when they are not 
available, in which case averages of the low and high estimates are used.

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

53

F I G U R E 1.1  Gangs and trafﬁ cking are global concerns

Following September 11, 2001, there was an exponential rise in media coverage of terrorism. Meanwhile, media coverage of 
gangs and traﬃ  cking has also been increasing. Recently, the coverage of gangs and traﬃ  cking approached that of civil war.

i

s
c
p
o
t
 
d
e
t
c
e
e
s
 
n
o
a
d
e
m

 

l

i

 
l

a
b
o
g
n

 

l

l

i
 
s
e
c
i
t
r
A

100,000

10,000

1,000

100

Jan.
2000

Jan.
2001

Jan.
2002

Jan.
2003

Jan.
2004

Jan.
2005

Jan.
2006

Jan.
2007

Jan.
2008

Jan.
2009

Terrorism
Civil war

Gangs
Traﬃcking

Source: Factiva. 
Note: Data in the ﬁ gure were compiled by using all available news sources from the Factiva search engine from January 2000 to December 
2009 and using the following four search terms: “terrorism,” “traﬃ  cking,” “gangs,” and “civil war” in multiple languages. Only articles where 
the search terms appeared in the headline and lead paragraph were counted. 

(cid:129)  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  between  1995 
and  2007,  increased  measles  immuniza-
tions from 53 to 96 percent for children 
aged  12–23  months,  and  reduced  infant 
mortality from 16 to 12.6 per 1,000 live 
births. Telephone lines per 100 people in-
creased fourfold, from 7 to 28. 

But global apprehension remains. Media 
references to terrorism peaked after 9/11 and 
then  gradually  declined,  but  references  to 
gangs and trafﬁ cking steadily increased over 
the last decade (ﬁ gure 1.1). The Middle East 
and North Africa has experienced a series of 
dramatic social protests and political turbu-
lence,  escalating  into  outright  conﬂ ict  in 
some countries. Violence in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan is consuming the attention of global 
policy makers. As this report goes to print, a 
new nation is emerging in Southern Sudan, 
with all the opportunities and risks involved 
in  that  endeavor.  Drug-based  violence  ap-
pears to be on the increase in Central Amer-
ica, threatening both local and national gov-
ernance. Global terrorism remains a serious 

threat. And new and unpredictable risks are 
likely to emerge from a combination of dem-
ographic  pressure,  climate  change,  and  re-
source scarcity. 

Modern violence comes in various 
forms and repeated cycles

The  tendency  to  see  violence  as  interstate 
warfare  and  major  civil  war  obscures  the 
 variety  and  prevalence  of  organized  vio-
lence—and  underestimates  its  impact  on 
people’s  lives.  The  organized  violence  that 
disrupts  governance  and  compromises  de-
velopment  also  includes  local  violence  in-
volving  militias  or  between  ethnic  groups, 
gang violence, local resource-related violence 
and  violence  linked  to  trafﬁ cking  (particu-
larly  drug  trafﬁ cking),  and  violence  associ-
ated with global ideological struggles (table 
1.1).  This  violence  is  often  recurrent,  with 
many  countries  now  experiencing  repeated 
cycles of civil conﬂ ict and criminal violence.

54 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

TA B L E 1.1 Country case examples of multiple forms of violence

“Conventional” political 
conﬂ ict (contests for state 
power or for autonomy or 
independence)

Widespread gang-
related violence

Organized crime 
or traﬃ  cking with 
accompanying violence

Local conﬂ icts 
with transnational 
ideological 
connections

Taliban, other actors 
(2002–present)

Warlordism 
(2002–present)

Opium production and 
traﬃ  cking

Al-Qaeda links with 
Taliban 

Pakistani Taliban 
(2007–present); 
Balochistan separatists 
(2004–present)

Rebel groups in Northern 
Mali (1990–present)

Drug production and 
traﬃ  cking

Cross-border 
ideological 
militant links

Transnational traﬃ  cking 
of illicit goods, principally 
drugs and weapons

Al-Qaeda in the 
Islamic Maghreb

Country 

Local intergroup conﬂ ict

Afghanistan

Multiple incidents 
involving militias including 
Amanullah Khan and Abdul 
Rashid Dostum (2002–08)

Pakistan

Intratribal conﬂ ict 
(2004–09)

Rebel inﬁ ghting (1994); 
ethnic violence in Gao, 
Kayes, and Kindal regions 
(1998–99)

Mali

Papua New 
Guinea

El Salvador

Ethnic and tribal 
conﬂ icts in the Highlands 
(2001–present)

Secessionist movement 
(Bougainville Revolutionary 
Army, 1989–2001)

Urban crime and 
gang violence

Human traﬃ  cking; source 
and transit point for illicit 
timber trade

Rebel groups (1979–92)

Kenya

Clan and ethnic group 
violence (2005–08)

Election violence

Tajikistan

Philippines 

Local clan conﬂ icts

Northern 
Ireland 
(United 
Kingdom)

Local tensions over 
religion and economic 
disparities underlie much of 
the escalated violence

Democratic and Islamist 
opposition groups (1992–96); 
Movement for Peace 
in Tajikistan (1998)

Muslim separatist groups 
in Mindanao (Moro Islamic 
Liberation Front and Moro 
National Liberation Front)

Irish Republican Army (IRA) 
(1971–98)

La Mara Salva 
Trucha, La 18, 
La Mao Mao, and 
La Máquina

Widespread gang 
activity (1980s–
present)

Drug traﬃ  cking

Drug traﬃ  cking hub, 
particularly for heroin

Major transit country for 
Afghan narcotics; human 
traﬃ  cking

Islamic Movement of 
Uzbekistan

Kidnap for ransom; human 
traﬃ  cking; methampheta-
mine source for East and 
Southeast Asia

Al-Qaeda and 
Jemaah Islamiyah 
links with Abu Sayyaf 
(Mindanao)

Splinter groups of 
IRA and Protestant 
paramilitaries

Drug traﬃ  cking 
(amphetamines)

Sources: Lockhart and Glencorse 2010; Straus 2010; Demombynes 2010; Barron and others 2010; Dinnen, Porter, and Sage 2010; Europa Publications 2001; Economist 
Intelligence Unit 2010; Oxford Reference Online 2001; Uppsala University 2009b, 2009a; UNODC 2010b. 

Violence is often interlinked 

As table 1.1 suggests, many types of violence 
have direct links to each other, as illustrated 
in the following examples:

(cid:129)  Countries rich in oil and other minerals 
that  can  be  illegally  trafﬁ cked  are  much 
more likely to have a civil war,10 and a lon-
ger one, with rebels ﬁ nancing their activ-
ity through the sale of lootable resources, 
such  as  diamonds  in  Sierra  Leone  and 
 coltan  (the  mineral  columbite-tantalite) 
in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.11 

Illegal trafﬁ cking has been a source of ﬁ -
nance  for  armed  groups  in  Afghanistan, 
Mindanao, and Northern Ireland.12

In  countries  as  diverse  as  Côte  d’Ivoire, 
Jamaica, Kenya, and the Solomon Islands, 
militant  groups  or  criminal  gangs  have 
been mobilized during past political con-
tests and elections.13

In  Melanesia,  the  ritualized  community 
conﬂ icts of previous generations have es-
calated  into  urban  gang  violence  associ-
ated with particular ethnic groups.14 

(cid:129) 

(cid:129) 

 

(cid:129) 

In Central America, combatants on both 
sides  of  political  conﬂ icts  between  the 
state and rebel movements have migrated 
into organized crime.15

In  other  cases,  violence  may  be  linked 
through underlying institutional weaknesses. 
Yemen now faces four separate conﬂ icts: the 
Houthi rebellion in the North, the presence 
of Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, griev-
ances in the south, and the popular protests 
for change that have swept through the Arab 
world. There is little direct evidence of links 
between these conﬂ icts, other than through 
the weakness of national institutions to ad-
dress  them.16  Similarly,  in  Nepal,  following 
a  decade-long  insurrection  (1996–2006)  a 
Com  prehensive Peace Agreement was signed 
between  the  Maoist  rebels  and  the  govern-
ment.  But  violence  between  political  rivals, 
quasi-political  extortion,  and  criminal  gang 
activity  have  increased  markedly  since  the 
civil war.17

The  modern  landscape  of  violence  also 
includes terrorist attacks by movements that 
claim  ideological  motives  and  recruit  inter-
nationally.  Terrorism—commonly,  though 
not universally, deﬁ ned as the use of force by 
nonstate actors against civilians18—stretches 
back at least to the Middle Ages. In modern 
times, the tactics and organizations have mu-
tated. The dominant forms and groups from 
the  1960s  to  the  early  1990s  were  leftist  or 

F I G U R E 1.2  Victims of terrorism 

Repeated violence threatens development 

55

 nationalist groups based in OECD (Organi-
sation for Economic Co-operation and De-
velopment)  countries  (the  Baader-Meinhof 
Group,  Red  Brigades,  the  IRA,  the  Euskadi 
Ta Askatasuna (ETA), and groups associated 
with the Israeli-Palestinian struggle). In con-
trast, the 1990s saw a surge in right-wing na-
tionalism  and  anti-government  libertarian 
terrorism  in  the  West,19  until  the  center  of 
gravity shifted with 9/11 and the later attacks 
in, among other places, Jakarta, London, Ma-
drid, and Mumbai. This Report does not en-
ter the debate on what terrorism is or is not. 
Instead, the concern with terrorism is about 
the elements of movements that pose partic-
ular threats to governance and development, 
along  with  their  ability  to  recruit  and  to 
 operate  across  national  boundaries  and  the 
 diverse motivations of those who join (chap-
ter  2).  While  the  preoccu pation  with  ter-
rorism  is  high  in  Western  countries,  some 
perspective  on  the  global  phenomenon  is 
necessary—fatalities  have  been  overwhelm-
ingly concentrated on nonwestern targets in 
every year except 2001 (ﬁ gure 1.2). 

Organized crime and trafﬁ cking 
are an important part of current 
violent threats

Trafﬁ cking of drugs, people, and commodi-
ties  has  been  an  international  concern  for 

Over the last decade, 86 percent of nearly 50,000 fatalities from terrorism occurred in attacks aimed at non-Western targets. The attacks of 
September 11, 2001, are the exception rather than the rule, and the phenomenon of terrorism has long aﬀ ected all regions of the world. 

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Fatalities in attacks aimed at Western targets
Fatalities in attacks aimed at non-Western targets
Fatalities in attacks aimed at unknown targets

Sources: National Counter Terrorism Center 2010; Global Terrorism Database 2010;  WDR team calculations. The Global Terrorism Database (GTD) contains data from 
1998 to 2008 and the National Counter Terrorism Center (NCTC) from 2004 to 2009. Pie charts from 1999 to 2003 are thus based on GTD data; from 2005 to 2007 on 
average shares from the two datasets; and for 2009 on NCTC data.
Note: From 1998 to 2009, 41,753 fatalities occurred in attacks on nonwestern targets, of a global total of 48,828. These statistics are based on the nationality of the 
principal target of each attack; “Western” targets are deﬁ ned as all targets from OECD countries, targets in all other countries are deﬁ ned as “non-Western.” So attacks 
on non-Western targets may occasionally include Western fatalities, and vice versa. 

56 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

B OX 1.2  Instability, political violence, and drug traffi  cking in West Africa

West Africa is one of the poorest and least stable regions in the world. All but 3 of its 16 countries are on the United Nations (UN) list of “least 
developed countries.” Since independence, countries in the region have experienced at least 58 coups and attempted coups and many civil 
wars—and rebel groups remain active.

Where conﬂ ict has ended, recovery and the creation of resilient institutions take time; and the weakness of governance in post-conﬂ ict 
environments attracts transnational criminal networks. International drug traﬃ  ckers began in 2004 to use the region as a base for shipping co-
caine from South America to Europe.

In 2008 an estimated 25 tons of cocaine passed through West Africa, with a transit value of about US$1 billion by the time it reached West 

Africa, and an ultimate value of some US$6.8 billion at its destinations in Western Europe.20 Drug traﬃ  ckers use some of the proﬁ ts to bribe 
government oﬃ  cials. As the UNODC (UN Oﬃ  ce on Drugs and Crime) notes in its Transnational Organized Crime Threat Assessment for West 
Africa, “Law enforcement oﬃ  cials can be oﬀ ered more than they could earn in a lifetime simply to look the other way.” 21 

Traﬃ  cking and violence during conﬂ icts in West Africa, 1990–2009

West Africa has experienced political, communal, and criminal violence since 1990. During conﬂ icts, diamonds, timber, and 
oil were traﬃ  cked. Recently the region has become a transit route for cocaine traﬃ  cked from South America to Europe.

Major cocaine seizures
(kilograms), 2005–2009:

3000 kg

1500 kg
500 kg

100 kg

Countries that reported
seizures on land

630

830

CAPE
VERDE

120

500

3,100

1,250

Former
Spanish
Sahara

IBRD 38458
April 2011

ALGERIA

MAURITANIA

MALI

In Sierra Leone in 1999, diamonds valued at

US$70 million were trafficked out of the country.

NIGER

1,200

SENEGAL

In Nigeria in 2009, US$1 billion

of oil was bunkered.

THE
GAMBIA

GUINEA-
BISSAU

635

674

GUINEA

116

1,500

2,210

Political violence, 1990–2009:

Rebel activity

Communal violence

Riots and protests

Political gangs

170

703

3,700

SIERRA
LEONE

CÔTE D’IVOIRE

LIBERIA

2,500

BURKINA

FASO

BENIN

TOGO
274

GHANA

388

160

588

1,900

360

840

NIGERIA

N
O
O
R
E
M
A
C

EQ. GUINEA

In Liberia in 2001, timber valued between
US$168–$180 million was illicitly traded.

SÃO TOME AND PRÍNCIPE

Sources: Conﬂ ict data are from Raleigh and others 2010 ACLED database (Armed Conﬂ ict Location and Event Database), seizure and traﬃ  cking 
data are from UNODC 2010a; WDR team calculations.
Note: The map above depicts West African political violence 1990–2009 overlaid traﬃ  cking and seizure data. Violence data for Sierra Leone and 
Liberia are for 1990–2010, while violence data for all other states are for 1997–2009. 

 decades.  Criminal  networks  take  advantage 
of  communications,  transport,  and  ﬁ nan-
cial  services—and  overwhelm  enforcement 
mech anisms that are either rooted in national 
jurisdictions  or  hampered  by  low  coopera-
tion and weak capacity. Drugs connect some 
of  the  wealthiest  and  poorest  areas  of  the 
world  in  mutual  violence,  showing  that 

many  solutions  to  violence  require  a  global 
perspective.  The  annual  value  of  the  global 
trade  in  cocaine  and  heroin  today  is  esti-
mated at US$153 billion (heroin US$65 bil-
lion and cocaine US$88 billion). Europe and 
North  America  consume  53  percent  of  the 
heroin and 67 percent of the cocaine; how-
ever,  the  high  retail  prices  in  these  markets 

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

57

mean  that  economic  share  of  consumption 
in Europe and North America is even higher: 
cocaine consumption in the two regions ac-
counted  for  an  estimated  US$72  billion  of 
the  US$88  billion  in  global  trade.22  Drugs 
provide  the  money  that  enables  organized 
criminals  to  corrupt  and  manipulate  even 
the most powerful societies—to the ultimate 
detriment  of  the  urban  poor,  who  provide 
most of the criminals’ foot-soldiers and who 
ﬁ nd  themselves  trapped  in  environments 
traumatized by criminal violence.23

Drug  trafﬁ cking  organizations  thus  have 
resources that can dwarf those of the govern-
ments attempting to combat them.24 The val-
ue-added  of  cocaine  traveling  the  length  of 
Central America is equivalent to 5 percent of 
the region’s GDP—and more than 100 times 
the US$65 million the United States allocates 
under the Mérida Initiative to assist interdic-
tion efforts by Mexico and Central American 
nations.25 Conservative estimates suggest there 
are 70,000 gang members in Central America, 
outnumbering  military  personnel  there.26  In 
many countries, drug cartels exert a heavy in-
ﬂ uence over provincial governance and, occa-
sionally, national governance (box 1.2).

Organized  crime  networks  engage  in  a 
wide  variety  of  illicit  activities,  including 
trafﬁ cking drugs, people, and small arms and 
light weapons; ﬁ nancial crimes; and money 
laundering. These illicit activities require the 
absence  of  rule  of  law  and,  therefore,  often 
thrive  in  countries  affected  by  other  forms 
of  violence.  According  to  various  studies, 
organized  crime  generates  annual  revenues 
ranging  from  US$120  billion  to  as  high  as 
US$330  billion,27  with  drug  trafﬁ cking  the 
most proﬁ table. Other estimates suggest that 
the  world’s  shadow  economy,  including  or-
ganized crime, could be as high as 10 percent 
of GDP globally.28

Countries  affected  by  political  violence 
that have weak institutions are also suscepti-
ble to trafﬁ cking. Since 2003, drug trafﬁ cking 
organizations have taken advantage of insti-
tutional weaknesses in West Africa to estab-
lish their operations there, resulting in a four-
fold  increase  in  cocaine  seizures  heading  to 

Europe since 2003. Box 1.2 shows how traf-
ﬁ cking  and  violence  coexist  in  the  region.29 
Armed groups in Central Africa secure their 
funding  from  mining  and  smuggling  pre-
cious  minerals  such  as  gold.  In  the  Demo-
cratic  Republic  of  Congo,  an  estimated  40 
tons  of  gold,  worth  US$1.24  billion,  are 
smuggled out every year.30 The link between 
criminal trafﬁ cking and violence is not unique 
to Africa. For example, Myanmar is still a ma-
jor source of opium, accounting for 10 per-
cent of global production, and continues to 
be a major trade hub to East and Southeast 
Asia.  Illegal  logging  remains  a  major  chal-
lenge in Myanmar; although trade in timber 
from Myanmar fell by 70 percent from 2005 
to  2008,  illegal  trade  into  countries  in  the 
 region  continues.  Myanmar  also  serves  as  a 
major conduit of wildlife trade coming from 
Africa and South Asia.31

Today’s violence occurs in 
repeated cycles

There  has  been  a  tendency  in  the  develop-
ment community to assume that the progres-
sion  from  violence  to  sustained  security  is 
fairly  linear—and  that  repeated  violence  is 
the exception. But recurring civil wars have 
become a dominant form of armed conﬂ ict 
in the world today. Every civil war that began 
since  2003  was  a  resumption  of  a  previous 
civil  war.32  Of  all  conﬂ icts  initiated  in  the 
1960s,  57  percent  were  the  ﬁ rst  conﬂ ict  in 
their  country  (many  countries  having  been 
newly  created  after  the  colonial  era).33  First 
conﬂ icts fell signiﬁ cantly in each subsequent 
decade, to the point where 90 percent of con-
ﬂ icts  initiated  in  the  21st  century  were  in 
countries  that  had  already  had  a  civil  war 
(table 1.2). Fighting has also continued after 
several recent political settlements, as in Af-
ghanistan  and  the  Democratic  Republic  of 
Congo. As the previous section showed, suc-
cessful peace agreements can be followed by 
high levels of criminal violence.

Several  Central  American  countries  that 
ended civil wars are now experiencing more 
violent  deaths  from  criminal  activity  than 

58 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

TA B L E 1.2   Countries oft en relapse into confl ict

Repeated violence is common in the world today, suggesting that few countries are ever truly “post-conﬂ ict.” The rate of onset in 
countries with a previous conﬂ ict has been increasing since the 1960s, and every civil war that began since 2003 was in a country that 
had had a previous civil war.

Onsets in countries with 
no previous conﬂ ict (%)

Onsets in countries with a 

previous conﬂ ict (%)

Number of onsets

57

43

38

33

10

43

57

62

67

90

35

44

39

81

39

Decade

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

Sources: Walter 2010; WDR team calculations. 
Note: Previous conﬂ ict includes any major conﬂ ict since 1945.

during  their  civil  wars.  Since  1999,  homi-
cide  rates  have  increased  in  El  Salvador 
(+101  percent),  Guatemala  (+91  percent), 
and Honduras (+63 percent) as criminal net-
works linked to drug trafﬁ cking have become 
more active (ﬁ gure 1.3). All these countries 
suffered  civil  wars  or  political  instability  in 
the 1980s and 1990s. While El Salvador and 
Guatemala signed peace accords in the 1990s 
that avoided a return to civil war, both now 

face levels of violent organized crime equally 
disruptive to development. 

The developmental consequences 
of violence are severe

The costs of violence for citizens, communi-
ties, countries, and the world are enormous, 
both in terms of human suffering and social 

F I G U R E 1.3   Criminal violence in Central America is on the rise despite political peace 

Homicides have increased in every country in Central America since 1999: in El Salvador from 30 to 61 homicides per 100,000 
people and in Guatemala from 24 to 46 per 100,000. 

l

 

9
9
9
1
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
r
 
e
t
a
r
 
e
d
c
m
o
h
n

 

i

i

i
 

 

e
g
n
a
h
c
e
t
u
o
s
b
A

l

40

30

20

10

0

–10

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

El Salvador
Panama

Honduras
Nicaragua

Guatemala
Costa Rica

Belize

Sources: WDR team calculations based on UNODC 2007; UNODC and the World Bank 2007; and national sources. 
Note: Base year for homicide rate is 1999 = 0. 
 

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

59

and  economic  consequences.  The  costs  are 
both direct (loss of life, disability, and destruc-
tion) and indirect (prevention, instability, and 
displacement). While some of these losses can 
be  directly  measured  and  quantiﬁ ed  in  eco-
nomic terms, others are not easily measured 
(trauma, loss of social capital and trust, pre-
vention  cost,  and  forgone  investment  and 
trade).34

Human costs of violence

Most  fundamentally,  violence  compromises 
human  security  and  dignity—and  for  this 
reason, freedom from violence and fear is a 
basic human right. The 2008 Geneva Decla-
ration on Armed Violence and Development, 
endorsed by more than 90 states, argues that 
“living free from the threat of armed violence 
is  a  basic  human  need.”35  To  better  under-
stand  the  impact  of  violence  on  lives  and 
livelihoods, the WDR team asked the Norwe-
gian  research  institute  Fafo  to  conduct  sur-
veys  in  seven  countries  and  territories,  in-

volving  a  mix  of  nationally  representative 
samples as well as subregions affected by vio-
lence.36 In the past three years, up to 26 per-
cent of respondents report that their imme-
diate family’s home had been looted, up to 32 
percent had been displaced, and up to 19 per-
cent had a family member who had been tor-
tured (ﬁ gure 1.4). 

The most vulnerable groups in society are 
frequently most affected by violence. Tied to 
their homes or places of work, the vulnerable 
have  little  of  the  protection  that  money  or 
well-placed contacts afford. Poor child nutri-
tion for those displaced or unable to earn in-
comes  due  to  violence  has  lasting  effects, 
 impairing  physical  and  cognitive  function-
ing. Violence destroys school infrastructure, 
displaces teachers, and interrupts schooling, 
often for an entire generation of poor chil-
dren.  War,  looting,  and  crime  destroy  the 
household assets of the poor, and fear of vio-
lent attacks prevents them from tilling their 
ﬁ elds  or  traveling  to  schools,  clinics,  work-
places, and markets. For poor people in poor 

F I G U R E 1.4   Violence creates suffering for families in myriad ways: Responses to survey on experiences of violence 

on immediate family member in last three years

People in conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected countries experience displacement, loss of contact, imprisonment, and humiliation, which aﬀ ect entire 
families, disrupting life and destroying social capital. In Gaza, a third of respondents reported that someone in their immediate family 
had been displaced in the last three years. In the West Bank, a third had experienced someone being imprisoned. In Sierra Leone, 
35 percent of the respondents reported that they lost contact with a member of their immediate family in the last three years.

s
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
”
s
e
y
“
 

%

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Displacement

Imprisonment

Torture

Humiliation

Loss of contact

Homes looted

Death

Congo, Dem. Rep.

Côte d’Ivoire

Mali

Sierra Leone

Gaza

West Bank

Colombia

Source: Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010. 
Note: Surveys were undertaken in early 2010 for seven countries, territories, or subnational areas. The samples were selected from multiple regions to cover 
countries varying geographically, at diﬀ erent stages of development and facing or recovering from diﬀ ering types of violence. Country representative samples were 
used for Côte d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone, and Colombia. The surveys were undertaken in selected regions of Democratic Republic of Congo and Mali. Independent 
representative samples were used in Gaza and the West Bank. 

60 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

countries,  extended  families  are  often  their 
only insurance, and deaths in the family of-
ten leave them alone and unprotected.37

Development impacts of violence 

Poverty  reduction  in  countries  affected  by 
major  violence  is  on  average  nearly  a  per-
centage point slower per year than in coun-
tries  not  affected  by  violence.38  After  a  few 
years of major violence, the contrast can be 
quite  stark:  countries  affected  by  violence 
throughout  the  1980s  lagged  in  poverty  re-
duction  by  8  percentage  points,  and  those 
that had experienced major violence through-
out  the  1980s  and  1990s  lagged  by  16  per-
centage points. On average, a country experi-
encing major violence over the entire period 
(1981–2005) had a poverty rate 21 percent-
age points higher than a country that saw no 
violence (ﬁ gure 1.5). The disruptive effect of 
violence  on  development  and  the  widening 
gap  between  countries  affected  by  violence 
and those not affected are deeply troubling.
The direct impact of violence falls primar-
ily on young males, the majority of ﬁ ghting 
forces, but women and children often suffer 
disproportionately from indirect effects (see 
table 1.3).39 Men make up 96 percent of the 

detainee  population  and  90  percent  of  the 
missing,40  women  and  children  comprise 
close to 80 percent of refugees and those in-
ternally displaced.41 And violence begets vio-
lence:  children  who  witness  abuses  have  a 
higher  tendency  to  perpetrate  violence  later 
in life.42

Sexual and gender-based violence remains 
a major problem, particularly in fragile and 
conﬂ ict-affected  countries.43  Most  contem-
porary  armed  conﬂ icts  are  “low-intensity” 
civil  wars  fought  by  small,  poorly  trained, 
and  lightly  armed  forces  that  avoid  major 
military  engagements—but  that  frequently 
target civilians with great brutality.44 A global 
review  of  50  countries  ﬁ nds  signiﬁ cant  in-
creases in gender-based violence following a 
major war.45 In some cases, it occurs due to a 
breakdown of social and moral order and to 
increased impunity, but the threat and per-
petration  of  sexual  and  physical  violence 
against  women  and  children  can  also  be  a 
systematic weapon of war—to dominate, to 
terrorize, to humiliate. Mass rapes have oc-
curred  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Liberia, 
Peru, and Uganda.46 In Rwanda’s 1994 geno-
cide alone, an estimated 250,000 rapes took 
place.47  Although  those  suffering  rape  and 
sexual  abuse  are  overwhelmingly  young 

F I G U R E 1.5   Widening gap in poverty between countries affected by violence and those not experiencing violence

Poverty is on the decline for much of the world, but countries aﬀ ected by violence are lagging behind. For every three years that a 
country is aﬀ ected by major violence (battle deaths or excess deaths from homicides equivalent to a major war), poverty reduction 
lags behind by 2.7 percentage points. For some countries aﬀ ected by violence, poverty has actually increased.

 
t
n
u
o
c
d
a
e
h
y
t
r
e
v
o
P

 

.

 

 

)
y
a
d
a
5
2
1
$
S
U
w
o
e
b
g
n
v

 

 

l

i

i
l
 

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p

 
f

 

o
%

(

65

60

55

50

45

40

35

1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

Countries aﬀected by major violence

1996
Countries aﬀected by minor violence

1999

2002

2005

Source: WDR team calculations based on Chen, Ravallion, and Sangraula 2008 poverty data (available at POVCALNET, HTTP://iresearch.
worldbank.org.)

Countries with negligible or no violence

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

61

TA B L E 1.3   Th  e gender-disaggregated impacts of violent confl ict

Direct impacts

Indirect impacts

Higher rates of morbidity and mortality from battle deaths

Higher likelihood to be detained or missing

Men

Sexual and gender-based violence: sex-selective massacres; forcibly 
conscripted or recruited; subjected to torture, rape, and mutilation; 
forced to commit sexual violence upon others

Higher rates of disability from injury

Risk of ex-combatants’ involvement in criminal or illegal activities 
and diﬃ  culties in ﬁ nding livelihoods

Increased prevalence of other forms of violence—particularly 
domestic violence

Higher likelihood to be internally displaced persons and refugees

Reproductive health problems

Women

Common

Sexual and gender-based violence: being subjected to rape, 
traﬃ  cking, and prostitution;  forced pregnancies and marriages

Women’s reproductive and care-giving roles under stress

Changed labor market participation from death of family members 
and “added worker eﬀ ect”

Higher incidence of domestic violence

Possibility for greater political participation

Women’s increased economic participation due to changing 
gender roles during conﬂ ict   

Depression, trauma, and emotional distress

Asset and income loss

Tendency toward increased migration

Disrupted patterns of marriage and fertility

Loss of family and social networks, including insurance 
mechanisms

Interrupted education

Eroded well-being, particularly poor health and disability from 
poverty and malnutrition

Sources: Anderlini 2010a; multiple sources described in endnote.48 

women,49 men can also be subject to sexual 
victimization  and  violence,  or  be  forced  to 
perpetrate  sexual  violence  against  others, 
even their family members.50

A major human consequence of violence 
is  the  displacement  of  people  from  their 
homes. At the end of 2009 some 42 million 
people around the world had been forced to 
leave  or  ﬂ ee  their  homes  due  to  conﬂ ict, 
violence,  and  human  rights  violations—15 
million  refugees  outside  their  country  of 
 nationality  and  habitual  residence,  and  27 
million internally displaced persons (IDPs). 
And developing countries are also hosts to 
the  vast  majority  of  refugees,  putting  ad-
ditional  strains  on  their  local  and  national 
 capacities.  In  2009  developing  countries 
hosted  10.2  million  refugees,  or  nearly  70 
percent of the global total. The rising num-
bers of IDP populations, which include sub-
stantial new displacements in 2009 and 2010 
in  countries  such  as  Pakistan,  the  Demo-

cratic  Republic  of  Congo,  and  Sudan,  un-
dermine  recovery  from  violence  and  inter-
rupt human development.51

The suffering of displaced populations is 
often  protracted.  Camps  in  Chad,  Jordan, 
Lebanon, and Sudan have become homes for 
many IDPs, not just for months or years, but 
often for decades. Most forced displacements 
in the 2000s were caused by internal armed 
conﬂ icts  rather  than  international  conﬂ icts. 
Population  movements  into  urban  centers 
have increased the potential for crime, social 
tension, communal violence, and political in-
stability.52 Meanwhile, the large-scale repatri-
ation movements of the past have diminished, 
with return ﬁ gures dropping since 2004.53

For  all  these  reasons,  areas  affected  by 
vio lence pose a major challenge to meeting 
MDGs. The arrested social development in 
countries  affected  by  violence  is  evident  in 
the  poor  showing  in  human  development 
indicators (ﬁ gure 1.6). Development in these 

62 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

F I G U R E 1.6   Violence is the main constraint to meeting the MDGs

a .   Incidence ratio of undernourishment, poverty and other ills for fragile, recovering, and non-fragile developing countries 

(non-FCS)

A child in a fragile or conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected state is twice as likely to be undernourished as a child in another developing country—and 
nearly three times as likely to be out of primary school. 

 

 
s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
o
t
 
d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c
 
s
a
o
i
t
a
r
 
e
c
n
e
d
c
n

 

i

I

l

i

 

 

e
c
n
e
o
v
y
b
d
e
t
c
e
ﬀ
a
 
t
o
n
e
r
a
 
t
a
h
t

 

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Undernourished Impoverished

Primary—
not enrolled

Secondary— 
not enrolled

Infant deaths

Under 5 
deaths

Births

unattended

HIV/AIDS

Access to 
improved 

water

Access to 
improved 
sanitation

Fragile and conﬂict-aﬀected states (FCS)

Recovering from fragility

Non-FCS (including BRIC)

Sources: World Bank 2010n; WDR team calculations based on Gates and others 2010.
Note: Figure 1.6a shows the incidence of each of the ills associated with unmet MDGs for fragile, conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected, and recovering countries in relation to the 
incidence for all other developing countries. The ratio is weighted by the aﬀ ected population, so each bar can be read as the odds-ratio of a person being aﬀ ected 
relative to a person in a non-fragile or conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected state: for example, children of primary school age are three times as likely to be out of school in fragile and 
conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected states as those in other developing countries. 

b.  Countries aﬀ ected by violence account for:

Fragile and conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected states and those recovering from conﬂ ict and fragility, account for 47 percent of the population 
considered here, but they account for 70 percent of infant deaths, 65 percent of people without access to safe water, and 77 
of percent of children missing from primary school. 

60% of undernourished

61% of impoverished

77% of children not in primary school

59% of children not in secondary school

70% of infant deaths

71% of child (under 5) deaths

64% of unattended births

43% of persons living with HIV/AIDS

65% of people without access to safe water 

54% of people without access to improved
sanitation 

Sources: World Bank 2010n; WDR team calculations based on Gates and others 2010. 
Note: Current fragile and conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected states account for 33 percent of the population of the countries considered here. States recovering from fragility and 
conﬂ ict account for an additional 14 percent of the population. So, if the MDG deﬁ cit were borne evenly, these countries would account for 47 percent of each of the 
ills described. The red to orange people-ﬁ gures represent the percentage of the deﬁ cit for each MDG in fragile, conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected, and recovering countries. The blue 
ﬁ gures represent the persons aﬄ  icted in other developing countries. Excluded here are Brazil, China, India, and Russian Federation, all signiﬁ cantly ahead of or on 
par with other developing countries on the MDGs (see panel a). Due to their size, including them in the calculations would skew any discussion involving the global 
population. 

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

63

countries is lagging on nearly every indica-
tor  associated  with  the  MDGs.  The  devel-
opment  deﬁ cit  is  concentrated  in  fragile 
and conﬂ ict-affected and recovering states,54 
which account for 77 percent of school-age 
children not enrolled in primary school, 61 
percent of the poverty, and 70 percent of in-
fant mortality.55

People  in  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected 
states are more likely to be impoverished, to 
miss out on schooling, and to lack access to 
basic health services. Children born in a frag-
ile or conﬂ ict-affected state are twice as likely 
to  be  undernourished  and  nearly  twice  as 
likely to lack access to improved water; those 
of  primary-school  age  are  three  times  as 
likely not to be enrolled in school; and they 
are nearly twice as likely to die before their 
ﬁ fth  birthday.  As  the  world  takes  stock  of 
progress on the MDGs, it is apparent that the 
gap  between  violence-prone  countries  and 
other  developing  countries  is  widening.56 
No low-income, fragile state has achieved a 
single  MDG,  and  few  are  expected  to  meet 
 targets  by  2015.57  Because  most  fragile  and 
conﬂ ict-affected  states  have  made  slower 
progress in the last 10 years, the gap is widen-
ing. For example, over the last two decades, 
infant mortality has been falling in nearly all 
countries,58 but the reduction in infant mor-
tality  in  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected  coun-
tries  has  lagged  behind  (ﬁ gure  1.7).  Of  the 
countries with infant mortality greater than 
100 per 1,000 in 1990, those not affected by 
conﬂ ict have reduced infant mortality by 31 
percent—while  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected 
states reduced it by only 19 percent. If these 
fragile and conﬂ ict-affected states had made 
the same rate of progress on infant mortality 
as other developing countries, almost a mil-
lion  more  children  in  these  countries  each 
year would survive their ﬁ rst year of life. 

Subnational  violence  can  have  severe 
 so cioeconomic  consequences  in  middle- 
income countries. In countries with stronger 
economies and institutions, impacts tend to 
be  relatively  localized,  but  they  still  hold 
back  key  segments  of  human  development 
and reduce the ﬂ ow of foreign direct invest-
ment (FDI) into affected areas.59 In the In-

F I G U R E 1.7   The widening gap in infant mortality rates between 

countries affected by violence and others

Of countries where more than 1 in 10 infants died in the ﬁ rst year of life 
in 1990, those aﬀ ected by violence are lagging behind in reducing infant 
mortality. The gap between these two sets of countries has doubled 
since 1990.

)
s
h
t
r
i
b
e
v

 

i
l
 

,

0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p

(
 
y
t
i
l

a
t
r
o
m

 
t
n
a
f
n

I

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

1990

1995

2000

2005

2008

Fragile and/or conﬂict-aﬀected 1990 to present
Not fragile or conﬂict-aﬀected

Sources: World Bank 2010n; WDR team calculations. 
Note: Due to limited data, the most recent available data in the preceding ﬁ ve-year 
period were used for the point estimates. The sample consists of all countries with 
infant mortality higher than 100 per 1,000 live births. Low-income countries that 
were never fragile or conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected from 1990 to 2008 are in the “non-fragile” 
cohort, and countries aﬀ ected by conﬂ ict or fragile throughout the period are in the 
“fragile and/or conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected” cohort.

donesian  province  of  Aceh,  the  economic 
cost of the conﬂ ict was estimated at US$10.7 
billion, more than 60 percent of it through 
the  damage  and  destruction  of  agriculture, 
livestock, enterprises, and ﬁ sheries. And dur-
ing conﬂ ict, Aceh’s infant mortality and pov-
erty were 50 percent higher than the national 
 average.60

The  effects  of  violence  are  long-lasting. 
For  countries  that  have  gone  through  civil 
war,  recovering  to  original  growth  paths 
takes an average of 14 years of peace.61 Until 
1990, Burkina Faso and Burundi had similar 
incomes  and  growth  paths. With  the  onset 
of  civil  war  in  Burundi,  real  incomes  de-
clined to 1970 levels.62 With no major con-
ﬂ icts, Burkina Faso now has an income more 
than two-and-a-half times that of Burundi 
(ﬁ gure 1.8). This effect was conﬁ rmed locally 
in  the  Moving  Out  of  Poverty  study,  which 
found that conﬂ ict-affected villages that feared 
renewed  violence  for  two  to  three  years  out 

64 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

F I G U R E 1.8   Effects of violence on growth are dramatic and long-lasting

Until the early 1990s, per capita incomes and growth in Burkina Faso and Burundi were 
similar. Following massive violence in Burundi, their growth paths diverged. In real terms, 
Burundi has lost nearly two decades of income growth, with incomes set back to 1970 levels.

 

 
)
$
S
U
5
0
0
2
(
 
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
P
D
G

 

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

1960

1962

1970

1972

1968

1964
1966
1974
Battle deaths in Burundi
Burundi GDP per capita

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1994

1996

1990

1992

1988

1986
1998
Battle deaths in Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso GDP per capita

1,600

1,400

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

r
a
e
y
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
e
l
t
t
a
B

 

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Sources: World Bank 2010n; Gleditsch and others 2002; Gates and others 2010; Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict dataset 
(Harbom and Wallensteen 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 2005); WDR team calculations.

of the past decade stalled economically, while 
non-conﬂ ict-affected  communities  experi-
enced only two to four weeks of apprehension 
over renewed violence and did not experience 
economic slowdown.63

One  reason  for  the  persistence  of  low 
growth in conﬂ ict-affected countries may be 
the  difﬁ culty  of  reassuring  investors,  both 
domestic and foreign. A civil war reduces a 
country’s average rating on the International 
Country Risk Guide by about 7.7 points (on 
a  100-point  scale);  the  effect  is  similar  for 
criminal  violence.64  For  the  ﬁ rst  three  years 
after conﬂ ict subsides, countries have a rating 
3.5 points below similar non-conﬂ ict coun-
tries. Although there is often a postviolence 
surge  of  economic  activity,  it  is  unlikely  to 
be investment-based activity that reﬂ ects re-
newed  investor  conﬁ dence.  Trade  can  take 
many years to recover as a result of investor 
perceptions of risk. It can drop between 12 
and 25 percent in the ﬁ rst year of a civil war, 
and for the most severe civil wars (those with 
a cumulative death toll greater than 50,000) 
the loss of trade is around 40 percent.65And 
the interruption in trade can persist even 25 

years after the onset of conﬂ ict. While effects 
are  smaller  for  less  severe  conﬂ icts,  it  still 
takes on average 20 years for trade to recover 
to pre-conﬂ ict levels.

Violence also has a lasting effect on human 
rights. The Physical Rights Integrity Index,66 a 
measure  of  respect  for  human  rights,  drops 
on average by 3.6 points over the course of a 
major civil war (on a scale of 0–8, with a score 
of 0 indicating no government respect for hu-
man  rights).  That  human  rights  abuses  in-
crease sharply during episodes of violence is 
to be expected. Less expected, however, is that 
after a conﬂ ict ends, the average society takes 
more than 10 years to return to the level of 
human rights observance before the conﬂ ict.67 
The  unraveling  of  trust  citizens  have  in  one 
another and in the state due to violence is dis-
cussed in chapter 2.68 

In addition to the human suffering, orga-
nized  violence  poses  social  and  economic 
costs  that  can  dwarf  the  impact  of  other 
events of concern to development practition-
ers, such as economic shocks and natural di-
sasters. While all the costs cannot be quanti-
ﬁ ed, conservative estimates of the economic 

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

65

costs  of  lost  production  range  from  2  to  3 
percent  of  GDP  both  for  civil  war  and  for 
very high levels of violent crime (box 1.3).69 
This does not include the destruction or loss 
of assets, which can also be considerable. For 
example, the material costs of crime in Latin 
America and the Caribbean are estimated to 
be nearly twice those of the United States, as 
a  percentage  of  GDP.70  Other  indirect  costs 
may not always be reﬂ ected by measures of 
productivity, as when military spending in-
creases and commensurately reduces invest-
ments  in  development  and  human  capital. 
Military  spending  typically  increases  by  2.2 
percent during civil war and remains 1.7 per-
cent higher than prewar levels after conﬂ ict.71 
As  noted  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter, 
these  estimates  do  not  include  the  human 
costs  of  conﬂ ict,  including  deaths,  injury, 
trauma, and stress. 

Spillover effects of violence

The development consequences of violence, 
like its origins, spill across borders, with im-
plications for neighbors, for the region, and 
globally. Violence in one country can create a 
“bad neighborhood.” For example, the mani-
festations of conﬂ ict in Liberia under Presi-
dent  Charles  Taylor  during  the  late  1990s 
(people trained in violence, proliferation of 
small  arms,  and  illicit  trade  in  timber  and 
diamonds)  hurt  Côte  d’Ivoire,  Guinea,  and 
Sierra  Leone.72  Bad  neighborhoods  affect 
eco nomic  prospects:  estimates  suggest  that 
countries  lose  0.7  percent  of  their  annual 
GDP  for  each  neighbor  involved  in  civil 
war.73 And a doubling of terrorist incidents in 
a  country  is  estimated  to  reduce  bilateral 
trade  with  each  trading  partner  by  some  4 
percent.74 As terrorism taps into illicit global 
markets, violent extremists can ﬁ nance their 
activities through smuggling, evading taxes, 
trafﬁ cking drugs and counterfeit money, and 
trading foreign currency on illegal exchanges 
in Europe.75

Piracy  also  reduces  regional  trade  and 
economic  activity,  as,  for  example,  Somali 
 pirates  operating  in  the  Gulf  of  Aden.76  To 

BOX 1.3   Violent crime and insecurity exact high 

economic costs

Indirect costs—associated with stress and trauma, time oﬀ  work due to violent 
incidents, and lower productivity from injury or mental illness—far overshadow 
direct costs. In Brazil in 2004, the direct medical costs of all interpersonal violence 
were estimated at US$235 million and the indirect medical costs at US$9.2 billion. 
Comparable ﬁ gures, respectively, for Jamaica are US$29.5 million and US$385 
million, and for Thailand US$40.3 million and US$432 million. Emerging ﬁ ndings 
from Kenya estimate total costs of violence at 1.2 percent of GDP. In the United 
Kingdom, the direct costs of domestic violence are estimated at £5.7 
billion annually. 

When other indirect costs are added, such as those for policing, health care, 
private security, and reduced investment, the ﬁ gures are even more staggering. 
In Guatemala, criminal violence cost an estimated US$2.4 billion, or 7.3 percent of 
GDP, in 2005—more than twice the damage caused by Hurricane Stan the same 
year, and more than twice the budget for the ministries of agriculture, health, and 
education for 2006. In El Salvador, criminal violence in 2003 cost about US$1.7 bil-
lion, or 11.5 percent of GDP. The Mexican government estimates that crime and 
violence cost the country 1 percent of GDP from lost sales, jobs, and investment 
in 2007 alone. Estimates suggest that if Haiti and Jamaica reduced their crime lev-
els to those of Costa Rica, they could increase annual GDP growth by 5.4 percent-
age points. These costs are comparable to estimates of the cost of civil war. Based 
on growth base lines for cross-country panel date in the last 50 years, researchers 
estimate the costs of civil wars to range from 1.6 percentage to 2.3 percentage of 
GDP per year of violence. For the average country aﬀ ected by violence, these 
eﬀ ects, compounded over time, can cost the equivalent of up to 30 years of miss-
ing GDP growth. 

Insecurity takes a signiﬁ cant toll on the private sector, in direct costs of crimi-

nal acts (theft, arson, or other victimization) and in investments in security sys-
tems. Cross-country surveys found that these costs represented 1–3 percent of 
sales in Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, and Uganda, and 6 percent in Kenya. In 
nearly all cases, the bulk of these costs were for security technology and ser vices. 
These estimates are conservative: other studies estimate the costs of crime to 
range from 3.1 percent to 7.8 percent of GDP.

Sources: Collier and Hoeﬄ  er 2004; Butchart and others 2008; Walby 2004; Geneva 
Declaration 2008; UNDP 2005c, 2006; UNODC and World Bank 2007; Skaperdas and 
others 2009; Willman and Makisaka 2010; Farrell and Clark 2004; Altbeker 2005; 
Alda and Cuesta 2010; Kenya Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation 2007; World 
Bank 2010d.

counter piracy in the Horn of Africa and the 
Indian  Ocean,  more  than  27  countries  de-
ployed  naval  forces  in  anti-piracy  missions, 
with a range of costs estimated at US$1.3–2.0 
billion  annually.77  At  a  global  level,  efforts 
aimed at containing and deterring maritime 
piracy are estimated to range between US$1.7 
and US$4.5 billion in 2010.78 All told, mari-
time piracy is estimated to have direct eco-
nomic  costs  of  between  US$5.7  billion  and 
US$11.2  billion,  once  ransoms,  insurance, 
and rerouting of ships are included.79

66 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

The  spillover  effects  of  violence  are  not 
just economic. As described above, nearly 75 
percent of the world’s refugees are hosted by 
neighboring  countries.80  Refugees  from  Li-
beria and Togo have sought shelter in Ghana 
for  extended  periods,  straining  the  state’s 
ability  to  deliver  services  and  opening  ten-
sions with the local population.81 The mas-
sive inﬂ ux of Kosovo Albanians into Mace-
donia  in  1999  during  the  Kosovo  conﬂ ict 
heightened tensions between the Slavic ma-
jority  and  the  Albanian  minority.82  Infec-
tious disease can also be traced to disrupted 
health care associated with violence or areas 
without public services. For every 1,000 ref-
ugees  entering  an  African  country,  for  ex-
ample, the host state acquires 1,400 new ma-
laria cases.83 

Spillovers  of  violence  and  instability  are 
felt globally. Even for parts of the world fairly 
immune to insecurity, thanks to wealth and 
distance,  the  costs  of  global  insecurity  are 
both  psychological  (in  the  preoccupation 
with threats of gangs, trafﬁ cking, and terror-
ism) and very practical, through the increased 
costs  of  security  measures.  A  study  of  18 
Western  European  countries  from  1971  to 
2004  revealed  that  each  additional  trans-
national terrorist incident per million people 
reduced economic growth by 0.4 percentage 
points, and each additional domestic terror-
ist incident reduced it by 0.2.84 And after in-
surgents struck an export terminal owned by 

Royal Dutch Shell in the oil-rich Niger Delta 
in June 2009, oil prices rose US$2.33 a barrel 
(3.4  percent)  on  the  New  York  Mercantile 
E xchange.85 In the four weeks following the 
beginning of the uprising in Libya, oil prices 
increased by 15 percent.86

Repeated violence is a shared 
challenge

Political and criminal violence both disrupt 
development—and occur in repeated cycles. 
It  is  essential  to  look  across  that  spectrum 
and to consider local conﬂ icts, social protest, 
gang  violence,  organized  crime,  and  trans-
national terrorism alongside the major civil 
wars  that  have  been  the  focus  of  most  aca-
demic research. This interlocking landscape 
raises  questions  about  the  coherence  of  the 
approaches to deal with these various forms 
of violence—approaches often divorced from 
one  another—as  well  as  the  treatment  of 
“post-conﬂ ict”  reconstruction  and “preven-
tion” as separate problems. The risks of vio-
lence  and  the  responses  to  it  are  shared  by 
countries across divides of income, national 
identity,  religion,  and  ideology.  One  of  the 
key  messages  of  this  Report  is  the  shared 
 interest  in  global  and  regional  peace  and 
prosperity—and the potential for greater ex-
changes between countries on how to address 
the common challenges.

 

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

Repeated violence threatens development 

67

67

FEATURE 1  The interlinked and evolving nature of modern organized violence 

The Caribbean has known political and criminal violence 

for  decades.  Except  for  Cuba,  every  large  island  coun-
try and many smaller ones—the Bahamas, the Cayman Is-
lands, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and 
Nevis,  St.  Vincent  and  the  Grenadines,  and  Trinidad  and 
 Tobago—have homicide levels above 10 per 100,000. In some 
of them, criminal gang activity has spilled over into politi-
cal violence, with mutually reinforcing dynamics. Since 1970, 
most  of  Haiti’s  elections  have  been  marked  by  violence—
with  34  deaths  in  1987  and  89  in  2004—and  the  country 
experienced political violence in 2010. The relationship can 
be reversed as well; in some countries, drug trafﬁ cking has 
exacerbated local organized violence.87 

The Western Balkans are known for the civil wars that dis-
solved Yugoslavia in the 1990s. In the chaotic aftermath of the 
wars, many turned to trafﬁ cking in drugs, people, human or-
gans, and weapons, such that organized crime perpetrated the 
most widespread and destabilizing violence.88 Crime has grad-
ually declined in recent years, but organized crime remains for-
midable.89 Some 32 percent of human trafﬁ cking victims come 
from or through the Balkans, and the Balkan route is the main 
trafﬁ cking corridor for more than US$20 billion in heroin from 
Afghanistan to Western Europe a year.90 Gang-related violence 
targeted political ﬁ gures. The Zemun gang, with close connec-
tions to heroin trafﬁ cking, assassinated Serbian Prime Minister 
Zoran Djindjic in 2003.91

In West Africa, the conventional political conﬂ ict that began 
in Liberia and spread to Sierra Leone and Côte d’Ivoire, later 
gave way to more organized crime across the region, as warring 
factions pillaged natural resources, drug trafﬁ cking networks 
entered the region, and the rule of law weakened. What had 
begun as a means of ﬁ nancing war became a successful busi-
ness  model  for  trafﬁ cking  diamonds,  timber,  arms,  and  hu-
mans.92 Charles Taylor, the leader of one of the factions and 
later president of Liberia, is accused in his indictment by the 
Special Court of Sierra Leone of “a joint criminal enterprise . . . 
[to exercise] control over the territory of Sierra Leone . . . and 
the  population  .  .  .  [through]  unlawful  killings,  abductions, 
forced  labor,  physical  and  sexual  violence,  use  of  child  sol-
diers . . . .”93 It is estimated that Taylor amassed US$105–450 
million through this criminal enterprise.94 At the height of the 
conﬂ ict  in  Sierra  Leone,  illegal  exports  accounted  for  more 
than 90 percent of its diamond trade,95 or more than US$200 
million in 2002.96 

In Nigeria, a largely subnational struggle in the oil-rich Ni-
ger Delta has given way to organized criminal syndicates that 
deal in oil, arms, and kidnapped foreign workers. An estimated 
250,000–300,000 barrels, valued at more than US$3.8 billion, 
are stolen each year through “oil bunkering” (the theft of oil 
from pipelines or storage facilities).97 Local gangs and political 
groups  can  also  be  drawn  into  ethnic  violence;  in  the  2007 
election aftermath in Kenya, gangs and politically motivated 
groups engaged in ethnically aligned violence.98

In Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the tribal areas on their bor-
ders,  violence  from  the  headline  conﬂ ict  in  the  region—be-
tween the government and international forces and the Taliban 
and  other  armed  groups—is  linked  to  drug  trafﬁ cking  and 
criminal violence, as well as kidnapping, extortion, and smug-
gling  of  a  range  of  natural  resources.  New  tensions  and  the 
presence of foreign ﬁ ghters exacerbate long-standing conﬂ icts 
between  capitals  and  peripheral  regions  over  power,  gover-
nance, and resources. 

Tensions and violence between ethnic groups can quickly 
transform into political violence where elections and other po-
litical contests affect the distribution of power and resources. 
In the Solomon Islands in the late 1990s, skirmishes between 
armed militias from the two main islands of Guadalcanal and 
Malaita, which displaced some 35,000 Malaitan settlers, culmi-
nated in the emergence of a Malaitan militia group, which—in 
response to the government’s failure to curb Guadalcanal mil-
itancy—forced the resignation of the prime minister. In Papua 
New  Guinea,  longstanding  ethnic  and  tribal  conﬂ icts  in  the 
Highlands—caused by a mix of traditional animosities, com-
petition  for  resources,  and  land  disputes—morphed  into 
“raskol” gang activities in Port  Moresby and other urban ar-
eas.99 The advent of international operations to exploit timber 
and minerals has added fuel to pre existing ethnic contests over 
natural resources.

Cross-border violence goes beyond the destabilization from 
sanctuaries in neighboring countries, as in West Africa and the 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border areas. Uganda’s Lord’s Resistance 
Army has spread far beyond its original geographical origins to 
operate across a wide number of countries and borders—again 
drawing on criminal trafﬁ cking for its ﬁ nancing. And Somali 
pirates hijacked more than 125 merchant ships passing through 
the Gulf of Aden in 2009. 

Many religious and ideological grievances in one part of the 
world are grafted onto a local conﬂ ict in some faraway place. 

68 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

At  the  height  of  the  war  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  in  the 
1990s, Islamic groups from outside the region joined the ﬁ ght 
alongside Bosnian Muslims.100 Likewise, foreign ﬁ ghters and 
ideological  links  between  armed  groups  dominate  interna-
tional  press  coverage  of Afghanistan  and  Iraq,  though  spill-
overs of international ideological groups into the Sahel, affect-
ing countries as isolated and historically peaceful as Mali, get 
less attention.

In other cases, violence may be linked through underlying 
institutional weaknesses. Yemen now faces four separate con-
ﬂ icts: the Houthi rebellion in the North, the presence of Al-
Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, grievances in the south, and 

the popular protests for change that have swept through the 
Arab  world.  There  is  little  direct  evidence  of  links  between 
these conﬂ icts, other than through the weakness of national 
institutions to address them.101

Sources: Harriott 2004; Curtis and Karacan 2002; Shanty and Mishra 2008; 
Andreas 2004; International Crisis Group 2003; UNODC 2008, 2010a; An-
astasijevic 2006; Special Court for Sierra Leone Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecutor 
2007;  Lipman  2009;  Coalition  for  International  Justice  2005;  Dufﬁ eld 
2000; Gberie 2003a; Even-Zohar 2003; Davies, von Kemedi, and Drennan 
2005; International Crisis Group 2008b; Ashforth 2009; Porter, Andrews, 
and Wescott 2010; Kohlmann 2004. 

Notes

1.   These numbers include best estimates of battle deaths from Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict Dataset 

(Lacina and Gleditsch 2005; Harbom and Wallensteen 2010).

2.   For details on regional trends in homicide, see the background paper on homicides prepared for 
this Report by Fearon 2010b and the 2008 Global Burden of Armed Violence report (Geneva Dec-
laration 2008). Homicide rates decreased for nearly every region of the world, except Latin America 
and the Caribbean; however, insufﬁ cient data are available on current and past homicide rates in 
Sub-Saharan Africa to establish a regional trend.

3.   WDR team calculations based on Powell and Thyne 2011.
4.  OAS 2001.
5.    The number of coup attempts also decreased, from 22 in the 1990s to 12 from 2000 through 2009. 
The average success rate of a coup attempt in the 1990s was 40 percent, compared to 29 percent in 
the period 2000–09 (see Powell and Thyne 2011).

6.    Lutz and Reiger 2009.
7.   WDR team calculation based on World Bank 2010n.
8.   Throughout this Report, countries affected by fragility, violence, and conﬂ ict include (1) countries 
affected  by  high  levels  of  criminal  violence—countries  with  homicide  rates  greater  than  10  per 
100,000  population,  (2)  conﬂ ict-affected  countries—countries  with  major  civil  conﬂ ict  (battle 
deaths greater than 1,000 per annum as deﬁ ned in the Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict Database 
(Harbom and Wallensteen 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 2005) from 2006 to 2009, (3) countries with 
UN or regionally mandated peacebuilding or peacekeeping, non-border missions, (4) fragile coun-
tries—low-income countries with institutional levels (World Bank’s CPIA less than 3.2) in 2006–09 
(see World Bank 2010e). “Low income fragile and conﬂ ict-affected countries” are low-income coun-
tries that meet any of the last three criteria (homicide data are not consistently available for many 
low-income  countries).  Following  World  Bank  deﬁ nitions, “developing  countries”  includes  both 
low- and middle-income countries. 

9.   Human Security Report Project, forthcoming.
10.   Ross 2003; McNeish 2010.
11.   Ross 2003. 
12.   Demombynes 2010; UNODC 2010a.
13.   Harriott 2004; Shanty and Mishra 2008; UNODC 2010a; Dufﬁ eld 2000; Gberie 2003a; Interna-

tional Crisis Group 2008b; Ashforth 2009; Porter, Andrews, and Wescott 2010.

14.   Constraints tended to operate in ritualized warfare in Melanesia that, for example, served to limit the 
number of people killed or restrict the parties against whom violence could be used. The Interna-

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

69

tional Committee of the Red Cross compares these “traditional” constraints on the use of violence to 
those pertaining in modern international humanitarian law. See Dinnen, Porter, and Sage 2010.

15.   Brands 2009; Parson 2010.
16.   International Crisis Group 2009c.
17.   Thapa 2010.
18.   The UN Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change deﬁ ned terror-
ism as “any action, in addition to actions already speciﬁ ed by the existing conventions on aspects of 
terrorism, that is intended to cause death or serious bodily harm to civilians or noncombatants, 
when the purpose of such an act, by its nature or context, is to intimidate a population, or to compel 
a government or an international organization to do or to abstain from doing any act” (UN 2004a, 
52). Earlier debates focused on whether deﬁ nitions should be based only on nonstate actors; the 
High-level Panel pointed out that issues of state use of force against civilians are covered in the in-
ternational laws of war, international criminal law, and international humanitarian law. See also 
Geneva Conventions 1949; UN 1998.

  19.   Most notably, the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building by terror-
ists afﬁ liated with the U.S. Militia Movement, in which 168 people died: the most destructive attack 
on U.S. soil prior to September 11, 2001. See Foxnews.com 2001.

20.   UNODC 2010a.
21.  UNODC 2010a, 235–36.
22.   UNODC 2010b.
23.   Jordan 1999; Lupsha 1991.
24.   See Demombynes 2010.
25.   Demombynes 2010.
26.   Estimate of number of gang members from Comisión de Jefes y Jefas de Policía de Centroamérica 
y El Caribe in World Bank 2010c. In terms of military forces, Nicaragua and Honduras have armies 
of about 12,000 soldiers each, El Salvador has 13,000 soldiers, and Guatemala has 27,000 (see Rod-
gers, Muggah, and Stevenson 2009).

27.   UNODC 2010a. This ﬁ gure only accounts for illicit ﬂ ows of criminal activities, namely drug, arms, 
trafﬁ cking people, smuggling, counterfeit currency and goods, and racketeering. Including corrup-
tion and fraudulent commercial activities, the value of illicit ﬂ ows increase to as high as US$1.1 
trillion annually. See also Baker 2005. 

28.   Van  der  Elst  and  Davis  2011;  Glenny  2008;  Garzón  2008;  Naim  2006;  Schneider,  Buehn,  and 

Montenegro 2010. 

29.   UNODC 2010b. 
30.   UNODC 2010b. 
31.   UNODC 2010b. 
32.   See Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict Database (Harbom and Wallensteen 2010; Lacina and Gleditsch 
2005). For discussions of the trends in civil war onset and termination see Hewitt, Wil kenfeld, and 
Gurr 2010; Sambanis 2004; Elbadawi, Hegre, and Milante 2008; Collier and others 2003. 

33.   The statistics in table 1.2 are based on the incidence of civil war after World War II, thus countries 
with previous conﬂ icts in the 1960s are those that had conﬂ icts between 1945 and 1959, and those 
with conﬂ icts in the 1970s had conﬂ ict between 1945 and 1969, and so on.

34.   See Skaperdas and others 2009 and Geneva Declaration 2008 for a deeper exploration of these costs 
and of the methods for measuring them. See also Human Security Report Project, forthcoming, for 
a discussion of measuring direct and indirect deaths associated with civil wars and other conﬂ ict. 

35.   Geneva Declaration 2008, 1.
36.   Country representative samples were used for Côte d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone, and Colombia. The sur-
veys  were  undertaken  in  regions  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  and  Mali.  Independent 
representative samples were used in Gaza and the West Bank. The original country sample included 
Haiti; however, the survey could not be undertaken following the earthquake of January 2010. 

37.   See  Justino  and Verwimp  2008;  Blattman,  forthcoming.  See  also  papers  published  through  the 
Households in Conﬂ ict Network (http://www.hicn.org) for broader analysis of micro-level conﬂ ict 
effects on households and individuals.

38.   These  results  are  based  on  country  year  ﬁ xed  effect  Generalized  Least  Squares  regressions  for  a 
panel of developing countries from 1981 to 2005, based on poverty data from Chen, Ravallion, and 
Sangraula 2008 (available on POVCALNET (http://iresearch.worldbank.org)) and the WDR data-
base. Countries with three years of major violence (major civil war or violent deaths above 10 per 

70 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

100,000, equivalent to a major civil war) lagged behind other countries by 2.7 percentage points on 
poverty headcount. Those with minor civil war (or equivalent homicides) lagged behind countries 
without violence by 1.29 percentage points. These results were statistically signiﬁ cant at the p < 0.10 
level and robust to period effects and time trends.

39.   Anderlini 2010a.
40.   Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action 1995; Women’s Refugee Commission 2009; UNICEF 

2004. 

41.   UNFPA 2002; Plümper and Neumayer 2006; Murray and others 2002; Bastick, Grimm, and Kunz 

2007; El Jack 2003.

42.   American Psychological Association 1996; Dahlberg 1998; Verdú and others 2008.
43.   UN 2000, 2011.
44.   Human Security Centre 2005.
45.   Bastick, Grimm, and Kunz 2007.
46.   See UNDP 2005b; Peruvian Truth and Reconciliation Commission 2003. 
47.   Bijleveld, Morssinkhof, and Smeulers 2009.
48.   Effects in this table drawn from multiple sources: Amnesty International 2005; Brück and Schin-
dler 2008; Carpenter 2006; Chamarbagwala and Morán 2011; Bijleveld, Morssinkhof, and Smeul-
ers 2009; Chun and Skjelsbæk 2010; El Jack 2003; Falch 2010; Finegan and Margo 1994;  Guerrero- 
Serdán 2009; Heuveline and Poch 2007; Ibáñez and Moya 2006; ICRC 2001; Internal Displacement 
Monitoring Centre 2007; International Alert and Eastern Africa Sub-Regional Support Initiative 
for the Advancement of Women 2007; ILO 2009; Jayaraman, Gebreselassie, and Chandrasekhar 
2009; Kelly 2010; Lamb and Dye 2009; Lewis 2009; Menon and Rodgers 2010; Peltz 2006; Murray 
and others 2002; Ndulo 2009; Plümper and Neumayer 2006; Prieto-Rodríguez and Rodríguez-
Gutiérrez 2003; Li and Wen 2005; Rehn and Johnson Sirleaf 2002;  Shemyakina 2006; Torres 2002; 
UNFPA 2007; UN 2002, 2006b; Verwimp and Van Bavel 2005; Verpoorten 2003; Ward and Marsh 
2006; Willman and Makisaka 2010; Women’s Refugee Commission 2008; Verdú and others 2008; 
WHO 2010.

49.   Ward and Marsh 2006. 
50.   Lewis 2009; Willman and Makisaka 2010; Anderlini 2010a; Carpenter 2006.
51.   Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre 2010. 
52.   UNHCR 2009. 
53.   Gomez and Christensen 2010; Harild and Christensen 2010. 
54.   “Recovering countries” are those affected by fragility, conﬂ ict, or violence in the previous 10 years. 
55.   Similar effects are found in Bowman and others 2008. 
56.   See also Geneva Declaration 2010. 
57.   In 2010, after 10 years, fragile and conﬂ ict-affected states had closed only 20 percent of the gap in 
reaching the MDGs, while low-income countries not affected by violence had closed 40–70 percent 
of their MDG gap (see World Bank 2010e). Current data compiled for the MDG Summit in 2010 
show that no low-income fragile or conﬂ ict-affected state has met the targets for a single MDG. 
Some countries are close and have made dramatic gains in recent years and it is possible that they 
could meet targets. For more information, see World Bank 2010n; UNSTAT 2010; UN 2007. 

58.   Progress in basic health services has advanced even in war zones; see the Human Security Report 

Project, forthcoming, for a description of global trends. 

59.   Lacina, Gleditsch, and Russett 2006.
60.   RAND Corporation 2009.
61.   Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010.
62.   Note that civil war coding in the Armed Conﬂ ict Database does not include all political violence. As 
evidenced  by  the  experience  of  Burundi,  while  the  onset  of  political  violence  resulted  in  battle 
deaths coded as civil war in Burundi in 1991, there was one-sided violence in the 1960s through 
1980s in Burundi. See the Uppsala/PRIO Armed Conﬂ ict Database (Harbom and Wallensteen 2010; 
Lacina and Gleditsch 2005).

63.   Narayan and Petesch 2010, 12.
64.   Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010.
65.   Martin, Mayer, and Thoenig 2008. 
66.   For more details on the Index see Cingranelli and Richards 1999. 
67.   Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010.
68.   Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010.

 

Repeated violence threatens development 

71

69.   For an overview of costs of conﬂ ict and violence, see Skaperdas and others 2009. Speciﬁ c estimates 
of the economic costs asso ciated with conﬂ ict are found in Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010; 
Imai and Weinstein 2000; Collier and Hoefﬂ er 1998; Stewart, Huang, and Wang 2001; Cerra and 
Saxena 2008; Collier, Chauvet, and Hegre 2007. An overview for the estimates of the cost of crime is 
found in Skaperdas and others 2009, with speciﬁ c estimates in Riascos and Vargas 2004; UNDP 
2006. 

70.   Skaperdas and others 2009 survey the recent literature on costs of crime. Material costs of crime, 
including injuries, property damage, and theft, were estimated as 3.6 percent of GDP for the Latin 
American and Caribbean countries and 2.1 percent of GDP for the United States.

71.   Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010. 
72.   Patrick 2006. 
73.   Bayer and Rupert 2004, while Baker and others 2002 found that the effect of conﬂ ict is equivalent 
to a 33 percent tariff barrier. For an updated discussion of the methodology for determining growth 
effects of conﬂ ict and theory and new analysis based on primary and secondary neighbors, see De 
Groot 2010; Murdoch and Sandler 2002; Bayer and Rupert 2004. The effects of conﬂ ict on trade are 
reviewed in Glick and Taylor 2005.

74.   The study investigated bilateral trade ﬂ ows in more than 200 countries from 1960–93 (see Nitsch 

and Schumacher 2004). 

75.   Europol 2007. 
76.   See Gilpin 2009. 
77.   For methodology, see Bowden 2010; for cost to the U.S. Navy, see U.S. Government Accountability 

Ofﬁ ce 2010a. For additional information, see European Affairs 2010 and Hanson 2010. 

78.   This ﬁ gure includes ranges for the costs of deterrent security equipment, cost of naval forces, cost of 

piracy prosecutions, and operating cost of anti-piracy organizations (see Bowden 2010).

79.   Included in this ﬁ gure are the costs of ransoms, insurance premium, rerouting, deterrent security 
equipment,  naval  forces,  piracy  prosecutions,  and  anti-piracy  organizations  (see  Bowden  2010; 
Chalk 2008). 

80.   Gomez and Christensen 2010; Harild and Christensen 2010.
81.   Out of 13,658 refugees in Ghana at the end of 2009, nearly 11,500 were from Liberia (84 percent) 

with a further 1,600 from Togo (12 percent) (UNHCR 2010). 

82.   See International Crisis Group 1999; Salehyan and Gleditsch 2006. 
83.   See  Patrick  2006.  Also  see  Collier  and  others  2003;  Garrett  2005;  National  Intelligence  Council 

2000, 37. 

84.   Gaibulloev and Sandler 2008. 
85.   Mufson 2009.
86.   WDR team calculations based on Europe Brent Spot Price FOB (dollars per barrel) reported by the 

U.S. Energy Information Administration 2011.

87.   Harriott 2004. 
88.   See Curtis and Karacan 2002; Shanty and Mishra 2008; Andreas 2004; International Crisis Group 

2003.

89.   UNODC 2008.
90.   UNODC 2010a. 
91.   Anastasijevic 2006. 
92.   UNODC 2010a; Harwell 2010.
93.   Special Court for Sierra Leone Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecutor 2007, 5. 
94.   Lipman 2009; Coalition for International Justice 2005; Dufﬁ eld 2000.
95.   Gberie 2003a. 
96.   Even-Zohar 2003. 
97.   Davies, von Kemedi, and Drennan 2005. 
98.   International Crisis Group 2008b; Ashforth 2009. 
99.   Porter, Andrews, and Wescott 2010. 
100.   Kohlmann 2004.
101.   International Crisis Group 2009c.

T hroughout history, agreement between powerful leaders has 

been the most common strategy to prevent large-scale vio-
lence. This type of agreement, which we call an “elite pact,” 

does impose security for periods, but violence generally recurs. The 
immediate cause of the violence varies greatly by country, with many 
countries experiencing a combination of security, economic, and 
political stresses. These stresses may be internal (including low in-
come or high inequality between groups) or they may be external 
(including global economic shocks, international drug traﬃ  cking, or 
the inﬁ ltration of foreign forces). This Report argues that in these 
environments, institutions and governance serve as an “immune 
system” and defense against stresses. When these stresses occur in 
societies with weak institutions and governance, violence often 
occurs. Reform is often diﬃ  cult or impossible where violence is pres-
ent. As a result, countries that fail to build legitimate institutions risk 
entering a vicious cycle of repeated violence and weak institutions. 
This chapter spells out what we know about this vicious cycle and
why some countries are more vulnerable to violence than others. 

CHAPTER2

Weak 

institutions

not transforming

New
pact

New
stresses

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

Vulnerability to Violence

Multiple stresses raise the risks 
of violence 

Economic,  political,  and  security 

factors can all exacerbate the risks 
of  violence.  Some  of  these  factors 
are domestic, such as low incomes, 
high  unemployment,  and  inequality  of  dif-
ferent sorts. Some factors may originate out-
side  the  state,  such  as  external  economic 
shocks  or  the  inﬁ ltration  of  international 
drug cartels or foreign ﬁ ghters. This Report 
refers to these triggers of violence as “security, 
economic, and justice stresses” (see table 2.1). 
Often related, they rarely exist in isolation. 

This  Report  summarizes  what  is  known 
about  the  factors  associated  with  organized 
violence  and  development.  It  draws  on  re-
search  from  a  variety  of  ﬁ elds,  particularly 
research on the risk of civil war, largely be-
cause it is further advanced than research on 
violent organized crime, trafﬁ cking, gang ac-
tivity, or terrorism (box 2.1). 

Our  approach  is  multidisciplinary  and 
draws  on  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 
evidence. Box 2.1 reviews the literature from 
various  disciplines  on  causes  of  conﬂ ict. 
Often  this  debate  has  been  characterized  as 
“greed  versus  grievance.”1  This  chapter  de-
scribes how the stresses in table 2.1 can pre-
cipitate organized violence through a vicious 
cycle  of  vulnerability  to  violence.  Later,  in 

chapter 3, the framework demonstrates how 
countries can build institutions that are resil-
ient  to  these  stresses  to  prevent  organized 
vio lence, moving the discussion beyond the 
base  causes  of  “greed  and  grievance”  and 
showing how justice and jobs can work to-
gether  to  promote  conﬁ dence  and  help  to 
deliver citizen security.

Where  possible,  quantitative  and  econo-
metric work has been used to assess the im-
portance of the stress factors listed, but there 
are data constraints. Data on civil wars at the 
national  level  are  fairly  comprehensive,  but 
data on extreme criminal violence, normally 
measured  by  homicides,  are  incomplete  for 
many developing countries, let alone parts of 
these countries. Cross-country data are fairly 
good for economic factors, such as incomes 
and  growth  rates,  but  the  comparability  of 
data on unemployment is poor. Data are rea-
sonably reliable for income inequality within 
countries,  but  less  so  for  inequality  among 
geographical areas and among ethnic or reli-
gious  groups,  and  for  political  exclusion  or 
in justice. Therefore, new survey data, coun-
try  case  studies,  and  country  consultations 
complement the analysis here. 

Security stresses

Internal  security  stresses  can  arise  when 
particular elites or groups feel threatened—

74 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

TA B L E 2.1   Security, economic, and political stresses

This table is not e xhaustive, but reﬂ ects major factors identiﬁ ed in the academic literature and raised in WDR consultations on the 
causes of violence.2 The complex relationship between factors that can trigger violence and the onset of violence is similar to the 
relationship between health threats and risk factors at individual, relationship, community, and societal levels found in the public 
health/ecological framework developed by the World Health Organization.3 

Internal

External

Legacies of violence and trauma

Invasion, occupation
External support for domestic rebels

• 
• 
•  Cross-border conﬂ ict spillovers
• 
• 

Transnational terrorism
International criminal networks

•  Price shocks
•  Climate change

•  Perceived global inequity and injustice in the 

treatment of ethnic or religious groups

• 

• 

Stresses

Security 

Economic 

Justice

Low income levels, low opportunity cost of 
rebellion

•  Youth unemployment
•  Natural resource wealth
• 
Severe corruption
•  Rapid urbanization
• 
•  Real or perceived discrimination
•  Human rights abuses

Ethnic, religious, or regional competition

Source: Compiled by the WDR team from the literature cited in box 2.1 and from WDR team consultations. 

often  as  a  result  of  past  oppression—and 
organize to defend themselves. In interstate 
war,  a  preemptive  move  based  on  percep-
tions of the other state’s intentions is called 
a “security  dilemma.”  If  one  state  believes 
another  is  preparing  to  attack,  it  may  de-
cide  to  strike  ﬁ rst  to  give  itself  a  decisive 
 advantage.  Understood  as  a  trigger  for  war 
from the time of the Greeks, preemption fea-
tured strongly in Cold War strategic thinking 
and  follows  from  the  realist  approaches  to 
international relations, though opinions are 
mixed about its validity under international 
law.4  In  the  late  1990s,  researchers  asked 
whether security dilemmas were causing civil 
wars as well.5 If one group believes that an-
other clan, ethnic, or religious group is pre-
paring to attack, it may choose to make the 
ﬁ rst  move.  How  often  this  occurs  is  debat-
able, but this risk is now accepted.6 

Manipulating fears of oppression has been 
a  factor  causing  civil  conﬂ icts  as  distinct  as 
the Rwandese genocide and the Balkan wars 
of  the  1990s.  And  it  can  be  an  obstacle  to 
ending  violence—once  conﬂ icts  break  out, 
perceptions of the enemy harden and socie-
ties tend to portray their opponents in dis-

torted and fearsome terms.7 Security dilem-
mas and defensive arming are also prevalent 
among criminal groups. The illicit nature of 
drug markets means that trafﬁ ckers often re-
sort to violence to settle disputes both within 
and between trafﬁ cking organizations, since 
they  do  not  have  access  to  the  formal  legal 
system to adjudicate disputes and constrain 
the misuse of group funds or property. For 
these  groups,  violence  becomes  the  ﬁ rst  re-
course for enforcing contracts.8

External threats to security can heighten 
internal pressures. Many states face pressure 
or incursions from outside state and nonstate 
actors. That external actors could at any time 
intervene in a country makes it particularly 
difﬁ cult for internal actors to make credible 
commitments  with  each  other—as  in  the 
“internationalized” civil conﬂ icts in Afghani-
stan or the Democratic Republic of Congo. 
International  trafﬁ cking  networks  can  also 
place  heavy  pressures  on  local  institutions 
(see box 2.2). Outside resources and armed 
intervention  may  tip  the  scales  in  favor  of 
one  actor,  allowing  it  to  renege  on  agree-
ments  with  other  actors.  This  can  come  in 
the  form  of  attacks  from  “safe  havens”  in 

 

Vulnerability to violence 

75

BOX 2.1  Economic and political theories of violence and this Report

Violent conﬂ ict has been the subject of large and long-standing literatures in many academic disciplines, and this report draws from 
many strands of that literature. 

Rapid change and rising expectations
One common perspective has been the importance of drivers such as rapid economic and social change. Drawing on research by psy-
chologists and sociologists, Gurr argued that social and political conﬂ ict arises when groups experience feelings of “relative depriva-
tion” and the frustration of expectations for deserved or anticipated economic or social status. Huntington agreed that economic mod-
ernization raises expectations and mobilizes members of traditional societies toward national politics, contending that conﬂ ict occurs 
when political institutions lack the capacity to accommodate and manage rapidly rising demands. 

Failing to credibly agree to abstain from violence
Many economists and political scientists see violence as originating from “commitment problems”—situations where organized groups 
have opposing interests but cannot credibly agree to abstain from violence for a variety of reasons. The focus in these theories is on 
the diﬃ  culty of groups or individuals in some settings to commit themselves to not using force when it would be advantageous to do 
so. This thinking can be traced back as far as Hobbes, who contended that violent civil conﬂ ict is a consequence of low state capacity 
to deter challengers and manage conﬂ ict among groups in society. Recent theories on opportunistic arming and consequent violence 
can be found in Hirshleifer, Skaperdas, Grossman, and Fearon. Becker developed a rational actor model of crime. Thinking on the “secu-
rity dilemma”—that arming for defense can also be used to attack, leading to violence—can be traced to Schelling, Posen, Snyder and 
Jervis, and de Figueiredo and Weingast. 

Greed or grievance
These contending theories have led to debates over the relative importance of normative and economic motives for violence, which 
has recently led to debates on whether economic incentives or broader social and political motives drive societies to violence. This 
question was formulated as “Greed and Grievance” by Collier and Hoeﬄ  er, who suggested that primary commodities, diasporas, low 
earnings, human capital, and dispersed populations were positively correlated to the outbreak of civil conﬂ ict, suggesting support for 
the “greed” hypothesis. Further exploration, review and critique of these issues can be found in Nathan and Sambanis, as well as 
Satyanath, Miguel, and Sergenti and Blattman and Miguel.9 

Horizontal inequality and identity
Signiﬁ cant contributions to this debate include recent theories of polarization and horizontal inequality and analysis of violence based 
solely on identity, such as nationalism and ethnicity. Theories of horizontal inequality as developed by Stewart, and polarization pro-
posed by Esteban and Ray argue that inequality alone does not predict civil war—violence may be driven by relationships between 
inequality and identity that contribute to the onset of civil violence.10 In addition, national or ethnic identity may lead to a violent 
response to oppression or marginalization and need not include any equity concerns, but may be motivated instead by a disposition 
for self-government.11 

Ethnic divides and commitment problems
Bridging the arguments on grievance and rational choice motives for conﬂ ict, Fearon contends that ethnic polarization is most likely to 
precipitate conﬂ ict when ethnic groups cannot make credible commitments to abstain from violence. This is consistent with the phi-
losophy in this Report: both political and economic dynamics are often at play, and neither greed nor grievance alone is suﬃ  cient to 
explain the incidence of violence. 

Avenues for peaceful contests
The question remains: why do some societies avoid violence when others do not? To answer this question, we build on the hypotheses 
put forward by North, Wallis, and Weingast, who focus on impersonal institutions with open access to political and economic opportu-
nities, creating avenues for peaceful and credible contestation.12 Besley and Persson contend that investments in legal systems and 
state capacity can reduce the incidence of violence. Keefer argues that violence occurs when societies cannot collectively punish 
leaders who engage in predatory behavior or collectively build a capable counterinsurgency force, suggesting that institutionalized 
political parties serve as a bulwark against conﬂ ict by resolving these problems of collective action and credibility. Recent empirical 
quantitative evidence supports these hypotheses—Goldstone and others ﬁ nd that the quality of political institutions is an order of 
magnitude more important than other factors in determining risks of political crises and civil wars, while Brückner and Ciccone suggest 
that institutions are necessary to accommodate shocks in prices to avoid violence. More work is needed to conﬁ rm these ﬁ ndings thus 
to better understand the channels through which institutions contribute to resilience to violence. 

(box continues on next page)

76 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 2.1  Economic and political theories of violence and this Report (continued)

Institutions matter in preventing violence
This chapter draws on existing research on the risk factors of violence across the political science, social science, and economic 
disciplines and extends understanding of violent conﬂ ict in two ways:

• 

• 

 It presents the risk factors associated with violence, organized into security, economic, and political factors. This adds to existing 
work on drivers of conﬂ ict, with an emphasis on the role of external stresses—those outside a country’s control. Examples are 
international organized crime and traﬃ  cking, inﬁ ltration of foreign ﬁ ghters, and economic shocks.

 It then presents empirical ﬁ ndings that support arguments by theorists (such as North, Wallis, and Weingast) that institutions mat-
ter for violence prevention. It concludes by hypothesizing why and how the failure to develop legitimate, capable, and accountable 
institutions causes repeated cycles of violence.

Sources: Gurr 1970; Hobbes 1651; Hirshleifer 1995; Skaperdas 1996; Grossman 1991; Fearon 1995, 2004; Schelling 1960; Posen 1993; Snyder and Jervis 1999; 
de Figueiredo and Weingast 1999; Collier and Hoeﬄ  er 2004; Nathan 2005; Sambanis 2004; Satyanath, Miguel, and Sergenti 2004; Blattman and Miguel 
2010; Esteban and Ray 2008; Stewart 2005, 2010; Keefer 2008, forthcoming; North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009; Besley and Persson 2009, 2010; Huntington 
1968; Goldstone and others 2010; Becker 1968; Brückner and Ciccone 2010.

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 2 . 2  The stress posed by transnational organized crime and drug trafﬁ cking
 

   Jorge Montaño, Member, International Narcotics Control Board; former Ambassador of Mexico to the 
United States; WDR Advisory Council Member

The diversiﬁ cation and sophistication that characterizes the 
challenge of transnational organized crime demands coor-
dinated global action. Drug and human traﬃ  cking, money 
laundering,  illegal  exploitation  of  natural  resources  and 
wildlife,  counterfeiting  and  violations  of  intellectual  prop-
erty  rights  are  lucrative  criminal  activities  which  facilitate 
the penetration by organized crime of the already vulnera-
ble sociopolitical, judicial, and security structures in devel-
oping countries. 

In  Central  America,  for  example,  several  countries  that 
regained political stability two decades ago are now facing 
the decay of the state, whose institutions lack the strength 
to  face  this  onslaught.  Transnational  organized  crime  has 
converted  some  Caribbean  countries  into  corridors  for  the 
movement of illegal drugs and persons to Europe and North 
America.  Bolivia,  Colombia,  and  Peru  continue  to  be  the 
main  global  cocaine  producers,  while  Mexico  is  presently 
facing an unprecedented wave of violence given its border 
with  the  largest  immigrant,  drug  consumption,  and  arms 
producing market. West Africa has become the newest pas-
sageway for drugs coming from South America destined for 

Europe. Several African countries suﬀ er the illegal exploitation 
of their natural resources, while Asia is a hub for tons of opiates 
originating from Afghanistan. It is evident that there is a lack 
of a coordinated multilateral strategy against a phenomenon 
that cannot be dealt with in a fragmented way. 

In  industrialized  countries,  organized  crime  syndicates 
operate  with  minimal  use  of  violence,  thus  assuring  that  the 
heavy  hand  of  the  law  does  not  interfere  in  their  activities, 
both in the banking system as well as satisfying the insatiable 
market for illegal drugs. In developing countries, on the other 
hand,  organized  criminal  groups  take  advantage  of  apparent 
impunity to acquire access to a limitless supply of arms, with 
which they destabilize national and local institutions. 

The unprecedented progression of organized crime could 
spell the collapse of many weak states as their institutions fall 
prey  to  the  associated  violence.  The  precarious  economic 
development observed in many regions of the world provides 
a stimulus for consolidating these illegal activities, which will 
continue  to  thrive  as  a  consequence  of  the  impunity  they 
encounter in developing countries.

neighboring  countries  (for  example,  Hutu 
rebels crossing into Rwanda from the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo).13 It can also come 
from the activities of drug trafﬁ ckers (much 
of  Central America  today)  or  transnational 

terrorists (such as “Al-Qaeda in the Maghreb” 
activity  in  northern  Mali).14  Some  coun-
tries—Afghanistan  and  Somalia—have  had 
the  misfortune  of  experiencing  all  these 
forms of external security stress, in addition 

Vulnerability to violence

77

BOX 2.3  Spillover of conﬂ icts in Central Africa

The countries of Central Africa have been engaged for decades 
in a variety of conﬂ icts that often spill across borders. The 
maps here show the locations of major conﬂ ict events involv-
ing rebel groups that operate across borders for two periods: 
1997 to 2000 and 2006 to 2009. Each colored circle indicates a 
geospatial information system-coded conﬂ ict event involving 
groups originating from a given country, identiﬁ ed in the leg-
end (usually a battle, though establishing a headquarters and 
recruitment campaigns are also included). Many conﬂ ict events 
involve groups active across borders. 

Highlighting the spillover of conﬂ ict across borders in 

Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Sudan, 

and Uganda, and increasingly in the later period, in the Central 
African Republic and Chad, these maps show how violent 
groups can disperse and commingle in areas of weak gover-
nance. These groups make common cause when it suits them 
to do so and shift their bases of operations to conform to local 
political opportunities. Much of their raison d’être has become 
proﬁ t, plunder, or simple subsistence, with political goals at 
times stronger, at times weaker. Such groups as the Lord’s 
Resistance Army no longer have a strong domestic base, 
so they continue moving opportunistically among areas of 
instability.

M AP A  Cross-border political violence spreads across Central Africa

Violence is not easily contained. The colored circles represent conﬂ ict events by those militant and rebel groups that are active 
across borders. Recent violence has spilled across many borders in Central Africa, most notably those of the Central African 
Republic, Chad, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Sudan.

 

a.   January 1997–March 2000 

b.  October 2006–December 2009 

Country of orgin for violent groups active
across borders in Central Africa, 1997–2000:
Burundi
Chad

D. R. of Congo
Uganda

Rwanda
Sudan

CHAD

M A P H E R E

SUDAN

CENTRAL AFRICAN

REPUBLIC

DEMOCRATIC 

REPUBLIC
OF CONGO

UGANDA

RWANDA

BURUNDI

IBRD 38415
March 2011

Source: Raleigh and others 2010; Raleigh 2010.

IBRD 38416
March 2011

CHAD

SUDAN

M A P H E R E

CENTRAL AFRICAN

REPUBLIC

DEMOCRATIC 

REPUBLIC
OF CONGO

UGANDA

RWANDA

BURUNDI

Country of orgin for violent groups active
across borders in Central Africa, 2006–2009:
Burundi
Chad

D. R. of Congo
Uganda

Rwanda
Sudan

Central African Republic

to internal stresses.15 Areas with cross-border 
ethnic  links  and  low  civilian  government 
presence  have  long  been  subject  to  insecu-
rity—and remain so today (box 2.3).

External security threats can also develop 
out of violence in neighboring countries. As 

described in chapter 1, the “neighborhood ef-
fect” can both increase the risk of civil war in 
countries with neighbors at war and have det-
rimental development effects over borders.16 
The movement of persons trained in violence, 
the displacement of persons who may cross 

78 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

borders and become refugees, the disruption 
of trade, the expansion of criminal networks 
through globalization or trafﬁ cking, and the 
safe haven that rebels often seek by crossing 
borders suggest that violence cannot be easily 
contained,  especially  when  institutions  in 
neighboring countries are weak (box 2.4).17

These  spillovers  effects  can  also  derive 
from interstate conﬂ icts in a region. The in-
vasion of Kuwait in 1990, the occupation of 
Iraq in 2003, and the military operations in 
the  West  Bank  and  Gaza  are,  in  historical 
terms, less common than invasion and occu-
pation were earlier in the 20th century—but 
had profound effects on neighbors. 

External  movements  that  have  common 
cause with local groups and internal poltical 
movements can act as stresses. While motives 
for individuals to join ideology-based groups 
may be linked to beliefs in larger causes, the 
ability  of  these  groups  to  garner  local  sup-
port depends on relating these larger narra-
tives to local claims of injustice. A more ma-
terial ethos prevails in the business alliances 
between local gangs and transnational drug 
cartels in Latin America.

BOX 2.4  External stresses: The deportation of the maras

One notable external stress for Central America was the U.S. deportation of 
maras in the 1990s. One of the main gangs (maras) to be deported, La Mara Sal-
vatrucha, was established in Los Angeles in the late 1970s and early 1980s by 
mainly Salvadoran and Guatemalan refugees and immigrants to the United 
States. In 1996, the U.S. Congress passed the Illegal Immigration Reform and 
Immigrant Responsibility Act, whereby non-U.S. citizens sentenced to one year 
or more in prison were to be repatriated to their countries of origin. Between 
1998 and 2005, the United States deported nearly 46,000 convicted felons to 
Central America, in addition to another 160,000 illegal immigrants. 

El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras received more than 90 percent of the 
deportees, many of them members of the maras who had arrived in the United 
States as children. On being sent back to countries they barely knew, they repro-
duced the structures and behaviors that had given them support and security in 
the United States, founding gangs that quickly attracted local youth.

This deportation did not aﬀ ect all countries in Central America equally. 
Nicaragua, for example, has a comparatively low deportation rate from the 
United States—with fewer than 3 percent of all Central American deportees. 
The diﬀ erence in settlement and deportation may be one factor explaining why 
gangs in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras are more violent than those in 
Nicaragua.

Sources: Rodgers, Muggah, and Stevenson 2009; WDR regional consultation in Mexico 
City with government oﬃ  cials, academics, and development practitioners from Latin 
America.

Economic stresses

Low incomes reduce the opportunity cost of 
engaging in violence. From an economic per-
spective,  it  is  important  to  understand  the 
cost-beneﬁ t  calculus  for  decisions  by  those 
who become involved in violence, as the lit-
erature on criminal motives has traditionally 
highlighted.18 Much recent research on civil 
war has focused on economic motives, with 
rebellion perceived to offer economic rents to 
rebel leaders and a viable living to followers 
who have no other source of livelihood. Cap-
turing this perspective, the leader of the Su-
dan People’s Liberation Movement, John Ga-
rang,  said,  “Under  these  circumstances  the 
marginal  cost  of  rebellion  in  the  South  be-
came very small, zero, or negative; that is, in 
the South it pays to rebel.”19 In a low-income 
environment the opportunity costs of engag-
ing in violence may be small. 

Slow-developing  low-income  economies 
largely dependent on natural resources are 10 
times more likely than others to experience 
civil  war.20  Reviewing  these  results  for  this 
Report, Fearon again ﬁ nds a strong relation-
ship  between  income  and  the  risk  of  civil 
conﬂ ict.21 Of course, low per capita income is 
also highly correlated with low institutional 
capabilities,  as  evidenced  by  the Worldwide 
Governance  Indicators  and  International 
Country  Risk  Guide  indicators.22  More  re-
cent work by Keefer and by Fearon for this 
Report indicates that the income links with 
violence  may  be  the  joint  product  of  other 
underlying  factors.23  Thus,  countries  have 
political and institutional characteristics that 
determine  both  their  capability  to  address 
violence and the level of governance neces-
sary for economic growth.

High  unemployment,  particularly  youth 
unemployment,  appears  to  increase  the  risk 
of  violence.  The  World  Development  Report 
2007:  Development  and  the  Next  Generation 
points to how young people’s initial failures in 
ﬁ nding a job can lead to persistent joblessness, 
a loss of interest in further schooling, delayed 
family formation, mental distress, and “nega-
tive manifestations of citizenship.”24 Findings 
from  the  Voices  of  the  Poor  Project  afﬁ rm 

 

Vulnerability to violence 

79

this: presence of unemployed and frustrated 
young men in post-conﬂ ict situations is often 
linked to higher levels of violence, substance 
abuse, and gang activities.25 In surveys for this 
Report  in  areas  affected  by  violence,  unem-
ployment and idleness was cited as the most 
important  factor  motivating  young  people 
to join rebel movements. The issue was also 
raised as important in every WDR consulta-
tion: Liberia’s President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 
summarizes,  “[Without]  jobs  for  our  very 
young population, we run the risk of having 
their  vulnerabilities  exposed  and  the  risk  of 
them  once  again  being  recruited  into  con-
ﬂ ict,  undermining  all  the  progress  we  have 
made.”26  But  econometric  work  has  consis-
tently failed to ﬁ nd any correlation between 
unemployment  and  violence,  perhaps  be-
cause data are poor or because the link is in-
direct rather than direct (box 2.5).27

Exploitative  employment  is  also  a  risk 
 factor in violence. The relationship between 
 unemployment  and  violence  often  involves 
social identity and exclusion. Several qualita-
tive  studies  on  Latin  America  and  African 
gangs and rebel movement recruitment point 
to  links  between  employment,  respect,  and 
identity (box 2.5). This mirrors a larger liter-
ature  on  unemployment  and  domestic  vio-
lence, showing how power relations and per-
ceptions of “dignity” can be more important 
than simple pecuniary motives as drivers of 
violence.28  This  is  consistent  with  employ-
ment  being  more  than  a  purely  ﬁ nancial 
transaction. It is also a social interaction car-
rying aspects of personal status and expecta-
tions of how one should be treated.29 In other 
words,  the  nature  of  work  relationships  on 
offer matters a great deal. As with the causes 
of  rebel  movements,  unemployment  and  a 
sense of low status also emerge as risk factors 
for recruitment into gangs (box 2.6).

Research has found a strong relationship 
between income inequality and criminal vio-
lence,  measured  by  homicide  rates.30  Many 
scholars  have  investigated  whether  income 
inequality and civil war are related and found 
no  statistically  signiﬁ cant  relationship.31 
However, there is evidence that horizontal in-
equalities (between regional, ethnic, or reli-

BOX 2.5   Does unemployment cause violence? Arguments 

for and against

The proposition that unemployment can lead to involvement in violence is often 
traced to Becker, who applied an “economic calculus” to criminology, with the 
aim of improving policies toward crime. In such an opportunity-cost argument, 
scholars like Cincotta, Engelman, and Anastasion and Grossman consider unem-
ployment a cause of violence and conﬂ ict. Urdal argues that the risk of violent 
conﬂ ict can be correlated with a high population proportion of young adults 
and poor economic performance. 

More recently, simplistic cost-beneﬁ t approaches have been questioned by 
Berman and others on the motives of groups claiming ideological inspiration: 

Most aid spending by governments seeking to rebuild social and political 
order is based on an opportunity-cost theory of distracting potential 
recruits. The logic is that gainfully employed young men are less likely to 
participate in political violence, implying a positive correlation between 
unemployment and violence in places with active insurgencies. We test 
that prediction on insurgencies in Iraq and the Philippines, using survey 
data on unemployment and two newly available measures of insurgency: 
attacks against government and allied forces and violence that kills civil-
ians. Contrary to the opportunity-cost theory, we ﬁ nd a robust negative 
correlation between unemployment and attacks against government and 
allied forces and no signiﬁ cant relationship between unemployment and 
the rate of insurgent attacks that kill civilians.32

Other research suggests that unemployment and violence may be related 
through respect, social justice, and social identity dynamics rather than pure 
cost-beneﬁ t motives. Contemporary case studies emphasize how employment, 
identity, and perceptions of social justice are intertwined. Padilla’s work on 
Puerto Rican drug gangs in Chicago stresses the insecure and demeaning nature 
of legal work opportunities compared with gang membership—which oﬀ ered 
not only income but social respect and a sense of belonging. Similar motives are 
echoed by those joining gangs in Guatemala, who “did so because they were 
searching for the support, trust, and cohesion—social capital—that they main-
tained their families did not provide, as well as because of the lack of opportuni-
ties in the local context.”33

Evidence on recruitment into the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of 
Colombia) suggests that many recruits, employed before joining, were moti-
vated by status and the excitement of the rebel life in comparison with the 
drudgery of agricultural wage labor. Gutierréz Sanín quotes a rancher kidnapped 
by the FARC: “The guerrilleros say: we, work with a machete? Never! Then they 
say: Peasants speak with us because of this. And they kiss their weapon! And 
they say that women love arms [sic]: the police, the army, the guerrilla.” Ethno-
graphic work on militias in rural Sierra Leone and insurgents in El Salvador34 
suggests that oppressive work relations can be a key motive for rebellion. 

Another understudied element of these dynamics is the time necessary for 

such interventions to be eﬀ ective. A WDR study in southern China tests how 
long it takes migrant workers to develop social networks, ﬁ nding that broad 
social networks are developed only after ﬁ ve years of secure employment.

Further research is needed to test the links between unemployment, idle-

ness, the temporal eﬀ ects of unemployment, the diﬀ ering forms of employment, 
and recruitment into violence. 

Sources: Urdal 2004; Berman and others 2009; Padilla 1992; Moser 2009; Gutiérrez 
Sanín 2008; Becker 1968; Cincotta, Engelman, and Anastasion 2003; Grossman 1991; 
Wood 2003; Richards 1996; Chauveau and Richards 2008; Cramer 2010; Huang 2010.

80 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 2.6   Do similar economic factors create risks for political conﬂ ict and extreme levels of 

violent organized crime?

The most reliable indicator to compare violence across countries is the homicide rate, which has risen markedly in Latin American and 
Caribbean countries since the early 1990s—from 12.6 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants to almost 20 homicides in recent years. 

Analysis of global data conﬁ rms earlier work by Loayza, Fajnzylber, and Lederman on homicide rates in Latin America, revealing 

that:

•  Institutional capacity and accountability is associated with lower risks of civil war and homicide rates.

•   Higher country GDP, like civil wars, is associated with lower homicide rates, even comparing periods within countries. 

•   Democratic collapses, as with civil wars, are associated with increasing homicides. 

•   Oil production, associated with civil war risk, does not predict higher homicide rates. 

•   Countries with higher income inequality tend to have more homicides, a pattern that holds when comparing countries in the same 
region. These ﬁ ndings are the principal factor that distinguishes criminal violence from civil wars, which are not found to be corre-
lated with income inequality, but exhibit some relation to horizontal inequalities across ethnicity or other identity groups. 

In qualitative studies, unemployment and idleness also feature as risk factors that spur recruitment into both rebel movements 
and gangs. Surveys showed remarkably similar perceptions about motives for participation in gangs and in rebel movements (see 
ﬁ gure). In both cases, unemployment and idleness were cited as the primary reasons for young people to join gangs or rebel move-
ments, reinforcing the links between social inequality and violence. 

Rebel movements and gangs attract people with similar motives

Surveys found that the main motivations young people cited for becoming rebels or gang members are very similar—
unemployment, idleness, respect, and self-protection, all well ahead of revenge, injustice, or belief in the cause.

39.5%

46%

15%

13%

13%

8%

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f

 

o
%

Rebel participation

Gang participation

Unemployment/Idleness

Feel more secure/Powerful

Belief in the cause/Revenge/Injustice

Sources: Fearon 2010b; Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010; Neumayer 2003; Loayza, Fajnzylber, and Lederman 2002a, 2002b; Messner, 
Raﬀ alovich, and Shrock 2002; WDR team calculations.
Notes: Figure shows aggregates of the most common responses for the questions, “What is the main reason why young people join 
rebel groups?” and “What is the main reason why young people join gangs?” for surveys conducted in Colombia; the Democratic 
Republic of Congo; Côte d’Ivoire; Gaza; Mali; Sierra Leone; and West Bank. Survey methodology described in Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 
2010. 

gious  identity  groups)  lead  to  political  vio-
lence  (discussed  further  in  the  section  on 
political stresses below). The structure of the 
inequality and the manifestation of violence 
may be linked, but the results are hardly con-
clusive; more research on this is needed. It is 

also possible that demographic shifts create 
stresses on societies that are not prepared for 
change—rapid  urbanization,  as  earlier  in 
Latin America and today in Asia and Africa, 
is associated with weakened social cohesion 
and increased risks of violence.35  

 

Vulnerability to violence 

81

Countries  with  signiﬁ cant  natural  re-
source  wealth  may  face  armed  attempts  to 
capture the beneﬁ ts. Because control of the 
state  or  speciﬁ c  areas  is  needed  to  beneﬁ t 
from  revenues  from  the  sale  of  oil,  timber, 
or minerals, countries with signiﬁ cant natu-
ral  wealth  are  particularly  vulnerable  to 
 conﬂ ict.36 This is demonstrated by the pro-
longed struggles between rival militias in the 
Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  from  the 
civil war period of the 1990s37 to present-day 
rebel “taxation”  of  artisanal  mining  of  col-
tan, tin, and gold deposits in the eastern part 
of the country. Subnational contests over re-
sources  are  important  in  country  cases,  al-
though cross-country data are not available. 
Once again, the key is the cost-beneﬁ t calcu-
lus  associated  with  engaging  in  trafﬁ cking 
and  the  violence  that  can  accompany  it.  In 
addition,  leaders  of  countries  with  signiﬁ -
cant  natural  resources  may  be  reluctant  to 
invest in the institutions to mediate or sup-
press violence, since these same institutions 
can challenge their regime and reduce their 
share  of  the  rents.38  For  example,  a  strong 
military  in  a  country  with  weak  civilian 
 oversight  is  associated  with  the  capture  of 
natural resource rents by military leaders.39

Economic shocks can also arise from fac-
tors  beyond  the  control  of  the  state—and 
food  and  energy  price  shocks  can  increase 
the risk of conﬂ ict. Work on rainfall shocks 
in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  concludes  that  civil 
conﬂ ict  is  more  likely  to  occur  following 
years of poor rainfall. Using rainfall variation 
as a proxy for income shocks in 41 African 
countries between 1981 and 1999, Satyanath, 
Miguel, and Sergenti found that a 5 percent 
decline  in  economic  growth  increased  the 
likelihood of conﬂ ict by half in the following 
year.40  A  majority  of  fragile  states  are  food 
importers—and average household expendi-
ture on food is higher in fragile developing 
countries (57.5 percent) than in other devel-
oping countries (49.4 percent).41 Sharp food 
price increases, in particular, have a long as-
sociation with urban instability. But there is 
less  risk  of  violence  where  institutions  pro-
tect  exporters  and  consumers  against  these 
economic shocks.42

Economic factors are important—but do 
not tell the full story. Many developing coun-
tries face multiple economic challenges, with 
low  or  stagnant  growth,  high  exposure  to 
global  commodity  price  trends,  and  rapid 
population  growth.  Potent  as  these  factors 
are,  explanations for conﬂ ict based purely on 
economic motives are inadequate—to avoid 
violence,  societies  must  do  more  than  just 
create growth. The attention in recent years 
to  quantitative  correlations  between  eco-
nomic  factors  and  conﬂ ict  has  led  some  to 
argue that economics is all that counts. Not 
only is this facile—it misrepresents the state 
of the research. It is much more difﬁ cult to 
test the importance of identity, ideology, in-
justice, and political motivations using statis-
tical methods, but current research suggests 
that  these  are  very  important  in  explaining 
violence and conﬂ ict.43 

Justice 

Humans value justice and fairness, the most 
obvious example being political inclusion of 
all citizens. When fairness is absent, injustice 
and exclusion can act as stresses. Justice and 
fairness  are  difﬁ cult  concepts  to  measure, 
though psychological experiments show that 
they  can  have  value  beyond  pure  material 
self-interest (see box 2.7). 

One aspect of injustice and unfairness is 
pure political exclusion of particular groups 
based  on  race,  ethnicity,  religion,  or  geo-
graphical location and origin. Political exclu-
sion  was  clearly  an  important  motive  for 
armed  resistance  in  the  anti-colonial  wars 
and  the  anti-apartheid  struggle.  Today,  few 
areas  of  the  world  have  systems  of  political 
representation so obviously inequitable. But 
recent research by Cederman, Wimmer, and 
Min and Goldstone and others suggests that 
countries  with  high  political  exclusion  or 
ethnic exclusion are more likely to experience 
violent upheaval.44

Economic and social inequality and per-
ceived  injustice  matter.  Security  and  eco-
nomic stresses may be ampliﬁ ed by the way 
people  perceive  their  identity—and  their 
treatment  by  others  may  be  based  on  that 
identity.  Data  are  incomplete  on  horizontal 

82 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 2.7  People expect fairness and punish inequity

Using the Ultimatum Game, a two-player experimental psychology game con-
ducted under laboratory conditions, economists have demonstrated that many 
people from a wide variety of cultures are willing to punish others at a cost to 
themselves in order to sanction unfair behavior. In this game, one bargainer 
makes a proposal on how to divide a sum of money with another bargainer—
who has the opportunity to accept or reject the proposed division.

The ﬁ rst bargainer is called the proposer, the second the responder. If the 

responder accepts the proposed division, each bargainer earns the amount pro-
posed; but if the responder rejects it, each bargainer earns nothing. If the only 
consideration is material interest, responders could be expected to accept quite 
a low percentage of the “pie” since this will still result in a net gain to them. 
The Ultimatum Game has been run hundreds of times in diverse cultures 

around the world and the results have been surprisingly consistent, which sug-
gests widespread consensus on interpretations of fairness and equity. From 
semisedentary Dolgan/Nganasan hunters, to wage laborers of Siberia, to seden-
tary Sanquianga ﬁ shermen of the Colombian Paciﬁ c coast, to Hadzan nomads in 
Tanzania—and from sedentary laborers in rural Missouri to urban wage workers 
in Accra—the oﬀ er from the proposer consistently averages 26 to 48 percent, 
while the responder is willing to punish if the oﬀ er is less than 12 to 17 percent.45

The responders would rather have both players get nothing than accept a 

small share while the proposer gets a much larger one. The results suggest that 
many individuals react strongly to what they perceive to be unjust—and are 
willing to forgo material beneﬁ t to punish behavior they perceive as unfair.

Sources: Hoﬀ  2010; Henrich and others 2010.

inequalities  (for  example,  inequalities  be-
tween  identity  groups  based  on  religion, 
caste,  ethnicity,  or  region).46  But  analysis 
across 55 countries for 1986–2003 reveals a 
signiﬁ cant rise in the probability of conﬂ ict 
in countries with severe horizontal inequali-
ties, both economic and social.47 Côte d’Ivoire 

illustrates  the  connection,  where  decades  of 
socioeconomic inequalities persisted between 
north and south. After President Houphouët-
Boigny’s death in December 1993, a conﬂ u-
ence of economic and political factors even-
tually led to civil war.48 The rebels’ Charte du 
Nord  clearly  expressed  the  economic  griev-
ances of northerners as well as their resent-
ment  over  insufﬁ cient  state  recognition  of 
the  Muslim  religion.  To  portray  identity  as 
driven  by  economic  considerations  alone  is 
to  ignore  the  consistency  with  which  the 
qualitative  literature  identiﬁ es  such  features 
as  humiliation,  pride,  and  desire  for  afﬁ lia-
tion as motivators for action.49 

State oppression and human rights abuses 
often  accompany  authoritarian  approaches 
to  prevent  violence  fueled  by  injustice.  Are 
such  tactics  sustainable?  Surprisingly  little 
quantitative  research  has  been  done  on  the 
links between human rights abuses and po-
litical violence. A review of evidence suggests 
a  strong  correlation  between  past  human 
rights  abuses  and  current  risks  of  conﬂ ict 
(box  2.8).  Additional  quantitative  work  is 
needed to determine the direction of causal-
ity and control for possibly omitted variables, 
while  further  qualitative  work  would  be 
needed  to  understand  the  links  between 
abuses  and  risks  of  violence.  It  is  not  clear 
whether human rights abuses affect the mo-
tives of those who engage in armed opposi-

BOX 2.8  Human rights abuses and future conﬂ ict risk 

Are improvements in human rights correlated with lower risks of conﬂ ict? Countries with recent 
human rights abuses are far more likely to experience conﬂ ict than countries with a strong his-
tory of respect for human rights. Each one-step deterioration on the Political Terror Scale—
which measures arbitrary detention for nonviolent political activity, torture, disappearances, and 
extrajudicial killings—resulted in a more than twofold increase in the risk of civil war in the sub-
sequent year. 

Holding large numbers of political prisoners makes a renewal of civil war twice as likely, 

while signiﬁ cant numbers of extrajudicial killings make it three times more likely.50 This is best 
summed up by Walter: “A reasonable interpretation of these results is that greater repression 
and abuse by a government creates both grievances and signals that those governments are not 
dependable negotiating partners; suggesting that less coercive and more accountable 
approaches signiﬁ cantly decrease the risk of civil conﬂ ict.”51 

Sources: Fearon 2010a; Walter 2010.

 

Vulnerability to violence 

83

tion, whether there is a wider effect in spur-
ring  indirect  popular  support  for  armed 
opposition  movements,  or  whether  oppres-
sive  state  tactics  can  under  certain  circum-
stances  cause  disaffection  among  groups 
within the military or political and economic 
circles of power. Whatever the speciﬁ c mech-
anisms at work, the results suggest that im-
provements  in  human  rights  often  accom-
pany a reduced risk of violence.52 

The  combination  of  political  and  socio-
economic  exclusion,  especially  when  per-
ceived to be government policy, can be used 
to  support  narratives  of  social  injustice.  In 
Côte d’Ivoire an explosive mixture of socio-
economic  and  political  inequalities  appears 
to have contributed to the outbreak of civil 
war.53 In Sri Lanka, some historians have ar-
gued that political and social exclusion of the 
Tamil  minority  through  the  1956  Ofﬁ cial 
Languages Act (which declared Sinhalese the 
only ofﬁ cial language of Sri Lanka) and the 
1972  constitution  (which  gave  Buddhism 
“foremost status” in the country) contri buted 
to early Tamil demands for greater autonomy 
and  to  later  support  for  Tamil  militancy.54 
Perceived injustice in access to political power 
and  economic  opportunities  between  Pro-
testants  and  Catholics  played  a  role  in  the 
Northern  Ireland  secessionist  conﬂ ict.55 Ac-
tual or perceived exclusion can be a powerful 
motivator of violence, creating pools of hos-
tility for rebel leaders to draw on.56 For ex-
treme levels of violent crime, inequality be-
tween classes—which may also carry aspects 
of  exclusion  and  perceived  injustice—ap-
pears to matter more that inequality between 
ethnic, geographical, or religious groups. 57 

Injustice  and  inequity  are  often  cited  as 
motivations for terrorism. Invasion, occupa-
tion, political repression, and the curtailment 
of human rights and civil liberties form much 
of  the  rationale  that  terrorist  organizations 
give for their attacks. Much of the empirical 
literature  validates  the  relevance  of  these 
 factors.58 Some scholars posit a relationship 
between  poverty  and  terrorism,59  but  many 
others  ﬁ nd  no  direct  evidence  that  poverty 
(or a lack of education) leads to terrorism.60 

F I G U R E 2.1   What drives people to join ideological militant 
 

movements?

Respondents in Mali and the West Bank cited revenge, injustice, and belief 
in a cause as reasons for participating in ideologically based militant move-
ments. These results contrast with the results for gang and rebel group par-
ticipation (box 2.5), which showed unemployment and idleness as leading 
reasons for participation. 

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 

%

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

46%

46%

21%

1%

Mali

Unemployment/Idleness
Feel more secure/Powerful
Belief in the cause/Revenge/Injustice

19%

16%

West Bank

Source: Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010. 
Notes: Figure shows percentage of responses for the question, “What drives 
people to join ideological movements?” for surveys conducted in Mali and West 
Bank. Survey methodology described in Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010.

On the contrary, some research ﬁ nds that per-
petrators of terrorist attacks are more likely to 
be well-off, with advanced education.61 

While the motives for individuals to join 
 ideology-based groups may be linked to be-
liefs  in  larger  causes,  the  ability  of  these 
groups to garner local support also depends 
on  relating  these  larger  narratives  to  local 
claims of injustice.62 The Taliban gained sup-
port in Pakistan’s Swat valley in part by build-
ing on a variety of local grievances, including 
weaknesses in local law enforcement and jus-
tice  institutions.63  Leaders  of  militant  ideo-
logical groups often espouse narratives of in-
justice or exclusion, and this appears to have 
popular resonance. Mali and the West Bank 
cited “belief in the cause and injustice” as far 
more important for recruitment into militant 
religious  groups  than  for  recruitment  into 
gangs or rebel movements (ﬁ gure 2.1).

84 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Thus,  stresses  related  to  security,  eco-
nomics, and politics can increase the risk of 
violence, and they tend to combine and pre-
cipitate actual violence. But the actual combi-
nations of stresses and the pathways to vio-
lent  conﬂ ict  are  highly  speciﬁ c  to  country 
circumstances. As discussed earlier, recent re-
search, while in its infancy, points to the im-
portance of institutions in mediating disputes 
and reducing violence. Where societies fail to 
reform  institutions  and  insulate  themselves 
from  stresses  associated  with  violence,  they 
risk repeated cycles of violence.

The vicious cycle of weak 
institutional legitimacy and 
violence

Much good work has been done on concep-
tualizing  the  relationship  between  institu-
tions and violence, both historically (North, 
Wallis,  and  Weingast  and  many  others);  in 
contemporary analysis of the coercive capac-
ities of the state (Fearon and Laitin); and in 
relation  to  processes  of  democratization 
(Goldstone  and  others).64  The  policy  world 
has also focused on the relationship between 
state-building  and  peacebuilding,  including 
work by the Organisation for  Economic Co-
operation  and  Development  (OECD)  In-
ternational Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragil-
ity,  as  well  as  other  bilateral,  regional,  and 
multilateral  institutions.  New  research  for 
this Report from Fearon, Walter, and Hoef-
ﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz explores how the 
characteristics  of  state-society  institutions 
and governance outcomes are associated with 
risk  of  violence  (box  2.9).65  Meanwhile,  re-
cent research supports the ﬁ nding that states 
with weak institutions run the greatest risk of 
the  onset  and  recurrence  of  civil  war,  and 
of extreme levels of criminal violence.66 These 
studies  should  be  further  expanded  and 
tested, but, taken together, they provide com-
pelling  early  evidence  that  institutions  are 
indeed critical for avoiding violence. 

The capacity and accountability of insti-
tutions  both  matter.  The  accountability  of 
institutions—expressed, for example, in the 

results  described  above  on  human  rights, 
corruption,  and  the  presence  of  a  written 
constitution—appear  to  matter  as  much  as 
their  capacity.  Both  capacity  and  account-
ability  are  applicable  to  security,  political, 
and  economic  systems:  political  scientists 
typically use the term “accountability” to re-
fer  to  processes  or  political  representation, 
for  example,  while  economists  more  often 
use  the  term  to  refer  to  responsible  use  of 
public  funds  and  responsiveness  to  citizen 
needs  and  complaints.  For  this  Report, “le-
gitimacy” refers to the responsiveness of in-
stitutions and is used as shorthand for capac-
ity,  inclusion,  and  accountability.  Several 
sources of legitimacy have been identiﬁ ed in 
the state-building literature.67 The most im-
portant are as follows:

(cid:129)  Political  legitimacy  (accountability)  and 
inclusion,  or  the  use  of  credible  political 
processes  to  make  decisions  that  reﬂ ect 
shared values and preferences, provide the 
voice  for  all  citizens  equally  and  account 
for these decisions. This includes providing 
information  to  citizens  and  mechanisms 
for  legal  recourse  to  resolve  disputes  and 
complaints,  including  complaints  against 
the state. This can also be considered to in-
clude  international  legitimacy:  the  state’s 
exercise of responsible sovereignty as laid 
out under international law. 

(cid:129)  Performance 

legitimacy 

(capacity), 
earned  by  the  effective  discharge  by  the 
state of its agreed duties, particularly the 
provision of security, economic oversight 
and services, and justice. 

Recent  events  demonstrate  how  different 
aspects  of  institutional  legitimacy  can  relate 
to conﬂ ict and violence. The Middle East and 
North African countries generally possess rel-
atively strong institutional capacity, but their 
systems have historically scored low on indi-
cators  of  accountability.  In  some  countries, 
such as Libya, institutions have remained more 
personalized than in neighboring states such 
as Egypt and Tunisia, and perceived tensions 
between regional, ethnic, or tribal groups are 

 

Vulnerability to violence 

85

BOX 2.9  Quantitative research on institutions and violence risk

For this Report, Fearon and Walter tested whether the rule of law, government eﬀ ectiveness, 
low corruption, and strong protection of human rights, as measured by the Worldwide Gover-
nance Indicators (WGI), correlate with a lower risk of onset and recurrence of civil conﬂ ict. This 
test involved a more detailed statistical examination of these governance indicators than 
undertaken before. 

Because countries with high incomes generally have stronger governance indicators, it has 
been diﬃ  cult for previous researchers to distinguish the eﬀ ect of institutional weakness from 
the eﬀ ect of low income. Fearon approached this problem by controlling the sample for 
national incomes, and then identifying “surprisingly good” governance—when a country has 
higher governance ratings than other countries at the same per capita income. The attempt to 
identify the impact of governance on the risk of violence then comes from seeing whether sur-
prisingly good or bad governance in one period is associated with the onset or recurrence of 
conﬂ ict later. 

Fearon ﬁ nds that a country with “surprisingly good” governance indicators has a 30–45 per-
cent lower risk of civil war in the next 5–10 years than its peers with more modestly rated gov-
ernance. Once institutions are added to the analysis, they become a more important factor 
than income as a correlate of civil war. Similarly, he ﬁ nds that institutions are highly related to 
the risk of extreme levels of criminal violence, proxied by homicides, with countries that had 
measures of better governance in 1996–98 experiencing lower homicide rates in 2000–05, 
even when controlling for income.

Walter ﬁ nds a similar governance impact on the risk of recurring civil war. A formal constitu-
tion—a simple measure of the rule of law and the expression of societal values through formal 
institutions—reduces the odds of renewed conﬂ ict by 64 percent. Measures of accountability 
are as important as measures of capacity in this calculation: as described earlier, past human 
rights abuses have a particularly strong impact on the risk of future conﬂ ict, and measures of 
rule of law and corruption are as important as, or more important than, those of bureaucratic 
eﬃ  ciency.

Sources: Fearon 2010a, 2010b; Walter 2010. 

higher. This may help explain why initial de-
mands for change in Egypt and Tunisia were 
managed largely peacefully, whereas protests 
in Libya escalated into civil conﬂ ict.

Fragile institutions and poor governance 
help explain why similar external shocks can 
produce violence in one country but not in 
another.  Consider  external  economic  stress 
and the long association of sharp food price 
increases with urban instability. In mapping 
food protests during the 2006–08 period of 
price spikes against government effectiveness 
data,  the  occurrence  of  violence  was  much 
higher in developing countries with less ca-
pable governance (ﬁ gure 2.2). 

The essential links between institutional 
weakness, governance, and violence are cap-
tured in the concept of “fragility” (box 2.10). 
Weak  capacity,  accountability,  and  legiti-
macy  of  institutions  are  the  basis  of  many 

deﬁ nitions of state fragility. The World Bank, 
for example, uses indicators of institutional 
strength  to  identify  fragile  situations.  And 
the  last  decade  has  seen  a  sharper  interna-
tional focus on the developmental and secu-
rity implications of  “fragile situations,” and 
a focus on the links between state-building 
and peacebuilding.68

Why does the lack of legitimate 
institutions open the risk of 
recurring violence? 

All societies face stresses, but only some suc-
cumb to repeated violence. Unemployment, 
income  shocks,  rising  inequalities  between 
social  groups,  external  security  threats,  and 
international  organized  crime—all  of  these 
have plausible causal relationships with vio-
lence. The analytical problem in identifying 

86 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

F I G U R E 2.2   Food price protests and associated violence are 

concentrated in fragile states

Developing countries with low government eﬀ ectiveness experienced more 
food price protests during the food crisis (2007–08) than countries with high 
government eﬀ ectiveness. More than half of those protests turned violent. 
In states in the bottom half of the governance spectrum, the incidence of 
violent protests was three times higher than in the top half.

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
 
f

o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

18

15

12

9

6

3

0

9

8

9

8

2

12

3

10

0–25th

25–50th

50–75th

75–100th

Increasing government eﬀectiveness

(percentile ranking)

Violent

Nonviolent

Sources: Compiled by Schneider, Buehn, and Montenegro 2010; food protest data 
are from news reports; government eﬀ ectiveness data are from Kaufmann, Kraay, 
and Mastruzzi 2010a.
Notes: Food protests are deﬁ ned as strikes, protests, or riots on food- or agriculture-
related issues in 2007 and 2008. A violent food protest is deﬁ ned as one that 
involves the use of physical force, results in casualties, or both.

the causes of violence is that many countries 
face these stresses, but not all of them actu-
ally experience outright violence, while oth-
ers contain it to small geographical areas or 
short  periods  of  time.  As  described  earlier, 
a common, underexplored condition across 
countries  facing  violence,  particularly  re-
peated violence, is their weak institutions and 
governance. 

The causal relationship between weak in-
stitutional  legitimacy  and  violence  may  be 
compared  to  the  relationship  between  the 
human body’s immune system and disease. 
Weak institutions make a country vulnerable 
to  violence,  just  as  a  weak  immune  system 
makes  a  body  vulnerable  to  disease.  To  re-
store a body to health means not only treat-
ing the disease but also restoring the body’s 
ability  to  ﬁ ght  off  disease.  Similarly  with 
weak  institutional  legitimacy  and  gover-
nance. The cause of each outbreak of violence 

may vary, but the underlying reason for soci-
eties’  inability  to  resist  stresses  is  that  their 
institutions  are  too  weak  to  mediate  them 
peacefully.  Durable  solutions  to   violence, 
therefore, require more than addressing each 
individual stress—they require action to ad-
dress  the  underlying  weaknesses  in  institu-
tional legitimacy.

Solutions that do not involve transform-
ing  institutions  may  postpone  rather  than 
solve  problems.  Throughout  history,  agree-
ments  between  powerful  leaders  have  been 
the most common strategy to prevent large-
scale violence—“I’ll prevent my armed men 
from attacking your territory if you prevent 
yours from attacking mine, so that we can all 
proﬁ t from trade or selling natural resources.” 
As  North,  Wallis,  and  Weingast  suggest,  if 
these  arrangements  create  sufﬁ cient  incen-
tives for powerful leaders and organizations, 
they can contain violence.69

Such arrangements, however, lead to a po-
litical system that manipulates the economy, 
so that economic rents are an essential com-
ponent  of  the  stability.  Unfortunately,  such 
arrangements are personal and rarely lead to 
the  development  of  impersonal  institutions 
that can act irrespective of whether a particu-
lar leader is still in power, or to wider gover-
nance  improvements  that  protect  citizens’ 
interests.  These  “elite  pacts”  can  establish 
limits on  violence, but this type of agreement 
is  subject  to  constant  renegotiation  as  cir-
cumstances  change,  and  the  threat  of  vio-
lence remains.

Does violence recur because, without im-
personal  institutions,  elite  pacts  have  difﬁ -
culty  in  adapting  to  change?  This  Report’s 
work on institutional correlations is new, and 
more  research  is  needed  on  why  countries 
with weak formal institutions experience re-
peated bouts of violence. One hypothesis is 
that these systems have difﬁ culty in adapting 
to change—because agreements are personal 
and need to be renegotiated when leaders die 
or lose power, or when new internal and ex-
ternal pressures force a change in the division 
of  economic  or  political  beneﬁ ts. A  further 
consideration is that these systems may lead 

Vulnerability to violence

87

BOX 2.10  Fragility, weak institutions, governance, and violence 

To capture state fragility, the World Bank and other multilateral development banks have used 
measures of institutional weakness, such as their Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 
(CPIA) frameworks. The CPIA indicators attempt to measure, however imperfectly, the quality 
and inﬂ uence of key state and society institutions and the policies they implement. Low-
income countries with scores below a composite 3.2 in the CPIA are coded as fragile. Nothing 
in the indicators themselves directly measures the levels of political or criminal violence. The 
ﬁ gure illustrates that countries lacking the institutional capacity and accountability to absorb 
systemic stress are more likely to experience violence—and less able to extract themselves 
from it or to contain its eﬀ ects. 

Of 17 countries that remained fragile between 1990 and 2008, 14 experienced major civil 
war violence in the same period and 2 experienced minor civil wars, as shown in the ﬁ gure.70 
In other words, nearly every country with prolonged periods of weak institutional capacity 
experienced organized political violence. Of course, this violence is in turn likely to compro-
mise development and further erode institutional capacity (similarly to the “conﬂ ict trap” 
identiﬁ ed by Collier and others (2003)). Even though the CPIA indicators do not include direct 
measurement of political and security institutions and policies, there is a striking correlation 
between “fragility” as deﬁ ned in the CPIA scores, and the incidence of major episodes of orga-
nized violence. By measuring institutional fragility, the CPIA is in eﬀ ect measuring the presence 
or risk of organized violence. 71

Source: Mata and Ziaja 2009. 

Countries that remained fragile were very likely to experience civil war

f

Of 17 countries that 
between 1977 and 1989 and remained fragile until 2009

were fragile five or more years

1 remained fragile with no conflict
2 remained fragile and experienced
minor civil war (battle deaths
exceeded 25 per annum)

14 remained fragile and experienced
major civil war (battle deaths
exceeded 1,000 per annum)

Source: WDR team calculations. 
Note: Throughout this report, major civil war includes conﬂ icts with more than 1,000 battle deaths per 
annum and minor civil war includes conﬂ icts with more than 25 battle deaths per annum. A fragile 
country has a CPIA of less than 3.2. 
*Correlation statistically signiﬁ cant at p < 0.01.

to the buildup of grievances over time—pos-
sibly because corruption and coercion attract 
external  condemnation  and  domestic  pro-
tests. These factors are surely becoming more 
important as the global pace of change quick-

ens,  the  vulnerability  to  external  shocks  in-
creases, and the tolerance of corruption and 
coercion diminishes. 

Institutional economics offers a wide body 
of  theory  and  evidence  on  how  institutions 

88 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

(formal  and  informal  rules)  facilitate  and 
constrain the behavior of economic and po-
litical actors (individuals, groups, and ﬁ rms).72 
In relation to violence, this Report offers three 
key  hypotheses  for  institutions  to  matter  in 
shaping the incentives for violence: 

(cid:129)  Institutional  capacity.  Strong  policing 
and defense capacities give states the power 
to overcome armed threats from rebel or 
organized criminal groups. If an individ-
ual is contemplating political or criminal 
violence, the knowledge that the country’s 
security forces have weak intelligence and 
coercive  capacity  will  make  that  person 
more  likely  to  pursue  violent  options. 
Conversely, if the country’s formal institu-
tions  do  not  deliver  local  justice,  educa-
tion, or employment, an individual has a 
greater incentive to turn toward nonstate 
groups that can deliver, even if the groups 
are violent. Social and family cohesion can 
also  be  a  critical  national  capacity:  if  an 
individual feels no sense of national pride, 
or if the family and community place no 
value on abiding by national laws, there is 
less to constrain that person from taking 
up  arms  against  the  state  or  engaging  in 
criminal activities. But increasing the ca-
pacity  of  the  state  is  fraught  with  risks: 
particularly  when  some  leaders  perceive 
a threat to their own interests from well-
organized  security  forces  and  economic 
institutions,  and  where  citizens  are  frag-
mented and unorganized, unable to insist 
that  economic,  justice,  and  security  ser-
vices be provided equitably to all citizens.

(cid:129)  Inclusion.  Government  capacity  alone  is 
not enough, however: many of the stresses 
described in this chapter relate to the fail-
ure of institutions to make all ethnic, reli-
gious, or social groups feel equally served 
by  the  actions  of  the  state.  If  the  geo-
graphic,  ethnic,  or  religious  community 
an individual belongs to is excluded from 
political  or  economic  opportunities  (for 
example, from taking part in political de-
cision making, civil service appointments, 
education,  health  care,  social  protection, 

access  to  infrastructure,  or  business  op-
portunities), that person will have less to 
lose by resorting to rebellion or crime. Ac-
countable  and  inclusive  political,  social, 
and  economic  institutions  can  mediate 
contests between different classes or eth-
nic,  religious,  or  regional  groups  peace-
fully—ensuring  that  each  party  feels 
 adequately  represented  in  decision  mak-
ing,  that  demands  are  heard,  and  that 
rights are protected. But inclusion is less 
likely for groups that are fragmented and 
unorganized—indeed,  their  very  frag-
mentation  could  explain  the  ease  with 
which the political system abuses them.

(cid:129)  Active  abuse  and  institutional  account-
ability. If a person or a family member is 
tortured  or  arbitrarily  imprisoned  or 
preyed upon by corrupt ofﬁ cials, that per-
son may have little to lose by risking in-
jury  or  further  imprisonment  by  taking 
up a life of crime or rebellion. Account-
able security forces and government agen-
cies  avoid  the  human  rights  abuses  and 
corruption  that  can  fuel  grievances  and 
create incentives for violent opposition.

Societies that rely on elite pacts, coercion, 
and  patronage  to  control  violence  risk  re-
peating  a  vicious  cycle.  Where  agreements 
among elites to end ﬁ ghting do not result in 
a transformation in state-society institutions 
and  better  governance  outcomes,  they  re-
main  vulnerable  to  the  same  stresses  that 
precipitated  ﬁ ghting  in  the  ﬁ rst  place.  In 
these  circumstances,  any  stresses  that  shift 
the balance of power—such as the death of a 
leader, external security threats, or economic 
and  demographic  pressures—risk  further 
violence. At some point this violence will be 
ended through another elite pact, but with-
out  broader  and  deeper  institutional  trans-
formation, the cycle will repeat (ﬁ gure 2.3). 
The vicious cycle can become more difﬁ cult 
to escape over time, as each successive bout 
of violence further weakens institutions and 
destroys  social  capital.  In  countries  where 
children  have  been  brutalized  as  victims  or 
witnesses of violence, or, worse yet, as perpe-

 

Vulnerability to violence 

89

F I G U R E 2.3   The vicious cycle of violence, elite pacts, weak institutions—and 

vulnerability to repeated violence

Weak 

institutions

not transforming

New
pact

New
stresses

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

Source: WDR team.

trators by being coerced to be child combat-
ants, the lasting trauma and lost human and 
social capital become an impediment to fu-
ture social progress.73 

The challenge for these societies is escap-
ing  this  vicious  cycle  of  repeated  violence. 

Historically, large-scale episodes of violence 
have  been  a  feature  of  all  human  societies. 
This cycle is doomed to repeat until societies 
ﬁ nd  collective  institutions  to  mediate  and 
control violence. Escaping this vicious cycle 
is the focus of the rest of this Report.

90 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 2  Nepal: Stresses, institutions, violence, and legitimacy

Chapter 2 argued that organized violence is likely to occur 

when internal and external stresses are not countered by 
 capable,  legitimate  institutions.  Despite  an  evolution  in  the 
nature  of  violence  and  the  intensity  and  variety  of  stresses 

TA B L E 1   Interlinked stresses in Nepal

faced,  the  weaknesses  and  exclusion  in  Nepal’s  institutions 
leave  the  country  continually  vulnerable  to  renewed  risk  of 
conﬂ ict, as shown in table 1.

Stresses

Security

Internal

External

•  Mistrust of security forces
•  Culture of impunity 
• 
• 

Legacy of violence and trauma
Lack of legitimate security presence and public 
security crisis

•  Cross-border criminality in the Tarai 

region

•  Refugees 

Economic

Low incomes, joblessness
Electricity, food, and fuel shortages

• 
• 
•  Corruption and extortion

Floods and other natural disasters

• 
•  Price shocks
• 

Illegal trade in natural resources

Political

• 
Ethnic, gender, caste-based, regional exclusion
•  Discrimination in access to opportunity and in 

•  Regional or international 

involvement in internal aﬀ airs

representation in institutions

•  Human rights abuses

Sources: Thapa 2010; Sharma 2008; Jha 2010. 

Political stresses and the continuation 
of elite politics

Feudalism is a system of governance designed to restrict power 
and wealth to a very small minority. Conﬂ ict in Nepal is rooted 
in struggles to depart from the country’s feudal past and move 
to a more inclusive and open society. Nepal is home to more 
than 100 ethnic groups, speaking 92 languages, and a caste sys-
tem dictating group-based opportunity and achievement. The 
groups most marginalized constitute the majority of Nepal’s 
population—nearly 70 percent.74 

Nepal’s  recent  history  can  be  described  as  a  protracted 
struggle  between  the  country’s  elites  and  the  groups,  classes, 
and ethnicities that believe they have been excluded from the 
national patrimony and institutions. The modern era in Nepal 
began in 1950, with the overthrow of the autocratic Rana re-
gime by a coalition of political parties supported by newly in-
dependent India. This action restored the authority of the Nep-
alese monarchy within a constitutional framework, and ushered 
in a period of democratic politics. The distribution of power 
between Parliament and the Palace remained contested, how-
ever, and in 1960, King Mahendra dismissed the parliament, 
assumed full executive powers, and instituted the “party-less” 
Panchayat  system.  Nepali  nationalism  was  modeled  after  the 

ruling elite—one religion (Hinduism), one language (Nepali), 
and the authoritarian Panchayat system kept dissent in check. 
This political settlement withstood pressures for democra-
tization until 1990. In that year, the ﬁ rst Jana Andolan (People’s 
Movement), led by a coalition of leftist and democratic parties 
and endorsed by the international community, forced King Bi-
rendra to reinstitute open national elections and to accept a 
severe curtailment of royal power. A series of governments led 
by the Congress Party and coalitions of leftist parties followed, 
all committed to modernization, equitable economic growth, 
and broader social justice. Yet the political parties that came to 
power in the wake of this movement failed to sustain public 
conﬁ dence—instead relying on a small group of political party 
elites to draft the new constitution and retain the preeminence 
of the Hindu religion and an army under the continued con-
trol of the king (see table 2).

As  the  high  expectations  for  meaningful  change  turned 
to  disenchantment,  the  Communist  Party  of  Nepal  Maoist75 
launched its People’s War in February 1996 to bring about the 
country’s “social and economic transformation.”  The Maoists 
drew their supporters from marginalized groups in the coun-
tryside, long left out of Nepal’s political structures and lacking 
socioeconomic  opportunity.  In  2006,  the  Maoist  movement 
joined with political parties to overthrow the king and create a 

 

Vulnerability to violence 

91

TA B L E 2   Offi  cer-level entry into Nepal government 
service by caste/ethnic group (percentages)

Security stresses and weaknesses in security 
and justice institutions

Caste/ethnicity

1984–85

1988–89

1992–93

1996–97

Bahun-Chhetri

Newar

Non-Newar Janajati a

Madhesi

Muslim

Dalit

 69.3

 18.6

 3.0

 8.5

 0.6

 0

 69.9

 18.8

 1.6

 9.0

 0.2

 0.5

Source: Thapa 2010. 
a.  Pre-Hindu conquest ethnic groupings.

 80.5

 10.7

 2.5

 5.3

 0.6

 0.4

 83.1

 9.4

 1.7

 5.5

 0.2

 0.1

“New  Nepal.” With  the  signing  of  the  Comprehensive  Peace 
Agreement  in  November  2006,  the  Maoists  and  the  political 
parties committed themselves to a democratic transition and 
the reform of Nepal’s traditional structures. Yet, in the years 
since the signing, the elected Constituent Assembly made little 
progress, and minority groups became increasingly frustrated 
with the continuation of Kathmandu’s elite-driven politics. 

In 2007, Madhesi groups across the southern Tarai belt of 
Nepal began calling for regional autonomy through a federal 
Nepal, a notion that has since then gained traction. But ques-
tions remain about the impact of ethnic federalism on national 
unity, minority protection, and administrative functioning.

The Maoist movement raised a new consciousness in Nepal. 
But  the  movement’s  tactics—coercion,  intimidation,  extor-
tion—left Nepali society deeply bruised. Across the country-
side,  Maoists  set  up  parallel  security  and  judicial  structures, 
such as people’s courts and the People’s Liberation Army. The 
failure to address the crimes and human rights abuses by both 
sides during Nepal’s 10-year civil war (1996–2006) has resulted 
in citizen distrust of the police, armed police, and army by sig-
niﬁ cant groups in society, compounded by a lack of represen-
tation  of  marginalized  groups  in  leadership  positions  in  the 
security forces. Nepal’s political establishment has also had to 
manage its external relations very delicately, given its strategic 
location. The multitude of actors, competing interests, and de-
mands, as well as the long, porous borders between Nepal and 
its neighbors, add to the complexity. 

Against this backdrop, insecurity in Nepal has evolved from 
a Maoist insurgency to opportunistic violence and criminality. 
This sense of lawlessness is most clearly manifest in the south-
ern Tarai region, where the government has identiﬁ ed more 
than 100 violent groups and criminal gangs (the map shows 
how  the  epicenter  of  violence  shifted  from  the  middle  hills 
during the Maoist insurgency to criminality in the southern 
Tarai).

M A P A  The shifting epicenter of political violence in Nepal 

a.  Violent events, 1996–99           

  b.  Violent events, 2006–07

CHINA

Dandeldhura

Jumla

Dhangarhi

Sallyan

Nepalganj

Baglung

Pokhara

Percentage of the
population living
below poverty line:

0–10%
10–20%
20–50%
> 50%

CHINA

Dandeldhura

Jumla

Dhangarhi

Sallyan

Nepalganj

Baglung

Pokhara

Percentage of the
population living
below poverty line

0–10%
10–20%
20–50%
> 50%

Bhairawa

Bhimphedi

KATHMANDU

Bhairawa

Bhimphedi

KATHMANDU

ACLED Data, 1996–1999

INDIA

ACLED Data, 2006–2007

INDIA

Ramechhap

Ilam

Rajbiraj

Biratnagar

IBRD 38417   March 2011

Ramechhap

Ilam

Rajbiraj

Biratnagar

IBRD 38418   March 2011

Source: Raleigh and others 2010. 
Note: ACLED = Armed Conﬂ ict Location and Event Database.

92 
92 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 2  Nepal: Stresses, institutions, violence, and legitimacy (continued)

Economic hardship and exclusion

Nepal remains the poorest country in South Asia, with the 
exception of Afghanistan. In the mid-1990s, after decades of 
“development,”  42  percent  of  Nepal’s  population  still  lived 
below the internationally established absolute poverty line. 
But this ﬁ gure declined to 31 percent by 2003–04. The main 
driver:  remittances  from  young  men  working  in  the  Gulf, 
India, and Malaysia, which account for about a half of Ne-
pal’s  strong  recent  GNI  growth  (5.3  percent  in  ﬁ scal  year 
2008 and 4.7 percent in ﬁ scal year 2009). Ironically, this in-
crease was spurred in part by ﬂ ight from the violence of the 
civil war.

More  recently,  political  insecurity  and  extortion  have 
caused disinvestment in the Tarai and investor hesitancy else-

where. Kathmandu, with an inﬂ ux of rural migrants and rising 
energy demands, also has frequent rolling blackouts, disrupt-
ing economic activity. In 2008, the government had to declare 
a  nationwide  power  crisis,  with  blackouts  lasting  up  to  16 
hours a day.76

Continuing vulnerability to violence

Despite  some  progress  in  institutional  development  and 
peacebuilding, Nepal remains vulnerable to different mani-
festations  of  violence  and  fragility.  Table  1.1  in  chapter  1 
showed  how  multiple  forms  of  violence  co-exist  in  many 
fragile states. Reproducing it for Nepal reveals the following 
(table 3).

TA B L E 3   Nepal’s multiple forms of violence, 1960–present

Localized criminal or 
gang-related violence

Gang-based extortion, 
theft, smuggling in 
Tarai, major increase in 
levels of violence after 
2006 

Transnational crime 
or traﬃ  cking with 
accompanying violence

Local conﬂ icts with 
transnational ideological 
connections

Human traﬃ  cking 
(prostitution) from the 1960s

Heroin transshipment from 
the 1960s

Illegal trade in timber, opium 
cultivation post-2006

Revolutionary left cross-
fertilization with ”Maoists” 
from the 1960s

Localized or subnational 
intergroup violence

“Repressed” intergroup 
conﬂ icts over land, access to 
political power 

Caste and ethnic exclusion 
underpinning People’s War 
(civil war) of 1996–2006
Regionalism and Tarai 
Andolan of 2007

“Conventional” political 
violence (contests for state 
power or for autonomy or 
independence)

Clandestine opposition to the 
Panchayat regime; reactive 
imprisonment, denial of 
human and political rights
Jana Andolan I 1990
People’s War of 1996–2006
Jana Andolan II 2006
Party-related extortion, 
intimidation post-2006 
(activities of the Young 
Communist League)

Source: Compiled by the WDR team.

Exiting the vicious cycle

Following the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, a broad-based 
constitutional assembly was created, which has been trying to 
create a new settlement that will divide political and economic 
power more equitably between Nepal’s many ethnic and caste 
groups. This process represents a major attempt to broaden the 
nature  of  Nepal’s  polity  and  move  it  beyond  the  high-caste 

Sources: Thapa 2010; Sharma 2008; Jha 2010. 

elite  competition  that  has  dominated  the  country’s  history. 
While  there  has  been  undeniable  progress  from  a  series  of 
more-or-less  exclusive  elite  pacts  toward  a  more  permeable 
and inclusive approach to statehood, curtailing today’s lawless-
ness and preventing further episodes of political violence re-
quires the creation of broader based coalitions, transformation 
of national institutions, and a process that delivers improved 
political, security, and economic outcomes to all citizens.

 

Notes

Vulnerability to violence 

93

1.    Ballentine and Nitzschke 2006; Murshed and Tadjoeddin 2007.
2.    In addition, for example, there are structural factors that increase conﬂ ict risk, which include features 
of the physical terrain that make rebellion easier. These features do not cause war in the common 
sense of that word, but simply make it more possible. Mountainous terrain has been shown to in-
crease risks by increasing the feasibility of rebellion. See Buhaug and Gleditsch 2008; Gleditsch and 
Ward 2000; Salehyan and Gleditsch 2006. See also Murdoch and Sandler 2004. On terrain and neigh-
borhood effects, see Fearon 2010a; Fearon and Laitin 2003; Goldstone and others 2010. On the effects 
of neighborhood on civil wars, see Hegre and Sambanis 2006; Gleditsch 2007. 

3.    See Dahlberg and Krug 2002.
4.    See Strassler 1996; Herz 1950; Jervis 1978.
5.    Posen 1993; Snyder and Jervis 1999; Walter 1999; de Figueiredo and Weingast 1999. 
6.    Stedman 1996; Jones 1999; Posen 1993. 
7.    Brown 1996; Stedman 1996; Fearon and Laitin 2003; Horowitz 2000. On the shifting nature of na-

tional identity, see Laitin 1998.

8.    Kumar and Skaperdas 2009.
9.    Much of this response has taken the form of critical discussion; see, for example, Nathan 2005. A 
particularly useful “study of studies” is Sambanis 2004, which ﬁ nds that GDP per capita and political 
instability are the only variables that consistently predict civil war onset. Researchers looking at natu-
ral resources have found mixed results—oil being most consistently associated with civil war out-
break. Recent work by Satyanath, Miguel, and Sergenti 2004 tied rainfall and agricultural shocks to 
the onset of civil war, while Besley and Persson 2009 explore the effect of international price shocks 
on the onset of conﬂ ict. Arnson and Zartman 2005 cover much of the core arguments in the greed 
versus grievance debate.

10.    On horizontal inequality, see Stewart 2005; Østby 2008; and Stewart 2010. On polarization, see Este-

ban and Ray 2008; Montalvo and Reynal-Querol 2005. 

11.    Thinking on this topic can be traced back to Gellner 1983; recent responses to the debate include Toft 

2003; Laitin 2007. 

12.    Brückner and Ciccone 2010 are also noteworthy in highlighting that institutions help societies to 

weather natural resource price shocks to avoid violence.
13.   Clark and Kaufman 2011; IRIN 2010; Gettleman 2009.
14.   Rubin 2002; Straus 2010.
15.   See, for example, Menkhaus 2007; Lockhart and Glencorse 2010.
16.   Buhaug and Gleditsch 2008; Gleditsch and Ward 2000; Salehyan and Gleditsch 2006. See also Mur-

doch and Sandler 2004; Fearon 2010a; Hegre and Sambanis 2006; Gleditsch 2007. 

17.   The presence of weak neighbors, rival neighbors, and refugee diasporas can play a crucial role in the 
emergence of transnational rebel (TNR) organizations, bargaining failure, and civil conﬂ ict; see Sale-
hyan 2007. 

18.   See Becker 1968.
19.   See Collier and Sambanis 2005, 193. Also see Garang 1987. 
20.   See Collier and others 2003.
21.   Fearon 2010a.
22.  Fearon 2010a.
23.   Keefer 2008; Fearon 2010a.
 24.   World Bank 2006f, 10.
25.   Narayan and Petesch 2010. 
26.   Sirleaf 2007a, 4.
27.   Labor market data in developing countries are irregular and unreliable. For example, very few Sub-
Saharan African countries have carried out labor force surveys. Population censuses (an important 
source for claims about labor force participation and unemployment rates) are commonly out of 
date, and often unreliable even when recent. Further, wage employment in agriculture in poor coun-
tries is “invisible” in most conventional databases. See Cramer 2010. 

28.   Macmillan and Gartner 1999; Panda and Agarwal 2005; Jeyaseelan and others 2007; Krishnan and 

others 2010; Silberschmidt 1999, 2001; see Cramer 2010.

29.   This is consistent with Relative Deprivation theory; see also Solow 1990; Argandoña 2001.
30.   See Loayza, Fajnzylber, and Lederman 2002a, 2002b; Messner, Raffalovich, and Shrock 2002. 
31.   Fearon and Laitin 2003; Collier and Hoefﬂ er 2002, 2004; Anyanwu 2004.

94 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

32.   Berman and others 2009, 1.
33.   Moser 2009, 240.
34.   Gutiérrez-Sanín 2008, 22.
35.   World Bank 2010m; Willmann 2010.
36.   Collier and Hoefﬂ er 1998, 2002; Anyanwu 2004; Fearon and Laitin 2003; de Soysa 2002; Bannon and 

Collier 2003; McNeish 2010.

37.   Ross 2003.
38.   See Keefer, forthcoming. 
39.   Fearon  2005  argues  that  oil  predicts  civil  war  risk  not  because  of  its  role  as  a  source  of  start-up 
 ﬁ nance for rebels but, instead, because producers demonstrate relatively low state capabilities given 
the level of per capita income.

40.   Satyanath, Miguel, and Sergenti 2004.
41.   Brinkman and Hendrix 2010.
42.   See Besley and Persson 2010. 
43.   Furthermore,  there  is  a  complex  relationship  between  motivations  for  and  incidence  of 

violence, as noted in Fearon and Laitin 2003.

44.   Cederman, Wimmer, and Min 2010; Goldstone and others 2010.
45.   These results are from the second comparison study collected by Henrich and others 2010. 
46.   The difﬁ culty of studying this phenomenon is compounded by the fact that our understanding of 
and data sets on identity are weak; as Hegre and Sambanis have shown, slight changes in how differ-
ent features of ethnicity—language groupings, afﬁ liation measures, and so on—are operationalized 
in studies have major effects on ﬁ ndings about causality and the direction of causality (Hegre and 
Sambanis 2006). On how identity afﬁ liations form, see Fearon 2006; Berman and Iannaccone 2006.
47.   See Østby 2008 who deﬁ nes groups alternatively by ethnicity, religion, and region, and ﬁ nds a sig-
niﬁ cant  relation  between  horizontal  inequalities  (HIs)  and  the  onset  of  violent  conﬂ ict  for  each 
deﬁ nition. Economic HIs are measured by average household assets and  social HIs by average years 
of education. The effect of HIs is quite high: the probability of conﬂ ict increases threefold when 
comparing the expected conﬂ ict onset when all variables have average values, compared to a situa-
tion where the extent of horizontal inequality of assets among ethnic groups is at the 95th percentile. 
In the case of inter-regional HIs, the probability of conﬂ ict increases 2.5 times as HIs rise from the 
mean value to the 95th percentile value. See also Stewart 2010.

48.   Stewart 2010.
49.   Gurr 1968; Herbst 2000; Stewart 2010; Strom and MacDonald 2007.
50.   The  data  on  political  prisoners  and  extra-judicial  killings  were  obtained  from  the  Cigna relli  and 
Richards Human Rights data set (Cingranelli and Richards 2010). Each indicator is coded from 0 to 
2, with 0 denoting large/signiﬁ cant degrees of human rights abuses and 2 denoting no abuses. 

51.  Walter 2010, 21.
52.   See Gurr 1968; Herbst 2000; Stewart 2010; Strom and MacDonald 2007; Brown 1996; Stedman 1996. 
On recent quantitative literature on this topic, see Bhavnani and Miodownik 2009. See also Abbink 
and Herr mann 2009; Kalyvas 2006; Sambanis 2001.

53.  Langer 2005; Stewart 2010.
54.  De Silva 2005. 
55.   Barron and others 2010.
56.   Qualitative and case study literature as well as WDR input from national ofﬁ cials and leaders consis-
tently highlight political injustice, social exclusion, and inequity between social groups as key corre-
lates of conﬂ ict. Among the many qualitative and case-based studies, see, for example, Heraclides 
1990; Murshed and Gates 2006; Salehyan and Gleditsch 2006. On measurement difﬁ culties, see Laitin 
2000; Cramer 2002; Posner 2004.

57.   See Loayza, Fajnzylber, and Lederman 2002a, 2002b; Messner, Raffalovich, and Shrock 2002. 
58.   Pape 2003; Krueger and Laitin 2008; Abadie 2006. 
59.   Stern 2003.
60.   Atran 2003; Berrebi 2007. 
61.   Krueger and Maleckova 2003; Hassan 2001; Kimhi and Even 2004. 
62.   Smith 2004; Wright-Neville 2004. 
63.   World Bank and ADB 2010; also WDR team consultations with government ofﬁ cials and representa-
tives from donor community, multilateral organizations, and civil society in Pakistan, 2010. See also 
Abbas 2008, 2010.

64.   North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009; Fearon and Laitin 2003; Goldstone and others 2010.

 

Vulnerability to violence 

95

65.   See Fearon 2010a; Walter 2010; Hoefﬂ er, von Billerbeck, and Ijaz 2010. A range of indicators can be 
used to measure governance and institutional capacity. The Users’ Guide on Measuring Fragility pro-
vides an excellent contemporary stocktaking of the literature and concepts (Mata and Ziaja 2009). 
The World Bank Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) scores are prepared internally 
and are publicly available for International Development Association (IDA) countries for the years 
2005 to present. The World Bank has recently  undertaken an annual harmonizing exercise to align 
the deﬁ nitions of fragility with regional development banks (the Asian Development Bank and the 
African Development Bank). Other well-known measures of governance and quality of  institutions 
include the Worldwide Governance Indicators measures of government and the International Coun-
try Risk Guide (ICRG) measures compiled by the PRS Group. The Worldwide Governance Indica-
tors are an index comprising multiple sources, whereas the ICRG measures are  expert assessments on 
multiple dimensions of political, economic, and ﬁ nancial risk. It locates three common attributes of 
states, “legitimacy, authority, and effectiveness,” among a variety of indexes and deﬁ nitions of fragil-
ity and compares the results across indices. See Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi 2010b. There is a 
blurred line in the indicators between the measurement of governance outcomes (actual levels of 
representation and participation, accountability for decisions and for illegal actions, and corruption 
and human rights abuses) and institutional characteristics (whether there are systems and capacities 
that regulate state-society relations within the rule of law, provide for prosecution of abuses, and so 
forth). Most governance indicators actually measure both: whether a system is in place (for example, 
a constitution or anti-corruption law, government policy on equitable service provision) as well as 
some measurement, often imperfect, of whether these systems deliver good governance outcomes in 
practice  (low  corruption  levels,  free  and  fair  elections,  avoidance  of  impunity  for  human  rights 
abuses, and so on).

66.   See Stedman 1996; Brown 1996; Posen 1993; Snyder 2000; Goldstone and Ulfelder 2004; Goldstone 

and others 2010; Besley and Persson 2009, 2010.

67.   State legitimacy is tied to agreed rules and  processes that promote accountability to its citizens, whether 
through participation or through patronage. Patronage is particularly pervasive in fragile situations 
where state capacity is weak; yet, it can also weaken state legitimacy if seen as unfair and reinforcing 
horizontal inequalities (OECD 2010g, 2011). Shared beliefs are essential to link the state and its society 
in constructive ways (Bellina and others 2009); for example, elections only become more than a formal 
tool to collect opinion when there is a common and entrenched belief that they express the “will of the 
people.” Together with  collective identities and religion, “tradition” is a very important way to “ground” 
state legitimacy (Clements 2010). These sources of legitimacy do not exist in isolation: improving 
service delivery does not necessarily increase state legitimacy if the other elements are missing. State 
legitimacy results from a combination of these sources and may take various forms, depending on 
context.

68.   The development community’s focus on fragility is related to pioneering work undertaken by Paul 
Collier and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala under the Low Income Countries Under Stress initiative. The pol-
icy implications of this original work were extensively elaborated by INCAF, an organization within 
the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of OECD, as well as by the UN and various bilaterals, 
most notably the U.K.’s DFID (Department for International Development). INCAF has produced 
innovative thinking on security system reform, service delivery in fragile situations, the legitimacy of 
the state, and the role of donors. The United Nations identiﬁ ed the need for institution-building for 
a more secure and developed world at an early stage, particularly in the ﬁ elds of conﬂ ict prevention 
and  peacebuilding.  New  thinking  on  fragility  and  state-building  has  received  signiﬁ cant  support 
from research funded by DFID over the past 10 years; for a synthesis, see Garassi 2010. 

69.  North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009.
70.   The current CPIA cutoff was normalized by year to account for the changing methodology in CPIA 

over time.

71.   For further discussion on measurements of governance, institutions, and fragility, see Mata and Ziaja 

2009.

72.   See North 1990; Williamson 1985; Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi 2004. 
73.   Maynard 1997. 
74.   The high-class group of Bahun-Chhetri constitutes 28 percent of Nepal’s population. 
75.   The Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) was renamed Uniﬁ ed Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), 
or UCPN (Maoist), following its merger in January 2009 with the Communist Party of Nepal–Unity 
Centre (Masal).

76.   Sharma 2008.

PART 2

Lessons from 
National and 
International Responses

T his chapter sets out the Report’s framework for how countries 

escape the vicious cycle of fragility and move toward a virtu-
ous cycle of conﬁ dence-building and institutional transfor-

mation, especially in the areas of citizen security, justice, and jobs. 
The framework is presented as an expanding spiral because these 
processes repeat over time as countries enter and exit multiple 
transition moments. Even as one set of immediate priorities is 
resolved, other risks emerge and require a repeated cycle of action 
to bolster institutional resilience. This process takes at least a 
generation. Societies undertaking this endeavor face a legacy of 
pervasive and enduring mistrust, which makes collective action to 
address challenges or provide public goods so diﬃ  cult. Outsiders 
cannot restore conﬁ dence and transform institutions for countries 
because these processes are domestic and must be nationally led. 
But to help countries restore peace and reduce regional and global 
instability, international actors can provide external support and 
incentives and help reduce external stresses. 

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

R

E

S

T

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT

UTIONS 

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

CHAPTER3

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

From violence to resilience: 
Restoring conﬁ dence and 
transforming institutions 

Why transforming institutions 
is so difficult

Changes  in  power  relations  and 

contests around them are a con-
stant feature of all societies. There 
is nothing unusual about intense 
social confrontation during the transforma-
tion of institutions, which normally involves 
changes  in  the  distribution  of  power  and 
wealth.  Such  contests  do  not  end  at  some 
point  in  a  society’s  development.  U.S.  gov-
ernment  support  for  private  banks  and 
greater state involvement in health care pro-
vision have stirred ﬁ erce controversy, as have 
the  recent  transformations  in  public  sector 
functions caused by the impact of the ﬁ nan-
cial crisis in Europe. In other words, change is 
contested  and  painful  in  all  circumstances. 
But some societies can accomplish change in 
the national interest, even when this involves 
temporary losses for some groups. Other so-
cieties ﬁ nd this more difﬁ cult. 

What makes institutional transformation 
particularly difﬁ cult for states affected by vi-
olence? Many countries that recovered from 
war in the mid-20th century, including most 
of Europe and Japan, transformed their insti-
tutions quickly and smoothly. But they had a 
long  history  of  national  institutional  devel-
opment and high levels of physical and hu-
man capital—and they had faced an external 

war,  not  internal  violence.  Today’s  middle- 
and  low-income  countries  affected  by  in-
ternal  violence  face  greater  challenges—for 
three key reasons. First, launching an initial 
agreement  on  change  is  hard  because  elites 
do not trust each other and few people trust 
the state. Second, maintaining an agreement 
is  difﬁ cult  because  institutional  change  can 
increase  the  risks  of  violence  in  the  short 
term, due to political backlash from groups 
that lose power or economic beneﬁ ts. Third, 
countries  do  not  exist  in  isolation:  during 
fragile  periods  of  institutional  transforma-
tion, they may face external security threats 
or  economic  shocks  that  can  overwhelm 
progress.  These  challenges  are  difﬁ cult  to 
overcome  when  physical,  institutional,  and 
human capital is relatively low.

The challenge of low trust and rising 
expectations 

Launching an initial transition in fragile sit-
uations is difﬁ cult because of low trust and 
low  capacity  to  deliver  on  promises.1  Mis-
trust  is  much  more  pervasive  in  violence-
affected countries than in those with a long 
history of a reasonably stable social compact 
between state and citizen. This makes many 
forms  of  cooperation  difﬁ cult,  including 
measures  to  address  the  stresses  triggering 
violence  in  the  ﬁ rst  place.  When  there  is 

100 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 3.1  Unrealistic expectations in fragile states are hurdles to progress 

The impact of a legacy of mistrust in violence-affected countries 
A legacy of mistrust can mean that key actors do not respond as hoped to new political signals or new public programs. Consider 
Afghanistan, where citizens need to calculate the risks of siding either with the Taliban or with the government and NATO (North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization)—or with neither. 

In making these decisions, individuals consider what they think others are likely to do. The thinking process might go like this: “The 
consequences of my decision to provide the authorities with information on the Taliban depend on what others around me are going 
to do. If my neighbors won’t cooperate, the authorities are going to lose control, and I’d be crazy to help them. So, even though I do 
not support the Taliban, I’m better oﬀ  helping them.” The same could apply to providing information on drug traﬃ  ckers.2 

All institutional change requires the coordinated actions of many people. That is why small events that change the beliefs about 

what others will do can evoke big changes in the choices each individual makes. A single, but widely publicized, government humilia-
tion in combat operations, for example, can translate into a major loss of popular support. A single, but widely publicized, incident of 
corruption can evoke big changes in expectations and in political and economic behavior.

Expectations and trust in fragile states and in non-fragile states
Analysis of 280 country surveys in Latin America and Africa shows a signiﬁ cant diﬀ erence in citizen trust in fragile and non-fragile 
states. The results reveal that countries that are not fragile or aﬀ ected by conﬂ ict have signiﬁ cantly higher levels of trust in the police, 
the justice system, and the parliament. This is consistent with recent research that explores cross-country diﬀ erences in trusting neigh-
bors and governments.

In simple terms, people’s expectations are often wrong about the future in fragile states. A simple cross-country regression using 
data on expectations of economic improvements and actual economic growth suggests that, in non-fragile states, peoples’ expecta-
tions of the direction the economy will take in the next 12 months has a signiﬁ cant correlation with actual outcomes.3 But in fragile 
states, there is no such correlation: responses to the survey question, “will economic prospects improve in the next 12 months?” bear 
no relationship to what subsequently happens in the economy. This is important, because all rational expectations theory in econom-
ics and political science—and the policy decisions linked to it—assume that people have a reasonably informed ability to make judg-
ments about the future. 

The low trust in government institutions in fragile and conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected countries poses a formidable constraint to leaders trying to 

launch positive change. To further complicate the situation, operational experience and input from national policymakers highlight a 
second, quite diﬀ erent version of the expectations problem, that is, the excessively high popular expectations that arise in moments of 
political hope and transition. Governments repeatedly encounter this: signing a peace agreement or a donor pledge conference can 
create a wave of enthusiasm and the expectation that rapid change will follow. When the bubble bursts, as it usually does, govern-
ments can experience a rapid loss of credibility.

If policy makers understand these dynamics, they can harness public enthusiasm for change to their advantage by crafting signals 
in ways that conform to expectations (chapter 4). Where mistrust is high, they have to take actions that send very strong signals—sig-
nals that are self-evidently costly, such as integrating former rebels into the national army structure, as in Burundi, or guaranteeing 
long-term employment to former adversaries, as in South Africa through the “sunset clause” oﬀ ered to white civil servants. They also 
have to ﬁ nd ways to make promises binding, often using third parties as guarantors.

Sources: Braithwaite and Levi 1998; Hoﬀ  and Stiglitz 2004a, 2004b, 2008; Schelling 1971, 1978; Axelrod 1984; Nunn 2008; Nunn and Wantchekon, 
forthcoming.
Note: Diﬀ erences in trust and expectations between fragile and non-fragile states reported here were statistically signiﬁ cant at the 5 percent 
level. These diﬀ erences were signiﬁ cant whether non-fragile was deﬁ ned as CPIA (Country Policy and Institutional Assessment) greater than 3.2 
or CPIA greater than 3.8.

no convincing track record of progress and 
 information  is  poor,  individuals  can  easily 
have  expectations  that  are  either  too  low 
(they are unresponsive to positive signals of 
change)—or too high (they hold unrealistic 
expectations  and  are  easily  disappointed) 
(see box 3.1).

Low institutional capacity to deliver fur-
ther  reduces  trust.  Low-trust  environments 

require strong signals of real change. Yet the 
capacity to deliver change is weak in most so-
cieties that score low on governance indica-
tors.4 A further reason for failure in reform is 
the “premature load-bearing” of institutions: 
too  many  demands  and  expectations  are 
placed on them in a short period. When they 
do  not  deliver,  there  is  a  loss  of  conﬁ dence 
and legitimacy (see box 3.2).

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

101

The  process  of  reform  itself  may  carry 
short-term  security  risks.  Research  suggests 
that  a  shift  from  authoritarian  rule  toward 
democracy  is  associated  with  a  higher  risk 
of civil war and an increase in criminal vio-
lence.5 Taking on too many reforms too fast—
such as decentralizing services and combating 
insurgents  or  trafﬁ ckers—can  risk  backlash 
and institutional loss of credibility. Rapid re-
forms make it difﬁ cult for actors in the post-
conﬂ ict  society  to  make  credible  commit-
ments with each other, since they do not know 
how  the  reforms  will  affect  the “balance  of 
power.” Elections, often seen as “winner takes 
all” events in fragile states, can evoke powerful 
reactions from those who lose.6 And if disad-
vantaged  groups  or  regions  are  empowered 
by reform, existing power-holders must lose 
some power as a result. Economic restructur-
ing  changes  the  balance  of  economic  access 
and opportunity. Anti-corruption efforts at-
tack  entrenched  interests,  sometimes  very 
powerful ones. The point here is not that it is 
wrong to attempt such reform: instead it is to 
be aware of the risks—and to adapt the de-
sign of reforms accordingly, to ensure that the 
state can deliver on promises.7

A history of recent violence sharpens this 
dilemma. In societies that lack effective secu-
rity and rule of law, potential reformers may 
well perceive that reforms will put their lives 
at risk and cause them to postpone or avoid 
change.  In  the  1983–93  “narco-terrorist” 
period  in  Colombia,  the  Cali  and  Medellín 
drug  cartels  ordered  an  estimated  3,500  as-
sassinations of presidential candidates, poli-
ticians, judicial ofﬁ cers, and government of-
ﬁ cials seen to oppose them.8 For those who 
need protection, legacies of violence can un-
dermine their belief in the efﬁ cacy of the state 
and weaken their willingness to support re-
form.  For  those  considering  violence,  the 
possibility  of  impunity  can  reinforce  their 
willingness  to  use  violent  means.9 A  potent 
illustration  of  how  reforms  can  evoke  vio-
lence  is  the  transitional  experience  of  the 
 former Soviet Union, where homicide rates 
soared as the state undertook wide-ranging 
reforms (see box 3.3).

BOX 3.2  Premature load-bearing

Public policy (or program) implementation involves agents taking action with a 
particular set of standards. Tax implementation, for example, involves the collec-
tion of taxes (sales, income, dutiable import, property valuation, and so on) 
according to rules for assessing the amount due. Procurement involves assessing 
bids according to stipulated procedures, followed by contract awards. Premature 
load-bearing can occur during a reform process when there is a large divergence 
between what is in the agents’ best interest and what they are supposed to do. 

For example, in implementing a revised customs code, if the tariﬀ  is very 
high, the importer may oﬀ er the customs oﬃ  cer a side payment to avoid (or 
reduce) what is owed. Higher tariﬀ s entail greater pressure on the system: but so 
do complex tariﬀ  codes with exemptions based on intended use. In Kenya and 
Pakistan the collected tariﬀ  rate increased with the oﬃ  cial tariﬀ  (not one for one, 
but it did increase) up to around 60 percent, after which the collected rate 
stopped increasing. After that point, further increases in the tariﬀ  just increased 
the discrepancy between the oﬃ  cial rate and the collected rate. As the tariﬀ  rate 
increases, the amount importers would pay to evade the tariﬀ  increases too, so 
the temptation for customs oﬃ  cers to deviate also increases. In other words, 
complexity and its ambiguity make collusion with importers easier. In this case a 
low and uniform tax would create less organizational stress. 

These same considerations apply across the range of state activities, from 

policing to justice and to public ﬁ nancial management and education. Diﬀ erent 
tasks create diﬀ erent organizational load-bearing pressures and diﬀ erent 
inducements to deviate from organizational standards. When those pressures 
overwhelm capacity and incentives are not aligned, systems fail. 

Systems often fail when stress is placed on individual components. Pressure 
can sometimes cause a nonlinear degradation in performance. In many organi-
zational situations where one agent’s performance depends on many other 
agents around them, modest amounts of stress can bring about total collapse. 
An example is the Chad College, established to enhance government account-
ability in the use of proceeds from newly discovered oil. The mechanism relied 
heavily on local civil society to secure, evaluate, and provide opinions on gov-
ernment funding allocations out of the oil revenues—a formula that works well 
in environments where civil society has high capacity, and where a tradition of 
government openness and accountability to citizens has been established. 
Under stress, however, the civil society groups could not hold government to 
account, and the mechanism collapsed.

Sources: Pritchett and de Weijer 2010; Kaplan 2008; Lund 2010. 

The challenge of vulnerability to 
external stress

Countries with weak institutions are dispro-
portionately  vulnerable  to  external  shocks. 
Severe  external  shocks  can  overwhelm  even 
fairly  strong  institutions:  witness  the  incipi-
ent social unrest in 2010 in many parts of Eu-
rope as a result of austerity measures to con-
tain the global ﬁ nancial crisis, or the  assaults 
on  governance  from  shifting  patterns  in 
global drug trafﬁ cking. When institutions are 
both well-developed and reasonably static—

102 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 3.3  Violence can increase during fast institutional transformations
The late 1980s witnessed major economic reform in the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev’s glasnost 
and perestroika initiatives. Among the consequences were severe unemployment, the virtual collapse of a 
previously comprehensive social welfare regime, and a sharp contraction of many public services. This 
was followed by the breakup of the Soviet Union into independent republics and the introduction of 
 multiparty politics. A rise in homicides accompanied this period of turbulence, peaking in 1993 at 18 
per 100,000 population and again in 2001 at 20 per 100,000 (see ﬁ gure). With reforms beginning to pay 
dividends by the 2000s, social instability subsided and homicides began to fall.

Homicides in turbulent times: The Soviet Union

Homicide rates increased in Russia following the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the rapid reforms 
during the 1990s. This phenomenon was not unique to Russia: nearly every former Soviet country had 
homicides increase in the early 1990s. 

a.  Homicide rates in Russia, 1986–2008 

)

l

 

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p

,

i

(
 
s
e
d
c
m
o
H

i

25

20

15

10

5

0

1986

1987

1988

1989

1992

1991

1990
1993
Period of reform

1994

1995

1996

1998

1999

1997
2006
Lowest smoothed curved for homicides

2003

2005

2004

2002

2000

2001

2007

2008

b.  Homicide rates in former Soviet republics, 1990–2000

)

l

 

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p

,

i

(
 
s
e
d
c
m
o
H

i

25

20

15

10

5

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Estonia
Georgia
Kazakhstan

Kyrgyz Republic
Lithuania
Latvia
Moldova
TajikTT
istan
Turkmenistan

Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Average for all
former Soviet republics
(excludes Russia)

ff

Most former Soviet republics experienced a spike in homicides following the dissolution of the Soviet 
Union, with notable peaks in Estonia (20 in 1994), Georgia (17 in 1993), Kazakhstan (17 in 1996), and Tajiki-
stan (21 in 1993). In every country except Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, homicides increased between 
1990 and 1994, followed by a decline, though the average homicide rate in 2000 remained above the level 
of 1990, and only a few countries had lower homicide rates at the end of the decade.

Sources: The PRS Group 2010; World Bank 2010n; WDR team calculations.

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

103

as in the OECD (Oranisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development) countries—
external  shocks  can  be  absorbed,  but  even 
then, they will affect reform plans. Chapter 2 
showed  that  fragile  countries  experienced 
more food protests, and more violence dur-
ing food protests, than non-fragile countries 
during recent food price crises. Likewise, re-
cent research suggests that the impact of nat-
ural disasters is more pronounced in fragile 
states.10  Not  only  are  fragile  countries  more 
vulnerable to the effects of disasters, but di-
sasters and external shocks can interrupt in-
stitutional transformation, as was the case in 
promising  sectors  after  Haiti’s  devastating 
earthquake in early 2010.11

Escaping violence, developing 
resilience

Given the difﬁ culties, how have countries es-
caped  from  violence  and  achieved  institu-
tional  resilience? These  pathways  are  under-

researched, and this Report has only some of 
the  answers.  The  framework  below  suggests 
some fundamental differences between fragile 
and  violent  situations  and  stable  developing 
environments.12  The  ﬁ rst  is  the  need  to  re-
store  conﬁ dence  in  collective  action  before 
embarking on wider institutional transforma-
tion. Second is the priority of transforming 
institutions  that  provide  citizen  security,13 
justice, and jobs. Third is the role of regional 
and  international  action  to  reduce  external 
stresses. Fourth is the  specialized nature of 
external support needed (ﬁ gure 3.1). 

The  framework  is  not  meant  to  be  a 
“grand theory” of violence, nor is it the only 
way  to  understand  violence  prevention.  It 
builds, however, from the research described 
in chapters 1 and 2 and a review of country 
experience, and provides a useful organizing 
framework for action. First, it provides a sys-
tematic way of thinking about what can be 
done  to  prevent  violence—and  the  recur-
rence of violence over time. Indeed, the ques-
tion of most relevance to national reformers 

F I G U R E 3.1  WDR Framework: Repeated cycles of action to bolster institutional resilience

The WDR framework is presented as an ever-expanding spiral because these processes repeat over time as countries go through 
multiple transitions. Even as one set of immediate priorities is resolved, other risks and transition moments emerge and require a 
repeated cycle of action to bolster institutional resiliency. The arrow below the spiral illustrates that external support and incentives 
can help this nationally led process, and the arrow above it illustrates how external stresses can derail it.  

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

R

E

S

T

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT

UTIONS 

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

Source: WDR team. 

104 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

and international agencies—and the one that 
an institutional emphasis puts front and cen-
ter—is in practical terms, “what can we do to 
prevent violence?” Second, the framework is 
compatible  with  the  theories  of  violence  in 
different disciplines (box 3.4). Third, by fo-
cusing on the challenges in moving from cri-
sis management to security, justice, and eco-
nomic institutional transformation, it brings 
together the thinking of local, national, and 
international actors as well as  political, secu-
rity, and development agencies.

The framework suggests that institutional 
transformation and good governance, which 
are  important  in  development  generally, 
work  differently  in  fragile  situations.  The 
goal is more focused—transforming institu-
tions that are directly important to the pre-
vention  of  repeated  cycles  of  violence.  The 
dynamics  of  institutional  change  are  also 
 different. A good analogy is a ﬁ nancial crisis 
caused by a combination of external stresses 
and  historic  weaknesses  in  institutional 
checks and balances. In such a situation, ex-
ceptional efforts are needed to restore conﬁ -
dence in national leaders’ ability to manage 
the crisis—through actions that signal a real 
break with the past, and through locking in 
these actions and showing that they will not 
be  reversed.  To  prevent  the  crisis  recurring, 
concerted action will also be needed to ad-
dress the underlying institutional and gover-
nance  weaknesses  that  precipitated  it—but 
without  a  restoration  of  conﬁ dence  among 
both national and international stakeholders, 
these reforms will not be possible. 

Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming 
institutions 

The framework therefore argues that conﬁ -
dence-building—a concept used in political 
mediation  and  ﬁ nancial  crises  but  rarely  in 
development circles14—is a prelude to more 
permanent institutional change in the face of 
violence. Why apply this to the challenges of 
fragility and violence? Because the low trust 
caused by repeated cycles of violence means 
that stakeholders who need to contribute po-
litical, ﬁ nancial, or technical support will not 

collaborate until they believe that a positive 
outcome  is  possible.  Chapter  4  examines 
country-level  experiences  of  three  mecha-
nisms to restore the conﬁ dence of key stake-
holders in fragile and violent situations: 

(cid:129)  Developing 

collaborative, 

“inclusive 
enough”  coalitions.  To  bridge  problems 
of  low  trust  between  societal  groups  and 
between the state and society, we examine 
the  role  that  coalitions  involving  a  broad 
range  of  stakeholders  have  played  in 
 successful  exits  from  violence—whether 
government-led alliances in support of se-
curity and development actions or negoti-
ated agreements between parties to a con-
ﬂ ict. Inclusion can embed strong political 
economy  incentives.  It  brings  beneﬁ ts  to 
leaders—by  providing  support  and  re-
sources  from  key  stakeholder  groups  and 
ensuring that individual leaders or parties 
do not take all the blame for unpopular de-
cisions.15 It can also signal change and pro-
vide incentives for reform if parties respon-
sible for abuses are excluded. An inclusive 
approach can also carry longer-term politi-
cal economy beneﬁ ts, by creating pressure 
for  continuing  change,  avoiding  narrow 
and persistent elite captures of the state. 

(cid:129)  Using  signals  and  commitment  mecha-
nisms  to  build  support.  Without  strong 
signals of a break with the past and ways 
to reassure stakeholders that the new di-
rection will be sustained, developing co-
alitions of support for change can be dif-
ﬁ cult. Leaders need ways to ﬁ nd the right 
signals to galvanize support—signals that 
have been successful in different country 
contexts  are  examined.  When  trust  in 
 announcements  on  future  policy  is  low, 
leaders  also  need  mechanisms  to  lock 
promises in and persuade people that they 
will  not  be  reversed—called  “commit-
ment  mechanisms”  by  economists  and 
political  scientists.  We  consider  the  type 
of  commitment  mechanisms  that  have 
been useful in the face of risks of repeated 
cycles of violence.

(cid:129)  Delivering  early  results.  Expectations 
from government policy announcements 
alone will likely be insufﬁ cient to persuade 

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

105

BOX 3.4  The WDR framework and theories of violence prevention 

Paul Collier in Breaking the Conﬂ ict Trap and The Bottom Billion, and Douglass North, John Wallis, and Barry 
Weingast in Violence and Social Orders have been among the most inﬂ uential theorists of the links among 
conﬂ ict, violence, and development. 

North, Wallis, and Weingast describe three “doorstep conditions” for fragile countries to move toward 

long-term institutional violence prevention: 
•  Ensuring the rule of law, particularly over property issues, for elites 
•  Creating a “perpetual state” in the constitutionality of transfer of power and the ability of state commit-

ments to bind successor leaders 

•  Consolidating control over the military. 

Their framework provides a perceptive analysis of national development dynamics but does not 

explicitly address international stresses on states, international assistance, or the inﬂ uence of international 
norms and standards. 

Collier’s work, by contrast, focuses less on domestic political dynamics and more on low income, cor-
ruption, and natural resource rents. He explicitly considers external security guarantees and international 
standards for resource extraction. 

This Report brings together these strands of thinking and adds analysis that both supports earlier 

hypotheses and provides new questions for further research. It uses quantitative techniques to conﬁ rm 
that institutions matter for violence prevention. It brings this together with other work from economics, 
political, and social science on how institutional transformations take place. And it adds some concepts 
and examples from country case studies and regional and country consultations to ﬂ esh out understand-
ing of these transitions. 

Chapter 2 provided empirical analysis of the importance of institutions for long-term violence preven-
tion. It supports the theories of economists and political scientists who have focused on institutions, such 
as Collier; Fearon and Laitin; and North, Wallis, and Weingast. Interestingly, it provides some initial evi-
dence not only that very highly developed countries deﬁ ned by North and colleagues as “open access 
orders” have lower rates of violence, but also that institutions and good governance outcomes matter at 
much lower levels of development. Institutions matter for preventing criminal violence and organized 
crime as well as for preventing political conﬂ ict. 

This chapter focuses on practical lessons that can be applied in extreme conditions of insecurity and 

weak institutions. It expands on existing work in three ways: 
•  Why institutional reforms are so diﬃ  cult. The chapter draws upon scholars such as Acemoglu and 

Robinson, Fearon, and Laitin; Keefer, Weingast and others who have studied early transition periods to 
describe why the political economy of institutional reform in insecure environments is so diﬃ  cult, and 
why so many reform eﬀ orts therefore fail.

•  What it takes to make institutional reforms happen. The chapter uses country case studies and inputs 

from national reformers to look at how countries in outright crises have restored conﬁ dence, and how 
countries with ongoing insecurity and weak legitimacy, capacity, and accountability have transformed 
their institutions in the longer term. This work builds on North and colleagues’ analysis of the pathways 
to move to broader institutional transformation, prevent violence from recurring, and lay the basis for 
longer-term development—but it focuses on earlier periods of transition in very insecure environ-
ments. In so doing, it moves beyond most existing theories by explicitly considering how external 
stresses and external assistance can aﬀ ect these processes.

•  Understanding that transformations take time and adopting appropriate institutional  models is 
critical. The chapter adds empirical measures of how long these transformations take, even for the 
countries that made the fastest transitions in the late 20th century, and considers what can accelerate 
them. It also adds an important qualiﬁ er to “institutions matter for violence prevention” by arguing that 
this does not mean convergence toward Western institutional models. Societies that prevent violence 
from recurring have designed solutions based on their own history and context—and have created or 
adapted rather than simply copied institutions from other countries. 
The rest of this chapter elaborates the arguments in each of these areas. Chapters 4–9 then show how 

countries can restore conﬁ dence and transform institutions—and how international support can help 
them do so. 

Sources: Collier and others 2003; Collier 2007; North, Wallis, and Weingast 2009; Weingast 1997; Fearon and Laitin 
2003; Acemoglu and Robinson 2006; Keefer 2008.

106 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

stakeholders  that  a  positive  outcome  is 
possible due to credibility issues described 
above. Delivering early tangible results in 
areas  that  reﬂ ect  the  priorities  of  key 
stakeholder groups and the broader citi-
zenry  is  vital.  We  look  at  the  mecha-
nisms countries have used to deliver early, 
conﬁ dence-building  results, 
including 
 results that span the security, justice, and 
economic domains, and the use of com-
bined  state,  community,  private  sector, 
and civil society capacities to deliver. 

Conﬁ dence-building is not an end in itself. 
Institutional  reforms  to  deliver  security  and 
check the power of those in government are 
necessary to prevent a reversion to the vicious 
cycle of narrow elite pacts and recurring vio-
lence (chapter 2). For this to happen, person-
alized  leadership  has  to  shift  toward  more 
permanent,  depersonalized  institutional  ca-
pacity and accountability. Unless conﬁ dence-
building  signals  and  early  results  are  linked 
to  the  development  of  more  legitimate,  ac-
countable,  and  capable  institutions,  coun-
tries  remain  acutely  vulnerable  to  violence. 
In chapter 5, we explore two mechanisms for 
sustained institutional transformation:

(cid:129)  Devoting early attention to the reform of 
institutions  that  provide  citizen  security, 
justice, and jobs. The interlink between se-
curity and development has been debated 
under the notion of human security, which 
encompasses freedom from fear, freedom 
from want, and freedom to live in dignity. 
By  putting  the  security  and  prosperity  of 
human beings at the center, human secu-
rity addresses a wide range of threats, both 
from poverty and from violence, and their 
interactions. While acknowledging the im-
portance  of  human  security  and  its  em-
phasis  on  placing  people  at  the  center  of 
focus, this Report uses the term “citizen se-
curity”  more  often  to  sharpen  our  focus 
more  on  freedom  from  physical  violence 
and  freedom  from  fear  of  violence.  The 
hope is to complement the discussion on 
the aspect of freedom from fear in the hu-
man security concept.16 In institutional re-

form efforts, there is a tendency to tackle 
everything at once, and immediately. We 
explore early efforts that have proven suc-
cessful  in  reforming  institutions  that 
 directly  address  the  correlates  of  vio-
lence—security,  justice,  and  economic 
stresses—and  which  reform  areas  have 
generally been addressed more gradually. 

(cid:129)  Using  and  exiting  “best-ﬁ t”  reform  ap-
proaches. The record of backlash against 
change  described  above  argues  that  re-
forms  of  institutions  in  fragile  contexts 
need to be adapted to the political context 
rather than be technically perfect. We ex-
plore  the  extent  to  which  countries  that 
have  become  resilient  to  violence  have 
 often used unorthodox, “best-ﬁ t” reform 
approaches  that  allow  for  ﬂ exibility  and 
innovation—public support for employ-
ment;  non-electoral  consultative  mecha-
nisms;  combinations  of  state,  private 
 sector, faith-based, traditional, and com-
munity structures for service delivery, for 
example (see box 3.5). 

Marshaling external support and 
resisting external stresses

Building  resilience  to  violence  and  fragility 
is  a  nationally  owned  process,  but  external 
support and incentives and external stresses 
can contribute to progress or to backsliding. 
Outsiders  cannot  restore  conﬁ dence  and 
transform  institutions—these  processes  are 
domestic and have to be nationally led. But to 
help countries restore normalcy and reduce 
regional and global instability, international 
actors can offer the following:

(cid:129)  Providing effective external support and 
incentives. Some countries have restored 
conﬁ dence  and  transformed  institutions 
using only their own ﬁ nancial and tech-
nical resources, but most have drawn on 
diplomatic,  security,  and  development 
assistance  from  outside.  External  action 
can help by building trust through exter-
nal commitment mechanisms; delivering 
quick  results  that  reinforce  government 

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

107

BOX 3.5  “Best-ﬁ t” reforms

What do we mean by “best-ﬁ t” reforms? Because of the risks of political backlash and premature overload-
ing described earlier, in conditions of imperfect security and weak institutions, “best-practice” technocratic 
reform options may not work. Less orthodox approaches that are best-ﬁ t in the context of imperfect secu-
rity, institutional capacity, and competitive markets can work better—but may have “second best” implica-
tions that need to be managed.17 Consider the following ﬁ ve examples:

•  A country wants to legitimize the formation of a government and a new reform direction through an 
election, but insecurity still rages over most of the territory, many voters cannot get to the polls, and 
polling and vote-counting cannot be monitored. Non-electoral representative mechanisms, where per-
ceived by citizens to provide genuine voice and accountability, can be used in the short term, but in 
the medium term, they will require renewed legitimization.

•  A country has 20–30 percent unemployment, criminal gangs recruiting from its youth population, and 

an economy structurally underinvested in areas of its comparative advantage. In the short term, pub-
licly subsidized employment may be the best-ﬁ t option, but in the longer term, an exit pathway to for-
mal employment in the private sector will be needed.

•  A country needs electricity for the economy to recover, but insurgents have the capability to attack 

large generation and distribution facilities. Medium-size generators may cost more but may be the best-
ﬁ t option in the short term. In the longer term, the country may need to exit to a lower-cost solution.

•  A country wants to divert public spending to education and infrastructure, but has a large standing 

army and a rebel army in place. In the short term, integrating these forces and paying their salary 
costs may be the best-ﬁ t option, but in the longer term, the force may need to be downsized and 
professionalized.

•  A country has tens of thousands of people accused of past human rights violations, but its formal jus-
tice system can process only 200 cases a year. A community-based process may be the best-ﬁ t option, 
but the formal justice system will still need to be built, with redress for families inadequately dealt with 
in the initial process.

Source: WDR team. 

legitimacy; supporting institutional trans-
formation  with  ﬂ exible  approaches  that 
respect  best-ﬁ t  reform  options;  applying 
realistic  timelines  for  institutional  prog-
ress;  and  providing  incentives  to  reward 
responsible  governance  and  to  sanction 
failing leadership.

(cid:129)  Diminishing  external  stresses  on  fragile 
states.  Reducing  external  stress  includes 
action  to  contain  the  adverse  impact  of 
illegal  trafﬁ cking,  international  corrup-
tion,  and  money  laundering—and  pro-
tecting countries against economic shocks. 
Some of these challenges are beyond the 
control of individual states. Analyzing the 
strengths  and  weakness  of  regional  and 
global  initiatives  can  ensure  that  national 
reform  efforts  are  not  overwhelmed  by 
new pressures and that successful action in 

one  country  does  not  simply  push  prob-
lems to neighboring countries.

Doing it again—and again, and in 
different types of transition

Just as violence repeats, efforts to build con-
ﬁ dence  and  transform  institutions  typi-
cally follow a repeated spiral. Countries that 
moved away from fragility and conﬂ ict often 
did  so  not  through  one  decisive  “make  or 
break” moment—but through many transi-
tion moments, as the spiral path in ﬁ gure 3.1 
illustrates. National leaders had to build con-
ﬁ dence in the state and to transform institu-
tions over time, as with the Republic of Ko-
rea’s transitions in the security, political, and 
economic spheres, which included repeated 
internal contests over the norms and gover-

108 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

nance  of  postwar  society.18 A  repeated  pro-
cess  enables  space  for  collaborative  norms 
and  capacities  to  develop,  and  for  success 
to  build  on  successes  in  a  virtuous  cycle. 
For  each  loop  of  the  spiral  the  same  two 
phases recur: building conﬁ dence that posi-
tive chance is possible, prior to deepening the 
institutional transformation and strengthen-
ing governance outcomes.

Transitions  out  of  fragility  and  repeated 
cycles  of  violence  occur  through  preventive 
actions as well as post-conﬂ ict recovery. The 
South  African  transition  was  not  a  classic 
post–civil war transition: while low-level civil 
and  political  violence  existed,  leaders  took 
preventive  action  before  the  country  suc-
cumbed to outright civil war (feature 3). This 
is  not  unusual:  two-thirds  of  the  socie ties 
 exiting fragility in the last 20 years did so with-
out  a  major  civil  war.19  Some  opportunities 
arose when incumbent leaders recognized the 
need for change and created the conditions to 
make change happen—as in Ghana in 2003, 
where  a  potential  conﬂ ict  over  succession 
rights  between  two  clans  in  the  north  was 
avoided.20  Other  opportunities  arose  from 
mass protests or social action, as in Benin in 
1990, where a popular movement precipitated 
a national conference that led to a new consti-
tution, multiparty elections, and the end of 17 
years  of  autocratic  rule.21  Multiple  transi -
 tions  have  also  been  the  general  pattern  in 
middle-income countries emerging from au-
thoritarian rule, such as Argentina and Chile.
Even the worst natural disasters can pro-
vide opportunities for transitions from con-
ﬂ ict  and  fragility:  although  movements  to 
negotiate  a  settlement  between  the  Indone-
sian  government  and  the  Free  Aceh  Move-
ment  (Gerakan  Aceh  Merdeka)  began  just 
before  the  devastating  2004  Indian  Ocean 
tsunami,  the  resulting  humanitarian  crisis 
and  massive  reconstruction  effort  created 
common  ground,  as  both  sides  turned  to 
helping survivors and rebuilding Aceh. While 
countries can remain in a vicious cycle of se-
vere violence for long periods, there are many 
opportunities for key participants to recog-
nize that change is in their self-interest. 

Do not expect too much, too soon

The passage of time permits the development 
of an institution’s identity and the shared val-
ues that support it. And repeated successes in 
delivery by an institution both reinforce in-
ternal morale and build credibility in the eyes 
of the public. To make reasoned judgments 
about  time  frames,  it  is  important  to  have 
historical reference points. One approach is 
to  ask  how  long  it  took  today’s  high-  or 
middle-income  societies  to  achieve  current 
institutional attainment levels. A comparison 
between  the  most  and  the  least  developed 
societies  is  unhelpful:  in  1700,  for  example, 
the Netherlands already had a real per capita 
GDP higher than that of the poorest 45 coun-
tries  today.22  A  more  useful  approach  is  to 
compare current rates of institutional devel-
opment among today’s fragile states against 
rates of more recent “transformers.” 

Historically,  the  fastest  transformations 
have taken a generation. Well-known institu-
tional  indices  are  relevant  to  reducing  the 
risk of violence—the rule of law, corruption, 
human  rights,  democratic  governance,  bu-
reaucratic  quality,  oversight  of  the  security 
sectors,  and  equity  for  the  disadvantaged.23 
How much time has it taken to move from 
current average levels in fragile states around 
the  world  to  a  threshold  of  “good  enough 
governance”? The results are striking. It took 
the 20 fastest-moving countries an average of 
17 years to get the military out of politics, 20 
years  to  achieve  functioning  bureaucratic 
quality, and 27 years to bring corruption un-
der  reasonable  control  (box  3.6).  This  did 
not  mean  perfection,  but  rather  adequacy. 
Nor should these targets be considered easy 
benchmarks  for  most  of  today’s  fragile  and 
violence-affected  countries,  since  the  “fast-
est transformers” described above often had 
more favorable starting conditions than to-
day’s fragile states. Portugal and the Republic 
of Korea are among the fastest institutional 
transformers  of  the  20th  century,  but  both 
started their transformations with a founda-
tion  of  extensive  state  institutional  experi-
ence, and with literacy rates far higher than 

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

109

BOX 3.6   Fastest progress in institutional transformation—An estimate of realistic ranges

The table shows the historical range of timings that the fastest reformers in the 20th century took to achieve basic 
governance transformations.

Scenarios for dimensions of “state capability” 

Indicator

Bureaucratic quality (0–4)

Corruption (0–6)

Military in politics (0–6)

Government eﬀ ectiveness

Control of corruption

Rule of law

Years to threshold at pace of:

Fastest 20

Fastest over the threshold

20

27

17

36

27

41

12

14

10

13

16

17

Source: Pritchett and de Weijer 2010.
Note: Calculations are based on International Country Risk Guide indicators that ranked countries on a 0–4 scale over the period 
1985–2009. The column “fastest 20” shows the average number of years the fastest 20 performers have taken to reach the threshold, 
and the second column shows the time it took the fastest ever country to achieve a threshold indicator score.

those  in,  say,  the  Democratic  Republic  of 
Congo or Haiti today.24

The track record of institutional transfor-
mations indicates that they have been getting 
faster  over  time:  modern  transformations 
can be contrasted with the 100+ years com-
mon  in  previous  centuries.  Three  interna-
tional trends may plausibly support a “virtu-
ous spiral” for faster transformations: 

(cid:129)  First,  states  do  not  operate  in  isolation 
from  each  other  or  the  global  system. 
Modern states are part of an international 
system  that  confers  certain  beneﬁ ts  and 
requires  speciﬁ c  behaviors.  Today  these 
behaviors include helping to maintain in-
terstate security (by not threatening other 
states,  for  example,  and  by  observing 
“rules  of  warfare”),  upholding  interna-
tional  law,  and  abiding  by  treaty  obliga-
tions—and  behaving  at  home  in  ways 
consistent  with  international  norms  (by 
protecting  human  rights  and  eschewing 
corruption  or  unconstitutional  changes 
in government, for instance). Global and 

regional norms are dealt with in more de-
tail in chapter 6.25 

(cid:129)  Second, new technologies support grow-
ing demands for good governance. People 
today  have  much  easier  access  to  infor-
mation on what others think (including 
others across the world), and this makes 
it  far  harder  for  governments  to  ignore 
the interests of their broad masses.26 Vid-
eos of events at the end of the Soviet era 
showed citizen movements from Nepal to 
Romania what could be achieved through 
mass  protest,  while  recent  revolutions27 
have exploited the newer personal com-
munication technologies, such as the so-
called Twitter revolution in Moldova, and 
the  role  of  social  media  in  the  Middle 
East and North Africa.28 States do some-
times  reject  citizen  demands,  but  the 
price  they  pay  today  tends  to  be  higher, 
measured  in  repression,  economic  stag-
nation,  and  international  isolation.  The 
spread  of  new  technologies  reinforces 
the cir culation of international principles 

110 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

and  the  benchmarking  of  government 
per formance by citizens and civil society 
organizations.  This,  and  the  organiza-
tional capabilities embodied in new tech-
nology,  has  a  huge  impact  on  people’s 
ability  to  put  pressure  on  their  state  in-
stitutions  (as  in  the  Islamic  Republic  of 
Iran  in  2009).29  But  the  expansion  of 
communications channels can cut either 
way. For example, in early 2008 in Kenya, 
following  the  contested  December  2007 
elections,  mobile  phones  played  a  dual 
role  of  encouraging  violence  and  pre-
venting its spread.30

(cid:129)  Third, new technologies also create possi-
bilities for improving service delivery, even 
in  the  most  fragile  situations.  Technolo-
gies that enable communication between 
citizen groups within and across countries 
can help governments accelerate the type 
of  institutional  transfor mation  that  im-
proves  performance  and  process  legiti-

BOX 3.7  Optimism or wishful thinking?

Haiti at the end of 2009 had made considerable advances in restoring security 
and better governance in the wake of the 2004 crisis following the removal of 
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Security had been restored in urban areas. 
Trust in government institutions, including the police, had risen. Basic public 
ﬁ nance functions were functioning. And considerable humanitarian and com-
munity services and small reconstruction projects had been launched. 

Before the earthquake struck Haiti in 2010, the government was in discus-
sions with various parts of the international community—diplomatic, peace-
keeping, and development—on pressing institutional transformations. These 
included fundamental economic restructuring needed to create jobs in agricul-
ture and textiles; the appointment of personnel in both the Supreme Court and 
the lower courts to restore better basic functioning to the justice sector; consti-
tutional changes to, among other things, reduce the frequency of elections; 
increased decentralization in the administration; rapid expansion of the police 
force; anti-corruption measures to avoid diversions of aid funds; revenue reform 
to increase the tax base; and action against drug traﬃ  ckers to address shifts in 
transit patterns into the Caribbean. All these actions were to take place over 18 
months when Haiti also had two elections scheduled.

The tragedy that overtook the country in January 2010 makes it impossible 
to know whether these reforms would have been completed. The link between 
violence and institutions, and of historical state-building experiences elsewhere, 
does show that these changes would make Haitian society more resilient to 
renewed violence—but that no country has ever successfully completed this 
level of change in 18 months.

Sources: WDR consultation with government oﬃ  cials, United Nations and donor 
representatives, local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and community-based 
organization representatives in Haiti, 2010.

macy.  In  the  Democratic  Republic  of 
Congo, transitional payments were made 
to  over  100,000  ex-combatants  via  cell 
phone since 2004, and citizen surveys have 
been conducted using SMS (short message 
service).31 Such services would have been 
costly and inefﬁ cient across a vast territory 
with little infrastructure before the advent 
of technological change. 

Wishful thinking on timing pervades de-
velopment assistance when it comes to gov-
ernance  and  institution  building.  In  part  it 
derives from the desire to meet international 
norms quickly, which is understandable: hu-
man rights abuses and gross corruption are 
abhorrent. But goals are then set that require 
state capability, sometimes without consider-
ing whether the capability exists, and some-
times under the presumption that it can be 
created quickly (given resources and “politi-
cal will”). This is mistaken. Even the Republic 
of Korea, which had the resources and politi-
cal will (and a higher level of human capital 
than many fragile states today), took a gen-
eration to make these changes.32 No country 
today is likely to be able to make it in three to 
ﬁ ve  years,  the  typical  timeline  of  national 
leadership and the international community 
(box 3.7).

Adapt to different contexts 

The process necessary to restore conﬁ dence 
and  transform  institutions  are  similar  in 
countries that have different combinations 
of stresses and institutional characteristics; 
between low- and middle-income countries, 
and even high- income countries facing sub-
national  violence;  and  between  countries 
facing  violence  of  purely  criminal  origins 
and those facing political and civil conﬂ ict. 
While the dynamics of change may be simi-
lar, the framework must be applied differen-
tially, depending on the speciﬁ c features of 
the case in question. 

In some countries, stresses from interna-
tional trafﬁ cking in natural resources or inﬁ l-
tration of armed groups from abroad are im-
portant, while in others, trafﬁ cking of drugs 

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

111

BOX 3.8   Spectrum of situation-speciﬁ c challenges and 

opportunities 

Types of violence:  Civil, criminal, cross-border, subnational, ideological, or any combination 
of these

Transition opportunity:  Gradual/limited to 
immediate/major space for change

Key stresses:  Internal vs. external stresses; 
economic vs. political stresses; high vs. low 
level of divisions among groups

Key stakeholders:  Internal vs. external 
stakeholders; state vs. nonstate stakeholders; 
low-income vs. middle-high-income 
stakeholders

Institutional challenges:  Low capacity 
constraints vs. high capacity; low 
accountability vs. high accountability; 
exclusion vs. inclusion

Source: WDR team.

may be the principal external stress. Internal 
stresses  stemming  from  actual  or  perceived 
inequalities  between  groups  may  take  the 
form  of  urban-rural  divides  in  some  coun-
tries, ethnic or geographical in others, or reli-
gious in still others. Economic shocks or high 
unemployment  may  be  important  in  some 
countries but not in others. 

Institutional  challenges  in  dealing  with 
these stresses also vary (box 3.8). Some coun-
tries have to deal with weak capacity in both 
state and civil society institutions, combined 
with weak accountability; others may possess 
reasonably strong capacity and resources, but 
face challenges in state legitimacy because the 
state is perceived to lack accountability in po-
litical  representation,  in  its  management  of 
public resources, or in its respect for human 
rights—or is perceived to represent the inter-
ests of only one section of the population, to 
the  exclusion  of  others.  In  some  countries, 
the  challenge  is  national:  all  areas  of  the 
country are affected. In others, it is contained 
but still signiﬁ cant: subnational areas exhibit 
characteristics of fragility, with risks of actual 
or potential violence.

Stresses  and  institutional  characteristics 
also change over time, with new stresses aris-
ing  and  new  capabilities  being  developed. 
In  addition,  the  trajectory  of  change  is    im-
portant. In some countries, events may pro-
vide  an  opportunity  for  major  political, 
 social, and economic change. In others, a his-

tory  of  recent  deterioration  may  mean  that 
upcoming  transition  moments  present  an 
opportunity  to  reverse  deterioration  in  the 
situation, but may not yet present a real op-
portunity to deliver decisive improvements. 
The types of transition moment that offer an 
opportunity for change of course vary enor-
mously—from elections to external crises to 
new government reform plans to anniversa-
ries that are important in the country’s na-
tional psyche.

Thus,  differentiated  application  of  the 
framework  is  essential.  In  applying  the 
framework,  the  choice  of  different  types  of 
“inclusive-enough”  coalitions  and  priori-
ties  for  early  results,  the  sequencing  of  in-
stitutional  transformation  efforts,  and  the 
development  of  politically  innovative  insti-
tutions  all  depend  on  country-speciﬁ c  cir-
cumstances.  Equally,  external  support  and 
incentives  and  international  actions  to  ad-
dress  external  stresses  need  to  be  designed 
to ﬁ t the speciﬁ cs of each country situation. 
Throughout this Report, a differentiated po-
litical economy framework is used to ask the 
following questions:

(cid:129)  What  stresses  does  the  country  face  that 
increase the risks of violence occurring or 
reoccurring? Areas to explore include the 
inﬁ ltration of external armed groups and 
trafﬁ cking networks; potential corruption 
pressures from natural resources or other 

112 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

forms  of  trafﬁ cking;  political,  social,  or 
economic  inequalities  and  tensions  be-
tween  groups;  high  or  rising  unemploy-
ment and income shocks; and stresses that 
arise  in  terms  of  ex-combatant  or  gang-
member activity and circulation of arms. 

(cid:129)  What institutional characteristics are par-
amount:  capacity,  including  in  different 
state  and  nonstate  institutions;  account-
ability,  including  for  different  aspects—
political  representation,  corruption,  re-
spect  for  human  rights;  inclusion  of 
different  groups,  ethnic,  religious,  class, 
geographical? What risks do these institu-
tional characteristics present for national 
actors and international actors?

(cid:129)  Which  stakeholder  groups  are  crucial  to 
building conﬁ dence and transforming in-
stitutions, and what signals, commitment 
mechanisms, and results are most impor-
tant  to  these  groups?  This  may   include 
different  groupings  among  political  ac-
tors,  security  force  leadership,  excluded 
citizens,  business,  labor,  faith-based  in-
stitutions,  or  other  inﬂ uential  civil  soci-
ety  groups,  and  external  actors  such  as 
neighboring  governments,  donors,  and 
investors.

(cid:129)  What  types  of  transition  moments  are 
coming  up,  and  what  opportunities  do 
they  present?  This  needs  to  include  not 
only a creative assessment of opportuni-
ties for change, but also a realistic assess-
ment of what these opportunities can and 
cannot  achieve—for  example,  some  up-
coming transition moments may offer an 
opportunity to reverse deteriorations, but 
not yet consolidate all the dimensions of 
change needed for long-term resilience to 
violence.

*    *    * 

Institutions matter, doubly so for coun-
tries  affected  by  violence.  It  is  well  known 
in the economic literature that institutions 
matter  for  economic  development.33  The 
emerging  econometric  evidence  suggests 
that  countries  are  doubly  affected  by  very 
weak  institutions—because  the  lack  of  in-
stitutions  slows  development,  but  also  be-
cause  weak  institutions  make  them  more 
vulnerable to violence, which, itself, reverses 
development.  They  ﬁ nd  themselves  in  a 
trap: the institutional reforms they need to 
exit the vicious cycle of violence and tem-
porary  elite  pacts  are  difﬁ cult  to  achieve, 
precisely  because  the  threat  of  violence 
 remains very real.34 As a result, the virtuous 
spiral  of  restoring  conﬁ dence  and  trans-
forming institutions cannot expand—since 
credibility  is  missing  where  violence  (in-
cluding the legacy of violence or the threat 
of violence) is present, leaders must ﬁ rst en-
gage in conﬁ dence-building through inclu-
sive enough pacts and early results for their 
commitments to be credible.

Only after actors have built trust and es-
tablished their commitment to peaceful de-
velopment through conﬁ dence-building can 
they then credibly undertake the institutional 
reforms necessary to escape the vicious cycle. 
The repeated expansion of the WDR frame-
work  spiral  is  important  because  transfor-
mation takes time. Leaders, stakeholders, and 
the  international  community  must  remem-
ber  that  societies  will  go  through  multiple 
cycles  of  conﬁ dence-building  and  institu-
tional reform before they can achieve the re-
silience  to  violence  necessary  for “develop-
ment as usual.” 

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

113

FEATURE 3  Restoring security in Colombia

Types of violence:  Traﬃ  cking, criminal and gang violence, civil conﬂ ict

Transition opportunity:  Preventive action in the face of rising 
criminality and failed peace talks

Key stakeholders:  Government, armed groups, citizens, civil society, 
regional, international partners, criminal networks

Key stresses:  Legacies of violence, presence of international traﬃ  cking 
and criminal networks, social and economic inequity 

Institutional challenges:  Absence in parts of the country of state 
institutions; legacy of capacity, inclusion, and accountability challenges

Colombia, a middle-income country, has experienced peace 

for only 47 of its ﬁ rst 200 years of independence. Until the 
turn  of  the  21st  century,  large  parts  of  the  territory  were 
marked  by  the  absence  of  state  institutions,  and  a  long  se-
quence  of  amnesties  and  negotiations  with  armed  groups 
merely recycled, but did not resolve, incentives for violence. 

Over the past two decades, a number of new initiatives were 
taken to restore conﬁ dence and security. These have been led 
by both local and national governments and have had a sig-
niﬁ cant impact in recent years. 

DESEPAZ—an  acronym  for  Desarrollo,  Seguridad  y  Paz, 
or development, security, and peace—started in Cali in 1992, 
based on epidemiological studies of the violence that afﬂ icted 
the city (murder rates had climbed from 23 per 100,000 inhab-
itants to 93 from 1983 to 1992). Contributing to signiﬁ cant 
reductions  in  violence,  its  programs  included  mulitsectoral 
coordination of arms control, policing and justice, education, 
housing, and recreation activities.

With  homicide  rates  very  high,  Bogotá,  like  Cali,  imple-
mented a multisectoral approach in the 1990s that included 
cooperation  between  community  police  and  local  residents, 
and initiatives to stimulate the local economy. These and other 
interventions reduced homicide rates in Bogotá from 80 per 
100,000 people to 28 between 1993 and 2004, and increased 
arrest rates by a factor of four.

More recently, Medellín also experienced a dramatic reduc-
tion in levels of criminal violence. As a city directly affected by 
rebel groups and the violence of the drug cartels, Medellín be-
came in 1991 the most violent city in the world, with a homi-
cide rate of 381 per 100,000. The impact of national and local 
security policies combined with social development strategies 
helped reduce this to 29 per 100,000 people in 2007. 

Serious efforts to negotiate with rebel groups began in the 
1990s and included the creation in 1998 of a neutral zone un-
der the control of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colom-
bia (FARC). The failure of these efforts was blamed by many 
on the FARC, and this helped build popular support for a shift 
in strategy that branded the FARC as a criminal group. Begin-

ning in 2002, the new administration decided not to continue 
with the previous government’s four-year negotiation with the 
FARC and the National Liberation Army (ELN). It focused in-
stead  on  consolidating  state  control  throughout  Colombia, 
protecting the population and ﬁ ghting the illicit drug trade—
aims subsequently formalized in the government’s “democratic 
security” policy. Based on an integrated approach to restoring 
conﬁ dence through security, private-sector job creation, and 
social cohesion, the new policy aimed at “institucionalidad,” or 
building and transforming institutions.

From 2002 to 2008, this approach had considerable success: 
the armed forces were expanded from about 300,000 in 2002 to 
more than 400,000 in 2007,35 and state presence throughout the 
country reduced violence, particularly in rural areas. National 
homicide rates were halved, from 70 per 100,000 people to 36,36 
households forcefully displaced fell by 60 percent, and kidnap-
pings fell by 83 percent.37 To increase the transparent function-
ing of government, Colombia improved on measures of cor-
ruption  (from  –0.44  to  0.24),  the  rule  of  law  (from  –0.92  to 
–0.50), government effectiveness (from –0.40 to 0.13), and ac-
countability (from –0.50 to –0.26).38 The reduction in violence 
helped  sustain  rapid  economic  growth—at  an  average  of  4.9 
percent a year between 2002 and 2008, almost three times the 
rate  in  the  previous  seven  years.39  These  impressive  security 
achievements did not come without costs, however: more than 
300,000 people were newly displaced in 2008. Crime and inse-
curity have also begun to rise again in some urban areas, such as 
Medellín (an increase in the homicide rate from 33.8 to 94.5 per 
100,000 in 2007–09),40 as new forms of organized crime have 
emerged. Nor has the FARC insurgency been decisively ended. 

Several key lessons follow:

(cid:129)  The  government  used  an  “inclusive-enough”  approach, 
building  broad  national  support  for  security  goals  when 
ceasing negotiations with the FARC. After an in-depth dia-
logue with business groups, a “wealth tax” paid by the coun-
try’s richest taxpayers was introduced in 2002, earmarked 
for  the  security  effort.  Social  network  campaigns  were 

114 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 3  Restoring security in Colombia (continued)

mounted against kidnapping and later against FARC’s use 
of violence. 

(cid:129)  Early conﬁ dence-building measures were crucial. The gov-
ernment deployed military resources to protect the main 
road network, sponsoring convoys of private vehicles that 
allowed many Colombians to travel between major cities in 
safety for the ﬁ rst time in years. Mobility increased mark-
edly: the number of vehicles passing through toll stations 
rose from about 60,000 vehicles in 2003 to close to 150,000 
vehicles in 2009.

(cid:129)  Combining political, security, and economic development 
measures was central to the approach. The government es-
tablished a national agency, reporting to the presidency, to 

coordinate military, police, and civilian developmental ef-
forts in the least secure areas. The multidisciplinary teams 
of the Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral (CCAI), 
worked  in  the  same  ofﬁ ces  and  developed  joint  plans  to 
guide  their  actions.  Common  concepts—“democratic  se-
curity”  and  the  restoration  of  “institutionality”  to  areas 
where the state had been absent—were important for close 
collaboration between military and civilian actors.

WDR  consultations  underlined  two  big  challenges  going 
forward. The ﬁ rst is to match the success in restoring conﬁ -
dence and security with longer-term institutional transforma-
tion.  Surveys  of  popular  perceptions  show  an  enormous  in-
crease in conﬁ dence in both the security situation and in the 
delivery of education services, as well as in overall trust in the 

a.  Popular conﬁ dence dramatically improved in services and security

”
s
e
y
“
 
g
n
i
r
e
w
s
n
a
 
s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 

%

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

86.1

86.1

66.6

50

11

Improvement in the delivery

of education services

Improvement in the
perception of security

Increased trust in
state institutions

Improvement in the delivery

Improvement in  transparency

of health services

and accountability of 

government

Source: WDR team calculations based on results from Bøås, Tiltnes, and Flatø 2010 for representative surveys conducted in early 2010.  

state (see ﬁ gure a). However, Amnesty International gave Co-
lombia its lowest rating in 2008, and Freedom House main-
tained a rating of 4 (on a scale of 7) between 2002 and 2008.   
A second challenge relates to security and justice institutions. 
The justice system, while preserving its independence, was not 
reformed at the same pace as the military and police, and had 
difﬁ culty keeping pace with the caseloads emerging from more 
effective policing.  A culture of impunity persisted, and threat-
ened progress made in security sector reform. National institu-
tions also faced a credibility test in relation to so-called false-
positive  deaths:  ongoing  investigations  and  prosecutions  are 
looking into evidence that innocent poor young men were killed 
and falsely portrayed as rebels killed in military operations.

Colombia’s success in attacking the larger drug cartels also 
had unintended effects on its neighbors. The area under coca 
cultivation has increased in Bolivia and Peru. Along with in-
creases in productivity, this boosted South America’s potential 
cocaine production to 865 metric tons in 2008, up from 800 
metric tons in 2002.

Sources: Arboleda 2010; UNODC 2010b; World Bank 2010n; Guerrero 
1999; Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral 2010; WDR team con-
sultations with government ofﬁ cials, civil society representatives, and se-
curity personnel in Colombia, 2010; WDR interview with former Presi-
dent Álvaro Uribe, 2010; WDR team calculations.

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

115

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 3.9   Lessons of the South African transition: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming 

 

institutions
   Jay Naidoo, Chairman of Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition; Former General Secretary, Congress of 
South African Trade Unions; Minister of Reconstruction and Development, South Africa; and Former 
Chairman of the Development Bank of Southern Africa; WDR Advisory Council Member 

Based on discussions with Mac Maharaj, Sydney Mufamadi, Roelf 
Meyer, Leon Wessels, Fanie van der Merwe, and Jayendra Naidoo.

In May 2010, as part of the World Development Report 2011 pro-
cess, I was part of a discussion with key negotiators from the 
ANC Alliance and National Party in which we reﬂ ected on the 
lessons that could be learnt from the political transition to de-
mocracy  in  1994. We  were  all  agreed  that  a  prerequisite  for 
successful political transitions had to be strong national own-
ership and that the peace process underpinning it had to be 
embedded at a local level and deliver a peace dividend that 
beneﬁ tted local communities. The following points are what I 
extracted from South Africa’s experiences:

There were multiple transition points which required ef-
forts  from  the  protagonists  to  shift  the  debate,  rather  than 
only one “moment” of transition in 1994. These included citi-
zen  protests  and  strikes;  legalization  of  unionism  for  black 
workers; the start of undercover contacts in the late 1980s; the 
release of Nelson Mandela and the unbanning of the ANC and 
political parties in February 1990; the National Peace Accord in 
1991; CODESA in 1992; the Transitional Executive Council and 
associated bodies in 1993–94; the Reconstruction and Devel-
opment  Program  in  1993–94;  the  Growth,  Employment  and 
Redistribution  Program  in  1996;  and  the  local  government 
democratic transition which only culminated in 2000.

Restoring confidence
South Africa’s transition steps in the early 1990s were preceded 
by a much longer period of change in mentality, or paradigm 
shift,  amongst  the  protagonists  that  gave  credibility  to  the 
process:

•  On  the  ANC  Alliance  side,  this  included  the  shift  to  a 
broader, mor e inclusiv e appr oach,  and  the  realization  of 
the need to ensure incentives for the National Party and 
the white population. 

•  On  the  National  Party  side,  this  included  the  shift  from 
thinking in terms of group rights and protection of minori-
ties  to  thinking  in  terms  of  individual  rights  and  majority 
rule.

•  Certain signals which were perceived as irreversible (nota-
bly  the  unconditional  release  of  Nelson  Mandela  and  the 
suspension  of  the  ANC’s  armed  struggle)  were  critical  in 
maintaining trust between parties.

• 

Leaders on both sides had to move quickly to avoid getting 
bogged down by narrow interests in their own constituen-
cies, in particular in periods of devastating crisis such as the 
political assassination of Chris Hani. 

After  the  1994  elections,  delivering a few early r esults—in-
cluding  maternal  and  infant  healthcare  and  using  community 
structures  to  improve  water  supply—were  important  to  main-
tain conﬁ dence in our new government.

Transforming institutions 
Unorthodox, locally adapted reforms . Participants agreed that 
much of the global communication on South Africa’s transition 
has been on the speciﬁ c organizational form of the institutions 
used  (for  example,  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Committees,  na-
tional peace committees); and that in fact it may be more useful 
to consider the underlying principles and approaches (including 
those described above), on the basis that each country needs to 
design their own institutional forms if they are to have full own-
ership of political processes.

Challenges in prioritizing and sequencing . In addition to some 
of  the  key  principles  emerging  from  South  Africa’s  successful 
transition, participants reﬂ ected on mistakes made or opportu-
nities  missed  which  may  be  of  use  when  other  countries  con-
sider these experiences. Four elements were highlighted as par-
ticularly important:

•  Very  little  of  the  discussions  leading  up  to  1994  considered 
preparation  for  delivery  through  the  civil  service.  Problems 
which later emerged as a result include lack of preparation in 
setting up the provinces and deﬁ ning local government de-
livery responsibilities. We should have anticipated the capac-
ity constraints as we increased the number of provinces and 
set up new institutions.

• 

• 

• 

Too little attention to job creation for youth and risks of crim-
inal violence meant that we did not fully address the critical 
need to ensure that the new generation who had not lived 
through the apartheid struggle as adults were provided with 
a  strong  stake—and  economic  opportunities—in  the  new 
democratic state. 

There  was  a  need  for  tradeoﬀ s  on  timing  and  the  mainte-
nance of social consensus to manage the mismatch between 
the  aspirational  goals  of  the  Reconstruction  and  Develop-
ment  Program,  the  macro  and  ﬁ scal  framework  to  pay  for 
them, and the institutional capacity to implement them.

There was too much of an assumption that 1994 marked the 
culmination of a process of democratization and reconcilia-
tion. Relatively little attention was given to what was meant 
by  the  transformation  to  a  constitutional  state;  the  contin-
ued role of civil society in deepening not just democratiza-
tion  and  accountability,  but  also  delivery;  and  there  was  a 
need for a deeper and more thorough ongoing debate on rac-
ism, inequality, and social exclusion.

116 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Notes

1.   According to Margaret Levi, “Trust is, in fact, a holding word for a variety of phenomena that enable 
individuals to take risks in dealing with others, solve collective action problems, or act in ways that 
seem contrary to standard deﬁ nitions of self-interest.” Furthermore, Levi notes that “At issue is a co-
operative venture, which implies that the truster possesses a reasonable belief that well-placed trust 
will yield positive returns and is willing to act upon that belief” (Braithwaite and Levi 1998, 78).

2.   Similar problems arise in the transition from communism to a rule-of-law state. The thought pro-
cess might be as follows: “If I build value in a new ﬁ rm rather than stripping the assets of the state, I 
will gain only if rule of law is established. That will happen only if others demand rule of law, too. If 
others don’t believe rule of law will be established, they will prefer to strip assets rather than build 
value, so they will be unlikely to demand rule of law, and in that case, I’d be crazy to build value in a 
new ﬁ rm. Thus, even though most people would be better off building value under rule of law than 
stripping assets in a lawless state, given my expectations of political development, I’m better off strip-
ping assets.”

3.   A 30 percent increase in people who believe that growth will improve in the next 12 months is associ-
ated with a 1 percent increase in actual growth rates in the subsequent year, signiﬁ cant at the 5 per-
cent level.

4.   A few societies have very strong state capacity, but score low on governance indicators because they 
are highly exclusionary—South Africa under apartheid is an example. These countries will have less 
difﬁ culty in implementing promises because their military and civilian organizations are capable. 
But it is possible that, even in these cases, institutional weaknesses in shared values and cohesion 
make it difﬁ cult to deliver on change. Indeed, in South Africa change has not been a simple process. 

5.   Collier, Hoefﬂ er, and Söderbom 2008; Fearon 2010a; Acemoglu and Robinson 2006.
6.   Goldstone 2010. 
7.   de Figueiredo and Weingast 1999; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2005. 
8.   Rich 2010. 
9.   Economic theory helps us understand the consequences of a perception of impunity that increases 
willingness to use violent means. Chapter 2 referred to the way in which insecurity dynamics produce 
“prisoner’s dilemmas,” where lack of trust between two actors undermines their ability to cooperate 
to produce mutually beneﬁ cial outcomes. Economic theory shows that if the actors in question be-
lieve they will encounter the same dilemma again in the future, their calculation may differ—they 
might recognize that taking a risk by trusting their counterpart in the present can produce important 
payoffs in the future. So-called iterated prisoner’s dilemmas make cooperation possible, though not 
guaranteed. If a society is confronted by a situation where many actors believe that others within 
society may use violence to resist change, their willingness to bet on future cooperation is dimin-
ished. Where insecurity is not an immediate issue, betting on future payoffs makes sense; where the 
future is highly uncertain, logic dictates placing an excessive premium on protecting existing privi-
leges and resources, not risking them for collective gains. See Axelrod 1984. 

10.   See Keefer, Neumayer, and Plümper 2010. 
11.   See UN Security Council 2010a, WDR consultation with government ofﬁ cials, UN donor represen-

tatives, local nongovernmental organizations, and community-based organizations in Haiti, 2010. 

12.   An alternative perspective to the intertwined relationship between institutions and violence can be 

found in Cramer 2006.

13.   The WDR deﬁ nes “citizen security” as both freedom from physical violence and freedom from fear 
of violence. Applied to the lives of all members of a society (whether nationals of the country or 
otherwise), it encompasses security at home; in the workplace; and in political, social, and economic 
interactions with the state and other members of society. Similar to human security, “citizen security” 
places people at the center of efforts to prevent and recover from violence. Also see Frühling, Tulchin, 
and Golding 2003. 

14.   Conﬁ dence-building in mediation means building trust between adversaries; in ﬁ nancial crises, trust 
in markets means that governments are adopting sound policies and will be capable of implementing 
them. The WDR deﬁ nes the term as building trust between groups of citizens who have been divided 
by violence, between citizens and the state, and between the state and other key stakeholders (neigh-
bors, international partners, investors) whose political, behavioral, or ﬁ nancial support is needed to 
deliver a positive outcome.

15.   These incentives are not always enough. Chapter 4 discusses cases where leaders are unwilling to 

recognize an impending crisis or take action, and the approaches used to resolve these situations.

16.   Building on the Commission on Human Security 2003 report, the importance of human security has 

 

From violence to resilience: Restoring conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

117

been recognized in the UN General Assembly 2005b resolution adopted at the 2005 World Summit, 
the UN General Assembly 2009b report, and UN General Assembly 2010 Resolution, as well as in 
other fora, such as Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation, G8, and World Economic Forum.

17.   Throughout this report, the term “best-ﬁ t” describes solutions that are ﬁ tted to context of the society 
at the moment and may not be the ﬁ rst best solutions by other metrics. Thus, these solutions invoke 
the concept of the “second best” as used in economic theory—reforms may only be optimal once all 
dis tortions and considerations are taken into account. In this way, best-ﬁ t solutions may be optimal 
given all of the economic, political, physical, and institutional constraints and conditions. 

18.   Bedeski 1994; Cumings 2005; Chang and Lee 2006.
19.   Based on historic CPIA scores, 40 countries would have been classiﬁ ed as fragile for ﬁ ve or more 
years between 1977 and 1989. Box 2.10 showed that 17 of these countries remained fragile until 2009 
and that 16 of those experienced minor or major civil war. Of the 23 that “escaped” fragility, 15 had 
no war, 4 had minor civil war and 4 had major civil war between 1990 and 2009. WDR team calcula-
tion. Also see Mata and Ziaja 2009.

20.   Odendaal 2010; Ojielo 2007; UNDPA 2010a.
21.   Encyclopedia of the Nations 2010.
22.   Pritchett and de Weijer 2010.
23.   The indices are the Quality of Government Institute’s “quality of government” indicator (derived 
from International Country Risk Guide data; the Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi indicator of “gov-
ernment effectiveness”; the Failed State Index’s “progressive deterioration of public services” indica-
tor, and the Bertelsmann Transformation Index’s “resource efﬁ ciency” indicator). See Pritchett and 
de Weijer 2010. 

24.   Pritchett and de Weijer 2010.
25.   Global and regional norms play an essential part in preventing violence by constraining leadership 
abuses of power, and in sup porting local institutional transformations by helping maintain a focus on 
goals and functions rather than particular institutional forms. These norms can take the form of  formal 
international agreements and can also manifest as social movements, such as the Otpor movement.

26.   For example, while both Myanmar and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have—to varying 
degrees of success—used communication and travel bans to limit access to information and main-
tain  control  domestically,  their  ability  to  restrict  information  has  declined  dramatically  in  recent 
years, as Internet access in Myanmar, and satellite television in both countries, convey images of the 
world outside. See Horsey and Win Myint 2010. 

27.   Color revolutions refer to a series of spontaneous movements that arose in succession in several 
former Soviet republics and one Balkan state during the early 2000s. These were mainly nonviolent 
protests advocating for democracy against governments seen as corrupt and/or authoritarian. Start-
ing as small spontaneous actions, they evolved within days or weeks into mass movements that top-
pled governments and instituted new democratic regimes. Each movement adopted a speciﬁ c color 
or ﬂ ower as its symbol, and at the center of these movements were nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs) and particularly student activists. These movements were successful in Serbia (2000), Geor-
gia  (Rose  Revolution  2003),  Ukraine  (Orange  Revolution  2004),  and  the  Kyrgyz  Republic  (Tulip 
Revolution 2005). See Kuzio 2006; D’Anieri 2006; Michalcik and Riggs 2007. 

28.   See Mungiu-Pippidi and Munteanu 2009.
29.   See, for example, Afshari and Underwood 2009. 
30.   Goldstein and Rotich 2008.
31.   MDRP 2006.
32.   Bedeski 1994; Cumings 2005; Chang and Lee 2006.
33.   North 1989, 1995; Rodrik 2000; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2005.
34.   There is an important difference between what this report argues and the “conﬂ ict trap” described by 
Collier and others 2003. In a “conﬂ ict trap,” low incomes lead to conﬂ ict, and conﬂ ict leads to low 
incomes, creating a low-level equilibrium. The WDR focuses on the institutional deﬁ cit: the institu-
tions that enable the peaceful resolution of contests are missing from fragile environments. With 
actors lacking the means to make credible commitments to reform, societies are unable to break free 
from the threat of violence. A low-level equilibrium of dysfunctional institutions and recurrent vio-
lence is thereby created. 

35.  See Arboleda 2010.
36.   WDR team calculations.
37.   See Arboleda 2010.
38.   Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi 2010a.
39.   WDR team calculations, based on World Bank 2010n.
40.   Municipio de Medellín 2010.

Chapter 4 analyzes country lessons on building conﬁ dence 

through coalitions and early results. Most states moving back 
from the brink of violence have developed “inclusive-

enough” coalitions for action, with diﬀ erent forms suiting their 
circumstances. In forming such coalitions, leaders took action to 
build trust by signaling that new policies would be diﬀ erent from 
the past and would not be reversed. They built conﬁ dence by 
achieving a few concrete results as a prelude to wider institutional 
transformation. States that have succeeded in early conﬁ dence-
building measures have often done so through a pragmatic 
blending of policy tools and by calling on non-state capacity, both 
civic and international. 

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

I

 
 

C

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

CHAPTER4

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

EXTERNAL
STRESS

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT

UTIONS 

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

Restoring conﬁ dence: 
Moving away from the brink 

Drawing on lessons from 
national reformers

Leadership  actions  to  restore  conﬁ -

dence  of  stakeholders  and  citizens 
in  collective  capacities  for  change 
are  a  crucial  ﬁ rst  step  in  moving 
away from the brink of violence. As chapters 
2  and  3  described,  the  trust  that  the  popu-
lation and stakeholders have in state institu-
tions to deal with violence can become shaky 
when insecurity is rising, or in the aftermath 
of  repeated  bouts  of  conﬂ ict.  Knowledge 
about  effective  ways  to  restore  conﬁ dence 
in  countries  affected  by  violence  is  limited. 
This  chapter  thus  expands  ideas  explored 
in the policy and academic worlds, with les-
sons drawn from the WDR background pa-
pers  and  country  consultations,  including 
the  views  of  national  reformers  involved  in 
efforts to lead their countries away from the 
brink.1 

Analysis of country cases reveals a variety 
of pathways away from the brink—but also 
suggests  two  common  elements.  The  ﬁ rst 
lesson is the importance of building inclu-
sive-enough  coalitions  and  identifying  the 
signals and commitment mechanisms2 that 
can  galvanize  support  for  change.  Second, 
national reformers have delivered results on 
the  ground  to  build  conﬁ dence  in  citizen 
security,  justice,  and  economic  prospects. 

In  both  elements,  successful  transitions 
made  astute  use  of  supplemental  capacity 
beyond  government:  from  the  private  sec-
tor, from traditional institutions, and from 
nongovernmental  organizations  (NGOs). 
This  chapter  considers  what  makes  coali-
tions  “inclusive-enough”  and  the  signals, 
commitment mechanisms, and early results 
that can help achieve momentum for later 
institutional transformation.3

These pathways away from violence have 
been analyzed in the literature. Stedman and 
Nilsson  suggest  that  pacts  to  end  violence 
need not be all-inclusive—they can promote 
peace if they are minimally inclusive at the be-
ginning.4 Fearon, Keefer, Azam and Mesnard 
examine  why  some  conﬂ icts  may  be  more 
intractable because of distrust and how com-
mitment  mechanisms  (ways  to  ensure  that 
promises will be difﬁ cult to reverse) can be 
designed  to  solve  those problems;  examples 
include peace agreements, power-sharing ar-
rangements, and security sector reform.5 

Societies  use  these  and  other  commit-
ment mechanisms to suit conditions on the 
ground.  More  important  than  the  form  of 
these  mechanisms  is  their  adaptability  to 
changing conditions over the course of mul-
tiple transitions. The lessons explored in this 
chapter build on this research through prac-
tical  country  examples  and  cross-country 
lessons. 

120 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Inclusive-enough coalitions

This section looks at country experiences in 
building “inclusive-enough” pacts for change; 
different approaches to coalition-building at 
national,  subnational,  and  local  levels;  and 
the guiding principles that emerge on what 
is  “inclusive-enough.”  It  considers  the  type 
of  immediate  actions  and  signals  on  future 
policy that have built support for change. 

How inclusive is inclusive enough? 

Action  by  national  leaders  during  transi-
tional moments can be decisive in preventing 
violence. Two contrasting cases illustrate this 
point. In Kenya, warnings of election-related 
violence in 2007 led Kenyan groups and sev-
eral foreign governments to offer support to 
peace  committees  and  other  forms  of  me-
diation or violence prevention; leaders of the 
various political factions refused them. 6 The 
predicted violence following the announce-
ment  of  the  election  results  led  to  nearly 
1,000 deaths and the displacement of 300,000 
people.  By  contrast,  the  Ghanaian  govern-
ment took decisive action in 2003 to forestall 
a potentially serious dispute over succession 
rights  between  rival  Dagomba  clans  in  the 
north.  After  national  efforts  failed  to  ﬁ nd 
compromise between the feuding groups, the 
government requested United Nations (UN) 
assistance  in  designing  conﬁ dence-building 
interventions,  including  the  facilitation  of 
government  and  civil  society  dialogue  and 
negotiations.7  That  action  defused  the  po-
tential for violence, and the country avoided 
a major conﬂ ict that could have undermined 
the 2004 national elections.

Leadership  is  sometimes  shared,  and 
sometimes  dominated  by  individuals.  That 
was  the  case  with  Mali’s  General  Amadou 
Toumani  Touré,  whose  willingness  to  deal 
differently with the Tuareg rebellion launched 
a  sustained  tradition  of  democratic  resolu-
tion.8 South Africa beneﬁ ted both from the 
exceptional personal leadership of President 
Nelson Mandela and the depth of collective 

leadership  developed  during  decades  of  re-
sistance in the African National Congress, the 
Communist Party, and the civil society orga-
nizations of the United Democratic Front.

Transition opportunities have led to more 
decisive  action  where  leaders  have  built  co-
alitions  for  change.9  Inclusive-enough  ap-
proaches  may  be  formal  power-sharing  ar-
rangements,  as  with  the  government  of  the 
Democratic Unionist Party and Sinn Féin in 
Northern Ireland.10 Most frequently, the co-
alitions  are  informal,  as  with  the  Colombia 
and Timor-Leste approaches described below. 
Some  successful  experiences  and  challenges 
in coalition-building in situations of political 
and civil conﬂ ict include the following:

• 

• 

Inclusive rather than exclusive approaches 
can  be  important  in  preventing  a  recur-
rence of violence. Timor-Leste leadership 
reached out in 2007 to other political par-
ties and to entrepreneurs to help in recon-
struction,  involving  independent  ﬁ gures 
and  those  from  other  parties  in  govern-
ment, and providing for local business in-
volvement. This approach contrasted with 
that taken in the period between indepen-
dence  in  2002  and  renewed  violence  in 
2006, when the ruling party engaged rela-
tively little with civil society, the church, or 
other domestic actors to build support for 
its program.11 

In some situations, speciﬁ c focus on build-
ing  national  and  provincial  support  for 
change simultaneously can be important. 
In Aceh, Indonesia, which had experienced 
a  long  and  costly  civil  conﬂ ict,  a  careful 
process  of  mediation  involving  the  Free 
Aceh Movement (Gerakan Aceh Merdeka 
or GAM)—a rebel movement—and lead-
ership  and  government  leaders  from  the 
province and from Jakarta secured a peace 
agreement in 2005 that mobilized a broad 
range of stakeholder support, as well as in-
ternational engagement (feature 4).

• 

Inclusion strategies can change over time. 
In Sierra Leone, the initial inclusion of the 
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in the 

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

121

1999  Lomé  Agreement  was  subsequently 
repudiated in 2000 as conditions changed 
and  following  repeated  abuses. Although 
initial arrangements did not succeed, they 
were  nonetheless  necessary  to  encourage 
the RUF leaders to cease ﬁ ghting. Having 
the  leaders  in  the  capital  also  helped  in 
monitoring  their  activities  once  the  ar-
rangements collapsed.12 

•  Conversely, in Sudan, peace talks between 
2000 and 2005 were held between a nar-
row group of leaders on both sides, with 
both North and South continuing to face 
internal divisions that were not managed 
through a broadening of the coalition after 
the peace agreement was signed in January 
2005.13

Inclusive-enough  coalition-building  has 
also been important in successful non-post-
conﬂ ict political transitions, as the following 
examples demonstrate:

•  The  political  transition  in  Chile  in  1990 
and onward involved heavily institutional-
ized political mechanisms to reach agree-
ment  in  policy  among  the  ﬁ ve  political 
parties of the “concertación democratica”; 
outreach  to  labor  and  civil  society;  and 
clear  signals  to  business  that  responsible 
economic management would be part of 
the  new  direction.  In  Chile,  as  in  other 
middle-income  country  political  transi-
tions such as Indonesia, a delicate balanc-
ing approach was used to undertake secu-
rity and justice reforms while maintaining 
support from the military for change.14

• 

In  South  Africa,  inclusive-enough  coali-
tion-building  in  the  run-up  to  the  1994 
election meant involving all political par-
ties  and  civil  society  in  discussions  over 
the country’s future, although the African 
National  Congress  (ANC)  maintained  a 
hierarchy  where  it  led  decision-making 
among  other  ANC  Alliance  and  Demo-
cratic Front members. 

•  The  Colombian  government  mobilized 
the military, civil service, business groups, 

and civil society actors in 2003 to support 
its democratic security policy. This process 
excluded the FARC (Revo lutionary Armed 
Forces  of  Colombia),  whose  breaches  of 
the  peace  talk  provisions  from  the  late 
1990s to 2002 created nationwide demand 
for action against the kidnappings and vi-
olence. Government communication and 
outreach bolstered popular conﬁ dence for 
difﬁ cult  military  and  police  actions  and 
civil service reforms.15

•  The  Consultative  Assembly  (CA),  estab-
lished  to  draft  a  new  constitution,  was 
the  basis  of  Ghana’s  inclusive-enough 
coalition-building  process  during  the 
transition  to  multiparty  democracy.  The 
260-member  Consultative  Assembly  was 
made up of 117 representatives from the 
District and Metropolitan Assemblies, 121 
representatives of various “established or-
ganizations”  (that  is,  corporate  groups) 
and associations, and 22 government ap-
pointees. The Assembly, which contained 
many opposition sympathizers, displayed 
independence and drafted a constitution 
that  was  approved  in  a  referendum  that 
set  the  stage  for  an  orderly  nonviolent 
transition.16

In  diverse  circumstances  of  negotiated 
peace settlements, military victories, and po-
litical  crises,  leaders  have  often  used  broad-
based governments to send a positive signal 
on  inclusion—but  it  is  no  simple  matter. 
Cabinets in developed countries not affected 
by   violence,  where  efﬁ ciency  is  a  primary 
concern,  generally  range  from  15  to  20  ap-
pointments in each administration. But when 
stability, rather than efﬁ ciency, drives the com-
position, cabinets are often larger, as in Kenya 
and Zimbabwe.17 When fragmented decision-
making  is  exacerbated  by  internal  divisions, 
the efﬁ ciency costs can be considerable. 

The  stresses  that  spur  violence  can  be 
rooted  in  provincial  or  local  as  well  as  na-
tional  dynamics,  and  local  coalitions  can 
be  crucial  in  preventing  violence.  The  links 
made between central and provincial govern-

122 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 4 .1  “All politics is local.”
 

  George Yeo, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Singapore; WDR Advisory Council Member 

Successful  eﬀ orts  must  begin  at  the  local  level.  Without 
emphasis  on  local  results,  citizens  lose  conﬁ dence  in  their 
government’s  ability  to  provide  a  better  life.  Actions  to 
restore  security,  create  trust,  generate  employment,  and 
provide services in local communities lay the foundation for 
national progress. It is not enough to deliver results in big 

cities. In cases of ethnic and religious strife, where mutual inse-
curity can feed on itself, a local authority that is seen to be fair 
and  impartial  by  all  groups  is  absolutely  essential  before  the 
process of healing and recovery can take place. This was Singa-
pore’s  experience  when  we  had  racial  riots  in  the  1960s.  A 
trusted leader can make a decisive diﬀ erence.

ments in Aceh (see feature 4) are one exam-
ple, as are the conﬂ ict prevention approaches 
in  Ghana  described  above  and  attention  to 
the  impartiality  of  local  administration  in 
Singapore  (box  4.1).  Country  lessons  also 
raise two developmental mechanisms to sup-
port local coalition building and strengthen 
relations  between  the  state  and  citizens  at 
the local level: ﬁ rst, where government pro-
vides  resources  directly  to  communities  to 
carry  out  development  activities  (through 
 community-driven  development,  or  CDD), 
and second, where communities do not nec-
essarily control funds, but are active partners 
in  actions  undertaken  by  others  (local  ad-
ministrations,  nongovernmental  organiza-
tions  (NGOs),  international  partners)  that 
are implemented for their beneﬁ t. 

Building  coalitions  at  the  local  level—
where the state works with community lead-
ers to combat violence—can be an important 
part of responses to criminal violence as well 
as  political  violence.  Across  Latin  America, 
approaches that work with local community 
leaders  and  combine  security  and  devel-
opment  initiatives  have  replaced  the  older, 
security-only  “mano  duro”  (iron  ﬁ st)  ap-
proaches.  Higher-income  countries  have 
used  similar  approaches,  from  community 
policing  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  France 
to  building  local  alliances  to  combat  drug-
trafﬁ cking and gang activity in Los Angeles 
(see box 4.2). 

The private sector is also crucial for coun-
tries  coping  with  and  emerging  from  vio-

lence. While in the short run, recovery from 
violence can be supported by external assis-
tance or natural resource revenues, the path 
to  longer-term  development  is  dependent 
on a healthy private sector. Private sector ac-
tivity  often  cuts  across  ethnic  and  religious 
lines,  where  rules-based  competition  is  the 
cornerstone. Violence shortens the time ho-
rizons of consumers, producers, traders, and 
policy  makers.  Outreach  to  the  private  sec-
tor can help build a sense of the long term, 
which is critical for planning, investment in 
the  future,  and  sustainable  growth.18  In  the 
Colombia, Chile, and Timor-Leste examples 
above, reaching out to the private sector was 
a crucial part of coalition building.19

The  ability  of  leaders  to  govern  and  to 
effect  change  also  depends  on  a  network 
of  civil  society  and  informal  institutions 
and  actors—and  the  interaction  between 
the  state  and  informal  institutions  takes  on 
even greater signiﬁ cance in societies ravaged 
by  violence.20  Many  nongovernment  initia-
tives have helped contain or stop violence.21 
The inclusion of civil society, informal, and 
traditional  institutions  in  inclusive-enough 
coalitions  helps  in  acquiring  broader  soci-
etal  legitimacy  and  in  ensuring  that  citizen 
security, justice, and jobs reach all segments 
of society. Community, traditional, and civil 
society  structures  can  also  be  crucial  part-
ners  for  the  delivery  of  early  results  where 
state  reach  and  trust  with  violence-affected 
communities is low. By drawing on nonstate 
capacity,  governments  can  “stretch”  their 

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

123

BOX 4.2  Gang-related homicides in Los Angeles
In Los Angeles, gang and drug-related violence accounts for a large percentage of crime 
(nearly 50 percent of homicides) and negatively aﬀ ects education, health, business and jobs, 
housing prices, and the ability for families to enjoy parks and other leisure activities. While 
gangs are not new to Los Angeles County, gang membership ballooned from negligible in 
1970 to 70,000 to 100,000 30 years later. Almost 6,000 people died from gang violence 
between 1995 and 2006, comparable to the civil war in Uganda over the same period, 
where estimates of battle deaths between 1995 to 2006 range from 3,300 to 16,000, with a 
best estimate of 7,500 (Uganda has more than twice the population of the Los Angeles 
metropolitan area).22 

After years of struggling to deal with gang-related violence, a team of experts recently 

wrote, “In short, Los Angeles needs a Marshall Plan to end gang violence” (Advancement 
 Project 2007, 1). New initiatives aim to prevent violence before it escalates by funding and 
training outreach workers who can mediate disputes, stop rumors, and engage with those 
who cause violence (“shotcallers”). The strategy involves regular conﬁ dence-building initiatives 
through frequent consultations among key stakeholders, which can include reformed gang 
members and community leaders. This outreach approach also involves multisectoral coordi-
nation (law enforcement oﬃ  cers conduct community visits accompanied by parole oﬃ  cers, 
educators, child services, and representatives from other city departments as well as civil soci-
ety) to develop relationships and trust between the community and law enforcement. 

Sources: WDR team consultations with law enforcement and civil society and Brian Center (Executive 
Director, A Better LA) in Los Angeles, August 2010; Advancement Project 2009; Uppsala/PRIO Armed 
Conﬂ ict dataset (Lacina and Gleditsch 2005; Harbom and Wallensteen 2010); Los Angeles Almanac 
(Thornton and others 2011).
Note: The challenges of measuring progress in these environments and scaling up successes are not 
dissimilar from those discussed in the rest of this Report. So-called outreach models are in their early 
stages of implementation in Los Angeles and have not been fully integrated into Los Angeles Police 
Department or County Sheriﬀ  practice.

ability to deliver public goods and signal an 
inclusive  partnership  between  the  state  and 
other parts of society.

Informal patronage networks also medi-
ate the effects of attempts to prevent violence 
in many fragile situations: these networks can 
undermine  the  institutional  change  needed 
to develop resilience to violence in the long 
run, but in the short term there is often little 
to  replace  them.  Country  lessons  indicate 
a  balance  between  the  credibility  of  initial 
coalition-building  efforts—which  the  in-
volvement of individuals and groups known 
to be corrupt can undermine—and the need 
to dismantle patronage systems over time as 
institutional  strength  builds.  Chapter  5  dis-
cusses lessons on sequencing anti-corruption 
efforts in fragile situations. 

The  participation  of  women  in  political 
reform can help to broaden initial coalitions 
to serve wider groups of citizens. As peace ne-
gotiations between the Liberian government 

of  Charles  Taylor  and  rebel  groups  in  2003 
were under way, the Liberian Women’s Mass 
Action for Peace movement mobilized thou-
sands  of  supporters  in  Liberia  and  Ghana, 
where  the  talks  were  being  held,  and  barri-
caded delegates in meeting rooms, prompting 
international mediators to set deadlines and 
secure  agreements.23  In  Papua  New  Guinea/
Bougainville, women’s delegations consulted 
with the Bougainville Revolutionary Army to 
end  the  war,  held  initiatives  to  create  peace 
areas,  and  convened  and  led  peace  talks.24 
Southern Sudanese women in the New Sudan 
Council  of  Churches  organized  the  Wunlit 
tribal summit in 1999 to bring an end to hos-
tilities between the Dinka and Nuer peoples. 
The  Wunlit  Covenant  resulted  in  an  agree-
ment  to  share  rights  to  water,  ﬁ shing,  and 
grazing  land,  which  had  been  key  points  of 
disagreement.25  In  Latin  America,  women’s 
groups  have  been  active  on  human  rights 
abuses;  one  of  the  most  well  known  is  Las 

124 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Madres  de  la  Plaza—a  group  of  mothers 
who  began  nonviolent  demonstrations  in 
1977,  demanding  information  from  the Ar-
gentinean government on the whereabouts of 
their “disappeared” children during the years 
known as the Dirty War (1976–83).26

An essential, yet often underrated, ingre-
dient in successful transitions from violence 
is  proactive  communication  by  the  govern-
ment  to  build  public  understanding  and 
support.  Successful  coalitions  have  usually 
managed  to  “capture  the  narrative”—that 
is, to articulate a compelling vision of hope, 
develop  a  sense  of  shared  identity,  generate 
broad popular buy-in, and mobilize citizens 
even  when  the  vision  entails  some  short-
term  sacriﬁ ces  for  their  supporters.  Com-
mon to successful leadership, whether indi-
vidual or collective, is this ability to redeﬁ ne 
citizen and elite expectations, to move them 
beyond negative frames of reference, and to 
transform public policies and institutions in 
ways that will enable the state to address im-
mediate and long-term sources of discord.

Citizens  who  lack  credible  informa-
tion  about  progress  made  and  challenges 
ahead  will  likely  attribute  the  lack  of  vis-
ible improvements to a lack of political will, 
and  they  can  lose  trust  in—and  even  turn 
against—those they believed or elected.27 An 
inclusive  public  dialogue  requires  capacity 
and resources, not just of state institutions or 
of civil society, but also of the media, which 
can play an important role in ensuring public 
accountability and act as a citizen voice. Ex-
perience  indicates  this  capacity  needs  to  be 
developed in a coordinated manner—media 
development should focus not only on basic 
skills  and  journalistic  training  but  also  on 
establishing  of  professional  standards  and 
an enabling regulatory environment for the 
media.  Governments,  meanwhile,  need  to 
be endowed with appropriate outreach and 
communication capacity. 

How inclusive is inclusive-enough? It may 
seem  that  conﬂ ict  can  only  be  prevented 
when all parts of society work together to set 
the country on a new path. This is correct in 
one  sense:  successful  efforts  to  prevent  and 

recover  from  violence  have  built  alliances. 
But as illustrated above, they have not neces-
sarily included all groups within society. 

Four  key  lessons  on  what  makes  for 

inclusive-enough coalitions are as follows: 

•  Groups  may  legitimately  be  excluded 
where there is an evolving belief among the 
population that they have sacriﬁ ced their 
right to participate due to past abuses.

• 

Including  groups  that  bring  political 
legitimacy and ﬁ nancial and technical re-
sources  and  will  continue  to  press  for 
deeper institutional transformation—such 
as business, labor, women’s, or other civil 
society groups—is valuable, but there may 
be  a  hierarchy  of  decision  making  at  the 
beginning, with parties present at the table 
but deferring on some decisions to politi-
cal leadership. 

•  There  can  be  trade-offs  between  wide 
inclusiveness  and  the  efﬁ ciency  of  sub-
sequent  state  decision-making,  as  when 
governments with very large numbers of 
ministries are created.

• 

Inclusion strategies can change over time 
as it becomes possible to marginalize con-
sistently abusive groups. 

Signals and commitment mechanisms 

In  the  early  stages  of  transition,  gaining 
the  conﬁ dence  of  these  stakeholder  groups 
often  requires  policies  that  signal  a  break 
from  the  past  and  instill  trust  that  the  new 
directions  will  not  be  reversed.  Signaling  a 
break from the past can include immediate 
actions or announcement of future actions. 
Committing  to  the  future  requires  assuring 
stakeholders—who may be skeptical on the 
basis  of  broken  promises  in  the  past—that 
changes will be difﬁ cult to reverse. The sig-
nals used by countries that successfully made 
the initial transition away from the brink in-
volved combined actions across the security-
economic or political-economic domains.

The most powerful signals show that lead-
ers  are  not  prisoners  of  anti-reform,  anti-

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

125

compromise  forces  among  their  own  sup-
porters. Strategic appointments can be a vital 
signal  of  future  intent.  The  ﬁ rst  president 
elected  after  the  Nicaraguan  peace  agree-
ment retained the chief of staff of the army 
in  his  position.  That  sent  a  strong  reassur-
ing signal to the defeated opposition that she 
would not use an electoral victory to resume 
military  campaigns.28  In  Mozambique,  the 
former  RENAMO  (Mozambican  National 
Resistance, the former rebel movement that 
is  now  an  opposition  party) supreme  com-
mander was appointed deputy chief-of-staff 
of the Mozambican Defense Force, and seven 
RENAMO  members  were  appointed  to  the 
national electoral commission (alongside 10 
government representatives).29 

In  the  security  sector,  signals  from  gov-
ernments  or  opposition  armed  movements 
have demonstrated what the security forces 
will not do—as much as what they will do. 
The  Mozambique  government  unilaterally 
announced  the  start  of  troop  conﬁ nement 
as  part  of  the  demobilization.  This  created 
enough trust for RENAMO to announce its 
own steps toward demobilization.30 

In  Iraq,  the  “surge”  to  restore  order  in 
2006–07 was preceded by a decision to with-
draw the police, who were accused of taking 
factional sides in the violence, from insecure 
urban areas and to deploy the army instead. 
While  this  created  longer-term  challenges 
of returning the army to its typical role and 
building up the civilian police, it did restore 
civilian conﬁ dence. 31 Strong signals can also 
be sent by rebel movements: the decision by 
Xanana Gusmão in 1999 to conﬁ ne to bar-
racks the Timorese resistance troops, Falintil, 
even in the face of widespread destruction in 
the country, avoided a repeat of the 1975 de-
scent into civil war.32 

Signals  on  political  reform  are  crucial 
where political exclusion was a central factor 
in motivating violence or civil protests. These 
may include rapid action toward elections or 
lay out a series of preparatory steps—as with 
the transitional executive bodies and consti-
tutional  reform  processes  in  South  Africa, 
supported  by  civic  education  and  national 

and local action to maintain security during 
the  political  process  through  the  National 
Peace  Accords  (box  3.9).  Where  elections 
will take place quickly, indicating that these 
are not an end but a step toward institutional 
transformation  (as  described  in  the  inputs 
by Lakhdar Brahimi and Nitin Desai in box 
5.11) is important. The creation of commit-
ment mechanisms to ensure that announce-
ments  on  political  reforms  will  be  honored 
in  their  implementation—such  as  robustly 
independent electoral commissions, supple-
mented where useful by regional or interna-
tional  technical  and  monitoring  capacity—
can help to build trust.

Signaling  early  intent  to  redress  human 
rights  violations  is  also  possible  even  when 
the  processes  take  time.  Countries  emerg-
ing  from  severe  violence  often  carry  lega-
cies of human rights violations and trauma 
that shatter social norms or break the social 
contract  between  state  and  citizen.33  Often 
poor  and  marginalized  communities  bear 
the brunt of predatory actions by state and 
nonstate  actors,  and  tackling  such  evident 
injustices can be a high priority in a govern-
ment  attempt  to  break  with  the  past,  while 
starting to rebuild the institutions of the for-
mal justice system. 

With trust so important for stabilization 
and  recovery,  some  societies  have  signaled 
early  commitments  to  transitional  justice. 
These  efforts  include  steps  leading  to  truth 
commissions, reparations programs for vic-
tims,  and  counter-impunity  initiatives  that 
may  involve  prosecuting  the  worst  abusers 
and vetting security forces.34 Such initiatives 
send  powerful  signals  about  the  commit-
ment of the new government to the rule of 
law.  Even  if  institutional  or  political  factors 
do not allow for full redress, early gathering 
of evidence of human rights violations and 
assisting victims can signal serious intent to 
overcome  legacies  of  impunity  and  rights 
violations  at  both  the  community  and  na-
tional level. These approaches have also been 
tried  with  some  success  in  middle-income 
countries making a transition from military 
rule.  The  state  governments  in  Brazil  pro-

126 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

vided early economic compensation to some 
victims of political violence during the coun-
try’s military dictatorship, prompting a pro-
cess of truth-telling and public discussion of 
past crimes.35 

Given  the  link  between  corruption  and 
violence,  judicious,  rapid  transparency  and 
anti -corruption measures can help to restore 
stakeholder and citizen conﬁ dence. In some 
countries, legacies of corruption leave heavy 
resentment and mistrust, which must be ad-

dressed for the new political arrangements to 
have credibility. In Liberia, government cor-
ruption was widely viewed as a major moti-
vator  for  the  rebellion  of  1980,  launching 
Liberia’s  long-running  sequence  of  internal 
wars,  temporary  transitional  governments, 
coups,  and  further  wars.  One  of  President 
 Ellen Johnson Sirleaf’s ﬁ rst and most popular 
actions was to ﬁ re two prominent ﬁ gures on 
corruption charges and maintain tight con-
trols  over  corruption  (box  4.3).  The  power 

BOX 4.3   Signals and commitments for economic management: GEMAP in Liberia

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, political violence, criminal and gang-related violence, traﬃ  cking

Transition opportunity:  Moderate space for change, presiden-
tial elections, strong international support

Key stresses:  Long history of violence, trauma, grievances and 
mistrust, corruption, youth unemployment

Key stakeholders:  Government needed to restore conﬁ dence 
of opposition parties and civil society, neighboring countries 
and regional institutions, donors and investors

Institutional challenges:  Extreme corruption and low domestic 
revenues, undermining political governance and constraining 
eﬀ orts to increase government capacity

Following the end of the 14-year Liberian civil war in 2003, the international community became increasingly concerned about the 
mismanagement and corruption under the National Transitional Government of Liberia (NTGL). Corruption was not just an economic 
concern: political and army reactions to the extensive corruption of the Tolbert government have been widely cited as a trigger for 
the coup that sparked Liberia’s ﬁ rst civil war in 1989, and the theft of national resources continued to ﬁ nance violent groups. The 
extreme corruption prevented improvements in government capacity by constraining national revenues and diverting external 
resources. 

After intense negotiations, diplomatic pressure, and the threat of an embargo on external assistance, the NTGL and Liberia’s inter-

national partners agreed to the Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program (GEMAP). The AU (African Union) and 
ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States) led discussions with the NTGL, and the UN Security Council welcomed GEMAP 
in Resolution 1626 of September 19, 2005. GEMAP’s aim was to improve revenue collection, budgeting, and expenditure management; 
upgrade procurement practices; strengthen transparency over concessions of national resources; control corruption; and build govern-
ment capacity. 

A deﬁ ning feature of GEMAP is the use of international experts with co-signatory authority in the operations of ministries and 
state-owned enterprises, the review of concessions and contracts (including timber and diamonds), and the establishment of an 
oversight mechanism, the Economic Governance Steering Committee (EGSC), to guide and monitor GEMAP implementation. The EGSC 
is a mechanism of shared accountability, chaired by President Johnson Sirleaf and the American Ambassador as the deputy chair.

GEMAP has helped bring some rapid improvements and was an appropriate response to Liberia’s particular mix of stresses, stake-

holders, and institutional challenges at the time. Revenues increased from US$84.5 million in 2005–06 to a projected US$347 million in 
2010–11, and Liberia’s ranking on the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index climbed from 150 to 97 between 2007 
and 2009. 

GEMAP, however, has also ignited debate over the management role of expatriates. President Johnson Sirleaf told the UN Security 
Council that “a major deﬁ ciency still exists as with other technical assistance programs—the lack of capacity development for sustain-
ability. This fault has contributed to tensions between foreign and local experts, thereby raising issues of ownership and sovereignty.”36 
A lesson from GEMAP is to look closely at phasing the handover of responsibilities over time and manage local understanding and 
support.

Sources: AllAfrica 2009; Andersen 2010; Atkinson 2008; Bøås 2009; Dwan and Bailey 2006; Jahr 2010; Government of the Republic of Liberia 
Executive Mansion 2009.

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

127

and enduring effect of such a signal rests on 
informing citizens that the leader can reject 
supporters  who  might  prefer  to  renege  on 
commitments to citizens or the opposition. 
(Chapters  6  addresses  temporary  external 
support to justice systems, especially for re-
dressing crimes committed during episodes 
of violence.)

Successful  early  stabilization  efforts 
have  often  featured  greater  transparency  in 
decision-making  and  budgeting  to  improve 
trust between citizens and the state. The new 
government of Timor-Leste broke with tradi-
tion in 2008 when it broadcast the budget de-
bate in its entirety on radio and television.37 
Open consultations over policy in Chile and 
public  inputs  to  appointment  conﬁ rmation 
processes  in  Argentina  created  conﬁ dence 
that new directions would not be reversed.

Other governments have pursued greater 
transparency  at  the  grassroots.  In  the  early 
1990s  in  Uganda,  concerns  arose  over  the 
 apparent  disparity  between  budget  allo-
cations  and  actual  spending  on  education. 
This  served  as  an  impetus  for  the  ﬁ rst 
Public  Expenditure  Tracking  Survey.  The 
initial  survey  of  250  government-run  pri-
mary schools in 1991–95 revealed that only 
13 percent of the education funds from the 
central government went to the schools, with 
the  remaining 87 percent used for personal 
gain or non-education purposes. Later sur-
veys,  implemented  after  the  ﬁ rst  was  made 
public,  showed  that  the  ﬂ ow  of  funds  to 
schools   increased  to  around  80–90  percent 
in 1999–2000. The expenditure tracking sys-
tem boosted citizen and donor conﬁ dence in 
the aftermath of the civil war. However, the 
system has since weakened.38 

Wealth-sharing can generate support and 
conﬁ dence in stable situations and in transi-
tions. Most countries rich in natural resources 
share smaller or larger amounts of the reve-
nues  from  extraction  with  subnational  gov-
ernments (as in Brazil, Mexico, and Nigeria). 
Such wealth-sharing arrangements are often 
vital when civil wars have been fueled by nat-
ural resources or have featured disputes over 

natural  resource  control.  The  arrangements 
for sharing oil revenues in Sudan are an es-
sential  aspect  of  the  Comprehensive  Peace 
Agreement of 2005 (an Agreement on Wealth 
Sharing, Chapter III of the CPA, was signed in 
early 2004). In Pakistan the government used 
a budgetary provision to signal greater atten-
tion to areas of growing insecurity (box 4.4). 
Commitments  were  built  into  these  agree-
ments by passing them into law—and, in Su-
dan, through limited third-party monitoring. 
Social cohesion policies are another strong 
signal that helps create a sense of fairness and 
social justice across population groups. Such 
policies  foster  the  participation  of  hitherto 
excluded  groups  or  areas  in  economic  and 
political  decision-making,  enabling  them 
to beneﬁ t from development assistance and 
 ensuring  that  civil  service  recruitment  is 
nondiscriminatory. To signify the state’s con-
cern for the victims of violence or those pre-
viously excluded from state services, Rwanda 
provided  housing  support  and  Timor-Leste 
cash  transfer  payments  for  internally  dis-
placed persons.

Signals can involve removing or amend-
ing laws perceived as unjust and discrimina-
tory—such  as  abolishing  apartheid  laws  in 
South Africa and, in Pakistan, the discussion 
over the Frontier Crimes Regulation, which 
applies a legal regime to the federally admin-
istered tribal areas differing from the rest of 
Pakistan.

In  pursuing  social  cohesion  policies,  an-
other signal is restoring public services to the 
middle class, who may be crucial for political 
support for change. For example, increasing 
social investments in Chile in the 1990s was 
balanced by restitution of civil service pen-
sions and appointments;39 sunset clauses for 
white civil servants in South Africa balanced 
fast action on maternal and child health care 
for the poorest communities.40 Policies aimed 
at tangible results for these groups are often 
not  pro-poor,  and  hence  are  often  difﬁ cult 
for development practitioners to agree on as 
priorities. But they can be part of the political 
economy of successful change.41

128 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 4.4  Pakistan: Using the budget to signal change

Types of violence:  Subnational, political, cross-border, traﬃ  cking, ideological including transnational

Transition opportunity:  Limited space for change following 
accession of new government in 2008 and military campaign of 
2009 in Swat valley

Key stakeholders:  Federal, regional, and local government 
(including tribal areas); excluded groups; neighboring countries; 
international partners; national and transnational militant groups

Key stresses:  Cross-border conﬂ ict spillovers; transnational 
terrorism; regional competition; corruption; political and social 
inequality; income and asset inequality; regional inequities; 
youth unemployment; tensions over natural resource wealth-
sharing in peripheral regions

Institutional challenges:  Accountability and capacity 
constraints in public administration; security, judicial, and 
political institutions 

Late in 2009, the agreement by Pakistan’s federal and provincial 
government leaders to the Seventh National Finance Commis-
sion Award was hailed as a “major achievement and a positive 
event for those who believe that the future of a vibrant Pakistan 
lies in a democratic federation.”42 

In Pakistan, grievances over inequity in revenue-sharing go 

back a long time and have been part of a broader set of tensions 
between regions within Pakistan. They have been exacerbated 
by debates over the distribution of political power and, more 
recently, over the independence of institutions of accountability, 
notably the judiciary. All this in a context where Pakistan faces 
terrorist threats, subnational tensions, separatist movements, 
regional insecurity, and severe economic inequality. 

Attempts to set in place a new agreement had failed for 17 

years. As part of the 2009 ﬁ ve-year public ﬁ nance award, the fed-

eral government sacriﬁ ced part of its share of the national divis-
ible pool of resources in favor of the provinces. While all prov-
inces will receive an increase in resources, two of them also 
accepted a reduction in their shares to provide more resources 
to Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provinces—which were 
both aﬀ ected by internal conﬂ ict and the war in Afghanistan. 
The award was also an important part of eﬀ orts to assuage sepa-
ratist sentiments in Balochistan and to settle more than 30 years 
of disputes between Sindh and Punjab about the distribution of 
water. On its own, however, the award does not address local 
governance and institutional challenges. The decline of public 
revenues and the impact of the ﬂ oods of 2010 have also con-
strained the overall potential for the allocation and transfer of 
funds, and legal and resource challenges remain constraints to 
implementation.

Source: Porter, Andrews, and Wescott 2010.

Delivering early results

Country lessons show that inclusive-enough 
coalitions have to be complemented by tan-
gible results to restore conﬁ dence in national 
institutions.  Results  on  the  ground  build 
conﬁ dence  for  three  reasons.  First,  they  are 
concrete  indicators  of  a  government’s  good 
intentions  toward  citizens.  Second,  they 
demonstrate the government’s ability to de-
liver on its promises. Third, they build con-
ﬁ dence by indicating that leaders are able to 
withstand pressure from their own support-
ers to play a “winner take all” game and that 
they  instead  provide  beneﬁ ts  to  all  citizens. 
This  conﬁ dence-building  requires 
listen-
ing to popular expectations, setting realistic 
priorities for what can be delivered, drawing 
on  nongovernment  capacity  to  deliver,  and 
communicating  results  to  the  population. 
This section identiﬁ es various practical ways 

to deliver results to violence-affected popu-
lations.  (Chapter  5  then  presents  examples 
of possible interventions across the security, 
justice, and jobs spectrum for both the im-
mediate and longer term.) 

Perception  surveys  in  Africa  and  Latin 
America  indicate  that  employment  and  se-
curity are people’s most pressing problems.43 
Electricity,  literally  the  most “visible”  of  all 
results, can be critical for progress in secu-
rity  and  job  creation.  In  many  countries,  a 
perception of increased justice for excluded 
populations  may  come  about  not  only 
through  action  in  the  justice  sector  per  se 
but also through broader social justice that 
includes greater provision of health, educa-
tion, or social protection. The speciﬁ c short-
term  results  most  important  for  restoring 
conﬁ dence will depend on an assessment of 
the priorities of the population and the pref-
erences of key stakeholder groups (box 4.5).

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

129

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 4 . 5  Building early conﬁ dence in Haiti—Challenges and reﬂ ections
 

   Carlos Alberto Dos Santos Cruz, Lt General, Brazilian Army; former Force Commander of the United 
Nations Peacekeeping Mission in Haiti; WDR Advisory Council Member

During  my  time  as  UN  force  commander  in  Haiti,  the  mis-
sion faced many challenges. In the very beginning, the big-
gest  one  was  how  to  balance  demands  for  security  and 
development.

From the start, it was made clear that the primary goal 
of the UN force was to protect and serve the interests of the 
citizens.  At  the  same  time,  troops  were  encouraged  to  act 
with determination against individuals and groups respon-
sible  for  violence.  This  meant  good  intelligence  work  fol-
lowed, when necessary, by robust operations using force if 
necessary. At the same time, troops tried to show that they 
were respectful and supportive of the population.

Institutions and individuals are not alone in such circum-
stances, and they must work with others in the international 
and  nongovernment  communities  and  encourage  them 
to  set  aside  parochial  mindsets  and  behaviors.  If  there  is 
not success in this, there is risk of wasting lots of time talk-
ing  on  coordination  and  cooperation  without  improving 
performance.

Once the environment is safe, it is important to focus on 
delivering basic services, creating jobs, and improving infra-
structure. At that time, as soon as the mission defeated the 
street  gangs,  the  peacekeeping  forces  began  to  deliver 
potable water each day and, working with local leaders, to 
help  with  small-scale  projects  like  renovating  community 
centers  and  cleaning  schools.  Military  troops  also  worked 
with  NGOs  to  clear  canals  and  distribute  food,  mattresses 
and stoves.

In all this, there was careful concern to not waste scarce 
funds on projects ill-suited to local conditions. Indeed, mak-
ing the most of ﬁ nancial resources was always uppermost in 
the  mind  of  the  military  contingent.  It  was  important  to 
guard  against  the  very  human  desire  to  not  act  quickly 
unless  it  is  sustainable  in  the  longer  term.  For  instance,  a 

generator was provided to a small ﬁ shing community to use in 
the ﬁ sh market. It seemed like a good idea at the time, but the 
locals  were  not  used  to  sharing  the  costs  for  fuel  or  mainte-
nance, and very soon the generator was broken.

The performance of local institutions is fundamental. With-
out strong political leadership, reasonable laws, and a judicial 
system that works, eﬀ orts will be in vain. Indeed, many actions 
may  actually  make  matters  worse.  In  Cité  Soleil,  after  many 
years without either a courthouse or police headquarters, one 
of the aid agencies rebuilt the courthouse and military troops 
started patrolling jointly with the national police. Pretty soon 
things started to improve as the police gradually won the trust 
of the local people.

It was amazing to watch long lines of citizens in front of the 
courthouse  waiting  to  resolve  their  problems  through  the 
law  and  to  see  the  growing  numbers  who  went  to  the  com-
missariat  to  ask  for  help  from  the  police.  People  know  when 
someone is trying to help and they respond positively. In Haiti, 
after just a few months, they began to bring to the UN troops 
valuable  intelligence,  to  hand  in  weapons,  and  to  deal  with 
criminals  and  the  perpetrators  of  violence.  They  also  began 
to participate in community eﬀ orts and start businesses. Peo-
ple  moved  back  into  their  homes,  rebuilt  the  markets,  and 
thronged  previously  abandoned  streets.  The  experience  in 
Haiti convinced me that if national leaders, with the right kind 
of support from the international institutions, focus on a few 
basic building blocks, citizens themselves will ﬁ x the problems 
and rebuild their countries.

WDR note: Haiti is often referred to as a “post-conﬂ ict” country, but 
this  is  inaccurate.  Haiti  did  experience  civil  uprisings  against  the 
autocratic Duvalier regime; Jean-Claude (“Baby Doc”) Duvalier ﬂ ed 
the country in 1986. Since that time, Haiti has experienced a suc-
cession  of  military  rule,  ﬂ awed  elections,  coups,  democratic  elec-
tions, militia activity, and gang violence.

What is the right balance of quick, 
visible results and longer-term 
institution-building?

Although  tangible  results  are  needed  in  the 
short  term,  these will  be  insufﬁ cient  to  pre-
vent  violence  recurring  without  simultane-
ous  steps  toward  transforming  institutions 
(see  chapter  5).  Striking  a  balance  requires 
an  astute  reading  of  available  capacity  and 
tradeoffs.  WDR  consultations  in  several 

countries  highlighted  the  need  for  govern-
ments  to  demonstrate  at  least  two  to  three 
visible results locally in the ﬁ rst year follow-
ing  a  new  pact  for  change,  and  ideally  one 
or two in the ﬁ rst months (box 4.6). Results 
need  to  be  repeated  at  regular  intervals, 
however, to maintain momentum and citizen 
conﬁ dence. 

Combined  political,  security,  and  de-
velopmental  capacities  are  often  needed  to 
deliver  conﬁ dence-building  results  quickly 

130 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 4.6    Only a few visible results are needed to restore conﬁ dence: Examples from civil war, 

organized criminal, and subnational violence

Liberia

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, political violence, criminal and gang-related violence, traﬃ  cking

Transition opportunity:  Moderate space for change, presiden-
tial elections, strong international support

Key stresses:  Long history of violence, trauma, grievances and 
mistrust, corruption, youth unemployment

Key stakeholders:  Government needed to restore conﬁ dence 
of opposition parties and civil society, neighboring countries and 
regional institutions, donors and investors

Institutional challenges:  Corruption and low domestic 
revenues, undermining political governance and constraining 
eﬀ orts to increase government capacity

The Liberian government capitalized on a well-managed donor program and a long-standing dearth of public-spirited government to 
visibly deliver public goods, restoring conﬁ dence in government. The key was to be speciﬁ c about what was promised—restoring elec-
tricity in Monrovia in a year, for example—and to make sure that the government actually delivered what it had promised. Tornorlah 
Varpilah, Liberian Deputy Minister of Health, told the WDR team that Liberia took some immediate actions to satisfy public opinion. 
The ﬁ rst was to guarantee peace and security using UN forces. Then the President took action to provide free primary education, free 
primary health care, and electricity in the capital city. Those interventions helped build conﬁ dence in the government.44 Simultane-
ously, the government worked to improve capacity in the public ﬁ nance and justice systems for the longer term.

Colombia

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, traﬃ  cking, criminal and gang-related violence

Transition opportunity:  Preventive action in the face of rising 
criminality and failed peace talks

Key stakeholders:  Government, armed groups, citizens, civil 
society, regional, international partners

Key stresses:  Legacies of violence, presence of criminal 
networks and drug production/traﬃ  cking, perceived social and 
economic deprivation, natural resource wealth 

Institutional challenges:  Lack of reach of state; accountability
challenges

In 2002, the government made restoring security a top priority and deﬁ ned a set of fairly narrow targets for violence-aﬀ ected areas: 
restoring safe transit by deploying military resources to protect the main road network and sponsoring convoys of private vehicles that 
allowed many Colombians to travel between major cities in safety for the ﬁ rst time in years; reducing homicides and kidnappings; 
restoring social services to the national average; and improving trust in the state. Meetings around the country during the electoral 
campaign and a review of the strengths and weaknesses of past eﬀ orts informed selection of these targets. A review of the previous 
Politica Nacional de Rehabilitación (PNR)45 program, for example, indicated that it had spread its eﬀ orts too thinly across diﬀ erent 
regions, so the new government chose a smaller number of violence-aﬀ ected areas. It also drew on wider capacities to execute the 
program, including U.S. support for security-sector capacity-building and the engagement of Colombian NGOs and other donors in 
social programs in violence-aﬀ ected rural areas. Frequent perception surveys of citizens kept the government up-to-date on progress. 

Pakistan

Types of violence:  Subnational, political, cross-border, traﬃ  cking, ideological, including transnational 

Transition opportunity:  Limited space for change following 
accession of new government in 2008 and 2009 military 
campaign in Swat valley

Key stakeholders:  National, regional, and local government 
(including tribal areas), excluded groups; neighboring countries; 
international partners; national and transnational militant groups

Key stresses:  Cross-border conﬂ ict spillovers, transnational 
terrorism, regional competition, corruption; political, social, 
income, and asset inequality; regional inequities; youth 
unemployment; tensions over natural resource wealth sharing in 
peripheral regions

Institutional challenges:  Accountability and capacity 
constraints in public administration, security, judicial, and 
political institutions

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

131

BOX 4.6    (continued)

Following the Pakistan government’s 2009 military oﬀ ensive to drive militants from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and 
the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province (KP; formerly the Northwest-Frontier Province), the government—with the World Bank, Asian Devel-
opment Bank, UN, and European Union—undertook an assessment to address needs and understand the factors underlying violence. 
In addition to traditional analyses of economic and social data, the assessment involved a crisis analysis and consultations with more 
than 1,000 representatives of communities from FATA and KP. Focus group discussions were also held by local NGOs and women’s 
groups. The primary issues were jobs and justice system reform, including the country’s overall legal framework (diﬀ erent in FATA from 
the rest of Pakistan) and the resolution of land and family disputes. The exercise highlighted the danger of overpromising: initial plans 
did not take capacity into account, resulting in unrealistic timelines. Since the assessment, Pakistan has faced the even more immediate 
challenges of the devastating humanitarian disaster caused by the ﬂ oods in August 2010. But the assessment still gives a detailed pic-
ture of citizen priorities.

Sources: Baily and Hoskins 2007; McCandless 2008; World Bank and ADB 2010; WDR team consultation with national leaders from fragile and 
conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected countries in Berlin, 2009; WDR team  consultation with government oﬃ  cials, representatives from civil society organizations, 
and security personnel in Colombia and Pakistan, 2010; Arboleda 2010; Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral 2010.

and initiate cross-sectoral institutional trans-
formations.  Governments  have  used  tools 
 associated  with  one  domain  of  action  (se-
curity, justice, economic) to achieve goals in 
 another. Navigating transitions has involved a 
clear focus on the stresses that drive violence 
and on designing programs to mitigate them. 
This implies an interdisciplinary approach to 
strategy based not on sectoral programs and 
outcomes but on balancing security, justice, 
and economic opportunity (box 4.7).

How can results be delivered when 
states face a legacy of weak capacity 
and legitimacy?

Governments that have restored conﬁ dence 
of  stakeholders  and  citizens  have  typically 
mobilized  nonstate  actors  to  deliver  results 
rather  than  doing  everything  themselves.46 
Drawing  on  “supplementary  capacity”  has 
meant tapping into both local nonstate struc-
tures (communities and community organi-
zations, traditional institutions of justice, the 
domestic private sector, NGOs) and external 
assistance  (regional  organizations,  interna-
tional donors, the international private sec-
tor; see chapter 6). 

Governments  are  often  concerned  that 
drawing in NGO, private sector, or commu-
nity  capacity  will  take  the  credit  away  from 

the  government,  or  that  it  will  be  difﬁ cult 
to  transform  these  modes  of  delivery  far-
ther down the line when state institutional ca-
pacity has increased. It is indeed critical that 
nongovernmental programs, particularly in-
ternational programs, give appropriate, visible 
attributions of credit to national institutions. 
Development  programs  stamped  with  the 
logo of international institutions do not build 
trust  in  national  institutions.  Yet  nongov-
ernmental mechanisms can be used to boost 
conﬁ dence in government responsiveness to 
its  citizens,  as  box  4.8  on  Afghanistan’s  Na-
tional Solidarity Program indicates. Similarly, 
the involvement of NGOs under government 
coordination in Afghanistan and Timor-Leste 
(see  chapter  8)  increased  the  perception  of 
government effectiveness in the health sector. 
Community-driven development (CDD) 
approaches have been applied in varied con-
texts.  While  such  programs  alone  cannot 
transform the security, justice, or economic 
dynamics  in  violent  settings,  their  use  is  a 
good indicator of the range of purposes they 
can  serve  and  the  relative  ease  of  adapting 
their  design  to  different  needs.47  Attributes 
such as participatory planning and decision-
making, cooperation between local authori-
ties  and  the  committees  selected  by  com-
munity members for the purpose of a CDD 
program,  and  community  control  of  funds 

132 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 4.7  Different sectors, core goals 

National programs (sometimes with international support) have used tools from one “sector” to meet goals in another. These 
approaches can be eﬀ ective in a variety of situations—in countries recovering from civil war and in societies aﬀ ected by drug-related 
violence, ranging from low to middle income. 

Justice and inclusion goal—Security intervention. In Burundi, a key part in the Arusha peace process that stabilized the long-running 
civil war was the creation in 2004 of a new national army, the Force de Défense Nationale, in which the Hutu ethnic group represented 
40 percent of the oﬃ  cer corps. This was important for the Hutu, who account for more than 80 percent of the population but had long 
been excluded from the military and had suﬀ ered from military actions against them as far back as 1972. 

Justice and inclusion goal—Economic intervention. Jamaica’s inner cities have been at the center of the country’s crime and violence 
problem, which, coupled with growing poverty, has further exacerbated social fragmentation and the weakness of civic organizing in 
inner-city communities. With donor support, the government launched a program to provide inner-city community infrastructure and 
services for the poor in 2006, which includes measures to promote short-term conﬂ ict mitigation and resolution, as well as medium-
term social prevention and capacity enhancement interventions.

Security goal—Economic intervention. In Mozambique, the civilian population was caught up in successive military oﬀ ensives. During 
Mozambique’s transition, joint international-national eﬀ orts to provide assistance and sustainable resettlement to both former com-
batants and the internally displaced eased the potential tension that postwar population shifts and a lack of livelihood opportunities 
might otherwise have caused.

Security goal—Multisectoral intervention. To address rising urban violence in Cali, Colombia, the DESEPAZ program (a Spanish acro-
nym for development, security, and peace) integrated employment and microenterprise programs for youth, urban upgrading, and pri-
mary education alongside security interventions. The program was also noteworthy for its organizers’ understanding of crime: because 
most homicides occurred on weekends, holidays, and at night, selling alcohol and carrying guns at those times were banned. A 30 per-
cent decline in homicides in 1994–97 is attributed directly to the program.

Economic goal—Justice and inclusion intervention. After early eﬀ orts to implement the Dayton Accords in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
international monitors found through interviews with business persons that trade between Bosnian, Croat, and Serb majority regions 
was substantially aﬀ ected by ethnically denominated license plates. The Oﬃ  ce of the High Representative mandated that nonethnic 
license plates be issued to all cars in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and within weeks of this initiative, traﬃ  c and trade had surged.

Economic goal—Security intervention. After the establishment of the UN Interim Mission in Kosovo in June 1999, UN administrators 
observed that trade between Kosovo and its neighbors was depressed. Insecurity on the major highways from Pristina to border cross-
ings was identiﬁ ed as an obstacle, so NATO’s KFOR troops were deployed to provide security along major highways and transit points. 
Exports rose from €27.6 million in 2002 to €297 million in 2010, and imports from €854.8 million to €2.1 billion.

Economic goal—Security intervention. In Liberia, partnership between the UN peacekeeping mission, the United Nations Develop-
ment Programme, and the World Bank maintained the country’s degraded roads, so that parts of the country were no longer cut oﬀ  
from the capital during the rainy season, with a consequent boost in conﬁ dence.

Sources: Roque and others 2010; Economist Intelligence Unit 2008a; International Crisis Group 2007; Igreja and Dias-Lambranca 2008; Villaveces 
and others 2000; World Bank 1999b, 2006e; Cousens and Harland 2006; Statistical Oﬃ  ce of Kosovo 2010; Chesterman 2004; Giovine and others 
2010. 

mean  the  programs  can  signal  a  change  in 
the attitude of the state to communities, even 
before physical projects are completed. They 
can  thereby  enhance  state-society  relations, 
increase citizen trust in institutions, and con-
tribute  to  longer-term  institution  building 
(box 4.8). Experience from a range of appli-
cations48 suggests that CDD programs can ex-
tend the state’s reach, especially in areas from 
which it has been absent during a conﬂ ict; re-

construct social capital and strengthen social 
cohesion;49  signal  inclusion  of  marginalized 
groups (such as women and youth); and con-
tribute  to  decentralization,  either  by  design 
or through adaptations over time.

The  importance  of  community  engage-
ment in local-level interventions can be il-
lustrated by psychosocial support programs. 
Political  and  criminal  violence  alike  can 
cause  signiﬁ cant  psychological  and  social 

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

133

BOX 4.8   Community-driven development strengthens state-society relations in Afghanistan

Types of violence:  Intergroup, ethnic, and political violence; organized crime and traﬃ  cking; cross-border; transnational ideological 

Transition opportunity:  Initial large space for change: Bonn 
Accord, loya jirga, presidential, parliamentary and provincial elec-
tions, national development budget

Key stakeholders:  National and local government, security 
forces, community leaders, civil society groups, citizens, interna-
tional partners, transnational militant groups

Key stresses:  Legacies of violence and trauma, transnational 
terrorism, criminal networks, low incomes, youth unemployment, 
corruption, gender discrimination

Institutional challenges:  Severe accountability and capacity 
constraints in public administration, security, judicial, and politi-
cal institutions

Afghanistan, one of the world’s poorest countries, has experienced a near continuous period of invasion and occupation, civil war, and 
oppression since the late 1970s. Between the overthrow of President Daoud before the Soviet invasion in 1979 and the Bonn Accord in 
2002, the central government never had authority across the entire country. In addition to a long legacy of violence and poverty, the 
country faces the daunting stresses of internal conﬂ ict, terrorism, ethnic tension, regional and global security stresses, and extensive 
corruption.

Development under these conditions obviously is particularly challenging. However, the largest development program in Afghani-
stan, the National Solidarity Program (NSP), has registered some important successes. Since its inauguration in 2003, it has established 
more than 22,500 community development councils across 361 districts in all 34 provinces and ﬁ nanced more than 50,000 develop-
ment projects. Through the democratically elected, gender-balanced councils, the program builds representative institutions for village 
governance. Typical projects construct or improve critical infrastructure, such as communal drinking water facilities, irrigation canals, 
local roads and bridges, and electrical generators, and oﬀ er vocational training or literacy courses to villagers.

Economic evaluations show consistently high rates of return across all sectors (above 12 percent). A midterm evaluation by the Uni-
versity of York in the United Kingdom in 2005–06 found signiﬁ cant evidence of greater public faith in the national government, along 
with better community relations. The independently conducted Randomized Impact Evaluation of Phase-II of Afghanistan’s National 
Solidarity Program in 201050 reinforced this ﬁ nding through a large-sample quantitative assessment using randomized controlled trials 
to compare outcomes in 250 villages covered by the NSP, with 250 villages not yet participating in the program. As part of the inde-
pendent evaluation indicated above, a survey was conducted between October 2007 and May 2008 that showed that the simple pro-
cess of electing councils and planning local investments increased villagers’ trust in all levels of government. Across the board, those in 
villages participating in the NSP had more trust in government oﬃ  cials, showing that it is possible to markedly change perceptions of 
state institutions through eﬀ ective local interventions. 

Furthermore, a separate study by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, in Washington, DC, found that “the CDCs and 

tribal shuras51 are seen as more responsive to Afghan needs than provincial governments and provincial councils, and in many cases are 
the only sign of improvement villagers have seen in the past ﬁ ve years.”52 

Sources: Beath and others 2010; Patel and Ross 2007; Selvarajan 2008; Brick 2008; Barakat 2006. 

(box continues on next page)

 suffering. Activities aimed at improving men - 
tal  health  and  well-being  of  at-risk  popu-
lations  through  psychosocial  support  have 
proven to be more effective if communities 
are involved. For example, evaluations of two 
psychosocial  programs  in  conﬂ ict-affected 
regions  of  Indonesia  from  1999  to  2001 
found that the program that used a more ho-
listic approach, engaging the wider commu-
nity, had a greater impact than the one that 
focused solely on trauma and used a medical 
model.53 Similarly, engaging the community 
in  traditional  healing  and  cleansing  ritu-
als for child soldiers in Angola, Liberia, and 

northern Uganda was found to be mutually 
empowering and more effective in reintegra-
tion than traditional psychological efforts—
the child soldiers felt “decontaminated” psy-
chologically  and  the  community  was  more 
willing to accept them back socially.54 

Traditional and community structures for 
dispute resolution are also potential partners 
in delivering early results—and it may be un-
wise to ignore them. In many fragile settings, 
formal  systems  for  the  provision  of  justice 
are weak or broken down. At the local level, 
this  breakdown  opens  gaps  not  only  in  the 
core criminal justice system, but also in the 

134 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 4.8   Community-driven development strengthens state-society relations in Afghanistan

(continued)

Do oﬃ  cials work for the beneﬁ ts of all the villagers? 

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
”
s
e
y
“
 

%

 

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

+4*

80

71

+6*

65

+7*

56

+5*

69

+5*

73

68

+4*

51

+5*

  29

+3*

President

Provincial
governor

District

administrator

Members of
parliament

Central

government

oﬃcials

Government

judges

Police

NGO workers

ISAF/U.S.

army soldiers 

NSP village

Non-NSP village

Source: Beath and others 2010.
Note: Villages that participated in the NSP program exhibit more trust in national and local governments. Participants responded that they believed 
that national and local government oﬃ  cials worked for the beneﬁ t of all villagers signiﬁ cantly more often in NSP villages than in other villages. Statisti-
cally signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences are shown with asterisked percentages above the Non-NSP Village bars. In the x-axis, the label ISAF is referring to the Inter-
national Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

regulation of land and family disputes. Such 
gaps have led to popular frustration and have 
opened  opportunities  to  violent  opposition 
movements such as the Taliban in both Af-
ghanistan and Pakistan, which have in some 
areas  of  the  country  established  a  shadow 
presence offering an alternative local dispute 
resolution system.55 Gangs can play a similar 
role in urban communities. The WDR Fafo 
perception  surveys  in  countries  affected  by 
violence  found  that  most  respondents  saw 
traditional  authorities  as  best  placed  to  re-
solve  land  disputes,  even  though  they  also 
believed that national or local state structures 
should  deliver  other  key  governance  func-
tions.56 (Chapter 5 explores complementari-
ties between traditional and formal systems 
in justice reform.)

Civil  society  and  faith-based  actors  can 
also play an important role in service delivery 
in many violent contexts when government 
capacity  and  reach  are  limited.  Many  suc-

cessful  initial  transitions  have  drawn  heav-
ily on nongovernmental capacity associated 
with  the  credibility  of  national  institutions. 
For instance, religious organizations run 81 
percent  of  public  primary  schools  and  77 
percent  of  public  secondary  schools  in  the 
Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  through 
a  protocol-based  school  management  sys-
tem,57 which was what kept the schools run-
ning through the turbulent 1990s.58

Communities can also play a central role 
in service provision (box 4.9). In many frag-
ile  environments,  NGOs  often  ensure  that 
basic social services, such as health care, edu-
cation, water, and sanitation, continue to be 
provided to the population. Delivery modes 
can  include  government  agencies  contract-
ing out some social services to local NGOs,59 
international NGOs working closely with lo-
cal NGOs and community groups, and local 
NGOs collaborating with community groups 
in the absence of the government.

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

135

One area that does not lend itself well to 
partnership  with  nonstate  actors  to  deliver 
fast  results  is  security.  Nonstate  actors  can 
be effective in supporting security efforts, for 
instance  in  community  policing  aiming  to 
 reduce  crime  through  community  partner-
ship;  joint  programs  against  crime  between 
municipalities,  civil  society,  and  the  private 
sector;  and  community  engagement  to  pre-
vent  and  respond  to  gender-based  violence 
(see chapter 5). Going further and implicitly 
ceding to others the state monopoly on secu-
rity should be avoided. New research shows 
that  preexisting  social  networks,  when  used 
by the state and competing elites, can stir up 
conﬂ ict  or  perpetuate  its  damaging  social 
effects—as  in  the  evolution  of  vigilantism 
in Nigeria (box 4.10).60 While circumstances 
clearly vary, the risks of such groups becom-
ing  predatory  or  difﬁ cult  to  demobilize  are 
considerable—not least because their meth-
ods  of  recruitment  are  not  generally  based 
on merit, while their armed status can make 
their social accountability tenuous. A similar 
tradeoff  exists  with  private  security  compa-
nies in internationally supported operations. 
For  instance,  Coalition  Forces  in  Iraq  faced 
problems in addressing abuses by private se-
curity  companies  entrusted  with  core  state 
security tasks.61 

A related issue is the proliferation of pri-
vate  security  companies  around  the  globe. 
They provide an array of functions, includ-
ing  monitoring,  investigation  services,  and 
bodyguards. Their growth is often attributed 
to  a  widespread  sense  of  insecurity  and  a 
lack of trust in the police and the judiciary. 
In Central America, the private security in-
dustry  expanded  dramatically  in  the  1990s 
following the signing of peace agreements. In 
El Salvador and Guatemala, private security 
ﬁ rms  sometimes  incorporated  ex-combat-
ants from civil wars, and throughout the re-
gion, many working for private security ﬁ rms 
are  former  government  security  personnel. 
By  2008,  legal  and  illegal  private  security 
companies in Guatemala and Honduras em-
ployed  around  120,000  and  60,000  guards, 
respectively, with ﬁ ve to six private security 

BOX 4.9   Nepal: Bringing others in—supplementing 

government capacity in education

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, interethnic and political violence, 
criminal violence, and traﬃ  cking 

Transition opportunities:  Modest 
space for change: “palace killings” and 
stepped-up Maoist campaign in 2001

Key stresses:  Legacies of vio-
lence and trauma; social, political, 
and economic inequality; youth 
unemployment; corruption; human 
rights abuses; rising expectations of 
formerly unrepresented

Key stakeholders:  National and 
local governments, civil society 
groups, marginalized ethnic groups, 
international partners, regional 
neighbors

Institutional challenges:  Feudal 
structures and associated exclu-
sion; accountability and capacity 
constraints in public administration, 
security, judicial, and political institu-
tions; lack of inclusion of diﬀ erent 
groups

In 2001, recognizing that extensive local capacity to provide education already 
on the ground had better success than the nationalized education system, the 
government devolved responsibility for primary schooling back to school man-
agement committees through amendments to the Education Act. (The govern-
ment relied exclusively on communities for the delivery of basic education until 
1971.) The responsibilities of these committees included generating resources; 
formulating budgets (using a combination of government incentive grants, 
international aid, and local resources); and hiring teachers. Signiﬁ cant local 
resources were unlocked, with every rupee of government grants leveraging 
1.5 rupees in community ﬁ nancing.

Decentralizing teacher hiring also spurred accountability, as the government 

froze the number of government-appointed teaching slots and introduced sal-
ary grants to allow communities to recruit teachers locally and hold them 
accountable for classroom performance. Better school governance reduced 
teacher absenteeism, improved learning achievements, increased community 
donations, and boosted primary completion rates (from 42 percent in 1998 to 60 
percent in 2003). 

Even though the country was in active conﬂ ict, net enrollment rates in pri-
mary education increased from 69 to 92 percent between 1998 and 2008. Gen-
der parity improved from 83 to 98 percent from 2003 to 2008. The impact on 
girls, dalits, and janajati (Nepal’s lower-caste groups) children was also signiﬁ -
cant: the rate of out-of-school children dropped from 50 percent in 2004 to 15 
percent in 2008 for dalits, from 42 percent to 11 percent for girls, and from 44 
percent to 11 percent for janajatis. 

Sources: World Bank 2009e.

personnel for each police ofﬁ cer.62 A worri-
some development, as noted by the president 
of the Guatemala Chamber of Security, is the 
severe  shortage  of  trained  security  person-
nel, so the typical marginal company ends up 
recruiting  farmers  from  the  interior  of  the 
country and sending them to work with little 
or no training. 

136 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 4.10    Nigeria: Strengths and risks of nongovernment capacity in the security sector—

 the Bakassi Boys

Types of violence:  Widespread criminal and gang violence, vigilantism

Transition opportunity (missed):  Rising insecurity and 
criminality

Key stakeholders:  Government, vigilante groups, perpetrators of 
crime and their victims, citizens

Key stresses:  Criminal networks, youth unemployment, 
corruption

Institutional challenges:  Low capacity and accountability in 
police and judicial institutions

Vigilantism has often provided security in the absence of eﬀ ective state performance. While it may be seen initially as legitimate, it 
presents tremendous risks to both the state and citizens, especially in protecting universal standards of due process (often the justice is 
summary) or in separating petitioner, prosecutor, and judge (often a mob dynamic prevails). 

Although Nigeria has had signiﬁ cant income from oil revenue, the country remained stuck in low per capita income and saw little by 
way of the development of eﬀ ective institutions. Throughout the 1990s and the early part of the 2000s, corruption and non-accountable 
institutions remained deﬁ ning features of the Nigerian political landscape. Earlier episodes of separatist conﬂ ict (in Biafra) had not resur-
faced, but oil-rich areas in the south had seen civil violence, and Nigeria had also experienced sectarian violence in its eastern provinces. 
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, vigilantism was rampant in eastern Nigeria. In response to a rash of robberies and home invasions, 

residents formed vigilante groups that patrolled and guarded entire neighborhoods at night. One such group was the Bakassi Boys, 
who initially earned the support of politicians and the public because they reduced crime. In the words of one newspaper columnist: 
“I am a living witness to the fact that for three years before the year 2000, in my part of Imo State, life was made unbearable by the 
callous activities of armed bandits. They suddenly seemed to have so multiplied that anybody found outside his front door after dusk 
was risking his or her life. Then suddenly things began to happen. Well-known hoodlums who were friends of the police gradually took 
notice and either ﬂ ed or stayed at their peril. Home was becoming haven again, and evening parties and outside engagements re-
turned to the community. It was such a great relief. Asked thereafter to choose between the Bakassi Boys and the police, the village 
folks preferred the former.”63

Vigilante groups are celebrated in Nigerian popular culture—pictured in movies and on calendars—as appropriate defenders of the 

public against criminals. Even mainstream observers of Nigerian society, including eminent political scientists like Peter Ekeh, saw the 
Bakassi Boys as qualitatively diﬀ erent from other vigilante groups. Yet, as noted by Human Rights Watch in 2002, the Bakassi Boys came 
to be viewed as an uncontrollable and illegal band, which, though ﬁ lling a void left by a weak state, had become ruthless mercenaries 
who could be hired to eliminate political or commercial opponents. Beyond these accusations, the celebrated operations of the Bakassi 
Boys were problematic because of the lack of due process accorded presumed criminals. As one anthropologist notes: “The Bakassi Boys 
originated in acts of necessity undertaken in the face of terror. Noble intentions, however, have a tenuous existence in the midst of the 
endemic corruption, political factionalism, and electoral machinations that characterize the Nigerian political landscape. Thus Nigerians 
remain suspicious of the power ceded to vigilantes.”64

Sources: Ekeh 2002; Nwana 2000; McCall 2004.

Early  results  need  to  be  compatible  with, 
rather than undermine, long-term institution- 
building. The choice of results and the man-
ner  in  which  they  are  to  be  achieved  is 
 important  because  it  can  set  directions  for 
later  institution-building.  For  instance,  if 
communities  are  passive  recipients  of  aid, 
they have fewer incentives to take responsibil-
ity for violence prevention; and if social pro-
tection  is  provided  by  external  actors  alone, 
national institutions have fewer incentives to 
undertake responsibilities to protect vulnera-
ble citizens. Hence, there is a need for building 
coalitions for delivery that include a mixture 

of  state  and  nonstate,  bottom-up  and  top-
down approaches. Such coalitions are a better 
underpinning  for  longer-term  institutional 
transformation; in fact, some early results ac-
tively  build  momentum  for  institutional 
transformation, as has been the case with the 
National  Solidarity  Program  in Afghanistan. 
As countries end one episode of violence or go 
through an initial political transition, they re-
main at high risk of recurring violence. The 
need at this point is to create legitimate social 
and  governmental  institutions  and  improve 
prospects of economic prosperity. Chapter 5 
will discuss these issues.

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

137

FEATURE 4  Indonesia: Restoring conﬁ dence in Aceh

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, gang-related violence, vigilantism

Transition moment:  Signiﬁ cant space for change: 2004 Indian 
Ocean tsunami, 2005 peace agreement

Key stakeholders:  National and provincial governments; GAM 
(political and military wings); conﬂ ict victims; Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), European Union (EU), and wider 
international community

Key stresses:  Distribution of natural resource wealth, legacies of 
conﬂ ict, reintegration of ex-combatants, loss of life and devastation 
due to tsunami

Institutional challenges:  Weak capacity and accountability of 
provincial political and administrative institutions, coordination of 
external inputs

In the choreography of peace negotiations—from efforts to 

build  both  national  support  and  local  inclusion  to  the 
 judicious use of external support—the peace process in Indo-
nesia’s Aceh province exempliﬁ es many of the attributes of ef-
fective conﬂ ict prevention and resolution after 30 years of sus-
picion and outright hostility. 

Inclusive-enough coalition 

Agreement on the parameters of the peace agreement—in the 
form of a memorandum of understanding (MOU) signed in 
Helsinki in August 2005—came at the end of six months of 
carefully mediated negotiations between the Indonesian gov-
ernment  and  the  Free  Aceh  Movement  (Gerakan  Aceh 
Merdeka, or GAM). Both sides did their best to ensure things 
went smoothly. The team representing the Indonesian govern-
ment  was  handpicked  by  President  Susilo  Bambang  Yud-
hoyono and Vice President Jusuf Kalla. In a deliberate effort to 
assuage  GAM’s  concerns  about  adequate  representation  for 
non-Javanese, the core team was drawn from other provinces. 
Learning from previous processes, the government was careful 
to manage communications in Jakarta and at a national level 
to demonstrate the beneﬁ ts of the process, avoiding focusing 
on provincial buy-in at the expense of national support. The 
Finnish  nongovernmental  organization,  Crisis  Management 
Initiative,  led  by  former  Finland  president  Martti  Ahtisaari, 
played a key role in facilitating the discussions.

The government mobilized support at the national level for 
peace talks by emphasizing the cost of the conﬂ ict to the na-
tional  budget—in  expenditures  on  security  measures  (esti-
mated at US$2.3 billion or 21 percent of the total economic 
cost of the conﬂ ict) and forgone tax revenues from lower oil 
and  gas  exports—and  the  imperative  of  stability  in Aceh  to 
private investment in the country.65

Signals for conﬁ dence-building

The Helsinki MOU articulated the main elements of the peace 
settlement, signaling a genuine break with the past. Acehnese 
demands for greater political autonomy within a unitary Indo-
nesian republic were clearly spelled out, along with provisions 
for this autonomy to be institutionalized in a new Law on the 
Governing of Aceh. This would give provincial and local gov-
ernment authority over a broad spectrum of public affairs, ex-
cept in foreign affairs, external defense, national security, and 
monetary  and  ﬁ scal  matters,  where  the  central  government 
would retain jurisdiction. The MOU also allowed for greater 
Acehnese political participation, including a commitment to 
facilitate the establishment of Aceh-based political parties—a 
prerogative  not  granted  to  other  provinces.  Provisions  were 
also made to hold local elections in Aceh as soon as possible. 

Equally important, the MOU dealt with key security and 
justice concerns: reintegrating former combatants and assist-
ing victims of conﬂ ict. Provisions included the release of po-
litical  prisoners  and  detainees  within  15  days  of  signing  the 
MOU; amnesty to all who had engaged in GAM activities; and 
full political, economic, and social rights to all political prison-
ers and detainees. The Indonesian and Aceh authorities pledged 
reintegration support to ex-combatants in the form of farm-
land,  employment  opportunities,  and  social  security  (in  the 
event of incapacity). GAM agreed to demobilize all 3,000 of its 
military troops and decommission their arms. In return, the 
Indonesian  government  agreed  to  withdraw  “non-organic” 
forces,  with  the  remaining  permanent  battalions  composed 
mostly of ethnic Acehnese.66 

Rights to natural resources had long been a bone of con-
tention,  and  the  MOU  addressed  them  by  stipulating  that 
Aceh would retain 70 percent of revenue from all current and 
future hydrocarbon deposits and from other natural resources 

138 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 4  Indonesia: Restoring conﬁ dence in Aceh (continued)

in  the  province.  This  was  a  better  deal  than  that  enjoyed 
by other hydrocarbon-producing regions.67 Addressing deep-
rooted fears about the rule of law and human rights, the MOU 
provided for the separation of powers between the executive, 
legislative, and judiciary branches of government. 

Commitment mechanisms to lock in signals 

A key commitment mechanism was the Law on the Governing 
of Aceh, passed by the Indonesian Parliament in August 2006. 
This  institutionalized  many  of  the  provisions  agreed  in  the 
Helsinki  MOU  and  serves  as  a  framework  for  relations  be-
tween Aceh and the central government.

A special effort went into addressing the ongoing commit-
ment  to  peace  and  economic  integration.  The  Aceh  Peace-
Reintegration Board (Badan Reintegrasi-Damai Aceh, or BRA) 
was  created  by  a  governor’s  decree  in  2006  as  the  principal 
 local agency responsible for overseeing the peace process and 
the economic reintegration of ex-combatants, political prison-
ers, and conﬂ ict victims. BRA—a provincial agency reporting 
to the governor of Aceh—was given a broad mandate encom-
passing  the  design,  funding,  and  implementation  of  various 
policies and procedures related to the reintegration process. 

The Aceh  Monitoring  Mission,  created  after  the  Helsinki 
MOU, is a good example of external parties monitoring stake-
holders’ commitment to their promises. Comprising represen-
tatives  from  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland,  and  ﬁ ve  ASEAN 
countries,  it  was  deployed  to  oversee  the  demobilization  of 
GAM, the decommissioning of its weapons, the reintegration 
of  GAM  forces,  and  the  removal  of  “non-organic”  police 
forces and military battalions from the province. In addition, 
the  European  Commission  funded  the  Aceh  Peace  Process 
Support Program to assist in implementing the peace agree-
ment in four areas: election support, police reform, justice re-
form, and local governance reform.

Delivering early results 

geting of aid. The four most heavily conﬂ ict-affected districts—
Aceh Utara, Bireuen, Aceh Timur, and Pidie—received more 
than 50 percent of all funds. GAM members (both combatants 
and noncombatants) and political prisoners received the larg-
est share of direct assistance, collectively worth almost Rp 400 
billion.69 

These provisions helped get ex-combatants and other key 
target groups back into the workforce. The Aceh Reintegra-
tion  and  Livelihood  Survey,  commissioned  by  the  World 
Bank, indicates that male ex-combatants are 7 percent more 
likely to be in full-time employment than their civilian coun-
terparts. Most former combatants and ex-political prisoners 
have returned to the occupations they held prior to joining 
the insurgency—mainly farming and agricultural wage labor. 
The survey also ﬁ nds that male victims of conﬂ ict are 14 per-
cent  more  likely  to  be  in  full  employment  than  male  non-
victims.70 Poverty has decreased in Aceh since the end of the 
conﬂ ict,  more  so  in  the  conﬂ ict-affected  areas  than  in  the 
nonconﬂ ict-affected areas, but the province still lags behind 
the national average.

Aceh  also  shows  how  community-driven  programs  can 
kick-start local reconstruction and social protection. Soon af-
ter the peace agreement was signed, BRA initiated community-
based reintegration assistance through the Kecamatan Devel-
opment  Program.  Aimed  exclusively  at  conﬂ ict  victims,  the 
program provided US$22.7 million of government money in 
one round of grants and operated in 1,724 villages in 2007.71 
It  focused  on  conﬂ ict-affected  communities  to  help  them 
 improve living conditions through small projects. Poverty de-
clined by 11 percent more in villages participating in the pro-
gram than in those that did not.72 Given that almost 90 percent 
of funds went to purchase private goods, community-driven 
development (CDD) projects can be an effective mechanism 
for  distributing  one-off  cash  transfers  in  emergency  situa-
tions.73 Survey data show that 88 percent of recipients felt that 
both BRA-KDP and KDP funds were spent on the most im-
portant needs.74

In Aceh, the government, working with external and local ac-
tors,  delivered  some  crucial  early  results  for  peace-building. 
The total estimated amount of funds committed to reintegra-
tion and peace-building is Rp 9 trillion.68 The distribution of 
funds across districts is evidence of effective geographic tar-

Sources:  Aspinall  2005;  International  Crisis  Group  2005;  Morﬁ t  2007; 
MSR 2009; World Bank 2010a; Government of Republic of Indonesia and 
Free Aceh Movement 2005; Braud and Grevi 2005; Schulze 2007; World 
Bank 2008a; Barron 2010; Barron and others 2009; Morel, Watanabe, and 
Wrobel  2009;  Government  of Aceh,  Syiah  Kuala  University,  and World 
Bank 2008. 

 

Notes

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

139

  1.   Background work for this Report included review of almost 30 low- and middle-income country 
cases—both successful efforts to transition away from violence and those less successful—that expe-
rienced a mix of forms of stress and types of violence as identiﬁ ed in chapters 1 and 2. The cases var-
ied widely in their institutional characteristics, ranging from low-capacity countries with relatively 
accountable institutions to higher capacity countries with weak accountability mechanisms. This 
work was supplemented by national and regional consultations with politicians and analysts from 
government and nongovernment institutions. 

  2.   As noted in the guide to the WDR, commitment mechanisms are means of persuading stakeholders 
that intentions will not be reversed. This follows the common economic deﬁ nition of commitment 
mechanisms or commitment devices. See Dixit 1980; Schelling 1960; Spence 1977.

  3.  See  Hartzell,  Hoddie,  and  Rothchild  2001;  Walter  2004;  Nilsson  and  Jarstad  2008;  Wenn mann 

2009. 

  4.  See Stedman 1996; Adam and Mesnard 2003; Nilsson 2008.
  5.  Fearon 2004, Keefer 2008. Also, for peace agreements, see Suhrke, Wimpelmann, and Dawes 2007. 
For  power-sharing  arrangements,  see  Papagianni  2009;  Gates  and  Strøm  2008;  Spears  2002; 
Sawyer 2004. For security sector reforms, see Azam and Mesnard 2003. For consociationalism, see 
Lijphart 1969, 1977; and Andeweg 2000.

  6.  International Crisis Group 2008b; Friends Committee on National Legislation 2009.
  7.  Odendaal 2010; Ojielo 2007; UNDPA 2010a.
  8.  Seely 2001; Keita 1998; Straus 2010.
  9.  According to leadership development literature, the three qualities of effective leadership include 
the ability to set direction, including deﬁ ning and vetting a vision among relevant individuals and 
groups; to create alignment, including coordinating the knowledge and work of a collective in ser-
vice of this broader direction/vision; and to maintain commitment to this broader direction/vision, 
in cluding through the expansion of the group’s efforts to achieve collective goals, not just individual 
goals. For more information about leadership theories, see Northouse 2008; Hughes, Ginnett, and 
Curphy 2005; McCauley and Van Velsor 2004.

10.  Knox 1996. 
11.  Timor-Leste Ministry of Finance 2010; WDR team consultation in Timor-Leste, 2010.
12.  Dupuy and Binningsbø 2008.
13.  de Waal and Flint 2008. 
14.  See  Sapelli  2000.  Other  examples  include Argentina,  where  under  the Alfonsin  administration, 
 efforts to make more rapid progress in transitional justice within the security sectors were accom-
panied by four coup attempts, a political crisis, and the subsequent more cautious approach to 
reform adopted by the Menem administration. See Addison 2009; de Greiff 2010.

15.  WDR  team  interview  with  former  president  Álvaro  Uribe,  2010; WDR  team  consultation  with 
government ofﬁ cials, representatives from civil society organizations, and security personnel in 
Colombia, 2010.

16.  Jeffries and Thomas 1993.
17.  Kimani 2008; International Crisis Group 2009d; Cheeseman and Tendi 2010.
18.  Mack 2003.
19.  WDR  team  consultation  with  government  ofﬁ cials,  representatives  from  civil  society  organiza-

tions, and security personnel in Colombia, 2010; WDR team consultation in Timor-Leste, 2010.

20.  Walter 1997.
21.  These include inter-clan pacts in Somaliland; traditional dispute resolution at a national level in 
Mali; the ceaseﬁ re agreement brokered by community action in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea; 
and the peace committees in South Africa. See also Menkhaus 2010; Bradbury 2008; Van der Graaf 
2001; Dinnen, Porter, and Sage 2010; Carl and Garasu 2002.

22.  Data  on  battle  deaths  in  Uganda  from  the  UCDP/PRIO  Armed  Conﬂ ict  dataset  (Lacina  and 
Gleditsch 2005; Harborn and Wallensteen 2010). Data on homicides comes from statistics based 
on  LA  County  Sheriff ’s  Department,  California  Department  of  Justice  and  Los  Angeles  Police 
Department, and compiled by the Los Angeles Almanac (Thornton and others 2011).

23.  Anderlini 2010b. 
24.  Sirivi and Havini 2004.
25.  Hunt and Posa 2001.

140 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

26.  Las Madres de la Plaza ﬁ rst appeared as a distinct group on April 30, 1977, when 14 women de-
cided to gather near the pyramid of the Plaza de Mayo in downtown Buenos Aires and demand 
that the repressive military regime disclose the whereabouts of their children who were abducted 
by the military due to their political ideals and associations and subsequently disappeared. Initially 
dismissed,  then  ridiculed,  and  later  brutally  persecuted,  the  ranks  of  Las  Madres  continued  to 
grow  and  received  recognition  internationally  for  their  nonviolent  demonstrations  in  a  society 
cowed into silence where all the traditional means of public expression, dissent, and protest were 
forbidden. Over time, the group of mothers transformed into a political movement and became a 
symbol of resistance against the military dictatorship. See Navarro 2001.

27.  For instance, shaping a positive and inclusive relationship between citizens and the state has been 
an important part of Timor-Leste’s institutional and political agenda since 2007. The government 
has actively worked on improving its communication and engagement capacity; a relaxation of the 
country’s language policy (though most young Timorese speak Bahasa and very little Portuguese, 
the ofﬁ cial language policy since 2000 mandated that Portuguese would be the national language 
of instruction and administration. This resulted in poor functioning of the civil service, a lack of 
development of media, and weak communication between the state and its people) is indicative 
of  a  general  shift  in  the  government’s  approach.  Simultaneously,  the  international  community 
started to lend more consistent support to initiatives that promote dialogue (see Von Kaltenborn-
Stachau 2008). 

28.  Hartzell 2006; Paris 2004. 
29.  Cadeado and Hamela 2009.
30.  Cadeado and Hamela 2009.
31.  U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce 2007.
32.  Agence France-Presse 1999.
33.  See  de  Greiff  2010,  11: “How  do  transitional  justice  measures  promote  this  sense  of  civic  trust? 
Prosecutions can be thought to promote civic trust by reafﬁ rming the relevance of the norms that 
perpetrators violated, norms that precisely turn natural persons into rights-bearers. Judicial insti-
tutions, par ticularly in contexts in which they have tra ditionally been essentially instruments of 
power,  show  their  trustworthiness  if  they  can  establish  that  no  one  is  above  the  law.  An 
 institutionalized effort to confront the past through truth-telling exercises might be seen by those 
who were formerly on the receiving end of violence as a good faith effort to come  clean, to under-
stand long-term patterns of socialization, and, in this sense, to initiate a new political project around 
norms and  values that this time around are truly shared. Reparations can foster civic trust by dem-
onstrating the seriousness with which institutions now take the violation of their rights . . . vetting 
can induce trust, and not just by ‘re-peopling’ institutions with new faces, but by thereby demon-
strating a commitment to systemic norms governing employee hiring and retention, disciplinary 
oversight, prevention of cronyism, and so on.”

34.  Transitional justice approaches are deﬁ ned by the UN as the “full range of processes and mecha-
nisms associated with a society’s attempt to come to terms with a legacy of large-scale past abuses 
in  order  to  ensure  accountability,  service  justice  and  achieve  reconciliation.  These  may  include 
both judicial and non-judicial mechanisms and individual prosecution, reparations, truth seeking, 
institutional  reform,  vetting  and  dismissals,  or  a  combination  thereof ”  UN  2004b,  4.  See  also 
Orentlicher 2004, 2005; UN General Assembly 2005a.

35.  Gonçalve 2008.
36.  Sirleaf 2007b.
37.  Porter and Rab 2010.
38.  See Kanungo 2004.
39.  Sapelli 2000.
40.  WDR consultation with former key negotiators from the ANC Alliance and the National Party in 

South Africa 2010.

41.  Successful  social  cohesion  policies  require  recognition  of  language  and/or  cultural  practice  in 
cases where a group perceives itself systemically excluded and disrespected. In so doing, care must 
be taken to avoid creating further ﬁ ssures or entrenching practices that curtail the civil rights of 
women, caste groups etc. See Easterly, Ritzen, and Woolcock 2006; Gupta 1970. 

42.  Pakistan Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 2010, 10.
43.  WDR calculations based on data from the Latinobarómetro survey (1993–2008) and the Afroba-

rometer survey (1999–2009). See Afrobarometer 2009; Latinobarómetro 2009. 

 

Restoring conﬁ dence: Moving away from the brink 

141

44.  WDR team consultation with current and former leaders from conﬂ ict-affected countries and re-

gions in Berlin, 2009. 

45.  The Politica Nacional de Rehabilitación (PNR) is a program of the Presidency of the Republic 
aimed at the establishment of peace; national reconciliation; and the normalization of areas af-
fected by development imbalances, weakness in the institutional presence of the state, and social 
conﬂ icts. See Presidencia República de Colombia 1993.

46.  See Pavanello and Othieno 2008; Baird 2010. 
47.  Barron 2010.
48.  The literature on community-driven development in situations of fragility and conﬂ ict is exten-

sive; see, for example, Baird 2010; Cliffe, Guggenheim, and Kostner 2003. 

49.  Experimental  evaluations  of  CDD  programs  are  rare.  One  example  is  Fearon,  Macartan,  and 
Weinstein 2009, who carried out research on the impact of a community-driven reconstruction 
program in 42 communities in Liberia. “A ﬁ eld experiment in which villages in northern Liberia 
were randomly assigned to receive international development assistance provides evidence that 
the introduction of new local-level institutions can alter patterns of social cooperation in a way 
that persists after the program’s conclusion. Villages exposed to a community-driven reconstruc-
tion  program  exhibit  higher  subsequent  levels  of  social  cooperation  than  those  in  the  control 
group,  as  measured  through  a  community-wide  public  goods  game.  These  results  are  striking. 
They suggest that changes in community cohesion can take place over a short period of time; can 
occur in response to outside intervention; and can develop without fundamental changes either to 
the structure of economic relations or to more macro-level political processes. Random assign-
ment of communities to treatment provides conﬁ dence in the causal nature of the relationship, 
and the use of behavioral outcome measures reinforces our sense that the effects are real. These 
ﬁ ndings suggest that post-conﬂ ict development aid can have a measureable impact on social cohe-
sion” (Fearon, Macartan, and Weinstein 2009, 12). For a broader discussion of violent conﬂ ict and 
the transformation of social capital, see Colletta and Cullen 2000. 

50.  The randomized impact evaluation of the National Solidarity Programme (NSP) is a multiyear study 
designed to quantify  changes—across indicators such as economic activity, agricultural production, 
access  to  infrastructure  and  services,  and  structures  and  perceptions  of  local  governance—in  250 
“treatment villages” compared to those villages not participating in the NSP. The evaluation is being 
led by Andrew Beath of Harvard University; Professor Fotini Christia of Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), Shahim Kabuli of the World Bank, and Professor Ruben Enikolopov of the New 
Economic  School,  and  is  being  implemented  in  conjunction  with  the Vulnerability  Analysis  Unit 
(VAU). It is being supported by the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO), and the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) of the Govern-
ment of Afghanistan. For more information, see the National Solidarity Programme website: http://
www.nsp-ie.org/index.html. 

51.  Shura is an Arabic word for “consultation” or “council.” The word itself can describe an assembly, 
an organized body of participants, or an administrative body or council, or may describe a deci-
sion-making process. In Afghanistan, tribal shuras have played an important role in community 
security and governance since the absence of a functioning government in 1978, and continue to 
play a pivotal role in the provision of justice. 

52.  Patel and Ross 2007, 43.
53.  See Melville 2003. 
54.  Verhey 2001.
55.  Carter and Clark 2010; Siddiqui 2011.
56.  As  noted  in  chapter  1,  the WDR  team  asked  the  Norwegian  research  institute  Fafo  to  conduct 
surveys in seven countries and territories, involving a mix of nationally representative samples as 
well as subregions affected by violence. One of the survey areas focused on the entity that should 
be responsible for providing public goods, such as reducing unemployment and protecting natio-
nal security. The survey offered respondents a range of actors (the national government, private 
enterprises, traditional authorities, and so forth). In answering the question: “Who should be the 
main body/entity responsible for allocating land?” respondents as a whole (across the seven loca-
tions—Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo (North and South Kivu prov-
inces), Mali, Sierra Leone, and the West Bank and Gaza) chose traditional leaders as the second 
most important entity for land allocation following national governments. In some countries (for 
instance, Côte d’Ivoire), the percentage of respondents who identiﬁ ed traditional leaders (57 per-

142 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

cent) actually surpassed those who identiﬁ ed the national government (30 percent). Of all the re-
sponsibilities, land allocation (22 percent) was on average the most popularly identiﬁ ed area for 
traditional  leaders,  followed  by  protecting  rivers  and  forests  (6  percent).  See  Bøås,  Tiltnes,  and 
Flatø 2010.

57.  Protocol-based school management system is a school management system in which control is 
decentralized.  The  government  provides  authorization  for  private  entities  (in  most  cases  faith-
based  groups)  to  operate  schools  under  speciﬁ c  government  guidelines  and  regulations.  These 
guidelines cover areas such as curricula, norms regarding class size, qualiﬁ cation and salaries of 
teachers, and system of assessment.

58.  Baird 2010.
59.  Contracting out is one mechanism for accountability between policy makers and service providers 
and tends to work better when both parties are focused on outcomes and keep the formal pro-
cesses light. Effective monitoring and evaluation of results is essential to reward good performers 
and improve or replace those who are not doing a good job. See Baird 2010.

60.  See, for example, Wood 2008, which shows how warring parties make use of networks at the sub-
state level, and also how legacies of conﬂ ict are transmitted through these networks into political 
and military life, local identities and authority structures, gender roles, and political relationships. 
See also Peterson and Zuckerman 2010. Blattman charts the need for further micro-level research 
on the topic. See Blattman, forthcoming; Spear and Harborne 2010. 

61.  For a discussion about privatizing certain security functions in peacemaking, peacekeeping, and 

enforcement, see Gerson and Colletta 2002. 

62.  Gómez 2008; Meléndez 2007; Muñoz 2010; Arias 2009. 
63.  Nwana 2000, 1.
64.  McCall 2004, 1.
65.  World Bank 2010a. 
66.  Government of Republic of Indonesia and Free Aceh Movement 2005. 
67.  MSR 2009. 
68.  This amount represents only one-seventh of the amount provided for the tsunami reconstruction 
effort—even though the estimated economic cost of the conﬂ ict (Rp. 107.4 trillion) was almost 
twice the cost of damage and losses from the December 2004 tsunami (MSR 2009).

69.  MSR 2009. 
70.  The MSR report hypothesizes that this could be because people who were employed during the 
conﬂ ict were more likely to be targeted or possibly that nonvictims are more likely to be students. 
Moreover, it is also likely that employment-generating projects that target conﬂ ict victims may miss 
non-victims who also need assistance (MSR 2009). 

71.  Barron 2010. 
72.  Barron and others 2009.
73.  Morel, Watanabe, and Wrobel 2009. 
74.  Barron and others 2009.

Chapter 5 describes the dilemmas of institutional trans-

formation for resilience to violence. The ﬁ rst of these is 
about timelines: delays in a “too slow” reform process pro-
long states’ vulnerability to violence. But lessons from the history 
of institutional transformation provide cautionary evidence that 
going “too fast” creates other risks of backlash. Countries that have 
addressed violence have sequenced reforms, frequently over a 
generational time period, to develop social consensus, and to allow 
their societies to absorb change and to develop their institutional 
capacities. The second dilemma is about the prioritization of institu-
tional reforms. This chapter provides lessons from country reform 
approaches to security, justice, and jobs, as well as from wider issues 
like elections and corruption, on how experimentation, adaptation, 
and pacing can result in “best-ﬁ t” reforms that are adapted to the 
local political context. 

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

CHAPTER5

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

EXTERNAL
STRESS

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT

UTIONS 

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

Transforming institutions to deliver 
citizen security, justice, and jobs 

Pacing and sequencing 
institutional transformation 

Pent-up demands for change in frag-

ile and transitional situations, and 
the  importance  of  legitimate,  ca-
pable, and accountable institutions 
for  violence  prevention,  mean  institutional 
transformation is central to effectively link-
ing  security  and  development  approaches. 
This section of the Report describes lessons 
on the pacing, prioritization, and sequencing 
of reform. 

Avoiding “too much, too soon,” and 
ﬁ nding the “best ﬁ t”

With deﬁ cits in the quality of governance in 
many  sectors  in  most  fragile  situations,  the 
best approach may seem to be rapid, across-
the-board  institutional  transformation.  But 
the scope and speed of reform are themselves 
risk factors—and attempting to do too much 
too  soon  may  actually  increase  the  risk  of 
resumed conﬂ ict. The “too much, too soon” 
syndrome  leads  to  many  of  the  symptoms 
observed  in  difﬁ cult  transitions  such  as  the 
following: 

•  Overtaxing the existing political and social 
network capacity of national reformers (as 
in the Central African Republic and Haiti 
in the early 2000s).1

•  Transplanting outside “best practice” mod-
els without putting sufﬁ cient time or effort 
into  adapting  to  context  (for  instance,  in 
Iraq).2

•  Adopting  an  output  orientation  that  de-
ﬁ nes  success  in  the  de  jure  space  in  the 
capital city (for example, by passing laws, 
writing sector plans and policies, or creat-
ing  new  commissions  or  organizational 
structures)  and  not  an  outcome  orienta-
tion  in  the  de  facto  world  where  people 
live (by improved services, even if basic, in 
insecure  and  marginalized  rural  and  ur-
ban  areas),  such  as  in  Timor-Leste  from 
2002 to 2005.3

•  “Cocooning” efforts into parallel channels 
that  facilitate  short-run  accomplishment 
by  bypassing  national  organizations  and 
institutions,  and  undermine  national  in-
stitution-building  in  the  longer  term,  as, 
for  example,  in  Afghanistan  in  2001–03 
and to some extent afterward.4 

Once  national  and  local  reformers  have 
set  priorities  and  sequenced  their  goals  for 
transforming  institutions,  the  next  steps 
might seem straightforward. Out there some-
where is the “state of the art,” the “best prac-
tice,” the “technically perfect” way. Common 
sense says not to “reinvent the wheel” but to 
adopt what works well. And so, national and 
international actors alike feel the temptation 

146 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 5.1  China’s approach to gradually piloting economic reform
 

   Ambassador Wu Jianmin, Chairman of the Shanghai Center for International Studies; WDR Advisory 
Council Member

China’s  economic  reform  and  opening  up  to  the  outside 
world  policy  has  led  China  in  the  last  32  years  to  a  strong 
and  steady  growth.  This  policy  generated  a  tremendous 
change  in  China.  There  are  three  key  factors  which  made 
China’s  economic  reform  successful:  bottom-up  approach, 
gradualism,  and  a  principle  to  pilot  reforms  and  measure 
their  impact  before  debating  whether  they  should  be 
national policy. 

China’s economic reform started ﬁ rst in the countryside. 
In  1978  China’s  urbanization  rate  was  17  percent.  The  over-
whelming  majority  of  the  Chinese  population  was  in  the 
countryside. In 1978, 18 peasants from Anhui province, Xiao-
gang  village,  decided  to  break  away  from  the  centrally-
planned economy and signed a secret contract. In accordance 
with this contract, they divided the land at their disposal into 
small  pieces.  Every  peasant  was  responsible  for  his  small 
piece of land and agricultural production. This contract pro-
vided a powerful incentive for them to produce more food, 
so that they could enjoy a better return. The provincial gov-
ernment was very much supportive of this 18 peasants’ initia-
tive. At the same time, in Guangdong province, some people 
started  private  business  with  the  local  government’s  tacit 
agreement. However, other provinces were very much skepti-
cal  about  it.  They  believed  that  kind  of  reform  was  wrong, 
“capitalistic,” and incompatible with a socialist China. 

The  central  government  of  China  did  not  ask  other  prov-
inces to adopt the same reform. It wanted the good results of 
the  reform  to  convince  those  hesitant  provinces.  The  fact 
speaks  louder  than  any  argument.  Three  years  later,  Anhui 
province  which  practiced  this  reform  enjoyed  more  food  on 
their plate. Gradually, other provinces followed suit. 

At the beginning of China’s economic reform, people had 
very  diﬀ erent  views  about  it.  Many  people  believed  that  the 
reform underway was not in compliance with Chairman Mao’s 
teaching.  The  Chinese  government  under  Deng  Ziaoping 
adopted a principle to pilot reforms and measure their bene-
ﬁ ts  before  debating  whether  they  should  be  national  policy, 
building on the change in thinking that had taken place after 
the Cultural Revolution which aimed to “emancipate the mind” 
from divisive ideological debate. 

To carry on successfully the reform, what we need most is 
people’s support. We can get it only when reform brings tan-
gible beneﬁ ts to the people. Step by step, a uniﬁ ed narrative 
on development, based on results, was created. History proved 
Deng Xiaoping right, avoiding the division of the Chinese peo-
ple  into  diﬀ erent  camps,  or  engaging  in  an  endless  sterile 
debate and instead producing a real improvement in the peo-
ple’s welfare. 

to apply off-the-shelf international best prac-
tices. But these practices are often designed 
for environments that are secure, have a high 
degree  of  capacity  in  state  institutions,  and 
have functioning competitive markets. Envi-
ronments of repeated violence are insecure, 
have institutional deﬁ cits, and generally have 
only  partially  functioning  markets.  So  the 
simple notion of “not reinventing the wheel” 
and just adopting best practice does not suc-
ceed nearly as often as one might hope. 

An  alternative  is  to  focus  on  pragmatic, 
best-ﬁ t options adapted to political realities, 
institutional capacity, and levels of insecurity. 
Countries  successfully  moving  away  from  
fragility  or  violence  have  adapted  solutions 
from abroad to suit their context. The fact that 
simply copying does not work does not negate 
the value in learning from other country ex-
periences. By so doing, countries create their 

own practical and feasible solutions adapted 
to their particular set of available institutions 
and capabilities. An example is China’s Town-
ship and Village Enterprises: These were not 
“private sector” ﬁ rms at all. They were instead 
a  transitional  device  that  provided  many  of 
the  functions  of  private  sector  ﬁ rms  (dyna-
mism, innovation, investment) without all the 
legal and institutional accoutrements private 
sector ﬁ rms need. So, rather than wait for the 
environment  to  be  right  for  one  institution 
(private ﬁ rms), the Chinese government cre-
ated a new form of enterprise (box 5.1). 

Early attention to basic functions of 
citizen security, justice, and job creation 

Chapter 2 underlined that the stresses associ-
ated with violence can occur in the security, 
justice,  and  economic  arenas.  The  research 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

147

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 5. 2  It takes time to build institutions. First things ﬁ rst—citizen security, justice, and jobs
 

   Minister George Yeo, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Singapore; WDR Advisory Council Member

It takes time to build institutions. Getting the urgent things 
done  ﬁ rst,  especially  improving  security,  delivering  basic 
justice, and providing jobs, helps people to feel more hope-
ful about the future. Success then creates the condition for 
further  success.  Without  a  practical  approach,  new  institu-
tions cannot take root in the hearts and minds of ordinary 
people.  For  Singapore  in  the  early  years,  being  pragmatic 
was not a choice but a necessity. Ideology was a luxury we 
could not aﬀ ord. We had to do ﬁ rst things ﬁ rst and get our 
priorities right. Then, as the economy took oﬀ  and life got 
better,  we  could  be  more  reﬁ ned  and  sensitive  in  public 
policy. We were fortunate to have many friends who wished 
us well and assisted us in ways big and small.

In the ﬁ rst few years of independence, the priority was 
on  security,  law  and  order,  and  creating  favorable  condi-
tions for investment and economic growth. Conﬁ dence was 
everything.  National  Service  was  introduced  within  a  year. 
Secret  societies  and  other  criminal  activities  were  sup-
pressed.  Corruption  was  progressively  rooted  out.  To  pro-
mote  investment,  labor  and  land  acquisition  laws  were 
reformed  early.  Against  conventional  wisdom  in  many 
developing countries at that time, we eschewed protection-
ism  and  encouraged  multinationals  to  invest.  We  did  not 

allow proﬁ t to become a dirty word. Opening wide the portals 
to  the  outside  world  was  a  sine  qua  non—the  sea  port,  the 
airport, telecommunications. Managing the politics of change 
was  always  a  challenge.  At  every  step  of  the  way,  we  had  to 
give  hope  to  the  population  that  tomorrow  would  be  better 
than today. A long-term massive public housing program was 
launched  with  home  ownership  a  priority.  This  gave  every 
household  an  equal  stake  in  Singapore’s  development.  The 
program  was  ﬁ nanced  through  a  system  of  compulsory  sav-
ings.  A  national  focus  was  brought  to  the  education  system, 
helping  us  to  overcome  racial  and  religious  divisions.  Having 
to accommodate so many people on a small island, we had to 
develop skills in urban planning, including good public trans-
portation, traﬃ  c management based on pricing of scarce road 
space,  and  provision  of  green  space  so  important  for  public 
morale.  We  studied  the  experiences  of  other  countries  and 
adapted them to our own situation. 

All this had to be done in a way that won majority support 
at every general election. The key was winning the trust of the 
people. Institutions which endure are sustained by the respect 
and aﬀ ection of the population. It is a process which takes at 
least a generation. Institutions are not built by merely passing 
laws or engaging consultants.

on  the  stresses  and  institutional  factors  as-
sociated  with  risks  of  violence  covered  in 
chapter 2, country cases studies, and consul-
tations  with  national  reformers  all  point  to 
the  importance  of  prioritizing  the  institu-
tions that provide citizen security, justice (in-
cluding  control  of  corruption),  and  jobs  to 
prevent a recurrence of violence and lay the 
basis  for  future  reform.5  This  prioritization 
is conﬁ rmed by ﬁ ndings of the Voices of the 
Poor  project  and  the  country-level  surveys 
conducted for the WDR: people’s top prior-
ity after basic security and law and order is 
their  own  economic  survival.6  Prioritizing 
security, justice, and jobs does not mean ad-
dressing all the wide-ranging functions that 
will  be  needed  in  these  areas  as  societies 
develop—but simply focusing on basic prog-
ress  in  these  areas  early  in  transitions from 
violence (box 5.2)

This chapter presents a range of practical 
interventions across the domains of security, 

justice, and jobs. These interventions include 
those  that  deliver  early  results  to  build  citi-
zen conﬁ dence, which can either buy time for 
institutional reforms to take hold, or actively 
support such reforms. Emphasis is also placed 
on interventions that use best-ﬁ t institutional 
approaches  that  offer  practical  solutions  to 
given problems; they may be context-speciﬁ c, 
but  they  demonstrate  the  adaptability  of  a 
wide range of tools. Early actions and best-
ﬁ t approaches are linked to priority reforms 
that can be undertaken with limited capacity, 
even  in  fragile  contexts.  These  are  set  apart 
from reforms that would generally be applied 
more gradually as they require more funda-
mental social, economic, or political shifts.

Multisectoral approaches 

The  interventions  in  this  chapter  are  pre-
sented  for  each  domain—security,  justice, 
and jobs and associated services—separately. 

148 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 5.3    Coordinated political, security, and development responses to violence—Lessons from 

urban, subnational, and organized criminal violence in Latin America

Multisectoral violence prevention programs suggest a way of bringing diﬀ erent actors together to address the complexities of violence. 
In rapidly urbanizing areas—not only in the developing world, but also in high- and middle-income countries—violence is character-
ized by the convergence of a wide range of risk factors, including overcrowding, inequality, youth unemployment, and drug crime. 
While violence has traditionally been managed through the criminal justice sector and coercive responses, recent multisectoral 
approaches, particularly in Latin American cities, have demonstrated the beneﬁ ts of a more integrated response. The approaches 
emphasize a balance between long-term structural prevention and control-oriented approaches and address a variety of stress factors 
simultaneously. The emphasis on local government and community engagement in design, implementation, and oversight has fostered 
better diagnoses of the drivers of violence and ensured stronger community ownership.

The city of Belo Horizonte, Brazil, had a steep rise in homicide rates from 1997 to 2001. The victims and perpetrators of violence 
were often young men under the age of 24 living in slums. Preventive actions were implemented by the state government of Minas 
Gerais, in partnership with the city and nongovernmental organizations, under the program Fica Vivo, which targeted youth for social 
support, education, and sports. Social interventions were accompanied by a new form of policing that ﬁ rst captured sought-after crimi-
nals and then installed a permanent community police element—gaining the trust and conﬁ dence of the population. An evaluation of 
the program in one of the targeted communities showed reductions of as much as 45 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants per semester 
compared with the rest of the city. Fica Vivo has a return on investment of 99–141 percent of the total cost of the program.

In Bogotá, Colombia, between 1993 and 2002, a multisector strategy was credited with progress in combating urban violence. The 

strategy included campaigns to promote citizen disarmament and control of alcohol consumption; neighborhood crime-monitoring 
committees; family police stations to control domestic violence and reduce assaults on women; police reform measures; urban renewal 
eﬀ orts, such as the Transmilenio urban transport program; and employment programs. Evaluations showed that some of these inter-
ventions resulted in sizable reductions in the levels of violent crime. For example, restrictions on gun carrying during weekends and 
holidays are credited with reducing the homicide rate by 14 percent. The urban renewal and transportation program, known as Trans-
milenio, was credited in some of the most violent areas of Bogotá with reducing overall levels of crime and violence dramatically by 86 
percent. Interventions related to the strengthening of the police force and interventions to alleviate the backlog of cases in the judicial 
system and speed up trials also had notable reductions in the levels of violent crime, with a 76 percent reduction in the assault rate.7

Source: Alvarado and Abizanda 2010; Beato 2005; Fabio 2007; International Centre for the Prevention of Crime 2005; Duailibi and others 2007; 
Peixoto, Andrade, and Azevedo 2007; Guerrero 2006; Llorente and Rivas 2005; Formisano 2002; WDR team consultation with law enforcement, 
civil society, and Brian Center (Executive Director, A Better LA in Los Angeles), 2010. 

However,  their  combination,  both  within 
and across the domains, is both feasible and, 
in fact, desirable in most instances, as high-
lighted in chapter 4. The interventions thus 
should  not  be  viewed  in  isolation  but  as 
part of a comprehensive approach to deliv-
ering  results  and  transforming  institutions. 
Speciﬁ c  multisectoral  approaches  bridging 
these areas have generated promising results. 
For  instance,  in  rapidly  urbanizing  areas  in 
Latin America and the United States, where 
gang- and drug-related violence have resisted 
“hard” policing efforts,8 there has been over 
time a gradual shift toward multisectoral pro-
grams of prevention at the community level. 
The  programs  combine  short-term,  quick-
impact  programs  (targeted  policing,  urban 
upgrading,  and  social  service  pro vision) 
with  longer-term  preventive  interventions 
(changing cultural norms, building alterna-

tive  conﬂ ict  resolution  mechanisms).  Brazil 
and Colombia have established some of the 
most  intensive  efforts  to  foster  multiagency 
approaches, creating teams drawn from the 
military, police, and civilian service agencies 
that  work  together  in  combined  national 
and local ofﬁ ces to address all aspects of lo-
cal crime reduction and violence prevention 
(box  5.3).  While  programs  of  this  kind  are 
demanding  for  interagency  coordination, 
their  results  suggest  that  their  underlying 
principles are worth considering in violence-
affected areas in other regions.

Citizen security

Consolidating  and  coordinating  security 
services  is  a  fundamental  ﬁ rst  step  in  insti-
tutional  reforms  to  prevent  violence.  For-

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

149

mer United Nations (UN) Under-Secretary-
General  for  Peacekeeping  Operations  Jean-
Marie  Guéhenno  points  out  that,  “Re-
establishing trust between the people and the 
state must therefore start with the core func-
tion of a state, the capacity to assert its mo-
nopoly on the legitimate use of force.”9 

A state may have lost the monopoly over 
the use of force because rebel forces or armed 
criminal groups operate in its territory with 
impunity—but also because fragmented se-
curity services within the state operate with-
out overall coherence of command and con-
trol,  contradicting  each  other.  In  the  West 
Bank and Gaza, prior to security reforms en-
acted in 2005, the Palestinian security forces 
had  12  divisions  under  multiple  chains  of 
command and multiple authorities, employ-
ing 40,000 people. This lack of monopoly of 
force and clear lines of authority had the ef-
fect  of  increasing  the  potential  for  corrup-
tion and racketeering.10 The need to consider 
a coordinated approach on police and mili-
tary  reform  is  also  recognized  in  the  2007 
security  sector  reform  framework  of  the 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation 
and  Development–Development  Assistance 
Committee (OECD-DAC).11 

Civilian oversight of the security forces is 
important  early  on  if  security  forces  are  to 
be used in the national interest and prevent 
abuses. It involves links between political and 
security strategy and public ﬁ nances. Three 
key elements in successful civilian oversight 
are as follows:

•  Have political and military leaders discuss 
the mission of the security forces in sup-
porting national objectives. This occurred 
in  Colombia  as  part  of  the  Democratic 
 Security Policy (box 5.4). In contrast, little 
dialogue was held in Timor-Leste between 
2000 and 2005 on the missions of the army 
and the police, which some argue culmi-
nated in renewed violence in 2006.12

•  Use  public  ﬁ nance  systems  to  reinforce 
civilian control. Obviously, se curity sec-
tor personnel need to be paid and ade-
quately equipped to perform effectively. 

They  also  need  to  be  accountable  for 
their  ﬁ nances:  civilian  oversight  can-
not  work  effectively  where  the  security 
forces draw their sources of revenue off-
budget.  Equally  important,  ensuring 
that the security and justice sectors are 
funded  adequately  and  transparently  is 
critical  to  stem  the  diversion  of  illegal 
revenues from natural resources or traf-
ﬁ cking to the security forces. Reforming 
budget  systems  in  the  security  services 
was part of the Colombian Democratic 
Security  Policy  (box  5.4).13  Reducing 
off-budget  sources  of  ﬁ nance  (such  as 
revenues from companies) was similarly 
important in Indonesia’s transformation 
of  the  role  of  the  military  in  political 
life.  Palestinian  leadership  eventually 
addressed  the  fragmentation  of  the  se-
curity forces by complementing political 
and  security  strategy  with  the  use  of 
budget and payment systems to increase 
accountability.14

•  Commit  the  military  to  improvements 
in accountability and human rights. Un-
derdeveloped  security  forces  deployed 
into  intensiﬁ ed  operations  may  end  up 
accused of preying on civilians, as in the 
Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.15  Such 
abuse  is  potentially  disastrous  for  the 
legitimacy  of  the  state  because  it  cuts  to 
the heart of the government’s obligation 
to care for its citizens. 

In  post-conﬂ ict  contexts,  large  security 
forces  can  be  an  unavoidable  necessity  in 
the  short  term,  even  if  they  are  a  drain  on 
ﬁ nancial resources. The need to build trust 
between erstwhile enemies may call for the 
integration  of  the  belligerent  forces  rather 
than  their  immediate  disarmament,  demo-
bilization,  and  reintegration  (DDR).  For 
instance, following the end of the Ugandan 
civil war in 1986 and subsequent agreements 
between opposing forces, ﬁ ghters were inte-
grated  into  the  National  Resistance  Army 
before the demobilization and reintegration 
program,  the  Uganda  Veterans  Assistance 
Program, was launched in 1992.16 Similarly, 

150 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 5. 4  Colombia’s establishment of civilian oversight and the Democratic Security Policy
 

   Marta Lucía Ramirez de Rincón, Director, Fundación Ciudadanía en Acción; former Senator and 
Chair of Security Commission, Colombia; former Defense Minister and former Foreign Trade Minister, 
Colombia; WDR Advisory Council Member

The  challenge  we  faced  in  2002  was  preventing  Colombia 
from becoming a failed state. This meant shielding our citi-
zens from kidnapping and terrorism. It also meant protect-
ing  our  infrastructure,  roads,  and  democratic  institutions 
against  attacks  by  the  guerrillas,  the  paramilitaries,  and 
drug traﬃ  ckers.

President  Uribe’s  Democratic  Security  Policy  called  for 
the presence of the military and police over the entire terri-
tory of the nation within six months. This required not just 
more people in the armed forces, but also providing them 
with  more  equipment  and  better  training  in  human  rights 
and doctrine, so the police and military could operate suc-
cessfully  under  a  single  command.  It  was  also  a  result  of 
American  cooperation  through  Plan  Colombia,  a  program 
initiated  by  the  previous  Colombian  government,  headed 
by Andrés Pastrana. 

From  the  beginning,  we  stressed  the  importance  of 
greater  civilian  control  over  defense.  We  brought  civilians 
into the ministry to work with the military commanders on 
defense and security policy. This had the additional beneﬁ t 
of greater transparency in budget allocations and the man-
agement  of  other  resources  used  by  the  military.  Civilian 
engagement  in  budget  planning  with  security  force  col-
leagues  helped  in  the  success  of  the  Democratic  Security 
Policy.

Having  strengthened  civilian  control  of  the  ministry,  we 
embarked  on  an  unprecedented  exercise  in  developing  a 
10-year  strategic  plan  with  performance  indicators  against 
which  we  could  chart  progress  in  implementing  the  presi-
dent’s security policy. As Minister of Defense, I brought in rep-
resentatives of the business community and academics of dif-
ferent ideological tendencies to provide input for the national 
security policy. The goal was both to increase the legitimacy of 
the  policy  and  to  build  conﬁ dence  in  the  armed  forces.  This 
was  the  ﬁ rst  time  such  consultations  had  taken  place.  I  also 
called on entrepreneurs to let us use their experience to help 
the  government  with  procurement  systems,  logistics,  and 
state-of-the-art technologies. 

It is hard to put your ﬁ nger on the precise reasons for our 
success. But over the past eight years we have won back con-
trol  of  the  national  territory.  We  have  ended  kidnapping  on 
our roads—in the so-called “Pescas Milagrosas.” And we have 
seen the number of terrorist organizations decline to the point 
where it would be hard to imagine their revival. Our focus now 
is  on  maintaining  momentum.  We  must  continue  to  pursue 
the policies that have brought success in recent years. And we 
must  go  further  by  strengthening  our  institutions  and  ensur-
ing  democratic  civilian  control  of  the  armed  forces  whose 
monopoly over the use of force is recognized and respected.

WDR note: Why is it important to pay attention to the security and justice budgeting process?

Security  and  justice  are  essential  public  goods  that  beneﬁ t  development  and  poverty  reduction.  It  is  both  appropriate  and 
necessary for the state to allocate resources for the maintenance of security and access to justice. Attention must therefore be 
paid  to  the  ﬁ nancial  management  of  the  security  and  justice  sectors  so  that  resources  are  used  eﬀ ectively  and  eﬃ  ciently 
against agreed priorities in a transparent and accountable manner. 

Three crucial, inter-related components of managing security and justice expenditure are as follows:

•  As in other parts of the public sector, security and justice budgets should be prepared against sectoral strategies. Gov-
ernments  must  be  able  to  identify  the  needs  and  key  objectives  of  the  security  and  justice  sectors  as  a  whole  and  the 
speciﬁ c roles that the various security and justice actors will be asked to play.

• 

• 

 Resources must be allocated according to priorities both within the security and justice sectors and between security 
and justice and other sectors. Sectoral strategies and information on performance are critical components of the allocative 
process. The key ﬁ nancial and economic managers plus the legislature must have the capacity to be fully involved in this 
process, and the process must include all relevant actors. Security and justice must compete fully with other sectors for fund-
ing. Public expenditure analysis that covers the whole of government can help provide information to inform this process.

 Finally, resources appropriated must be used eﬃ  ci ently and eﬀ ec tively. This requires careful monitoring and evaluation of 
operational performance, both within the security and justice services and by civil servants. Basic well-functioning ﬁ nancial 
management information systems are critical in this regard. Additionally, it is extremely important that irregularities identi-
ﬁ ed in the course of monitoring are addressed, lest a climate of noncompliance be created or reinforced. The transparency 
of procurement processes is as important in security and justice as in other areas. Internal audit units or inspector-general 
functions within the defense, justice, and interior ministries can play important roles in ensuring eﬀ ective resource use.

Sources: Ball and Holmes 2002; Harbone and Sage 2010.

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

151

South Africa expanded the wage bill for se-
curity services as a transitional measure.17 A 
lack  of  alternative  livelihood  opportunities 
also argues for a cautious approach to DDR. 
In  Colombia,  many  former  Autodefensas 
Unidas de Colombia (AUC) guerillas passed 
through  a  DDR  process,  only  to  reemerge 
as  hired  killers  for  the  existing  drug  deal-
ers or as leaders and operatives in new drug 
gangs.18 The “least-bad answer” between ﬁ s-
cal  costs  and  security  risks  may  be  tolerat-
ing an oversized security sector for a transi-
tional period as a source of employment for 
combatants who would otherwise have little 
chance of ﬁ nding work.19

Guéhenno also notes that “Trust depends 
on legitimacy, but legitimacy is also a func-
tion  of  effectiveness.  A  reformed  security 
force  needs  to  be  perceived  as  professional. 
Recruitment  and  vetting  [are]  probably  the 
single most important factor.”20 Dismantling 
covert,  abusive,  or  corrupt  networks  within 
the  security  forces  through  recruitment  or 
vetting has also been an important early re-
form in many countries that have sustained 
successful institutional transformations away 
from  violence.  In  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina 
between  1999  and  2002,  the  United  Na-
tions  Mission  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina 
(UNMIBH) vetted all law enforcement per-
sonnel in the country.21 

The  removal  of  abusers  has  often  been 
achieved through indirect professional ization 
measures.  For  example,  vetting  in  security 
services was not conducted in Argentina, but 
the requirement to accept nongovernmental 
organization  (NGO)  submissions  on  past 
abuses  when  conﬁ rming  security  appoint-
ments  resulted  in  implicit  “vetting  out”  of 
 ofﬁ cers  who  did  not  want  to  face  queries 
over  their  past  records.  Both  Chile  and  Ar-
gentina made use of the recruitment of grad-
uates  into  the  security  forces  and  increased 
emphasis  on  professional  training  to  create 
an  environment  that  furthered  professional 
standards and made it difﬁ cult for abusers to 
prosper.22 

Vetting programs can be strongly custom-

ized to context in three principal ways: 

•  Vetting programs differ in terms of their 
targets.  No  transitional  society  has  re-
formed  or  vetted  all  institutions  at  the 
same time and, in fact, rarely even a single 
institution at all hierarchical levels. Choices 
have  to  be  made  about  both  the  institu-
tions where vetting will be applied and the 
positions  within  those  institutions  that 
will be subject to screening. 

•  Programs differ also in terms of the screen-
ing criteria. What kind of abuses, precisely, 
is the system designed to root out? 

•  Not all programs are the same in terms of 
the sanctions they impose; even ﬁ rings can 
take place in many different ways (starting 
with a relatively mild one involving giving 
people the opportunity to resign without 
disclosing  their  participation  in  behavior 
considered abusive). Vetting sanctions can 
involve  different  degrees  of  publicity  and 
also prospective limitations in seeking em-
ployment in various sectors in the future.23 

Actions  to  reform  the  security  services 
during transitions are often combined with 
deliberate  decisions  not  to  undertake  ac-
tions that could threaten military support for 
change. In Indonesia, for example, the role of 
the military in civilian administration and in 
the economy was dramatically decreased, but 
little action was taken on past human rights 
abuses.  In  Chile,  civilian  oversight,  elimi-
nation  of  abusive  security  units,  and  some 
prosecutions  of  past  human  rights  abuses 
were undertaken quickly, but initial prosecu-
tions were targeted and limited in scope and 
military  revenues  were  protected  under  the 
“copper law.”24 

Attention to gender sensitivity and wom-
en’s  full  participation  in  security-sector  re-
form  can  contribute  to  success.25  Women 
bring a more gender-speciﬁ c value-added to 
broader  security  tasks,  including  enhanced 
access to services by women, fewer incidents 
of  sexual  misconduct,  and  greater  trust  of 
the civilian population in the security sector. 
Moreover, studies on policing have found that 
female police ofﬁ cers use less force, are better 

152 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

at defusing potentially violent situations, and 
facilitate community policing well.26 

In Nicaragua, gender reforms of the po-
lice  sector  initiated  in  the  1990s  resulted  in 
the  police  being  described  as  the  most 
“women-friendly” force in the region, hailed 
for its success in addressing sexual violence.27 
In a similar vein, the UN Mission in Liberia’s 
(UNMIL) all-female Formed Police Unit un-
dertook joint crime prevention night patrols 
with  local  police  in  Liberia,  helping  them 
overcome  lingering  suspicions  of  citizens 
whose trust in the uniform had been eroded 
by civil war.28 In Namibia, a Women and Child 
Protection Unit was created within the police 
force to address the problem of domestic vio-
lence.29  In  Sierra  Leone,  female  victims  had 
also been reluctant to come forward and seek 
help from police. The UN Mission in Sierra 
Leone  helped  create  a  Family  Support  Unit 
within  the  police  department  that  included 
female police ofﬁ cers. This more compassion-
ate environment for victims resulted in an in-
crease in reports on sexual violence, 90 per-
cent of which came from women and girls.30 
Citizen security can be addressed at both 
local and national levels. At the local level, in-
volving communities and the private sector 
can improve the relations between the state 
and its citizens and thereby help prevent vio-
lence and conﬂ ict. Effective interventions in-
clude the following: 

•  Community  policing  works  by  reducing 
crime  through  community  partnership. 
Working  with  community  members,  it 
identiﬁ es,  responds  to,  and  solves  crimes 
and  other  problems  that  affect  the  com-
munity.31 Neighborhood policing is simi-
lar to community policing. It aims to pro-
vide  a  visible  police  force  that  is  citizen 
focused  and  accountable  to  community 
members,  expressing  local  solidarity,  in 
order  to  meet  a  community’s  needs.  For 
instance,  community  policing  in  Kosovo 
brought  together  residents,  municipal 
governments,  and  security  providers  to 
agree  upon  speciﬁ c  “community  safety 
plans.”  Easier  and  less  sensitive  security 
problems  such  as  trafﬁ c  violations  were 

tackled ﬁ rst to allow for quick wins. Harder 
security concerns such as recovery and re-
moval  of  illicit  weapons  were  addressed 
once conﬁ dence was built in the process. 
Interviews  with  residents  show  tangible 
progress  in  reduction  of  minor  security 
breaches, as well as improved community-
police  relations  and  perceptions  of  secu-
rity.32  Similarly,  in  the  municipality  of 
 Hatillo in Costa Rica has applied commu-
nity policing, involving community mem-
bers in action plans for public safety. One 
year after implementation, the program’s 
impact  on  delinquency  was  not  signiﬁ -
cant, but the feeling of insecurity decreased 
from 36 percent of community members 
to  19  percent,  and  public  perceptions  of 
the police improved.33

•  The private sector can support municipal 
governments  and  civil  society  in  local 
crime and violence prevention initiatives. 
The police paciﬁ cation units in Rio de Ja-
neiro,  Brazil,  were  started  in  late  2008  to 
replace coercive, short-term interventions 
in favelas with a long-term police presence 
and  social  services.  The  aim  is  to  ensure 
the consolidation of territorial control and 
peace in the areas of intervention through 
the promotion of citizenship and develop-
ment, fully integrating these areas into the 
larger city. The private sector helps ﬁ nance 
the  initiative,  thus  contributing  to  social 
and economic development in the paciﬁ ed 
favelas.34

•  Communities  have  prevented  and  re-
sponded  to  gender-based  violence.  The 
European Union (EU) military operation 
in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo 
collaborated  with  local  women’s  organi-
zations,  which  provided  information  on 
whom to contact regarding psychosocial, 
medical, and legal support whenever EU 
forces  came  across  cases  of  sexual  vio-
lence.  The  UN  Mission  there  also  orga-
nized  villagers  to  establish  a  community 
alarm  scheme  to  warn  against  intruding 
forces  committing  violent  acts,  often 
against women.35

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

153

It  can  be  helpful  to  maintain  long-
 established, functioning practices to help ad-
dress policing and public security, even if these 
are  not  very “technical”  solutions.  In  Haiti, 
Prime  Minister  Jean-Max  Bellerive  noted 
that  the  country  needs  a  modernized  force 
with advanced technical equipment for large 
urban  areas,  which  face  sophisticated  and 
highly  violent  networks  of  gangs  and  orga-
nized crime. In rural areas, however, the tra-
ditional rural police force operated effectively 
in resolving small land and property disputes. 
Establishing a force with sophisticated tech-
nical equipment and a mission more suited 
to urban areas “should not make the police 
feel that it is no longer their job to walk up 
the hill and resolve a property or family dis-
pute before it escalates into violence.”36 

Making security reform a top priority does 
not  mean  fully  comprehensive  reform  and 
modernization across all aspects of these sys-
tems. Basic reforms that improve citizen secu-
rity, and that prevent outright capture of the 
system, can enable reforms to move forward 
in other political and economic areas, allow-
ing more gradual comprehensive reform and 
professionalization.  Haiti’s  police  force  pro-
vides  an  example  of  progress  in  basic  func-
tions and state-society trust in the security in-
stitutions from a very fragile start (box 5.5).

Justice 

Criminal justice functions and dispute 
resolution 

Experience  has  shown  that  coordination 
across  justice  agencies  is  critical  to  reduce 
impunity,  and  that  effective  linkages  must 
exist  between  the  police  and  other  justice 
institutions,  including  the  judiciary,  public 
prosecutors,  and  prisons,  to  address  crime 
and violence.37 While the police force in Haiti 
post-2004 made impressive strides (see box 
5.5), advances in the courts and prison sys-
tem did not match the police force’s increase 
in capacity and legitimacy, so offenders were 
often released back into communities with-
out  due  process  and  continued  to  engage 

BOX 5.5   Reform of the Haiti police force, even in difﬁ cult 

circumstances

Types of violence:  Widespread crime and gang-related violence, militia 
activity, organized crime, drug traﬃ  cking

Transition moments:  Major space for 
change, new national and police lead-
ership, signiﬁ cant external support

Key stakeholders:  Government, 
citizens, international partners, 
police 

Key stresses:  Legacy of violence and 
mistrust, drug traﬃ  cking and orga-
nized crime activities, low incomes, 
youth unemployment, corruption

Institutional challenges:  Weak 
political, judicial, and security 
institutions; lack of accountability; 
low trust in security forces

The transformation of the Haiti National Police from the least to the most 
trusted institution of the state over ﬁ ve years can be attributed to a reform plan 
of internal and external actors. Reform was viewed not only as an internal tech-
nical activity, but ﬁ rst and foremost as a political process requiring the buy-in of 
Haiti’s leaders. Their political support ensured that ﬁ nancial resources were allo-
cated to pay salaries and support day-to-day police operations. Another external 
factor was that the UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), through its 
military and police presence, contributed to internal security, allowing space 
for a thorough police training program. 

With these critical external factors in place, the Haiti National Police (HNP), 

supported by MINUSTAH, professionalized the force, raised the morale of its oﬃ  -
cers, and boosted public conﬁ dence. It implemented procedures to vet existing 
oﬃ  cers and recruit new ones. Including women in the police force was given a 
priority by both the government and police leadership. A strengthened internal 
aﬀ airs unit acted decisively in cases of wrongdoing, reinforcing the value of and 
need for oﬃ  cer integrity. A seven-month initial recruit training program (rather 
than the typical two to three weeks often seen in post-conﬂ ict environments) 
was implemented alongside other specialized training programs. Each oﬃ  cer 
was properly equipped to undertake his or her policing functions and received 
regular salary payments. The police uniform, closely associated with the corrup-
tion and human rights abuses of the past, was changed—both to prevent for-
mer oﬃ  cers from using their uniforms for illegal activities and, more important, 
as a public symbol of the change in the police force. The HNP also strengthened 
its management, delegated more authority to the ﬁ eld, and enhanced its admin-
istrative and support functions.

Haiti’s population has recognized the changes in the HNP: asked in 2009 

whether they had seen a change in police work over the past year, 72 percent 
reported a positive change, and 83 percent reported that the security situation 
in the country was either “a lot” or at least “a little” better than in the year prior. 
Tested by ﬂ oods, hurricanes, earthquakes, and nationwide food riots, the service 
on each occasion has performed credibly. Immediately after the earthquake and 
aftermath of January 12, 2010, the police was the only arm of government seen 
to be functioning in the streets of Haiti. 

Source: UNDPKO 2010a. 

in  illegal  activities.  By  contrast,  the  rule-
of-law  reforms  introduced  by  the  Regional 
Assistance  Mission  to  the  Solomon  Islands 
(RAMSI)  focused  in  parallel  on  police  re-
forms, further developing a court system that 

154 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

once had a good reputation and refurbishing 
the  country’s  prisons.38  In  middle-income 
country contexts such as the transitions from 
military rule in Chile and Argentina, where 
accountability posed greater constraints than 
capacity,  reform  of  security  and  justice  ser-
vices proceeded at a more or less similar pace 
and  were  mutually  reinforcing  (some  early 
changes,  some  more  gradual).39  Conversely, 
as noted in chapter 3, in Colombia capacity 
increases in the military and police were not 
matched  by  similar  increases  in  resourcing 
and capacity within the courts, constraining 
overall progress.40 

Vetting  of  personnel,  discussed  above 
in  connection  with  the  security  forces,  can 
also be crucial for judges and prosecutors. In 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina, three High Judicial 
and Prosecutorial Councils (HJPC), made up 
of international and national personnel, re-
structured the court system and reappointed 
all judges and prosecutors between 2002 and 
2004. Almost  1,000  posts  were  declared  va-
cant, and there was open competition to ﬁ ll 
them.41 Indirect mechanisms have also been 
used to improve professionalism in the jus-
tice sectors. In Chile following the transition 
to military rule, rapid action on civilian over-
sight of the Carabinieri was combined with 
a  reform  to  the  promotion  and  conﬁ rma-
tion  processes  of  judges,  which  encouraged 
lower-level  prosecutorial  independence  and 
merit-based promotion to higher courts.42 

In  terms  of  capacity-building,  a  focus 
on  basic  administrative  functions,  replac-
ing of obsolete procedures, and targeting of 
improvements  in  caseload  processing  have 
tended to deliver better results than grand le-
gal and judicial reform plans.43 Governments 
and donors have often tended to sacriﬁ ce this 
pragmatism in approaches to reform justice 
systems, favoring redrafting legal codes over 
the  administration  of  essential  justice  and 
basic institution-building (as in Afghanistan 
after  2001  and  Iraq  after  2003).44  Provision 
of local-level justice services is important to 
maintain conﬁ dence in institutional reform 
efforts, and partnering with communities or 
civil society to do so can be an important link 
between  early  results  and  later  institution-

building. In Latin America, innovative local 
courts have been effective in bringing justice 
to the population (box 5.6). 

Other  approaches  to  increase  access  to 
justice  that  have  shown  positive  results  in 
areas underserved by the formal system are 
mobile  courts  and  the  use  of  paralegals.  In 
Nicaragua in the early 2000s, mobile courts 
and community-based paralegals were cred-
ited  with  a  10  percent  reduction  in  crime 
where the scheme operated.45 The approach 
by  Timap  for  Justice,  a  not-for-proﬁ t  orga-
nization offering free justice services in sites 
across  Sierra  Leone,  has  also  demonstrated 
important results. Paralegals backstopped by 
lawyers have assisted communities to address 
disputes and grievances since 2003. Qualita-
tive  research  has  shown  that  Timap’s  inter-
ventions have empowered clients (especially 
women)  to  claim  their  rights.  Community 
perceptions of institutional fairness and ac-
countability  of  the  police,  traditional  lead-
ers, and courts also improved as a result of 
Timap’s work.46 Building on Timap, donors 
and the government of Sierra Leone joined 
with  nongovernmental  organizations  and 
community-based groups in 2010 to develop 
a  national  approach  to  justice  services,  in-
cluding a front line of community paralegals 
and a smaller core of supporting lawyers.

Access  to  justice  (and  services)  is  often 
denied to those who are not registered, and 
registration  initiatives  can  be  an  impor-
tant  form  of  recognition  of  citizenship 
and  community  identity  for  marginalized 
groups.47  Organizations  like  the  Commu-
nity  of  Sant’Egidio,  through  its  BRAVO 
(Birth  Registration  for All  versus  Oblivion) 
program,48  the  International  Committee  of 
the  Red  Cross,  United  Nations  Children’s 
Fund  (UNICEF),  and  United  Nations  High 
Commissioner  for  Refugees   (UNHCR),  as 
well as nongovernmental organizations, have 
supported  national  authorities  in  register-
ing births in difﬁ cult contexts. Effective tools 
include  putting  speciﬁ c  provisions  in  peace 
agreements for birth registration and proper 
identiﬁ cation, utilizing community “report-
ers” such as midwives through mobile regis-
tration programs, and combining birth regis-

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

155

BOX 5.6  Innovative court solutions in Latin America

Twenty-four-hour courts—arraignment courts that hear complaints and review fresh evi-
dence—show how criminal cases can be expedited. One example is the 24-hour court that was 
established in 2005 by the Supreme Court of Guatemala. This is an interinstitutional eﬀ ort, with 
not only the judiciary, but also the Public Ministry, the Ministry of Government, the National 
Civil Police, and Public Defense Institute participating. Apart from operating 24 hours a day, 
365 days a year, the 24-hour court availability has facilitated compliance by the police with the 
due process requirement of presenting detainees to a court within a six-hour limit. Over the 
ﬁ rst three years of the court’s operation, the number of cases it dismissed declined from 77 
percent to under 15 percent. Nearly 50 percent of all arraignments ended in alternatives to 
detention, such as bail, house arrest, weekly presentations at the local court, or restrictions on 
travel. Drug consumption cases fell from over 30 percent to about 7 percent. And the courts 
made greater use of alternatives to trial. 

In ﬂ agrante delicto courts were established in Costa Rica in 2008 on a pilot basis in San José 
to reduce criminal case disposition times. They were set up within the existing legal frame-
work, with no need for further legal reforms. Their purpose is to ensure due process guaran-
tees in simpliﬁ ed procedures to handle cases where the defendant is caught in the act of com-
mitting of a crime (that is, in ﬂ agrante delicto). These courts remain open 24 hours a day, 365 
days a year and operate with several shifts of judges, prosecutors, and public defenders. The 
cases are turned over immediately to the prosecutors, who may request an immediate hearing 
with the judge to analyze alternative mechanisms, such as summary judgment or preventive 
detention. When the defendant and the public defender choose an expedited trial, it can take 
place immediately or be set in a few days. 

In Colombia, Justice Houses—integrated, multi-agency service centers—are used to solve con-
ﬂ icts. These Justice Houses, ﬁ rst designed and implemented by USAID (the United States 
Agency for International Development) in 1995, have assisted over 7.8 million citizens since 
inception, mainly from low-income communities. There are now 50 well-staﬀ ed facilities 
throughout the country in urban and rural areas, some of which are regional in nature. Given 
their success in reducing local conﬂ ict and preserving peace, plans include the construction of 
10 new Regional Justice Houses in partnership with the Ministry of Interior and Justice. Other 
social services include Peace Centers, which are expanded versions of Justice Houses where the 
community has access to programs that promote citizenship values, peaceful coexistence, and 
amicable solution of conﬂ icts. The ﬁ rst Peace Center opened in December 2002 in Barrancaber-
meja, one of the most violent areas in Colombia, and there are now 15 throughout Colombia.

Sources: World Bank 2010i; USAID Guatemala 2008; USAID 2009b. 

tration with the provision of complementary 
services such as immunization.49

Supplementing  formal  justice  with  tra-
ditional community systems can be another 
best-ﬁ t.  Deep  and  comprehensive  judicial 
reforms  can  rarely  be  achieved  in  the  short 
or  medium  term.  One  challenge  of  justice 
reform,  then,  is  to  create  bridges  between 
the formal and informal systems in the early 
stages  of  transitions.  Traditional  systems  all 
over the world settle disputes over land, prop-
erty, and family issues. As many as 80 percent 
of the people in today’s fragile states relies on 
nonstate actors for various forms of security 
and justice.50 For instance, in Kenya—where 
land  is  frequently  a  source  of  private  and 

communal  disputes,  even  when  and  some-
times  because  it  is  titled—traditional  insti-
tutions  are  widely  held  to  be  more  reliable 
in resolving conﬂ ict than the state.51 In Mali 
in recent years, combinations of local tradi-
tional institutions and the state have settled 
land  disputes,  with  community  groups  ad-
judicating between contestants, and all par-
ties then recording the judgment at the local 
prefecture.52  Informal  women’s  courts  can 
also supplement formal structures, generally 
convened by civil society to allow women to 
recount  abuses.  Women’s  courts  have  been 
used in Guatemala for abuses during the civil 
war, in Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon 
for rapes during the 1982 Sabra and Shatila 

156 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

massacres,  and  in  Japan  around  issues  of 
World War II “comfort women.”53 

The  lesson  here  appears  to  be  to  use  a 
process  of  recognition  and  reform  to  draw 
on  the  capacities  of  traditional  community 
structures  and  to  “pull”  them  gradually  in 
the direction of respect for equity and inter-
national norms. One such example is Timor-
Leste’s  blending  traditional  customary  law 
provisions  into  the  formal  legal  system.  In 
Timor-Leste  after  independence,  a  de  facto 
hybrid  system  emerged,  where  local  justice 
mechanisms continued to function in parallel 
to the formal legal system. The main reasons 
for conﬁ dence in the traditional system were 
that  it  resolved  conﬂ icts  according  to  cul-
tural norms and heritage (51 percent of sur-
vey respondents) and was less expensive and 
more effective than the formal justice system 
(38 percent of survey respondents).54 As the 
formal justice system gained capacity, rather 
than  attempting  to  entirely  displace  this  in-
formal system, the government in 2009 began 
a nationwide public consultation on the legal 
recognition  of  customary  law  processes,  as 
envisioned under the constitution. Customary 
penalties, such as ﬁ nancial compensation, are 
being incorporated into the formal legal code. 
The process has also involved a debate on the 
tensions between formal and customary ap-
proaches applied to such crimes as rape.55

Corruption 

Justice is also concerned with ensuring equi-
table access of citizens to the state’s resources, 
that  is,  it  is  concerned  with  corruption.  In 
Georgia, the Saakashvili government that was 
swept up to power by the Rose Revolution of 
2003 cracked down on corruption in the pub-
lic sector after 2003 by better disclosing public 
ofﬁ cials’  assets,  strengthening  whistleblower 
protections,  and  improving  public  ﬁ nancial 
control and procurement measures. In addi-
tion, it criminalized active and passive bribery, 
enforced  its  criminal  legislation  and  created 
the  Anti-Corruption  Interagency  Council, 
tasked  with  developing  and  implementing  a 
new national anti-corruption strategy. Three 
years  later,  Georgia  ranked  as  a  top  anti-

corruption reformer on several global action-
able governance indicators, such that 78 per-
cent  of  Georgians  felt  that  corruption  had 
decreased in the last three years, the best result 
among the 86 countries surveyed.56

Private  and  international  capacity  can 
supplement state systems in applying best-ﬁ t 
approaches  to  ﬁ ght  corruption  in  fragile 
 situations.  Liberia  recognized  it  lacked  the 
capacity to properly oversee its national for-
estry industry in the post-conﬂ ict period and 
turned  to  nonstate  capacity  to  ensure  reve-
nue  recovery  from  logging  (under  former 
president Charles Taylor, less than 15 percent 
of taxes owed from forestry revenue were col-
lected) and to safeguard against money from 
sale of illegal wood being laundered through 
the legal supply chain. The government con-
tracted a private inspection company to build 
and operate a system to track all timber from 
point  of  harvest  through  transport  to  sale, 
with  an  agreement  to  transfer  the  system 
back to the government after seven years. The 
system  ensures  the  government  collects  all 
revenues because it will not issue an export 
permit until the Central Bank conﬁ rms that 
all taxes have been paid.57 Similarly, both In-
donesia and Mozambique have used private 
sector customs collection agencies to help in-
crease  efﬁ ciency  in  an  area  that  is  always 
highly vulnerable to corruption.58

Transparency  of  budget  and  expendi-
ture information is an easy change to put in 
place  early  on,  and  can  be  crucial  to  stem 
illegal  ﬂ ows  of  funds  into  violent  activi-
ties. For example, Timor-Leste’s Petroleum 
Law,  which  came  into  effect  in  2005,  was 
established  very  early  in  the  transition  to 
independence.  It  establishes  a  high  degree 
of  transparency  over  funds  and  recom-
mends that the government only withdraw 
amounts up to what is needed to maintain 
the capital value of the country’s oil assets.59 
The framework for petroleum revenues has 
remained robust and protected national as-
sets,  even  during  a  bout  of  renewed  inse-
curity in 2005–06, and is supplemented by 
open reporting to parliament and the public 
on expenditures in each ministry, including 
the security sectors.

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

157

Local  community  and  civil  society  or-
ganizations  can  also  combat  corruption. 
“Social  accountability”  approaches  draw  on 
the incentives for citizens and communities 
to  monitor  the  expenditures  most  directly 
affecting  their  welfare.  These  tools  include 
citizen report cards, community scorecards, 
participatory  public  budgeting,  and  pub-
lic  expenditure  tracking  surveys,  as  well  as 
community-driven development approaches 
where expenditures are publicized transpar-
ently  at  the  local  level.  In  fragile  situations, 
such social accountability tools can contrib-
ute to building citizens’ trust in the state at 
the national and local levels.60 The results can 
be  signiﬁ cant.  In  the  Kecamatan  Develop-
ment  Program  in  Aceh,  Indonesia,  88  per-
cent of the population surveyed believed that 
the  program  funds  had  been  properly  ad-
ministered  and  spent  on  what  they  consid-
ered most important.61 In Madagascar, com-
munity monitoring in the health sector (via 
community scorecards) led to a 10 percentage 
point increase in consumer satisfaction with 
health  services  (from  39  percent  to  49  per-
cent) in as little as four months. Scorecards 
also helped improve the regularity of salary 
payments  and  interactions  between  users, 
health staff, and village administrators.62 

Determined  reformers,  supported  by 
equally  determined  international  partners, 
can  achieve  important  gains  in  public  ac-
countability  and  transparency,  even  in  dif-
ﬁ cult  circumstances  (box  5.7).  In  2002  the 
Palestinian Authority embarked on a reform 
of  its  public  ﬁ nancial  management  system 
and  in  less  than  two  years  achieved  several 
notable improvements. All revenue payments 
were centralized into the central treasury ac-
count,  eliminating  previous  discretionary 
and non-transparent spending by line min-
istries.  The  Department  of  Supplies  and 
Tenders in the Ministry of Finance assumed 
full jurisdiction over all purchases (above the 
threshold value of US$15,000) by ministries 
and  agencies,  including  the  Security  Finan-
cial Administration. Salary payments to secu-
rity personnel were made directly into their 
bank  accounts  instead  of  the  previous  cash 
handouts. And the previous large discretion-

ary transfer appropriation for the president’s 
ofﬁ ce  was   virtually  eliminated,  with  these 
funds instead transferred to service ministries 
(Health, Education, and Social Affairs).63

Private sector enterprises can also estab-
lish their own pragmatic, best-ﬁ t procedures 
to deal with the risk of corruption, even in 
weak institutional contexts (box 5.7).

Jobs 

Private sector recovery 

Alleviating  key  bottlenecks  identiﬁ ed  by 
the private sector can help to restore conﬁ -
dence by signaling to entrepreneurs a more 
business-friendly  environment  generating 
economic  revival  and  setting  the  stage  for 
broader reform. An early emphasis on sim-
pliﬁ cation  of  business  regulations—rather 
than  expansion  or  reﬁ nement—has  proved 
effective.  In  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  the 
“Bulldozer  Initiative”  of  2002,  and  subse-
quent  “guillotine”  initiatives  by  the  entity 
governments,  mobilized  the  local  business 
community  to  lobby  for  the  elimination 
of  signiﬁ cant  bureaucratic  impediments  to 
private sector growth. The Bulldozer Initia-
tive delivered 50 reforms aimed at eliminat-
ing excessive bureaucratic steps in 150 days, 
improving the investment climate.64 Selective 
legal amendments that permitted freer trade 
and simpliﬁ ed inward investment have also 
produced early successes. Similarly, in 2001, 
as part of a strategy for private sector–led de-
velopment,  Rwanda  overhauled  its  contract 
enforcement regime, long an impediment to 
investment. Domestic business registrations 
increased at 10 percent a year from 2001 to 
2004,  driving  formal  sector  growth  of  6  to 
7 percent in 2003 and 2004.65 

In violent situations, where business con-
ﬁ dence  is  very  low,  however,  creating  the 
right environment for businesses is often not 
enough to attract investment; more direct in-
tervention is needed for the private sector to 
play its catalytic role. One approach is to sup-
port  value  chains.66  Links  between  produc-
ers, traders, and consumers can unravel with 
violence, eroding trust between social groups. 

158 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 5.7  Experiences in countering corruption 

Flexible and robust mechanisms for combating corruption in the private sector

Mo Ibrahim, Founder, Mo Ibrahim Foundation; Founder, Celtel; WDR Advisory Council Member

When I founded Celtel in 1998 to build and operate mobile 
phone  networks  across  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  well-meaning 
friends, shaking their heads in disbelief, told me two things: 
You  will  not  succeed  because  there  is  no  potential  market 
for this new technology in this poor continent and you must 
be prepared to bribe every decision maker, at every level.

Well,  Celtel  was  indeed  a  tremendous  success.  Africa 
proved  to  be  the  fastest  growing  continent  for  mobile 
phones.  As  for  corruption,  I  did  two  simple  things.  First,  I 
established  a  powerful  and  prominent  company  board. 
Then we decreed that any payment, initially above US$30,000, 
must be board approved.

This  decision  proved  to  be  crucial  to  enforce  the  anti-
bribery  stand  of  the  company  and  provided  our  managers 

on the ground with invaluable protection and cover. It indeed 
enhanced  ﬁ nancial  discipline  throughout  the  operations.  The 
wonderful  support  of  our  board  members  and  their  commit-
ment to respond quickly to any unpredictable funding require-
ments was crucial. In fairness to African oﬃ  cials, the number of 
incidents where our people came under pressure to pay was far 
less than we had expected. On the three occasions we did resort 
to  legal  action  in  local  courts,  we  won  every  single  case.  The 
valuable lesson I learnt was that corporate governance pays and 
it  enhances  your  bottom  line.  It  is  not  enough  for  company 
boards  to  make  grand  statements  on  corruption.  Until  and 
unless they put in place the policies that enforce and support 
their  managers  on  the  ground,  their  pronouncements  will 
remain an empty attempt at discharging their ﬁ duciary duties.

Making anti-corruption institutions eﬀ  ective in Rwanda after the genocide

H.E. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda; WDR Advisory Council Member

In the early post-genocide period, Rwanda’s recovery eﬀ orts 
were  focused  on  stabilization,  restoring  security,  fostering 
social  trust,  and  rebuilding  and  reforming  political  institu-
tions, as well as laying the foundations for economic recov-
ery  and  growth.  Three  years  after  the  genocide  and  civil 
war, work on institution-building to restore virtue and ﬁ ght 
corruption began in earnest. Such eﬀ orts included the cre-
ation  of  the  Rwanda  Revenue  Authority,  Ombudsman’s 
Oﬃ  ce, Auditor General’s Oﬃ  ce, National Public Prosecution 
Authority,  National  Police  and  the  Rwanda  Public  Procure-
ment Authority, among others. These were complemented 
by  legislative  measures  such  as  the  Organic  Law  on  the 
Leadership Code of Conduct, all of which were in place prior 
to the development of long-term economic strategies, thus 
ensuring  that  our  fragile  economic  development  was  not 
wasted away through theft and greed. 

A vital lesson drawn from our experience is that institution-
building  and  appropriate  laws  are  imperative.  Nonetheless, 
making institutions and laws work eﬀ ectively is often more dif-
ﬁ cult. In our context, the commitment to ﬁ ght corruption was 
an  important  priority  for  the  incoming  Government  in  July 
1994.  A  zero-tolerance  policy  resulted  in  the  resignation  or 
 dismissal  of  holders  of  public  oﬃ  ce,  among  others,  including 
some  members  of  the  Government  of  National  Unity.  Action 
was taken in this respect, by Parliament and the Executive, to 
enforce  the  notion  of  political  accountability  at  a  critical 
moment in our history and has nurtured increasingly eﬀ ective 
governance institutions. This has been reinforced by a contin-
ued  policy  of  consistently  prosecuting  corrupt  oﬃ  cials.  Upon 
reﬂ ection, it is clear that action against high-level oﬃ  cials, dem-
onstrating that no one is untouchable, was critical. A continued 
strong public support for the anti-corruption eﬀ ort was and is 
still of utmost importance, as this remains a work in progress.

Restoring these connections by bringing to-
gether  market  actors  and  providing  infor-
mation about market trends can create jobs 
and rebuild social cohesion.67 It also provides 
local businesses with legitimate new market 
connections as an alternative to illegal activi-
ties, as with the Kosovo dairy and Rwandan 
coffee  sectors  (box  5.8).  An  approach  that 
is  promising  for  new  market  development, 
even  in  fragile  environments,  is  matching 

grants for new market development that ex-
ploit the private sector’s capacity to innovate 
and help entrepreneurs develop new product 
lines while sharing the risk of investment.68 

Investment in basic infrastructure 

Domestic  and  international  investors  need 
basic  infrastructure.  Electricity  emerges  as 
a  key  constraint  to  recovery  efforts  by  the 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

159

BOX 5.8  Value chain development in Kosovo and Rwanda

Kosovo 

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict; ethnic violence; political, criminal, and gang-related violence

Transition moment:  Large space for change, declaration of 
statehood, national and municipal elections, new constitution

Key stakeholders:  Farmers, private sector, ethnic groups, 
municipal and national government, Serbian government, regional 
and international partners

Key stresses:  Unemployment, legacies of violence and trauma, 
corruption, ethnic divisions, traﬃ  cking, unemployment, low 
incomes

Institutional challenges:  Accountability and capacity constraints 
in public and private institutions, destroyed infrastructure, legacy 
of exclusion

Dairy is a traditional consumer product in Kosovo. In the 1990s, the command production system broke down and cooperatives dis-
solved. Many families became self-suﬃ  cient units, producing to meet their own consumption needs and trading surplus for other 
goods and services. The conﬂ ict of 1998–99 destroyed much of the production base, damaged infrastructure, displaced people, wid-
ened ethnic divisions, and eroded Kosovars’ trust in each other and their government. Shortly after agricultural production and eco-
nomic activity resumed in Kosovo, donors began working with value chain participants to upgrade the dairy industry. Value chain 
implementers worked ﬁ rst with individual farmers to make no- or low-cost changes to improve yields and quality, then expanded their 
reach by working with larger groups and associations. Thereafter, they steered farmers toward commercial channels, helping them fur-
ther upgrade their processes to improve productivity and quality and to rebuild links with processors. In parallel, they worked with pro-
cessors to orient them to end markets and, based on demand, to upgrade their processes and products to improve quality, expand 
production, and increase market share. By working from the micro to the macro as Kosovo moved from relief to development, donors 
and implementers supported upgrading and sustained growth in the dairy sector. In just over three years, for example, the Kosovo 
Dairy Value Chain project boosted domestic sales by €36 million and added 624 new jobs following an investment of €3.9 million. The 
impact on social cohesion is unclear. While a dairy board was set up that explicitly included both ethnic Albanians and Serbs, there was 
no evidence as to whether the board had a direct impact on participation of diﬀ erent ethnic groups or increased cooperation between 
ethnic groups.

Rwanda 

Types of violence:  Genocide; political, communal, and cross-border

Transition opportunity:  Large space for change post-genocide 

Key stakeholders:  Smallholder farmers, private sector, 
government, international partners

Key stresses:  Intercommunal tension and ethnic divides, 
continuing security threat—mistrust/fear, trauma and legacy of 
abuse, return of refugees and IDPs (internally displaced persons) 

Institutional challenges:  Severe accountability and capacity 
constraints in judicial, security, and political institutions—public 
and private; legacies of communal suspicion and violence

Coﬀ ee, grown mostly by subsistence farmers, has long been an important source of income in rural areas and foreign exchange 
for the Rwandan economy. But the war and genocide of 1994 had a devastating eﬀ ect on the coﬀ ee sector due to loss of life and the 
destruction or neglect of coﬀ ee trees. By 1996, coﬀ ee production was only about half the 1993 level. Between 2002 and 2006, the USAID 
(United States Agency for International Development)-funded US$5 million Agribusiness Development Assistance to Rwanda project 
boosted export-ready coﬀ ee production and created several thousand seasonal jobs. 

Traditionally, farmers depulped and washed their cherries by hand before selling them to traditional exporters of semiwashed coﬀ ee. 

Modern stations now encourage farmers to sell them unwashed cherries, since they can process them more eﬃ  ciently with modern 
equipment. By selling directly to the station rather than through intermediaries, the farmers are paid more per pound while avoiding the 
tedious hand labor. 

The result has been tremendous. Between 2000 and 2006, the country went from producing 18 tons of fully washed coﬀ ee to 940 
tons. There is also some evidence that greater economic security among participants in the coﬀ ee value chain is also linked to lower 
ethnic distance, lower distrust toward other ethnic groups, and a tendency toward conditional forgiveness.

Sources: USAID Rwanda 2006; Boudreaux 2010; Grygiel 2007; Parker 2008; Chuhan-Pole 2010.

160 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

private  sector  in  fragile  environments—but 
comprehensive reform of the electricity sector 
is made difﬁ cult by insecurity. Based on the 
World Bank Group’s Enterprise Surveys, the 
number one business environment constraint 
faced  by  ﬁ rms  working  in  conﬂ ict  areas  is
lack of electricity.69 A state-of-the-art electri-
cal  grid  typically  has  fewer  generators  (be-
cause  of  the  economies  of  scale  to  genera-
tion, bigger is better) that are located far from 
con sumers (since fuel sources—coal, natural 
gas, hydro—can be expensive to move). That 

design assumes away violent conﬂ ict: the tech-
nically perfect design is particularly susceptible 
to disruption, takes a long time to build, and 
is difﬁ cult to defend. Restoration of electricity 
in Lebanon demonstrates both the positives 
and  the  negatives  of  a  best-ﬁ t  approach  to 
reform and institution-building in the elec-
tricity sector, which is also critical to private 
sector  job  creation.  An  alternative  best-ﬁ t 
system  gave  nearly  all  households  access  to 
power,  but  at  higher  costs  in  the  long  term 
(box 5.9).

BOX 5.9   Technically less than perfect, but robust to circumstances: Best-ﬁ t electricity provision 

in Lebanon

Types of violence:  Civil war, sectarian violence

Transition opportunity:  Space for rapid reconstruction and 
conﬁ dence building, but continued instability and threat of 
violence

Key stakeholders:  Citizens, government, private sector, 
sectarian interests, governments of neighboring countries, 
international partners

Key stresses:  Corruption, sectarian competition, legacies 
of violence, cross-border conﬂ ict spillovers, regional political 
involvement

Institutional challenges:  Weak institutional capacity for public 
service provision, tenuous inclusion arrangements

By the time the Ta’if Accord (1989) put an end to civil war (1975–90), Lebanon was marked by widespread destruction of infrastructure 
and a climate of instability. At the time, little public conﬁ dence existed in the state and its institutions to deliver basic services. The 
electricity  sector had suﬀ ered heavily during the war from extensive destruction and the signiﬁ cant reduction of payment collections. 
Despite this, most Lebanese people still beneﬁ ted from some access to electricity during the war and in the initial stages of recovery—
and continued to do so in subsequent periods of instability. 

Already during the war, the bulk of electricity was provided by the private sector in the absence of a functioning public sector. 

A mix of individual and collectively owned electricity generators, run by a few formal and many informal private businesses, became 
an established part of the utility market. The ability of the private sector to ﬁ ll the void left by a ﬂ awed public service owed much to an 
open and unregulated economy—and a strong culture of entrepreneurship. 

Even after the end of the civil war, the private sector remained a critical energy supplier. Privately sold generators continued to 

supply electricity (primarily during blackouts) to both households and businesses and often covered whole neighborhoods. By 1994, 
for example, 98 percent of businesses and 95 percent of households were estimated to have received round-the-clock electricity, with 
a signiﬁ cation portion from private sources. 

Although small-scale private capacity ﬁ lled a void left by a lack of public sector engagement, the small, unregulated, and private 
provision of electricity has serious economic and environmental drawbacks as a long-term system. Private generation costs Lebanese 
households nearly twice as much as public generation. And the public electricity sector has yet to be reformed. State subsidies to the 
sector in 2007 were estimated to have reached 4 percent of the country’s GDP. Lebanon’s electricity sector thus illustrates the beneﬁ ts 
of best-ﬁ t approaches during periods of crisis, but also the need to exit them over time to prevent long-term ineﬃ  ciencies. 

Given the electricity crisis during reconstruction eﬀ orts in Iraq, the question arises as to whether a best-ﬁ t, short-term solution 

could have been found. Iraq opted to rebuild its national electricity grid, but lack of progress in such a massive undertaking has left the 
proportion of unmet demand for electricity largely constant since 2003, at 40–50 percent. Did the political, economic, and security con-
text in Iraq create an enabling environment for a private sector–led solution? In 2003–04, several Lebanese companies started estab-
lishing secondary neighborhood grids in Baghdad, supplied by small, private electricity generation. The Government of Iraq also con-
sidered policies to promote small, private generation in 2005, recognizing its own lack of capacity to meet demand in the short term. 
However, the deepening security crisis in Baghdad, including active campaigns to target small private power suppliers, preempted this 
approach. In comparison to Lebanon, Iraq’s weaker tradition of private entrepreneurship and record of eﬀ ective public service delivery 
into the 1990s may be additional  reasons for the lack of emergence of privately generated electricity in the past decade. 

Sources: World Bank 2008f, 2009d; Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Environment 1999; UN Inter-Agency Information and Analysis Unit 2010. 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

161

Road rehabilitation is another infrastruc-
ture investment critical to both private sec-
tor recovery and employment generation. It 
can aid both directly, by using local contrac-
tors  and  applying  labor-intensive  methods, 
and indirectly, by facilitating access to mar-
kets. For instance, in Afghanistan, the Salang 
tunnel—the  only  pass  connecting  Kabul  to 
northern Afghanistan that is in use through-
out the year—was reopened for trafﬁ c within 
weeks  of  the  2001  Bonn  agreement  after  a 
four-year blockage, cutting travel time from 
72 hours to 10.70 In the Democratic Repub-
lic  of  Congo,  the  construction  of  a  bridge 
linking two cities, Kikwit and Tshikapa, had 
similar effects. Travel time was cut to a few 
hours, as opposed to the previous ﬁ ve days, 
lowering the prices for food, fuel, and most 
other commodities imported to the diamond 
city of Tshikapa from the agricultural zones 
of Kikwit and surrounding cities.71 

Public ﬁ nance for employment and 
other “best-ﬁ t” approaches

Regulatory reform and infrastructure invest-
ments  often  take  time  to  deliver  jobs,  how-
ever.  Governments  aiming  to  generate  em-
ployment  in  insecure  areas  may  need  to 
provide  an  initial “bridge.”72  A  2009  World 
Bank  review  of  labor-intensive  programs  in 
43 low- and middle-income countries in the 
past  20  years  ﬁ nds  that  well-administered 
programs  can  have  a  substantial  impact  on 
the welfare and nutrition of poor beneﬁ cia-
ries, and that it is feasible to operate such pro-
grams  on  a  large  scale—as  with  Ethiopia’s 
Productive Safety Net Programme (7 million 
beneﬁ ciaries  in  2006)  and  India’s  National 
Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Act.73  Labor-
intensive programs in fragile and violent set-
tings can be a quick win for stabilizing a high-
risk  situation;  examples  include  sporadic 
employment initiatives in the Gaza Strip since 
the 1990s and the Liberian Emergency Em-
ployment  Plan,  which  created  90,000  jobs 
within  two  years.74  Afghanistan’s  National 
Emergency  Employment  Program,  now 
known as the National Rural Access Program, 
was expanded across the country after early 

successes and has generated 12.4 million la-
bor days building or rehabilitating more than 
10,000 kilometers of roads through 2010 in 
all of Afghanistan’s 34  provinces.75

But labor-intensive public works are rarely 
sustained  in  fragile  situations.  These  pro-
grams commonly are donor ﬁ nanced, and do-
nors prefer short durations, between two and 
three years. Alternatives to short-term inter-
ventions could be labor-intensive public works 
programs in rural areas that are seasonal or 
vary in intensity between the seasons, to com-
plement employment in agriculture (and that 
could  be  integrated  into  community-driven 
development  programs;  see  chapter  4),  or 
programs  that  are  linked  to  a  longer-term 
national  strategy,  such  as  the  Feeder  Roads 
Program in Mozambique, in operation since 
1981,  and  India’s  long-term  National  Rural 
Employment  Guarantee  scheme.76  For  pub-
lic works programs to be successful, evidence 
suggests  that  it  is  important  to  have  clear 
objectives (for instance, aimed at addressing 
one-time shocks or poverty), to select projects 
that can create valuable public goods, and to 
ensure predictable funding.77

Providing  (short-term)  jobs  needs  to  be 
complemented by enhancing skills and em-
ployability.  Low  skill  levels—especially  of 
young people like former gang members and 
combatants—constrain  their  opportunities 
for  sustainable  employment.  International 
experience has shown that traditional voca-
tional training programs without clear links 
to  the  labor  market,  though  frequently  im-
plemented, are ineffective.78 A more promis-
ing intervention is traditional apprenticeship 
programs and programs that include work 
placement opportunities.79 

For those who did not complete primary 
education, second-chance programs (such as 
education equivalency or life skills training) 
are  an  important  stepping  stone  to  further 
education, training, and employment oppor-
tunities. Second-chance programs can have a 
positive impact on at-risk youth, both directly 
(which  increases  their  chances  of  acquiring 
employment  and  receiving  higher  wages) 
and  indirectly  (by  providing  them  with  in-
formation and skills to make good decisions, 

162 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

giving them better prospects for a successful 
life, and consequently reducing their chances 
of engaging in risky behavior).80 Conditional 
cash  transfers  could  be  linked  to  programs 
that focus on preparing both offenders and 
communities  for  offenders’  reintegration, 
through technical and life skills training and 
links to employment opportunities,81 such as 
YouthBuild International, which is active in 
over  a  dozen  countries  and  supports  youth 
for a period of up to 24 months.82

Support  to  agriculture  in  violence-
affected  countries  is  also  essential.  Together 
with  the  informal  sector,  agriculture  is  the 
most likely source of jobs in many conﬂ ict-
affected situations.83 Even in a relatively ad-
vanced economy, such as Bosnia and Herze-
govina,  informal  employment  is  estimated 
to account for more than one-third of total 
employment,84 and agriculture is an impor-
tant  income  provider.  There,  for  example, 
self-employment  in  agriculture  was  suc-
cessfully  supported  for  many  demobilized 
soldiers who chose to reintegrate in rural ar-
eas and engage in small-scale farming. They 
received  livestock  and  equipment  (with  a 
minimum holding period to ensure that they 
would not be sold on the market) and coun-
seling,  which  enabled  them  to  reestablish 
their liveli hoods.85 A wide range of activities 
can support this sector, including strengthen-
ing agricultural services, providing local ex-
tension programs that combine input supply 
with training on basic business skills, restor-
ing rural roads, improving the agribusiness-
enabling  environment,  improving  land  and 
water management, and organizing farmers 
into  associations  to  connect  them  to  com-
modity buyers and agricultural credit. 

Supporting  self-employment  is  another 
best-ﬁ t  approach  to  creating  jobs  and  gen-
erating  incomes.86  The  main  constraints  to 
self-employment include the lack of market-
creating infrastructure that brings trade into 
rural areas, lack of electricity that allows the 
use  of  higher  productivity  technology,  lack 
of formal marketplaces and workplaces, high 
local taxes and fees, lack of access to informal 
savings  and  ﬁ nancial  services  (which  could 
be  alleviated  by  the  use  of  mobile  ﬁ nancial 

services  such  as  M-Paisa  in  Afghanistan),87 
and  lack  of  appropriate  training  (which 
needs to be designed for those with limited 
education and also stress basic skills such as 
literacy and numeracy). In order to be effec-
tive  and  avoid  indebting  poor  households, 
self-employment  assistance  programs  need 
to  address  all  these  constraints  and  not  be 
limited  to  providing  ﬁ nancial  assistance.88 
Despite  the  popularity  of  self-employment 
programs  in  fragile  and  stable  settings,  evi-
dence  is  scarce,  however.  The  evidence  (for 
middle-income  countries)  shows  that  self-
employment  programs  can  signiﬁ cantly  in-
crease the probability of young participants 
ﬁ nding  jobs,  at  least  in  the  short  term.  But 
the cost-effectiveness and the longer-term ef-
fects still need to be proven.89 

Asset  expansion  programs  have  also 
helped  in  some  successful  transitions  from 
vio lence—such  as  land  reform  in  the  Re-
public  of  Korea  and  Japan,90  and  housing 
programs  in  Singapore  (see  box  5.2).  Land 
reform contributed to post-conﬂ ict stability 
in those countries and, when combined with 
policies that favored agricultural growth and 
exports,  set  the  stage  for  high  rates  of  eco-
nomic growth in succeeding decades. These 
positive experiences have proved difﬁ cult to 
replicate  though,  due  to  political  resistance 
and  institutional  capacity  weaknesses.91  A 
different  type  of  program  to  help  violence-
affected communities reestablish livelihoods 
and restore lost assets is, very simply, transfer-
ring funds directly to citizens to support their 
recovery.  This  may  be  done  by  gov ernment 
transfers,  as  with  transitional  payments  to 
demobilized ex-combatants in Angola, Mo-
zambique,  and  Rwanda—or  Timor-Leste’s 
cash payments to internally displaced people 
and  veterans.  Such  programs  can  provide  a 
sense  of  justice  for  populations  previously 
excluded  from  state  attention.  There  is  a 
common perception that corruption or leak-
age is more likely in a cash transfer program, 
but years of practice have highlighted proven 
safeguards to reduce leakage.92

Temporary labor migration to neighboring 
countries or farther abroad can provide job 
opportunities for skilled and unskilled labor-

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

163

ers from fragile or conﬂ ict-affected countries 
and requires few reform elements. Successful 
examples include the Russia Federation’s aid 
for the post-conﬂ ict Tajik regime,93 and the 
various migration streams for Paciﬁ c Islanders 
especially  to  Australia  and  New  Zealand.94 
Such  measures  include  ﬁ xed  annual  migra-
tion  quotas,  temporary  seasonal  employ-
ment, skilled and professional workers pro-
visions,  and  education  scholarships.  Labor 
migration can diffuse some of the pressures 
on the labor market and generate remittances 
that can be used for social and economic ex-
penditures like schooling or business start-up 
capital. Well-designed bilateral schemes can 
thus  deliver  important  economic  gains  but 
also  mitigate  the  economic  and  social  costs 
for sending and receiving countries.95

Economic empowerment of women 

Involving women in economic initiatives can 
generate  jobs  and  income  and  lay  the  basis 
for  longer-term  empowerment,  as  well  as 
 enable them to contribute to the recovery of 

their communities. Women can be actors in 
violence; for instance, in El Salvador and Eri-
trea,  nearly  a  third  of  the  combatants  were 
women.96  But  far  more  often,  violence  up-
roots women’s lives and livelihoods, as chap-
ter  1   described.  Aiding  women  to  recover 
socially and economically from violence not 
only beneﬁ ts the women themselves, but also 
their  families  and  communities.  For  exam-
ple, in El Salvador, involving former women 
guerrillas in land reform led to the inclusion 
of both men and women as beneﬁ ciaries, en-
suring that grievances on these issues would 
not later affect the post-conﬂ ict settlement.97 
A  different example of economic empower-
ment,  from  Nepal,  demonstrates  how  well 
thought out projects can produce small but 
signiﬁ cant social shifts within just a few years 
(box 5.10). 

Engaging  women  in  economic  activities 
in  fragile  and  post-conﬂ ict  countries  is  not, 
however,  without  challenges.  Women  face 
limited mobility and physical access to mar-
kets,  incomplete  access  to  market  informa-
tion, and restricted access to credit and other 

BOX 5.10   Economic empowerment of women: Women’s Empowerment Program in Nepal

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, interethnic and political violence, criminal violence,  traﬃ  cking 

Transition opportunities:  Modest space for change: “palace 
killings” and stepped-up Maoist campaign in 2001

Key stakeholders:  Federal and local government, civil society 
groups, marginalized ethnic groups, international partners, 
regional neighbors

Key stresses:  Legacies of violence and trauma: social, political, 
and economic inequality; youth unemployment; corruption; 
human rights abuses; rising expectations of formerly 
unrepresented groups

Institutional challenges:  Feudal structures and associated 
exclusion; accountability and capacity constraints in public 
administration, security, judicial, and political institutions; 
lack of inclusion of women

Women in Nepal have suﬀ ered disproportionately from the decade-long civil war and the continued waves of political, criminal, and 
ethnically driven violence, including in the country’s southern Tarai region. Women are among the poorest population groups; their 
traditional social and economic networks were severely aﬀ ected and many became heads of households as a result of the conﬂ ict, 
and their educational attainment is signiﬁ cantly below that of men. In this context, empowerment of women is especially critical in 
engendering sustainable economic growth and human development, as well as signaling a break from the past. 

The Women’s Empowerment Program provided cost-eﬀ ective training and support to 6,500 groups of 130,000 members in the 
Tarai from 1999 to 2001. Its impact on the lives of the participating women has been encouraging. Almost half of the women who 
participated in the program gained a level of literacy, and two-thirds of the women started a business since joining it, thus having an 
independent source of income for the ﬁ rst time. When 200 groups were asked how the program had changed their lives, they most 
frequently mentioned gaining self-conﬁ dence and an enlarged sphere of inﬂ uence in the household, followed by learning to read and 
being accorded more rights.

Source: Ashe and Parrott 2001. 

164 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

ﬁ nancial  services,  and  they  are  also  subject 
to  restricting  attitudes  and  systemic  gender 
discrimination  and  exclusion  through  unfa-
vorable  legislation.98  These  obstacles  are  not 
insurmountable,  however.  Efforts  as  varied 
as promoting women’s access to ﬁ nance and 
helping  ﬁ nancial  institutions  to  bank  on 
women  entrepreneurs  proﬁ tably  (such  as 
in  Afghanistan),  establishing  baselines  with 
a  gender  focus  on  helping  the  government 
formalize  women’s  participation  in  national 
reconstruction efforts (for instance, in Libe-
ria),  promoting  training  and  business  men-
toring  opportunities  that  reach  women  en-
trepreneurs  (in  Iraq  and  Jordan),  and  using 
legal reform initiatives to ensure that existing 
gender-discriminatory  legislation  is  revised 
and that new legislation provides a level play-
ing  ﬁ eld  for  women  (as  in  the  Democratic 
Republic of Congo) can be effective tools to 
make  the  gender  balance  less  unfavorable 
to women.99

What to do systematically 
but gradually 

Focusing on citizen security, justice, and jobs 
means that most other reforms will need to 
be sequenced and paced over time, including 
political  reform,  decentralization,  privati-
zation, and shifting attitudes toward margin-
alized  groups.  Systematically  implementing 
these reforms requires a web of institutions 
(democratization, 
for  example,  requires 
many  institutional  checks  and  balances  be-
yond  elections)  and  changes  in  social  at-
titudes.  There  are  exceptions—where  the 
exclusion  of  groups  from  democratic  par-
ticipation has been a clear, overriding source 
of grievance, as in South Africa, fairly rapid 
action on elections makes sense. But in most 
situations, systematic and gradual action ap-
pears to work best. 

political,  or  military  inﬂ uence  at  national 
and  local  levels  are  unlikely  to  succeed  in 
their  broader  objectives.  Initial  transitions 
to  multi party  elections  have  been  shown 
to  increase  the  short-term  chances  of  con-
ﬂ ict, even though countries with very robust 
democratic  institutions  lower  their  risks  of 
violence  in  the  long  term.100  Elite  coopera-
tion  may  require  prior  steps  to  build  trust 
and  conﬁ dence, such as those undertaken in 
South Africa.101  In  contrast,  leaders  lacking 
trust in “winner-take-all” scenarios may ma-
nipulate  outcomes  and  protests,  which  can 
trigger serious violence—as in Iraq in 2005 
and Kenya in 2007.102 Holding elections be-
fore a reasonable degree of security has been 
achieved,  and  a  non-coercive  environment 
established  for  polling,  makes  little  sense 
(box 5.11). 

Where conditions of trust and security do 
not indicate that rapid elections will deliver 
increased legitimacy, other options exist. Ap-
proaches that build on traditional decision-
making  mechanisms  (such  as  the  Afghan 
Loya  Jirga103)  have  been  used  to  transition 
toward  greater  inclusiveness.  National  sov-
ereign conferences in francophone Africa in 
the  1990s,  which  in  most  cases  represented 
a  cross-section  of  society,  were  effective  for 
negotiating transitions from one-party auto-
cratic rule to plural democratic regimes and 
provided a workable framework for a peace-
ful  change  of  power.104  Some  nonelectoral 
structures, as in the case of the South African 
constitutional  convention  and  transitional 
executive  structures,  have  also  provided  for 
considerable accountability downward to the 
members of the groups represented, through 
debates within political parties and business 
and  labor  groupings.  Using  alternative  op-
tions while the conditions are put in place for 
elections also allows time to build a culture 
of democratic practices (see box 5.11). 

Elections are a means of institutional 
transformation, not its end 

Devolution and decentralization can 
broaden power-sharing but are best 
approached step-by-step 

Elections without a substantial degree of co-
operation among those wielding economic, 

Territorial devolution and decentralization of 
political, administrative, and economic pow-

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

165

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 5.11  Pacing institutional transformation   

Elections are not a panacea 

 

   Lakhdar Brahimi, former UN Special Representative of the Secretary General to Iraq and 
Afghanistan; WDR Advisory Council Member 

It  is  ten  years  since  the  Report  of  the  Panel  on  UN  Peace 
Operations,  which  I  had  the  great  privilege  to  chair,  was 
produced. The Report called for the exit of UN forces to be 
determined  on  the  basis  of  a  broad  and  carefully  studied 
range  of  peacebuilding  and  institution-building  require-
ments being met. We said that elections were not a pana-
cea. I think there has been movement in the right direction 
over  the  past  decade,  but  there  still  is  some  way  to  go  to 
better  understand  how  and  when  to  conduct  elections  to 
the maximum beneﬁ t of a peace process. 

Attention is needed to ensure that new democratic pro-
cesses  reinforce  rather  than  undermine  the  fragile  peace 
that has been achieved and promote institutional legitimacy 
and accountability. Institutions for political participation and 
checks and balances devised at the national and local level, 
by their very nature, can take many diﬀ erent forms, such as 
constituent assemblies, consultative conferences, and power 
sharing  pacts.  For  example,  the  Afghan  Loya  Jirga  drew  its 
legitimacy  from  a  traditional  system  of  political  exchange 
and  decision  making  (although  some  Afghans  and  larger 
numbers  of  foreigners  were  critical  of  the  participation  of 
Members viewed by them as responsible for past abuses).

It is important not to confuse speed with haste in political 
processes: too hasty approaches can precipitate the opposite 
eﬀ ect from the one we seek to support. The international com-
munity’s high hopes for Iraq’s 2005 experiment in proportional 
electoral  democracy  produced  a  contest  for  power  that 
increased rather than allayed sectarian violence, and the con-
stitution hastily produced later is proving almost impossible to 
implement. Similarly, the 2009 presidential election in Afghan-
istan  proved  to  challenge  rather  than  bolster  perceptions  of 
institutional legitimacy in the immediate aftermath. 

The  options  are  not  mutually  exclusive—there  is  great 
worldwide  demand  for  more  inclusive  and  responsive  gover-
nance,  and  elections  can  be  a  crucial  means  to  provide  this. 
But  their  timing  requires  careful  attention.  Democratic  tradi-
tions  have  developed  in  most  countries  over  a  considerable 
period.  Democratization  eﬀ orts  today  similarly  require  atten-
tion to historical heritages and existing political cleavages and 
must be seen as an ongoing process of social transformation 
and the development of a broad range of institutions that pro-
vide  checks  and  balances  rather  than  an  identiﬁ able  “event.” 
Democratization does not start or end with elections.

Building a culture of democracy 

 

   Nitin Desai, former UN Under Secretary General for Social and Economic Affairs; 
former Secretary and Chief Economic Adviser, Ministry of Finance, India; 
WDR Advisory Council Member

A  constitution  and  elections  are  only  the  beginning  of  a 
functioning democracy. A lot depends on the emergence of 
working practices that respect the rights of the opposition 
and  that  set  standards  for  political  behavior  that,  in  time 
become traditions. Even constitutional provisions like those 
for  an  independent  election  commission  to  supervise  the 
electoral  process  require  unwritten  working  practices  for 
independence to become eﬀ ective. That has been the expe-
rience of India, where the respect for parliamentary norms 
shown by Pandit Nehru and the early congress leaders set a 
standard  that  matters,  not  least  when  it  is  under  threat. 
Thus, the leader of the opposition is treated with as much 
respect as the head of government and is entitled to public 
services that allow him or her to function eﬀ ectively.

Traditions  can  be  invented  but  are  most  eﬀ ective  when 
they are not codiﬁ ed, leaving some elasticity to accommodate 
changes  in  the  balance  of  political  power.  These  traditions 
come  often  from  imitation  of  practices  in  old  established 
democracies  like  the  United  Kingdom  or  the  United  States. 
How  can  one  impart  some  knowledge  of  something  that 
should  remain  unwritten?  Perhaps  by  showing  the  parties  to 
the post-conﬂ ict settlement the way in which democratic pro-
cesses  work  in  developing  countries  where  they  have  stood 
the  test  of  time,  India  being  one  big  example.  Maybe  this  is 
something that these young democracies can themselves con-
tribute to the post-conﬂ ict eﬀ ort.

166 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

ers also offer the potential to broaden power-
sharing, but with caveats. Between 1946 and 
2008,  49  countries  experienced  secessionist 
demands  that  resulted  in  violent  conﬂ ict.105 
Fragile  states  that  have  resisted  movements 
for autonomy or independence by force have 
often  found  themselves  embroiled  in  costly 
wars,  as  Nigeria  did  with  Biafra  (1967–70); 
Sudan  with  its  southern  region  (1955–
1972,106 1983–2002); Pakistan with East Paki-
stan, which became Bangladesh (1971); and 
Myanmar  with  the  Karen  and  Shan  people 
and other ethnic groups (1948–today).107 The 
argument in favor of greater decentralization 
of  power  (for  example,  through  federalist 
structures that hand signiﬁ cant autonomy to 
local representatives) is that it can avert center-
periphery  ethnic  conﬂ ict,  or  secession.  For 
example, in Sierra Leone in 2010 the OECD 
reported  that “decentralization  and  devolu-
tion are important peace-building and state 
building activities” and that “the decentraliza-
tion process has gone a long way to redress-
ing some of the fundamental ﬂ aws in Sierra 
Leone’s original political structure.”108 

However,  devolution  and  decentraliza-
tion  also  carry  risks.  The  OECD-DAC “Do 
No Harm” paper warns that donor support 
for devolution without sufﬁ cient analysis of 
political context or capacity constraints can 
cause serious problems if “political power at 
the  center  is  highly  fragmented,  or  constel-
lations of local power are misunderstood.”109 
Similarly,  evidence  shows  that  decentraliza-
tion  processes  may  make  local  democracy 
more  vulnerable  to  political  capture  when 
restraints  and  accountability  measures  are 
absent.110 Devolution can also lead to a lack 
of  local  accountability  and  signiﬁ cant  op-
portunities for corruption111 and reinforce or 
create elites who can use devolved power to 
pursue their own interests—to the detriment 
of both local and national interests.112 

Successful  devolution  requires  gradual 
preparation. Agreeing in detail on the degree 
of  “subsidiarity”  (pushing  authority  to  the 
lowest capable level) in security, justice, and 
economic  functions  is  essential  to  prevent 
further  center-periphery  friction.  A  second 
success factor is to ensure proper accountabil-

ity of devolved structures to local citizens, off-
setting the potential for local elite capture.113 
It is also important to ensure that new institu-
tions are offered adequate technical support 
and the ﬁ scal resources to deliver services.114 
Various decentralization experiences indicate 
that  achieving  success  on  all  three  fronts  at 
once—political  arrangements,  technical  ca-
pacity, and adequately accounted funding—
is  difﬁ cult,  and  that  agreeing  on  a  sequence 
is critical, as with the experience in Northern 
Ireland (box 5.12).115

Transitional justice to recognize past 
crimes 

Some countries have addressed the sins of the 
past early through traditional justice measures 
to deﬁ ne a healthy new form of nationhood. 
Germany made a deliberate effort after World 
War II to address the past, including a focus 
on  the  dangers  of  totalitarianism  and  the 
atrocities of the holocaust in the high-school 
curriculum,  and  the  establishment  of  sites 
of  remembrance  and  education  throughout 
the country, including former concentration 
camps.116 Other countries that have instituted 
early  transitional  justice  procedures  include 
Argentina  and  Chile  after  their  transitions 
from authoritarian rule. In Argentina, in ad-
dition  to  a  truth  commission117  and  various 
reparation programs for victims, junta lead-
ers were tried and convicted for massive hu-
man rights violations. While initial processes 
faltered and were suspended for a 10-year pe-
riod, prosecutions of human rights  violators 
have  resumed  and  currently  comprise  more 
than  600  cases.118  Chile’s  experience  is  not 
radically different: truth-seeking119 and repa-
rations have been followed by more than 600 
prosecutions, with more than 200 convictions 
thus far.120

Other countries have relied less on prose-
cutions and formal justice processes. A com-
parison  of  transitional  justice  approaches 
in  ﬁ ve  countries  that  have  made  promising 
transitions out of violence (Cambodia, Mo-
zambique,  Rwanda,  South Africa,  and Viet-
nam)121  found  that  nonjudicial  measures 
include  truth  commissions122  and  repara-

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

167

BOX 5.12   Devolution and decentralization can help manage conﬂ ict, but are better done 

gradually

Types of violence:  Political and sectarian violence

Transition opportunity:  Space for progress—Good Friday 
Accord, referendum that represented opportunity for power-
sharing arrangements

Key Stresses:  Inequitable access to political and economic 
power, sectarian tensions, perceptions of discrimination

Key stakeholders:  British and Irish governments, political parties 
and armed forces/groups in Northern Ireland, citizens, diaspora

Institutional challenges:  Low inclusion and accountability in 
security and justice institutions, low trust, legacies of extrajudicial 
dispute resolution

In many center-periphery conﬂ icts—where groups are engaging in violence to gain autonomy or secede from the state—the devolution 
of political power has been proposed as a possible solution to resolve conﬂ ict, maintain or restore law and order, and rebalance relations 
between local and central governments. 

But devolution is not an automatic answer to regional tensions and can at times amplify conﬂ ict. In Northern Ireland, it was not only 

the 1921 partition of Ireland that drove the conﬂ ict, but also the devolution of authority to a new Northern Ireland Assembly and the 
eﬀ ects on center-periphery relations. Unionists found a need to reemphasize that they were British, while the Catholic minority lost faith 
in political structures that provided few safeguards for them. 

In Northern Ireland, a new process of devolution was a centerpiece of the Good Friday Accord, introduced gradually to allow conﬁ -

dence to be built up. The Accord was signed in 1998, but decommissioning of the Irish Republican Army’s weapons and the security 
reforms were not completed until 2005, and the devolution of policing and justice to the Northern Ireland Assembly was ﬁ nally com-
pleted on March 8, 2010.

Source: Barron and others 2010.

tions programs for victims,123 as well as ad-
ministrative  sanctions,  such  as  vetting,124 
and  traditional  or  local  justice  measures.125 
While the differences in the approaches were 
signiﬁ cant, there was no straightforward re-
lationship between the approach and the at-
tainment of stability.126

Where abuses are on such a huge scale that 
the  formal  justice  system  is  unable  to  deal 
with them, special procedures may be justi-
ﬁ ed.  Rwanda  faced  this  challenge  following 
the genocide that left at least 800,000 people 
dead at the hands of their fellow citizens. In 
November  1994,  the  UN  Security  Council 
set  up  an  international  tribunal  in  Arusha, 
Tanzania,  to  prosecute  people  accused  of 
violations  of  international  law.  Rwanda’s 
own  jails,  meanwhile,  were  bursting  with 
120,000  people  accused  of  genocide-related 
crimes—and  there  were  only  15  judges  to 
oversee  their  trials.  The  situation  called  for 
extraordinary  measures.  Rwanda’s  solution 
was to adopt a traditional community con-
ﬂ ict  resolution  system,  gacaca,  and  to  train 
more than 250,000 community members to 

serve on panels in 12,000 community courts. 
Gacaca  is  based  on  an  extended  plea  bar-
gaining  principle  and  has  elements  of  both 
punishment and reconciliation; it is expected 
to draw to a close in 2011, having processed 
more  than  1.5  million  cases.  It  was  a  con-
tentious approach, but with only 30 convic-
tions to date at the international tribunal, a 
decimated national judicial system, and jails 
ﬁ lled beyond capacity, there were few options 
other than a community process to deal with 
the enormous pressures.127

Economic reforms—in moderation 

Economic  reforms  are  needed  to  escape 
the  cycle  of  violence,  but  they  must  not  be 
victims  of  the “too  slow-too  fast”  trade-off. 
Fragile  and  conﬂ ict-prone  situations  often 
share  a  raft  of  structural  economic  prob-
lems—low per capita GDP, ﬁ scal imbalances, 
chaotic regulations, dependence on agricul-
ture  and  natural  resources,  high  illiteracy, 
rapidly  growing  populations,  and  a  dearth 
of  physical  infrastructure.  All  raise  the  risk 

168 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

of  violence,  but  addressing  them  too  rap-
idly also raises the risk of reigniting violence 
or deepening societal cleavages. Major issues 
for investors are “signiﬁ cant downside risks,” 
which  implies  that  individual  economic 
policies may be less important initially than 
conveying certainty about the overall trajec-
tory—including  security.128  Most  economic 
reforms  create  real  or  perceived  “winners” 
and “losers.” Reform areas particularly sensi-
tive to social tensions include access to land 
and water. It is therefore important to pay at-
tention to the distributive aspect of growth.
In  macroeconomic  policy,  gradually  in-
troducing  feasible  and  prioritized  reforms 
will allow for an appropriate level of breath-
ing  space  and  enable  foundational  institu-
tional  reform  without  running  the  risk  of 
political backlash. The beneﬁ ts of adopting a 
gradualist approach  are  evident  in  Mozam-
bique,  where  early  macroeconomic  reforms 
after the 1992 peace accord focused on over-
coming  ﬁ scal  crises,  curbed  hyperinﬂ ation, 
created a situation of stability, and built the 
conﬁ dence and trust needed to enact deeper 
reforms.129 In order to be effective, early re-
form efforts must also reﬂ ect the speciﬁ c po-
litical and economic contexts and macroeco-
nomic problems in a given situation, instead 
of  attempting  to  be  one-size-ﬁ ts-all  solu-
tions. For instance, while the government in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2002 
to  2004  undertook  a  decisive  stabilization 
policy  involving  a  major  tightening  of  the 
ﬁ scal  stance  to  curb  hyperinﬂ ation,  Bosnia 
and Herzegovina adopted, in the early post-
conﬂ ict period, a currency board, preventing 
the central bank from printing money.

Experience  indicates  that  privatizing  for 
the  purpose  of  economic  growth  is  better 
done  gradually.  Moving  economic  assets 
from public to private hands has two distinct 
motives: one is ﬁ scal, to stem losses or gain 
revenue from the sale of assets, and the other 
is  productivity,  to  spur  economic  growth. 
Clarity about motives helps avoid common 
mistakes.  Shutting  down  inessential  enter-
prises  that  drain  revenues  can  be  an  early 
priority.  But  early  or  rapid  privatization  of 
essential or valuable state assets runs major 

risks. A review of privatization efforts in frag-
ile settings suggests that such reforms need to 
be carefully prepared.130 This can be a lengthy 
process, but it can assist both with transpar-
ency and with managing expectations about 
the gains and accommodating the losers. 

Shifting attitudes toward excluded 
groups is crucial but takes time 

Tackling  horizontal  inequalities131  between 
social groups is particularly challenging be-
cause  it  demands  behavioral  change  to  re-
verse deeply ingrained habits, attitudes, and 
ways  of  doing  business  among  the “exclud-
ers.” Frances Stewart distinguishes direct ap-
proaches  (to  privilege  groups),  indirect  ap-
proaches  (to  reduce  group  disparities),  and 
integrationist  approaches  (to  break  down 
group boundaries).132 

Histories of exclusion create pent-up de-
mands  for  action  in  redressing  the  legacies 
of  the  past,  such  as  preferential  quotas  for 
employment  or  education.  The  risk  is  that 
they can make existing differences more per-
manent and salient, actually slowing integra-
tion. Pratap Mehta argues that “the best way 
of  conﬂ ict  mitigation  or  prevention  is  the 
creation  of  political  structures  and  identi-
ties where questions of rights and citizenship 
are  progressively  detached  from  questions 
of which particular communities people be-
long to.”133 The implementation of afﬁ rma-
tive action programs is often associated with 
mounting opposition as well as perceptions 
of corruption. 

Addressing  gender  equality  beyond  eco-
nomic empowerment also takes time. Gender 
roles and relations change during periods of 
conﬂ ict, and appear to signal social progress. 
But such gains may not be sustained or may 
be counterbalanced by a reversion to tradi-
tional  identities  and  norms  when  families 
and  communities  are  threatened.  In  effect, 
economic  realities  can  push  in  one  direc-
tion while social traditions pull in the other. 
In  many  countries  the  economic  situations 
of  women  widowed  by  violence  may  mean 
that they need to look for jobs and business 
opportunities,  but  social  mores  can  make 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

169

this difﬁ cult. The experience of the National 
Solidarity Program in Afghanistan indicates 
the signiﬁ cant potential beneﬁ ts of programs 
that enable women to participate in the pub-
lic  sphere  but  also  indicates  that  social  and 
cultural change takes time (box 5.13). 

Education and health reforms are 
crucial medium-term challenges 

Education systems have the potential to miti-
gate conﬂ ict and contribute to peacebuilding 
in the long term, but also to exacerbate and 
perpetuate  violent  settings,  depending  on 
the nuances of policies, designs, and imple-
mentation  efforts,  as  well  as  the  different 
drivers of conﬂ ict and fragility. For instance, 
an  internationally  led  education  campaign 
in Afghanistan in 2002–03 failed to remove 
messages of hate and intolerance from cur-
ricula,  and  it  is  feared  that  this  socializa-
tion of intolerance may exacerbate social ten-
sions over time.134 Conversely, in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina,  the  international  community 
made  deliberate  efforts  to  exclude  divisive 
messages from educational content, but has 
had unintended consequences of  increasing 
suspicions of external politicization of educa-
tion, in effect exacerbating local divisions.135 
Education  does  not  need  to  stop  at  the 
classroom door. Parental behavior, the family 
environment, and the extent to which young 
people  feel  connected  to  their  parents  (or 
to caregivers who play a parental role) have 
shown to be either one of the strongest pro-
tective  factors  in  the  lives  of  young  people 
or one of the strongest risk factors. Evidence 
shows that investing in family-based parent-
ing training that promotes positive, healthy, 
protective  parent-child  interactions  can  re-
duce domestic violence, the extent to which 
young people associate with delinquent peers, 
alcohol and substance abuse, school dropout, 
and  arrests.136  Therefore,  parenting  training 
is one of the most cost-effective ways to pre-
vent risky behavior among young people. 

Where  reform  of  the  health  service  and 
the training of national personnel would take 
years, delivering public services using inter-
national capacity for transitional periods can 

create the space to build national capacities 
in the longer run. Timor-Leste, after the 1999 
referendum,  faced  serious  health  problems, 
a  destroyed  infrastructure,  and  virtually  no 
trained personnel. Instead of pursuing a top-
down reform of the health service immedi-
ately,  the  Interim  Health  Authority  signed 
agreements  with  international  NGOs  for 
each  district  and  focused  its  efforts  on  de-
veloping sensible plans, monitoring delivery, 
and training a new cadre of health staff. The 
Timor-Leste model fostered a learning envi-
ronment  by  using  100-day  planning  cycles 
with clear targets and a strong focus on re-
sults,  building  conﬁ dence  and  capacity  by 
meeting those targets. Over time, the govern-
ment gradually phased out NGOs and took 
back  responsibility  for  the  health  services. 
The program had drawbacks—among them, 
high  unit  costs—but  it  did  provide  a  path 
 toward  institutional  transformation  while 
continuing  to  serve  immediate  needs.137  A 
similar approach has been used in Afghani-
stan and has proven reasonably robust in in-
secure circumstances (see also chapter 8).

Institutional transformation as a 
continuous process

The risk of a moderately paced and ﬂ exible 
approach  to  reform  is  getting  stuck,  either 
moving  too  slowly  or  not  making  the  next 
step  when  needed.  Many  best-ﬁ t  solutions 
may  indeed  remain  in  place  for  the  long 
term—for  example,  this  may  occur  with 
traditional  justice  systems  because  they  are 
more  effective  at  maintaining  social  cohe-
sion  at  the  community  level—while  others 
are  temporary  stop-gap  measures  only.  For 
the latter, realism about timelines is essential 
to avoid losing ground on hard-won results. 
There are a variety of ways to sustain impetus 
for improvement that we discuss here. 

One way to build both internal esprit de 
corps and external legitimacy is to work up 
from small, more achievable targets to pro-
gressively  more  ambitious  ones.  Stress  is 
carefully  calibrated,  and  tasks  are  selected 
in  ways  that  do  not  threaten  to  overwhelm 

170 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 5.13   Development approaches can empower women in the most fragile environments

Afghanistan

Types of violence:  Intergroup, ethnic, and political violence; organized crime and traﬃ  cking; cross-border; transnational ideological

Transition opportunity:  Initial large space for change: Bonn 
Accord; Loya Jirga; presidential, parliamentary, and provincial 
elections; national development budget

Key stakeholders:  Federal and local government, security 
force, community leaders, civil society groups, citizens, women, 
international partners, transnational militant groups

Key stresses:  Legacies of violence and trauma, transnational 
terrorism, criminal networks, low incomes, youth unemploy-
ment, corruption

Institutional challenges:  Severe accountability and capacity 
constraints in public administration, security, judicial, and 
political institutions; lack of representation of women

Gender has been one of the most politicized issues in Afghanistan for a century. Afghan women and girls today still face suﬀ ering, 
humiliation, and marginalization from the discriminatory views of the role and position of women in society. Gender gaps are wide-
spread in health, education, access to and control over resources, economic opportunities, and political power and voice. And yet, this 
role is not stagnant. The National Solidarity Program (NSP), the country’s largest development program, operates in villages across the 
country through democratically elected community development councils (CDCs). Through mobilization by facilitating partners, 
women are involved in voting, while CDC modalities provide a variety of conﬁ gurations enabling more balanced gender participation 
(mixed CDCs, parallel committees (one male, one female) that report to a mixed-gender CDC, or a women’s committee that consults 
with a fully male CDC). Results of a comparison between NSP and non-NSP villages using a rigorous study design in an independent 
evaluation suggest that having women in charge of decisions in community projects improves the perceptions by both men and 
women of women in leadership roles (see ﬁ gure). This is not being advocated as “the” solution, but it shows that incremental steps can 
lead to incremental progress, even for culturally diﬃ  cult issues of inclusion. 

FI G U R E  A  Opinions on the role of women in community life: “Is there a woman in the village who is well 

respected by men and women?”

More men and women in villages that participated in the NSP believe that there is a woman who is 
well respected in their village than did respondents in villages that did not participate in the program. 
Statistically signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences are shown with percentages above each bar.

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f

 

o
%

50

40

30

20

10

0

+10%

+7%

42%

37%

Male

Female

 NSP village

 Non-NSP village

Source: Beath and others 2010.

Sources: Beath and others 2010; UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and UNOHCHR 2010.

the organization. In 2006, with support from 
the  World  Bank  Institute,  the  government 
of  Burundi  introduced  a  rapid-results  ap-
proach.  This  approach,  now  applied  across 
80  gov ernment  projects,  breaks  up  long-
term  development  plans  into  manageable 

100-day  chunks.  A  pilot  program  in  the 
Ministry  of  Education  resulted  in  the  dis-
tribution  of  250,000  textbooks  to  primary 
schools in 60 days, a task that had previously 
taken an entire school year. In a health care 
pilot program, 482 pregnant women visited 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

171

health centers and were provided with HIV/
AIDS screening in one month—almost seven 
times the previous monthly average of 71.138 
A  similar  simpliﬁ ed  approach  was  followed 
in Indonesia in the early years following the 
turbulence  of  the  1960s,  where  ministries 
undertook simple annual targets to improve 
service provision.

This  chapter  began  by  describing  the 
“too fast-too slow” dilemma in institutional 
transformation. What are the principles of a 
middle way of progress that can produce suc-
cess? An  emerging  literature  on  approaches 
to development across a variety of domains—
from economic policy to social policy to in-
stitution building—promotes a ﬂ exible and 
pragmatic,  and  thus “experimental  best-ﬁ t,” 
approach  to  progress.139  This  includes  the 
following:

•  Pressure for performance around mean-
ingful  goals.  Overall,  this  is  a  shift  from 
measuring  progress  around  “outputs” 
(whether  budgets  spent,  items  procured, 
legislation passed, or policies adopted) to 
assessing performance around “outcomes 
including citizen trust.” 

•  Pragmatism  and  ﬂ exibility  in  the  ways 
goals are accomplished. Pressure for per-
formance must be accompanied by giving 
ﬂ exibility to the agents responsible for per-
formance. Reformers need to be given the 
space  for  “disruptive”  innovations  that 
may  look  inferior  but  hold  the  seeds  to 
progress.140

•  Monitoring,  information,  and  evalua-
tion systems for decision-cycle-oriented 
feedback  loops  and  continuous  learn-

ing.  Rigorous  evaluation  of  results  is 
one key element of evaluating alternative 
 approaches, but not the only one.141 Pro-
grams  need  built-in  mechanisms  of 
learning so that what is promising can be 
scaled up and what is not working can be 
changed—in  shorter  cycles  of  continu-
ous feedback. Such evidence about what 
works  and  what  does  not  work  will  in 
turn be useful for other countries as they 
strive to adapt experience from abroad to 
their own context.

This “middle way” requires capacity, which 
is  scarce  in  fragile  states.  That  is  why  the 
“best-ﬁ t” approach and careful prioritization 
and sequencing go hand in hand. If existing 
capacity  is  focused  on  prioritizing  items  in 
sequence (rather than trying to do everything 
all at once), some items can move ahead rap-
idly, and once they have enough momentum 
to sustain gradual progress, the country can 
move on to tackle the next items.

Delivering  results  and  transforming  in-
stitutions  are  primarily  the  responsibility 
of state and nonstate actors in countries af-
fected by violence. However, the international 
community—bilateral donors, international 
organizations,  nongovernmental  organiza-
tions, businesses—can provide essential sup-
port  for  such  processes,  and  it  has  done  so 
on  many  occasions,  including  many  of  the 
initiatives  described  in  this  chapter. Yet,  the 
international community is itself challenged 
by  the  evolution  of  violence  since  the  Cold 
War era, and has its own transformation to 
adapt  to  new  contexts.  To  this  we  turn  in 
chapter 6.

172 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 5 

 Violence in Central America—Depth of institutional 
transformation matters 

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, traﬃ  cking (national and cross-border), criminal and gang violence

Transition opportunities:  Peace agreements, cease-ﬁ res, elec-
tions, rapidly rising insecurity and criminality

Key stakeholders:  Governments, armed groups, refugees, 
ex-combatants, conﬂ ict victims, citizens, international partners

Key stresses:  Legacies of violence and trauma: presence of 
international criminal networks, repatriation of suspected gang 
members, perceived social and economic deprivation, youth 
unemployment; human rights abuses

Institutional challenges:  Severe accountability and capacity 
constraints in judicial and security institutions

Most  countries  in  Central  America  experienced  violent 

civil conﬂ icts through the 1980s and into the 1990s. Al-
though all of those that experienced war signed peace accords, 
the  legacy  of  civil  strife  has  had  long-lasting  and  profound 
negative  repercussions.  Although  civil  war  has  ended,  new 
forms  of  violence,  such  as  trafﬁ cking  and  organized  crime, 
have been on the rise. During the civil wars, around two mil-
lion people are estimated to have been displaced or sought ref-
uge in other countries. The trauma exacted by these conﬂ icts 
created a culture of violence with a long legacy.

More  recently,  external  stresses—speciﬁ cally,  increased 
transit of drugs through Central America—have contributed 
to  violence.  The  dismantling  of  the  Cali  and  Medellín  drug 
cartels in Colombia, which had controlled the production and 

transport of drugs, led to dispersed competition for control of 
transit routes with a consequent impact on several countries 
in the region—particularly those in the Northern Triangle of 
El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala. Today, the majority of  
the drugs transiting from South America to the United States 
comes through Central America en route to Mexico or the Ca-
ribbean. 

In the last 10 years, homicide rates have resurged signiﬁ -
cantly,  and  Central  America  now  has  an  estimated  70,000–
300,000 gang members. Not all countries are equally affected, 
however:  according  to  ofﬁ cial  statistics,  El  Salvador,  Guate-
mala,  and  Honduras  exhibit  signiﬁ cantly  higher  homicide 
rates than the rest of Central America. In 2009, Guatemala re-
corded 6,450 murders and only 231 convictions. In El Salva-

Repeated violence in Central America and rising homicide rates

a.  Repeated violence in Central America, 1965–2009

b.  Homicide rates in Central American countries 

Civil War 1965–96

Current drug violence

BELIZE

 Attempted coup 1999
Coup in 2009

GUATEMALA

HONDURAS

Homicide rate (per 100,000)

> 20

20–40

40–60

60–80

> 80

EL SALVADOR

NICARAGUA

Civil war 1979–89

Civil war 1979–92

Current drug violence

COSTA
RICA

PANAMA

)

l

 

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p

,

(
 
e
t
a
r
 
e
d
c
m
o
H

i

i

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

IBRD 38419
March 2011

Source: WDR team.

Coup attempts in 1988–89

Honduras
Panama

El Salvador
Nicaragua

Guatemala
Costa Rica

Belize

Source: WDR team calculations based on homicide data from WDR Database.
Note: Homicide rates are per 100,000 population.

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

173

dor, levels of impunity are also very high: in 2005, only 4 per-
cent of homicides were resolved by legal convictions. 

Both external stresses and differences in approaches to in-
stitutional  transformation  between  the  Central  American 
countries may help explain the current differences in levels of 
violence. 

External stresses

The deportation of suspected gang members from the United 
States  back  to  Central  America  has  inﬂ uenced  gang  culture 
and membership. El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras suf-
fered the effects of the massive repatriation of suspected gang 
members and illegal immigrants from the United States while 
Nicaragua was much less affected (box 2.4). Where drug traf-
ﬁ cking is more intense, the levels of violence seem to be higher. 
Guatemala’s Peten region, a corridor for transshipments into 
Mexico, suffered more than 100 homicides per 100,000 people 
in 2008 and 2009.142 

Institutional capacity, inclusion, and accountability

After  the  end  of  the  civil  wars,  each  country  undertook  re-
forms—including reforming the security forces and, eventu-
ally, the judiciary. Both Guatemala and El Salvador included 
such  reforms  in  their  long-negotiated  and  comprehensive 
peace agreements, while in Nicaragua reforms were undertaken 
at the end of the war. In accordance with the peace agreement 
signed  in  January  1992,  El  Salvador  reduced  the  size  of  the 
military  (from  60,000  to  15,000),  disbanded  elite  military 
groups and two police bodies, and over time created an entirely 
new  National  Civilian  Police  that  integrated  elements  of  the 
former  guerrilla  movement,  former  police  ofﬁ cers,  and  new 
recruits (allowing a 20-20-60 percent proportion among these 
cohorts  in  its  ﬁ rst  promotion).  The  approach  therefore  was 
broad-ranging.  The  comprehensive  peace  accords  in  Guate-
mala signed on December 29, 1996, not surprisingly included 
some of the same elements: redeﬁ nition of the functions of the 
military and police, reduction of the military, disbandment of 
special elite units, and reform of civilian police. 

The type of transition moment each country faced at the 
end  of  its  internal  conﬂ icts  affected  the  reach  of  otherwise 
similar measures. In Nicaragua, the Frente Sandinista won the 
conﬂ ict  outright.  Its  ability  to  induce  institutional  reform 
therefore was signiﬁ cantly greater than in Guatemala or El Sal-
vador. Both the Nicaraguan security forces and the judiciary 

were amply vetted. In addition, Nicaragua also undertook an 
extensive reform of its police forces, adopting legislation and 
national guidelines on arms control, piloting targeted commu-
nity policing, and initiating public health projects focusing on 
the risks of armed violence. Notably, the modernization of the 
National Police Force of Nicaragua included a number of ini-
tiatives to mainstream gender and increase the participation of 
women, such as the addition of training modules on gender-
based  violence  within  police  academies;  the  introduction  of 
women’s police stations (staffed by female police ofﬁ cers and 
focusing on cases of gender-based violence); the reform of re-
cruitment criteria, including female-speciﬁ c physical training 
and  the  adaptation  of  height  and  physical  exercise  require-
ments for women; introduction of transparent promotion re-
quirements; introduction of family-friendly human resource 
policies; and establishment of a working group to evaluate and 
improve the working conditions of female ofﬁ cers. 

The conﬂ ict in El Salvador, by contrast, ended in a military 
stalemate  with  no  clear  victor.  This  led  to  compromises:  the 
Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional (FMLN) 
decided,  for  example,  to  abandon  its  demands  for  vetting  the 
judiciary  in  exchange  for  deeper  reforms  of  the  military,  al-
though there were some subsequent reforms in the judiciary. On 
the  other  hand,  the  military  had  to  accept,  for  the  ﬁ rst  time, 
having its ofﬁ cers vetted by civilians (the ad hoc commission 
established  by  the  peace  agreement,  which  recommended  the 
dismissal or transfer of 103 ofﬁ cers), and the integration of for-
mer  FMLN  members  into  the  new  NCP  (National  Civilian 
 Police).

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement that settled the Gua-
temalan conﬂ ict was negotiated with the Salvadoran experience 
as  a  backdrop  and  featured  intense  international  pressure  to 
obtain similar results—but in circumstances in which the state 
had  essentially  defeated  the  insurgency.  The  severity  of  the 
crimes committed by forces that belonged to or supported the 
state, in a context of international pressure, helps explain why 
the government appeared to make concessions. Yet while some 
units of the armed forces were eliminated and the police force 
was reformed, the changes were not signiﬁ cant enough to make 
a sustained difference in terms of security; with new pressures 
from drug trafﬁ cking networks, violence increased rapidly.143 

Sources: Bateson 2010; CODEH 2008; CICIG 2010; Dudley 2010; Insti-
tuto  Universitario  en  Democracia  Paz  y  Seguridad  2010;  STRATFOR 
2009; UNODC 2007; UNDP 2008a; Zamora and Holiday 2007; Popkin 
2000; WDR team calculations.

174 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Notes   

    1.  World Bank 2006c; WDR consultation with government ofﬁ cials, United Nations, donor representa-
tives, local nongovernmental organizations, and community-based organization representatives in 
Haiti, 2010.

    2.  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 2009.
    3.  Porter and Rab 2010.
    4.  Lockhart and Glencorse 2010.
    5.  Spear and Harborne 2010; Harbone and Sage 2010; de Greiff 2010; Guehenno 2010; Sherman 2010; 
Sage and Desai 2010; Roque and others 2010; Dobbins and others 2007; Collier and others 2003; 
Collier 2007; Johnston 2010. 

    6.  Narayan and Petesch 2010. 
    7.  Guerrero 2006; Llorente and Rivas 2005; Formisano 2002.
    8.  Crawford 1999; Sutton, Cherney, and White 2008; Willman and Makisaka 2010. Mano dura (“iron 
ﬁ st”) policies may be effective in the short term but may have long-term negative consequences—
they  promote  youth  incarceration,  reducing  crime  in  the  short  term,  but  may  ultimately  lead  to 
greater recidivism and more serious crime in the longer term (see Cunningham and others 2008). 

    9.  Guehenno 2010, 2. 
  10.  Pan 2005. 
  11.  OECD-DAC 2007a. 
  12.  UN Security Council 2006. 
  13.  Ball and Holmes 2002; Transparency International 2011. 
  14.  Public ﬁ nancial management (PFM) reviews are a useful tool to improve transparency and gover-
nance in the security sector. A PFM review in the Central African Republic found that 25 percent 
of  the  national  budget  was  spent  on  the  security  sector,  of  which  21  percent  was  on  the  military 
and gendarmerie (law enforcement agency charged with police duties, but organized along military 
lines) and only 3 percent was on the police, and that 75 percent of the security sector expenditures 
were on salaries, which were relatively clearly controlled. A major drain on recurrent expenditure 
was an over-age component, comprising over one-third of the army. The main area of concern was 
about receipts and income, which remained off-budget, including taxation on ﬂ ow of persons and 
commerce. As a result of this report, the European Commission has started ﬁ nancing the pensioning 
off of the over-age in the army, and the World Bank has provided training in public ﬁ nancial man-
agement practices to key staff in the security sector as part of its program on improving capacity and 
functioning of public ﬁ nancial systems in the government (World Bank 2009f).

  15.  Perry  2008;  International  Crisis  Group  2009a;  Human  Rights  Watch  2009;  Reyntjens  2007;  Kelly 

2010.

  16.  Colletta, Kostner, and Wiederhofer 1996.
  17.  South Africa Ministry of Defence 1996; Williams 2005; Batchelor and Dunne 1998.
  18.  Rozema 2008.
  19.  Guehenno 2010.
  20.  Guehenno 2010, 5.
  21.  OECD-DAC 2007a.
  22.  International Center for Transitional Justice 2010; Mayer-Rieckh and de Greiff 2007; Patel, de Greiff, 

and Waldorf 2009; de Greiff 2006; Hayner 2010.

  23.  de Greiff 2010.
  24.  Addison 2009.
  25.  The general target for female representation in police formers and other security agencies in post-
conﬂ ict countries has been 30 percent. However, this may take time and not be feasible, especially as 
most developed societies do not fulﬁ ll this target. For example, Finland has 10 percent, the United 
States 12–14 percent, and Canada 18 percent. Mobekk 2010. 

  26.  Mobekk 2010.
  27.  Bastick, Grimm, and Kunz 2007.
  28.  UNIFEM, UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conﬂ ict, and UNDPKO 2010. 
  29.  OECD-DAC 2007a.
  30.  OECD-DAC 2007a.
  31.  Sherman 2010.
  32.  OECD-DAC 2007a.
  33.  Willman and Makisaka 2010; International Centre for the Prevention of Crime 2008. 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

175

  34.  O Dia Online 2010; Jornal O Globo 2010.
  35.  UNIFEM, UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conﬂ ict, and UNDPKO 2010. Similarly, tra-
ditional  dispute  resolution  systems  can  be  adapted  to  address  violence  against  women.  For 
instance,  90  percent  of  women  were  satisﬁ ed  with  the  shalishi  process  (a  community  dispute 
resolution system) when it was introduced by a rural women’s group in West Bengal, two-thirds 
felt that they were better off, and nearly 90 percent said that physical violence by the husband had 
decreased or stopped. See International Center for Research on Women 2002; Bott, Morrison, 
and Ellsberg 2005. For more on Shalishi process, see Samity 2003.

  36.  WDR team interviews with Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerine in Haiti, 2010. 
  37.  For example, the OECD Handbook on  Security System Reform underscores this approach when 
advocating that police reform be done as part of an integrated justice sector reform that includes 
the judiciary and prisons; see OECD-DAC 2007a; UNODC and the World Bank 2007. 

  38.  Dinnen, Porter, and Sage 2010; Wainwright 2005. 
  39.  International  Center  for  Transitional  Justice  2010;  Mayer-Rieckh  and  de  Greiff  2007;  Patel, 

de Greiff, and Waldorf 2009; de Greiff 2006; Hayner 2010.

  40.  For more information, see feature 3 in chapter 3.
  41.  Guehenno 2010; OECD-DAC 2007a.
  42.  International  Center  for  Transitional  Justice  2010;  Mayer-Rieckh  and  de  Greiff  2007;  Patel, 

de Greiff, and Waldorf 2009; de Greiff 2006; Hayner 2010.

  43.  World Bank 2010i.
  44.  Between  2001  and  2009,  the  Government  of Afghanistan  passed  244  laws,  legislative  decrees, 
regulations, and amendments, addition and repeal of laws and regulations. In addition, the gov-
ernment has entered into 19 charters, conventions, agreements, and protocols. See World Bank 
2010g. 

  45.  Another  successful  example  of  the  use  of  Peace  Justices  and  mobile  courts  to  provide  better 
access to justice, especially for the most disadvantaged groups, was in Honduras, as part of a 
project to modernize the judicial branch. Project results include (1) enhanced access to justice 
for vulnerable groups (30,000 annual users), ﬁ rst-instance courts in rural zones (1,000 annual 
users), and mobile courts in urban-marginal areas (7,000 annual users); (2) specialized service to 
10,000 women in family courts; (3) improved protection to 15,000 women and children against 
domestic violence; (4) specialized service to 1,500 persons from vulnerable groups; (5) establish-
ment of an integrated ﬁ nancial management system that promotes transparency and efﬁ ciency 
of the courts; (6) development of the judicial career with all the manuals for the selection, classi-
ﬁ cation, and evaluation of personnel that will allow the transparent and competitive selection of 
3,200 personnel; (7) adoption of a new management model for case management that will allow 
monitoring and evaluation of 1,200 judges; and (8) improved services to internal and external 
users of the courts through an IT (information technology) system and judiciary information 
kiosks. See Scheye 2009.

  46.  Dale 2009.
  47.  For  example,  in  Angola,  over  70  percent  of  children  were  unregistered  in  the  mid-1990s. 

UNICEF 2007.

  48.  Comunità di Sant’Egidio 2010.
  49.  UNICEF 2007.
  50.  OECD 2007.
  51.  Berger 2003; Coldham 1984. 
  52.  Straus 2010. 
  53.  Bastick, Grimm, and Kunz 2007. 
  54.  Everett 2009, 33.
  55.  Timor-Leste Independent Comprehensive Need Assessment Team 2009; WDR team consulta-

tion with Attorney General Ana Pessoa in Timor-Leste, 2010; Everett 2009, 33.

  56.  See OECD 2010e; World Bank 2006a.
  57.  Blundell 2010.
  58.  For Indonesia, see SUCOFINDO 2002. For Mozambique, see Crown Agents 2007.
  59.  Porter and Rab 2010.
  60.  Boko 2008.
  61.  Barron  and  Burke  2008.  Another  tool  includes  social  audits  involving  communities  in  cross-
veriﬁ cation of government records, such as the one used successfully under the National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme in Andhra Pradesh, India (Centre for Good Governance 2009).

176 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

  62.  Agarwal, Heltberg, and Diachok 2009.
  63.  World Bank 2004. 
  64.  Herzberg 2004.
  65.  BizCLIR 2007. 
  66.  See Parker 2008 for a synthesis of practical lessons from value chain projects in conﬂ ict-affected 
environments; see also Bagwitz and others 2008; The SEEP Network 2009; Stramm and others 
2006.

  67.  Evidence  about  the  impact  of  value  chain  projects  on  social  cohesion  is  mixed.  For  example, 
in Nepal, participants in a fresh vegetable value chain project pointed to improved community 
relations  stemming  from  their  expanded  common  interest.  And  joint  efforts  and  research  in 
Rwanda indicates that participation in a coffee value chain project was linked to low ethnic dis-
tance and distrust. In contrast, a groundnut value chain project in Guinea, while strengthening 
ties between two ethnic groups, did not include the local refugee population, a key party in local 
tensions. For Guinea and Nepal, see Parker 2008. For Rwanda, see Boudreaux and Tobias 2009.

  68.  In the West Bank and Gaza for instance, the Facility for New Market Development (FNMD), 
funded jointly by the U.K. Department for International Development and the World Bank, has 
been providing matching grants and technical support to private Palestinian companies seeking 
to expand their product lines and markets since 2008. In just over two years and with ﬁ nancial 
support amounting to US$2.4 million, companies enrolled in the project realized US$32.7 mil-
lion in incremental export and local sales from market development plans the project supported; 
42 companies entered 34 export markets in ﬁ ve continents; 48 products have been improved, 
including  15  products  that  are  now  certiﬁ ed  by  international  and  local  standards  bodies;  92 
new products have been developed; more than 670 people have been hired to help with busi-
ness expansion; and 85 business service providers offer their services through the FNMD Online 
Roster. Development Alternatives Incorporated 2010. 

  69.  Twenty-two  of  the  181  countries  included  in  the  Enterprise  Surveys  are  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-
affected states. Ten of these countries have electricity as the most important environment con-
straint facing ﬁ rms (and usually electricity is much higher than any of the other issues). It is also 
in the top three issues for 17 out of the 22 countries assessed. Only two countries, Côte d’Ivoire 
and Tonga, do not have electricity in their top six environmental constraints. Other constraints 
include obtaining ﬁ nance, political instability, practices of the informal sector, and corruption. 
World Bank 2010d. 

  70.  BBC News 2010. 
  71.  World Bank 2011a.
  72.  A thorough review of job creation programs in post-conﬂ ict environments can also be found in 

ILO 2010. 

  73.  The Productive Safety Net Programme launched in Ethiopia in 2005 is an important policy ini-
tiative  by  government  and  donors  to  shift  millions  of  chronically  food-insecure  rural  people 
from recurrent emergency food aid to a more secure, predictable, and largely cash-based form 
of  social  protection.  See  Sharp,  Brown,  and  Teshome  2006.  The  National  Rural  Employment 
Guarantee Act in India was implemented on February 2006 in 200 of the poorest districts in its 
ﬁ rst phase. An additional 130 districts were covered by the Act during 2007–08 in its phase II. 
The remaining districts have been brought under subsequently. See del Ninno, Subbarao, and 
Milazzo 2009; India Ministry of Rural Development 2005, 2010; Blum and LeBleu 2010.

  74.  Giovine and others 2010; Arai, Cissé, and Sock 2010; Sayigh 2010.
  75.  Lockhart and Glencorse 2010; UNOPS 2009.
  76.  Wilson 2002; McLeod and Dávalos 2008; Centre for Good Governance 2009; India Ministry of 

Rural Development 2005, 2010.

  77.  del Ninno, Subbarao, and Milazzo 2009.
  78.  Lamb and Dye 2009; Tajima 2009.
  79.  Beasly 2006.
  80.  Cunningham and others 2008. 
  81.  Mattero and Campbell-Patton 2008.
  82.  Cross 2010 discusses both opportunities and challenges of this approach.
  83.  Mills and Fan 2006. 
  84.  Demirgüc-Kunt, Klapper, and Panos 2011; Cunningham and others 2008
  85.  Heinemann-Grüder, Pietz, and Duffy 2003. 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

177

  86.  See, for instance, ILO 2010 for a detailed analysis of self-employment and other local economic 

recovery activities in post-conﬂ ict settings.

  87.  M-Paisa builds on the experience of M-PESA in Kenya; see Mas and Radcliffe 2010. 
  88.  See,  for  example,  World  Bank  and  others  2009.  A  successful  management  training  program 
for  small  and  medium  enterprises  is  Business  Edge  of  the  International  Finance  Corporation 
(IFC),  which  makes  lo cally  adapted  and  translated  adult-learning  materials  available,  trains 
local  trainers,  builds  capacity  of  local  training  companies  (who  tend  to  be  small  and  medium 
enterprises  themselves),  and  establishes  quality  assurance  mechanisms  so  that  local  ﬁ rms 
might  in  turn  train  the  local  population.  Business  Edge  operates  in  several  fragile  and  con-
ﬂ ict-affected economies, including Iraq, Papua New Guinea, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen. 
In Yemen,  nearly  30,000  participants  were  trained  from  2006  to  2010.  An  independent  evalu-
ation  found  that  the  program  had  a  lasting  impact  on  the  country.  Business  Edge  fostered  a 
vibrant  management  training  market  that  is  active  even  after  subsidies  have  been  withdrawn. 
In  Pakistan,  an  assessment  of  the  program  showed  that  the  number  of  small  and  medium 
enterprises  preparing  cash  ﬂ ow  statements  after  training  increased  by  20  percent  and  that 
71 percent of participants with irregular credit histories had cleared or decreased their outstand-
ing amounts six months after the training. See Peschka 2010.

  89.  Cunningham and others 2008. 
  90.  For Japanese land reforms, see Kawagoe 1999; Tsunekawa and Yoshida 2010; For broader state-
building experience in Japan, see Tsunekawa and Yoshida 2010; For Korean land reforms, see Shin 
2006.

  91.  Lipton 2009; Rosset, Patel, and Courville 2006; IRIN 2009.
  92.  See World Bank 2008d on the design and implementation of cash transfer programs in emer-

gency situations.

  93.  It is estimated that more than 650,000 Tajiks live and work in Russia—representing 18 percent 
of Tajikistan’s adult population and as much as 80 percent of all Tajiks abroad. Remittances are 
estimated to account for around 50 percent of GDP—one of the highest ﬁ gures in the world 
(Kireyev 2006, 3, 7).

  94.  Economic Times 2008.
  95.  Four elements are considered the backbone of successful schemes: (1) choice of workers to ensure 
that hiring is skill-appropriate rather than hiring overqualiﬁ ed workers who are likely to use the 
scheme as a stepping stone; (2) circular movement of workers to allow good employees to return 
in  subsequent  years  rather  than  be  offered  a  one-time-only  chance  at  offshore  employment 
thereby reducing the incentive to violate the agreement; (3) cost-sharing on travel-related costs 
with employers so that ﬁ xed costs borne by migrants are not so large that they make overstaying 
attractive; and (4) commercial viability so that the scheme remains private sector driven and 
reﬂ ects labor market conditions in host countries rather than by arbitrary quotas that become 
outdated if labor market conditions in destination countries change (World Bank 2006b).

  96.  Kingma 1997.
  97.  International Alert and Women Waging Peace 2004.
  98.  “For example, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where women run only 18 percent of the 
small business es, discriminatory provisions in the Family Code require married women to obtain 
marital authorization to go to court in a civil case, to buy and sell property, or to enter into any 
obligations, including starting a business. Banks generally require co-signature/approval of hus-
bands if women are to obtain loans. The Family Code also affects the ability of all women to 
obtain employment, because proof of marital status is required, and this is difﬁ cult in a context 
in which identiﬁ cation papers are largely unavail able. Neighboring Rwanda, by contrast, has no 
such regu lations, and women in that country run more than 41 percent of the small businesses.” 
IFC 2008, 3.

  99.  IFC 2008. 
100.  Fearon 2010a.
101.  Eades  1999;  WDR  consultation  with  former  key  negotiators  from  the  ANC  Alliance  and  the 

National Party in South Africa, 2010.

102.  See, for example, Snyder 2000; Fearon and Laitin 2003; Epstein and others 2006; Goldstone and 
others 2010; Zakaria 2003; Mansﬁ eld and Snyder 2005. For Iraq, see Special Inspector General 
for Iraq Reconstruction 2009. For Kenya, see International Crisis Group 2008b.

103.  The Loya Jirga is a forum unique to Afghanistan in which, traditionally, tribal groups have come 
together to settle affairs of the nation or rally behind a cause. Historically, it has been used to 

178 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

settle intertribal disputes, discuss social reforms, and approve a new constitution. More recently, 
a Loya Jirga was convened in 2002 following the fall of the Taliban government and the Bonn 
Accord to choose the new transitional government for the country. See BBC News 2002. 

104.  Success  was  not  universal,  however,  and  some  conferences  failed  to  produce  an  institutional 

avenue for peaceful transition (Robinson 1994; Clark 1994; van de Walle and Bratton 1997).

105.  Harbom and Wallensteen 2010. 
106.  Historically, the ﬁ rst civil war in Sudan started in 1955 and ended with the Addis Abba agreement 
of  1972  (see  Gadir,  Elbadawi,  and  El-Batahani  2005).  However,  rebels  in  the  south  (primarily 
Anya Nya) were not organized until the early 1960s, and battle deaths from violence did not reach 
major civil war thresholds until 1962, not falling till 1973 (Harbom and Wallensteen 2010).

107.  See also Horowitz 2000; Barron and others 2010.
108.  OECD 2010c, 24.
109.  OECD 2010a. 
110.  Narayan and Petesch 2010. 
111.  Narayan and Petesch 2010. 
112.  Wilkinson and others argue that proportional representation may spur in-ﬁ ghting among var-
ious  ethnic  groups  over  a  small  number  of  highly  coveted  political  ofﬁ ces,  limited  economic 
resources, and positions of social status; it may also lead ethnic leaders to bargain harder with 
their rivals and overplay their hands (Wilkinson 2000; de Zwart 2000). Others argue that decen-
tralization can reinforce ethnic identities, produce discriminatory legislation, provide resources 
for rebellion, and facilitate the collective action necessary for secession. Those that have recently 
found in favor of devolution as a way of maintaining national integrity have done so with cave-
ats: Brancati argues that decentralization can reduce the likelihood of secession and ethnic con-
ﬂ ict, but can have the opposite effect if regional parties are too strong. Lustick and others have 
run simulations that suggest that power-sharing in multicultural countries can lessen the likeli-
hood of secession—but will in the process mobilize ethnic minorities (Brancati 2006; Lustick, 
Miodownik, and Eidelson 2004; OECD 2004.

113.  Crook and Manor 1998.
114.  Schelnberger 2005; Tukahebwa 2000.
115.  Crook and Manor 1998; Ndegwa and Levy 2004. 
116.  Grimm 2010. 
117.  Truth commissions are non-judicial, independent panels of inquiry typically set up to establish 
the facts and context of serious violations of human rights or of international humanitarian law 
in a country’s past. Commissions’ members are usually em powered to conduct research, support 
victims, and propose policy recommendations to prevent recurrence of crimes. See International 
Center for Transitional Justice 2010. 

118.  See, for example, Filippini 2009.
119.  Truth-seeking is a process through which societies attempt to make sense of the atrocities they 
have suffered during conﬂ ict or authoritarian regime and to prevent future injustices. Through 
the  truth-seeking  process,  victims  are  able  to  ﬁ nd  closure  by  learning  more  about  the  events 
they suffered, such as the fate of disappeared individuals, or why certain people were targeted 
for abuse. It involves the protection of evidence, the opening and maintenance of archives, the 
opening and publication of state information, and production of comprehensive reports. These 
efforts often come from ofﬁ cial inquiry groups called truth commissions. See International Cen-
ter for Transitional Justice 2010. 

120.  For recent numbers, see, for example, Estrada 2010.
121.  Roque and others 2010. 
122.  See Hayner 2010; UNOHCHR 2006. 
123.  See de Greiff 2006. 
124.  See Mayer-Rieckh and de Greiff 2007.
125.  See, for example, Huyse and Salter 2008.
126.  Roque and others 2010. 
127.  Roque and others 2010.
128.  Svensson 2000.
129.  UNDP 2008b.
130.  A World Bank study found: “There was a tendency in some post-conﬂ ict situations to give high 
priority to immediate and widespread privatization. While there is much in the histories of the 
countries studied to support the priority given to privatization of state enterprises, this does not 

 

Transforming institutions to deliver citizen security, justice, and jobs 

179

necessarily imply that sweeping and total privatization should be among the ﬁ rst reforms under-
taken” (Kreimer and others 1998, 34).

131.  Horizontal inequality is a measure of inequality among individuals or households, not groups. It 
differs from “vertical” inequality in that measurement of vertical inequality often is conﬁ ned to 
income or consumption between groups. See Stewart 2010. 

132.  Stewart 2010. 
133.  Mehta 2010, 23.
134.  INEE 2010.
135.  INEE 2010. 
136.  Betancourt and Williams 2008; Melville 2003.
137.  After the 1999 referendum, Timor-Leste faced serious health problems, a destroyed infrastructure, 
and virtually no trained personnel. The Interim Health Authority signed agreements with inter-
national NGOs for each district, and focused its efforts on developing sensible plans, monitoring 
delivery, and training a new cadre of health staff. The initial priority was to provide basic health 
care and services. In the ﬁ rst phase, international and national NGOs occupied a central role in 
providing  emergency  health  services  throughout  Timor-Leste,  independently  funded  through 
humanitarian assistance. In the second and third phase, Timor-Leste fostered a learning environ-
ment by using 100-day planning cycles to standardize the service packages provided in different 
parts of the territory, with clear targets and a strong focus on results, building conﬁ dence and 
capacity by meeting those targets. Over time, the Interim Health Authority was replaced by a new 
Ministry of Health, which assumed district management of the system and facilities. As a result 
of this framework, by late 2001 a fully Timorese Ministry of Health had recruited more than 800 
health staff, given 60 percent of the population access to basic services within a two-hour walk 
from their homes, and boosted health facility use to 1.0 outpatient visits per capita. By 2004, an 
estimated 90 percent of the population had a facility within a two-hour walk, and health facility 
use rose from 0.75 outpatient visits per capita to 2.13. The health ministry and district opera-
tions were among the few state functions resilient to renewed violence in 2005–06, continuing to 
operate and indeed to provide assistance to the displaced population. World Bank 2002a, 2008h; 
Baird 2010; Rohland and Cliffe 2002; Tulloch and others 2003. 

138.  World Bank 2008c. 
139.  For economic policies, see Rodrik 2007; for social policy, see Grindle 2010; for institution build-

ing, see Andrews 2010. 

140.  Christensen 2003. 
141.  Banerjee and Duﬂ o 2009; Demombynes and Clemens 2010.
142.  The homicide rate in Peten region was 101 in 2008 and 96 in 2009 according to homicide statis-

tics collected by the Guatemalan National Police. WDR team calculations.

143.  The peace agreement stipulated a one-third reduction during 1997, down from a bench mark 
ﬁ gure of 45,000 members to 31,000. Shortly after the signing of the accords, however, the army 
reported that its force level actually stood at 35,000, so it only needed a 4,000 troop reduction, 
which indeed took place (more systematically among rank and ﬁ le than among the ofﬁ cer corps) 
(Stanley and Holiday 2002). See the report of the UN Veriﬁ cation Mission in Guatemala, as it 
was winding down its operations (UN Veriﬁ cation Mission in Guatemala 2003, 2004).

Chapter 6 examines the achievements and shortfalls of 

international support for violence prevention and recovery. 
Multilateral, bilateral, and nongovernmental agencies have 
helped committed national leaders deliver great accomplishments 
in reducing levels of civil wars. But the international system has not 
kept pace with the adaptation of violent actors themselves, and it is 
ill-equipped to navigate repeated cycles of violence or the blurred 
boundaries between political conﬂ ict and criminal violence. Interna-
tional agencies are geared to minimizing domestic reputational and 
ﬁ duciary risk—increasingly so—rather than supporting “best-ﬁ t” 
institutional solutions that match political realities on the ground. 
And there are critical gaps: development agencies have long 
focused on building national capacity, but much less so in the 
spheres of security and criminal justice. Security agencies operate 
in those spheres, but with less long-term focus on building national 
institutions. “Support for job creation is a crucial gap across the 
international architecture.”

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

CHAPTER6

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

International support to 
building conﬁ dence and 
transforming institutions

The promise and peril of 
outside support 

R estoring  conﬁ dence  in  societies 

struggling  to  prevent  or  recover 
from  violence  generally  requires 
a combination of leadership and 
international  support—normally,  neither 
alone  can  sufﬁ ce.  The  achievements  of  the 
global  system  in  supporting  such  processes 
have been signiﬁ cant: societies facing diverse 
stresses—from  organized  crime  and  gang 
violence in Colombia to long-standing, bru-
tal civil war in Mozambique (box 6.1)—used 
international support to help stop violence, 
save  lives,  and  rebuild  economies.  Many  of 
the measures in chapters 4 and 5 that helped 
restore  conﬁ dence  and  transform  institu-
tions  in  situations  of  criminal  and  political 
violence  have  been  supported,  ﬁ nancially 
and technically, by international actors. 

As  important  as  these  accomplishments 
are,  they  are  incomplete:  repeated  and  new 
forms of violence mean that hundreds of mil-
lions of people are still trapped in a vicious 
cycle of legacies of violence, low trust, weak 
institutions, and continuing risk. This chap-
ter delineates patterns and trends in the in-
ternational architecture that affect its ability 
to respond effectively in fragile and violence-
prone settings. The analysis includes lessons 
from international efforts to prevent violence 

at  multiple  transition  points,  encourage 
 inclusive-enough coalitions, support the de-
livery of early results, and provide sustained 
and predictable assistance to help with insti-
tutional  transformation.  This  chapter  also 
identiﬁ es  measures  to  address  the  dual  ac-
countability dilemma faced by international 
actors—accountability  pressures  both  from 
domestic  constituencies  and  shareholders 
and from the leaders and citizens of recipient 
states—that often constrains effective inter-
national support.

The evolving international 
architecture

The international community has made im-
portant strides over recent decades in build-
ing international institutions and expertise 
to  support  a  reduction  in  the  incidence  of 
civil war. However, the international system 
has not been adjusted to keep pace with the 
emerging  analysis  of  conﬂ ict—in  particu-
lar, recognition of the repetitive and inter-
linked nature of conﬂ ict, and the increasing 
challenge  of  organized  crime  and  trafﬁ ck-
ing.  At  the  same  time,  the  expansion  in 
in ter national  assistance  efforts  has  led  to 
overlaps  and  discontinuities  between  hu-
manitarian, development, security, and po-
litical initiatives.

182 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 6.1  The beneﬁ ts of international support: Mozambique 

Type of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict
Transition opportunities:  Ceaseﬁ re, peace 
agreement, elections

Key stresses:  Social and economic depriva-
tion, human rights abuses, external political 
and security interference

Key stakeholders:  Governments, rebels, 
civil society, regional and international 
partners
Institutional challenges:  Accountability, 
inclusion, capacity constraints 

After 17 years of violence that killed an estimated 900,000 people and displaced a quarter 
of the country’s people, a General Peace Agreement (GPA) was brokered from June 1990 to 
October 1992 by the Roman Catholic Community of Sant’Egidio. The ﬁ nal outcome was a 
full-ﬂ edged peace agreement owned by the two parties, the Mozambique Government led 
by FRELIMO (the Mozambique Liberation Front) and RENAMO (the Mozambique National 
Resistance). The result was a complex legal and political system that provided institutions and 
methods for the transition to the 1994 elections. The sustainability of the peace agreement 
itself was immediately proved by the absence of any ﬁ ghting in the seven-month vacuum in 
which Mozambique was left, before the United Nations (UN) operation in Mozambique 
(ONUMOZ) strengthened its presence in the country to monitor the implementation of the 
peace agreement, support the resettlement of refugees, and help form a national army. 
The ONUMOZ mandate brought together for the ﬁ rst time the political, military, electoral, 
and humanitarian components of the UN intervention, with an emphasis on enhancing 
coordination.

ONUMOZ acted as a guarantor of the ceaseﬁ re, playing a stabilizing role on the basis of 
its perceived neutrality and helping create trust on both sides. Its role was facilitated by the 
content and quality of the peace agreement resulting from the 27 months of negotiations in 
Sant’Egidio, where a full set of guarantees was devised and proved a key element in facilitating 
a durable peace settlement after the end of ﬁ ghting. Strong donor engagement and ﬁ nancial 
contributions also played a key role in demobilizing combatants from both sides, while human-
itarian aid during the early years after the GPA helped lessen tensions among displaced popu-
lations. Since the GPA, Mozambique has grown rapidly—GDP increased an average of 8 per-
cent a year between 1993 and 2007. Civil liberties and political rights have also increased,1 
reﬂ ected in elections held in 1994, 1999, 2004, and 2009.

The readiness of both bilateral and multilateral donors to support the implementation of 
the peace agreement through large-scale ﬁ nancial support for reconstruction was crucial in 
the transition process. Mozambique is calculated to have received about US$500 million a year 
(in both humanitarian and development aid) on average throughout the 1990s, which was 
equivalent to about two-thirds of imports and 60 percent of the government budget. This 
external aid has played a pivotal economic role in supporting private consumption at the out-
set, and subsequently in providing ﬁ nance for investment and institutional strengthening that 
became the driving force behind Mozambique’s economic growth.2

Sources: Quinn 2007; Dobbins and others 2005; Manning and Malbrough 2009; Moran and Pitcher 
2004; Jones 2008; Cingranelli and Richards 2010; Brück, Fitzgerald, and Grigsby 2000; Cadeado and 
Hamela 2009; World Bank 2005b; Hume 1994; Morozzo Della Rocca 2003; Morozzo Della Rocca and 
Riccardi 2003; Edis 1995; Alden 2001; Bartoli 2005; Walter 1997.

The volume of assistance and the 
number of actors are increasing

Worldwide,  international  support  to  coun-
tries  affected  by  violence  has  increased  in 
the last 15 years. The international commu-
nity  has  scaled  up  peacekeeping  missions. 

More  than  124,000  personnel  are  currently 
deployed  in  the  UN  peacekeeping  mis-
sions,  with  troop  contributions  from  115 
countries.3 The African Union now has sig-
niﬁ cant  peacekeeping  capacity.  Support  for 
 mediation  has  increased  at  the  United  Na-
tions,  in  regional  institutions,  and  through 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

183

civil society actors. Aid to fragile and conﬂ ict-
affected  states  has  also  grown  from  29  per-
cent of total aid in 1996–98 to 41 percent in 
2006–08. However, much of that shift is due 
to increases in humanitarian assistance and 
debt relief, which have become increasingly 
concentrated in fragile and conﬂ ict-affected 
states. In the period 1996–98, 34 percent of 
humanitarian assistance and debt relief was 
to  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected  states—that 
increased  to  75  percent  in  2006–08.  Once 
humanitarian  assistance  and  debt  relief  are 
taken out, aid to fragile and conﬂ ict-affected 
states was 28 percent of the total in 1996–98, 
and 30 percent in 2006–08.4

Increasing engagement by middle-income 
countries with a history of solidarity support 
is also changing the international landscape 
at a fundamental level in many regions. The 
past decade has brought with it new energy, 
resources,  and  inﬂ uence  from  a  wider  set 
of players. Middle- and new higher-income 
countries  have  become  important  donors, 
investors,  and  diplomatic  and  trading  part-
ners  for  countries  affected  by  fragility,  vio-
lence,  and  conﬂ ict.  They  bring  with  them 
additional resources, lessons from their own 
economic  and  institutional  transitions,  and 
strong  regional  connections.  Consider  Chi-
na’s economic investment in and trade with 
Africa (investment is estimated to have at least 
tripled  since  2002),5  Brazil’s  peacekeeping 
role in Haiti, Indian development assistance 
to Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia’s increased as-
sistance to the World Food Program, and the 
evolving roles of South Africa, Qatar, and the 
United Arab Emirates in mediation.6 

Alongside  the  increase  in  support  has 
come  a  proliferation  of  humanitarian,  de-
velopment, security, and political actors and 
initiatives, bringing increased complexity. In 
2009–10, there were 14 special envoys to Af-
ghanistan alone.7 Even security responses are 
complicated by multiple actors: of 54 peace-
keeping or monitoring operations deployed in 
2009, 40 involved two or more international 
or  regional  organizations—creating  coordi-
nation,  co-management,  and  accountability 
challenges.8  International  nongovernmental 

organizations (NGOs) have also proliferated. 
Haiti’s Ministry of Planning placed the num-
ber of NGOs operating in Haiti following the 
January  2010  earthquake  as  high  as  10,000. 
The  number  of  international  humanitarian 
workers  has  similarly  increased  at  an  aver-
age  annual  6  percent  globally  over  the  past 
decade, with roughly 211,000 in the ﬁ eld in 
2009, and humanitarian funding has tripled 
since the start of the decade.9

As a result, and despite continuous policy 
attention and recommendations for reform, 
aid  management  and  broader  strategic  co-
ordination  are  more  daunting  today  than 
20  years  ago.  In  high-proﬁ le  contexts  like 
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Haiti, 
and the West Bank and Gaza, strategic impor-
tance,  signiﬁ cant  funding,  and  limited  local 
capacity have brought forward a dizzying ar-
ray of international and bilateral aid and hu-
manitarian agencies, NGOs, and contractors, 
each competing for a piece of the  action—and 
often displacing local  initiatives. 

Current international assistance focuses 
on recovery rather than prevention

The  international  architecture  for  coopera-
tion has evolved signiﬁ cantly over the last 60 
years, attesting to the ability of the interna-
tional system to adapt its support to changing 
circumstances and challenges. It is in need of 
adaptation again today: its focus on political 
rather than social protest and criminal vio-
lence,  its  linear  view  of  the  transition  from 
violence  to  peace,  its  separation  of  actors 
across ﬁ elds of engagement, and the prepon-
derance  of  high-income  Organization  for 
Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD)  countries  in  development  policy 
discourse no longer reﬂ ect today’s realities.

Since  the  end  of  the  Cold  War,  interna-
tional  support  has  focused  on  ending  civil 
conﬂ ict. There are good reasons for this: at the 
conclusion of the Cold War, civil war was the 
dominant form of violence, consuming mil-
lions of lives globally and retarding develop-
ment in the South. Bilateral and multilateral 
agencies  underwent  major  transformations 
to  adapt  their  activities  to  helping  end  civil 

184 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FIGUR E 6.1   Uneven international support in West Africa—Post-conﬂ ict trumps 

prevention

Total aid and peacekeeping assistance per capita to ﬁ ve West African countries during their 
transition periods over the last decade. Assistance to “post-conﬂ ict” Liberia was over US$415 
in 2008 and Sierra Leone’s averaged US$186 between 2000 and 2003. In contrast, assistance 
to “fragile” Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, and Togo averaged just US$42 in each country.

 

 

a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
e
r
u
t
i
d
n
e
p
x
e
g
n
p
e
e
k
e
c
a
e
p
d
n
a
d
a

 

 

i

 

i

 
l

a
t
o
T

)
$
S
U

 
t
n
e
r
r
u
c
(

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Liberia 

(highlighted

Sierra Leone
(highlighted

period 2004–08)

period 2000–03)

Guinea

(highlighted
period 2008)

Guinea-Bissau
(highlighted

Togo

(highlighted

period 2002–05)

period 2005–08)

Global

average for
low-income
countries

West Africa, selected countries (2000–08)

Source: WDR team calculations based on OECD 2010d.
Note: Total combined aid and peacekeeping assistance. This eﬀ ect of greater assistance to “post-conﬂ ict” countries is 
not due to small state issues (small states typically receive higher per capita aid): Liberia is larger than Guinea-Bissau, 
and Sierra Leone is the same size as Togo. Peacekeeping expenditures accounted for roughly 55 percent of the 
aggregate in Liberia and 63 percent of the aggregate in Sierra Leone.

wars  and  supporting  recovery  efforts,  with 
important successes. In the process, though, 
the  international  architecture  for  coopera-
tion has paid less attention to other forms of 
conﬂ ict,  including  social  protest,  organized 
crime, trafﬁ cking, and cross-border violence. 
This  focus  on  civil  war  has  led  aid  and 
 security  systems  to  give  priority  to  post- 
conﬂ ict  transitions.  With  some  exceptions, 
countries  affected  by  violence  and  fragility 
receive special attention only in post-conﬂ ict 
situations—as West Africa illustrates (ﬁ gure 
6.1).  The  aid  and  peacekeeping  assistance 
going  to  countries  after  civil  conﬂ ict  ends 
greatly exceeds what is provided to countries 
struggling  to  prevent  an  escalation  of  con-
ﬂ ict. Of course, countries that have experi-
enced  major  conﬂ ict  can  have  exceptional 
needs in costly areas such as infrastructure. 
But societies struggling to prevent violence 
also  have  particular  needs.  Some  interven-
tions, such as state-society consultations, are 

inexpensive.  But  tangible  ﬁ nancial  and  se-
curity  assistance  to  address  rising  violence 
can  often  make  a  vital  difference,  as  in  the 
institutional  reforms  and  community  pro-
grams  supported  by  donors  in  Colombia. 
Moreover, assistance to post-conﬂ ict coun-
tries usually pays little attention to “second 
generation challenges” in countries that face 
risks  of  repeated  violence,  such  as  Guate-
mala and Yemen.

International  actors  do  support  violence 
prevention outside the “post-conﬂ ict” coun-
tries,  but  the  degree  and  nature  of  this  en-
gagement varies substantially across types of 
violence and from state to state. International 
diplomats and security actors have been less 
involved in cases of criminal violence; the UN 
Peacebuilding Commission’s role in Guinea-
Bissau  is  an  exception.  Bilateral  counter-
terrorism and counter-crime programs pro-
vide operational support but rarely cross over 
into supporting political dialogue or develop-

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

185

ment  programs.  No  bilateral  or  multilateral 
agency  known  to  the  authors  has  a  speciﬁ c 
policy  for  assisting  countries  confronted  by 
rising criminal violence or social protest.

The  international  tools  to  address  vio-
lence—diplomacy,  defense,  and  develop-
ment—were not originally designed to work 
together. This weakness in the international 
architecture  has  long  been  recognized,  and 
there is a growing international policy con-
sensus  that  addressing  violent  conﬂ ict  and 
promoting  economic  development  both 
require  deeper  understanding  of  the  close 
relationship  among  politics,  security,  and 
de velopment.10  UN  “integrated  missions”11 
and  various  bilateral  and  regional “whole-
of-government”12  and  “whole-of-system”13 
initiatives have emerged to address the chal-
lenge  of  merging  development,  diplomatic, 
and security strategies and operations.14 

But  different  disciplines  bring  with 
them different goals, planning time frames, 
 decision-making processes, funding streams, 
and  risk  calculi.  They  can  also  create  com-
plexity when each agency in donor countries 
works through their own national counter-
parts, making it difﬁ cult to set national pri-
orities.15 Whole-of-system entities also often 
leave out those departments and ministries 
that address organized crime and trafﬁ cking. 
And  most  international  actors  do  not  have 
speciﬁ c  processes  to  ensure  a  whole-of-
government  approach  in  their  representa-
tion in multilateral agencies, so that different 
signals  on  priority  action  within  the  same 
recipient country can be provided to the in-
ternational ﬁ nancial institutions and to dif-
ferent parts of the UN system.

A  number  of  governments  have  been 
making  headway  at  integrating  whole-of-
government strategy design and resource al-
location. Australia’s experience with mount-
ing a truly cross-governmental operation in 
the  Solomon  Islands  (Regional  Assistance 
Mission to Solomon Islands, RAMSI) is per-
haps  the  most  developed;  notably,  it  relied 
on  the  personal  involvement  of  the  prime 
minister and his ofﬁ ce to drive deep engage-
ment by AusAID, and the Australian Defense, 
Treasury, Justice, Federal Police, Foreign Af-

fairs,  and  other  departments.16  Canada’s 
Stabilization and Reconstruction Task Force 
(START) recently ﬁ nalized interdepartmen-
tal  guidance  that  requires  joint  assessment 
by the Ministries of Defense, Foreign Affairs, 
and  Development  (and  other  departments 
where  relevant)  before  a  recommendation 
is made to ministers about whether Canada 
should  engage  in  a  given  high-risk  setting. 
The  Dutch  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  ap-
proved  an  approach  to  its  security  sector 
reform  work  that  keeps  the  question  of  re-
sources separate from strategy design, so that 
programs are not hampered—as many are—
by issues of ODA eligibility (ofﬁ cial develop-
ment  assistance.)  The  U.K.  Department  for 
International Development’s (DFID) Stabili-
zation Unit and the U.S. Ofﬁ ce of the Coor-
dinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization 
have  development  interagency  assessment 
and planning frameworks to encourage joint 
action,  including  for  bilateral  interventions 
in Afghanistan, Haiti, and Sudan,17  and  the 
U.K.  Multilateral  Agency  Review  assesses 
the  support  provided  by  multilaterals  in 
fragile situations.

Building confidence

International actors have supported, or facili-
tated,  “inclusive-enough”  coalitions;  helped 
develop  leadership  capacity  across  a  wide 
range  of  responsibilities;  undertaken  third-
party  mediation  and  prevention  activities; 
supported commitment mechanisms; and in-
voked sanctions when positive incentives did 
not bring national leaders together. They have 
also helped deliver early results (see interna-
tional support for national action in chapter 
4).  But  international  interventions  have  not 
always been as fast, as ﬂ exible, or as responsive 
to local political conditions as was needed to 
support early conﬁ dence-building efforts.18

Support to building inclusive-enough 
coalitions

Across cases with different attributes and fac-
ing different stresses, international actors can 

186 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

use  a  range  of  tools  to  create  incentives  for 
coalitions to avoid violence. These include

•  Providing  evidence  of  a  deteriorating 
situation.  Communications  from  diplo-
matic and development actors in Togo and 
Zimbabwe in the early 2000s, for example, 
focused on the growing gap between coun-
tries that had once led their neighbors in 
social  and  economic  outcomes  but  had 
fallen behind in periods of fragility. 

(cid:129)  Highlighting the potential negative con-
sequences  of  inaction.  Following  the  re-
sumption  of  Israeli-Palestinian  violence 
in the fall of 2000, the World Bank, with 
assistance from the UN and other donors, 
prepared a series of reports that addressed 
the  relationship  between  Israeli  security 
measures  and  Palestinian  socioeconomic 
development. The parties used this analy-
sis as the basis for a resumption of bilateral 
negotiations in the context of Israel’s dis-
engagement from Gaza in 2005. 

(cid:129)  Jointly  signaling  the  need  for  govern-
ments to address crisis situations. When 
Cyclone Nargis hit Myanmar in 2008, the 
government initially resisted offers of in-
ternational support. Association of South-
east  Asian  Nations  (ASEAN)  mediation 
and a visit by the UN Secretary-General—
buttressed by technical support from the 
UN,  the World  Bank,  and  the Asian  De-
velopment Bank—produced a policy shift 
that  resulted  in  Myanmar  opening  its 
borders to large-scale humanitarian assis-
tance. South-South exchanges with Indian 
and  Indonesian  political  and  technical 
leaders who had been involved after natu-
ral disasters helped to open dialogue. 

The  cost  savings  to  the  international 
 community of avoiding or minimizing vio-
lence  are  potentially  considerable—a  1997 
Carnegie Commission Report on Preventing 
Deadly Conﬂ ict estimated that seven major 
international  post-conﬂ ict  interventions  in 
the  1990s  cost  some  US$200  billion,  while 
prevention would have required only around 
US$70 billion.19 More recent work on six cases 
concluded  that  conﬂ ict  prevention  would 

have  been  cost-effective  in  each  instance, 
even  allowing  for  large  margins  of  error  in 
estimating  costs  and  beneﬁ ts:  every  dollar 
of prevention would have saved the interna-
tional  community  US$4.1.20 And  each  time 
the  Fica  Vivo  program  in  Brazil  prevented 
a  homicide,  it  saved  up  to  US$82,000.21 Yet 
since the probability of successful preventive 
action in a given case is not known, and since 
preventive  action  often  requires  diplomatic 
risk-taking, it is difﬁ cult to marshal political 
and ﬁ nancial support resources. For instance, 
the UN Department of Political Affairs often 
scrambles to ﬁ nd travel funds for its envoys 
despite  the  high  return  on  investment  in  a 
successful preventive effort. 

External mediation has helped build col-
laborative coalitions to promote prevention 
of  or  recovery  from  violence—and  is  eco-
nomical. Mediation has played a signiﬁ cant 
role  in  a  range  of  cases—ECOWAS  (Eco-
nomic  Community  of  West  African  States) 
mediation in West Africa (see feature 6), UN 
facilitation of Afghanistan’s Bonn Agreement, 
Norway’s facilitation in Sudan, and NGO ef-
forts such as those of the Crisis Management 
Initiative  and  the  Centre  for  Humanitarian 
Dialogue in Aceh, Indonesia. 

It is hard to attribute results conclusively 
to mediation, or to demonstrate what would 
have happened without it; but we do know 
that it is cheap. The UN Department of Politi-
cal Affairs estimates22 that the start-up budget 
for “light mediation support” is US$330,000 
and  for  “heavy  mediation”  is  US$1.1  mil-
lion.23 However,  mediation to manage tran-
sitions tends to neglect economic factors and 
thus faces capacity and personnel constraints 
(box 6.2). Because mediation support is pro-
vided  mainly  by  diplomatic  mechanisms, 
there  are  few  cases  of  integrated  political 
mediation and economic diagnosis provided 
to  governments  grappling  with  transitions. 
Routinely lamented, this situation has rarely 
been  addressed.24  Some  exceptions  include 
the World Bank’s support during the Dayton 
negotiations on Bosnia and Herzegovina, ﬁ -
nal  status  negotiations  for  Kosovo,  and  the 
Agreement  on  Movement  and  Access  be-
tween Israel and the Palestinian Authority.25

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

187

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 6 . 2  Investing in long-term mediation as a cost-effective approach to preventing and 

 

responding to violence
   Martin Grifﬁ ths, Former Director of the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue; WDR Advisory 
Council Member 

As  has  often  been  observed,  most  armed  conﬂ icts  today 
are  internal  to  states,  rather  than  between  states.  Media-
tion  in  these  conﬂ icts  is  rarely  preventive.  It  is  also  often 
short-lived. This is partially because mediation is still often 
seen  as  interference  in  the  internal  aﬀ airs  of  a  state,  par-
tially because there are few national mediators and there 
are  limited  numbers  of  international  oﬃ  cials  with  the 
necessary  stature  and  diplomatic  skills.  Mediation  is  seen 
as a last resort, only acceptable when it becomes evident 
that  armed  victory  is  unlikely  and  when  non-state  armed 
groups  gain  credibility  and  a  degree  of  international 
acceptance.

The  record,  though,  varies  between  regions.  In  Africa 
there  is  a  robust  tradition  of  mediation,  typically  led  by 
former senior statesmen from the continent, assisted by the 
AU’s  Peace  and  Security  Commission,  which  increasingly 
holds its member states to political account on the basis of 
a  broad  consensus.  In  Asia,  the  picture  is  very  diﬀ erent. 
Mediation, especially by neighbors, is extremely rare, and it 
is no surprise that regional mechanisms are, by comparison 
with  Africa,  much  less  developed.  Europe,  by  further  con-
trast,  has  been  quite  open  to  third-party  mediation,  but 
usually by individuals or international NGOs. 

The  nature  of  mediators  exacerbates  the  diﬃ  culties. 
Mediators  are,  on  the  whole,  drawn  from  the  ranks  of 

serving or former senior politicians and oﬃ  cials. This is a lim-
ited pool, and those willing to take on the dubious rewards of 
mediation are likely to be very busy men. And they are mostly 
men: there are precious few women mediators, an imbalance 
which does nothing for the quality of the output. 

A further factor that abbreviates mediation eﬀ orts is a sim-
ple human one: many mediators prefer to avoid involvement 
in the post-agreement implementation phase, which extends 
the time of their involvement and is usually messy and compli-
cated.  A  striking  contrary  example  comes  from  the  AU  panel 
that  mediated  in  Kenya  in  2008,  where  former  Secretary-
General  Koﬁ   Annan  was  a  “prisoner  of  peace”  for  41  straight 
days  of  talks.  That  41  days  of  continuous  eﬀ ort  is  viewed  as 
unprecedented  says  volumes  about  the  nature  of  standard 
mediation eﬀ orts. 

Agreements intended to initiate a durable peace must deal, 
if not immediately, with the whole range of issues relevant to 
social  transformation.  A  political  settlement  is  thus  necessary 
but  not  suﬃ  cient.  However,  the  ﬂ aws  in  today’s  approach  to 
mediation  make  such  a  comprehensive  and  thoughtful  inclu-
sion in the negotiation rather unlikely. Typically, therefore, dif-
ﬁ cult  issues  are  left  for  later  resolution.  It  is  not  by  chance, 
therefore,  that  peace  settlements,  aided  by  the  brilliant  but 
passing  presence  of  mediators,  often  fail  the  more  rigorous 
tests of implementation.

In  peace  negotiations,  international  me-
diators  often  pursue  inclusive-enough  co-
alitions  by  encouraging  or  pressuring  for 
agreements that include key minority rights 
and human rights provisions, as well as early 
political  participation.  As  third-party  fa-
cilitation and mediation in internal conﬂ ict 
and violence have developed, there has been 
growing emphasis on including core human 
rights  provisions  in  peace  agreements,  and 
in  1999  there  was  formal  guidance  for  the 
UN against endorsing agreements that con-
tained amnesties for war crimes.26 Similarly, 
external  actors  have  urged  that  democratic 
processes  or  other  accountability  and  voice 
mechanisms be made a routine part of con-
ﬂ ict  settlements.  The  UN  Security  Council 

has included such provisions in most of the 
54 operations it has authorized since the end 
of the Cold War.27 Such provisions in an ini-
tial settlement can create incentives for inclu-
sive social and economic strategies.

But  international  support  often  swings 
between  “all-inclusive”  and  “not  inclusive 
enough”  options.  In  some  processes  there 
is  pressure  to  treat  all  political  groupings 
equally  and  to  give  everyone  a  seat  at  the 
table—in Timor-Leste in 1999, the National 
Council for Resistance in Timor was told by 
international  counterparts  that  it  was  only 
one  among  many  political  groups,  despite 
almost  80  percent  of  the  Timorese  popula-
tion  having  voted  for  independence  under 
its logo. International actors have also pres-

188 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

sured  national  authorities  not  to  engage  in 
dialogue with groups listed as terrorist orga-
nizations by the UN, regional organizations, 
or bilateral donors, even when those groups 
command  substantial  domestic  followings. 
Consequently,  those  actors  have  withdrawn 
support when national authorities have taken 
a different path. 

International  approaches  to  coalition 
building often exclude women, despite inter-
national efforts such as UN Security Council 
Resolution (UNSCR) 1325 and UNSCR 1960.28 
Women bring different issues to the negotiat-
ing table—not only gender-related topics but 
also different visions of how to share power, 
address  security  concerns,  and  promote  hu-
man rights.29 According to UNIFEM (United 
Nations  Development  Fund  for  Women), 
fewer than 7 percent of negotiators on ofﬁ cial 
delegations in peace processes since 2000 have 
been women. Moreover, women make up just 
2.3 percent of military peacekeeping person-
nel globally.30 Similarly, in peace support oper-
ations, at the end of 2003, women represented 
only  25  percent  of  civilian  professional  staff 
and 4 percent of civilian police.31

Despite the challenges, both international 
political  actors  and  international  develop-
ment actors have demonstrated their ability to 
support effective prevention activities in frag-
ile transition moments. Donors have funded 
diverse  interventions  in  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-
affected  countries  to  help  support  effective 
leadership and enhance collaborative capaci-
ties,32 coalition-building, and national and lo-
cal strategy development. In Guyana in 2006, 
after  a  period  of  rising  political  tension,  the 
ﬁ rst-ever  violence-free  elections  were  con-
ducted.33  The  Social  Cohesion  Program—
a  joint  UNDP-UNDPA  (UN  Development 
 Programme–UN  Department  of  Political 
 Affairs)  national  initiative  that  included  a 
 national  dialogue, a network of local medi-
ators  to  help  ease  tensions  among  com -
munities,  and  agreements  among  political 
parties—contributed  much  to  this  result.  In 
Burundi, the World Bank and  others ﬁ nanced 
leadership support, which aided in developing 
a  vision for economic recovery for the transi-

tional period and led to an extension of the 
program for army and rebel commanders to 
prepare  for  the  upcoming  cease-ﬁ re.34  An-
other  type  of  program  is  international  sup-
port  to  national  efforts  to  build  an  institu-
tional  infrastructure  for  conﬂ ict  prevention 
and prevention and risk reduction (box 6.3). 

Commitment mechanisms

International  actors  have  also  helped  in 
providing  ongoing  monitoring  and  imple-
mentation  guarantees—the  commitment 
mechanisms described in chapter 4.35 In the 
post–Cold  War  era,  their  most  signiﬁ cant 
role has been in helping to implement post-
conﬂ ict settlements when trust is low. Exter-
nal forces can reassure parties and begin to 
restore conﬁ dence by monitoring and pro-
viding  credible  information  about  imple-
mentation,  and  thus  intent.  They  can  also 
deploy  troops  to  provide  physical  security 
guarantees against a relapse.36 Cross- country 
studies  repeatedly  show  that  peace  settle-
ments with third-party guarantees are more 
stable  than  those  without.37  Similarly,  IMF 
(International Monetary Fund) and World 
Bank programs, including those that carry 
no ﬁ nancing but simply give an imprimatur 
of good ﬁ nancial practice, can help govern-
ments  reassure  investors  and  citizens  of 
their  commitment  to  ﬁ scal  responsibility 
and clean government. Among nongovern-
ment actors, the Extractive Industries Trans-
parency Initiative (EITI)38 and the new Nat-
ural  Resource  Charter39  have  in  effect  set 
new  standards  for  the  responsible  use  of 
some natural resources in a partnership of 
civil society, the private sector, and govern-
ments.  Adherence  to  these  standards  and 
their reporting requirements can also act as 
a commitment mechanism.

Commitment  mechanisms  that  mix  na-
tional  and  international  capacity  can  help 
shepherd economic recovery and progress on 
justice.  They  are  particularly  appealing  be-
cause they combine the strength of interna-
tional guarantees with elements of national 
institution-building.  Liberia’s  Governance 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

189

BOX 6.3   Heading off escalation: Dialogue and compromise in 

Ghana in 2003–04

Type of violence:  Political, local, and intergroup conﬂ ict
Transition opportunity:  Preventive actions 
leading to peace negotiations before a 
critical national election
Key stresses:  Ethnic competition linked to a 
political contest

Key stakeholders:  Local and national 
government, clans, police, civil society, 
opposition party, international organizations
Institutional challenges:  Capacity and 
legitimacy of formal and informal gover-
nance systems

Ghana, viewed as one of the most stable countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, has experienced its 
own bouts of local or community violence; a recent study identiﬁ ed more than 200 low-level 
conﬂ icts between 1994 and 2002. The potential for serious violence threatened to emerge in 
2002 over the succession to the Dagbon chieftaincy, after the Andani clan chief of the Dagbon 
ethnic group and 40 of his followers were murdered by the rival Abudu clan. This had national 
implications: Ghana’s vice president was a Dagomba, and the main opposition party had cho-
sen its vice presidential candidate from a faction contesting the succession. The central gov-
ernment therefore needed to defuse tension before the next national election. A state of 
emergency was declared in the Dagbon kingdom, and a commission of inquiry established. 
But the commission failed to bring a settlement: its report was rejected by both sides.

The government then sought UN help to broker a dialogue among youth, women, and 

labor leaders and state institutions, including the police. A compromise was devised that 
included a funeral with full state honors for the slain Andani leader and the nomination of an 
Andani regent. An agreed “roadmap” for succession gave both factions a future chance at pro-
viding a successor. The 2004 national elections were peaceful, with chiefs and police cooperat-
ing to avoid violence.

Building on this dialogue, the Ministry of the Interior, supported by UNDP and UNDPA, 

created a National Architecture for Peace, consisting of district, regional, and national councils, 
which brings together locally respected, politically neutral Ghanaians and provides a platform 
for community dialogue and consensus-building on divisive issues. The councils also serve as 
an early warning mechanism, used by state oﬃ  cials to identify problems. The national govern-
ment now has a Peace Building Support Unit in the Ministry of the Interior to coordinate pre-
ventive eﬀ orts by national, regional, and district government agencies and to provide mentor-
ing and capacity-building to government and nongovernment actors.

Sources: Ojielo 2007; GhanaWeb 2006; UNDPA 2010a.

and Economic Management Assistance Pro-
gram40 (chapter 4) shows the beneﬁ ts of joint 
international-national  mechanisms  in  the 
economic sphere, as does Guatemala’s Inter-
national  Commission  Against  Impunity  in 
the justice sphere (box 6.4).

In  the  extreme,  international  actors  can 
threaten a range of sanctions when national 
actors  seem  reluctant  to  take  meaningful 
steps to avoid new cycles of violence.41 While 
sanctions  are  often  cited  as  an  important 
measure  in  forcing  political  change  in  the 
target state (for example, contributing to the 

fall of apartheid in South Africa), their causal 
effects remain disputed.42 Critics cite negative 
humanitarian  effects  and  the  creation  of  il-
licit economies that can enrich regimes.43 Ef-
forts to mitigate such effects have emerged in 
the two decades through the use of “targeted” 
sanctions—ﬁ nancial  and  travel  restrictions 
imposed  on  individual  leaders  or  groups.44 
The European Union imposed travel restric-
tions,  for  example,  on  Zimbabwe’s  leaders 
when they failed to deal with a deteriorating 
economy and suppressed mounting political 
tensions.

190 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 6.4  International-national institutional partnerships—CICIG in 

Guatemala

Types of violence:  Legacy of civil conﬂ ict, rising criminal and gang violence, traﬃ  cking
Transition opportunity:  Rising crisis, moderate 
space for change

Key stakeholders:  Government, opposition 
parties, victims, gangs, international drug net-
works, citizens, regional partners, wider global 
partnership
Institutional challenges:  Low capacity in police 
and civilian justice system, past problems of 
accountability

Key stresses:  Rising external pressures from drug 
traﬃ  cking, perceptions of injustice and impunity 
by victims of violence and marginalized groups

To combat corruption and crime, Guatemala created the International Commission against Impunity, 
known by its Spanish acronym, CICIG, through an agreement with the UN in 2007. Its mandate is to 
“support, strengthen, and assist institutions of the State of Guatemala responsible for investigating and 
prosecuting crimes allegedly committed in connection with the activities of illegal security forces and 
clandestine security organizations.”45 It is one of the few instances of an international commitment 
mechanism deployed to help a state deal with gang-related and criminal violence.

CICIG responds to the reality that Guatemala, after a 36-year civil war, has experienced continuous and 
mounting stresses of gang-related violence and police and judicial corruption. Studies show that a legacy 
of failed reintegration of demobilized soldiers at the end of Guatemala’s civil war has contributed to 
today’s spike in criminal violence and gang activity. 

CICIG draws on independent international and local investigative expertise and refers cases to 

Guatemalan prosecutors in the domestic judicial system. A Special Prosecutor’s Oﬃ  ce for CICIG has been 
established in the Public Prosecutor’s oﬃ  ce, and CICIG has also provided technical assistance and capacity-
building support to the National Civilian Police, the Ministry of the Interior, and the Public Prosecutor.46 
As of March 2010, CICIG had mounted 1,544 judicial proceedings and arrested 135 individuals, including 
former President Alfonso Portillo, accused of embezzling funds. 

CICIG has been an innovative response to the twin challenges of high external stress and low internal 

capacity. However, while CICIG has registered successes within Guatemala, larger regional challenges of 
organized crime and traﬃ  cking lie beyond its control. 

Sources: CICIG 2009; Férnandez 2010; Donovan 2008; The Economist 2010; UN 2006a; UN General Assembly 
2009a; Hudson 2010.

But  international  and  regional  norms—
and  mechanisms  for  recognition  and  sanc-
tions—are  not  always  fully  aligned.  Some 
regions  have  developed  norms  and  prin-
ciples  that  recognize  responsible  national 
leadership. The African Union (AU) and the 
Organi zation of American States have norms 
for dealing with extra-constitutional changes 
of  government,  notably  coups  d’état.47  But 
even where a region has a strong principle-
based standard, international mechanisms do 
not always reinforce it. For example, there are 
no  structured  discussions  on  international 
cooperation  among  non-regional  bilateral 
partners,  the  UN,  and  international  ﬁ nan-
cial institutions following the imposition of 
sanctions by the AU on a member.48 

Support to delivering early results 

For the leaders of an initial pact to build con-
ﬁ dence,  they  must  deliver  results  quickly; 
when  timely,  international  assistance  can 
 bolster  these  efforts.  Rapid  assistance  for 
 conﬁ dence-building  can  take  many  forms 
(chapter 4). Early results can be achieved when 
programs  are  appropriately  designed,  as  the 
initiatives described in chapters 4 and 5 make 
clear. However, much of the assistance for pri-
ority development tasks remains slow, in par-
ticular when best-ﬁ t needs on the ground fall 
outside the regular donor processes (see box 
6.5). A critical ingredient for bridging the gap 
is  the  mutual  involvement  of  humanitarian 
and development actors in planning.

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

191

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 6 . 5 Quick action? Ghana helps restore electricity in Liberia
 

  H. E. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia; WDR Advisory Council Member

After  the  2005  election  in  Liberia,  the  new  government 
announced a 100-day plan that included the restoration of 
electricity to certain areas of the capital to help restore con-
ﬁ dence  in  the  state  and  jumpstart  recovery  in  economic 
activities  and  basic  services.  With  ECOWAS’  support,  the 
Liberian  government  approached  various  donors  to  help, 
since  the  new  government  lacked  resources  and  institu-
tional capacity for implementation. None of the traditional 
donors, which included the United Nations, the World Bank, 
the  African  Development  Bank,  the  European  Union,  and 
USAID, were able to provide the generators needed for this 
endeavor within the desired timeframe under their regular 
systems. The Liberian government was eventually success-
ful in securing help from the Government of Ghana, which 
provided  two  generators  that  helped  restore  electricity  in 
some urban areas.

The  Liberian  experience  points  to  two  key  lessons. 
First  is  the  need  for  early  consultation  between  national 
governments and international partners on realism in deliv-
ering  quick  results  and  demonstrating  progress  to  local 

populations. Second is the challenge of rigidities in donor sys-
tems  unable  to  provide  particular  types  of  assistance  fast.  In 
fact, the EU, USAID, and the World Bank were able to provide 
other types of support (fuel, transmission line restoration) for 
the  electricity  system  within  the  100  days,  but  none  of  the 
donors were able to cover the speciﬁ c need for generators. 

Indeed, there is a need to rethink existing policies and pro-
cesses,  to  modify  what  I  call  procedural conformism  for  coun-
tries in crisis situations. Another case in point is the rebuilding 
of  two  primary  roads  in  Liberia.  The  World  Bank,  joined  by 
other  donors,  made  signiﬁ cant  commitments  to  this  project. 
However, a new procedure was to be adopted which calls for a 
multiyear  construction  and  maintenance  arrangement.  This 
represented an innovative new process, but one which required 
a  long  gestation  period  for  implementation.  Liberia  gained 
when the Bank agreed to proceed with one of the roads under 
more ﬂ exible procedures, but the other will likely experience a 
two-year delay under the new process. This case in point is a 
clear demonstration of both the problems of procedural con-
formism and the possibility of more ﬂ exible thinking.

Humanitarian  assistance,  the  main  tool 
the  global  system  has  for  rapid  relief,  can 
provide  vital  life-saving  and  stabilizing  as-
sistance.  There  is  evidence  that  “indirect 
deaths”—those  caused  by  disease  and  mal-
nutrition  in  violent  environments—have 
declined faster than deaths caused directly by 
war. This is in part a testament to the increas-
ing  effectiveness  of  humanitarian  aid—but 
humanitarian assistance alone cannot deliver 
on  priority  political,  security,  and  develop-
ment needs.49 

As domestic pressure on donors to dem-
onstrate results has increased, so has the ap-
peal of branding as a communications tool. 
For  example,  the  United  States  Agency  for 
International Development’s (USAID) policy 
is that all programs and commodities funded 
by USAID are marked with the USAID logo. 
However,  there  is  some  ﬂ exibility—where 
needed, a partner country symbol or minis-
try logo may be added, while branding may 
be  avoided  altogether  if  it  can  be  shown  to 

threaten the neutrality of a program.50 Other 
donors, such as the European Commission, 
have  similar  practices.51  Where  the  popula-
tion  sees  all  assistance  marked  with  logos 
of  international  agencies,  the  opportunity 
to boost conﬁ dence in the ability of national 
reformers and institutions to lead the coun-
try out of violence may be lost. In some cir-
cumstances, “joint branding,” as was adopted 
in Aceh, Indonesia, between the Indonesian 
Government and donors, can help maintain 
donor visibility while boosting the legitimacy 
of national institutions. 

When protracted, humanitarian assistance 
confronts  a  dilemma:  because  it  does  not, 
for  the  most  part,  deliver  through  national 
institutions, it can undermine national insti-
tutional  capacity.  Yet  international  agencies 
and NGOs that have both humanitarian and 
development  mandates  can  build  bridges 
from  relief  to  early  results  and  institutional 
transformation. For instance, the United Na-
tions  Children’s  Fund  (UNICEF)  has  been 

192 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

developing  the  capacity  of  national  and  lo-
cal  actors  to  protect  the  rights  of  disadvan-
taged  groups.  Most  successful  are  activities 
that  support  individuals  (such  as  teachers), 
improve  organizational  capacities  (such  as 
school management structures), and address 
state  and  civil  society  capacities  simultane-
ously. In Sri Lanka, UNICEF has worked with 
the Ministry of Education and communities 
to  adopt  a  child-friendly-schools  approach, 
even  in  conﬂ ict-affected  areas,  increasing 
student  and  teacher  attendance  and  reduc-
ing dropout rates. Similarly, the World Food 
Programme  has  increased  its  uses  of  local 
purchase  of  food  to  support  domestic  agri-
cultural capacity. 

The potential gap between humanitarian 
and  development  assistance  has  long  been 
recognized.52 As the examples above demon-
strate, UN agencies and international NGOs 
with  humanitarian  and  development  man-
dates can do much in the critical early phase 
of transitions to provide quick support while 
paying attention to longer-term institution-
building. Another example is recovery in the 
health sector in Timor-Leste: the government 
drew on the capacity of humanitarian NGOs 
for immediate service provision as an integral 
part of a program that gradually transferred 
management and service delivery to national 
institutions (see chapters 5 and 8).53 

Even  when  citizen  security  is  acknowl-
edged  as  a  priority,  responses  can  still  be 
slow.  In  2005,  the  UN  Mission  in  Sudan 
took  more  than  nine  months  to  deploy 
3,600  troops,  just  40  percent  of  its  man-
dated level. The UN Department of Peace-
keeping  Operations  took  12  months  to 
achieve  the  authorized  troop  levels  for 
MONUC,  the  UN  Peace keeping  Force  in 
the Democratic Republic of Congo.54 Over-
coming  barriers  to  rapid  contracting  and 
recruitment  would  make  a  difference  in 
the ability of the UN and regional institu-
tions to deploy peacekeeping operations to 
confront violence in a timely manner. The 
adoption  of  the  UN  global  support  pack-
age in Spring 2010 is an important step in 
this direction. 

Similar delays have affected bilateral secu-
rity cooperation. Between 2008 and 2010, the 
United States pledged US$1.6 billion to the 
Mérida Initiative, which aims to provide law 
enforcement support to Mexico and Central 
American countries. By July 2010, only 9 per-
cent of the funds had been spent.55

Global funds for peacebuilding and state-
building have also increased in recent years to 
ﬁ ll ﬁ nancing support gaps in transition set-
tings.  For  example,  the  UN  Peacebuilding 
Fund (PBF) plays a catalytic role bridging the 
humanitarian and the transitional and devel-
opment phases, while the World Bank’s State-
building  and  Peacebuilding  Fund  (SPF)  is 
able  to  mobilize  technical  and  ﬁ nancial  re-
sources  and  foster  coherence  with  longer-
term  development  planning.56  In  Nepal,  for 
example, the PBF has provided US$2.2 mil-
lion in catalytic funding to discharge and re-
habilitate minors, post-cease-ﬁ re recruits, and 
discharged  women  back  to  civilian  life.  The 
discharge  process  was  completed  across  the 
seven principle cantonments in some of the 
most inaccessible areas of the country over a 
four-week period; this initial funding was fol-
lowed by investments by the Governments of 
Norway and the United Kingdom to ﬁ nance 
the reintegration efforts that have followed.57 
Collaborative tools for national-interna-
tional  strategy  development  have  emerged 
in  recent  years  to  set  goals,  ﬁ nancing  pri-
orities,  and  progress  indicators  in  conﬂ ict-
affected  countries.  Commonly  focusing  on 
early results, they may also contain measures 
to  aid  institutional  transformation.  The 
tools range from Post Conﬂ ict Needs Assess-
ments (PCNAs)58 to international compacts 
and  strategic  peacebuilding  frameworks.59 
Effectively implemented, they can galvanize 
national  and  international  stakeholders  in 
support  of  a  jointly  agreed-upon  and  well-
coordinated program of priority actions sen-
sitive to the underlying drivers of conﬂ ict. 

In practice, however, joint planning and 
assessment  tools  have  not  generally  been 
used to their full potential. Among the rec-
ognized shortcomings is a lack of real inte-
gration of economic, security, humanitarian, 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

193

and  political  programs—and  thus  a  focus 
on  economic  or  technical  development  is-
sues to the detriment of attention to politi-
cal and security concerns, as well as a near 
complete  neglect  of  transitional  justice.60 
Some  bilateral  governments—such  as  the 
United Kingdom and the United States61—
have  integrated  diplomatic,  development, 
and security assessment tools, but these are 
rarely coordinated with other international 
or,  more  importantly,  national  assessment 
and planning processes. In only two PCNA 
cases, Georgia and Liberia, did humanitarian 
and  development  partners  fully  coordinate 
the  humanitarian  appeal  and  needs  assess-
ment processes to ensure consistency among 
the  humanitarian  and  the  transitional  and 
development actions and promote the nec-
essary  continuum  from  humanitarian  re-
sponse to development.62

International  assessment  and  planning 
processes  have  also  registered  mixed  results 
in  engaging  national  actors  and  linking 
strategy  development  processes.  They  are 
typically structured around discrete one-off 
transitions from conﬂ ict to post-conﬂ ict that 
ignore  the  multiple  transitions  required  for 
progress.  They  often  omit  attention  to  the 
 security and justice sectors. Although adapt-
able to a wide range of situations, they have 
rarely  been  used  for  prevention  or  for  the 
analysis  of  interlinked  and  cross-border 
forms of violence (such as organized crime 
and trafﬁ cking)—nor do they generally fo-
cus on external stresses.63 

International  planning  processes  in  the 
early stages of transition have proliferated.64 
Burundi  has  had,  in  addition  to  its  own 
poverty  reduction  strategy,  13  international 
or joint national-international strategies and 
plans,  on  different  timetables  and  with  dif-
ferent  priorities  identiﬁ ed,  between  2008 
and  2010.65  In  some  countries,  this  kind  of 
risk  has  been  minimized  by  strong  support 
to government planning and a close dialogue 
with donors over results. Timor-Leste’s tran-
sition benchmarks in 2001–02 and Liberia’s 
results-focused transition framework in 2002 

both used a simple matrix planning format 
to lay out expected results—from both gov-
ernment and donors.66 These plans have the 
effect  of  a  “double  compact”  (an  idea  ﬁ rst 
proposed by Ashraf Ghani and Clare Lock-
hart).67 Double compacts describe in a simple 
form the results that governments are aiming 
to provide to their own citizens, and can be 
used to facilitate cross-government action in 
weak  institutional  environments.  They  can 
also  be  designed  to  make  donor  commit-
ments explicit, and to monitor whether these 
commitments  have  been  met.  In  practice, 
donor  reporting  inside  recipient  countries 
on how much of their own funds have been 
disbursed,  and  in  what  activities,  has  often 
been weak, complicating national reformers’ 
efforts to report on public promises.68 

Supporting institutional 
transformation

Essential  building  blocks  of  international 
support  to  successful  institutional  transfor-
mation  are  time  and  patience,  best-ﬁ t  ap-
proaches  appropriate  to  the  local  political 
context, and supporting capacity for critical 
institutional  reform  in  the  areas  of  citizen 
security, justice, and jobs. The international 
community’s  track  record  in  supporting 
these building blocks is mixed.

Time and patience 

International assistance needs to be sustained 
for a minimum of 15 years to support most 
long-term institutional transformations. Lon - 
gevity is something that some international 
NGOs have understood for some time (box 
6.6), while bilateral and multi lateral donors 
have  started  to  adopt  longer  time  frames. 
Witness  the  U.K.  DFID’s  10-year  partner-
ship agreements, the recent Dutch agreement 
with  Burundi  on  a  10-year  security-sector 
reform plan, and the 10-year exceptional as-
sistance  to  post-conﬂ ict  countries  from  the 
World  Bank.  But  most  strategic  donor  and 
ﬁ nancing  frameworks  cover  from  three  to 

194 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 6.6   The Aga Khan Development Network: Local 

knowledge, longevity, realistic expectations

For decades the Aga Khan has supported local initiatives in Northern Afghani-
stan, Northern Pakistan, and Eastern Tajikistan—areas geographically and eco-
nomically isolated, environmentally marginal, and marked by interethnic ten-
sions. The Aga Khan Development Network (AKDN) approach was forged in 
self-help traditions to “facilitate change that is . . . long-lasting in consequence 
and sustainable into the future.”69 In Afghanistan, Tajikistan, and Pakistan, the 
AKDN cements its commitment in protocols, agreements, and treaties with local, 
district, and national governments. It builds a diverse donor base, including 
local, national, and international contributions; invests heavily in local manage-
ment and implementation capacity; develops approaches and services that can 
be sustained by local partners and institutions if donor interest declines; and 
adopts a cautious approach to area and program expansion unless driven by 
local demands, priorities, and readiness.70 Typical engagements exceed 20 years.

Working closely with communities, local institutions, and government enti-

ties, the AKDN bases its development approach on trust earned through demon-
strated long-term commitment to these regions and their peoples. That commit-
ment is reﬂ ected in its staﬀ : some 95 percent are nationals or regional 
expatriates who work in beneﬁ ciary communities for many years. 

Sources: Aga Khan Development Network 2003, 2010; Agence Française de Dével-
oppement and others 2005; Commission on Growth and Development 2008.

ﬁ ve years, with many projects having an even 
shorter life cycle. Foundational reforms can 
rarely be achieved within such time frames, 
and so are subject to renegotiation whenever 
a strategy or project ends.

Long-term  security  commitments  are 
also rare. The majority of peacekeeping mis-
sions run from two to six years—for under-
standable reasons. A long-term presence on 
the ground would be both exceedingly costly 
and  unwelcome  by  host  communities  and 
states. UN missions do exist that have been 
present  for  decades—such  as  the  UN  Mili-
tary  Observer  Group  in  India  and  Pakistan 
(since 1949) and the UN Peacekeeping Force 
in Cyprus (since 1964)—but these are small 
in size and mandate. Over-the-horizon forces 
or  longer-term  security  commitments  are 
alternatives to too short or too long deploy-
ments. But the use of such devices to provide 
long-term security support has been rare. An 
exception  is  the  European  Union’s  Congo 
force,  which  provided  MONUC  with  rapid 
and  strategic  support  during  the  national 
elections of 2006.71

Despite the need for sustained support for 
institution building, volatility of aid ﬂ ows is 
a major problem, especially in fragile states. 
Practitioners have long argued that ﬂ uctua-
tions in donor aid destabilize the budget and 
ﬁ scal deﬁ cit, and that predictable assistance 
is needed to enhance a government’s capac-
ity to plan expenditures rationally.72 Insecure 
situations are in particular need of consistent 
support  because  of  the  high  potential  that 
interrupted reforms will be reversed. Yet aid 
to fragile and conﬂ ict-affected states is much 
more  volatile  than  that  to  other  develop-
ing  countries—indeed,  more  than  twice  as 
volatile, with the efﬁ ciency costs of volatility 
much  more  profound  in  fragile  states  than 
in  those  with  stronger  institutions  (see  box 
6.7). In  a  recent  study,  the  economic  losses 
associated  with  volatile  net  ofﬁ cial  devel-
opment  assistance  were  more  than  twice  as 
high for weak states as for strong states (2.54 
percent versus 1.19 percent of GDP).73 These 
estimates suggest that from 30 to 50 percent 
of volatility is donor-driven, independent of 
events in or actions by the recipient country. 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions

195

BOX 6.7  Stop-go aid: Volatility in selected fragile states
Over the last 20 years, countries that experienced longer periods of fragility, violence, or conﬂ ict experi-
enced more volatility in their aid. Figure A shows that the coeﬃ  cient of variance (CV) of net oﬃ  cial develop-
ment assistance (ODA), excluding debt relief, is higher for countries that have experienced more violence 
since 1990. This relationship, reﬂ ected by the upward trend line, is statistically signiﬁ cant and suggests that, 
on average, a country that experienced 20 years of violence experienced twice the volatility in aid of a 
country that did not experience violence. Volatility of revenues has considerable costs for all governments, 
but particularly so in fragile situations where it may derail reform eﬀ orts and disrupt institution-building.

FIGU RE  A   Aid volatility higher for countries that have
 

experienced violence 

,

A
D
O

 
t
e
n

 
f

 

o
e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v
 
f

i

o
 
t
n
e
c
ﬃ
e
o
C

f
e

i
l

 

e
r
 
t
b
e
d
g
n
d
u
c
x
e

l

i

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Number of years of high homicides, conﬂict, and fragility

Low-income countries

Linear (Low-income countries)

Source: WDR team calculations based on OECD 2010d.

This volatility is illustrated by ﬁ gure B—it was not uncommon for total aid to Burundi, the Central African 
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, and Haiti to drop by 20 or 30 percent in one year and increase by up to 50 per-
cent the following year (humanitarian aid and debt relief, excluded from these statistics, would further 
increase the volatility).

FIGU RE  B   Annual percentage change in disbursed aid per capita, 
 

net of debt relief and humanitarian assistance

Aid to these four fragile countries has been extremely volatile over 
the past 15 years. Aid to Guinea-Bissau more than doubled in 
2003, only to be cut in half th e following year. Likewise, the Central 
African Republic experienced a doubling of aid in 2004 and a 25 
percent cut in 2005. This applies in all fragile states, for which 
variance in aid is 0.7 compared to 0.3 in other developing contexts.

150

100

50

0

a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
p
d
a
n

 

 

i

i
 

e
g
n
a
h
c
%

 

 
l

a
u
n
n
A

–50

–100

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Burundi

Central African Republic

Guinea-Bissau

2008

Haiti

Source: WDR team calculations based on OECD 2010d.

196 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Using methodology developed in Kharas and 
adopting conservative assumptions, a reduc-
tion  in  volatility  of  30  percent  by  donors 
would deliver a value to each recipient frag-
ile or conﬂ ict-affected country of US$27–39 
million a year.74 

Short  project  duration  and  small  proj-
ect  size  compound  the  problem.  While  the 
median  IDA  (International  Development 
Association, the World Bank’s “fund for the 
poorest”) operation is US$22.7 million, it is 
as  little  as  US$116,000  and  US$65,000  for 
some bilateral donors.75 According to a Eu-
ropean Commission study, 63 percent of all 
donor projects in Cambodia have a duration 
of less than three years, and over one-third, a 
duration of less than a year.76 A performance 
review of aid partners in Mozambique indi-
cates that while the number of multiyear aid 
projects has increased, most of them are still 
only for two years.77 Longer project life cycles 
is  vital,  given  the  timelines  for  institutional 
transformations, even under the most accel-
erated conditions.

Approaches adapted to the local context 

The 
international  community  remains 
tempted to emphasize form rather than the 
function  to  be  accomplished.78  Within  a 
year of its creation, for example, the Coali-
tion  Provisional  Authority  (CPA)  in  Iraq 
promulgated more than 100 separate regu-
lations  and  orders  covering  a  wide  range 
of  security,  economic,  and  administrative 
matters. Although the international drafters 
tried to improvise in a complex and volatile 
setting, they were hampered by their lack of 
knowledge of Arabic, local sociopolitical re-
alities,  and  Iraq’s  broader  jurisprudential 
principles.  As  the  United  States  Special 
 Inspector-General  for  Iraq  Reconstruction 
 reported, “The CPA—and the U.S. govern-
ment  agencies  that  supported  it—demon-
strated  an  inadequate  understanding  of 
both Iraqi culture and the complicated in-
ternal  political  relationships  that  existed 
among and within various Iraqi groups.”79

The general response of the international 
community to the pervasive capacity deﬁ cits 
in fragile situations is technical assistance. Be-
cause they are constrained by short contracts 
and under pressure to deliver reports, tech-
nical advisers often bring with them a  focus 
on  transplanted  best  practices  from  other 
country  experiences,  which  can  undermine 
the  search  for  tailored  and  context-speciﬁ c, 
best-ﬁ t approaches. In fragile states, techni-
cal assistance works best in the turnaround 
period, when leaders and reformers are look-
ing for help in well-speciﬁ ed areas.80 The at-
tributes  of  effective  technical  assistance  in 
fragile  environments  have  long  been  estab-
lished.81 Yet, despite a general understanding 
of the elements of good design, much tech-
nical  assistance  has  not  been  well  prepared 
or  effectively  implemented.  Some  critiques 
include the following:

•  A quarter of international aid to Afghani-
stan goes for technical assistance, intended 
to support government capacity-building, 
with minimal impact.82

•  More  than  80  cents  of  every  dollar  of 
aid Kosovo receives is delivered as tech-
nical  assistance,  but  this  has  not  pro-
duced  lasting  capacity  within  govern-
ment institutions.83

•  Despite  there  being  only  ﬁ ve  donors  in-
volved in technical cooperation in Sierra 
Leone  in  2007,  a  mere  22  percent  of 
aid dollars was coordinated with country 
programs.84

•  Donor  technical  assistance  services  have 
been between 11 and 30 percent more ex-
pensive  than  those  available  from  other 
vendors.85

Bilateral  and  regional  actors86  have  also 
created  civilian  surge  capabilities  with  ros-
ters of experts who can be deployed at short 
notice  to  countries  affected  by  violence.87 
But  large  numbers  of  expatriate  personnel, 
particularly  if  deployed  for  short  periods 
without  knowledge  of  the  country  context, 
are,  as  with  “normal”  technical  assistance, 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

197

unlikely  to  build  sustainable  capacity.  The 
UN Independent Review of Civilian Capaci-
ties  recently  reached  a  similar  conclusion, 
stressing  national  ownership  and  partner-
ship  as  key  principles  for  the  UN’s  civilian 
response.88  Providing  capacity  to  deliver 
donor-designed projects is very different in 
both  philosophy  and  approach  to  support-
ing  national  institutional  capacities  to  de-
liver good-quality public services.89

South-South  learning  offers  promise  for 
effective  capacity  development  and  best-ﬁ t 
approaches  because  it  can  draw  on  knowl-
edge from countries that have more recently 
experienced  transitions  or  share  regional 
 political, economic, or sociocultural charac-
teristics.90  The  African  Development  Bank 
(AfDB),  UNDP,  and  the  World  Bank  all 
now have speciﬁ c South-South facilities, the 
AfDB’s being notable for its size and focus on 
fragile states.91 

Learning  from  recent  trans formations  in 
middle-income countries can be particularly 
valuable. The Brazilian NGO Viva Rio works 
in Haiti’s slum Bel Air to reduce armed vio-
lence,  using  its  experience  of  working  in 
 Brazilian favelas.92 Triangular cooperation to 
support South-South cooperation, involving 
a  ﬁ nancing  donor  and  a  southern  partner 
providing technical assistance, has also shown 
some success in peacebuilding.93 The Repub-
lic of Ireland engaged in a triangular learning 
partnership with Liberia and Timor-Leste on 
the  role  of  women  in  conﬂ ict  prevention, 
management, and resolution.94 South-South 
cooperation might prove particularly relevant 
in  supporting  executive  management.95  An-
other important area for South-South coop-
eration is peer learning for effective leadership 
and the successful management of conﬂ ict.96

Internal international agency systems

Responsiveness to the local context in frag-
ile  situations  is  also  hampered  by  internal 
processes that were originally developed for 
more stable environments. For example, the 
international ﬁ nancial institutions’ procure-

ment procedures were based on the assump-
tion of ongoing security, a reasonable level of 
state  institutional  capacity,  and  competitive 
markets.  They  thus  have  difﬁ culty  adapt-
ing  to  situations  where  security  conditions 
change between the design and the tendering 
of a project, where a small number of quali-
ﬁ ed  government  counterparts  struggle  to 
manage  complex  procurement  documenta-
tion, and where the number of qualiﬁ ed con-
tractors prepared to compete and mobilize is 
very limited. 

Similarly,  the  UN  Secretariat  originally 
developed  procurement  systems  designed 
to  support  its  function  as  a  headquarters-
based advisory service and secretariat to the 
General Assembly. When  peacekeeping  op-
erations were launched, these systems were 
extended with relatively little adaptation to 
all  the  requirements  of  a  peacekeeping  op-
eration,  despite  the  difference  in  contexts 
and  objectives.  Most  bilateral  aid  agencies 
do  not  have “risk  policies”  speciﬁ c  to  frag-
ile and conﬂ ict-affected situations—instead, 
they  apply  their  normal  criteria.  Some  do-
nors  have  approaches  or  instruments  that 
recognize  the  problem,  but  these  have  not 
yet been mainstreamed across country strat-
egies  or  in  the  criteria  for  project  funding 
decisions.97

When the environment is insecure, these 
standard procedures (procedural conformism, 
as  Liberia’s  President  Ellen  Johnson  Sirleaf 
calls them in box 6.4) often do not produce 
the  results  intended.  Frequently  complex 
and time-consuming, they can be difﬁ cult to 
manage  for  weak  institutional  counterparts 
and can cause delays. In environments such 
as Cambodia, Liberia, and Sudan, it has often 
been difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd qualiﬁ ed international 
contractors  to  bid  on  projects,  and  their 
mobilization has been slow.98 Standard pro-
cedures can also undermine best-ﬁ t institu-
tional approaches to develop capacity or they 
can  have  difﬁ culties  in  meeting  objectives 
of  transparency  and  anti-corruption  in  en-
vironments with difﬁ cult political economy 
considerations (box 6.8). The g7+ group of 

198 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 6.8   Publishing cost estimates as best practice? 

Trade-offs between transparency and collusion

Transition opportunity:  Pressure for speed 
of action in fragile situations

Key stakeholders:  Government agency 
tendering, domestic citizens, domestic com-
panies, international donors and companies
Institutional challenges:  High insecurity, 
low institutional capacity, shallow competi-
tion, legacy of past corrupt practice

Key stresses:  Perceptions of cronyism 
toward contractors from particular political, 
ethnic, regional groupings in contracting 
that can exacerbate risks of violence
Dual accountability dilemma:  Conducting processes acceptable to international donors 
and investors while achieving speed and legitimacy in local context

In its loan agreements, the World Bank often requires the publication of partner countries’ 
engineering estimates of the costs of building a road. When the market is competitive, publish-
ing the estimates can produce lower bids. Such publication also ensures a procurement norm 
of transparency and equity—that all bidders are on equal footing and companies with close 
ties to the roads authority cannot obtain the estimates “under the table.” 

Set against these beneﬁ ts is the risk that this procurement practice will facilitate the oppo-
site of its intent—collusion. When ﬁ rms are negotiating an agreement on a collusive price, the 
cost estimate provides a target or focal point for their agreement. This eﬀ ect is dramatically 
illustrated in a World Bank Institutional Integrity comparison of the estimated price against the 
winning bid on 46 contracts for road construction and repair let during 2009 and 2010 under a 
Bank-ﬁ nanced project in an Eastern European country. The closeness of the two is inconceiv-
able without collusion (see ﬁ gure). As a result, a procurement norm has achieved neither the 
goal of quick support—delays are created in publishing the estimate , nor fostering a legitimate 
and transparent process—due to real or perceived collusion. 

FI G U R E  A  Closeness of bids inconceivable without collusion

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

 

m
$
S
U

(
 
t
s
o
C

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46

Contract Number

Estimated cost

Actual cost

Source: Adapted from discussion with the World Bank Integrity Vice Presidency in 2010.

fragile  states’  Dili  Declaration  of  May  2010 
states: “Although we all accept international 
standards,  the  donor  community  must  be 
aware  of  our  conditions  and  needs.  That  is 

why we must give ourselves a transitional pe-
riod to reinforce our capabilities and systems 
and not have complex and slow procedural 
requirements and conditions imposed upon 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

199

us.”99 Responsible leaders appreciate the abil-
ity  of  well-functioning  ﬁ duciary  systems 
to  signiﬁ cantly  reduce  opportunistic  rent-
seeking and reinforce rule-based behavior—
but they need processes adapted to the reality 
of local conditions.100 

Suggestions for “best-ﬁ t” procurement ar-
rangements are not hard to come by. Country 
experience points to the need for contracting 
processes that allow direct negotiations with 
knowledge  of  regional  markets,  a  focus  on 
speed  of  mobilization  and  track  record  in 
operating in insecure environments in con-
tracting, better information to the local pri-
vate  sector  about  procurement  procedures, 
subcontracting to local contractors to build 
their  capacity,  pre-tendering  internationally 
under variable quantity contracts, civil soci-
ety monitoring of procurement to build trust, 
simplifying  processes  and  documentation 
consistent with existing donor guidelines, and 
decentralizing donor decision-making to the 
country  ofﬁ ce.101  But  the  search  for  best-ﬁ t 
procurement practices has proceeded further 
in some donors than others, and multilateral 
systems have not caught up with innovations 
in bilateral procurement.

The  fragmentation  of  international  aid 
efforts  also  acts  against  the  provision  of 
institutional support at sufﬁ cient scale. Not 
only have the number of donors and vertical 
programs grown to more than the number 
of  recipient  countries,102  but  aid  has  itself 
also become more fragmented. In the Dem-
ocratic Republic of Congo, 30 active donors 
are ﬁ nancing 362 projects in the health sec-
tor, 262 for less than US$1 million, and 305 
projects in the justice sector, 199 for less than 
US$1 million.103 A recent OECD study iden-
tiﬁ ed 32 countries receiving aid from 15 or 
more donors.104 In contrast, studies on Bots-
wana and the Republic of Korea argue that 
development successes in these cases can be 
at  least  partly  attributed  to  the  presence  of 
a  single  or  dominant  donor.105  Fragmented 
assistance places a huge administrative bur-
den on weak capacities, draining rather than 
building them. 

Focus on citizen security, justice, 
and jobs

Assistance to countries struggling to develop 
well-governed police, justice, and corrections 
systems in the face of ﬂ uid violent threats is 
much more limited than assistance available 
to build military capacity. The supply of per-
sonnel is constrained, since states do not have 
the  kinds  of  reserve  capacities  in  police  or 
criminal justice that they do in their militar-
ies. For justice, the UN’s Independent Review 
on Civilian Capacities found that it was one 
of the largest lacunae in international civil-
ian mechanisms, despite efforts to ﬁ ll gaps.106 
The  UN  Department  of  Peacekeeping  Op-
erations  (UNDPKO),  bilateral  donors,  the 
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), 
the  UNDP,  and  others  have  each  deepened 
their  delivery  capacity  related  to  citizen  se-
curity  and  justice,  and  the World  Bank  has 
expanded somewhat assistance for legal and 
judicial issues—but major gaps in personnel 
and delivery remain. 

Support to the criminal justice system is 
frequently more challenging to provide than 
support  to  military  reform  and  capacity 
building  because  of  the  great  disparities  in 
policies,  legal  frameworks,  and  organiza-
tional  structures  between  different  nation-
state providers.107 These disparities have his-
torically  caused  tensions  in  international 
support to policing and civilian justice, from 
Bosnia to Timor-Leste.108 Regional organiza-
tions like the European Union have focused 
on training to bridge differences in national 
practices. The UN’s 50-person-strong Stand-
ing Police Capacity and its Ofﬁ ce of Rule of 
Law  and  Security  Institutions  have  also  be-
gun to make headway in developing standard 
doctrine  and  training  packages  for  police 
units willing to deploy into UN operations, 
but this is still a small capacity to manage the 
current  growth  in  police  deployments,  let 
alone support a broader international capac-
ity.109 There is no similar mechanism for joint 
training of national judicial personnel to ex-
pose them to different systems and practices, 

200 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

and less of a body of knowledge on approach-
ing institution-building in fragile settings. 

Structural constraints in the international 
architecture also limit international support 
to security and justice. The UN’s peacekeep-
ing  budget  can  support  the  deployment  of 
police forces, but only if a country is under a 
Security Council mandate. This poses a ma-
jor political obstacle to countries that might 
seek  international  support  for  their  police 
sector  but  are  hesitant  to  agree  to  being 
on the Security Council’s agenda. Without a 
peacekeeping operation, national authorities 
can  seek  civilian  or  advisory  support  from 
the UN and operational support from bilat-
eral actors. But the former does not include 
the actual deployment of police units, while 
the latter lacks the legitimacy of support pro-
vided by a multilateral organization to which 
the national authority belongs. 

Chapter  5  described  the  common  prob-
lems arising at a country level from discon-
nects  between  support  to  the  military  and 
police  and  support  to  the  civilian  justice 
system.  The  lack  of  a  clear  focal  point  for 
criminal  justice  as  a  whole  in  the  interna-
tional system may underpin this problem—
remarkably, there are international agencies 
for a wide range of functions, but no agency 
charged  with  taking  the  lead  on  criminal 
justice  issues.  Fragmentation  of  ﬁ nancial 
support for the security sectors and civilian 
justice functions, due to the current division 
in what can be counted as “Ofﬁ cial Develop-
ment  Assistance  under  DAC  rules”  and  to 
the  differing  ﬁ nancial  rules  applying  under 
peacekeeping  missions  and  voluntary  sup-
port in these areas, also exacerbates discon-
nected approaches on the ground.

With regard to employment creation, un-
derstandable shifts by donors to focus support 
on the MDGs have led many to dedicate signif-
icant parts of their development assistance to 
health, education, and basic services like water 
and sanitation—with relatively little emphasis 
on job creation. International economic pol-
icy  advisory  services  have  generally  focused 
on growth rather than jobs. This has included 
consideration of labor-intensive growth paths 
as central to poverty reduction, but has placed 

relatively little emphasis on the value of em-
ployment  in  terms  of  violence  prevention, 
and the type and quality of employment that 
can strengthen social cohesion and promote a 
positive role for youth in the community. As 
a result, there is little consensus on the type 
of  employment-related  interventions  that 
can systematically make a difference in frag-
ile environments. An exception is the use of 
community-based public works: while having 
very  different  designs,  programs  supported 
by  bilateral  donors,  UN  agencies,  and  inter-
national ﬁ nancial institutions in Afghanistan, 
Indonesia, Nepal, Burundi, Rwanda, and vari-
ous Latin American countries have generated 
considerable transitional employment. Some 
bilateral donors, such as the United States and 
India,  have  also  dedicated  a  signiﬁ cant  pro-
portion of their assistance in fragile states to 
income-generating activities.

The role of the private sector in mitigating 
and recovering from the effects of violence at 
both the local and national level is now widely 
recognized,110 especially if creating jobs and 
incomes  is  to  outlast  donor-funded,  short-
term  emergency  works.  Various  innovative 
schemes,  including  some  supported  by  the 
International  Finance  Corporation  and  by 
several bilateral donors, have proven effective 
in  building  up  private  sector  and  entrepre-
neurship capacity; examples include linking 
local entrepreneurs to larger national or in-
ternational businesses and linking education 
to entrepreneurship development.111 Donors 
such as the Multilateral Development Banks, 
Japan, and China provide signiﬁ cant invest-
ments in infrastructure that supports private 
sector  development.112  However,  the  inter-
national  community  has  not  paid  as  much 
attention  to  labor-intensive  private  sector 
development as is warranted by the impor-
tance  of  equitable  growth  and  job  creation 
for violence prevention.113 

Dual accountability and managing 
the risks of action

International  actors  know  that  fast  engage-
ment, long-term commitments, and support 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

201

to  national  institutions  are  central  to  pre-
venting  repeated  cycles  of  violence.114  Why 
then is international practice slow to change? 
We  argue  that  this  is  because  of  the  “dual 
 accountability  dilemma”—international  ac-
tors,  whether  bilateral  or  multilateral,  are 
accountable ﬁ rst to their domestic constitu-
encies and shareholders, and only second to 
their counterparts or to the citizens of recipi-
ent states. This leads them to emphasize one 
set of risks—the risks of action and of engage-
ment with weak counterpart institutions—at 
the  expense  of  the  risks  of  inaction  or  lack 
of long-term institution-building outcomes, 
for which there is less accountability (ﬁ gure 
6.2). The consequences are twofold: privileg-
ing the reputational risks of action over the 
consequential  risks  of  delay  and  hesitation 
to channel ﬁ nancing and assistance through 
the budget of fragile national institutions.

in 

Working 

fragile  states  necessar-
ily  involves  uncertainty,  ﬂ uidity,  and  high 
risk—but there are risks of action and risks 
of  inaction.  A  highly  simpliﬁ ed  example 
illustrates  the  problem:  A  community  of 
100,000  people  faces  a  dire  humanitar-
ian  threat.  The  external  world  is  willing 
to  help  and  has  two  broad  options  to  do 
so.  Both  are  estimated  to  cost  US$50  mil-
lion.  Under  option A,  external  donors  can 
wait six months to ensure that all the funds 
will  be  used  appropriately,  but  this  will 
mean  that  only  20  percent  of  the  people 
will be saved. Under option B, donors can 
be  conﬁ dent  of  saving  all  the  people,  but 
can  only  be  conﬁ dent  that  80  percent  of 
the  funds  can  be  properly  accounted  for. 
Which option to choose? Most people would 
say that option B should be chosen. Indeed, 
sensitivity to the risk of inaction and a tol-
erance for a certain degree of ﬁ duciary risk 
underpins  humanitarian  interventions—
and most humanitarian actors would adopt 
option B. 

Now  consider  this  for  developmental  or 
peacekeeping  interventions:  airlift  support 
for troops; ﬁ nancing to pay salaries of police, 
education,  and  health  workers  and  to  keep 
the electricity system functioning; and a pro-
gram  to  reopen  schools  are  deemed  highly 

FIGUR E 6.2   International support to nation-states—The dual 

accountability dilemma

National
Actors

Accountability

Accountability

International

Actors

A
c
c
o
u
n
t
a
b

i
l
i
t
y

A
c
c
o
u
n
t
a
b

i
l
i
t
y

Domestic constituencies

Domestic constituencies

Source: WDR team.

likely to prevent the spread of violence. The 
same  options  are  available—option  A,  wait 
six months to be conﬁ dent that the funds will 
be used properly, but at the cost of averting 
an  estimated  20  percent  of  the  risk,  or  op-
tion B, act immediately with a high degree of 
conﬁ dence that violence can be averted, but 
with conﬁ dence that only 80 percent of the 
funds can be satisfactorily accounted. Again, 
most  people  would  say  option  B  should  be 
chosen. 

There  is  no  certainty  that  development 
interventions will save lives and prevent the 
spread  of  violence—while  hasty  interven-
tions often are less likely to succeed. But what 
if the risk is differentiated? One can probably 
judge that delays in the arrival of peacekeep-
ing troops and the ﬁ nancing for salaries and 
the electricity system are likely to spur vio-
lence if no action is taken—80 percent likely, 
for  the  sake  of  illustration.  For  the  schools 
program, however, one might judge this risk 
to be lower and that spending a few months 
working on the design of the program would 
deliver better results. Most people would then 
say  pay  for  the  airlift,  the  salaries,  and  the 
electricity—but wait for the schools program. 
Yet, in practice, the development  community 
would likely treat the issues of electricity and 
schooling in the same manner; and while the 
UN Security Council sometimes takes deci-

202 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

sions  rapidly,  the  supporting  infrastructure 
for peacekeeping deployments results in op-
tion A outcomes. The strategic challenge is to 
move from should to would—in other words, 
to rework risk-management systems to bet-
ter align risk measurement and risk-taking to 
optimal outcomes.

A further example of the impact of dual 
accountability is donor reluctance to channel 
assistance  through  the  national  budget  and 
national  institutions  in  a  violence-affected 
and fragile state despite its impact on trans-
forming institutions. In addition to avoiding 
the  negative  effects  of  parallel  systems,  aid 
through  the  budget  supports  institutional 
mechanisms of political decision-making on 
priorities and trade-offs, leverages the devel-
opment of public ﬁ nancial management and 
accountability  systems,  and  creates  a  tool 
for  coordinating  international  assistance.115 
However,  donors  confront  a  dilemma—as-
sistance to weak institutions is needed if they 
are ever to become strong, but their weakness 
in itself poses political and ﬁ duciary risks.116 
In these high-risk engagements, the interna-
tional community is therefore prone to rely 
on bilateral and multilateral organizations to 
perform  functions  normally  performed  by 
the state,117 in order to avoid being associated 
with the corrupt use of resources or the vio-
lence or human rights abuses by the parties 
being supported. 

Available options for risk management 

A range of approaches that deal with differ-
ing  levels  of  ﬁ duciary  and  reputational  risk 
exist  to  engage  with  national  institutions. 
They include greater independent oversight 
and  monitoring  of  government-executed 
programs.  For  instance,  in Afghanistan  and 
the West Bank and Gaza under World Bank–
administered  multidonor  trust  funds,  inde-
pendent  monitors  have  been  employed  to 
scrutinize procurement and expenditures by 
both national institutions and international 
contractors.118 A related example is releasing 
donor funds only upon unqualiﬁ ed monthly 
or  quarterly  audits  by  a  certiﬁ ed  external 
auditing ﬁ rm, as undertaken for the Uganda 

Veterans Assistance Program.119 A third is in 
external ﬁ nancial management and procure-
ment agencies, where international ﬁ rms have 
overall  responsibility  for  program  ﬁ nancial 
management  and  procurement  and  main-
tain a program’s consolidated budget and ac-
counts, as was carried out in demobilization 
and reintegration in Angola, Guinea-Bissau, 
and  Sierra  Leone.120  A  fourth  is “dual  key” 
programs,  where  both  national  and  inter-
national actors sign off on critical, high-risk 
transactions, such as the Liberia Governance 
and Economic Management Assistance Pro-
gram described in chapter 4. And a ﬁ fth is in-
kind support to items in the national budget, 
as in Zimbabwe, where a bilateral donor has 
directly  ﬁ nanced,  procured,  and  provided 
such items through contractors, as with the 
provision of medicines to state-run clinics.

These approaches can manage donor ﬁ du-
ciary risk and provide space to establish and 
strengthen  national  systems.  But  since  they 
use international expertise, they are generally 
expensive. A range of more localized options 
is also available to engage with national in-
stitutions while dealing with differing levels 
of  ﬁ duciary  and  reputational  risk.  They  in-
clude  community-driven  development  pro-
grams (chapter 4) and contracting to NGOs 
using  results-based  ﬁ nancing  and  output-
based  aid  in  key  sectors.  Direct  support  to 
subnational  administrations  and  assistance 
through  nongovernment  agencies  that  em-
ploy  local  staff  are  other  ways  of  managing 
assistance  outside  government  budget  sys-
tems in situations of weak governance, main-
taining a focus on local institutional capacity 
and skilled personnel.

Pooling funds also provides a way to man-
age risk. Multi-Donor Trust Funds (MDTFs) 
have  increasingly  been  used  in  fragile  and 
conﬂ ict-affected situations—for example, in 
Afghanistan and Southern Sudan (box 6.9), 
Iraq,  Indonesia,  West  Bank  and  Gaza,  and 
Haiti.  MDTFs  can  help  to  bridge  the  dual 
accountability dilemma. For national actors, 
they improve the transparency of donor in-
vestments, ensure greater coherence with na-
tional planning, and provide a platform for 
resource  mobilization.  For  donors,  MDTFs 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

203

BOX 6.9  Multidonor trust funds: Afghanistan and Southern Sudan

Types of violence:  Intergroup, ethnic, and political violence; organized crime and traﬃ  cking; 
cross-border; transnational; ideological
Transition opportunity:  Initial large space 
for change; Bonn Accord/Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement; elections; national 
development budget

Key stakeholders:  Federal and local gov-
ernment, security forces, militias, community 
leaders, civil society groups, citizens, women, 
international partners, armed transnational 
groups
Institutional challenges:  Severe account-
Key stresses:  Legacies of violence and 
ability and capacity constraints in public 
trauma, cross-border violence, criminal 
administration, security, judicial, and political 
networks, low incomes, youth unemploy-
institutions; lack of representation of women
ment, corruption, gender discrimination
Dual accountability dilemma:  Accountability and capacity constraints at the national level 
made multidonor trust funds an attractive solution; trust fund arrangements took advantage 
of the mandates and competencies of the UN and the World Bank.

Afghanistan
UNDP established the Afghan Interim Authority Fund (AIAF), supported by 24 donors and 
valued at US$73 million for a limited period of six months, to pay for the most pressing needs 
of reestablishing the civil service: paying salaries, rehabilitating government buildings, and 
procuring equipment. This support bolstered government capability and legitimacy in the 
early phases of transition and bridged the gap until such time as a subsequent MDTF could 
provide long-term budget support and ﬁ nance investment programs.

The Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF), supported by 32 donors, disburses 

funds through a ”recurrent window” to ﬁ nance the budget (salaries of civil servants and facility 
costs, particularly in education and health) and an “investment window” to support the gov-
ernment’s National Priority Programmes. The ARTF is intended to coordinate funding and 
reduce the burden on the government, promote transparency and accountability, and rein-
force the role of the national budget in promoting national objectives. Since its inception in 
2002, donors have committed US$4 billion (as of December 2010), the largest contribution to 
the Afghan budget. The ARTF moved quickly, disbursing 99 percent of committed funds in 
2003–04 and 75 percent in 2005–06, serving as the main vehicle for ﬁ nancing payment 
of government salaries, as well as key projects such as the Salang Tunnel and the National 
Solidarity Program. UNDP administers the complementary Law and Order Trust Fund for 
Afghanistan (LOTFA), which largely funds police salaries. The current phase of LOTFA was 
funded by 15 donors providing around US$306 million.

Southern Sudan
A US$545 million Southern Sudan Multidonor Trust Fund was established in 2005, with 
ﬁ nancing from 14 donors and with the World Bank appointed as trust fund administrator.

The government of Southern Sudan, donors, NGOs, and civil society have criticized the 
MDTF for slowness and ineﬃ  ciency, lagging disbursements, and inﬂ exibility. Reviews have 
pointed to the World Bank’s underestimation of logistical diﬃ  culties, institutional deﬁ ciencies, 
and communication challenges—and to inconsistent managerial oversight, especially in the 
critical early phase. Part of the explanation for this was the dilemma faced by the World Bank 
in trying to balance the risk posed by swift action (possible misuse of the funds) with the risks 
of inaction (failing to disburse funds and not achieving goals). 

The World Bank has taken steps to improve the fund’s management—disbursements in 
2010 amounted to US$188 million and reached a total of US$400 million by December 2010 
(almost three-quarters of the funds committed).

Source: Scanteam 2007; Fenton and Phillips 2009; Randel 2010; Atos Consulting 2009; Scanteam 2010; 
OECD 2010c; Government of Afghanistan and UNDP 2010; World Bank 2005a, 2009a, 2010b, 2010j; 
Randel and Mowjee 2006.

204 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

can  reduce  transaction  costs  and  provide  a 
forum for donor collaboration and dialogue 
with national authorities, while MDTF sec-
retariats can provide information to capitals 
that donors may not be able to generate on 
their  own.121  MDTFs  can  enable  donors  to 
adopt  a  collective  approach  to  the  risks  in-
herent in transition situations. 122 In the hu-
manitarian context, pooled mechanisms may 
increase  funding  levels  because  they  enable 
donors to disburse larger sums than they can 
manage directly. 

MDTFs, however, are rarely the most im-
portant ﬁ nancing instrument in conﬂ ict set-
tings—total funding through some 18 opera-
tive  MDTFs  in  2007  amounted  to  US$1.2 
billion, still a small fraction of international 
ﬁ nancing  for  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected 
states.123 Moreover, MDTF performance has 
been  uneven  across  country  examples  in 
speed and delivery of outputs, in quality of 
processes, and in stakeholder perceptions of 
success.  Recent  evaluations  of  MDTFs  have 
pointed to inconsistency of MDTF manage-
ment  processes  within  and  across  agencies, 
the need for better management of expecta-
tions,  more  robust  monitoring  and  impact 
evaluation, quicker delivery of funds to sup-
port national conﬁ dence building, and more 
emphasis  on  support  through  national  sys-
tems  for  institution  building.124  Balancing 
the competing demands of providing short-
term ﬁ nancing and building longer-term in-
stitutional capacity is illustrated in the expe-
rience of the Southern Sudan MDTF. 

Because  of  their  high-proﬁ le  nature  and 
complex  governance  system,  MDTFs  can 
also increase risk aversion within their host-
ing agency. Bilateral donors, in effect, transfer 
their risk to multilateral MDTF administra-
tors.125 There can also be micromanagement 
by donors of MDTF portfolios and earmark-
ing  of  funds,  undermining  alignment  with 
nationally driven strategy and budgeting.126 

Monitoring progress out of fragility

Making  the  dual  accountability  dilemma 
even  worse  is  a  lack  of  systems  to  monitor 

progress  out  of  fragility.  The  only  agreed 
global  framework  for  measuring  the  results 
of  development  assistance  is  the  MDGs 
and  their  associated  indicators.  No  global 
measures  exist  to  assess  progress  in  ef-
forts  to  improve  human  and  citizen  secu-
rity.  So  a  simple  agreed  set  of  indicators 
to  measure  progress  in  reducing  violence 
and creating better institutions would allow 
both  the  international  community  and  na-
tional  leaders  to  track  progress  on  violence 
risk management alongside the MDGs.

Nor do reliable global data exist on levels or 
patterns of insecurity. Basic data on war battle 
deaths are poor—best estimates are missing 
in 36 percent of the cases, and low and high 
estimates are often separated by an order of 
magnitude.127 The quality of data on indirect 
deaths due to war is signiﬁ cantly worse—es-
timates of casualties in Iraq for 2003 to 2006 
range  from  50,000  to  600,000.128  Homicide 
data are similarly inadequate for monitoring 
violence. While every OECD country reports 
homicide statistics for every year of the past 
ﬁ ve, only 62 percent of developing countries 
have  one  or  more  observations  for  the  past 
ﬁ ve  years,  and  only  29  percent  of  fragile  or 
conﬂ ict-affected states in Sub-Saharan Africa 
report a single homicide rate. 

An innovative approach that tracks con-
ﬂ ict and violence reported in the local press 
is  being  used  in  Aceh  since  the  signing  of 
the peace accord in August 2005.129 Another 
source  of  information  on  attitudes  toward 
domestic  violence  is  UNICEF’s  periodic 
Multiple  Indicator  Cluster  Surveys,  which 
cover  around  100  countries,  many  of  them 
fragile and violence-affected. On the whole, 
however,  there  are  few  agreed  baselines  for 
measuring reductions in violence. Better data 
collection is an easy win for improving inter-
national responses (chapter 9).

Polling to measure citizen conﬁ dence and 
expectations over time is rarely used in frag-
ile states. Perception-based polling could be 
an important part of measuring citizen pri-
orities and citizen trust in government. Such 
data  have  rarely  been  collected  consistently 
in fragile states,130 for reasons that range from 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

205

poor  communications  and  underfunded 
organizations  to  fears  of  how  the  informa-
tion  will  be  used.131  But  technological  ad-
vances make collecting survey data easier—
this  WDR,  for  example,  carried  out  rapid 
SMS  (short  message  service)  surveys  in  the 
Democratic Republic of Congo.132

Lessons of international 
engagement

The  paradox  of  dual  accountability  is  well 
understood  by  actors  on  the  ground—the 
question  is  how  to  do  better.  Any  number 
of major reports on international assistance 
that have to do with conﬂ ict-affected coun-
tries in the last decade have underlined the 
limits to what international support can do 
to  reduce  conﬂ ict  and  bring  about  institu-
tional  transformation  in  fragile  conditions. 
This chapter calls for the consistent applica-
tion  of  best-ﬁ t  practices  that  have  already 

proved their usefulness, and reaches the fol-
lowing three conclusions:

•  First, there are serious gaps in support for 
citizen security, justice, and jobs for coun-
tries struggling to prevent violence. 

•  Second,  “procedural  conformism”  in  in-
ternational  agencies  is  unsuited  to  the 
challenges  of  rapid  conﬁ dence-building 
and  best-ﬁ t  approaches  to  institutional 
transformation. Better ways to manage ac-
countability to domestic taxpayers and lo-
cal counterparts are needed.

•  Third,  new  challenges  and  the  chang-
ing landscape of international assistance 
require  new  efforts  to  work  together. 
Complex problems of political and crim-
inal  violence  require  the  combined  ca-
pacities  of  diplomatic,  security,  and 
 development  actors—and  better  under-
standing  between  OECD,  low-income, 
middle-income, and regional partners. 

206 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 6  A tale of two assistance programs—Liberia and Guinea-Bissau

Liberia: Strong leadership, critical recovery assistance

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, political violence, criminal and gang-related violence, traﬃ  cking
Transition opportunity:  Signiﬁ cant space for change following 
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in September 2003
Key stresses:  Legacy of abuse, violence, trauma grievances and 
mistrust, corruption, unemployment, ethnic competition
Dual accountability dilemma:  Need to increase capacity in national institutions in an environment of extreme ﬁ duciary risk

Key stakeholders:  Ex-combatants, victims, government, 
opposition parties, international partners and peacekeepers
Institutional challenges:  Accountability and capacity constraints 
in economic, security, judicial, and political spheres

The international community can provide critical assistance 

to  fragile  states  during  difﬁ cult  transitions.  When  done 
well,  this  support  can  make  a  major  difference  to  countries 
trying to avoid or recover from violent conﬂ ict, but only when 
domestic processes are headed in a positive direction. The re-
cent history of international support to Liberia and Guinea-
Bissau offer two starkly contrasting stories (see box 6.10).

The international community played a key role in support-
ing the Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), signed 
in Accra, Ghana, in September 2003, which brought an end to 
two civil wars that had devastated Liberia. The UN mobilized 
a peacekeeping mission of 25,000 troops. The highest troop-
to-population ratio in the history of peacekeeping, it provided 
a  credible  deterrent  against  opponents  of  the  peace  process 
and third-party assurances that peace would be maintained.

Liberia’s transition government, however, experienced se-
rious governance and corruption problems (see below). Yet, 
with a peace agreement and international security guarantees 
in  place,  Liberia’s  GDP  grew  at  a  healthy  6.4  percent  a  year 
between 2004 and 2008 (having contracted by almost a third 
in 2003). In the same period, the international aid community 
provided US$2.6 billion to Liberia, an average of US$146 per 
capita per year (total international spending, including secu-
rity, was considerably higher at US$415 per capita in 2008—
the highest to date in Africa).

That was not all. International actors such as the UN and 
the World Bank worked with the government of Liberia to lift 
public conﬁ dence through an innovative program to provide 
jobs, restart the economy, and provide tangible evidence of the 
peace process. “Roads with UNMIL” restored hundreds of ki-
lometers of roads, reconnecting areas of the country long iso-
lated from one another by the war, enabling trade to resume, 
and  facilitating  humanitarian  relief  efforts.  Drawing  on  the 
resources and expertise of different agencies in the political, 
security, and development ﬁ elds, the project delivered results 
in the short term, while facilitating reform in the transport 
sector in the medium term. Going beyond the conﬁ nes of in-

frastructure development, it offered short-term employment 
opportunities for many ex-combatants and non-combatants.
Liberia’s  recovery  trajectory  also  shows  how  regional 
organizations  can  help.  The  ECOWAS  worked  with  donors 
on  conﬁ dence  building  tailored  to  the  Liberian  milieu.  The 
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program 
(GEMAP, see box 4.2), introduced in the run-up to the 2005 
elections,  provides “dual  key”  authority  in  the  areas  of  rev-
enue earning and expenditure. Jointly managed by the gov-
ernment  and  the  international  community,  it  was  designed 
speciﬁ cally to reassure a skeptical population and donors that 
years of ofﬁ cial looting and corruption were over and that ser-
vices would be reliably delivered. Economic governance has 
improved under GEMAP and, with consistent international 
commitment and willingness to share risk, it has helped rein-
force conﬁ dence in state institutions. While noting these posi-
tives, critics point out that the slow transfer of knowledge and 
capacity to local authorities and stakeholders may have created 
dependency—highlighting the importance of integrated and 
sustained external engagement with national institutions.

Seven  years  after  signing  the  CPA,  Liberia  qualiﬁ ed  for 
the  World  Bank/IMF  Heavily  Indebted  Poor  Countries  ini-
tiative, setting in motion the largest per-capita debt write-off 
in  history.  The  peace  process  has  since  been  consolidated, 
driven  by  determined,  output-oriented  national  leadership 
and pragmatic international support. Today, Liberia has initi-
ated  a  process  of  stabilization  that  few  dared  imagine  a  few 
years  earlier.  The  challenge  now  is  to  ensure  that  this  extra-
ordinary  and  successful  episode  in  international  support  is 
not ended prematurely, that emerging stresses continue to be 
clearly identiﬁ ed, and that legitimate, accountable institutions 
receive sustained support.

In contrast to the coordinated international support for Li-
beria, no comparable international effort was made in nearby 
Guinea-Bissau. This in part reﬂ ects a lack of international con-
ﬁ dence in national governance and country leadership—but 
similar conditions existed in Liberia before the 2005 elections. 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

207

Guinea-Bissau: Weak national processes, uneven international support

Types of violence:  Civil conﬂ ict, political violence, organized crime and traﬃ  cking, transnational crime
Transition opportunity:  Repeated and brief opportuni-
ties for change: multiparty elections, peace agreements 
after civil war, National Stability Pact
Key stresses:  Legacies of violence and trauma, ethnic 
competition, external support for domestic rebels, 
international criminal networks, low incomes, youth 
unemployment, corruption
Dual accountability dilemma:  International community that viewed preventive action as too risky; national actors that needed early 
and sustained support to combat domestic violence and the inﬂ uence of international traﬃ  cking

Institutional challenge:  Severe accountability and capacity constraints 
in public administration, security, judicial, and political institutions; lack of 
access to services; lack of inclusion of diﬀ erent groups

Key stakeholders:  Federal and local government, military, citizens, 
regional institutions, international partners, international drug cartels

Over the past 15 years, there have been sporadic windows of 
opportunity, but with leadership commitment to overcoming 
the rifts in society largely found wanting, they received scant 
support  from  the  international  community.  Today  Guinea-
Bissau remains one of the world’s most impoverished nations 
and an “aid orphan,” with a human development index rank 
of 164 among 169 countries in 2010. 

Since independence in the 1960s, Guinea-Bissau has been 
ruled mainly as a one-party regime interrupted by coups and 
a civil war (1998–99). International pressures for democracy as 
a condition for aid led to a tentative move toward a multiparty 
political system in 1991. A moment of opportunity came in 1994 
with the ﬁ rst multiparty elections. But aside from proclaiming 
the elections to be “transparent, free, and fair,” the  international 
community remained largely absent. Similarly, during the civil 
war, the international community kept its distance, while re-
gional  institutions  such  as  ECOWAS  and  the  African  Union 
 attempted to mediate and enforce peacekeeping. 

Peace and elections in 1999–2000 gave rise to new hopes, 
and  the  UN  set  up  its  Peacebuilding  Support  Ofﬁ ce  in 
 Guinea-Bissau  (UNOGBIS).  A  donor  conference  was  orga-
nized to support post-war recovery and reconstruction, and 
the  IMF  and  World  Bank  provided  emergency  assistance. 
Hopes  were  undermined  by  continued  poor  governance—
without the supporting mechanisms in place in Liberia.

The response of the international community: further iso-
lation. In what looked like an increasingly risky environment, 
the IMF suspended assistance while the African Development 
Bank and the World Bank cut back their programs. Without 
budgetary  support,  civil  servant  salaries  went  unpaid.  Real 
GDP  contracted  by  4.1  percent  in  2002  and  0.6  percent  in 
2003. A coup d’état soon followed.

Elections were held in 2005, a new government was formed, 
and the international community slowly reengaged. The UN 
strengthened UNOBGIS’ mandate to include supporting po-
litical dialogue and national reconciliation and upholding the 
rule of law and human rights. There was agreement between 
the new government and the few donors present in the coun-

try on strategic priorities—reforming the security sector, pay-
ing salaries to the military and civil service, and restoring some 
electrical service to the capital.

The IMF resumed assistance and a donor meeting was held 
in Lisbon in February 2005. But only €1.5 million was pledged. 
A  donors’  roundtable  in  2006  was  more  successful—amid 
growing concerns about the inﬂ uence of the drug trade and 
criminal networks, some US$280 million was pledged, though 
continuing political instability remained an obstacle to deliv-
ering funds. 

In 2007, in reaction to the president’s unconstitutional dis-
missal of the prime minister, parliamentarians formed a major-
ity  coalition.  They  committed  the  three  largest  parties  in  the 
assembly to a national stability pact and, after months of nego-
tiations, passed a vote of no conﬁ dence that forced the president 
to appoint a new prime minister. Hopes were dashed when the 
pact collapsed, triggering a new political crisis and the fall of 
the government. In 2008, another round of elections, which re-
ceived some limited international assistance to ensure the elec-
toral staff was paid, produced another new government. 

Guinea-Bissau remains deeply fragile and insecure. In 2009, 
it was thrown into further turmoil with the assassination of 
the  president,  a  top  general,  and  two  ministers.  Drug  traf-
ﬁ cking has become a major concern. Security sector reforms 
remain  integral  in  addressing  this  rising  violence,  but  so  far 
have received limited backing from international actors. The 
EU and ECOWAS have helped settle some salary arrears, and 
Angola and South Africa have modest programs in place. But 
the  international  community  is  largely  absent—without  re-
sponsible national leadership, it is unwilling or unable to take 
the risk and provide the kind of sustained support that could 
have helped Guinea-Bissau back on its feet.

Sources: AllAfrica 2009; Andersen 2010; Atkinson 2008; Bøås 2009; Dwan 
and Bailey 2006; Jahr 2010; Government of the Republic of Liberia Execu-
tive Mansion 2009; Giovine and others 2010; UNDP 2010b; International 
Crisis  Group  2008a,  2009b;  Gberie  2003b;  Economist  Intelligence  Unit 
2008b; IRIN 2005; Vulliamy 2008. 

208 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 6 .10  Uneven international support to violence prevention and recovery in West Africa
 

   Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Secretary-General of the African, Caribbean, and Paciﬁ c Group of States (ACP), 
Former President of the Economic Community of West African States; WDR Advisory Council Member

We  assumed  the  successes  chalked  up  in  Liberia  would 
be  enough  justiﬁ cation  to  see  similar  quick  and  strong 
responses  from  the  international  community  in  Guinea-
Bissau to avoid recurrence of violence and conﬂ ict. That was 
not  to  be.  Consequently,  the  country  still  totters  on  the 
brink of instability, violence, conﬂ ict, or state disintegration, 
given the real threat posed by drug traﬃ  cking.

The  neglect  of  the  international  community  made  it 
diﬃ  cult  for  a  number  of  regional  initiatives  to  put  the 
country on a path of steady recovery and eventual takeoﬀ . 
A  donor  conference  in  Geneva  in  2006  to  raise  funds  for 
a  security  sector  and  national  reconstruction  plan  was 
poorly  attended;  ECOWAS  ended  up  pledging  the  most 
funding. Nor was the national strategy for combating drug 
traﬃ  cking  adequately  funded,  even  though  its  destabiliz-

ing  impact  on  the  country  and  the  region  was  and  still  is 
 evident.

Above  all,  the  failure  to  provide  funding  for  the  much 
needed  security  sector  reform  has  been  particularly  dis-
appointing  and  baﬄ  ing.  The  impunity  and  persistent  in -
cursion  into  the  political  domain  by  the  military  can  only  be 
tackled  through  a  comprehensive  security  sector  reform  that 
ad dresses  the  legal,  institutional,  and  capacity  weaknesses  of 
various security agencies (military, police, immigration, prisons, 
customs) and the judicial system. ECOWAS did not succeed in 
obtaining for Guinea-Bissau the requisite resources to embark 
on the urgently needed reforms in this strategic sector.

The  contrast  in  international  support  to  Liberia  as  com-
pared to Guinea or Guinea-Bissau was quite noticeable and a 
source of great frustration to us at ECOWAS.

Notes

    1.   In 1990, Freedom House gave civil liberties in Mozambique the worst possible score and political 
rights the second-worst on a scale of 1 to 7, whereas the scores had both improved to 3 in 2009. 
Freedom House uses a 1 to 7 scale, where 7 indicates the lowest level of freedom, with few or no 
political rights because of severe government oppression, sometimes in combination with civil war. 
At the other end of the scale, countries and territories with a rating of 1 enjoy a wide range of po-
litical rights, including free and fair elections.

  2.   The megaprojects include the Mozal aluminum smelter, the Cahora Bassa hydroelectric plant, and 

Sasol gas project. See Cadeado and Hamela 2009; World Bank 2005b.

  3.   UNDPKO 2010b, 2010c.
  4.   WDR team calculations based on OECD 2010d.
  5.   Davies and others 2008; Meidan 2006.
  6.   South-South bilateral aid increased by some 68 percent, from 2004 to 2008, to an estimated US$626 
million. Data for several major non-DAC development partners, such as China and India, are not 
included in this estimate (see OECD-DAC 2010b).

  7.   The following multilateral organizations and governments had special envoys or representatives to 
Afghanistan or Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2009–10: United Kingdom, United States, United Na-
tions, European Union, Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, France, Australia, Belgium, China, Germany, 
Japan, Denmark.

  8.   New York University Center on International Cooperation 2009.
  9.   Harvey and others 2010. 
10.   This interdependence has been recognized explicitly in, for instance, in the World Bank’s frame-
work for rapid response to crisis and emergencies, which enables it to participate in integrated in-
ternational support efforts for programs that include important linkages to areas outside the Bank’s 
core competencies, while maintaining its engagement in areas of core competencies (World Bank 
2007d, 2008b; Stewart and Brown 2007).

11.   UN integrated missions are an instrument through which the UN seeks to help countries in the 
transition from war to lasting peace, or address a similarly complex situation that requires a system-

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

209

wide UN response, through subsuming various actors and approaches within an overall political-
strategic crisis management framework. See Eide and others 2005; Campbell, Kaspersen, and Weir 
2007.

12.   “Whole-of-government approaches” refers to how agencies and ministries within a government ad-
ministration can work coherently together in order to develop a comprehensive response to fragile 
states in crisis. See DFID 2010, Stewart and Brown 2007; OECD-DAC 2006.

13.   “Whole-of-system approaches” speciﬁ cally refers to how regional and international organizations 
and the international architecture in general can best develop policy coherence and a comprehen-
sive response to fragile states in crisis. See DFID 2010. 

14.   These  include  the  U.K.  Stabilization  Unit  (created  in  2004  as  the  Post-Conﬂ ict  Reconstruction 
Unit), U.S. Ofﬁ ce of the Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization, Canada’s Stabilization 
and Reconstruction Task Force, the UN Peacebuilding Committee and Peacebuilding Support Of-
ﬁ ce; and the AusAID Fragile States Unit (created in 2005).

15.   OECD-DAC 2006. 
16.   Wainwright 2005; Dinnen, Porter, and Sage 2010. 
17.   Stewart and Brown 2007.
18.   OECD-DAC 2007b.
19.   Harborne and others 2010. 
20.   Chalmers 2007.
21.   Peixoto, Andrade, and Azevedo 2008.
22.   Annual  budget  costs  compiled  for  UN  political  missions,  Organization  for  Security  and  Co-
operation in Europe (OSCE) mission, and EU representatives by New York University’s Center on 
International Cooperation.

23.   Light mediation start-up budget (LMSB) covers the cost of a small mediation team that is required 
to address a limited conﬂ ict. Such conﬂ icts are typically clearly between two states or coherent par-
ties within a state (without a regional dimension) that are amenable to resolution within a short 
period of time (possibly within a year). The LMSB will allow UNDPA to establish a mediation effort 
quickly and sustain it for up to three months, while the full costing for the initiative is being devel-
oped and resourced. Heavy mediation start-up budget (HMSB) covers the initial costs of address-
ing a complex conﬂ ict situation. Complex conﬂ icts typically have local and regional dimensions, 
and the mediation team is likely to be deployed in multiple locations. Complex conﬂ icts are likely 
to require a heavier presence in the capital and a presence in the regions and neighboring countries. 
In this regard, the HMSB is intended to facilitate the rapid establishment of the initial UN presence 
on the ground for a period of one year, while the costing of the full mediation team for the ﬁ rst and 
subsequent years is developed and resourced.

24.   An early, and still relevant, critique of this problem is found in de Soto and del Castillo 1994. 
25.   World Bank 2008b.
26.   For discussion of the interaction between human rights and mediation communities, and the pro-
gressively greater incorporation of human rights provisions into peace agreements, see Stedman 
1996.

27.   Stedman 1996.
28.   UN 2000, 2011.
29.   For instance, the Guatemalan peace accords incorporated signiﬁ cant commitments for gender eq-
uity aimed at the elimination of discrimination against women, including the promotion of wom-
en’s political participation and their access to education, health, housing, and other resources—a 
success attributed to the only female member in the peace negotiations. See Potter 2005. 

30.   UNIFEM, UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conﬂ ict, and UNDPKO 2010. 
31.   International Alert and Women Waging Peace 2004. 
32.   A 2010 meeting of anglophone and francophone delegates in Kenya, convened by UNDP, coined 
the phrase “collaborative capacities” and further reﬁ ned the institutions relevant to prevention and 
recovery from violence as “dynamic networks of interdependent structures, mechanisms, resources, 
values, and skills which, through dialogue and consultation, contribute to conﬂ ict prevention and 
peace-building in a society” (UN Interagency Framework for Coordination on Preventive Action 
2010, 1).

33.   Commonwealth Secretariat 2006; The Carter Center 2007; UNDPA 2010b.
34.   Wolpe and McDonald 2006.
35.   The WDR’s glossary deﬁ nes commitment mechanisms as ways to persuade stakeholders that in-
tentions to break with past policies will not be reversed, including creating independent functions 

210 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

for  implementing  or  monitoring  agreements.  This  follows  the  common  economic  deﬁ nition  of 
commitment mechanisms or commitment devices (e.g., see Dixit 1980, Schelling 1960, and Spence 
1977). Doyle and Sambanis (2006, 111) ﬁ nd that treaties and UN missions work in concert and 
note “a positive (though not large) correlation between UN mandates and the signing of a peace 
treaty, since treaties are necessary for certain UN operations.” The UN can facilitate peace treaties 
among parties, and enforce peace when agreements become unstuck as “without a treaty and trans-
formational UN mission, the likelihood of success drops substantially from an initial value of about 
80 per cent to less than 5 per cent at extreme values of hostility” (Doyle and Sambanis 2006, 130). 
See also Human Security Centre 2005; Fortna 2008; Walter and Kydd 2002. 

36.   Hartzell, Hoddie, and Rothchild 2001. 
37.   Walter and Kydd 2002.
38.   The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) is a coalition of governments, companies, 
civil society groups, investors and international organizations. It aims to strengthen governance by 
improving transparency and accountability in the extractives sector through the establishment of a 
global standard for transparency in oil, gas, and mining. See EITI 2009. 

39.   The Natural Resource Charter is a set of economic principles for governments and societies on 
how to best manage the opportunities created by natural resources for development. The charter 
comprises 12 precepts, or principles, that encapsulate the choices and suggested strategies that gov-
ernments might pursue to increase the prospects of sustained economic development from natural 
resource exploitation. See Natural Resource Charter 2010.

40.   Additional  information  regarding  Liberia’s  Governance  and  Economic  Management  Assistance 

Program can be found in chapter 4, box 4.3.

41.   A comprehensive study of 204 cases of sanctions imposed between 1914 and 2006, half of which 

took place after 1990, found about one-third to be successful (Hufbauer and others 2007). 

42.   Nossal 1999; Wallensteen and others 2007.
43.   Van Genugten and de Groot 1999; Bessler, Garﬁ eld, and McHugh 2004.
44.   Cortright, Lopez, and Gerber 2002.
45.   UN 2006a, 3.
46.   CICIG has presented two legal reform packages to the Guatemalan Congress that seek to improve 
the legal and institutional framework of the criminal prosecution of crimes that fall under CICIG’s 
jurisdiction. To date, the Congress has approved four essential laws: Law on Arms and Ammunition, 
Law to Strengthen Criminal Prosecutions, Law on Jurisdiction in High-Risk Criminal Proceedings, 
and Reforms to the Law Against Organized Crime and Incidents. See CICIG 2009.

47.   See,  for  example,  the  Lomé  Declaration  on  the  Framework  for  an  OAU  Response  to  Unconsti-
tutional  Change  of  Government  (Organization  of African  Unity  2000)  and  the  Inter-American 
Democratic Charter (OAS 2001).

48.   Both  the  UN  and  the  international  ﬁ nancial  institutions  consider  regional  stances  in  their  ap-
proaches  to  governments,  but  no  structured  mechanisms  exist  to  discuss  this  with  the  regional 
institutions.

49.   A major focus of humanitarian assistance in past years has been four deadly disease clusters––acute 
respiratory infections, diarrheal diseases, malaria, and measles—all of which are major killers in 
wartime. All are preventable and treatable at very low cost. Worldwide increases in immunization 
coverage over the past 30-plus years have played a large part in reducing mortality from these dis-
eases. Between 1974 and 2006, coverage for the six major vaccine-preventable diseases rose from 
less than 5 percent to more than 75 percent of the world’s population. In addition to preventing 
and treating disease, a signiﬁ cant share of humanitarian aid budgets is devoted to treating severe 
malnutrition. Fatality rates for severely malnourished children have decreased because of this and 
better treatment protocols. Peacetime immunization drives, together with the life-saving impact 
of humanitarian assistance, have all contributed to reducing wartime mortality from disease and 
malnutrition. See Human Security Report Project, forthcoming; Guha-Sapir and D’Aoust 2010.

50.   These exceptions include where branding would “compromise the intrinsic independence or neu-
trality of a program or materials where independence or neutrality is an inherent aspect of the 
program and material.” USAID 2009a, 16; 2010.

51.   Stoddard, Harmer, and Haver 2006. 
52.   The “Brookings Process” brought together Ofﬁ ce of the UNHCR, UNDP, and the World Bank in 
2000 to more effectively address the “gaps” that occur in relief-to-development programs, funding, 
and strategies. 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

211

53.   See section on education and health reforms as crucial medium-term challenges in chapter 5. Also 

see World Bank 2002a, 2008g.

54.   Jones, Gowan, and Sherman 2009.
55.   U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce 2010b. 
56.  Garassi 2010.
57.   Government of Nepal, UNDP, and UNDG 2010.
58.   World Bank and UN 2007.
59.   International conﬂ ict and fragility assessment frameworks include: United States: Interagency Con-
ﬂ ict Assessment  Framework,  2009;  United  Kingdom:  Strategic  Conﬂ ict Assessment;  DFID:  Con-
ducting  Conﬂ ict  Assessments:  Guidance  Notes,  2002;  SIDA:  Manual  for  Conﬂ ict  Analysis,  2006; 
UNDP: Conﬂ ict-Related Development Analysis, 2003; USAID: Conducing a Conﬂ ict Assessment, 
2005; World Bank, Conﬂ ict Analysis Framework, 2002. 

60.   Chandran, Slotin, and Sorensen 2010.
61.   U.S. Department of State 2009; DFID 2002.
62.   World Bank and UN 2008.
63.   OECD-DAC 2010a.
64.   World  Bank  and  UN  2007;  see  also  International  Dialogue  on  Peacebuilding  and  Statebuilding 

2010.

65.   Strategies produced by Africa Development Bank (Country Strategy Paper 2008–2011); EC (Coun-
try  Strategy  Paper  and  Indicative  Programme,  2008–2013);  UN  (UN  Development  Assistance 
Framework 2010–2014); World Bank (Poverty Re duction Strategy Paper, 2006–2009; 2008 Country 
Assistance Strategy); Austria (Three Year Program on Austrian Development Policy, 2006–2008); 
Belgium  (Indicative  Cooperation  Program,  2007–2009,  Indicative  Cooperation  Program,  2010–
2013); France (Framework Partnership Agreement, 2006–2010); Sweden (Strategy to Great Lakes 
Region, including Burundi, 2004–2008); and United States (Strategic Statement 2006–2008). See 
AfDB 2008; European Commission and Republic of Burundi 2007; Government of Burundi and 
UN 2009; Republic of Burundi 2006; World Bank 2008e; Austrian Federal Ministry for European 
and International Affairs 2006; Belgium Development Agency 2006, 2009; French Ministry of For-
eign Affairs 2006; SIDA 2005; Government of Burundi 2005. 

66.   A notable exception to the fragmentation of donor assistance strategies is the preparation of a coun-
try assistance framework in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Following the 2006 elections, do-
nors confronted the need to begin planning for the post-election period in a fragile and uncertain 
political landscape. A joint strategy framework, building on the ﬁ ve pillars identiﬁ ed in the Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Program, appealed to the Democratic Republic of Congo’s partners as a way of 
mitigating risk while preparing the way for partners to engage in substantive dialogue with the new 
government on pre-identiﬁ ed and pre-agreed issues as soon as it was formed. Under an initiative by 
the UN Integrated Ofﬁ ce in the UN Democratic Republic of Congo peacekeeping mission and the 
World Bank, a Country Assistance Framework was developed as a common strategic approach to 
recovery and development assistance, and was agreed to by 17 international partners. A challenge 
with such joint donor planning, however, is to keep it ﬂ exible enough to respond to new challenges, 
as subsequently emerged in the Democratic Republic of Congo. See also Rohland and Cliffe 2002; 
Republic of Liberia and UN 2007.

67.   Ashraf Ghani and Clare Lockhart, in Fixing Failed States, analyze the issue of establishing legitimacy 
and closing the sovereignty gap in fragile and conﬂ ict-affected states through the lens of “double 
compact.” The double compact focuses on the “network of rights and obligations underpinning 
the state’s claim to sovereignty . . .” and refers ﬁ rst to the “compact . . . between a state and its citi-
zens . . . embedded in a coherent set of rules,” and second, “between a state and the international 
community to ensure adherence to international norms and standards of accountability and trans-
parency” (Ghani and Lockhart 2008, 8). 

68.   Cox and Thornton 2010.
69.   Aga Khan Development Network 2003. 
70.   Fully consistent with the ﬁ ndings of the many development assessments and studies conducted in 
recent years, including Agence Française de Développement and others 2005 and Commission on 
Growth and Development 2008. 

71.   Gowan 2007. 
72.   These points were made forcefully by ministers of ﬁ nance from 12 African conﬂ ict-affected coun-

tries at two post-conﬂ ict learning events in 2002 and 2003 (World Bank 2002b, 2003).

212 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

73.   Kharas 2008.
74.   Volatility has costs in all economic activity with expectations, reﬂ ected by risk premiums. Losses 
associated with volatility can come in the form of additional costs of ﬁ nancial management; the 
opportunity  costs  of  idle  funds  (windfalls)  or  missed  investment  opportunities  (shortfalls);  the 
costs associated with over borrowing and debt buildup when there is uncertainty about amount 
needed and concessional credits are used; and the costs associated with volatility in ﬁ scal spending 
and the real exchange rate that can follow from volatility in aid (Kharas 2008). These costs can be 
further ampliﬁ ed by donor “herding” behavior, which is often more responsive to political instabil-
ity and violence. Additionally, the costs of shortfalls may be higher in fragile and conﬂ ict-affected 
states. While an aid shortfall in a typical developing country may lead to the costs above, in a fragile 
or conﬂ ict-affected state, such a shortfall may completely derail transition moments, interrupting 
reform and possibly leading to political crises.

75.   Birdsall and others 2010. 
76.   Council for the Development of Cambodia 2010. 
77.   Killick, Castel-Branco, and Gerster 2005. 
78.   Some forms do travel well, however. For instance, secret ballots and the separation of women and 

children from men in jails support principled outcomes in most situations.

79.   Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 2009, 326. However, the international commu-
nity has supported many best-ﬁ t measures in complex conﬂ ict settings (see chapter 5). As further 
examples, in 2003–04, while conditions for comprehensive disarmament in Haiti were not in place, 
UNDP undertook an innovative project that linked  disarmament to a community approach in-
volving information campaigns, support to community conﬂ ict-resolution mechanisms, and mi-
croprojects beneﬁ ting community groups as well as former members of armed gangs. In the West 
Bank and Gaza since 2002, the World Bank and several donors have been ﬁ nancing non-salary 
recurrent expenditures of the ministries of Health, Edu cation and Higher Education, and Social 
Affairs through the Emergency Services Support Program MDTF in response to a deepening ﬁ scal 
and economic crisis. 

80.   See Collier 2007.
81.   These  attributes  include,  for  example,  the  quality  and  experience  of  the  experts  (governments 
should expect and receive highly competent and committed professionals able to work in difﬁ cult 
environments); a simple and well thought out program that can be implemented quickly; effec-
tive coordination among donors to ensure consistent policy advice; the participation of national 
champions to move the process along; and links to speciﬁ c programs (so that advice and training 
reinforces new initiatives) (World Bank 2000).

82.   Waldman 2008, 10; Michailof 2007.
83.   Institute for State Effectiveness 2007.
84.   OECD 2008.
85.   National Academy of Public Administration 2006. 
86.   Civilian surge capacity is typically classiﬁ ed as standing capacity (can be in-country within 72 hours 
of need, and remain deployed for a minimum of 60 days); standby capacity (can be in-country 
within 60 days, and remain deployed for a minimum of 180 days); and rostered capacity (can be in-
 country within 180 days, deployment term subject to contract) (see Chandran and others 2009; Sisk 
2010; Korski and Gowan 2009). Australia’s International Deployment Group (IDG), for example, is 
a standing corps of more than 500 Australian federal police ofﬁ cers trained and ready to deploy on 
peacekeeping missions (see Peake and Brown 2010). The U.S. Ofﬁ ce of the Coordinator for Recon-
struction and Stabilization is building up a civilian standby capacity of interagency personnel. 

87.   For example, the United States, the United Kingdom, EU, and Australia.
88.   UN, forthcoming. 
89.   See Baird 2010.
90.   Of the different forms that South-South cooperation has taken, technical assistance has been the 
most common. Although many technical assistance projects focus on economic and social devel-
opment, countries in the Global South have also developed specialized capacities in post-conﬂ ict 
peacebuilding. Examples include South Africa’s support to build structural capacities for public 
service through peer learning among public sector schools (Management Devel opment Institutes) 
at the Ministries for Public Administration in Burundi, Rwanda, and Southern Sudan. Cooperation 
among 45 municipalities in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras helps to manage regional public 
goods, such as water, in the Triﬁ nio region. See OECD 2010f. 

 

International support to building conﬁ dence and transforming institutions 

213

91.   In 2008, the African Development Bank Group (AfDB) established the Fragile States Facility (FSF) to 
“effectively assist eligible fragile states to consolidate peace, stabilize economies and lay foundations 
for sustainable poverty-reduction and long-term economic growth” (AfDB 2011, 1). The FSF has 
three grant pillars: Pillar I, the supplemental support window for funding infrastructure, state capac-
ity building, and accountability; Pillar II, the arrears clearance window; and Pillar III, the technical 
assistance and  capacity-building window. Eligible states are those that have a harmonized AfDB/
World Bank CPIA rating of less than 3.2, or countries that have had UN or regional peacebuilding, 
peacekeeping, or mediation operations over the last three years. Pillar III provides technical assis-
tance and capacities aimed at ﬁ lling critical gaps in carefully selected public sector domains through 
secondment  of  seasoned  professional  staff  from  neighboring  countries  and  on-the-job  training 
opportunities with the objective of building a sustainable cadre of senior civil servants—fragile 
states that have the capacity in management and implementation of reforms. The program is usu-
ally implemented as integrated components of comprehensive capacity-building plans. By March 
2010, this South-South cooperation facility had received resources in the amount of UA (Units of 
Accounts) 85.39 million, equivalent to13.2 percent of the total FSF resources (AfDB 2010, 5). 

92.   Viva Rio negotiated a peace accord among 14 rival groups, and the homicide rate in Bel Air fell 
from 26 per 100,000 in 2006–07 to 17 in 2008–09, lower than in any other major Latin American 
city (OECD 2010f). 
93.   See UNPBSO 2010. 
  94.   OECD 2010f. 
  95.   UN, forthcoming. 
  96.   For instance, nearly a third of the “peace and development advisers” who are jointly deployed by 
UNDP and UNDPA to build such capacities in violence-affected countries are either former inter-
nal mediators or facilitators from the “Mont Fleur” visioning exercise in South Africa, which was 
implemented with discrete UN assistance, or have been trained by them. See UNDP 2010a.

  97.   Funding provided through the Ofﬁ ce of the Transition Initiatives at USAID is one example. This 
transition funding is not subject to the same policies and procedures as other ﬁ nancing provided 
by USAID. DFID’s Middle East and North Africa Department has created a Program Risk Assess-
ment Matrix that assesses risk factors in conﬂ ict programming. The EU is currently developing a 
framework for analyzing the risks associated with budget support to fragile states. 

  98.   For Cambodia, see Jones 2009. For Liberia, see World Bank 2010k.
  99.   International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding 2010, 9.
100.   Colletta and Tesfamichael 2003.
101.   Colletta and Tesfamichael 2003.
102.   World Bank 2007a. 
103.   World Bank analysis prepared for the 2009 workshop in Kinshasa on aid effectiveness.
104.   OECD-DAC 2008. 
105.   Azam, Devarajan, and O’Connell 2002; Bräutigam 2000. 
106.   UN, forthcoming.
107.   Etzioni 1999. The United States, for example, uses several layers of police agencies, most of them 
under local government control, while many European countries favor national police forces with 
specialized divisions. The principles underlying security provision can also be quite different in oth-
erwise similar societies: the ubiquitous use of street cameras to track civilians in a number of Euro-
pean cities would be considered invasive in the United States, where history and tradition privilege 
individual privacy. 

108.   Lemay-Hébert 2009; Graydon 2005; Greenfell 2006; Wisler 2005; Vetschera and Damian 2006.
109.   UNPOL 2011.
110.   For a review of the characteristics of the post-conﬂ ict private sector and the ways in which the de-

velopment community can engage with it, see Mac Sweeney 2008. 

111.   For instance, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) has worked with Nestlé and ECOM, a 
soft commodity trading company, to support small-scale farmers in the coffee sector around the 
world (with a mix of investment and advisory interventions) and partnered with Standard Char-
tered Bank to strengthen practical business skills of small and medium entrepreneurs in Pakistan. 
IFC also partnered with the BBC in Afghanistan on a series of radio “edutainment” programs that 
combine education with entertainment on issues such as unemployment, lack of infrastructure, 
and inadequate service provision and aimed to raise awareness of the beneﬁ ts of small business 
enterprises and provide practical information on small-business-related issues. A recent audience 

214 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

feedback survey found that listeners are learning, through storylines and the experiences of others, 
how to start small businesses and generate income, and that many have acted upon information in 
the programs to improve their own ﬁ nancial situation (BBC World Service Trust 2010).
112.   OECD and WTO 2008; Kawai and Takagi 2004; Davies and others 2008; Meidan 2006.
113.   Battle 2008; World Bank 2011b.
114.   OECD-DAC 2007b. 
115.   World Bank and AfDB 2010. 
116.   Precisely because the budget is a tool for political bargaining, when the government has few re-
sources available to it within a budget, its scope for negotiating inclusive-enough pacts is dimin-
ished. Diminished also is its ability to balance the process of building more inclusive institutions, 
for  which  social  service  delivery  is  an  important  tool  (see  also  Ghani,  Lockhart,  and  Carnahan 
2005).

117.   See Boyce and Forman 2010; Porter, Andrews, and Wescott 2010.
118.   For a description of the Holst Fund in West Bank and Gaza, see Schiavo-Campo 2003. 
119.   Mondo 1995; Colletta, Kostner, and Wiederhofer 1996.
120.   For Angola, please see World Bank 2009c. For Guinea-Bissau, see Arzeni, Cesanelli, and Pes 2004.
121.   Scanteam 2010; Garrasi 2010.
122.   OECD 2010i; Scanteam 2010; Garrasi 2010.
123.   Boyce and Forman 2010.
124.   OECD 2010i; Scanteam 2010; Garrasi 2010.
125.   OECD 2010i.
126.   Garrasi 2010.
127.   See Harbom and Wallensteen 2010. 
128.   See Roberts 2010 for a discussion of the Iraq estimates and Butty 2010 for a similar discussion with 
Andrew  Mack  of  Human  Security  Report  Project  on  estimates  for  the  Democratic  Republic  of 
Congo, 1996 to present. 

129.   See  Conﬂ ict  and  Development  Programs 

in  Indonesia  website  (http://www.conﬂ ictand

development.org) for up-to-date information on conﬂ ict and violence in Aceh.

130.   One example is monthly monitoring of  Palestinian perceptions on political, economic, and social 

conditions by Near East Consulting, http://www.neareastconsulting.com.

131.   Scheye and Chigas 2009; Agoglia, Dziedzic, and Sotirin 2008.
132.   DRC Speaks! is a geo-polling project utilizing cell phone technology to conduct surveys. It was cre-
ated by Mobile Accord in conjunction with the WDR, and with generous donations of SMS by Vo-
dacom Congo. Using SMS through cell phones, the project allowed more than 140,000 Congolese 
to share, without any ﬁ lters, their thoughts, feelings, and concerns.

Chapter 7 extends the analysis of this Report to international 

eﬀ orts to deal with the regional and global stresses associ-
ated with the risks of violence. Here we encounter a diﬀ erent 
lacuna: agencies dealing with country-level support have neglected 
global stresses, and international agencies tackling global stresses 
have paid modest attention to the special characteristics of coun-
tries aﬀ ected by violence. Rectifying this requires a two-pronged 
approach: take more decisive steps to tackle global stresses in 
their own right, and build into those eﬀ orts a conscious eﬀ ort to 
reinforce the capacity of states with weak institutions to build up 
buﬀ ers against global shocks. This approach may often need to be 
initiated at the regional level, where states can pool capacities and 
share eﬀ orts to manage the impacts of global systems. No state or 
society is impermeable, and most states’ economies are deeply 
interwoven with regional and global economic systems. 

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

CHAPTER7

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

International action to 
mitigate external stresses

Economic  globalization 

exposes 
states to external economic stresses 
ranging from international corrup-
tion  to  resource  shortages.  States 
with weak political institutions are also rou-
tinely exposed to a variety of forms of exter-
nal interference in their internal negotiations. 
Social groups within states often have links to 
external populations that can be an important 
source of support—but also of both political 
and security interference. Increasingly, trans-
national groups with ideological motivations 
are forging relationships with internal groups 
to  pressure  the  state  or  introduce  violence 
into state-society relations. 

As  with  internal  stresses,  external  secu-
rity  and  economic  stresses  are  interlinked. 
Consider  trafﬁ cking.  Arms  trafﬁ ckers  often 
move drugs and commodities as well,1 using 
similar techniques of fraud, corruption, and 
money  laundering.2  Trafﬁ cking  has  deeply 
damaging  effects  on  national  security  and 
economic systems. 

Where  buffering  institutions  are  weak, 
external  stresses  can  overwhelm  internal 
governance.  Even  states  with  resilient  insti-
tutions  are  exposed  to  international  pres-
sures—think of the impact of drug trafﬁ ck-
ing on cities in Europe and the United States. 
These  pressures,  though  serious,  have  not 
undermined  the  legitimacy  or  resilience  of 
domestic institutions or triggered large-scale 
violence. But for states with weaker institu-

tions, large changes in the price of oil or food 
can  increase  social  tensions,  which  internal 
mechanisms are ill-equipped to deal with. 

Because  many  fragile  states  have  small 
populations and small economies, their im-
pact on global markets and systems is slight. 
International  mechanisms  that  focus  on 
global or transnational issues like drug traf-
ﬁ cking  have  tended  to  neglect  impacts  on 
fragile states. Aid and peacekeeping responses 
to fragile states are normally country-speciﬁ c, 
overlooking both the regional dimension of 
countries’  economic  and  security  arrange-
ments  and  the  impact  of  transnational  or 
global forces. Where transnational or global 
mechanisms  do  interact  with  fragile  states, 
the  policies  often  are  suitable  only  for  the 
larger,  more  capable  states  that  contribute 
the greater part of the global gross domestic 
product  (GDP),  in  the  process  overlooking 
the capacity constraints of fragile states. 

Furthermore,  international  systems  de-
signed  to  address  transnational  issues  are 
often fragmented and overlapping. For states 
with  substantial  administrative  capacities, 
fragmentation  in  international  systems  is  a 
nuisance;  for  states  with  weak  administra-
tive capacities, responding to demands from 
a fragmented international system can absorb 
all available capacity in dealing with a single 
issue area. 

Regional cooperation can help national ac-
tors navigate internal pressures and build buf-

218 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

fers against external ones. For most states, on 
most issues, the region rather than the world 
bears  the  greatest  brunt  of  spillovers  from 
violence.  Regional  cooperation  thus   offers 
large potential rewards on issues like the il-
legal transit of commodities and the expan-
sion  of  legal,  productive  opportunities  for 
trade. 

External security stresses

Cross-border insecurity and trafﬁ cking, par-
ticularly  in  small  arms  and  drugs,  can  have 
highly corrosive impacts on governance and 
the development of stable, legitimate institu-
tions. Nor are the more fragile states and re-
gions able to counter these challenges without 
signiﬁ cant amounts of international help: the 
resources  and  manpower  available  to  them 
can be simply overwhelmed by these nonstate 
actors.

Cross-border insecurity

For many fragile states, the regional dimen-
sion of insecurity is central. Chapter 2 shows 
how  external  security  stresses  can  amplify 
internal tensions and undermine initial set-
tlements to end conﬂ ict. Invasion, the pres-
ence  of  foreign  troops,  or  occupation  can 
overwhelm the state. Such cases—which in-
clude Afghanistan, Iraq, and the West Bank 
and Gaza in recent years—consume much of 
the debate around fragile states, though their 
number today is small.

More commonly, as chapter 1 illustrates, 
violence  in  fragile  states  now  involves  non-
state  organizations  that  operate  across  bor-
ders.  Porous  borders  can  provide  rebels  or 
organized criminal gangs with escape routes 
from  national  armed  forces.  In  many  parts 
of  the  world—South  Asia,  Southeast  Asia, 
West Africa, Central Africa, the Horn of Af-
rica,  the  Middle  East,  Central  America,  the 
Andean region—states face cross-border at-
tacks  by  nonstate  groups,  neighboring  state 
support for internal rebels, or trafﬁ ckers and 
transnational  terrorists.3  Many  zones  of  in-

security  and  violence  are  concentrated  in 
border  areas.  With  many  borders  drawn  in 
the colonial era for reasons that had little to 
do with settlement patterns, populations on 
either side of an insecure border may share 
ethnic  identities,  common  cultural  norms, 
and family and trading links.

Chapter  1  describes  how  many  internal 
conﬂ icts  are  generated  or  fueled  by  cross-
border or global dynamics. Where the actors 
are responsive to a neighboring government, 
steps by those neighbors may be vital to a suc-
cessful transition. Relative stability returned 
to  eastern  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo 
(DRC) only after a Rwanda–DRC agreement 
was concluded in 2007.4 The Central Ameri-
can  “Esquipulas  Process,”  which  ended  the 
Nicaraguan war in 1987, involved an accord 
signed  by  ﬁ ve  Central  American  presidents 
and a change in U.S. policy toward the Sand-
inista regime.5 Groups of Friends and similar 
mechanisms have managed to bring together 
neighbors  seeking  stable  internal  pacts  that 
tackle cross-border stresses.6 

Even so, international security responses 
are typically organized on a national rather 
than  a  subregional  level.  As  chapter  6 
points out, international peacekeeping op-
erations  are  rarely  organized  to  deal  with 
transborder  security  threats,  even  when 
the  major  source  of  insecurity  is  a  group 
that  operates  subregionally.  For  example, 
the  United  Nations  (UN)  has  three  sepa-
rate  peacekeeping  operations  deployed  in 
areas of Africa inﬁ ltrated by the Lord’s Re-
sistance Army—but each is mandated and 
managed at a national level, and none can 
share  resources  or  move  across  another’s 
area of operation. The logic that drives this 
is  that  Security  Council  and  UN  member 
states are sensitive to national sovereignty; 
the irony is that the policy hands a tactical 
advantage to groups that ignore sovereign 
borders. This vulnerability makes clear the 
need for enhanced regional roles and capa-
bilities, a point discussed further in chapter 
9. The Multi-Country Demobilization and 
Reintegration Program in central Africa is 
an exception (box 7.1).

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

219

Development programs are also typically 
organized  at  a  national  level,  even  though 
borders  often  divide  regions  with  close 
socio economic  ties. As  one  example,  devel-
opment programming in Pashtun tribal ar-
eas  that  straddle  the  Afghanistan-Pakistan 
border requires the two governments to ad-
dress similar issues of insecurity, weak local 
administrations,  and  strong  ethnic  and  so-
cial  identities—but  there  is  relatively  little 
exchange  between  national  institutions  to 
discuss  lessons  learned.7  Of  course,  inter-
national  security  and  development  opera-
tions are—correctly—designed to reinforce, 
not  abrogate,  national  sovereignty.  Where 
neighbors  have  tense  relations,  orchestrat-
ing cross-border programs can be politically 
complicated. 

Some  innovative  cross-border  programs 
do  exist.  Recognizing  that  insecure  borders 
have  been  recurrent  hosts  to  conﬂ ict,  the 
African  Union  (AU)  established  the  Afri-
can  Union  Border  Program  in  2007  to  de-
marcate sensitive border areas and promote 
cross-border cooperation and trade as a con-
ﬂ ict prevention tool. The program has four 
components. First, it pursues both land and 
maritime border demarcation since less than 
a quarter of Africa’s borders have been for-
mally marked and agreed upon, and disputes 
are  likely  to  continue  with  future  discover-
ies  of  oil.  Second,  it  promotes  cross-border 
cooperation  to  deal  with  itinerant  criminal 
activities.  Third,  it  supports  cross-border 
peacebuilding  programs.  Fourth,  it  consoli-
dates gains in economic integration through 
the creation of regional economic networks. 
An initial pilot project was launched in the 
Sikasso  region  of  Mali  and  in  Bobo  Di-
oualasso in Burkina Faso—bringing together 
local, private, and public actors to strengthen 
economic cooperation, but the program has 
lacked resources. 8 

Another  example  of  cross-border  pro-
gramming is a UN interagency initiative that 
from 2004 to 2009 supported national efforts 
to stabilize Ecuador’s northern border region 
with Colombia. Already facing internal social 
conﬂ ict, Ecuador was confronted with spill-

BOX 7.1   The Multi-Country Demobilization and 

Reintegration Program: Addressing regional 
violence

The Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP) was a 
World Bank–led regional initiative in which, between 2002 and 2009, over 40 
partners collaborated to disarm, demobilize, and reintegrate close to 300,000 
combatants in the Great Lakes Region of Africa. Seven neighboring countries 
embroiled in the regional war fought out in the Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC) participated in the MDRP: Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, DRC, 
Republic of Congo, Rwanda, and Uganda.

This regional program was the best response to a regional conﬂ ict that tran-

scended borders. Although demobilization, disarmament, and reintegration 
(DDR) programs were implemented at the national level, the MDRP’s regional 
framework helped build conﬁ dence for mutual disarmament by increasing trans-
parency across programs and supporting joint learning and collaborative activi-
ties. The regional approach also enabled the pooling of ﬁ nancing for DDR, which 
in turn promoted eﬃ  cient resource allocation across participating countries. As a 
regional program, the MDRP could support cross-border activities, including the 
DDR of irregular forces that needed to be repatriated to their home countries. 

For programs like the MDRP that have both national and regional elements, 
attention should be paid to regional aspects up front, including putting in place 
a dedicated team and resources. Generating collective action for regional activi-
ties and establishing incentives for actors to think beyond their country borders 
was not easy, particularly since countries faced problems on their home fronts. 
Undertaking a large regional multistakeholder initiative like the MDRP was also 
inherently a high risk, high reward enterprise. 

The World Bank, the donors, and the broader development community must 

be prepared to accept the risks, diﬃ  culties, and uncertainties associated with 
implementing such programs in a post-conﬂ ict setting—especially when 
national peace processes and elections dictate the speed of DDR operations. 

Source: Correia 2010. 

overs from the activities of armed groups in 
Colombia, with communities along the bor-
der overwhelmed by refugees, gang violence, 
and  drug  trafﬁ cking.  But  by  2009,  follow-
ing  cross-border  programming,  crime  and 
violence  were  reduced,  services  improved, 
and dialogue established to resolve local con-
ﬂ icts. More important, despite upswings and 
downturns  in  diplomatic  relations  between 
the  two  countries,  lasting  bilateral  collabo-
ration  has  been  established  with  respect  to 
these issues.9

Regional organizations also play a key role 
in  addressing  cross-border  violence.  As  the 
AU example suggests, and as the post–World 
War II history of European cooperation dem-
onstrates,  regional  organizations  can  help 
countries  address  mobile  populations  and 

220 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

the seepage of violence across national bor-
ders.  They  can  also  spur  regional  adoption 
of global principles. Many of them, however, 
need  support  to  operationalize  these  roles. 
Euro  region  cross-border  cooperation  and 
integration can offer inspiration in tackling 
some border area challenges in other regions 
(see  box  7.1  and  the  later  discussion  of  re-
gional economic integration).

Trafﬁ cking

Internal security—and economic—arrange-
ments  can  also  be  undermined  by  external 
trafﬁ cking. In February 2010, the UN Secu-
rity Council noted “the serious threat posed 
in some cases by drug trafﬁ cking and trans-
national  organized  crime  to  international 
security in different regions of the world.”10 
Chapter 1 discusses the role trafﬁ cking plays 
in generating violence in fragile states, partic-
ularly when illicit revenues provide nonstate 
groups  the  wherewithal  to  outbid  national 
police and armed services. 

Over the past 15 years, regional and global 
initiatives have been launched to address ille-
gal trafﬁ cking. They typically use one of two 
types  of  mechanism  to  stem  activities  and 
bring perpetrators to justice: either they try 
to identify and intercept smuggled commodi-
ties  at  points  of  production,11  transit,  pro-
cessing, or consumption; or they attempt to 
identify and disrupt the ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows that 
both fund and result from illicit trafﬁ cking. 

Other initiatives, such as the recently released 
due diligence guidance on “Responsible Sup-
ply  Chains  of  Minerals  from  Conﬂ ict  Af-
fected and High-Risk Areas,” have objectives 
that focus not just on tracking ﬂ ows, but also 
on human rights protection and loss of live-
lihoods.12  Efforts  to  tackle  physical  trafﬁ ck-
ing in commodities are discussed here; those 
dealing with the ﬁ nancial dimensions of traf-
ﬁ cking are dealt with in the following section 
on external economic stresses. 

Approaches to tackling the trafﬁ cking of 
commodities is shaped by their physical and 
market  characteristics;  these  determine  the 
ease  of  physical  tracking  and  interdiction. 
Trafﬁ cking  in  commodities  with  concen-
trated production, processing, or wholesaling 
is easier to control (table 7.1). This helps ex-
plain some of the initial success of the Kim-
berley Process in dealing with “conﬂ ict dia-
monds” (box 7.2). Timber, unlike gemstones 
or point-source resources, has a big footprint, 
with  many  upstream  production  and  pro-
cessing points, and is easily mixed with legal 
wood—requiring  detailed  systems  for  veri-
fying the legality of origin, and permits and 
expertise to identify restricted species. 

In  contrast  to  diamonds,  weapons  (par-
ticularly  small  arms)  are  very  portable,  are 
manufactured by many enterprises, are sold 
everywhere—and are cheap. Despite a steady 
decline in the total dollar value of the arms 
trade since the end of the Cold War, there is 
no apparent corresponding decline in the in-

TA BL E 7.1  To defeat trafﬁ cking in commodities, pay attention to physical and market characteristics of the products

Commodity

Estimated 

annual value of 
traﬃ  cking ﬂ ows

Value-to-weight 
ratio/portability

Concentration 
of production 

Concentration 
of processing or 

wholesale markets 

Ease of tracing 
origin of product

Ease of consumer 

identiﬁ cation

Diamonds

US$127 million13

US$1 billion15

US$6 billion16

US$170 million–
US$320 million18

Oil

Timber

Arms

Drugs (cocaine, 
heroin)

US$143 billion21

High

Medium

Sources: UNODC 2009a, 2010a; Lawson and MacFaul 2010; Small Arms Survey Project 2001; Greene 2001.

High

Medium

Low

High

Medium

Low

Medium

Low 19

High

High

Low

Low

Low

Depends 14

Yes

Yes17

Limited20

No

High

Medium

Low

Low

Low

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

221

ternational  transfer  of  small  arms  and  light 
weapons (SALW). The total annual value of 
SALW  is  estimated  at  between  US$4  billion 
and  US$6  billion,  of  which  approximately 
10–20 percent constitutes illicit transactions.22 
There are over 900 million small arms in cir-
culation worldwide, produced by more than 
1,000 companies dispersed in more than 100 
countries.23 SALWs are responsible for almost 
500,000  deaths  a  year,  of  which  50,000  to 
300,000 occur in armed conﬂ icts, most par-
ticularly in poor countries.24 While SALWs do 
not cause internal conﬂ ict, they do multiply 
its effects. Beyond massive civilian casualties, 
the misuse of SALWs also impacts negatively 
on  development.  The  illegal  use  of  SALWs 
contributes  to  human  insecurity,  crippling 
burdens on health care systems, rising crimi-
nality, and violation of human rights.25 

The  focus  on  arms  trafﬁ cking  in  fragile 
states  has  shifted  from  the  international  to 
the subregional arena.26 The UN Department 
of Disarmament Affairs has increased its ef-
forts,  in  collaboration  with  major  donors, 
to  pursue  subregional  trafﬁ cking  in  arms—
including opening regional ofﬁ ces, as in West 
Africa. But the country-speciﬁ c nature of the 
UN’s peacekeeping presence restricts the in-
terdiction of weapons ﬂ owing across borders. 

Similarly, the UN’s peacekeeping operation in 
southern Lebanon faces mandates and politi-
cal restrictions to investigating claims of illegal 
small and heavy weapons shipments to non-
state armed forces across regional borders.27 
Drug  trafﬁ cking  is  also  increasingly  im-
portant in fragile states. Heroin, cocaine, and 
a  variety  of  recreational  drugs  are  illegal  in 
almost all countries. Increases in demand in 
recent  years  have  driven  up  prices  and  cre-
ated  huge  proﬁ ts  for  the  illegal  networks 
that trafﬁ c in them (see box 7.3). Heroin and 
cocaine networks—organized on paramilitary 
lines, to protect themselves from competitors 
and  law  enforcement  agencies—are  respon-
sible for high levels of death and mayhem. 

Tracking  and  interdiction  of  drug  trad-
ers  are  fragmented.  International  efforts  to 
track and seize illegal drugs are intense, but 
given the high value of even small volumes, 
these efforts have failed to stop global ﬂ ows. 
Instead, concentrating efforts in one area has 
more  often  simply  displaced  the  trafﬁ cking 
route.  Since  transshipment  costs,  including 
the  bribery  and  intimidation  of  ofﬁ cials  en 
route,  are  only  a  small  fraction  of  what  is 
earned  from  trafﬁ cking,  criminal  networks 
have overcome or adapted to even the most 
sophisticated  interdiction  systems.  Com-

BOX 7.2  The Kimberley Process for “conﬂ ict diamonds”

The Kimberley Process, a certiﬁ cation scheme to ensure that the origins of rough diamonds are 
sources free of conﬂ ict, was initiated to stem the ﬂ ow of ”conﬂ ict diamonds” used to fuel rebel-
lions in countries like the DRC, and has been jointly undertaken by civil society groups, indus-
try, and governments. It evolved from recommendations by a UN Security Council sanctions 
committee that investigated the relationship between commodity traﬃ  cking and violence in 
the DRC. The Kimberly Process diamond certiﬁ cation scheme imposes extensive requirements 
on its 49 members (representing 75 countries) to ensure that the rough diamonds shipped 
have not funded violence. 

Although diamonds have high value-to-weight ratios and are very portable, diamond 
wholesale markets and processing facilities are concentrated in speciﬁ c locations, with the 
former primarily in Antwerp and the latter primarily in Mumbai. Some 80 percent of rough dia-
monds and more than 50 percent of polished stones pass through Antwerp. Only high-value 
stones are now polished in New York; most small low-value stones are polished in and around 
Mumbai, whose workshops accounted for an estimated 90 percent of the global polished dia-
mond output in 2009. The number of licit diamond producers is also small. All these factors 
make it hard to trade conﬂ ict diamonds without attracting attention. 

Sources: Goreaux 2001; Montgomery 2010; Kimberley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme 2009, 2010.

222 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 7.3  The economics of cocaine trafﬁ cking

In 2008, the average kilo of cocaine entered the Mesoamerican transit corridor at a price of 
about US$1,000.28 The same kilo could then be sold on the U.S. side of the border for about 
US$33,500. These numbers, point estimates based on average market values, can vary widely 
depending on market conditions, purity, organization, and vertical integration in cocaine 
production and traﬃ  cking. Still, taking these rough estimates as a starting point, the average 
potential proﬁ t for moving a kilo of cocaine through the Mesoamerican transit corridor into 
the United States is over US$30,000 before other costs of traﬃ  cking are deducted.

If 10 to 20 percent of the cost is used in transportation, security, and labor, and 20 to 30 

percent of cocaine in transit is seized, this would reduce the potential proﬁ ts from traﬃ  cking 
an individual kilo to between US$15,000 and US$21,000. Even taking these deductions into 
account, this proﬁ t range is far higher than the annual 2008 GDP per capita of any country in 
the region. But in economic terms, the prospective drug traﬃ  cker must consider two other 
potential costs: the opportunity cost of other gainful employment forgone and the risk pre-
mium associated with the dangerous and illegal occupation of drug traﬃ  cking. Recent 
increases in interdictions and arrests would also increase these costs.

Source: WDR staﬀ  calculations based on Demombynes 2010; UNODC 2010a

pounding this inherent difﬁ culty is the frag-
mentation of efforts to halt the ﬂ ow of drugs 
(box 7.4). 

The  majority  of  efforts  against  trafﬁ ck-
ing in drugs have focused on supply—or on 
actions  by  producing  and  transit  countries. 
Because drug consumption is illegal in most 
countries, only fairly limited mechanisms are 
available  to  reduce  the  links  with  violence 
through  demand-side  measures.  The  poor 
record of global attempts to stop the trade in 
illegal drugs, and the extreme violence asso-
ciated with these attempts, have spurred de-
bates on legalization and some tentative steps 
to  test  the  proposition  (mainly  with  mari-
juana,  but  more  broadly  with  several  drugs 
in Portugal). Opinions are divided (box 7.5). 

Insecurity and injustice: Transnational 
ideological threats

Violent  transnational 
ideological  move-
ments29 can ﬂ ourish in violence-affected and 
fragile  states,  making  common  cause  with 
local  movements  and  drawing  resources 
from  transnational  trafﬁ cking  routes.  The 
insertion of transnational ideological move-
ments into otherwise localized violence adds 
resources, expertise, and ideological fuel that 

can  signiﬁ cantly  alter  the  balance  of  force 
and severely pressure the domestic capabil-
ity to respond.30 

This Report is not the place to engage in a 
full discussion of the performance of global 
or regional approaches to counter-terrorism. 
The adoption by the UN General Assembly 
last  year  of  a  comprehensive  strategy  for 
counter-terrorism  provides  a  starting  point 
for engagement on the multilateral front, and 
governments (through both bilateral and re-
gional mechanisms) are increasing their co-
operation on counter-terrorism activities.31

However, global terrorist movements can 
feed on the absence of what the Report has 
highlighted  as  critical  to  building  resilience 
to  violence:  institutional  accountability,  le-
gitimacy,  and  capability.  Ideologically  mo-
tivated groups may have a particular ability 
to penetrate where the presence and reach of 
legitimate government are limited (as in the 
Sahel and Afghanistan). These global move-
ments often cast their cause in terms of injus-
tice and exclusion32—a message that can res-
onate  with  local  perceptions  of  elite-driven 
and  exclusionary  politics  and  policies.  This 
raises  questions  about  the  balance  between 
global and local approaches to reducing the 
threat from terrorism. 

International action to mitigate external stresses

223

BOX 7.4  Multiple interdiction efforts: Cocaine in the Americas

In the Americas, the cocaine trail begins with on-farm production in only three South American countries 
(in 2008, Colombia accounted for 51 percent of global production, Peru 36 percent, and Bolivia 13 per-
cent);33 transits through Central America, Mexico, and the Caribbean; and is sold wholesale and retail in the 
United States. A proliferation of initiatives is trying to stem this ﬂ ow: 10 bilateral or regional programs, with 
many countries belonging to more than one program (see map). 

This situation raises questions about the coherence of the international response, especially since 
increased enforcement in one area often leads to diversion to another. The creation of one Caribbean 
initiative was justiﬁ ed in part because “recent eﬀ orts to enhance drug enforcement eﬀ orts along the 
[U.S.] southwest border seem to be having a consequent eﬀ ect of moving transit routes back into the 
Caribbean.”34 

The current (fragmented) state of international cooperation against drugs in the Americas

The map illustrates the fragmented regional focus and overlapping mandates of 10 initiatives related 
to drug traﬃ  cking in the Americas. Each colored line indicates a separate initiative and connects the 
member countries involved in the initiative. 

The Mérida
hh
idid
Initiative

US-Mexico High Level
Consultation Group on
Bilateral Cooperation

Permanent Central American Commision for the
Eradication of Production, Trafficking,
Consumption and Illicit Use of Narcotic
and Psychotropic Substances and Related Crimes (CCP)-
Initiative by Central American Integration System (SICA)

Andean Counterdrug
Initiative (ACI)

Central American Regional
Security Initiative (CARSI)

IBRD 38420   March 2011

AAAA

rug 
rug AbbAbbAb

I
Inter-American Drug Abuse
Control Comission (CICAD)–
Initiative by Organization of
American States (OAS)

The Caribbean Basin
Security Initiative (CBSI)

iegioegioiegiog nal 
Regional Security System (RSS) -
ooo
II
Initiative by Organisation of
Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)

ySSty Syy yy yy Sy tt
byybby Obby y O O

iitii

iiiiii

Plan Colombia

Andean Cooperation Plan for the
Control of Illegal Drugs–Initiative
bbbbb
bb
by Comunida Andina (CAN)

ddA dA dd

a Aa Aa 

CoCoCo

Sources: UNODC 2009b; U.S. Oﬃ  ce of National Drug Control Policy 1999; Seelke, Sun Wyler, and Beittel 2011; Cen-
tral American Integration System 2009; Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission 2010; Andean Council of 
Foreign Ministers 2001; Embassy of the United States in Mexico 2010. 

Research  into  the  interactions  between 
the  local  and  the  international  dimensions 
of terrorist recruitment and mobilization is 
too limited to allow for deﬁ nitive statements 

about the relationship between violence, de-
velopment, institutional transformation, and 
terrorism. What we do know, however, sug-
gests  that  international  development  prac-

224 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 7.5   Expert viewpoints: For and against regulated drug 

legalization to reduce violence

The WDR team asked two well-known authorities on the subject to oﬀ er their opinions.

Against

Mark A. R. Kleiman, UCLA School of Public Aﬀ airs 

If the avoidance of failed states were the sole policy goal, the legalization of all drugs would be 
transparently desirable: failed states and civil conﬂ icts create congenial conditions for illicit 
drug-dealing, while illicit drug production weakens states and fuels civil conﬂ ict, with drug rev-
enues supporting insurgents and other armed nonstate actors and corrupting oﬃ  cials. How-
ever, drug abuse creates problems for drug abusers and for their families, neighbors, and co-
workers. Prohibition is not a perfect answer: it can exacerbate those problems, create violence 
and corruption around illicit markets (in producer, transit, and consumer countries), and con-
tribute to the problem of mass incarceration. Yet prohibition also tends to reduce drug con-
sumption. Alcohol abuse is far more common, and generates far more intoxicated violence, 
than the abuse of any illicit drug. So there is tension between security and governance and the 
control of drug abuse: blanket drug legalization would be a blow against terrorism, but would 
also increase the prevalence of substance-abuse disorders.

It is sometimes claimed that the full beneﬁ ts of prohibition in reducing substance abuse 

could be achieved through some combination of taxes and regulations, without incurring the 
costs of prohibition in terms of violence. But that claim rests on two fallacious beliefs: that 
taxes and regulations would not be proﬁ tably deﬁ ed, and that the economic and political mus-
cle of the newly legalized drug industries would not succeed in eating away at the controls 
that limit their marketing scope.

Eﬀ ective taxation and regulation might be technically feasible, with bans on marketing, 

restriction of commerce to cooperatives, or delegation of authority to physicians and pharma-
cists operating under professional strictures. But there is no reason to be conﬁ dent that such 
systems of eﬀ ective control would be established or would remain stable. 

The current international drug-abuse control regime too rests on twin fallacies: ﬁ rst, that 

actions in producer countries can greatly restrict drug abuse “downstream,” and, second, that, 
since drug production creates security-and-governance problems, any sort of counter–drug 
activity naturally helps solve those problems. “Source control” eﬀ orts are largely futile, and 
source-country counter-narcotics eﬀ orts—not only enforcement but also alternative develop-
ment—naturally exacerbate, rather than ameliorate, security and governance problems. They 
do so by raising prices (and thus revenues, since ﬁ nal demand is highly inelastic to farm gate 
price) and by conferring competitive advantage on traﬃ  ckers with the most guns and the most 
inﬂ uence: terrorists, insurgents, warlords, armed transnational crime groups, and corrupt oﬃ  -
cials. The same is true of “crop substitution” or “alternative development.” In Afghanistan, a 
combination of enforcement and development eﬀ orts has concentrated poppy growing in 
areas under Taliban control, and thus increased the yield to the Taliban from whatever “taxes” 
it can collect from poppy farmers and heroin reﬁ ners.

It is possible to imagine a drug-enforcement eﬀ ort focused on the intersection between 

drug dealing and security-and-governance problems, pursuing traﬃ  ckers and growing regions 
that contribute most to instability. But as with taxation and regulation, imagining a better pol-
icy is not the same as implementing it. 

Reduced source-country enforcement would have minimal impact on the drug problem in 
rich consumer countries. Soil in which illicit drug crops can be grown is not a scarce resource, 
and shrinking the supply from one producer generally means a corresponding increase in pro-
duction elsewhere.

Successful demand-reduction eﬀ orts both reduce substance abuse and shrink the revenues 

of illicit enterprises, including those that threaten the stability of producer-country govern-
ments. Forcing drug abusers under criminal-justice supervision for other crimes has much 
greater potential to shrink total volumes. We should try to optimize the policies that imple-
ment prohibition, developing a drug-control regime that serves the goal of reducing the 
extent of substance-abuse disorders and the damage they cause at the minimum cost in terms 
of security and governance.

 

For

International action to mitigate external stresses 

225

Jeﬀ  rey A. Miron, Department of Economics, Harvard University 

Worldwide prohibition of drugs is roughly 100 years old. During that time span, national and 
subnational governments have expended enormous sums on police, prosecutors, and prisons 
in attempts to enforce it. Advocates of prohibition believe that, despite these costs, the world 
has beneﬁ ted by avoiding a far greater incidence of drug use, addiction, and other negatives. 
Thus, according to this perspective, the beneﬁ ts of prohibition exceed the costs. 

In fact, prohibition causes far more deleterious consequences than it prevents. To see why, 

consider the consequences of prohibition.

First, prohibition generates violence because it drives markets underground. In legal mar-

kets, participants resolve their disputes with advertising and lawsuits, but in underground mar-
kets these nonviolent mechanisms are not available, so participants use violence instead. Traf-
ﬁ ckers engage in turf battles with rival traﬃ  ckers and shoot employees who steal, customers 
who do not pay, and suppliers who renege on contracts. Traﬃ  ckers also employ violence 
against law enforcement attempts to arrest them, against politicians who support extradition 
to the United States, and against civilians who cooperate with the police.

Violence soared in the United States, for example, in response to federal alcohol prohibition 

in 1920 but then declined rapidly after repeal. Prohibition also generates corruption. Those 
who run afoul of the law have strong incentives for bribery of police, judges, and politicians. 

Prohibition contributes to the spread of HIV, hepatitis, and other blood-borne diseases 

because it raises drug prices. When drugs are expensive, users face an incentive to inject rather 
than consume in less risky ways because injection delivers the biggest bang for the buck. The 
impact is not only on drug users but on the broader population.

Prohibition creates a source of ﬁ nance for violent groups, including terrorist groups and 

rebel organizations. Traﬃ  ckers need protection from law enforcement and the military, so they 
hire terrorist groups to provide this enforcement. Terrorists beneﬁ t by earning income that 
supports their operations. Without this support, terrorist groups like the Taliban in Afghanistan, 
the FARC in Colombia, and the Shining Path in Peru would face far greater diﬃ  culty in funding 
their activities. On the ﬂ ip side, legalization would allow police and the military to devote more 
resources to ﬁ ghting terrorist or insurgent groups than ﬁ ghting traﬃ  ckers.

All these eﬀ ects are adverse consequences of prohibition. The only possible justiﬁ cation for 

prohibition, therefore, is that it might reduce drug use or the harmful side-eﬀ ects of use. 

Yet abundant evidence suggests that prohibition has, at most, a modest impact in reducing 

drug use. Repeal of alcohol prohibition produced only about a 20 percent increase in use, 
while Portugal’s 2001 decriminalization policy for reasonable personal consumption of drugs 
did not cause a measurable increase (indeed, use was lower afterwards). Across countries, use 
rates bear little connection to the strictness of the prohibition regime. The Netherlands has a 
tolerant policy towards use of marijuana, for example, yet use rates diﬀ er little from those in 
the United States.

This evidence does not rule out the possibility that use might increase by measurable 

amounts under legalization, but assertions that use or addiction would skyrocket are inconsis-
tent with evidence. Societies have the option of legalizing the good but targeting misuse—as 
is done for alcohol and other goods that can be used irresponsibly but that most people use 
responsibly. Consistency therefore requires the same approach to drugs. 

In sum, prohibition has a broad range of harmful eﬀ ects and, at best, a modest and specu-

lative beneﬁ t. Legalization means the harms from drugs fall mainly on those who choose these 
risks, many of whom were already doing so under prohibition, rather than on innocent 
bystanders and law enforcement institutions. The choice between prohibition and legalization 
is therefore clear. Legalization is not a panacea, but it is unquestionably the lesser of the evils. 

226 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

titioners and diplomats working to support 
national  coalitions  and  institutional  trans-
formation  should  pay  attention  to  the  po-
tential  for  excluded  groups  and  neglected 
regions  to  become  fertile  ground  for  ideo-
logically driven recruitment into violence—
while international actors working on global 
counter-terrorism  policy  should  pay  atten-
tion to the way local violence and weak insti-
tutions can help fuel global movements. 

External economic stresses

Fragile  states  and  areas  can  be  exposed  to 
externally generated stresses of an economic 
nature. Prominent among these are corrup-
tion  driven  by  outside  corporate  interests, 
illicit  ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows associated with corrup-
tion, tax evasion, and trafﬁ cking—and both 
the price shocks associated with rising global 
demands for food and fuel and the pressure 
to acquire access to or ownership of essential 
natural  resources  (land,  water,  and  energy). 
Again, states with relatively weak governance 
systems and bargaining power cannot be ex-
pected to address such external stresses with-
out global and regional assistance. 

Transnational corruption

As  chapter  5  highlights,  efforts  to  counter 
corruption  are  an  important  and  politically 
challenging part of national reform processes. 
Corruption is often not just a local challenge; 
international  malefactors  are  signiﬁ cant  in 
cor ruption dynamics and can pose a substan-
tial obstacle to national efforts at transforma-
tion. Progress will depend at least in part on 
international  efforts  to  address  the  external 
dimension of corruption. The principle that 
states  should  criminalize  acts  by  their  own 
nationals who corrupt ofﬁ cials of other states 
is now ﬁ rmly entrenched in international law, 
although  there  is  much  room  for  improve-
ment in its implementation. 

As recently as 2000, many developed na-
tions actually fostered corruption across na-

tional  boundaries  by  allowing  their  citizens 
or  companies  to  take  a  tax  deduction  for 
bribes paid to ofﬁ cials of other governments.35
Ten  years  on,  the  situation  has  changed 
dramatically.  The  OECD  (Organisation  for 
Economic  Co-operation and Development) 
Anti-Bribery  Convention  (Convention  on 
Combating  Bribery  of  Foreign  Public  Ofﬁ -
cials) and the UN Convention Against Cor-
ruption  require  that  state  parties  prescribe 
criminal sanctions for bribing a foreign pub-
lic ofﬁ cial. This extraordinary turnaround is 
particularly important for states with fragile 
governance.  The  bribes  paid  to  ofﬁ cials  of 
these countries to win mineral concessions, 
arms  contracts,  or  other  lucrative  business 
opportunities  almost  always  originate  out-
side their borders—so shutting down trans-
national bribery is crucial to curbing corrup-
tion in these states. 

Sanctioning  those  who  corrupt  foreign 
public  ofﬁ cials,  however,  is  still  a  work  in 
progress.  Transparency  International’s  2010 
evaluation of the OECD Anti-Bribery Con-
vention found that only seven of the 38 coun-
tries party to the convention are actively en-
forcing the provisions of their domestic laws 
to  criminalize  the  bribery  of  foreign  public 
ofﬁ cials. Another nine are making some ef-
fort to enforce the ban. The remaining 20 are 
making little or no effort to do so. Although 
this is an improvement from the group’s ﬁ rst 
report  in  2005,  when  only  four  parties  had 
prosecuted  more  than  one  case,  Transpar-
ency  International  concludes  that  “current 
levels of enforcement are too low to enable 
the convention to succeed.”36 

The  international  community  is  devel-
oping  innovative  measures  to  prosecute  of-
ﬁ cials  involved  in  transnational  corruption. 
Yet even when there is evidence that a public 
ofﬁ cial in a fragile state has accepted a bribe, 
proving the case presents legal, technical, and 
logistical challenges that are often beyond the 
capacity of investigators and prosecutors in 
fragile situations. Where capacity or political 
constraints  prevent  prosecution,  authorities 
in  weaker  jurisdictions  have  exploited  the 

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

227

BOX 7.6   Partnering with client countries to curb corruption in 

World Bank–funded projects

The World Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency investigates allegations of corruption, fraud, coer-
cion, collusion, and attempts to conceal this conduct in World Bank–funded projects. If a com-
plaint is substantiated, a process is begun and can result in barring ﬁ rms or individuals from 
bidding on Bank-ﬁ nanced contracts, with referrals to the appropriate law enforcement authori-
ties for possible criminal prosecution under national law. 

Over the past six years, 67 individuals and ﬁ rms have been barred from bidding on World 

Bank contracts from two years up to indeﬁ nitely. The list includes very small ﬁ rms and nongov-
ernmental organizations in developing countries to U.K. publisher Macmillan Limited and the 
China Road and Bridge Corporation, a large state-owned enterprise. During this period, the 
Bank also concluded a settlement agreement with Siemens AG whereby the Siemens Group 
agreed to voluntarily refrain from bidding on Bank-ﬁ nanced contracts for two years. As part of 
its settlement with the Bank, Siemens will commit US$100 million over the next 15 years to 
global eﬀ orts to ﬁ ght fraud and corruption. Macmillan and others have agreed to cooperate 
with the Bank’s ongoing eﬀ orts to combat fraud and corruption in its projects and to imple-
ment an anti-corruption compliance program. 

The World Bank, the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the Euro-
pean Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the Inter-American Development Bank 
have agreed to honor each other’s debarments so that in the future, a ﬁ rm debarred by one 
bank will be ineligible to bid on contracts funded by the other banks.

Since it was established in 2001, the Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency has referred 112 cases 
to national law enforcement agencies. Referrals in 2001–06 resulted in convictions in national 
courts in Bolivia, Guinea, Norway, and the United States for receiving a bribe, embezzlement, 
or other corruption oﬀ enses. More recently, a referral led the Kenyan Anticorruption Commis-
sion to open 38 criminal investigations, two of which are being prosecuted. Acting on informa-
tion from the World Bank, the Norwegian government indicted three former employees of 
Norconsult for bribery, and the Palestinian Attorney General’s oﬃ  ce opened an investigation of 
a contractor on a World Bank–funded project for fraud.

Source: World Bank 2010h. 

laws  in  other  countries  to  overcome  these 
hurdles. Under U.K. law, for example, using 
the  proceeds  of  corruption  to  invest  in  the 
U.K. constitutes an offense under anti-money 
laundering  laws—Nigeria’s  Economic  and 
Financial Crimes Commission has supplied 
U.K.  authorities  with  information  that  en-
abled prosecutions in the U.K. related to stolen 
Nigerian state assets. Haitian and U.S. ofﬁ cials 
worked  together  to  convict  a  senior  ofﬁ cial 
of  Haiti’s  telecom  authority  in  a  U.S.  court 
for taking bribes from American companies. 
Three  U.S.  nationals  have  also  pled  guilty 
to offenses in connection with the payments 
to the Haitian company.37

As ties between law enforcement authori-
ties in developed and developing states have 
grown, authorities have also begun joint in-
vestigations  with  the  evidence  available  for 

use in proceedings in both countries. The in-
vestigations provide invaluable training op-
portunities  when  experienced  investigators 
from developed countries pair up with coun-
terparts  from  developing  states.  Indeed,  the 
World  Bank’s  Department  of  Institutional 
Integrity plans to follow this model when it 
refers evidence of corruption in a Bank proj-
ect to national authorities (box 7.6).

Illicit international ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows

Prosecuting  corruption  in  commodities  is 
complemented  by  efforts  to  interdict  the  ﬁ -
nancing ﬂ ows from these and other corrupt 
activities,  including  drug  trafﬁ cking.  Many 
international initiatives are under way in this 
area. A  large  number  of  laws  and  programs 
aim  to  identify  and  stem  the  laundering  of 

228 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Together,  these  steps 

 illicit  funds—whether  generated  by  corrup-
tion, tax evasion, or drug trafﬁ cking—through 
the legitimate ﬁ nancial system. This is impor-
tant  for  violence  prevention:  many  armed 
movements in civil and political conﬂ ict are 
ﬁ nanced  from  these  sources.  The  Financial 
Action Task Force, established in 1990 to con-
trol the ﬂ ows of drug proﬁ ts, now has rules 
for controlling laundering of illicit funds, and 
ﬁ nancial  intelligence  units  combat  money   
laundering at the national level.38 Such units, 
in place in 116 countries, work together un-
der  the  Egmont  Group  initiative.39  This  ex-
pansion in ﬁ nancial intelligence has been par-
alleled  by  greater  attention  from  banks  and 
other  ﬁ nancial  institutions  to  monitor  and 
report on customer transactions—and by in-
creased interest in law enforcement agencies 
in following the “money trail.”40
in 

intelligence-
 gathering,  monitoring,  and  the  amassing 
of evidence increase the ability of the inter-
national  community  to  build  strong  cases 
against  organized  and  transnational  crime. 
Using the same principle applied in the pros-
ecution of Al Capone for income tax evasion 
in 1931, evidence of illicit ﬁ nancial dealings 
provides a way to prosecute violent criminals 
for “proxy  offenses”  without  having  to  rely 
on witnesses to violence—who can be bribed 
or threatened. In August 2009, 70 countries 
and dependencies agreed to create a Global 
Forum  on  Transparency  and  Exchange  of 
Information for Tax Purposes to reduce tax 
evasion  through  trusts,  corporations,  and 
other devices outside the country levying the 
tax.  Modeled  on  the  Financial  Action  Task 
Force,  the  forum  will  conduct  peer  reviews 
of  members  and  selected  nonmembers  to 
determine whether they have entered at least 
12  tax  information  exchange  agreements, 
enacted  legislation  allowing  them  to  com-
ply with requests for information from their 
treaty partners, and are in fact providing in-
formation when requested. 

However, the sheer number of initiatives 
poses  a  challenge.  More  than  74  global,  re-
gional, and multicountry exercises now col-

lect  and  use  information  on  money  laun-
dering,  international  corruption,  trafﬁ cking 
of  speciﬁ c  commodities,  and  terrorism.  Of 
these,  30  are  focused  on  money  laundering 
or  corruption,  while  another  37  deal  with 
speciﬁ c  commodities  (drugs,  arms,  illicit 
minerals,  and  natural  resources).41  In  addi-
tion, there are numerous national ofﬁ ces: just 
four OECD countries have at least 22 ofﬁ ces 
between them dealing with these issues.42 

The  system  for  identifying  money  laun-
dering or terrorist ﬁ nancing establishes links 
between persons and transactions. The more 
detailed the data, the more likely they are to 
reveal  malfeasance.  But  tracking  and  inves-
tigating  “criteria-based”  activities  (foreign 
exchange  transactions,  international  wire 
transfers)  multiplies  the  ﬂ ow  of  data  to  a 
ﬁ nancial  intelligence  unit.  To  operate  well, 
these initiatives require sophisticated capac-
ity.  The  analysis  of  transnational  ﬁ nancial 
ﬂ ows  can  uncover  information  for  use  in 
several  different  jurisdictions,  and  analysis 
in  higher  capacity  environments  can  thus 
be of great use to developing countries (box 
7.7). While analytical capability is high in a 
few wealthier countries, this is not the case in 
most low- and middle-income states.43 

Pulling  out  information  to  uncover  so-
phisticated  networks  requires  resources  and 
analytical capacity not found in many units. 
Nor  are  the  necessary  prosecution  and  ju-
dicial  system  capabilities  always  in  place. 
Effective  international  action  depends  on 
strong networks and information exchanges 
between  jurisdictions.  Even  in  the  medium 
term, it is unlikely that developing states can 
build the capacity to operate ﬁ nancial intel-
ligence units at the level required to produce 
results.  Resources  may  be  better  devoted  to 
stopping  the  ﬂ ow  of  funds  to  secrecy  juris-
dictions44 than to controlling the ﬂ ow out of 
fragile states.

Cooperation  across  borders  is  not  al-
ways  smooth.  To  prosecute  cases  of  cross-
border  money  laundering  and  trafﬁ cking, 
jurisdictions  must  share  data  that  may  not 
affect  their  own  nationals  or  institutions, 

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

229

BOX 7.7   The Australian Crime Commission’s high-risk money 

movement strategy

Under its ﬁ nancial crimes program, the Australian Crime Commission is piloting a risk-based 
approach to identifying funds linked to organized crime. This approach to money laundering, 
developed with the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Center (AUSTRAC), analyzes bulk 
ﬁ nancial transaction data to identify and monitor “high-risk” money movements (those most 
likely to involve illicit funds). To identify these ﬂ ows and the associated criminal enterprise struc-
tures and entities, the commission has developed a methodology to identify unusual and unex-
pected amounts of money ﬂ owing through AUSTRAC and the SWIFT (Society for Worldwide 
Interbank Financial Telecommunication) banking system. 

This highly selective approach allows investigators to target their resources eﬃ  ciently. 

Individuals and groups identiﬁ ed this way are cross-checked for police records and, if found 
suspicious, are further investigated using surveillance, interviews, and, where necessary, coercive 
powers. The intelligence enables investigators to follow high-risk transactions into and from 
Australia and to identify potential criminal actors at each end of the money chain. 

This approach helped identify one Southeast Asian crime syndicate that imported A$129 mil-

lion of narcotics over ﬁ ve weeks in 2001. The group is likely to have conducted similar imports 
throughout the preceding 12 months, or more than A$1 billion in illicit funds for this syndicate 
alone. Another Southeast Asian crime syndicate of four small shops transferred A$300 million in 
drug proﬁ ts overseas over 12 months in 2001. 

Sources: Australian Crime Commission 2010; Government of Australia 2010.

and must trust the other jurisdiction not to 
leak  the  data  to  those  implicated.  NORAD 
(Norwegian  Agency  for  Development  Co-
operation)  sponsors  an  informal  network 
that brings prosecutors and anti-corruption 
agency ofﬁ cials from developed and develop-
ing countries together twice a year to share 
information and collaborate on cases. Under 
the auspices of the Asian Development Bank 
and  the  OECD,  anti-corruption  ofﬁ cials 
in  East  Asia  and  the  Paciﬁ c  meet  regularly 
to  discuss  common  problems.  The  World 
Bank supports the International Corruption 
Hunters Alliance and, with the UNODC, the 
Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative.

Getting  the  most  from  today’s  systems 
will  take  perseverance.  Despite  progress  to 
date, three problems need attention. The ﬁ rst 
is  the  varying  capacity  across  jurisdictions, 
with a disproportionate weight in developed 
country organizations. The second is a mis-
alignment of incentives among countries, and 
even among institutions within a country. A 
third is the imperfect harmonization of vari-

ous  international  initiatives.  In  principle,  a 
more uniﬁ ed global system capable of analyz-
ing ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows and strengthening country 
ﬁ nancial systems would beneﬁ t all countries, 
particularly  if  reinforced  by  stronger  justice 
systems in conﬂ ict-affected countries. A global 
commitment of this complexity and magni-
tude would require signiﬁ cant addi tional re-
sources and political will at many levels. Nor 
should  the  challenge  be  underestimated—
even  though  the  number  of  global  jurisdic-
tions that account for the bulk of global trans-
actions is fairly small (see chapter 9).45

Resource stresses

Fragile states are disproportionately suscepti-
ble to globally driven resource shocks. Unlike 
other low-income countries, fragile states de-
pend heavily on food imports and are vulner-
able to globally driven increases in commodity 
prices and scarcities in essential resources. The 
pressures are mounting as economic growth 

230 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 7.8   Growing regional and global approaches to 

food insecurity

Eﬀ  ective early warning systems.  Multi-agency food security early warning 
systems that use satellite data to anticipate crop failures and food shortages 
include the Global Information and Early Warning System, which aims to 
improve food security response planning in 22 drought-prone African coun-
tries—and the Famine Early Warning System Network, which monitors food 
supply and demand in all countries, with special emphasis on 80 low-income, 
food-deﬁ cit nations. 

Regional expertise.  The Southern African Development Community’s (SADC) 
Remote Sense Unit in Harare, Zimbabwe, and the AGRHYMET Regional Center in 
Niamey, Niger, are two specialized institutes that provide national and local food 
security assessments and help build local capacity in agricultural policy and pro-
gram development. Recent regional eﬀ orts include the creation in 2002 of the 
ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) Food Security Information Sys-
tem (AFSIS) by member states plus China, Japan, and the Republic of Korea. 
AFSIS aims to improve food security in the region through the systematic collec-
tion, analysis, and dissemination of food security–related information.

Regional price stability mechanisms.  AFSIS is closely linked to the East Asia 
Emergency Rice Reserve Pilot Project, which is building a mutual assistance 
mechanism to share rice stocks among the 13 ASEAN and AFSIS countries, 
addressing shortages, and helping stabilize prices in the region. 

Financial mechanisms.  Insurance for agricultural communities may prove eﬀ ec-
tive in countries where conﬂ icts over access to and control of natural resources 
are heightened in periods of drought, ﬂ ood, or other climate-driven scarcity. 
Index-based insurance relies on objective measurements such as rainfall (too 
little, too much), and acts to share risk between farmers and insurance markets. 
The schemes have been piloted in instances of crop loss (in Ethiopia) or livestock 
mortality (in Mongolia). Although index-based insurance has been implemented 
in more than 15 countries, it has yet to be scaled up or become sustainable, 
especially in low-income countries. 

Sources: Bora and others 2010; Brinkman and Hendrix 2010. 

in  middle-income  countries  produces  new 
middle  classes,  which  are  adopting  OECD 
consumption  patterns  in  food  and  energy. 
Climate change—and the search for adaptive 
measures—is likely to amplify them. 

As  chapter  1  notes,  climate  change  can 
multiply  natural  resource–related  pressures 
due to its potential effects on food produc-
tion, water availability, energy demand, and 
land-use patterns (such as carbon sinks and 
biofuel  production).  Climate  change  is  al-
ready  affecting  water  systems  and,  in  some 
areas,  the  supply  of  arable  land.  Climate 
change and economic pressures are not sepa-
rate: wealthier countries also face declining 
water  supplies  and  are  searching  for  new 

sources  of  food,  water,  and  land  overseas, 
often in fragile states. 

Food  vulnerabilities  need  priority  atten-
tion. The share of agriculture in ofﬁ cial de-
velopment  assistance  declined  from  a  high 
of  17  percent  in  the  1980s  to  5  percent  in 
2006–08, with only 18 percent of this spend-
ing  (some  US$1.2  billion)  going  to  fragile 
and conﬂ ict-affected states.46 Some regional 
and global efforts to address food insecurity 
and agricultural productivity are under way 
(box 7.8), but much more needs to be done 
at the country level to develop agriculture in 
those countries.

By  contrast,  international  water  treaties 
have shown signs of success in reducing the 
risks of violence. A shared water resource has 
more often stimulated a search for compro-
mise than conﬂ ict, with cooperative interac-
tions between riparian states over the last 50 
years outnumbering conﬂ icts by more than 
two  to  one.47  The  international  commu-
nity  has  also  helped  resolve  riparian  issues 
such  as  water  use.  But  there  are  qualiﬁ ers. 
Although  many  shared  water  systems  have 
cooperative  frameworks,  some  150  do  not. 
Many feature both high water stress (low per 
capita water availability) and fragility in one 
or more riparian state. And climate change 
may affect regimes based on speciﬁ c quanti-
ties (as opposed to proportions) of a deﬁ ned 
water  ﬂ ow  (map  7.1).  Based  on  these  cir-
cumstances, there are instances where it may 
be appropriate to update and reﬁ ne certain 
elements of existing water treaty systems (see 
chapter 8).

The global search for energy and food sup-
plies is amplifying pressure on arable land in 
developing countries, especially where insti-
tutions are weak. Land-based conﬂ ict is typi-
cally treated as a purely national issue, or at 
best a subregional issue, but land use is in-
creasingly  subject  to  external  competitive 
pressures. Commercial leases or purchases by 
foreign governments or foreign government–
backed  enterprises  can  overlap  with  com-
munal  land  claims  and  lead  to  tensions—
famously  so  in  Madagascar,  where  such  an 
arrangement  over  a  large  land  leasing  deal 

International action to mitigate external stresses

231

M A P 7.1    Water availability, fragility, and the potential for riparian conﬂ ict 

in Africa

Fragile states are not necessarily water stressed. Most have signed international treaties. 
Still, some vulnerabilities remain. (Red areas on the map indicate riparian areas that have 
water stress and few or no treaty components. Those in blue have low or mitigated water 
stress).

Water stress (m3/person/yr)
and treaty coverage in
international river basins

Water stress with few
or no treaty components

Low or mitigated stress

Stress not available

Fragile or conflict-affected
states (2006–2010)

Source: De Stefano and others 2010. 

IBRD 38421
March 2011

generated  popular  resentment  that,  com-
bined  with  other  long-standing  tensions, 
contributed to unrest and the eventual top-
pling of the government in early 2009.48

A recent World Bank research effort sug-
gests that foreign investment in land does not 
increase with good governance, unlike other 
types  of  foreign  investment.  On  the  con-
trary, foreign investment in land tends to be 
greatest in countries with a combination of 
weak  land  governance,  abundant  land,  and 
low mechanization. This ﬁ nding lends sup-
port to growing concerns about the ability of 
local  and  national  institutions  to  provide 
adequate  protection  to  vulnerable  groups 
against land acquisition. 

Contributing  to  weak  governance  in  ar-
eas  of  increasing  land  demand  are  project 
approvals  issued  without  due  diligence,  ri-
valries among institutions with overlapping 
responsibilities, and insufﬁ cient capacity. All 
these  problems  are  exacerbated  by  lack  of 
transparency.  Ofﬁ cial  records  on  land  ac-
quisition are often incomplete; poor data on 
land transfers reduce tenure security and in-
vestment, increase the likelihood of conﬂ ict, 
and make it difﬁ cult to collect land taxes and 
monitor project progress.49 

International attention to land pressures is 
fragmented. The UN’s Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) examines the impact of 
changing food production and consumption 

232 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 7.9  Global approaches to land

In response to a sharp increase in investment involving signiﬁ cant use of agricultural land, 
water, grassland, and forested areas in developing and emerging countries, the FAO, Interna-
tional Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD), and the World Bank launched a consultative process involving gov-
ernments, civil society, international organizations, and the private sector to develop voluntary 
guidelines for responsible large-scale acquisition of land rights. 

The principles are intended to assist in “alleviating hunger and poverty, enhancing the 
 environment, supporting national and local economic development, and reforming public 
administration” by setting priorities for domestic food, shelter, and sustainable development 
needs. The draft set of “Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investment that Respects Rights, 
Livelihoods and Resources” is as follows:

1.   Existing rights to land and associated natural resources are recognized and respected. 
2.   Investments do not jeopardize food security but rather strengthen it.
3.   Processes for accessing land and other resources and then making associated invest-

ments are transparent, monitored, and ensure accountability by all stakeholders, within 
a proper business, legal, and regulatory environment.

4.   All those materially aﬀ ected are consulted, and agreements from consultations are 

recorded and enforced.

5.   Investors ensure that projects respect the rule of law, reﬂ ect industry best practice, are 

viable economically, and result in durable shared value.

6.   Investments generate desirable social and distributional impacts and do not increase 

vulnerability.

7.   Environmental impacts due to a project are quantiﬁ ed and measures taken to encourage 

sustainable resource use while minimizing the risk/magnitude of negative impacts and 
mitigating them.

The draft guidelines will be available for review by the same parties in 2011.

Source: FAO and others 2010. 

patterns on land use; the International Orga-
nization for Migration tracks the impact of 
changing land patterns on migration; the In-
ternational Commission on Property Rights 
for  the  Poor  has  analyzed  the  implications 
for  the  poorest  people  of  arbitrary  or  un-
regulated transfers of land rights. The World 
Bank has provided a comprehensive view of 
how  international  pressures  affect  domestic 
land availability and use, and an international 
working group has presented draft guidelines 
to improve the governance of land and other 
natural  resources  (box  7.9).  This  exercise 
needs to be deepened to ensure that land in-
vestment does not deprive local populations 
of the means of sustaining themselves. 

In international dialogues on food, energy, 
and  climate,  fragile  states  have  weak  voices 
 despite  bearing  substantial  impacts.  As  with 
international dialogues on counter-terrorism, 
the impact on fragile areas is often neglected, 

and the least developed countries have modest 
capacities to contribute. An important excep-
tion  is  the  way  African  states  pooled  their 
 diplomatic energies, under Ethiopia’s leader-
ship, in the 2010 Cancún climate change ne-
gotiations, contributing to agreement on ad-
aptation funding of US$100 billion a year—a 
model worth replicating in other fora.50 Mov-
ing forward, international negotiations on cli-
mate, energy, and food scarcity issues need to 
keep a careful eye on impacts on fragile states.
International donors can also help fragile 
states  weather  volatile  external  pressures  by 
investing in social protection programs. That 
assistance can take several forms (see chap-
ters  8  and  9). While  the  systems  are  global, 
many of the buffer mechanisms that warrant 
most  attention  are  regional—true  not  just 
for issues related to resources, but more gen-
erally for buffering national authorities and 
societies against external stresses. 

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

233

Between the global and the 
national: Regional stresses, 
regional support

Like all states, fragile states exist in a regional 
and global space. The region matters for sev-
eral  reasons.  Personal  relationships  within 
subregions are often deep, allowing regional 
actors and institutions to exercise moral sua-
sion  and  create  incentives  for  responsible 
leadership. Neighbors are a source of trade, 
cooperation,  and  even  of  potential  shared 
administrative capacity. On the negative side, 
neighbors can be a source of insecurity and 
political interference. 

Regional organizations provide an increas-
ingly  strong  platform  for  action.51  Since  the 
end of the Cold War, regional organizations 
have become more prominent, in conformity 
with  the  principle  of “regional  subsidiarity” 
articulated in chapter 8 of the UN Charter.52 
Chapter 1 of this Report discussed the impres-
sive progress made in combating coups d’état 
and abusive military rule in Africa and Latin 
America.  The  African  Union’s  African  Peer 
Review Mechanism and the mediatory efforts 
of  the  Economic  Community  of  West  Afri-
can States (ECOWAS) show that support in 
the neighborhood has advantages.53 Member 
states of the African Peer Review Mechanism 
participate on a voluntary basis and use this 
forum to work toward the aims set out in the 
New  Partnership  for  Africa’s  Development. 
The  mechanism  assesses  and  reviews  prog-
ress  toward  a  set  of  ambitious  governance 
indicators,  economic  growth,  and  regional 
inte gration.54  The  degree  of  capacity  for  ac-
tion does vary between regions: regional se-
curity, political, and economic arrangements 
are only as strong as the interests they share. 
Regional  organizations  are  also  combin-
ing their comparative advantage in political 
leadership  with  global  technical  capacity. 
In Southeast Asia, for example, ASEAN has 
provided  political  leadership  in  a  number 
of international engagements with technical 
support from other organizations. In Timor-
Leste,  it  provided  much  of  the  lead  diplo-
matic and peacekeeping capacity within the 

UN peacekeeping mission. In Aceh, Indone-
sia,  ASEAN  led  a  joint  monitoring  mission 
with the European Union, at the Indonesian 
Government’s request, to support the peace 
agreement. In Myanmar after Cyclone Nar-
gis,  the  organization  helped  open  access  to 
humanitarian  workers,  with  support  from 
the  UN,  the Asian  Development  Bank,  and 
the World Bank. 

Regions that have experienced conﬂ ict face 
a  dilemma.  Organized  criminal  groups  and 
cross-border  support  to  rebels  undermine 
the potential for cross-border collaboration. 
But collaboration and shared administrative 
services  could  create  precisely  the  net  gains 
in capacity that would allow all participating 
states  to  better  handle  organized  violence. 
In Central America, the peace processes ex-
plicitly  linked  neighbors  into  monitoring 
and  implementation  arrangements,  includ-
ing  implementation  within  their  own  bor-
ders. This not only helped reduce violence—it 
laid  the  foundation  for  greater  subregional 
economic  integration.  Even  states  that  have 
had  tense  relations,  or  have  suffered  from 
disruption inﬂ icted by groups based in each 
other’s territory, can ﬁ nd common interests 
in tackling transnational threats and protect-
ing shared resources like water. In the Middle 
East, cross-border initiatives to manage wa-
ter resources have survived turbulence in po-
litical and security relations;55 Thailand and 
Myanmar  have  had  successful  cooperation 
on health issues and on trafﬁ cking.

The physical, demographic, and economic 
characteristics of many fragile states increase 
the potential returns to regional cooperation. 
Of the 38 states classiﬁ ed by the World Bank 
as  fragile  today,  24  have  populations  under 
10  million,  and  13  are  either  landlocked  or 
island  nations  off  the  main  sea  lanes.  The 
economies of many fragile states share struc-
tural  disadvantages:  physical  isolation  of 
the whole or part of the country, combined 
with high transport costs to export destina-
tion markets, limited internal demand (and 
limited  economies  of  scale),  weak  national 
institutions,  and  scarce  trained  personnel. 
This lack of competitiveness and consequent 

234 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 7.10   The role of regional institutions and initiatives in norm-setting and violence prevention

ASEAN’s experience in crisis prevention and recovery

Surin Pitsuwan, Secretary-General ASEAN; WDR Advisory Council Member

There  are  many  conﬂ icts  simmering  in  the  ASEAN  land-
scape. But the region is not totally without its own experi-
ences  in  mediation  and  conﬂ ict  resolution.  ASEAN  has 
played an important role in endeavors. The ASEAN Troika in 
the Cambodian conﬂ ict of 1997–99, the Timor-Leste peace-
keeping operation of 1999 onward, the Aceh Reconciliation 
of  2005,  and  the  Myanmar  Cyclone  Nargis  catastrophe  of 
May 2008 were cases of mediation and eventual resolution 
where  the  regions  and  some  ASEAN  member  states  have 
made valuable contributions and learned lessons from the 
process.  It  has  always  been  like  putting  pieces  of  a  diplo-
matic jigsaw together, weaving tapestry of peace, improvis-
ing  the  best  modality  and  pattern  from  the  available  and 
suitable materials at hand.

One important lesson for us is that our ASEAN structures 
can play an important political convening role when there 
are  sensitivities  with  member  states.  There  was  a  higher 
level  of  mutual  conﬁ dence  between  Indonesia  and  the 
ASEAN states participating in the Timor-Leste operation. We 
got  around  the  rigid  principle  of  “non-interference”  by 
oﬀ ering  troops  under  a  joint  command  with  an  “ASEAN” 
military leader taking an active leadership role. And Indone-
sia made it easier for all ASEAN partners by issuing an invita-
tion to come and assist. In Myanmar, ASEAN played a central 
role  in  the  dialogue  with  the  Government  after  Cyclone 
Nargis,  helping  to  open  up  the  aﬀ ected  areas,  where  over 
130,000  men,  women,  and  children  had  died  and  many 
more faced traumatic conditions, to international aid. 

A second lesson is that we can ﬁ nd useful combinations of 
capacity between our local knowledge and political convening 
role, and the technical capacities of other partners. Our work in 
support  of  recovery  after  Cyclone  Narghis  was  supported  by 
technical  teams  from  the  World  Bank,  and  performed  in  con-
junction with the United Nations. In the Aceh Monitoring Mis-
sion,  we  worked  jointly  with  colleagues  from  the  European 
Union who brought valuable technical knowledge. 

The  third  is  that  the  more  operations  of  this  type  that  we 
undertake,  the  more  our  capacity  builds.  In  Timor-Leste,  long 
years of joint military training and exercises between the Philip-
pines,  Republic  of  Korea,  and  Thailand,  supported  by  partners 
outside the region such as the United States, paid oﬀ . The troops 
on  the  ground  could  communicate,  cooperate,  and  conduct 
joint  operations  without  any  delay—but  their  experiences  in 
Timor-Leste  also  added  to  their  capacity.  In  Myanmar,  ASEAN’s 
role  meant  drawing  on  personnel  from  many  of  our  member 
states,  such  as  Indonesia,  Thailand,  and  Singapore,  who  have 
extensive  experience  of  managing  post-disaster  recovery,  and 
also building capacity within our Secretariat. Linked to long-term 
programs of capacity-building with some of our donor partners, 
these experiences make us more ready to face new challenges in 
the future. The cumulative results of these eﬀ orts in managing 
political conﬂ icts and natural disaster relief have helped ASEAN 
in enhancing its capacity to coordinate our de velopment coop-
eration strategies. We have learned to contain sporadic violence 
and tension in the region and would not allow them to derail our 
community  development  eﬀ orts  aiming  at  common  security 
and sustainable prosperity for our people.

low  national  income  is  often  offset  only  by 
foreign assistance and rents from natural re-
source extraction. These factors can create an 
unhealthy mix of what has been called “en-
claved development plus dependency.”56 

Remote and insecure areas have little in-
frastructure—and need more.57 Areas that are 
mountainous or have few roads are difﬁ cult 
for governments to provide basic services or 
to police. Isolation tends to result both in di-
vided identity groups and in marginalization. 
And  there  are  few  economic  opportunities: 
the average GDP per capita of all landlocked 
developing  countries  is  three-ﬁ fths  that  of 
their maritime neighbors.58 The 2009 World 
Development Report on economic geography 

underscored  the  challenge  of  distance  and 
division  for  development  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa, and called for spatially blind institu-
tions as the bedrock of integration efforts.59 
In many parts of the world, roads and other 
infrastructure are absent from the more re-
mote  and  insecure  areas  (map  7.2).  In  the 
 Paciﬁ c,  the  high  transport  costs  associated 
with small-capacity freighters play the same 
isolating role as the lack of roads in the Saha-
ran and Sahelian areas of northern Africa and 
the mountainous drug-producing regions of 
Myanmar. 

A  lack  of  economic  incentives  for  infra-
structure explains much of the shortage. The 
reason for low infrastructure penetration in 

remote  areas  is  a  combination  of  low  eco-
nomic  activity  and  insecure  transit,  which 
lessen  the  demand  from  business  interests 
and  result  in  low  projected  returns  to  such 
investments.  The  returns  can  be  improved 
if such investments are part of regional net-
works. But governments can be reluctant, on 
sovereignty  grounds,  to  allow  international 
or  regional  investment  in  troublesome  bor-
der areas.

Where  issues  of  mistrust  can  be  over-
come—say,  by  involving  a  neutral  third 
party or joint organization—shared regional 
services have a good track record. The pro-
vision  of  some  government  services  by  re-
gional institutions can result in higher qual-
ity of services than countries could otherwise 
afford—and  can  build  a  high-quality  cadre 
of  civil  servants.  For  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-
affected  states,  the  regional  pooling  of  ser-
vices  can  reinforce  rather  than  undermine 
national  sovereignty  and  citizen  conﬁ dence 
in  government  (box  7.11).  This  is  exempli-
ﬁ ed  in  the  Caribbean  and  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  where  regional  solutions  have  im-
proved the quality of various public services. 
The  Eastern  Caribbean  Supreme  Court  is  a 
regional superior court of record for six in-
dependent states60 and three British Overseas 
Territories.61 Countries under the court rank 
high on the World Bank Institute’s 2008 Rule 
of Law rating, derived from enterprise, citi-
zen,  and  expert  surveys.  The  Paciﬁ c  Islands 
Forum’s Paciﬁ c Plan for Regional Integration 
and Cooperation includes a provision for re-
gional pooling of national services (customs, 
health, education, sports).62

Shared administration also has signiﬁ cant 
potential. Small and fragile states can beneﬁ t 
from  pooling  administrative  functions.  As 
chapter 4 discussed, the poor quality of pub-
lic services is a serious obstacle to economic 
growth  and  degrades  citizen  conﬁ dence  in 
government.63 Most countries spend around 
12 percent of GDP on government goods and 
services,  but  nonfragile  states  spend  about 
twice as much as fragile states do in per cap-
ita terms64 (the average low-income fragile or 
conﬂ ict-affected state spends US$38 per cap-

International action to mitigate external stresses

235

M A P 7.2    Sub-Saharan Africa’s regional infrastructure challenge in 

fragile states

Regional infrastructure is extremely limited in many of the fragile states in 
Africa. This map shows the presence of power plants, power lines, and regional 
roads in Sub-Saharan Africa (fragile states shaded pink). Some areas lacking 
infrastructure have very low populations to support, but others—such as the 
border area between the Central African Republic, Chad, and Sudan—are iso-
lated primarily due to insecurity. This reduces trade across borders and access to 
electricity, locking insecure areas out of economic connectivity.

IBRD 38422
March 2011

Hydro and thermal
power plants greater
than 100MW

Existing power lines
and paved regional
roads

Planned power lines
and unpaved regional
roads

Fragile states (2011)

Source: Briceño-Garmendia and Foster 2010.

ita on government goods and services, while 
the  average  low-income  non-fragile  state 
spends US$80) (table 7.2). The poor quality 
of public services is a serious obstacle to eco-
nomic growth, eroding citizen conﬁ dence in 
governments.65

Forging  shared  regional  arrangements 
often  beneﬁ ts  from  support  by  third-party 
mediation  perceived  to  be  neutral.  For  ex-
ample, the evolving institutions of the Euro-
pean Union sponsored many arrangements 
that  fostered  cross-regional  cooperation  at 
the  national  and  local  level  (see  box  7.12). 
Suspicion  between  neighbors  can  be  ame-
liorated by a trusted third party—a role that 

236 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 7.11  Pooling services regionally

In the past three decades, the role of regional organizations as providers of  public services has increased in Sub-Saharan Africa and the 
eastern Caribbean. Political independence brought self-determination but also meant that services formerly provided through colonial 
institutions had to be supplied by ﬂ edgling national institutions. Several countries responded by pooling resources regionally and con-
tracting out some public service provision to the newly created regional organizations. 

In most cases, the services contracted out were advisory rather than executive. For instance, countries relied on regional organi-
zations for advisory aspects of banking supervision (as with the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank or the Banque des Etats de l’Afrique 
Centrale,66 and the Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique de l’Ouest),67 while retaining the role of each country’s sovereign government 
in enforcing recommendations. In hindsight, this model worked well when there was a tradition of cooperation in central banking that 
predated independence. 

By pooling resources, countries have produced higher quality services and better civil servants than would have been possible had 
the countries acted separately. The success of this model has encouraged other experiments. The Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, Civil 
Aviation Authority, and Supreme Court, regional entities under the Revised Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Treaty, have been 
followed by a joint telecommunications regulator, the Eastern Caribbean Telecommunications Authority, and a joint natural disaster risk 
pooling mechanism, the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Fund. These organizations have also raised the bar on what the public 
and politicians expect for the quality of public services. Similarly, the regional central banks were followed in 1993 by the Organisation 
pour l’Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Aﬀ aires in Central and West Africa, founded to harmonize business law among member 
countries and serve as a supranational appeals court on aspects of business law. The West Africa Telecommunications Regulatory Agree-
ment, established in 2002, has pursued the harmonization and integration of the telecommunications market in West Africa. 

Although the role of regional organizations as public service providers has not developed to the same extent in the Paciﬁ c, due in 

part to vast distances and more diverse historical and cultural backgrounds, the University of the South Paciﬁ c is an initiative that others 
can learn from. Opened in 1968 and supported by 12 Paciﬁ c Island countries, it is acknowledged internationally as a credible institution 
of higher learning.

Source: Favaro 2008, 2010.

TA BL E 7.2   Shared administration can help fragile and conﬂ ict-affected states provide better quality public services

Low income

Fragile and conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected states

Non-fragile states

Lower middle income

Fragile and conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected states

Non-fragile states

Government 
consumption, 

% of GDP

11

15

13

13

Government expenditure on goods and services

US$ per capita

US$ purchasing power 

parity per capita 

38

80

247

470

131

267

858

1,296

Sources: Favaro 2010.
Note: Averages of most recent data available (2001 to 2008) for 88 low- and lower-middle-income countries (data are missing for 11 fragile and conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected countries).

the  Asian  Development  Bank  has  played 
with  good  effect  in  the  Greater  Mekong 
Subregion.68  Regional  organizations  have 
been  encouraging  national  leaders  to  ex-
plore  such  arrangements—and  seek  third-
party help in managing violence and shep-
herding transition. 

External  assistance  can  help  regional 
initiatives  and  regional  institutions  to  real-
ize their full potential in addressing security 
and  development  links.  As  with  Europe’s 
early  integration  (see  box  7.12),  where  re-
gions  have  the  political  appetite  to  explore 
sharing  administrative  capacity  or  pooling 

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

237

BOX 7.12    Early European measures to create shared economic interests in peace

The creation of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC)—the forerunner to the European Union—shows how economic inte-
gration can underpin peace and security. The ECSC was formed to create a common market and jointly monitor the production and 
use of coal and steel—strategically important goods. The ECSC Treaty was signed in Paris in 1951 and led to the free movement of coal 
and steel and free access to sources of production. A common High Authority supervised the market, respect for competition rules, 
and price transparency.

The ECSC enabled the lifting of ceilings on coal and steel production in key German industries in the postwar period without 

seeming to threaten the security of the country’s neighbors. Lifting these ceilings and generating regional conﬁ dence in coal and steel 
markets were important, not just for Germany’s economic growth, but also for European economic recovery as a whole. The notion of 
cross-border cooperation to spur investment, regulate production, open markets, and build conﬁ dence and trust are applicable in 
other regions prone to political instability or recovering from conﬂ ict.

Other forms of European cooperation have also managed to develop productive exchanges across borders and individual regions. 
The “Euro region” began as an innovative form of transborder cooperation (between two or more states that share a common border-
ing region) in the late 1950s. With the purpose of stimulating cross-border economic, sociocultural, and leisure cooperation, the Eurore-
gion model grew, and was boosted through the creation of the European common market and recent democratic transitions. There are 
currently more than 100 Euroregions spread across Europe, and the model has in recent times been replicated in eastern and central 
European territories. Cooperation has not been without problems in areas previously aﬀ ected by conﬂ ict, but there are good examples 
of cross-border developmental, social, and security programs that involve areas where ethnic minorities reside across several states or 
in areas that have suﬀ ered the trauma of interstate and civil war in the past. 

Sources: Lockhart 2010; Eichengreen 2010; Kelley 2004; Kubicek 2003; Schimmelfennig and Sedelmeier 2002; European Union 1951; Greta and 
Lewandowski 2010; Otocan 2010; Council of Europe 1995; Council of Europe and Institute of International Sociology of Gorizia 2003; Bilcik and 
others 2000.

functions  or  services,  external  assistance  to 
that process can be invaluable. So far, inter-
national aid has tended to support national 
rather  than  regional  efforts.  Support  to  re-
gional  organizations  has  grown  in  recent 
years, but it is generally directed as technical 
assistance  to  the  organization,  rather  than 
to  larger-scale  regional  delivery  programs 

(European assistance to African peacekeep-
ing is a signiﬁ cant exception). The potential 
for  regional  arrangements  to  create  buffers 
against  external  threats  and  to  provide  a 
cost-effective  way  to  enhance  institutional 
capacity  warrants  much  more  attention  in 
international assistance—an issue discussed 
in chapter 9.

238 
238 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1
WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 7  Central Asia: External pressures and external assistance

Types of violence:  Political violence, local intergroup conﬂ ict, local conﬂ icts with transnational ideological connections

Transition moment:  Moderate space for change

Key stresses:  Legacies of colonial past, transboundary natural 
resource management, human rights abuses, real or perceived 
discrimination, corruption

Key stakeholders:  Governments, opposition parties, regional 
partners

Institutional challenges:  Lack of political accountability and 
inclusion, limited capacity of regional forums and institutions

Regional cooperation is widely accepted as a process and 

instrument for preventing conﬂ ict, promoting economic 
growth, and facilitating country integration within the region 
and  with  the  international  community.  The  most  successful 
model is the European Union, which evolved over half a cen-
tury  from  the  original  six-nation  European  Coal  and  Steel 
Community.  The  Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations 
(ASEAN) and other subregional groups are also often cited as 
models to follow for conﬂ ict prevention and economic coop-
eration in Central Asia. But almost 20 years after Kazakhstan, 
the  Kyrgyz  Republic,  Tajikistan,  Turkmenistan,  and  Uzbeki-
stan  emerged  as  independent  states  from  the  former  Soviet 
Union, there has been little progress in regional cooperation in 
Central Asia, and the risk of conﬂ ict may be increasing.

Despite their cultural links and shared development expe-
rience as part of a large centrally planned economy for most of 
the 20th century, the ﬁ ve Central Asian countries have pur-
sued different paths and rates of economic and political tran-
sition—partly the outcome of policy choices and partly from 
their  Soviet  legacy.  Their  different  approaches  and  uneven 
natural  resource  endowments  have  resulted  in  increasingly 
differentiated  outcomes  in  growth,  poverty,  and,  ultimately, 
stability. Moreover, their sometimes conﬂ icting interests—in 
transboundary water use and management, for example—in-
ﬂ uence their attitudes toward, and thus the prospects for, en-
hanced regional cooperation. 

Is regional cooperation important?

Central Asia’s  geography,  history,  and  people—as  well  as  its 
landlocked position and the integrated energy, transport, and 
water infrastructure it inherited from the Soviet Union—to-
gether make the ﬁ ve countries unusually interdependent. In 
reality, a modicum of day-to-day coordination of transbound-
ary oil and gas pipelines, electricity transmission, and water 
distribution is a practical necessity. 

Given their economies’ small size, relative isolation, and re-
liance  on  exports  of  primary  products,  these  countries’  re-
gional integration and market development could in principle 
help develop clusters of suppliers and complementary public 
services, improving all ﬁ ve countries’ access to world markets. 
Local community associations and networks developed dur-
ing  Soviet  times,  based  on  the  contours  of  economic  sub-
regions  such  as  the  Fergana Valley—now  partitioned  by  the 
borders of three countries—could be revived as the basis for 
increased intraregional trade, thus reducing the risk of cross-
border conﬂ ict. 

If  regional  approaches  were  adopted  and  strengthened, 
 several negative externalities could be tackled more effectively 
and efﬁ ciently. These include environmental deterioration, of 
which the dying Aral Sea is only the most visible example; land 
degradation  and  desertiﬁ cation,  which  have  reduced  crop 
yields and the availability of arable land; drug transit and trade; 
and eventually the impacts of climate change. 

Two international studies have estimated that improved re-
gional cooperation could increase Central Asia’s regional GDP 
by between 50 and 100 percent—and regional per capita in-
comes by up to 100 percent—in about 10 years. Lower trans-
port costs would increase trade with large neighbors such as 
China,  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Iran,  the  Russian  Federation, 
and,  indirectly,  South  Asia.  Managing  and  exploiting  trans-
boundary  water,  irrigated  agriculture,  and  related  hydro  and 
other energy resources would be more cost-effective. And col-
laborative approaches to regional public goods, such as biodi-
versity, the environment, and public health, would beneﬁ t from 
economies  of  scale—as  would  enhancing  security,  managing 
natural disasters, and curbing the drug trade. 

If so, why is cooperation receding? 

The explanation for cooperation not developing, and even re-
ceding—less  than  20  years  after  independence—is  that  each 

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

239

country’s  interest  in  regional  cooperation  is  different,  and 
individual  nation-building  is  still  under  way.  Other  factors 
include

(cid:129) 

(cid:129) 

(cid:129) 

(cid:129) 

 Diverging approaches to, and different rates of, economic 
transition—exempliﬁ ed most obviously by the contrast be-
tween  Kazakhstan’s  relatively  open  economy  and  Uzbeki-
stan’s relatively closed one

 Differing  views  between  the  two  upstream  (the  Kyrgyz 
Republic and Tajikistan) and three downstream countries 
(Kazakhstan,  Turkmenistan,  and  Uzbekistan)  over  the 
management of the region’s two key transboundary water 
resources (the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers and their 
tributaries) for hydroelectric power generation and irri-
gation, respectively

 Rival searches for the same extraregional and global mar-
kets, often complicated by the competing interests and mo-
tivations of the subregion’s principal external actors

 Rekindled cultural, ethnic, and religious identities of the ﬁ ve 
titular nationalities—following 70 years of suppression dur-
ing the Soviet era—coupled with the stresses and strains of 
modern nation-building. 

Less tangible but still signiﬁ cant are contending claims to re-
gional leadership by the two largest countries (Kazakhstan and 
Uzbekistan) and growing instability in the two smallest, most 
fragile countries (Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic)—partic-
ularly in the Kyrgyz Republic where recent political turmoil and 
interethnic violence could destabilize its neighbors. An outcome 
of these divergent interests is the dwindling efﬁ cacy and inﬂ u-
ence of the regional forums and institutions, whose managerial 
and decision-making capacity remains limited.

Institutional constraints

The only regional institution involving all ﬁ ve countries is the 
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea—a single-purpose 
body established in the early 1990s to mobilize ﬁ nancial re-
sources to mitigate the environmental, humanitarian, and so-
cial impact of the Aral Sea’s drying up. In addition, the UN has 
sponsored three regional groups. The Special Program for the 
Economies  of  Central  Asia—a  framework  for  periodic  dia-
logue inspired originally by Kazakhstan—has only very lim-
ited resources. The UN Regional Center for Conﬂ ict Resolu-
tion, based in Ashgabat, promotes regional dialogue, security, 
and understanding. And the recently established Central Asia 

Regional Information and Coordination Center, based in Al-
maty, Kazakhstan, exchanges intelligence to identify and dis-
rupt drug trafﬁ cking networks and strengthens regional crim-
inal  justice  capacity.  The  Central  Asia  Regional  Economic 
Cooperation  program,  initiated  and  funded  mainly  by  the 
Asian Development Bank, is a partnership of eight countries 
and six multilateral institutions to promote and facilitate re-
gional cooperation in transport, trade facilitation, trade policy, 
and energy. 

What lessons can be learned?

A 2008 survey of regional cooperation institutions worldwide 
suggested ﬁ ve key lessons relevant to Central Asia: 

(cid:129) 

(cid:129) 

(cid:129) 

(cid:129) 

 Effective regional cooperation takes time and effort to de-
velop, requiring incremental, gradual, ﬂ exible implementa-
tion with visible payoffs. 

 It also requires sustained leadership—at the country, insti-
tutional, and individual levels. 

 The size and membership of regional institutions should be 
kept manageable. 

 Financial resources and instruments are needed to support 
regional investments and cooperation. 

(cid:129) 

 External actors should assist wherever possible.

In addition to these ﬁ ndings, a 2007 World Bank Indepen-
dent  Evaluation  Group  analysis  of  regional  programs—
including  two  in  Central Asia—listed  ﬁ ve  design  features  of 
successful  programs  consistent  with  these  principles:  strong 
country commitment to regional cooperation; objectives that 
match  national  and  regional  capacities;  clear  deﬁ nition  and 
coordination of the roles of national and regional institutions; 
accountable governance arrangements; and plans for the sus-
tainability of program outcomes.

Central Asia satisﬁ es few, if any, of these criteria. In par-
ticular, there is little or no country commitment to regional 
cooperation—for  the  reasons  noted  earlier—beyond  the 
minimal bureaucratic and technical coordination needed to 
ensure effective functioning of the countries’ integrated infra-
structure. Indeed, relations have deteriorated in the last two 
years, particularly with tensions strained among some coun-
tries over plans to complete two Soviet-era hydropower proj-
ects. Some of the countries have agreed to accept the conclu-
sions of externally ﬁ nanced, independent assessments of one 
of  the  project’s  economic,  environmental,  and  technical 

240 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FEATURE 7  Central Asia: External pressures and external assistance (continued)

feasibility —apparently signaling their interest in a mutually 
acceptable bilateral solution. 

From conﬂ ict to cooperation

Experience appears to conﬁ rm the analysis of at least one Cen-
tral Asian  scholar,  Matveeva  (2007),  who  concludes  that  re-
gional  cooperation,  however  desirable  in  theory,  cannot  be 
prescribed from outside. The mediation of conﬂ icts inherited 
by the ﬁ ve countries, if not their resolution, is a prerequisite 
for  more  broadly  based  regional  cooperation.  And  regional 
cooperation is more likely to evolve in limited well-deﬁ ned ar-
eas of obvious mutual interest or concern. 

Another couple of scholars, Linn and Pidufala (2008), view 
relations between the ﬁ ve countries as driven mainly by com-
petition and rivalry—for inﬂ uence, leadership, markets, and 
resources—warning, in addition, that this may not be a tem-
porary phenomenon related to nation-building. According to 
this view, Central Asia’s regional problems are unlikely to be 
resolved in the near term, and the main priority for external 
actors should be to reduce the risk that they may worsen and 
cause real conﬂ ict. 

The need for closer cooperation in Central Asia—to pre-
vent  conﬂ ict  and  to  maintain  and  reinforce  regional  stabil-
ity—may be greater and more urgent than ever, especially in 
energy and water, and trade and transport, which have so far 
proven intractable. While the outlook for enhanced coopera-
tion may have worsened, this makes renewed focus and coor-
dinated  effort  by  external  actors  all  the  more  important.  In 
this  context,  the  Central Asia  Regional  Economic  Coopera-
tion program’s pragmatic emphasis on coordinated country-
speciﬁ c  investments  in  energy  and  transport  infrastructure 
beneﬁ ting two or more countries may be a model for other 
partners to follow. 

If cooperation is indeed more likely to be ad hoc and in nar-
rowly deﬁ ned areas of common interest or concern—not in-
volving  all  ﬁ ve  countries—a  ﬂ exible  operational  framework, 
rather than an elaborate regional plan or strategy, is the right 
way to shape external actors’ actions. External actors can do 
much in convening, mediating, and resolving issues, but with-
out mutual interest and political will in the countries, their role 
will be limited.

Sources:  Houdart and Pearce 2010; and others described in endnote.69

Notes

  1.  For a discussion of these linkages, see for example Naim 2006. 
  2.  See Baker 2005.
  3.  Rubin 2002; Small Arms Survey Project 2005, 2009.
  4.  Gambino 2010; U.S. Department of State 2010.
  5.  Oliver 1999.
  6.  UN “Groups  of  Friends”  began  in  the  post–Cold  War  period  as  a  mediation  tool  for  countries 
attempting  to  prevent  or  exit  conﬂ ict.  Friends  groups  have  been  operating  over  the  past  two 
decades, providing a core group of interested states that apply diplomatic persuasion—carrots and 
sticks—in promoting peace settlements. Most often these are informal groupings, with a negotiated 
and varied rather than rigid mandate based on the country context. See Whitﬁ eld 2007.

  7.  Patel and Ross 2007; O’Loughlin, Witmer, and Linke 2010.
  8.  See African Union 2007a.
  9.  UNDP 2010a.
10.  UN Security Council 2010b.
11.  In the case of heroin and cocaine, which are illegal in almost all countries. 
12.  See OECD 2010h.
13.  Estimated  value  of  conﬂ ict  and  illicit  diamonds.  In  2008,  conﬂ ict  diamonds  were  estimated  to 
account for 0.1 percent of the total global production of rough diamonds, which stood at US$12.7 
billion. See Kimberley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme 2009, 2010. 

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

241

14.  Gemologists are generally able to identify the origin of diamonds if they receive several parcels of 
gems coming from the same area. They have great difﬁ culties in identifying origin once stones from 
different areas have been mixed, and they are completely unable to identify the origins of a polished 
stone (see Goreaux 2001).

15.  This is an estimate for oil trafﬁ cked only from Nigeria, where this problem is concentrated, and is 
based on an estimated 150,000 barrels per day at a price of US$20 per barrel—a signiﬁ cant discount 
over world oil prices to attract large buyers (see UNODC 2009a).

16.  Estimated 2008 value of illegally imported wood products (see Lawson and MacFaul 2010, 125).
17.  While it is technically feasible to trace the origins of timber (and this indeed has been the focus of a 
number of “responsible forestry” initiatives), doing so depends either on tagging at the country of 
origin and a secure chain of custody, or on a more complicated DNA analysis. 

18.  UNODC 2010a, 129.
19.  The number of legal manufacturers of small arms is estimated to have increased from fewer than 
200 companies in 1980 to more than 600 by 2001. As of 2001, at least 95 countries had the capacity 
to undertake the legal production of small arms. See Small Arms Survey Project 2001.

20.  Most, but not all, small arms and light weapons are marked at the point of manufacture, for exam-
ple, with a serial number and manufacturer’s mark that is stamped, etched, or engraved into metal-
lic parts of the weapon. However, where they exist, the marks often contain insufﬁ cient informa-
tion for unique identiﬁ cation and reliable tracing, and there is no centralized record-keeping. See 
Greene 2001. 

21.  UNODC 2010a, 82, 111.
22.  Illicit trade in small arms and light weapons takes place in both the black and the gray markets. For 
a deﬁ nition of both markets, see Stohl and Grillot 2009. For information on the SALW, see Small 
Arms Survey Project 2006. The estimate of the elicit portion is reported in Marsh 2002.

23.  Small Arms Survey Project 2011. 
24.  See Cukier 2002 and Markowski and others 2009.
25.  On the developmental impact of SALW, see Bourne 2007.
26.  See Small Arms Survey Project 2009.
27.  Ben-Ari 2010; Worsnip 2009; UN Security Council 2009. 
28.  Demombynes 2010.
29.  Although the deﬁ nition of terrorism is fraught, and the question of which groups should be referred 
to as terrorist organizations is contested, 12 UN Conventions that have been adopted by the Gen-
eral Assembly specify tactics that are classiﬁ ed as terrorism. 

30.  An  example  of  this  today  is  the  presence  of  transnational  terrorist  organizations  afﬁ liated  with 
Al-Qaeda in the subnational conﬂ icts in Indonesia and the Philippines (see Putzel 2003; Kilcullen 
2009; Acharya and Acharya 2007). 

31.  UN General Assembly 2006.
32.  Berman and others 2009; Berman 2009; Berman and Iannaccone 2006.
33.  UNODC 2009b, 65.
34.  U.S. Ofﬁ ce of National Drug Control Policy, 1999, 26.
35.  OECD 1996, 2009; Greenberger 1995; Gantz 1998; Hines 1995.
36.  Transparency International 2010, 8. 
37.  Messick 2011. Also see box 8.4 in chapter 8.
38.  The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) was established in 1990 by the ﬁ nance ministers of G-7 
countries  to  combat  the  problem  of  illegal  narcotics  trafﬁ cking  and  money  laundering  through 
strengthened international cooperation. The FATF’s initial mission was to focus on preventing the 
use of the banking system and other ﬁ nancial institutions for the purpose of money laundering. 
As an initial step and based on an analysis of the existing situation, the FATF developed a series of 
recommendations on speciﬁ c measures, including the adaptation of national legal and regulatory 
systems,  that  would  help  detect,  prevent,  and  punish  misuse  of  the  ﬁ nancial  system  for  money 
laundering. Following the terrorist attacks of 9/11, the FATF issued additional guidelines to counter 
the terrorist ﬁ nancing. The FATF relies on a unique cooperation network involving more than 180 
jurisdictions around the world, including multilateral organizations such as the G-20, UN, World 
Bank, and IMF. Additionally, eight FATF-style regional bodies have been created over the years as 
part of this network. See Financial Action Task Force 2010.

39.  The Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units is an informal international gathering of ﬁ nan-
cial intelligence units (FIUs) formed in 1995. FIUs are national centers to collect information on 
suspicious or unusual ﬁ nancial activity from the ﬁ nancial industry and other entities or professions 
required to report transactions suspected of being money laundering or terrorism ﬁ nancing. FIUs 

242 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

are normally not law enforcement agencies; their mission is to analyze the information received. If 
sufﬁ cient evidence of unlawful activity is found, the matter is passed to the public prosecution. The 
goal of the Egmont Group is to provide a forum for FIUs around the world to improve cooperation 
in the ﬁ ght against money laundering and ﬁ nancing of terrorism and to foster the implementation 
of domestic programs in this ﬁ eld. Intscher 2010.

40.  Intscher 2010.
41.  WDR team calculations.
42.  Such as the U.S. Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FINCEN), the U.K. Serious Organized 
Crime Agency (SOCA), the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Center (AUSTRAC), and 
the Canadian Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Center (FINTRAC). 

43.  A  large  proportion  of  FIUs  (about  60–65  percent)  receive  only  Suspicious  Transaction  Reports, 
which meet some test of suspicion, and are by and large domestic transactions, usually of a relatively 
modest amount. This is the mandatory minimum reporting requirement of the FATF Recommen-
dations. A substantial minority of FIUs (about 25–30 percent) also receive, or have access to, Large 
Cash  Transaction  Reports,  reported  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  transaction  exceeding  a  threshold 
value speciﬁ ed in law or regulation. A small proportion of FIUs (perhaps 10–15 percent) receive 
some  Foreign  Ex change  Transaction  Reports,  usually  those  above  a  speciﬁ ed  value  threshold. A 
quite small proportion of FIUs (maybe 5–8 percent) receive, or have access to, Electronic Funds 
Transfer Reports (“wire transfers”), usually above a threshold, mostly for international, but in some 
instances also domestic transfers. See Intscher 2010. 

44.  Secrecy jurisdictions refer to jurisdictions that facilitate illicit ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows stemming from three 
overlapping sources: bribery, criminal activity, and cross-border trade mispricing. Secrecy jurisdic-
tions undermine development for the poorest countries as individuals taking advantage of these 
jurisdictions can commit a wide range of crimes such as tax evasion, nonpayment of alimonies, 
money  laundering,  terrorist  ﬁ nancing,  drug  trafﬁ cking,  human  trafﬁ cking,  illegal  arms  trading, 
counterfeiting, insider dealing, embezzlement, ﬂ eeing of bankruptcy orders, fraud, and others.

45.  One barrier relates to privacy: access to information on wire transfers, for example, means infring-

ing the privacy of the many millions of customers using wire transfers for entirely legal means. 

46.  OECD 2010b; Willman 2010.
47.  De Stefano and others 2010. 
48.  Cooke and Brown 2010.
49.  World Bank 2010f. 
50.  The Green Climate Fund will support projects, programs, policies, and other activities in develop-
ing country parties using thematic funding windows. The fund will be governed by the Green Cli-
mate Board comprising 24 members, as well as alternate members, with equal number of members 
from  developing  and  developed  country  parties.  The  assets  of  the  Green  Climate  Fund  shall  be 
administered by a trustee, and the World Bank was invited to serve as the interim trustee, subject 
to a review three years after operationalization of the fund. The Cancún negotiations also decided 
that an independent secretariat shall support the operations of the fund. It was also decided that 
the Green Climate Fund shall be designed by a Transitional Committee of 40 members, with 15 
members from developed country parties and 25 members from developing country parties. 

51.  The preeminent example of regional cooperation in the cause of conﬂ ict prevention is captured in 
the emergence of today’s Europe, after centuries of interstate violence had culminated in the most 
destructive war in history. From the Marshall Plan and the Organisation for European Cooperation 
through the creation of the European Union and its absorption of former Soviet bloc countries, 
this evolving social compact has so far managed to navigate a range of volatile political and social 
developments and to bring a degree of political and economic unity that few would have foreseen 
65  years  ago.  The  current  accession  process  provides  very  strong  incentives  for  candidate  states 
to attain speciﬁ ed governance, security, and human rights standards. Lockhart 2010; Eichengreen 
2010; Grimm 2010.

52.  See Wulf and Debiel 2009.
53.  See Shiawl-Kidanekal 2004. 
54.  For further information, see NEPAD 2010. 
55.  World Bank 2007b; Kramer 2008.
56.  “The  cost ‘wedges’  associated  with  small  size,  undeveloped  human  capital  and  institutions,  and 
market distance mean there is little scope for exports of manufactured goods or services; national 
economic viability in the Paciﬁ c is instead vested largely in three external income streams: i) rents 

 

International action to mitigate external stresses 

243

from natural resource extraction; ii) aid and ﬁ scal ﬂ ows; and iii) remittances from labor exports.” 
See World Bank 2009b. 

57.  See, for example, Fearon and Laitin 1999, 2003.
58.  Faye and others 2004.
59.  World Bank 2008h.
60.  Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the 

Grenadines.

61.  Anguilla, British Virgin Islands, and Montserrat. See Byron and Dakolias 2008.
62.  See Paciﬁ c Island Forum Secretariat 2005.
63.  See also La Porta and others 1999; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001; Hall and Jones 1999.
63.  The result holds for both lower- and lower-middle-income countries, both nominally and in pur-

chasing power parity adjusted.

65.  Favaro 2010. 
66.  The Banque des États de l’Afrique Centrale (BEAC) serves six countries: Cameroon, Central Afri-

can Republic, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Republic of Congo.

67.  The Banque Centrale des États de l’Afrique de l’Ouest (BCEAO) serves eight states: Benin, Burkina 

Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo.

68.  The  Greater  Mekong  Subregion  (GMS)  countries  (Cambodia,  China,  Lao  People’s  Democratic 
Republic, Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam) have implemented a wide-ranging series of regional 
projects  covering  transport,  power,  telecommunications,  environmental  management,  human 
resource  development,  tourism,  trade,  private  sector  investment,  and  agriculture.  These  projects 
were carried out with the assistance of the Asian Development Bank, which had a track record of 
working with each of these countries on a bilateral basis, and was able to offer a platform for dia-
logue as well as contribute technical knowledge and expertise that helped set consistent standards 
acceptable  to  all.  The  GMS  is  recognized  as  having  enhanced  cross-border  trade  while  reducing 
poverty levels and creating shared interests in economic stability and peace. See World Bank 2006d.
69.  UNDP  2005a;  Asian  Development  Bank  2006;  Linn  and  Pidufala  2008;  World  Bank  2007c;  

Matveeva 2007; Olcott 2010.

PART 3

Practical Options
and Recommendations

T his chapter draws together practical country lessons and 

options to prevent organized criminal and political violence 
and recover from their eﬀ ects. The audience is strategic 

decision makers in countries grappling with violence or attempting 
to prevent it—national reformers in government and civil society, as 
well as international representatives in the ﬁ eld. As this Report has 
emphasized throughout, eﬀ orts to build conﬁ dence and transform 
institutions for citizen security, justice, and jobs need to be adapted 
to the local political context in each country, at each transition 
moment—and there is a need for humility, since lessons in how to 
combat changing patterns of repeated violence are being reﬁ ned 
and expanded on the ground all the time. This chapter, therefore, 
lays out basic principles and a toolkit of options emerging from 
country lessons and illustrates how these can be adapted to 
diﬀ erent contexts. 

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

R

E

S

T

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

R

E

S

T

 T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

S

TIT

UTIONS 

R

E

S

T

O

R
I

N

G

 
 

C

O

N

F

I

D
E
N
C
E

  T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R

M

I

N

G

 
I

N

S

TIT
U

TIONS 

CHAPTER8

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

Practical country directions 
and options

Principles and options, not recipes 

This Report lays out a different way 

of  thinking  about  approaches  to 
violence prevention and recovery 
in  fragile  situations.  It  does  not 
aim to be a “cookbook” that prescribes rec-
ipes—every  country’s  history  and  political 
context differ, and there are no one-size-ﬁ ts-
all solutions. As described earlier, recovering 
from  fragile  situations  is  not  a  short,  linear 
process. Countries go through multiple tran-
sitions over a period of at least a generation 
before achieving institutional resilience. Be-
cause trust is low in high-risk environments, 
building  conﬁ dence  and  political  support 
among stakeholders in each round of change 
is a prelude to institutional transformation. 
Managing these complex dynamics and mul-
tiple transitions is the basis of statecraft, and 
this  chapter  draws  heavily  on  lessons  from 
national reformers and country experiences 
in  chapters  4  and  5.  There  is  no  substitute 
for the judicious blend of political judgment, 
deep  knowledge  of  actors,  innovation,  and 
tactical calculus that only national reformers 
can wield.

The ﬁ rst section presents basic principles 
emerging from many different settings where 
societies  have  been  able  to  prevent  and  re-
cover from episodes of violence and develop 
institutional resilience, as well as a framework 

for  differentiating  these  principles  in  coun-
try  strategies.  The  second  section  summa-
rizes  practical  tools  for   conﬁ dence-building 
and gives examples of how these have been 
adapted  to  different  country  circumstances. 
The third section considers insights from pro-
gram design to link early results with  longer-
term   institution-building,  again  illustrating 
how  common  tools  have  been  tailored  to 
country contexts. The last section considers, 
more  brieﬂ y,  lessons  on  addressing  external 
stresses  and  marshaling  external  resources. 
Some of the challenges in relation to external 
assistance and regional and global stresses are 
beyond the capacity of individual states and 
donor ﬁ eld representatives to resolve. So this 
chapter should be read with chapter 9, which 
considers directions for global policy.

Basic principles and country-
specific frameworks for sustained 
violence prevention and recovery

Basic principles

The Report’s analysis underlines that institu-
tions  and  governance,  which  are  important 
for development in general, work differently 
in  fragile  situations.  Restoring  conﬁ dence 
through inclusion and early, visible results at 
the local level is important before undertak-
ing wider institutional reforms. The princi-

248 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

pal tactic national reformers and their part-
ners  have  used  to  restore  conﬁ dence  in  the 
face  of  recent  or  rising  violence  and  fragil-
ity is to build “inclusive-enough” coalitions. 
Coalition-building  efforts  will  sustain  suc-
cess only if they can address the underlying 
weaknesses that increase the risks of repeated 
cycles  of  violence—deﬁ cits  in  security,  jus-
tice, and job creation. Cycles of conﬁ dence-
building  and  institutional  transformation 
repeat  over  time.  To  galvanize  and  sustain 
this “virtuous circle” in the face of deep chal-
lenges of repeated violence and weak institu-
tional capacity, four key principles emerge.

(cid:129)  Inclusion  is  important  to  restore  con  -
ﬁ  dence, but coalitions need not be “all-
inclusive.”  Inclusive-enough  coalitions 
work in two ways. At a broad level, they 
build  national  support  for  change  and 
by bringing in the relevant international 
stakeholders whose support is needed. At 
a local level, they work with community 
leaders  and  structures  to  identify  pri-
orities  and  deliver  programs.  Inclusive-
enough coalitions apply just as much to 
criminal violence as to political violence, 
through  collaboration  with  community 
leaders, business, parliaments, civil soci-
ety—and  with  regional  neighbors,  do-
nors, and investors.

(cid:129)  Some  early  results  are  needed  to  build 
citizen conﬁ dence and create momentum 
for longer-term institutional transforma-
tion. When trust is low, people do not be-
lieve  grand  plans  for  reform  will  work. 
Some  early  results  that  demonstrate  the 
potential  for  success  can  generate  trust, 
 restore  conﬁ dence  in  the  prospects  of 
 collective  action,  and  build  momentum 
for  deeper  institutional  transformation. 
Transforming institutions takes a genera-
tion,  but  political  cycles  are  short—early 
results can both meet political imperatives 
and generate the incentives for the longer-
term project of institution-building.

(cid:129)  It makes sense to ﬁ rst establish the basic 
institutional functions that provide citi-
zen security, justice, and jobs (and asso-

ciated  services)—and  that  ensure  that 
new initiatives do not lose credibility due 
to  cor ruption.  Progress  in  these  areas, 
and  coordination  among  them,  are  the 
foundation  for  broader  change.  Other 
reforms that require the accrual of greater 
social  consensus  and  capacities—politi-
cal reform, decentralization, deeper eco-
nomic  reform,  shifts  in  social  attitudes 
toward  marginalized  groups—are  best 
addressed systematically over time once 
these  foundational  reforms  have  made 
some  progress. 

(cid:129)  Don’t  let  perfection  be  the  enemy  of 
progress—embrace  pragmatic,  best-ﬁ t 
options to address immediate challenges. 
In insecure situations, it is generally im-
possible to achieve technical perfection in 
approaches  to  security,  justice,  or  devel-
opment. There is a need to be pragmatic, 
to  address  immediate  challenges  within 
political  realities,  with  approaches  that 
can improve over time. Sometimes these 
approaches  will  have  temporary  second-
best aspects  associated with them. For ex-
ample,  jobs  generated  may  not  immedi-
ately meet long-term goals for high skills 
and  wages.  Community  and  traditional 
structures  may  have  drawbacks  in  their 
representation of women or youth groups. 
Anti-corruption  initiatives  may  have  to 
focus on major corruption while tolerat-
ing ﬁ nancial weaknesses in other areas.

A framework for tailoring country-
speciﬁ c strategies

Within these general principles, each country 
needs  to  assess  its  particular  circumstances 
and  ﬁ nd  its  own  path.  National  reform-
ers will face different types of violence, dif-
ferent  combinations  of  international  and 
external stresses, different institutional chal-
lenges,  different  stakeholders  who  need  to 
be involved to make a difference, and differ-
ent  transition  opportunities.  Throughout, 
this  Report  has  covered  some  of  the  most 
important  variations  in  country  circum-
stances  through  a  simple  assessment  (table 

 

Practical country directions and options 

249

TA B L E 8.1 Situation-speciﬁ c challenge and opportunities

Types of violence:  Civil, criminal, cross-border, subnational, and/or ideological 

Transition opportunity:  Opportunities can 
be gradual and limited, or can present more 
immediate or major space for change.

Key stresses:  Situations pose diﬀ erent mixtures 
of internal versus external stresses; high versus low 
levels of division between ethnic, social, regional or 
religious identity groups. 

Key stakeholders:  Stakeholder balances include 
internal versus external stakeholders, state versus 
nonstate stakeholders, low-income versus middle-
high-income stakeholders.

Institutional challenges:  Degrees and mixtures of 
capacity, accountability, and inclusion constraints 
in state and nonstate institutions aﬀ ect strategy.

8.1). There are ﬁ ve factors to be considered in 
applying a tailored strategy—each, of course, 
tempered by political judgment. 

First is the transition moment and oppor-
tunity for change. Some situations, because of 
political, economic, or security factors, offer 
greater space for change and a major break 
from the past—a peace agreement, a leader-
ship or electoral succession, or even a crisis 
that spurs an opportunity for change. Other 
situations  present  more  limited  space  for 
change—a sense of mounting problems that 
spurs debate, pressure for reform by groups 
outside government, or a new governmental 
reform plan. The type of strategy advocated 
needs to take account of this opening. Is this 
a moment to put forward a long-term trans-
formational  vision  or  to  make  incremental 
advances?

Second is the type of stress. In situations 
where the internal divisions between ethnic, 
religious,  social,  or  geographical  groups  are 
a  major  factor  in  the  mobilization  for  vio-
lence,  strategies  need  components  that  ad-
dress political, economic, or social inclusion. 
External  stresses  such  as  incursions  from 
drug trafﬁ cking networks or global economic 
shocks clearly require working with regional 
or global partners. 

Third  is  the  type  of  violent  threat.  Suc-
cessful approaches to address political, com-
munal, or criminal violence have common-
alities in the underlying institutional deﬁ cits 
that  permit  repeated  cycles  of  violence—
and  common  priorities  to  develop  the  in-
stitutions to provide citizen security, justice, 
and jobs. But the particular mix of different 
types of violence does make some difference. 

Capacity for formal investigations and pros-
ecutions  in  the  police  and  civilian  justice 
institutions is more important, for example, 
in situations of organized criminal violence 
than  in  civil  war  or  communal  conﬂ icts—
although  it  is  important  in  both.  Ideologi-
cally  motivated  violence  may  require  more 
emphasis on security, justice, and social in-
clusion, since this form of violence appears 
to be less motivated by employment or eco-
nomic considerations. 

Fourth  is  the  type  of  institutional  chal-
lenges.  Where  states  have  fairly  strong  ca-
pacity but inclusion is weak, reform actions 
need  to  draw  marginalized  groups  into  de-
cision making and ensure they beneﬁ t from 
national growth, service delivery, and welfare 
improvements. Where lack of accountability 
has been a source of tension, strategies need 
to focus on responsiveness to citizens and to 
act against abuses. Where both capacity and 
accountability  are  weak,  it  makes  sense  to 
make greater use of state-community, state–
civil  society,  state–private  sector,  and  state-
international mechanisms in delivering and 
monitoring early reform efforts.

Fifth is the set of stakeholders. National or 
subnational  political  and  economic  leaders 
and current combatants or ex-combatants—
while  not  among  the  poorest  groups—can 
be crucial stakeholders in achieving security 
and early results, and they may need to see 
beneﬁ ts  from  initial  reforms  if  they  are  to 
support them. Where neighboring countries, 
international donors, and investors affect the 
success of a reform, they need to be brought 
into the debates on strategy and the delivery 
of early results.

250 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

For deeper analysis of each country con-
text, national leaders and their international 
partners  need  tools  to  assess  risks,  develop 
priorities, and formulate plans for action. Na-
tional governments can often draw expertise 
from  their  own  line  ministries  or  political 
parties, as South Africa did in developing its 
reconstruction and development program in 
1993 and 1994, or as Colombia did in review-
ing the strengths and weaknesses of previous 
efforts to address violence in the early 2000s.1
Where  external  actors  play  critical  roles, 
national leaders can initiate a joint national-
international  assessment  with  help  from 
regional  institutions,  the  United  Nations 
(UN),  international  ﬁ nancial  institutions, 
or  bilateral  partners,  as  in  Liberia  follow-
ing  the  Comprehensive  Peace  Agreement 
of  2003  and  in  the  post-crisis  needs  assess-
ment  in  Pakistan  in  2009–10.  Many  good 
international assessment tools exist for these 
purposes,  such  as  the  post-conﬂ ict/post-
crisis  needs  assessments  developed  by  the 
World  Bank,  UN,  and  European  Commis-
sion.  More  formal  national-international 
processes  have  the  advantage  of  generating 
buy-in,  as  well  as  possible  ﬁ nancial  assis-
tance,  from  international  partners,  though 
they may also set high expectations for im-
mediate ﬁ nancial assistance that need careful 
management.

One key lesson on assessments and plan-
ning  processes  is  that  they  have  often  been 
lengthy exercises that have difﬁ culty in later 
adapting to new challenges. Recognizing the 
analysis of this Report on the repeated nature 
of violent threats and the succession of mul-
tiple transitions that countries go through to 
address them, lighter and more regular assess-
ments of risks and opportunities make sense. 
Assessments can also be strengthened by 

(cid:129)  considering  where  the  society  stands  on 
the  spectra  of  transition  opportunities, 
stresses,  institutional  challenges,  and 
stakeholders. 

(cid:129)  explicitly  considering  the  history  of  past 
efforts and the legacy of earlier episodes of 
violence. 

(cid:129) 

identifying  both  the  early  results  needed 
for  stakeholder  conﬁ dence-building  and 
the  path  toward  long-term  institutional 
transformation.

(cid:129)  keeping strategies simple, and being realis-
tic about the number of priorities identi-
ﬁ ed and the timelines, as with the changes 
recommended  to  the  joint  UN–World 
Bank–European  Union  (EU)  post-crisis 
needs assessment. 

(cid:129) 

 ensuring  that  political,  security,  and  de-
velopment  actors  at  national  and  inter-
national  levels  have  joint  ownership  of 
assessments and strategy exercises. Where 
assessments and plans are led by only one 
ministry,  for  example,  other  ministries 
may  resist  implementation.  Equally,  for 
strategies to bring to bear a range of dip-
lomatic,  security,  and  development  assis  
tance from external partners, all need to 
be consulted in their preparation. 

Practical approaches to 
confidence-building

Basic tools

When confronted with a rising crisis or tran-
sition  opportunity,  national  reformers  and 
their international partners have a variety of 
tools  available  for  conﬁ dence-building  and 
the development of “inclusive-enough” coali-
tions, based on lessons from a range of coun-
try  experiences  (table  8.2).  Key  stakeholder 
groups whose support has often been sought 
in  coalition-building  (in  different  combina-
tions  according  to  country  circumstances) 
include the leaders and populations affected 
and targeted by violence; security actors, both 
governmental  and  nongovernmental,  com-
batants; political leaders with inﬂ uence, both 
in ruling and opposition parties; business, and 
civil society, whose support may be needed to 
undertake reforms; and neighbors and inter-
national  partners.  Including  women  leaders 
and women’s groups has a good track record 
in creating continued pressure for change.

 

Practical country directions and options 

251

TA B L E 8.2 Core tools for restoring conﬁ dence

Signals: Future policy 
and priorities

Signals: Immediate 

actions

Commitment 
mechanisms

Supporting actions

•  Citizen security goals 

•  Participatory processes

•  Key principles and realistic 

•  Local security, justice, and 

timelines for addressing 
political reform, decen-
tralization, corruption, 
basic justice services, and 
transitional justice

•  Utilize state, community, 

NGO, and international 
capacities 

development results

•  Credible government 

appointments

•  Transparency of 

expenditures

•  Redeployment of 

security forces

• 

• 

Independence of key 
executing agencies

•  Risk and priority 

assessments

Independent third-
party monitoring

•  Communicating of costs 

of inaction

•  Dual-key systems

•  Simple plans and 

• 

International execu-
tion of functions 

progress measures on 
2–3 early results

•  Strategic 

communication 

•  Removal of discriminatory 

policies 

Source: WDR team. 
Note: NGO = nongovernmental organization.

To build national and local-level support, 
political and policy signals that demonstrate 
a break with the past are important. Signals 
that help to build political support among 
stakeholder  groups  are  particularly  effec-
tive when they are based on immediate ac-
tions  rather  than  only  on  announcements 
of  intent. 

Signaling  through  immediate  action  can 
include  credible  government  appointments 
(national and local) who can command the 
conﬁ dence  of  stakeholder  groups.  Rede-
ployment of security forces can restore con-
ﬁ dence  by  signaling  an  increase  in  civilian 
protection—as  when  Colombia  redeployed 
military contingents to protect civilian road 
transit  in  2002–03.2  Similar  effects  can  be 
achieved by removing units that have a his-
tory of abuse or mistrust with communities. 
In  some  cases,  the  quick  removal  of  legal 
regimes seen as discriminatory or abusive—
apartheid laws, collective punishments, gov-
ernment restrictions on hiring from speciﬁ c 
identity groups—can help restore conﬁ dence. 
Transparency  in  budgets  and  expenditures 
can be an important signal of improved gov-
ernance, as with Timor-Leste’s public budget 
debates and reporting systems to parliament 
after  the  renewed  violence  and  instability 
of 2006–07.3 Most successful signals require a 
mix of security, political, and economic con-
tent—with credible resource allocations and 

transparency measures, for example, backing 
up political and security plans. 

Some  options  for  signaling  a  break  with 
the past will necessarily constitute announce-
ments  of  future  action  rather  than  imme-
diate  action.  For  example,  clear  signals  on 
approaches  and  timelines  for  political-  and 
security-sector reform, decentralization, and 
transitional  justice  have  often  been  part  of 
conﬁ dence-building—drawing lessons, how-
ever, on the generational timelines often re-
quired to complete the comprehensive insti-
tutional reforms described in chapter 3. 

 Signals on political reform may include 
rapid  action  toward  elections  or  laying  out 
of a series of preparatory steps—as with the 
transitional  executive  bodies  and  constitu-
tional reform processes in South Africa, sup-
ported by civic education and national and 
local action to maintain security during the 
political process through the National Peace 
Accords.  Where  elections  will  take  place 
quickly, indicating that these are not an end 
but a step toward transformation of institu-
tions and democratic practices (as described 
in the inputs by Lakhdar Brahimi and Nitin 
Desai  in  chapter  5,  box  5.11),  is  important. 
Particular attention is also merited on local 
participatory processes—such as a commit-
ment to involve violence-affected communi-
ties  in  identifying  priorities  and  delivering 
programs in their areas.4 

252 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

To  generate  support  of  stakeholders  in 
low-trust  environments,  special  commit-
ment  mechanisms  to  persuade  key  politi-
cal  and  economic  stakeholder  groups  and 
citizens that announcements will be carried 
through  have  proved  useful.  These  include 
the creation of special independent agencies 
to implement programs, as with Indonesia’s 
reconstruction  agency  in  Aceh,5  and  inde-
pendent third-party monitoring of commit-
ments. Third parties can be national—as with 
independent  agencies  or  local  civil  society 
monitoring—or  involve  joint  national  and 
international  cooperation,  as  with  the  Gov-
ernance and Economic Management Action 
Plan in Liberia6 and the Commission against 
Impunity in Guatemala.7 They also can sim-
ply be international and provide either mon-
itoring or direct execution for a transitional 
period,  as  with  United  Nations  or  regional 
peacekeeping missions’ electoral monitoring, 
or the ASEAN-European Union Aceh Moni-
toring Mission, which supported implemen-
tation of the Aceh peace agreement.8

Several  supporting  actions  can  help  in 
conﬁ dence-building and in persuading stake-
holders whose support is sought of the bene-
ﬁ ts of collaboration. In some situations, there 
may  be  great  unwillingness  in  the  national 
discourse  to  recognize  the  potential  for  an 
escalation of violence and the depth of chal-
lenges. Where the risks of crisis escalation are 
not  fully  recognized  by  all  national  leader-
ship, providing an accurate and compelling 
message on the consequences of inaction can 
help galvanize momentum for progress.9 For 
example, technical analysis can be produced 
on the costs of violence and the beneﬁ ts of 
restored  security—as  for  the  regional  ben-
eﬁ ts of peace in Afghanistan and for the costs 
of  crime  to  business  in  several  countries.10 
Economic and social analyses can also show 
how  rising  violence  and  failing  institutions 
are causing national or subnational areas to 
lag  far  behind  their  neighbors  in  develop-
ment  progress,  or  how  other  countries  that 
have  failed  to  address  rising  threats  have 
faced  severe  and  long-lasting  development 
consequences. 

This Report’s analysis also provides some 
clear messages from global experience to un-
derpin efforts to persuade stakeholders of the 
urgency of action:

(cid:129)  No country or region can afford to ignore 
areas  where  repeated  cycles  of  violence 
ﬂ ourish  or  citizens  are  disengaged  from 
the state.

(cid:129)  Unemployment,  corruption,  and  exclu-
sion  increase  the  risks  of  violence—and 
legitimate  institutions  and  governance 
that give everyone a stake in national pros-
perity are the immune system that protects 
from different types of violence.

(cid:129)  Citizen security is a preeminent goal, un-

derpinned by justice and jobs.

(cid:129)  Leaders need to seize opportunities before 

violence escalates or recurs.

Strategic communication on the need for 
change and for a positive vision for the fu-
ture is crucial—no one can be persuaded to 
support new initiatives if they do not know 
they exist, or if their intent and content have 
been  distorted  in  reporting.  Common  les-
sons  on  strategic  communications  include 
ensuring that different parts of government 
communicate consistently on the vision for 
change  and  speciﬁ c  plans;  fostering  sup-
portive messages from civil society and in-
ternational partners; and directing commu-
nications to assuage concerns while avoiding 
promises  that  cannot  be  kept.  Traditional 
consultation  mechanisms  and  new  tech-
nologies also offer the potential to mobilize 
broader  citizen  input  into  debates,  as  with 
the use of traditional community meetings 
in West Africa11 or youth activists using so-
cial  networking  tools  to  mobilize  popular 
support  and  oppose  violent  actions  by  the 
FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Co-
lombia) in Colombia.12

It helps to produce clear plans and bud-
gets that identify early results as well as the 
approach  toward  longer-term  institution-
building  early  on,  informed  by  a  sense  of 
 realism  in  timelines  and  availability  of  re-
sources. The key lesson from country experi-

 

Practical country directions and options 

253

ences  is  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  generate 
early  results  in  every  area.  Two  or  three 
early  results  are  sufﬁ cient  in  each  period 
of  conﬁ dence-building.  Once  the  pursuit 
of  these  results  is  properly  resourced  and 
achieved,  other  available  capacities  (leader-
ship and managerial, technical, and ﬁ nancial) 
can  be  targeted  at  institutional  transforma-
tion. Of course, results have to be repeated at 
regular intervals and help rather than hinder 
longer-term institution-building.13 

Early results can take the form of progress 
on political and justice, security, or develop-
ment outcomes and often involve successful 
combinations  of  all  three.  In  South  Africa, 
transitional mechanisms that ensured broad 
participation  in  political,  security,  and  eco-
nomic  decision-making  during  the  transi-
tion  played  a  key  role.  In  Kosovo,  highway 
security was a crucial early result to support 
increased  trade,  and  hence  employment.14 
In  Liberia,  basic  improvements  in  security, 
electricity,  and  action  against  corruption 
were crucial in restoring conﬁ dence.15 In Af-
ghanistan16 and in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo,17 reopening key transit routes for 
imports  and  exports  through  linked  secur-
ity  and  development  efforts  increased  sup-
plies  in  the  capitals  and  lowered  producer 
prices.  In  Chile  and  Argentina,  responsible 
macroeconomic  management,  social  pro-
tection, and initiation of transitional justice 
measures  helped  restore  conﬁ dence  follow-
ing transitions from military rule.

The choice of early results and how they 
are delivered is important because it sets in-
centives  for  later  institution-building.  For 
example,  if  services  and  public  works  are 
delivered  only  through  national,  top-down 
programs and social protection only through 
international  humanitarian  aid,  communi-
ties have few incentives to take responsibility 
for violence prevention; neither do national 
institutions have incentives to take on the re-
sponsibility for protecting all vulnerable citi-
zens.  Using  partnerships  in  delivering  early 
results with civil society, communities, faith-
based organizations or the private sector has 
two beneﬁ ts: it expands the range of capac-

ity available to states, and it creates a sense of 
broader stakeholder and citizen engagement 
in  crisis  prevention  and  recovery.  For  these 
reasons, short-term conﬁ dence-building and 
longer-term efforts to transform institutions 
need to be linked.

Differentiating conﬁ dence-building 
tools to match country circumstances

The particular mix of transition opportuni-
ties,  stresses,  stakeholders,  and  institutional 
challenges  makes  a  difference  in  selecting 
types  of  conﬁ dence-building  approaches. 
Where  political  power  is  contested  and  op-
position groups have the potential to derail 
progress,  developing  collaborative  capaci-
ties among political parties is crucial. Where 
political  leadership  is  uncontested,  more 
focused  approaches  to  building  coalitions 
between the ruling party and key stakehold-
ers whose support is needed, such as subna-
tional leaders, civil society, the military, and 
business  interests,  can  be  inclusive-enough 
to create momentum for change. Where the 
engagement of external partners—investors, 
donors,  diplomatic  partners,  neighboring 
countries—can  provide  additional  support 
or  help  manage  external  stresses,  signals 
that  build  their  conﬁ dence  become  more 
important.  (Box  8.1  contrasts  the  experi-
ences of Colombia and South Africa in ini-
tial  conﬁ dence-building and constructing of 
inclusive-enough coalitions.)

Two trade-offs to be decided within each 
country context with regard to using inclu-
sion strategies to build conﬁ dence are inclu-
sion  versus  justice  for  perpetrators  of  past 
abuses and inclusion versus efﬁ ciency. With 
regard to inclusiveness and justice for groups, 
country experiences indicate that groups may 
be  legitimately  excluded  from  political  dia-
logue where there is an evolving belief among 
the population that they have sacriﬁ ced their 
right to participate due to past abuses, as the 
FARC  were  excluded  from  political  talks  in 
Colombia. But that exclusion can pose dan-
gers  when  it  is  driven  by  international  op-
position to engagement by groups that have 

254 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 8.1    Conﬁ dence-building in South Africa, 1990–94, and Colombia, 2002 onward

Types of violence:  Both countries had faced long-standing civil conﬂ ict and high levels of criminal violence.

Transition opportunity:  South Africa faced a more fundamental 
transition in the run-up 1994 election and the end of apartheid. 
Before its 2002 election, Colombia faced a sense of rising crisis 
due to failed peace talks and growing violence, but initially had 
less space for major institutional change.

Key stresses:  South Africa’s stresses were primarily internal: 
huge inequities between black and white citizens; ethnic 
tensions; high unemployment. Colombia faced high internal 
social inequity, but also external stresses from organized crime 
networks.

Key stakeholders:  In South Africa, key stakeholders for the 
two main protagonists, the ruling National Party (NP) and the 
African National Congress (ANC), were their own members and 
allied constituencies, Inkatha and other smaller parties, security 
forces, domestic and international businesses, and neighboring 
states. In Colombia, before and during the presidential election, 
key stakeholders in setting a new direction were the ruling party, 
businesses, the military, and some civil society groups.

Institutional challenges:  Both countries had relatively high 
capacity, but low accountability in state institutions, as well as 
low social cohesion.

South Africa
In South Africa, inclusive-enough coalition-building in the run-up to the 1994 election meant involving all political parties and civil 
society in discussions over the country’s future, although the ANC maintained a hierarchy in which it led decision making among other 
ANC Alliance and United Democratic Front members. In Colombia, an inclusive-enough coalition to implement the new government’s 
Democratic Security Policy did not include all parties: FARC rebels were automatically excluded since they were not recognized by the 
Colombian government as a political organization. The ruling party instead galvanized support from the military; most business orga-
nizations; and some civil society groups, who were also instrumental in leading popular protests demanding action on security; as well 
as community leaders in violence-aﬀ ected areas. Business groups were important in supporting the new government’s wealth tax, 
which provided an important source of ﬁ nance for the Democratic Security Policy.

In both countries, the main protagonists sent signals to demonstrate a break with the past. In South Africa, this involved a move 
within the ANC to adopt an inclusive approach to other parties and interests and a move by the National Party from discourse over 
group rights to discourse over individual rights—immediate actions such as the ANC’s unilateral suspension of armed struggle and the 
National Party’s decision to release Nelson Mandela and unban the ANC, Communist Party, Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), and Azanian 
People’s Organisation (AZAPO); and announcements on future policy, such as the creation of provincial governments to provide oppor-
tunities for power for the smaller parties, job security for white civil servants, and free maternal and child health care for the broader 
population.

Colombia
In Colombia, the use of the word “democratic” in describing security approaches was intended to show that future policy would not 
involve the human rights abuses that had been common in the past in Colombia and other Latin American countries. Redeployment of 
military forces to protect civilian road transit and budget increases to the military were designed to foster business, military, and popu-
lar support. In South Africa, however, announcements about future policy went much further than Colombia in the commitments of 
the Reconstruction and Development Program to social and institutional transformation, reﬂ ecting the political background of the 
ANC Alliance as well as the greater space for change at the time of the transition. In both countries, the degree to which these initial 
signals have been maintained in the longer term is still a subject of debate, but they were undoubtedly important in mobilizing 
support.

Leaders in each country used diﬀ erent types of commitment mechanisms to provide guarantees that policy announcements would 

not be reversed: broad mechanisms for transitional decision making, constitutional and legal change, and electoral monitoring in 
South Africa, reﬂ ecting more inclusive coalition-building; and narrower mechanisms in Colombia to ensure cooperation between the 
military and civilian agencies, such as the creation of a new coordination framework, Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral (CCAI), 
reporting to the  President.

Sources: South Africa: WDR consultation with former key negotiators from the ANC Alliance and the National Party in South Africa, 2010; Eades 
1999; Piron and Curran 2005; Roque and others 2010. Colombia: Arboleda 2010; Guerrero 1999; Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral 2010; 
WDR team consultations with government oﬃ  cials, civil society representatives, and security personnel in Colombia, 2010; WDR interview with 
former president Álvaro Uribe, 2010.

 

Practical country directions and options 

255

strong  local  support.  Transitional  justice 
processes can and often should form part of 
a dialogue on new directions, but inclusion 
strategies can change over time as it becomes 
possible  to  marginalize  consistently  abusive 
groups,  as  with  the  Revolutionary  United 
Front (RUF) in Sierra Leone.18 

With regard to the trade-off between in-
clusion  and  efﬁ ciency,  the  main  question  is 
how far to go. Exclusion of groups or regions 
from core coalitions has the risk of fostering 
resentment and generating pent-up pressure 
for later rounds of contestation and violence. 
But including everyone risks stretching col-
laborative decision-making capacity too far. 
This  tension  often  takes  speciﬁ c  form  for 
political leaders in broadening appointments 
to power through the creation of new senior 
posts and expanded participation in decision 
making,  when  these  actions  may  also  slow 
the  delivery  of  results.  For  national  policy, 
political parties and governments have been 
clear  that  there  is  a  hierarchy  of  decision 
making—with  many  present  at  the  table 
presenting  views  and  engaged  in  action  to 
implement strategy, but with one body tak-
ing  ﬁ nal  decisions.  For  local  participatory 
decision  making,  the  mere  fact  of  engaging 
communities is often seen as a positive sig-
nal, which merits taking the time necessary 
to gain local buy-in.

Program approaches to link early 
results to transforming institutions 

Basic tools

The  way  programs  are  designed  must  vary 
according to country circumstances, but ex-
perience suggests a core set of basic program 
tools,  delivered  at  scale  either  nationally  or 
subnationally, that can be adapted to differ-
ent country contexts—from low to high in-
come  and  with  different  mixes  of  criminal 
and  political  violence  (table  8.3).  These  are 
programs based on the concept of building 
a rhythm of repeated successes, linking regu-
lar early results for conﬁ dence-building with 
transformation. 
longer-term 

institutional 

They  are  deliberately  kept  small  in  number 
to  reﬂ ect  country  lessons  on  the  priority 
 areas  of  citizen  security,  justice,  and  jobs. 
These basic program tools are designed to be 
delivered in combination. Action on se curity 
alone  has  not  had  a  good  track   record  in 
delivering  long-term  results  on  the  ground. 
Nor  are  economic  programs  sufﬁ cient  on 
their  own  to  address  problems  of  violence. 
Five  common  insights  for  program  design 
can link rapid conﬁ dence-building to longer-
term institutional transformation. 

Insight  1:  Multisectoral  community  em-
powerment  programs  are  important  to 
build  state-society  relations  from  the  bot-
tom  up,  as  well  as  to  deliver  development 
improvements.  Top-down  programming 
through  the  state  can  help  build  technical 
capacity,  but  may  be  misaligned  with  the 
process  of  forging  and  reforging  trust  in 
state  institutions  and  in  state-society  rela-
tions.  Bottom-up  program  design  works 
with  community  structures  to  identify  and 
deliver  priorities  for  violence  prevention. 
The clearest signal is to entrust community 
structures  with  their  own  funds  to  identify 
and  deliver  local  activities,  as  with  the  Af-
ghanistan  National  Solidarity  Program.  A 
second model, which can be combined with 
community  block  grants,  is  for  state  agen-
cies and NGOs working in concert to consult 
with community councils on their activities. 
Examples  are  the  Latin American  multisec-
toral  violence  prevention  programs,  which 
combine community policing with access to 
local justice and dispute resolution services, 
creating a safe physical environment (such as 
public  trading  spaces,  transit);  employment 
and vocational training; civic education; and 
social  and  cultural  activities.  Activities  that 
“recognize” community membership can be 
an important part of this, through programs 
as simple as registering births and life events.

Insight  2:  Prioritization  of  basic  security 
and justice reform programs has been part 
of  the  core  tools  countries  use  to  develop 
resilience  to  violence.  Community-based 

256 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

TA B L E 8.3 Core tools for transforming institutions

Citizen security

Justice

Jobs and associated services

Foundational reforms and “best-ﬁ t” approaches 

Security sector reform: 
•  Designed to deliver citizen security 

beneﬁ ts

•  Capacity increases linked to repeated 
realistic performance outcomes and 
justice functions

•  Dismantling of criminal networks 

through civilian oversight, vetting, and 
budget expenditure transparency

•  Use of low-capital systems for rural and 

community policing

Justice sector reform: 
• 

Independence and links to security 
reforms 

•  Strengthening of basic caseload 

 processing 

•  Extending of justice services, drawing on 

Multisectoral community empowerment 
programs: Combining citizen security, employ-
ment, justice, education, and infrastructure.

Employment programs: 
•  Regulatory simpliﬁ cation and infrastructure 

traditional/community mechanisms

recovery for private sector job creation 

Phasing anti-corruption measures:
•  Demonstration that national resources 

can be used for public good before 
dismantling rent systems 
•  Control of capture of rents 
•  Use of social accountability mechanisms

•  Long-term public programs 
•  Asset expansion 
•  Value-chain programs 
• 
•  Labor migration 
•  Women’s economic empowerment

Informal sector support 

Humanitarian delivery and social protection: With 
planned transition from international provision

Macroeconomic policy: Focus on consumer price 
volatility and employment 

Gradual, systematic programs

•  Phased capacity and accountability in 

specialized security functions

Source: WDR team. 

•  Political and electoral reform
•  Decentralization
•  Transitional justice
•  Comprehensive anti-corruption reforms 

•  Structural economic reforms such as 

privatization

•  Education and health reforms
• 

Inclusion of marginalized groups 

programs are important, but they cannot on 
their own deliver wider institutional change. 
The lessons from security and justice reform 
programs  are  to  focus  on  basic  functions 
that build trust and performance, such as the 
f ollowing:

(cid:129)  Crucial early actions can include strength-
ening of civilian oversight of the security 
forces alongside capacity increases; crimi-
nal caseload processing in the courts; ad-
equate basic investigation and arrest pro-
cedures in policing; and vetting of budget 
and expenditure transparency to disman-
tle covert or criminal networks across the 
security  and  criminal  justice  functions. 
Budget  and  expenditure  analysis  and 
strengthening of public ﬁ nance processes 
in these areas form a part of early reforms. 
In some situations, tolerating an oversize 
security  wage  bill  (as  in  South  Africa’s 
early reforms) is necessary until opportu-

nities exist to reintegrate former security 
force members into civilian life. Country 
experiences that can provide insights in-
clude Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
Chile,  El  Salvador,  Indonesia,  Mozam-
bique, Nicaragua, and Sierra Leone.

(cid:129)  Linking security and justice reform is im-
portant. One of the most common weak-
nesses  in  country  experiences  has  been 
increasing actions to reform security sys-
tems  without  complementary  action  to 
reform justice systems. This causes several 
problems. First, increases in arrests by the 
security forces not processed by the courts 
result in either grievances over prolonged 
detention without due process or the re-
lease of offenders back into the commu-
nity,  as  in  the  relatively  successful  police 
reforms  in  Haiti  in  the  1990s  and  the 
2000s.19 Second, where civilian justice sys-
tems are absent in insecure areas, the mili-

 

Practical country directions and options 

257

tary  and  police  will  end  up  performing 
justice  and  correction  functions  beyond 
their mandate and capacity—and perhaps 
result in abuses. 

(cid:129)  Security and justice reforms should go be-
yond paper reforms, and reach into local 
communities. Extending access to the for-
mal  justice  system  in  underserved  areas 
can  help,  as  with  mobile  courts.  The  ca-
pacity  of  formal  justice  systems  to  deal 
with local dispute resolution is often lim-
ited, however. Blending of formal and in-
formal systems, such as Timor-Leste’s in-
corporating  traditional  justice  measures 
into the formal system;20 community para-
legals;  and  the  use  of  nongovernmental 
organization  (NGO)  capacity  to  support 
access to justice for the poor, as in Nicara-
gua and Sierra Leone, can help bridge this 
 divide. 21

Insight 3:  Shifting back to basics on job cre-
ation goes beyond material beneﬁ ts by pro-
viding a productive role and occupation for 
youth. There is still debate over what works 
in  generating  jobs  and  widening  economic 
stakes in prosperity—not only in fragile ar-
eas but worldwide in the wake of the global 
ﬁ nancial crisis. Because there is no consensus 
on  the  exact  set  of  policies  that  can  gener-
ate  employment—and  even  less  so  in  envi-
ronments  where  insecurity  is  a  constraint 
to  trade  and  investment—program  design 
needs  to  draw  from  what  is  known  about 
pragmatic  interventions  that  have  worked. 
The  lessons  here,  drawing  from  the  experi-
ences in chapter 5, include the following:

(cid:129)  The  role  of  jobs  in  violence  prevention 
argues for judicious public ﬁ nancing of 
employment programs, as in India or In-
donesia.  To  ensure  that  these  are  com-
patible with long-term job creation and 
strengthening of social cohesion, it makes 
sense  to  deliver  employment  programs 
through community institutions, ensure 
that wages are set to avoid distorting pri-
vate sector activities and programs, keep 
the  design  simple  to  match  administra-

tive capacity, and complement programs 
with vocational training and life skills.22 

(cid:129)  Easing  the  infrastructure  constraints  to 
private  sector  activity  is  important  for 
early  results  and  longer-term  labor- 
intensive  growth.  Trade  and  transit  in-
frastructure such as roads and ports can 
be  crucial  for  private  sector  activity, 
but the number one constraint cited by 
businesses  in  World  Bank  enterprise 
surveys  in  violent  areas  is  electricity.23 
Approaches to restitute electricity capac-
ity  may  involve  programs  that  are  fast, 
even while these are technically subopti-
mal in the early period, as in the experi-
ence  of  Lebanon  and  Liberia  after  the 
civil war.24

(cid:129)  Regulatory  simpliﬁ cation,  as  in  Bosnia 
and Herzegovina’s removal of the bureau-
cratic constraints to business activity, can 
gain business con ﬁ dence.25 Simpliﬁ cation, 
rather than the addition of complexity in 
business  regulation,  is  crucial  to  demon-
strating fast results and adapting to insti-
tutional capacity constraints.

(cid:129) 

Investment  in  the  value  chain  for  labor-
intensive sectors—bringing together pro-
ducers, traders, and consumers—can sup-
port job creation and address links between 
different regional, social, or ethnic groups 
affected by violence, as in Rwanda’s invest-
ments in coffee and Kosovo’s in dairy.26 

(cid:129)  Agriculture  and  informal  sector  jobs  are 
often viewed as second best in relation to 
the formal sector—but they often offer the 
only  realistic  prospect  for  large-scale  job 
creation. Support can include access to ﬁ -
nance  and  training,  sympathetic  regula-
tion,  and  basic  market  and  transit  infra-
structure. 

(cid:129)  Asset expansion programs have helped in 
some  successful  transitions  from  vio-
lence—such as land reform in the Repub-
lic of Korea and Japan and housing pro-
grams in Singapore.27 But they require the 
political  capital  to  succeed  in  redistribu-
tion (in the Republic of Korea and Japan 

258 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

the power of landowning classes had been 
considerably weakened) as well as consid-
erable  public  resources,  access  to  private 
ﬁ nance, and institutional capacity. Smaller 
programs  that  provide  transfers  to  vic-
tims  of  violence,  such  as  Timor-Leste’s 
transfers  to  displaced  people,  provide  a 
simpler model of asset expansion.28 

(cid:129)  Labor migration agreements also provide 
an  example  of  best-ﬁ t  policies  in  some 
circumstances: all countries would prefer 
to generate jobs at home, but where mas-
sive  youth  unemployment  exists,  man-
aged  migration  agreements  that  inform 
and protect workers are a good “best-ﬁ t” 
alternative.29 

Insight  4:  Involving  women  in  security, 
justice,  and  economic  empowerment  pro-
grams  can  deliver  results  and  support 
longer-term  institutional  change.  While 
the pacing of involvement of women in re-
forms will vary by local context, experience 
across regions and forms of violence shows 
the value of accelerating the involvement of 
women. Given the large number of female-
headed households in violence-affected com-
munities, women often engage in economic 
activities out of necessity. Targeting women’s 
economic empowerment can be a core part 
of job creation programs, as in Nepal,30 and 
may  have  more  lasting  effects  on  women’s 
status than national gender action plans. Re-
forms to increase female stafﬁ ng and gender-
speciﬁ c  services  in  the  security  forces  and 
justice systems, as in Nicaragua, Liberia, and 
Sierra Leone, and a number of high-income 
police forces facing urban violence have de-
livered good results.31 Involving women lead-
ers in decision making in community-driven 
programs  can  also  shift  attitudes  toward 
gender—but as the Afghanistan example in 
chapter 5 shows, this takes time.

Insight  5:  Focused  anti-corruption  initia-
tives demonstrating that new programs can 
be well governed are crucial for credibility. 
This  does  not  mean  addressing  all  corrup-
tion at once—it is as impossible for develop-

ing countries with high levels of corruption 
to eliminate it overnight, as it was for OECD 
(Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation 
and Development) societies to do so at ear-
lier  stages  of  their  development.  Moreover, 
deep-rooted  patronage  systems  are  a  way 
of holding together potentially violent situ-
ations,  however  imperfect,  so  dismantling 
them before other, more transparent institu-
tions  are  embedded  to  take  their  place  can 
increase risk. However, high levels of corrup-
tion  increase  the  risks  of  violence,  making 
action  on  corruption  important.  Two  main 
mechanisms  emerge  as  realistic  early  mea-
sures to improve controls over corruption in 
highly fragile situations:

(cid:129)  The ﬁ rst is to prevent serious corruption 
in  major  new  concessions  and  contracts, 
including  those  for  natural  resources,  by 
making  processes  more  transparent  and 
drawing  on  private  sector  audit  and  in-
spection capacity. 

(cid:129)  The  second  is  to  use  social  accountabil-
ity  mechanisms  to  monitor  the  use  of 
funds—making  budgets  transparent  and 
using community and civil society capac-
ity to monitor them, as with the use of lo-
cal  budget  transparency  in  community-
driven programs. 

Managing trade-offs: Toward more 
systematic reform

The key trade-off in best-ﬁ t approaches that 
link rapid conﬁ dence-building with longer-
term institutional transformation is balanc-
ing  their  positive  effects  with  their  possible 
negative  and  distortionary  effects.  An  over-
sized  security  sector  draws  resources  away 
from  other  productive  activities.  Services 
provided  by  nongovernment  groups  or  the 
private sector can be costly. Publicly funded 
employment,  if  badly  designed,  can  draw 
people away from private sector work. 

Where best-ﬁ t approaches can have some 
costs that will exceed beneﬁ ts once security, 
state  institutional  capacity,  and  competitive 
markets return to normal, it helps to design 
a clear but ﬂ exible exit strategy. This can in-

 

Practical country directions and options 

259

volve the move from nongovernment to state 
systems, or from informal to formal systems.
Next, mitigate the negative consequences. 
For  example,  labor  migration  agreements 
can  be  accompanied  by  information  and 
protection  for  workers.  And  public  action 
to support employment can be designed to 
avoid pressure on private sector recruitment 
by keeping wages at self-selecting levels and 
using  controls  on  incremental  job  creation 
by employers.

Similar  lessons  apply  to  systematic  but 
more gradual reform (see table 8.3). Mark-
ing  these  areas  as “systematic  and  gradual” 
does not mean they are unimportant—they 
have  played  a  big  role  in  successful  transi-
tions,  from  devolution  in  Northern  Ireland 
to transitional justice and education reform 
in  South  Africa  and  Germany.32  What  they 
have  in  common,  however,  is  that  they  in-
volve a complex web of institutions and so-
cial norms. So, in most situations, systematic 
and gradual action appears to work best. 

Monitoring results

National  reformers  and  their  international 
partners  in-country  need  efﬁ cient  ways  to 
monitor results from these programs, both to 
demonstrate successes and to create a feed-
back loop on areas that are lagging. The Mil-
lennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  have 
been crucial for shifting attention to poverty 
and social issues, and remain important long-
term goals even in the most fragile situations. 
But they move too slowly to act as a feedback 
loop for policy-makers—and they do not fo-
cus on citizen security, justice, or jobs. 

Table  8.4  shows  sample  indicators  for 
measuring early results of programmatic in-
terventions.  These  outcome-oriented  mea-
sures will vary by country context, but could 
include, for example, freedom of movement 
along transit routes, electricity coverage, num-
ber of businesses registered, and employment 
days created. These will not, however, provide 
a  more  systematic  picture  of  risk  and  prog-
ress. Useful complementary indicators would 
cover the areas most directly related to citizen 
security, justice, and jobs over the short and 

longer terms—actual levels of insecurity; em-
ployment;  access  to  justice;  and  differences 
in welfare and perceived welfare between eth-
nic, religious, geographical, and social groups, 
as shown in table 8.4. They would also cover 
developments in trust, state society relations, 
and  institutional  legitimacy.  Governance  in-
dicators  take  time  to  shift—a  useful  short-
term  measure  is  polling  citizen  perceptions 
of institutions, as Haiti did to measure early 
shifts in the performance of its police.33 Such 
polling  data  are  a  regular  part  of  govern-
ment policy information in high-income and 
many  middle- income  countries,  but  much 
less  so  in  the  lowest  income  fragile  states, 
where,  arguably, they would be of most use to 
 policy-makers.

As with the discussion of early results, it 
is important that progress indicators set the 
right incentives for later institution-building. 
For  example,  if  security  forces  have  targets 
set based on the number of rebel combatants 
killed or captured or criminals arrested, they 
may  rely  primarily  on  coercive  approaches, 
and  there  would  be  no  incentive  to  build 
longer-term  trust  with  communities.  Tar-
gets  based  on  citizen  security  (freedom  of 
movement  and  so  on),  by  contrast,  create 
longer-term incentives for the role of the se-
curity forces in underpinning effective state-
society  relations.  Similarly,  if  progress  on 
security, justice, and jobs is monitored only 
through indicators of access, there are fewer 
incentives for state institutions to work with 
communities in violence prevention and pay 
attention  to  citizen  conﬁ dence  that  institu-
tions are  responsive to their needs. A mix of 
indicators  that  measure  citizen  perceptions 
and  security,  justice,  and  employment  out-
comes to monitor progress can help address 
both areas.

Fitting program design to context 

The idea of best-ﬁ t approaches has been used 
throughout  the  WDR:  rather  than  copying 
programs  that  have  been  used  elsewhere, 
adapting  their  design  to  local  context  can 
ensure  that  they  will  deliver  results  within 
local political dynamics. For example, while 

260 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

TA B L E 8.4 Feasible indicators for results measurement

Indicators

Citizen security

Justice

Jobs and associated services

Sample program 
indicators:
Outcome-oriented 
results

(sample associated 
program in 
parentheses)

• 

Freedom of movement 
along transit routes 
(redeployment of 
security forces, focus 
on citizen security)

•  Number of additional people 
with access to justice services 
(e.g., mobile courts, community 
paralegals, traditional justice 
systems)

•  Decline in crime rate 

•  Number of cases prosecuted/

statistics 

• 

backlog (processing of judicial 
caseloads)
Transparency of decision making 
and meeting of targets (publication 
of budgets, expenditures, and 
audits)

•  Coverage and representation in state and 
community decision-making mechanisms 
(multisectoral community programs)

•  Number of employment days and small 

infrastructure or income-generating projects 
produced (employment programs)

•  Number of businesses registered and 

operating, including large, labor-intensive 
businesses resuming operations in insecure 
areas (security, regulatory simpliﬁ cation, 
infrastructure bottlenecks)

•  Percentage of vulnerable groups reached 

with services and transfers through national 
institutions (community social protection, 
humanitarian aid, vaccination)
Electricity coverage/number of hours of 
blackouts

• 

•  Reduction in level/volatility of consumer 
prices (macropolicy and/or infrastructure 
bottlenecks) 

Short-term 
systematic 
monitoring of conﬁ -
dence in 
institutions

Long-term 
systematic 
monitoring of 
institutional 
transformation

Source: WDR team. 

•  Number of violent 

•  Perception surveys by groups 

•  Perceptions of whether employment 

deaths

•  Perception survey data 

on trends in security 
and trust in security 
forces

(ethnic, geographical, religious, 
class) regarding whether their 
welfare is increasing over time and 
in relation to others 

•  Perception survey data regarding 

trust in national institutions, justice 
sector; and on corruption, nationally 
and by region and group 

opportunities are increasing
•  Business conﬁ dence surveys 

•  Victim surveys 

•  Household survey data on vertical 

•  Household data on employment and labor 

and horizontal inequalities and 
access to justice services

•  Governance indicators refocused 

on degree of progress within 
historically realistic time frames 

force participation

multisectoral  community  approaches  can 
be  effective  in  contexts  as  different  as  Côte 
d’Ivoire,  Guatemala,  and  Northern  Ireland, 
speciﬁ c stresses in Côte d’Ivoire and North-
ern  Ireland  linked  to  geographical  or  re-
ligious  divides  makes  it  imperative  for 
 program designs to ensure that activities are 
seen not as targeted to one ethnic or religious 
group  and  instead  build  bonds  between 
groups.  Box  8.2  shows  how  the  core  tool 
of multisectoral state-community programs 
has been adapted to different contexts.

Different types of stresses and institutional 
challenges make a difference. Box 8.3 shows 
an example of anti-corruption approaches in 

Liberia and Mozambique, which both drew 
on  nongovernmental  capacities  to  monitor 
key functions. In Liberia, a history of funds 
corrupted  from  natural  resource  extraction 
sources, as well as concern over the risk of di-
version of public funds following the Com-
prehensive Peace Agreement in 2003, argued 
for  the  use  of  intensive  state–private  sector 
and  state-international  partnerships  to  pre-
vent  a  recurrence  of  corruption-fueled  vio-
lence. In Mozambique, corruption had been 
less of a divisive issue during the conﬂ ict, but 
increases  in  trade  linked  to  reconstruction 
programs created new risks, for example, in 
customs functions.

 

Practical country directions and options 

261

BOX 8.2   Adapting community-level program design to country context: Afghanistan, Burundi, 

Cambodia, Colombia, Indonesia, Nepal, and Rwanda

The basic elements of community-based programs for violence prevention and recovery are simple and can be adapted to a 
broad range of country contexts. All community programs under state auspices consist, essentially, of a community decision-
making mechanism to decide on priorities and the provision of funds and technical help to implement them. Within this model 
there is a great deal of variance that can be adapted to diﬀ erent types of stresses and institutional capacities, as well as to diﬀ er-
ent opportunities for transition. Three important sources of variance are in how community decision-making is done, who con-
trols the funds, and where programs sit within government. 

Diﬀ erent stresses and institutional capacities and accountability aﬀ ect community decision-making. In many violent areas, 

preexisting community councils are either destroyed or were already discredited. A critical ﬁ rst step is to reestablish credible par-
ticipatory forms of representation. In Burundi, for example, a local NGO organized elections for representative community devel-
opment committees in the participating communes that cut across ethnic divides. Similarly, Afghanistan’s National Solidarity Pro-
gram began with village-wide elections for a community development council. But Indonesia’s programs for the conﬂ ict-aﬀ ected 
areas of Aceh, Kalimantan, Maluku, and Sulawesi did not include holding new community elections. Community councils were 
largely intact, and national laws already provided for local, democratic village elections. Indonesia also experimented with sepa-
rating grants to Muslim and Christian villages to minimize intercommunal tensions, but eventually used common funds and 
councils to bridge divides between these communities.

Diﬀ erent institutional challenges also aﬀ ect who manages the funds. Programs must weigh the trade-oﬀ s between a ﬁ rst 

objective of building trust with the risks of money going missing and the elite capture of resources. Diﬀ erent approaches to pro-
gram design to ﬁ t context include the following:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

In Indonesia, where local capacity was fairly strong, subdistrict councils established ﬁ nancial management units that are 
routinely audited but have full responsibility for all aspects of ﬁ nancial performance. 

In Burundi, lack of progress in overall decentralization and diﬃ  culties in monitoring funds through community structures 
meant that responsibility for managing the funds remained with the NGO partners. In Rwanda, by contrast, greater space for 
change after the genocide meant the councils could from the start be integrated into the government’s decentralization 
plans. 

In Afghanistan’s National Solidarity Program, NGOs also took on the initial responsibility for managing the funds while coun-
cils were trained in bookkeeping, but within a year, block grants were being transferred directly to the councils. 

In Colombia, where the primary institutional challenges were to bring the state closer to communities and overcome distrust 
between security and civilian government agencies, funds are held by individual government ministries, but approvals for 
activities are made by multisectoral teams in consultation with communities. 

In Nepal, community programs show the full range of design options, with some programs giving primary responsibility for 
fund oversight to partner NGOs, to their large-scale village school program, where community school committees are the 
legal owners of school facilities and can use government funds to hire and train their staﬀ . 

In Cambodia’s Seila program, councils were launched under UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) auspices and 
then moved into the government’s newly formed commune structure. 

The type of transition moment and governance environment also aﬀ ects how community decision-making structures align 

with the formal government administration. Many countries emerging from conﬂ ict will also be undergoing major constitutional 
and administrative reforms, just as the early-response community programs are being launched. There may be tensions between 
national and local governance and power-holders at the center and the community. In Afghanistan, where center-periphery 
issues are a key driver of conﬂ ict, and where warlords are a continuing threat to stability, community-driven development (CDD) 
programs must be sensitive to national-local dynamics. Afghanistan’s Community Development Councils, though constituted 
under a 2007 vice presidential bylaw, are still under review for formal integration into the national administrative structure. 

In other settings of either prolonged crisis or in authoritarian systems, CDD programs can be designed to sustain human capi-
tal and oﬀ er an avenue for local-level debate in the absence of national-level progress. CDD programs designed in environments 
with more limited space for change may rely more heavily on nongovernmental delivery of services, employing local workers for 
skill building and focusing on “neutral,” nonpolitical issues in community debates.

Source: Guggenheim 2011. 

262 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 8.3  Anti-corruption approaches in Liberia and Mozambique

Types of violence:  Both countries had faced long-standing civil war.

Key stakeholders:  Government, opposition 
parties, civil society, and donors were important 
stakeholders relating to corruption issues in both 
countries: regional institutions played a higher- 
stake role in Liberia than in Mozambique on 
corruption-related issues.

Institutional challenges:  Both countries had low-
capacity state institutions and low state revenues, 
with accountability problems greater in Liberia than 
in Mozambique.

Transition opportunity:  Both countries went 
through major transitions: peace agreements 
followed by electoral transitions.

Key stresses:  Corruption under the transitional 
government in Liberia between 2002 and 2004 
reached extremely high proportions, threatening 
progress in the peace agreement by denuding the 
country’s large natural resources and potentially 
ﬁ nancing renewed electoral violence. Increasing 
trade in Mozambique created the potential for 
increased customs revenue—but also increased 
vulnerability to corruption. High unemployment 
and a legacy of regional and ethnic tensions were 
issues in both countries—with a commensurate 
need to attract investors and donor funds to 
supplement public ﬁ nances.

Both countries outsourced some key functions to the private sector and undertook additional monitoring 
to guard against corruption and increase revenues. The functions chosen and the nature of external moni-
toring were diﬀ erent, however. Liberia focused on forestry inspections and natural resource concessions, 
reﬂ ecting the role of natural resource revenues in ﬁ nancing violence, while Mozambique focused on cus-
toms as a source of additional revenue that was vulnerable to corruption.

Liberia undertook, through the Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program, “dual 

key” oversight by regional and international experts of major contracts and concessions. The African Union 
and ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States) were instrumental in reaching agreement on 
this arrangement, along with the international ﬁ nancial institutions, the UN, the United States, and the 
European Union, in recognition of the potential regional spillover eﬀ ects of rising corruption. In its initial 
stages, this arrangement focused more on accountability than capacity transfer, reﬂ ecting the severe 
nature of corruption challenges at the time. More recently, the program has emphasized capacity transfer 
more strongly. Following the elections, the new government also contracted a private inspection company 
to build and operate a system to track all timber from the point of harvest through transport to sale. The 
system ensures the government collects all revenue because it will not issue an export permit until the 
Central Bank conﬁ rms that all taxes have been paid. In Mozambique, the government contracted a private 
company to run customs inspection functions and collect customs revenues. Both strategies delivered 
results, with domestic revenues rising and increased donor funds.

Sources: Giovine and others 2010; Dwan and Bailey 2006; Jahr 2010; Government of the Republic of Liberia Execu-
tive Mansion 2009; Hubbard 2005; Mosse 2007; De Wulf and Sokol 2004; Crown Agents 2007.

External factors: Reducing external 
stresses and mobilizing external 
support

Societies  do  not  have  the  luxury  of  trans-
forming their institutions in isolation—they 
need  at  the  same  time  to  mobilize  external 
support for change and to manage external 
pressures, whether from economic shocks or 

from  trafﬁ cking  and  international  corrup-
tion.  Many  of  these  constraints  on  external 
assistance  and  the  management  of  exter-
nal  stresses  are  beyond  the  control  of  each 
nation-state to address. Chapter 9 considers 
possible directions for international policy in 
these issues. National leaders and their inter-
national partners at a country level can, how-
ever,  help  to  mobilize  external  support  and 

 

Practical country directions and options 

263

galvanize  cooperation  programs  to  address 
shared stresses with external partners. 

Factoring in external stresses

National  development  strategies  rarely  in-
volve  an  assessment  of  potential  external 
stresses or collaborative action with others to 
address them—yet action on external stresses 
may be key to effective violence prevention. 
Regular  assessment  of  risks  and  opportuni-
ties,  as  described  earlier should  also  include 
considering and planning for possible external 
stresses. One example is the potential security 
impacts of economic stresses, such as volatile 
food prices. Another is increased insecurity of 
neighbors—how to mitigate, for example, the 
economic spillover of Somalia piracy on the 
neighboring  economies  and  ﬁ shing  indus-
tries.34 Still others include, ironically, consid-
ering the impact of a successful action against 
trafﬁ cking  or  rebel  groups  on  neighboring 
countries—for  example,  whether  these  ac-
tions  will  push  insecurity  over  borders,  as 
Colombia’s  dismantling  of  drug  cartels  did 
for Central America and Mexico.

Actions to address external stresses can be 
taken  in  security,  justice,  and  developmen-
tal areas (table 8.5). Some of the actions to 
address  potential  external  stresses  and  op-
portunities fall in the purely diplomatic and 
security  sphere.  (This  Report  does  not  at-
tempt to address these in detail, but it is clear 
that  they  can  be  crucial  for  conﬁ dence-
 building  with  external  stakeholders.)  Bor-
der cooperation, redeployment of troops to 
signal  non-interference  or  engagement  in 
shared  security  approaches,  or  simple  dip-

lomatic  signals,  such  as  the  visit  of  Sheikh 
Sharif  of  Somalia  to  the  Government  of 
Ethiopia  in  March  2010  immediately  after 
his nomination as president or Timor-Leste’s 
outreach  to  the  Government  of  Indonesia, 
can all form an important part of the basic 
tools for restoration of conﬁ dence. 

Cross-border  programs  to  link  security 
and  development  approaches  can  be  initi-
ated  by  national  governments. An  openness 
to discussing both security and development 
cooperation  across  insecure  border  regions, 
based  on  shared  goals  of  citizen  security, 
justice, and jobs, has the potential to deliver 
results. Cooperation between China’s south-
eastern  provinces  and  neighboring  ASEAN 
states  under  the  Greater  Mekong  Subregion 
initiative, while still with potential for expan-
sion,  has  addressed  some  of  these  issues.35
EU  member  states  have  a  range  of  models 
to  address  cross-border  cooperation:  while 
some may be appropriate only for advanced 
economic  and  institutional  environments, 
many involve subregions that were historically 
underdeveloped and driven by conﬂ ict, either 
after World War II or more recently  after the 
Balkan War.36 Lessons from cross-border co-
operation  in  Europe  appear  to  include  the 
need to start with economic and social issues 
(including  pooled  administrative  capacity 
in universities), as well as shared actions on 
border security and trafﬁ cking—while avoid-
ing actions that can cause political or cultural 
tensions,  particularly  those  involving  ethnic 
groups residing across borders.

A  promising  form  of  bilateral  coopera-
tion to address external stresses further aﬁ eld 
is to address the complex web of corruption 

TA B L E 8.5 Core tools—National action to address external stresses

Citizen security

Justice

Jobs and associated services

•  Border cooperation

•  Coordination of supply and 

demand-side responses

•  Military, police, and 
ﬁ nancial intelligence 

 

•  Pooled supplementary 
administrative capacity

•  Joint investigations and 

•  Cross-border development

prosecutions across jurisdictions 

programming 

•  Building of links between formal 

•  Social protection to mitigate 

and informal systems 

global economic stresses

264 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 8.4    Bilateral cooperation against corruption and money 

laundering in Haiti and Nigeria

Key stresses:  In both countries, corruption with international money-laundering links has 
undermined the capacity of national institutions to combat violence. 

Key stakeholders:  Government, opposition parties, civil society, and donors were important 
stakeholders relating to corruption issues in Haiti, with the Unites States playing a particularly 
important role. Donors were less important in Nigeria, but civil society was much stronger 
than in Haiti. 

Institutional challenges:  Political obstacles to prosecuting grand corruption were high in 
both countries. Capacity in the criminal justice system to prosecute complex corruption cases 
was present in Nigeria but absent in Haiti.

Both countries developed links with the law enforcement institutions of other nations. 
Haiti’s government drew on capacity from the United States not only during the investigative 
phase but in the prosecution as well. In Nigeria, by contrast, local oﬃ  cials mainly drew on the 
investigative capacity of the United Kingdom to gather evidence to be used for convictions in 
Nigerian courts. 

Since former Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide ﬂ ed into exile in 2004, successive Hai-
tian governments have sought to recoup funds lost from a corrupt agreement with American 
telecommunications companies. According to the government, Haiti Teleco, Haiti’s state-
owned telecom ﬁ rm, had provided services at cut-rate prices to American providers in return 
for kickbacks to senior government oﬃ  cials and key Teleco staﬀ . The case involved a complex 
scheme of favorable tariﬀ s with kickbacks channeled through an intermediary’s oﬀ shore bank 
account. Proving it in a Haitian court would have been a challenge, given the absence of police 
and prosecutors with experience handling cases of sophisticated ﬁ nancial crime, and once the 
earthquake hit in January 2010 it would have been nigh impossible. In December 2009, the U.S. 
Department of Justice charged two former employees of Teleco who allegedly received kick-
backs with money laundering oﬀ enses. In June 2010, one of the two was convicted and sen-
tenced to four years in prison and ordered to pay US$1.8 million in restitution to the govern-
ment of Haiti and forfeit another US$1.6 million. The second employee awaits trial.

In Nigeria, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) worked closely with the 

U.K. Crown Prosecution Service and Scotland Yard to develop evidence against the corrupt 
governors of three Nigerian states. The EFCC alerted British authorities to the possibility that 
the governors were hiding the proceeds of corruption in London banks or real estate invest-
ments. In one of the cases, the governor was prosecuted in the U.K. for money laundering; in 
the others, the evidence was used to prosecute them in Nigeria. Under the Nigerian consti-
tution, state governors enjoy immunity while in oﬃ  ce. In one instance, evidence developed 
by the U.K. criminal justice agencies was presented by a U.K. law enforcement oﬃ  cial to a com-
mittee of the state’s legislature, which voted to remove the governor from oﬃ  ce, thus lifting 
his immunity and allowing him to be charged in Nigeria. During these investigations, the EFCC 
worked closely with U.K. oﬃ  cials and received on-the-job training.

Source: Messick 2011.

and money laundering through joint inves-
tigations  or  prosecutions.  Where  stronger 
jurisdictions pair with those with weaker in-
stitutions, these initiatives have the potential 
to build capacity as well as deliver practical 
results  in  diminishing  impunity.  Investiga-
tions and prosecutions involving trafﬁ cking 
can increase this type of cooperation, which 

can  be  differentiated  for  different  environ-
ments, as in Haiti and Nigeria (box 8.4).

Mobilizing international support

Some  constraints  on  international  support 
come from policies and systems in the head-
quarters  of  multilaterals  and  donor  coun-

 

Practical country directions and options 

265

tries (chapter 9). National leaders and their 
partners on the ground cannot individually 
determine  these  broader  changes  to  the  in-
ternational system, but they can act to maxi-
mize the beneﬁ ts of existing support.

It  helps  when  national  leaders  and  their 
international  partners  in  the  ﬁ eld  lay  out 
clear, program-level priorities across the se-
curity,  justice,  and  development  domains. 
Where  national  actors  are  divided  in  their 
priorities  (for  example,  with  different  min-
istries  putting  forth  different  requests,  or 
donor  ﬁ eld  representatives  disagreeing  on 
overall priorities), international capitals and 
the governing structures of multilaterals will 
not  receive  a  clear  message  to  focus  efforts. 
Priorities are better laid out in a very limited 
number of clear programs, as in Liberia after 
the civil war or Colombia in the face of ris-
ing criminal violence after 2002.37 Using the 
national budget process to decide on prior-
ity  programs  creates  leverage  to  coordinate 
messages  and  implementation  between  the 
security and development ministries. 

Being  alert  to  the  needs  of  international 
partners  to  show  results  and  manage  risks 
can  also  improve  results  from  international 
aid.  International  partners  have  their  own 
domestic  pressures—such  as  demonstrat-
ing that aid funds are not misused and being 
able to attribute results to their endeavors. A 
frank  exchange  on  risks  and  results  helps  to 
ﬁ nd  ways  to  bridge  differences.  In  Indone-
sia in the aftermath of the tsunami and Aceh 
peace agreement, the government agreed with 
donors  that  incoming  assistance  would  be 
“jointly  branded”  from  the  Indonesian  Re-
construction Agency and donors, with special 
transparency measures in place. This enabled 
both sides to show visible results and manage 
risks,  while  bolstering  state-society  relations 
in the aftermath of crisis. In donor coordina-
tion  arrangements  for  highly  aid-dependent 
countries,  “double  compacts,”  de scribed  in 
chapter 6, can be a useful tool. These agree-
ments lay out the results governments aim to 
provide to their own citizens as well as clarify 
mutual  commitments  between  governments 
and donors.

An  important  trade-off  for  national  re-
formers  and  their  international  partners  is 
to  ensure  that  international  delivery  capac-
ity  can  help  deliver  fast  results  while  also 
supporting  increases  in  the  legitimacy  of 
national institutions. International humani-
tarian assistance, for example, not only can 
save lives but also can help greatly in deliv-
ering quick conﬁ dence-building results. But 
humanitarian  delivery  of  food  imports  can 
also distort production in local markets, and 
long-term  international  humanitarian  pro-
vision  of  health,  education,  and  water  and 
sanitation  services  can  undermine  efforts 
to  increase  the  credibility  of  local  institu-
tions. Much of this can be avoided through 
phased  transitions  from  humanitarian  ca-
pacity to local institutions (box 8.5). Similar 
approaches can be used in other sectors: the 
International Commission against Impunity 
in  Guatemala,  for  example,  combines  local 
judicial  capacity-building  with  the  use  of 
international staff to assist in investigations 
and  prosecutions.38  The  Governance  and 
Economic Management Program in Liberia 
has shifted from an initial focus on interna-
tional  executive  support  for  accountability 
over public resources to capacity-building in 
national systems.39

National reformers and their international 
partners in-country have a rich set of experi-
ences to draw on—both in evaluating efforts 
in the past in their countries and in adapt-
ing experiences from around the world. The 
tools in this chapter offer options for this ad-
aptation.  Conﬁ dence-building  through  col-
laborative  approaches  and  early  results  and 
the foundational reforms that can deliver cit-
izen security, justice, and jobs have some ele-
ments in common. But they need to be well 
adapted  to  the  local  political  context.  The 
task of national reformers and international 
representatives in the ﬁ eld is made easier—
or harder—by the supporting environments 
in  global  policy  and  in  the  headquarters  of 
bilateral  actors  and  the  global  institutions. 
Chapter 9 turns to directions for global pol-
icy to support countries struggling to prevent 
and recover from violence on the ground.

266 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

BOX 8.5    Phasing the transition from international humanitarian aid to local 

institutions: Afghanistan and Timor-Leste

Types of violence:  Both countries have a history of external and civil conﬂ ict, with signiﬁ cant ongoing violence in Afghanistan and, in 
Timor, a more limited wave of renewed political and communal conﬂ ict and gang-based violence in 2005–06. 

Transition opportunities:  Signiﬁ cant transitions occurred in both 
countries: particularly signiﬁ cant was space for change under the 
UN transitional authority in Timor in 1999–2002.

Institutional challenges:  Limited service delivery, severe capacity 
constraints, many donor players were the major challenges.

Key stakeholders:  Government, civil society, and humanitarian 
and development donors were key stakeholders.

Timor-Leste
Following the UN supervised referendum on independence of August 1999, Timor-Leste  suﬀ ered widespread violence and destruction 
of its infrastructure and collapse of state services. In the transition period before and after independence in 2002, Timor-Leste man-
aged, however, to provide both rapid results and long-term institution-building in the health sector in four phases.

In the ﬁ rst phase international and national NGOs occupied a central role in providing emergency health services throughout 

Timor, independently funded through humanitarian assistance. In the second phase, the interim health authority established in 2000 
developed a health plan and performance indicators and signed memoranda of understanding with NGOs to standardize the service 
packages provided in diﬀ erent parts of the territory still under independent humanitarian funding. In the third phase, NGOs were con-
tracted directly by the transitional authority to perform both local management and service delivery functions. In the fourth phase, the 
Interim Health Authority was replaced by a new ministry of health, which assumed district management of the system and facilities, 
with NGOs important in specialized service delivery and a capacity-building role, but decreased local personnel over time. All the 
major international agencies in the health sector worked together within this framework.

By 2004 this gradual phasing of responsibility and capacity-building had led to 90 percent of the population having access to 

health facilities within a two-hour walking distance. Between 2000 and 2004, the use of these facilities rose from 0.75 outpatient visits 
per capita to 2.13. The health ministry and district operations were among the few state functions resilient to renewed violence in 
2005–06, continuing to operate and, indeed, to provide assistance to the displaced population. 

Afghanistan
In the wake of the fall of the Taliban in 2002, Afghanistan’s basic health services were in a dismal condition, with maternal mortality 
estimated at 1,600 per 100,000 live births. The Afghan ministry of public health outlined a package of priority health services in 
response (costing about US$4 per capita per year) and contracted NGOs to deliver them, while also establishing rigorous monitoring 
and evaluation. The NGOs were selected competitively and sanctioned for poor performance. 

Early results have been optimistic, with a 136 percent increase in the number of functioning primary health care facilities between 

2002 and 2007. Despite a worsening security situation, the number of outpatient visits between 2004 and 2007 also increased by nearly 
400 percent. These outcomes have relied not only on political support but also on a commitment by the ministry of public health not 
to micromanage the process. 

By contracting autonomously operating NGOs while ensuring accountability, the Afghan government both earned and sustained 

policy leadership in the health sector. It allowed the ministry of public health to address scarce human resources, a lack of physical 
facilities, and logistical hurdles. The depth of ongoing violence in Afghanistan has not permitted national institutions to assume the 
role played by NGOs over time, as in Timor-Leste, but the Afghan government and ministry of public health have still managed to 
achieve much needed health outcomes in an uncertain environment dominated by insecurity and institutional challenges. 

Sources: Baird 2010; Rohland and Cliﬀ e 2002; Tulloch and others 2003. 

Notes

1.   WDR Consultation with former key negotiators from the ANC Alliance and the National Party in 
South Africa, 2010; WDR team interview with former president Álvaro Uribe, 2010; WDR team 
consultation with government ofﬁ cials, representatives from civil society organizations, and secu-
rity personnel in Colombia, 2010.

2.   Arboleda 2010; WDR team consultation with government ofﬁ cials, representatives from civil soci-

ety organizations, and security personnel in Colombia, 2010.

3.   Porter and Rab 2010.
4.   For more in-depth discussion, see the section on delivering early results in chapter 4. 

 

Practical country directions and options 

267

5.   Barron and Burke 2008; World Bank 2010a.
6.   Dwan  and  Bailey  2006;  Jahr  2010;  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Liberia  Executive  Mansion 

2009. Also see box 4.3 in chapter 4.

7.   CICIG  2009;  Férnandez  2010;  Donovan  2008;  UN  2006a;  Hudson  2010.  Also  see  box  6.4  in  

chapter 6.

8.   Braud and Grevi 2005; Schulze 2007. Also see feature 4 in chapter 4. 
9.   See section on support to building inclusive-enough coalitions in chapter 6.
10.   See UNODC 2010a; Dufﬁ eld 2000; Kohlmann 2004. Also see the section on spillover effects of 

violence and feature 1 in chapter 1.

11.   Robinson 1994; Kingah and Kingah 2010.
12.   Salazar 2007; Murphy 2008; Bronstein 2007.
13.   For more information, see the section on delivering early results in chapter 4.
14.   Cousens and Harland 2006; Statistical Ofﬁ ce of Kosovo 2010; Chesterman 2004. Also see box 4.7 

in chapter 4.

15.   Dwan  and  Bailey  2006;  Jahr  2010;  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Liberia  Executive  Mansion 

2009; Baily and Hoskins 2007. Also see box 4.3 and box 4.6 in chapter 4.

16.   BBC News 2010. 
17.   World Bank 2011a.
18.   Dupuy and Binningsbø 2008. Also see discussion on inclusive-enough coalitions in chapter 4.
19.   UNDPKO 2010a. Also see box 4.5 in chapter 4.
20.   Graydon 2005; Greenfell 2006; Timor-Leste Independent Comprehensive Need Assessment Team 

2009.

21.   For Nicaragua, see Scheye 2009. For Sierra Leone, see Dale 2009. Also see the section on justice in 

chapter 5 for more in-depth discussion.

22.   Lamb and Dye 2009; Tajima 2009; see section on public ﬁ nance for employment in chapter 5 for 

in-depth discussion.
23.   World Bank 2010d.
24.   For Lebanon, see World Bank 2008f, 2009d; Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Environment 1999, box 
5.9 in chapter 5. For Liberia, see Bailey and Hoskins 2007; McCandless 2008, box 4.6 in chapter 4; box 
6.5 in chapter 6.

25.   Herzberg 2004. Also see section on jobs in chapter 5.
26.   USAID Rwanda 2006; Grygiel 2007; Parker 2008; Chohan-Pole 2010; Boudreaux 2010. Also see 

box 5.8 in chapter 5.

27.   For Japanese land reforms, see Kawagoe 1999; For broader statebuilding experience in Japan, see 
Tsunekawa and Yoshida 2010; For Korean land reforms, see Shin 2006. For Singapore, see box 5.2 
in chapter 5.
28.   Lopes 2009.
29.   World Bank 2006b; Kireyev 2006; Economic Times 2008. Also see section on public ﬁ nance for 

employment in chapter 5.

30.   Ashe and Parrott 2001. Also see box 5.10 in chapter 5.
31.   Mobekk 2010; Bastick, Grimm, and Kunz 2007. Also see section on security in chapter 5 for more 

information. 

32.   For Northern Ireland, see Barron and others 2010. Also see the section on decentralization and 
devolution  in  chapter  5.  For  South  Africa,  see  Hayner  2010;  UNOHCHR  2006.  For  Germany, 
see  Grimm  2010.  Also  see  the  section  titled “Transitional  justice  to  recognize  past  crimes”  in 
chapter 5. 

33.   UNDPKO 2010a. Also see box 5.5 in chapter 5.
34.   Bowden 2010; Gilpin 2009. Also see section on spillover effects of violence in chapter 1.
35.   World  Bank  2006d.  See  section  titled “Between  the  global  and  the  national:  Regional  stresses, 

regional support” in chapter 7.

36.   Greta  and  Lewandowski  2010;  Otocan  2010;  Council  of  Europe  1995;  Council  of  Europe  and 
Institute of International Sociology of Gorizia 2003; Bilcik and others 2000. Also see box 7.11 in 
chapter 7.

37.   Liberia: Giovine and others 2010; box 4.6 in chapter 4. Colombia: WDR team interview with for-
mer president Álvaro Uribe, 2010; WDR team consultation with government ofﬁ cials, representa-
tives from civil society organizations, and security personnel in Colombia, 2010.

38.   CICIG  2009;  Férnandez  2010;  Donovan  2008;  UN  2006a;  Hudson  2010.  Also  see  box  6.4  in  

chapter 6.

39.   Dwan  and  Bailey  2006;  Jahr  2010;  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Liberia  Executive  Mansion 

2009. Also see box 4.3 in chapter 4.

Chapter 9 sets out new directions for international policy. 

International assistance to strengthen the national institu-
tions and governance that provide citizen security, justice, 

and jobs, and to alleviate the factors that undermine them, is crucial 
to break the repeated cycles of violence described in this Report. 
But it requires an international system better adapted to address 
21st-century risks of violence. This means refocusing assistance on 
preventing criminal and political violence through greater, and 
more integrated, support for security, justice, and jobs; reforming 
the procedures of international agencies; responding at a regional 
level; and renewing cooperative eﬀ orts among lower-, middle-, and 
higher-income countries.

CITIZEN
SECURITY,
JUSTICE,
AND JOBS

EXTERNAL
STRESS

CHAPTER9

VIOLENCE and

FRAGILITY

EXTERNAL SUPPORT 
AND INCENTIVES

New directions for 
international support

The  international  system  achieved 

remarkable  progress  in  reducing 
20th-century violence. The overall 
decrease  in  interstate  war  owes  a 
great deal to the establishment and growth of 
an international architecture after World War 
II that viewed peace and prosperity as linked 
and  embodied  shared  global  standards  and 
new methods of collective action to address 
threats. The adaptation of that system at the 
end of the Cold War provided new tools that 
contributed to a subsequent reduction in the 
number and severity of civil wars. This Re-
port stresses that progress in overcoming vio-
lence and reducing risk is above all a national 
process and that national actors need to own 
their institutional transformation. Yet many 
of the national responses analyzed in part 2 
of  this  Report, “Lessons  from  National  and 
International Responses,” were achieved with 
international support. It is difﬁ cult to imag-
ine  how  committed  leaders  in  post–World 
War  II  Europe,  Indonesia,  the  Republic  of 
Korea,  Liberia,  Mozambique,  Northern  Ire-
land, Singapore, or Timor-Leste would have 
stabilized their countries or regions without 
help from abroad.

The  international  system  is  hampered, 
however, by structures and processes that are 
not sufﬁ ciently adapted to the current chal-
lenge as described in chapters 6 and 7. There 
is  relatively  little  capacity  internationally  to 

support the core institutional challenges for 
violence prevention—citizen security, justice, 
and jobs. Internal agency processes are often 
too slow to support conﬁ dence-building and 
too quick to exit, inadequately engaged with 
building national institutions, and preoccu-
pied  with  technical  “best  practice”  rather 
than functionality adapted to the local politi-
cal  context.  Divisions  between  diplomatic, 
security, and development agencies, and be-
tween those initiatives dealing with political 
conﬂ ict  and  criminal  violence,  persist,  de-
spite  the  practical  links  on  the  ground  be-
tween these issues. Efforts are targeted more 
at  the  national  than  the  regional  level,  and 
global initiatives on corruption and trafﬁ ck-
ing lack robust tools to “follow the money” 
across fragile jurisdictions. A focus on smarter 
assistance  tools  is  particularly  urgent  given 
the  current  environment  of  constraints  on 
aid budgets.

The  changing  international  balance  of 
power  is  also  widening  the  circle  of  inﬂ u-
ential actors. With the rising economic and 
diplomatic inﬂ uence of lower- and middle-
income countries, the focus of inﬂ uence on 
national  action  is  shifting.  Middle-income 
countries, many with a history of solidarity 
support  and  increasing  aid  programs,  are 
taking on greater responsibilities for shaping 
outcomes beyond their borders. And regional 
institutions are playing a larger role. In fragile 

270 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

situations,  the  different  domestic  pressures 
faced by OECD (Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development) donors, re-
cipient countries, and middle-income coun-
tries—the “dual accountability dilemma” of 
accountability  pressures  both  to  domestic 
constituencies  and  shareholders  and  to  the 
leaders  and  citizens  of  recipient  states  de-
scribed in chapter 6—often means that their 
view on priorities and what is reasonable to 
expect of national actors are divided. 

Taken  together,  these  constraints  mean 
that international assistance is not yet mar-
shaling the resources needed to address the 
21st-century  challenges  of  repeated  and  in-
terlinked violence and weak governance. To 
achieve  real  change  in  approaches,  this  Re-
port considers four tracks to improve global 
responses for security and development.

(cid:129)  Track 1: Preventing repeated cycles of vio-
lence by investing in citizen security, jus-
tice, and jobs

(cid:129)  Track  2:  Reforming  internal  agency  sys-
tems  to  support  rapid  action  to  restore 
conﬁ dence  and 
long-term  institution-
building

(cid:129)  Track 3: Acting regionally and globally on 

external stresses

(cid:129)  Track 4: Marshaling experience and sup-
port  from  lower-,  middle-,  and  higher- 
income  countries  and  global  and  re-
gional institutions to reﬂ ect the changing 
landscape  of  international  policy  and 
 assistance.

Track 1: Preventing repeated cycles 
of violence by investing in citizen 
security, justice, and jobs

The  demand  for  international  support  that 
can  help  areas  struggling  to  prevent  large-
scale  political  or  criminal  violence  is  high. 
Prevention does not mean only the preven-
tion  of  new  violence  in  hitherto  peaceful 
 areas,  but  reducing  the  risk  of  recurring 
violence  in  countries  that  have  already  ex-
perienced  past  cycles,  for  example,  Guate-

mala  or Yemen.  Repeated  cycles  of  political 
and criminal violence require thinking out-
side the box, beyond the traditional develop-
ment paradigm. Issues of citizen security are 
not peripheral to “mainstream” development. 
They are in varying forms a problem for sub-
national areas of larger and more prosperous 
countries, for countries emerging from con-
ﬂ ict that need to prevent recurrence, and for 
areas facing new or resurgent threats. More 
effective international support to risk reduc-
tion  requires  (1)  combined  tools  that  link 
citizen  security,  justice,  jobs,  and  associated 
services,  and  (2)  structural  investments  in 
justice and employment capacity.

Operational gaps in capacity—
New tools for combined action 

International  actors  increasingly  recognize 
that development and security march hand 
in hand. But most international instruments 
do not. The basic tools presented in chapter 
8 to prevent repeated cycles of violence re-
quire linked action from political, security, 
de velopment, and humanitarian actors. Yet 
these  actors  generally  assess  priorities  and 
develop their programs separately, with ef-
forts to help national reformers build uni-
ﬁ ed  programs  being  the  exception  rather 
than  the  rule.  United  Nations  (UN) “inte-
grated  missions”  and  various  bilateral  and 
regional  “whole-of-government”  initiatives 
have  emerged  to  address  the  challenge  of 
merging  development,  diplomatic,  and  se-
curity  strategies  and  operations.  But  these 
models  still  struggle  with  the  reality  that 
different disciplines bring with them differ-
ent  goals,  business  models,  planning  time 
frames, decision-making processes, funding 
streams, and risk calculus. Action has often 
stopped at the level of light “coordination” 
rather  than  moving  toward  programs  that 
combine efforts on the ground.1 

The range of practical experience available 
in the international system in supporting in-
tegrated approaches to prevent repeated cy-
cles of violence has improved. There has been 
an increase in global and regional mediation, 
a  greater  focus  on  security-sector  reform, 

 

New directions for international support 

271

an increase in police capacity-building, and 
strengthening  of  links  between  peacekeep-
ing and civilian assistance. Some innovative 
programs have been developed, such as the 
“peace infrastructure” supported by the UN 
Development Programme (UNDP) and De-
partment of Political Affairs (UNDPA),2 the 
Inter-American Development Bank’s (IADB) 
community projects for citizen security, and 
collaboration  on  safe  transit  between  the 
World Bank and UN peacekeeping missions. 
Such initiatives often support combined ac-
tion  relating  to  citizen  security,  justice,  and 
jobs, but they are not yet in the mainstream 
of diplomatic, security, or development im-
plementation on the ground. 

A  different  way  of  doing  business  is 
needed. There is a need to move away from 
simply  tweaking  current  practices  toward 
a  fundamentally  new  practical  set  of  tools 
to  link  development  and  security,  develop-
ment and mediation, and development and 
humanitarian  assistance.  New  tools  should 
aim  to  have  a  catalytic  effect  in  supporting 
conﬁ dence-building  and  longer-term  insti-
tutional transformation. 

The  key  lessons  from  country  experi-
ences of international assistance are that four 
types  of  programs  requiring  combined  ef-
forts by development, security, political, and 
humanitarian actors are needed in insecure 
situations (table 9.1). These would be the top 
priority  operational  tools  for  international 
partners  to  target  combined  action  on  the 
ground.  The  development  of  a  specialized 
suite of catalytic products deliverable at scale 
nationally  or  subnationally  would  enhance 
the  ability  of  international  agencies  to  re-
spond effectively to government requests for 
assistance  in  preventing  repeated  cycles  of 
violence. Amongst the member states of the 
multilateral organizations, greater coherence 
and consistency in the positions they take in 
multilateral  governance  bodies  would  help 
foster such combined operations. 

Principles for combined operations 

Shared  principles  for  the  management  of 
combined  operations  are  also  necessary—

again  moving  beyond  mere “coordination.” 
For  in-country  management,  much  inter-
national  action  remains  stuck,  aptly  char-
acterized  by  the  adage,  “everyone  wants  to 
coordinate  but  no  one  wants  to  be  coordi-
nated.” In this case, the Report suggests us-
ing the principle of subsidiarity: the closer to 
violence, the better the understanding of the 
local  priorities  and  the  more  effectively  the 
combined management can operate. In gen-
eral, this would mean empowering national 
leadership in the coordination of assistance 
and  ensuring  that  they  have  the  support  to 
do this. In others, thinking about subsidiarity 
may mean empowering regional institutions 
to  supplement  national  governments’  coor-
dinating role.

Where national coordinating mechanisms 
lack sufﬁ cient authority or capacity to inﬂ u-
ence the more powerful international actors, 
joint  global-local  or  global-regional-local 
leadership  could  improve  conﬁ dence  and 
traction. The Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations  (ASEAN),  the  UN,  and  the  Myan-
mar Government Tripartite Core Group after 
Cyclone Nargis in Myanmar is one example, 
and the Bosnia Board of Principals3 structure 
involving  international  partners  and  senior 
government  ofﬁ cials  is  a  second.  Where  re-
gional or UN special representatives are given 
the  task  of  coordination,  the  World  Bank 
could  consider  coordinating  the  work  of  its 
ﬁ eld representatives more closely behind their 
leadership—with a clear lead on resource mo-
bilization supporting the political convening 
role of the UN or regional  organizations. 

Structural gaps in capacity—
justice and jobs

As argued throughout this Report, the insti-
tutions that provide citizen security, justice, 
and  jobs  are  crucial  in  creating  resilience 
to repeated cycles of violence. Unfortunately, 
these priority areas are underresourced and 
lack  ownership  in  the  current  international 
architecture. In each area, there are structural 
gaps  in  knowledge  and  operational  capac-
ity. Economic policy assistance still tends to 
be  focused  more  on  growth  than  employ-

272 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

TA BL E 9.1   International tools to link conﬁ dence-building and institutional transformation across the political, 

security, development, and humanitarian spheres

Risk and opportunity 
assessments

A shift from early warning to contingency planning for repeated cycles of violence. While agency and academic models 
of early warning continue to make useful progress, no such model can ever predict the exact timing of the onset of 
violence or capture all local variations. More useful is a mode of planning that accepts as a starting point that states and 
subnational areas with weak institutions continually risk being overwhelmed by a range of stresses.

Changes to planning and assessment tools as a basis for combined action. To adapt to the reality of repeated cycles of 
violence and multiple transitions, assessment processes would become lighter and more ﬂ exible to provide regular, 
repeated assessments of risks and opportunities. The assessments would beneﬁ t from more realism in priorities and 
timelines; stronger political economy analysis; and a tighter focus on the goals of citizen security, justice, and jobs.

Security, justice, and 
jobs 

Technical assistance and fi nancing for multisectoral community programs that involve policing and justice as well as 
development activities. These eﬀ orts can build on initiatives in Latin America and Africa to provide local dispute resolution 
and justice services, community policing, employment and training, safe public and trading spaces, and social and cultural 
programs that promote tolerance. 

Links to sustained 
mediation

Combined technical teams and fi nancing to support the strategic, technical, and public fi nancing aspects of institutional 
reforms in the security and justice sectors—with economic, governance, and public ﬁ nance specialists complementing 
the eﬀ orts of security, police, and judicial personnel. These eﬀ orts would build on the insights presented in this Report, 
focusing on basic functions to build trust and performance (including budget and expenditure functions); connections 
between the police, civilian justice, and corrections systems; and access to justice services at a local level, including 
through the blending of formal and informal systems. 

Supporting of national and local capacities for mediation and coalition-building. Countries facing rapid transitions and 
cycles of violence will need to negotiate new internal pacts, and build consensus, around eﬀ ective policies to address 
their many challenges. These negotiations will in turn require that the parties have access to internal mediators, and to 
their own skills and autonomous platforms, for dialogue and for the resolution of conﬂ icts. By helping build and apply 
such capacities, development assistance has already contributed to peaceful elections, for instance, in several cases since 
2004, and most recently during the constitutional referendum in Kenya in 2010. Further development of national and local 
capacities for managing cyclical conﬂ ict, cascading change, and rapid transitions is therefore not only essential, but also 
feasible.

Supporting of expertise for international mediation. For these eﬀ orts to deliver sustained results, they should be linked 
to the developmental assistance that can provide conﬁ dence-building and institutional transformation and should be 
available to governments for the longer term. Seconding increased expertise from bilateral agencies and international 
ﬁ nancial institutions (IFIs) to UN regional and civil society special envoys and mediators would help bridge gaps in 
political, security, and economic support. 

Developmental help during mounting crises. Countries struggling to prevent escalation of criminal and political violence 
often need timely ﬁ nancial help, although this can be met in part by improving the predictability of funding for mediation, 
initiating planned development support, and focusing security or development activities on localities with rising threats. 
Where exceptional additional ﬁ nancial support is needed (for example, in situations of high external stress and weak 
institutions), the responsible leadership of national reformers can be gauged by the signals they are prepared to give—for 
example, they might welcome international access to violence-aﬀ ected areas and transparent reporting of budget and 
expenditure data under the auspices of an accepted regional prevention plan (see box 9.1 on investment in prevention). 

Humanitarian 
support to national 
institution-building

Guidelines on phasing humanitarian assistance to build national institutional capacity over time. Where national 
institutional capacity and governance are improving, guidelines build on good practice by the UNDP, UNICEF (UN 
Children’s Fund), WHO (World Health Organization), WFP (World Food Programme), and many nongovernmental 
organization (NGO) partners in combining humanitarian services delivery with capacity-building. Timelines for phasing 
the transition from international humanitarian assistance to national institutional capacity will vary by country. 

A strengthened framework under which international humanitarian assistance can be “jointly branded” with local institu-
tions, or in-kind assistance of humanitarian materials and staff  provided to support state social protection operations, 
with appropriate monitoring. Where this is not possible, increased use of community-driven mechanisms and local staﬀ  to 
deliver humanitarian aid would help to build resilient local capacities. 

 

New directions for international support 

273

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 9.1  Preventing violence: Prioritizing investment in citizen security and justice reforms

Investment in prevention

Kenzo Oshima, Senior Vice President, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), 
Former Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations; WDR Advisory Council Member

The vital importance of conﬂ ict prevention has been under-
stood for many years, and advocates have argued passion-
ately for it. When Article 1 of the United Nations Charter was 
written,  however,  enshrining  a  mandate  “to  take  eﬀ ective 
collective  measures  for  the  prevention  and  removal  of 
threats to the peace,” the main focus of concern was inter-
state  war.  Since  then,  the  nature  of  armed  conﬂ ict  has 
changed. Although for many years we were unaware of the 
magnitude, there has been a signiﬁ cant shift from interstate 
to  intrastate  conﬂ ict  and  then  from  “classic”  civil  war  to 
mixed problems of criminal and political violence, demand-
ing a concomitant shift in our prevention focus. 

The  case  of  Afghanistan  exempliﬁ es  the  consequences 
of this unawareness. After the Soviet withdrawal, the inter-
national community was largely oblivious to ongoing inter-
nal struggles. Then, in the early 2000s, that “forgotten con-
ﬂ ict” became a serious global security threat. Our capacity 
internationally  to  foresee  the  risk  that  a  particular  country 
might fall into conﬂ ict and to mitigate that risk in a timely 
manner has been weak and that weakness has contributed 
to our failure to prevent conﬂ icts from happening. 

It  is  important  that  the  international  community  ﬁ nd 
a  better  way  to  coordinate,  through  mechanisms  that 
include not only UN agencies, but also international ﬁ nan-
cial  institutions  and  regional/sub-regional  organizations 

such as African Union (AU), ASEAN, and Economic Community 
of  West  African  States  (ECOWAS).  My  profound  hope  is  that 
WDR 2011 will convince these stakeholders that collaboration 
on investment in conﬂ ict prevention is urgently needed. 

While the UN Security Council retains the primary author-
ity under international law for the prevention of armed con-
ﬂ ict, others can play vital roles. This includes, vitally, national 
governments  themselves,  who  ultimately  have  the  primary 
responsibility to manage violence. These actors are all present 
in  the  country-speciﬁ c  meetings  of  the  UN  Peacebuilding 
Commission  (PBC),  which  was  established  in  2005  following 
on  the  recommendations  of  the  Secretary-General’s  High-
Level  Panel  on  Threats,  Challenges  and  Change.  However, 
while  the  two  tasks  were  suggested  for  it  by  the  High-Level 
Panel,  one  focusing  on  response  to  the  soaring  risk  of  fresh 
conﬂ icts—“to  help  states  avoid  collapse  and  the  slide  to 
war”—was omitted from its core functions. In the face of this 
limitation, the 2010 review of UN peacebuilding architecture, 
while  recognizing  the  narrowness  of  the  mandate,  recom-
mends that the Commission utilize to the fullest the potential 
given  by  its  existing  mandate  to  expand  its  prevention  role. 
Whether  through  this  route  or  otherwise,  the  fact  remains 
that linking political, security and economic actors is a critical 
part of how the international system can better help countries 
prevent new threats of conﬂ ict and other forms of violence.

Security and justice as foundational reforms: Addressing violence and criminality

Zeid Ra’ad Al-Hussein, Ambassador of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United Nations; 
WDR Advisory Council Member

War creates crime; and I do not mean the atrocity crimes we 
commonly associate with war; rather, I refer to the appear-
ance of its oldest companion and practitioner: the war prof-
iteer. The smuggler of weapons, of fuel, of vehicles and nar-
cotics, in war, will often bind with others to create networks 
of black market activity so eﬃ  cient that, by the time a peace 
is struck, their potency means they not only survive the war 
intact,  supremely  well-organized,  but  also  they  do  so  with 
momentum. 

A  newly  formed  government  in  the  aﬀ ected  country 
could only hope to match them, indeed overcome or defeat 
them in the long term, if two early conditions are fulﬁ lled—
with vital action by the international community itself.

The target country must ﬁ rst be provided with security 
assistance,  and  then  must  be  in  a  position  to  deliver  an 
eﬀ ective judicial system to its people, including police and 
corrections. If the nascent government cannot do the latter, 

and in many cases it would be too weak to do so, the interna-
tional  community  must  then  do  it  with  them.  It  must  supply 
doctrine for international policing and criminal justice support 
operations, as well as fast and ﬂ exible executive assistance to 
help  Governments  carry  out  police  and  judicial  functions  as 
well as the corrections facilities. And that is all. Nothing more 
need be done. 

With security and a functioning judicial system in place, a 
country recovering from war could hope to maintain the low-
est  levels  of  public  corruption,  indeed,  extinguish  organized 
crime altogether, and be ready to embrace the in-ﬂ ow of for-
eign direct investment (FDI) and other forms of ﬁ nancial assis-
tance. Should we fail to grasp just how fundamental security 
and  justice  are  to  the  whole  enterprise  of  peacebuilding,  the 
sole  beneﬁ ciaries  of  our  inattentiveness,  and  much  to  their 
delight—will  continue  to  be  organized  crime—the  very  oﬀ -
spring of war itself.

274 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

ment,  despite  rising  demands  for  assistance 
on  employment  policy  from  countries  fac-
ing  fragile  situations  due  to  unemployed 
and  disengaged  youth  populations.  Assis-
tance to countries struggling to develop well- 
governed  police  forces,  civilian  justice,  and 
corrections systems in the face of ﬂ uid violent 
threats is much more limited than assistance 
available to build military capacity, and there 
is a disconnect between the policing and civil-
ian justice areas. The section below provides 
recommendations to address gaps in support 
for employment and the rule of law.

Employment

As described in chapters 5 and 8, there is little 
consensus on the exact set of policies that can 
generate sustained labor-intensive growth in 
the face of high unemployment, and even less 
so  in  violent  environments.  What  we  have 
available is a series of “good ﬁ t” examples of 
policies  and  programs  that  appear  to  have 
delivered results in creating employment in 
different country circumstances. At the inter-
national level, better evaluation of these pro-
gram interventions and the macroeconomic 
environment in which they can deliver is an 
important priority. 

At the national level, leaders cannot wait 
for a more comprehensive international con-
sensus  on  employment  policies  to  evolve— 
they need to address the challenges of youth 
unemployment in insecure areas now, based 
on the tools they have available. A sensible ap-
proach would be to support the types of pro-
grams described in chapter 8, combined with 
evaluations and feedback loops that provide 
information  to  reﬁ ne  policies  and  program 
design. 

Priority  programs  for  job  creation  to 
which  this  approach  should  be  applied  in-
clude  investments  in  supporting  infrastruc-
ture,  in  particular,  electricity  and  transit.  A 
second program cluster is those that invest in 
skills; develop links among producers, trad-
ers,  and  consumers;  and  expand  access  to 
ﬁ nance and assets. Last, recognizing that pri-
vate  sector–led  growth  sufﬁ cient  to  absorb 

young entrants to the labor market may take 
a generation in many fragile situations, there 
is a need to simultaneously support and eval-
uate transitional employment measures. 

Efforts  to  strengthen  international  sup-
port  to  employment  should  draw  on  joint 
security, justice, and economic tools. Unem-
ployment  is  traditionally  viewed  as  simply 
a  function  of  economic  conditions.  But  in 
highly  insecure  areas,  international  security 
assistance  can  help  ensure  safe  trade  and 
transit, enabling productive investment from 
within and outside the country. For violence 
prevention, there are also links between em-
ployment,  justice,  and  identity  issues.  Pro-
grams  that  reinforce  the  role  of  disengaged 
youth as community members and support 
job creation with social and cultural activities 
merit investment and further evaluation. 

These approaches would help. But there is 
likely to be continued pressure from large un-
employed  youth  populations  unless  a  more 
signiﬁ cant international effort is launched. A 
bolder approach could draw together capaci-
ties from development agencies, the private 
sector,  foundations,  and  nongovernmen-
tal organizations (NGOs) to support a new 
global  partnership  to  galvanize  investments 
in  countries  and  communities  where  high 
unemployment  and  social  disengagement 
contribute to the risks of conﬂ ict. Focusing 
primarily  on  job  creation  through  project 
ﬁ nance, advisory support to small and me-
dium  businesses,  training,  and  guarantees, 
the initiative would also support social and 
cultural initiatives that promote collaborative 
capacities  in  communities,  social  tolerance, 
and recognition of young people’s social and 
economic  roles.  Private  sector  capacities  to 
draw on include large companies that trade 
and  invest  in  insecure  areas  (creating  links 
with local entrepreneurs), as well as technol-
ogy companies that can assist with connec-
tivity and training in remote insecure areas. 

Police and justice

To ﬁ ll the rising demand for assistance with 
criminal  justice  issues,  systems  to  provide 

 

New directions for international support 

275

support  for  police  and  justice  should  be 
ﬂ exible.  This,  in  three  senses.  First,  some 
states have adequate police capacity but face 
gaps in other aspects of their civilian justice 
systems—or  the  gaps  are  in  police  capac-
ity,  not  in  justice  systems.  Others  have  gaps 
across the board. Second, some will need as-
sistance as part of a broader package of con-
ﬂ ict  management  support,  often  under  UN 
Security Council or regional institution aus-
pices. Others will need specialized assistance 
to strengthen their police and civilian justice 
sectors without broader political engagement. 
Third, some will prefer assistance from within 
the  region,  while  others  will  prefer  to  look 
to global mechanisms. Any effort to deepen 
international  capacity  to  provide  assistance 
should  build  in  this  ﬂ exibility  of  response. 
That  assistance  should  also  be  available  to 
help national authorities deal with specialized 
transboundary  challenges—from  ﬁ nancial 
crimes to trafﬁ cking issues. These specialized 
challenges will be covered in the next section. 
The  starting  point  for  improving  the 
international  response  to  criminal  justice 
capacity-building is increasing the supply of 
personnel. National governments, both high 
and middle income, could usefully invest (or 
continue to invest) in increasing the pool of 
police  and  other  criminal  justice  personnel 
available  for  overseas  deployment,  whether 
through  bilateral  or  multilateral  programs. 
There  are  three  main  options  available  to 
increase  this  supply,  all  desirable:  drawing 
on  retired  ofﬁ cers  as  advisers;  secondment 
of active service members; and provision of 
formed police units. Formed police units are 
requested  by  a  relatively  small  number  of 
countries under UN peacekeeping missions, 
but demand has clearly grown in recent years 
in relation to military deployments. Second-
ment  of  active  service  members  can  be  as-
sisted by career and promotion systems that 
recognize  and  reward  international  experi-
ence. In all three areas, deployment of women 
police ofﬁ cers has proved valuable. 

For other functions of the civilian justice 
system, current capacity to supply personnel 
is weaker than for police. Within ongoing ef-

forts to develop rosters of civilian expertise, 
the  availability  of  justice  professionals  and 
administrators  should  continue  to  receive 
particular attention—but with a focus on ca-
pacity from the South that can provide expe-
rience of reform of weak systems in difﬁ cult 
environments of political contest.

Police and justice personnel must also be 
deployed with appropriate training. In both 
policing and broader civilian justice, national 
systems differ greatly in their organizational 
structures,  legal  frameworks,  and  practices, 
far  more  so  than  for  military  capacity.  As 
de scribed  in  chapter  6,  the  UN’s  Standing 
Police Capacity and its Ofﬁ ce of Rule of Law 
and Security Institutions have begun to make 
headway on standardized doctrine and train-
ing for police units willing to deploy into UN 
operations. But there is no similar mechanism 
for joint training of national judicial person-
nel to expose them to different systems and 
practices,  and  less  of  a  body  of  knowledge 
on approaching institution-building in frag-
ile settings. Extending training in both areas 
through  global  and  regional  centers  would 
improve  the  impact  of  additional  person-
nel capacity. Within bilateral assistance pro-
grams,  long-term  institutional  partnerships 
between  agencies  providing  technical  assis-
tance and national counterpart agencies may 
be another mechanism to strengthen the sen-
sitivity of assistance to the local context. 

As  with  employment,  combined  secu-
rity  and  developmental  approaches  will  be 
needed  to  support  justice  issues.  There  are 
areas  where,  at  the  request  of  government, 
the  Bank  and  other  international  ﬁ nancial 
institutions  (IFIs)  could  consider  playing  a 
greater role in supporting the developmental 
underpinnings of violence prevention within 
their  mandates—such  as  the  links  between 
public  ﬁ nancial  management  and  security 
sector reform and institution- building, legal 
administration, justice systems development 
and multisectoral approaches at the commu-
nity level that combine community policing 
and  justice  services  with  social   cohesion, 
developmental,  and  employment  creation 
programs. 

276 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

But the IFIs are not well placed to support 
the core operational aspects of a criminal jus-
tice system. A clear lead within the UN sys-
tem would help. Softer options for change in 
this area include the “global service provider” 
model currently under discussion, with one 
agency  leading  on  police  and  another  on 
other  aspects  of  the  civilian  justice  system, 
or  one  leading  on  deployments  for  execu-
tive functions and the other on institutional 
transformation.  Since  a  consistent  theme 
throughout  this  Report  has  been  the  need 
to link support to police and civilian justice 
systems,  the  division  of  labor  in  the  inter-
national  system  would  ideally  facilitate  this 
linkage rather than further separate capaci-
ties. Bolder options for change could involve 
breaking  down  barriers  between  police  and 
justice assistance, either at a country level by 
facilitating  an  integration  of  the  ﬁ nancing 
and program management of police and jus-
tice support, or by identifying a single orga-
nizational responsibility.4

Track 2: Reforming internal agency 
procedures

New international commitment to programs 
that  combine  citizen  security,  justice,  and 
employment  linkages  and  an  increase  in 
structural  capacities  to  support  justice,  and 
employment challenges will be effective only 
to the extent that international agencies can 
provide  assistance  fast,  and  take  the  risks 
necessary  to  support  national  institutional 
development. Without  these  actions,  an  in-
creased emphasis on prevention will not be 
reﬂ ected  in  improved  performance  on  the 
ground. To address this, internal agency re-
forms, new tools to manage risks and results, 
and mechanisms to end the stop-go pattern 
of international assistance are needed. 

Principles for internal agency reforms

To support countries with rapid conﬁ dence-
building  assistance  and  longer-term  insti-
tutional  transformation,  internal  reform  is 
needed for international agencies to improve 

responsiveness. Many individuals working on 
fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected  states  are  dedi-
cated  professionals  attempting  to  support 
national  efforts.  But  they  are  held  back  by 
structures,  tools,  and  processes  designed  for 
different contexts and purposes. Best-ﬁ t ap-
proaches designed to ﬁ t the local context are 
as important for international approaches as 
for national reforms. Budgeting, stafﬁ ng, re-
sults measurement, and ﬁ duciary systems re-
quire signiﬁ cant changes to achieve a best ﬁ t in 
fragile situations in almost all the multilateral 
agencies—and  in  many  bilaterals.  Existing 
systems  that  implicitly  avoid  risk—insisting 
on  sophisticated  controls  initially  developed 
for  more  stable  and  higher- capacity  coun-
tries,  and  often  choosing  to  delay  assistance 
when risks are high—have not delivered con-
sistent results. For the g7+ group of leaders of 
fragile states5 who have begun to meet regu-
larly as part of the International Dialogue on 
Peacebuilding  and  Statebuilding,  reforming 
internal agency procedures, particularly pro-
curement  procedures,  was  the  number-one 
suggestion  for  international  reform.  Prin-
ciples to bridge the different perspectives of 
donors and recipient countries on risks and 
guide  internal  agency  reforms  that  emerge 
from this Report’s analysis are as follows. 

(cid:129)  First,  accept  the  links  between  security 
and development outcomes. Few internal 
systems  in  the  multilateral  agencies  are 
designed to support the links between se-
curity  and  development  outcomes.  Pro-
gram  objectives  tend  to  be  narrowly  set. 
Economic  and  social  interventions  in 
 situations of insecurity can justiﬁ ably be 
designed to contribute to citizen security 
and justice outcomes (a decrease in homi-
cides,  for  example).  Security  programs 
can also be designed to contribute to de-
velopment outcomes (an increase in trade, 
for example). This would require agencies 
to  use  outcome  measures  outside  their 
traditional “technical” domains, and work 
together  within  the  combined  program 
frameworks  described  above.  Rewarding 
staff  for  partnership  would  also  help  fa-
cilitate cooperation. 

 

New directions for international support 

277

(cid:129)  Second, adapt to the reality of the absence 
of security, institutional capacity, and fully 
competitive  markets  in  fragile  situations. 
When  insecurity  is  high,  both  the  costs 
and beneﬁ ts of interventions may change 
dramatically  over  a  short  period.  This 
 argues  for  greater  ﬂ exibility  in  adminis-
trative budget and staff planning. In pro-
gram budgets, it implies careful sequenc-
ing  where  some  programs  will  be  more 
beneﬁ cial at a later date, but also placing 
more  weight  on  speed  (over  some  cost- 
efﬁ ciency  and  quality  concerns)  in  con-
tracting  of  personnel,  goods,  works,  and 
services  where  beneﬁ ts  to  fast  action  are 
high. Where competitive markets are very 
thin  and  not  transparent,  different  pro-
curement controls—such as pre-tendering 
internationally  under  variable  quantity 
contracts,  or  contracting  processes  that 
 allow direct negotiations with knowledge 
of regional markets—can be appropriate. 
Where institutional capacity is insufﬁ cient, 
procedures need to be distilled to the sim-
plest  level  of  due  process,  together  with 
ﬂ exible  mechanisms  to  execute  some  ac-
tivities on behalf of recipient institutions. 

(cid:129)  Third, balance the risk of action with the 
risk  of  inaction.  The  ﬁ rst  implication  of 
this principle is that countries in need of 
assistance and their international partners 
have  to  accept  each  other’s  concerns  on 
risk. The prime minister of a country in a 
fragile situation is not wrong to seek im-
mediate  help  to  pay  salaries  and  provide 
equipment for the security forces; a minis-
ter  of  development  cooperation  is  not 
wrong to worry about risks of corruption 
or human rights abuses. To align their in-
terests, they must understand each other’s 
constraints. The second implication is that 
solutions will require that these needs are 
balanced, rather than risk aversion domi-
nating. Decentralizing greater responsibil-
ity and accountability to international staff 
on the ground can increase responsiveness 
to the risks of inaction. Transparent publi-
cation  of  achievements  against  target 
timelines for donor funds release and ac-

tivities—and  reasons  for  delays—would 
also  help  to  shift  international  incentives 
in  favor  of  action.  Donors,  though,  will 
need to have different ways to manage the 
risks  of  their  engagement,  which  will  be 
covered in the next section.

(cid:129)  Fourth,  accept  that  some  programs  will 
fail, and adapt rapidly in response. Rates of 
success in assistance programs should be 
lower  in  fragile  situations  than  in  stable 
development situations, since the contex-
tual risk is by deﬁ nition higher. This is jus-
tiﬁ ed because  returns  are  also  far  greater 
when programs work—in peace and secu-
rity terms, but also in development terms 
because these countries start from such a 
low  baseline  on  the  Millennium  Devel-
opment  Goals  (MDGs).  The  political 
problem for donors in accepting a certain 
degree of failure is the perception that in-
ternational  actors  are  naive  about  risks 
and slow to act when problems arise. Hav-
ing a menu of options to shift modalities  
rapidly  when  failures  occur  is  crucial  in 
managing  donor  risks  without  abandon-
ing  support  to  national  institutions.  To 
avoid disrupting program continuity, em-
bedding  contingencies  into  program  de-
sign from the beginning is crucial, as will 
be discussed in the next section. 

Adopting these principles would help bi-
lateral  and  multilateral  agencies  reform  in-
ternal systems in an appropriate way, to both 
manage risks and deliver better results. These 
principles could be incorporated into agency 
procedures in several ways: (1) increasing the 
use  of  adequate  contingency  funds  under 
appropriate  oversight;  (2)  adapting  models, 
such  as  community  procurement,  already 
geared to thin markets and low institutional 
capacity  in  national  procurement  processes; 
(3) putting in place effective best-ﬁ t measures 
to  increase  transparency  and  control  costs, 
such  as  staff  able  to  monitor  reasonable  re-
gional prices in noncompetitive procurement 
processes; (4) simplifying processes, delegat-
ing  authority,  and  accelerating  turnaround 
times; and (5) changing incentives and per-
formance monitoring mechanisms for staff to 

278 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

ensure that those who learn from failure and 
adapt  quickly  are  rewarded.  Responses  will 
and  should  vary  by  agency—but  common 
principles  would  help  improve  the  comple-
mentarity of international agency support. 

Risk and results management

Current  donor  risk  management  relies  on 
two  primary  mechanisms:  postponing  or 
suspending  assistance  when  risks  are  too 
high, and using headquarters controls rather 
than  best-ﬁ t  delivery  mechanisms  adapted 
to local conditions. Both are driven in large 
part  to  meet  the  dual-accountability  pres-
sure  from  domestic  constituencies  to  avoid 
risks of corruption, wastage, or abuse. This 
may  manage  donor  risk,  but  it  constrains 
real  progress  in  institution-building  on  the 
ground. Where continuity in aid is needed, 
risks  do  exist,  and  innovation  is  needed  in 
national  strategy  to  ﬁ t  the  political  context 
(see ﬁ gure 9.1). An alternative is to embrace 
faster  and  more  consistent  engagement 
through  national  institutions  but  to  vary 
the  ways  aid  is  delivered  to  manage  risks 
and results. Some donors have a higher risk-

tolerance and will be able to choose modes 
that go more directly through national bud-
gets and institutions; others will need greater 
oversight or nonstate involvement in deliv-
ery. Various options exist for managing risk, 
including the following: 

(cid:129)  Increasing the contingencies in budgets, 
under  transparent  planning  assump-
tions. Where governance is volatile, devel-
opment  program  budgets,  as  well  as  the 
budgets  for  political  and  peacekeeping 
missions, would beneﬁ t from greater con-
tingency  measures  so  that  activities  and 
delivery  mechanisms  could  be  adjusted 
when new risks and opportunities emerge 
without  disrupting  overall  support.  The 
planning  assumptions  for  such  contin-
gencies—for  example,  that  additional 
oversight mechanisms will be adopted if 
certain agreed-on measures of governance 
deteriorate—should  be  transparent  to 
both recipient governments and the gov-
erning bodies of international agencies.

(cid:129)  Varying the oversight mechanisms when 
engaging  through  national  budget  and 
institutions.  Oversight  mechanisms  to 

F I G UR E 9.1   Adapting the modality of assistance to risk

Regular
support

Focus on
poverty
reduction

Regular

risk 

environment

Contingency
and standby
measures

 Flexible for
risks and

opportunities;
transparent 
expectations

Varied

oversight

Varied
delivery

mechanisms

mechanisms

Tracking

expenditures;
independent

oversight

State-community,

state-UN, and
state-NGO under

government 

auspices

Balancing risk and institution-building: 
Rising violence or post-crisis with high 

risk of recurrence

Dual key

mechanisms

Economic,
security, and

justice programs

Non-

government
execution

Use of local
personnel and
community

systems

Balancing risk to 

avoid disengagement

g
n
d

i

l
i

u
b
-
n
o
i
t
u
t
i
t
s
n

i
 

 

d
n
a
k
s
i
r
 
g
n
i
c
n
a
l
a
B

Source: WDR team.

Increasing risk

 

New directions for international support 

279

adapt to risk include shifting from budget 
support to “tracked” expenditure through 
government  systems,6  and  from  regular 
reporting  and  internal  control  mecha-
nisms to independent ﬁ nancial monitor-
ing  agents,  independent  monitoring  of 
complaints,  and  independent  technical 
agents. 

(cid:129)  Varying  the  delivery  mechanisms  when 
engaging  through  national  institutions. 
Variations in delivery mechanisms include 
community  structures,  civil  society,  the 
private sector, and the UN and other inter-
national  executing  agencies  in  delivering 
programs jointly with state institutions.

In situations of more extreme risk where 
donors  would  normally  disengage,  the  fol-
lowing options could be considered: 

(cid:129)  Consider  executive  capacity  to  supple-
ment  national  control  systems,  as  with 
“dual  key”  mechanisms,  where  interna-
tional  line  management  capacity  works 
alongside national actors, and agency pro-
cesses are governed by joint national and 
international boards. 

(cid:129)  Use  local  personnel  and  community 
structures  for  delivering  humanitarian, 
economic, and social programs, which still 
maintains  some  focus  on  local  institu-
tional capacity, mitigating the brain drain 
of local skills overseas.

Risk can also be shared by pooling funds. 
To achieve results at scale, pooling funds can 

provide  recipient  governments  with  larger 
single  programs  and  international  partners 
with a way to support programs that greatly 
exceed  their  own  national  contribution. 
Pooling funds can also be an effective way to 
pool risks, shifting the burden of responsibil-
ity  for  risks  of  waste,  abuse,  or  corruption 
from the shoulders of each individual donor 
to the multilateral system. Multidonor trust 
funds (MDTFs) have delivered excellent re-
sults in some situations. But the performance 
of these funds is mixed, with criticisms rang-
ing  from  slowness  and  cumbersome  pro-
cedures  and  governance  arrangements  to  a 
lack of robust monitoring and evaluation of 
results and limited support through national 
systems. A small fraction of international as-
sistance in violence-affected countries ﬂ ows 
through  MDTFs,  undermining  their  over-
all  impact.  The  combined  security-justice-
development programs and internal agency 
reforms described above would help mitigate 
some of these challenges.

Measuring  transitional  progress—as  dis-
cussed  in  chapter  8  from  the  perspective  of 
national  reformers—can  also  give  interna-
tional actors help in responding to risks. Na-
tional  reformers  and  donors  need  to  show 
results to their parliaments, media, taxpayers, 
and citizens. Standard development measures, 
such as economic growth and the MDGs, are 
excellent long-term goals and indicators, but 
they are not always helpful in fragile situations 
in the short term. These indicators move too 
slowly to give feedback to governments and 

TA BL E 9.2   Compelling and feasible short-term indicators

Current data coverage: Most recent 5 years 
Violence

Trust in national

Homicide rates

24% coverage

institutions

Many every 3 to 4 years, some 

more infrequently 

48% coverage

Biennially 

64% coverage

Annually, some more frequently 

78% coverage

Monthly/weekly 

Battle deaths
100% coverage,
low precision
100% coverage,
low precision
100% coverage,
medium precision
100% coverage,
high precision 
(low incidence)

Low-income 
countries 

Fragile 

Non-fragile 

Middle-income countries 

High-income countries 

Source: WDR team calculations.

280 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

their international partners on the speed and 
direction of progress, and they do not directly 
measure security, or citizen concerns over is-
sues  such  as  inequality,  unemployment,  or 
trust in national institutions.

The  development  of  indicators  that  can 
show short-term progress is not just a techni-
cal issue—it is important at a political level 
for both national governments and donors to 
show short-term improvements and to main-
tain  support  for  continued  investments—
and at times for the occasional risky and dif-
ﬁ cult  institutional  reforms.  The  indicators 
presented  in  chapter  8  on  security,  trust  in 
national  institutions,  and  progress  in  gov-
ernance in relation to the historic record of 
how long transformations have taken in other 
countries can help donors as well as national 
reformers—by showing that progress is being 
made even when some setbacks occur. 

International actors could also play a role 
in  helping  countries  develop  the  capacity 
to  measure  these  indicators  (see  table  9.2). 
WDR  estimates  indicate  that  information 
on deaths in civil conﬂ ict is available for all 
developing countries, although only 24 per-
cent of fragile countries have homicide data 
and  the  precision  of  battle-death  informa-
tion is likely lower. A partnership of member 
states,  the  UN  Ofﬁ ce  on  Drugs  and  Crime 
(UNODC), the IFIs, and the universities and 
NGOs  that  collect  conﬂ ict  data  could  take 
this forward. A similar effort could develop 
another  useful  indicator:  measuring  conﬁ -
dence  in  institutions  through  polling. With 
regard to trust in institutions, regular infor-
mation  on  security  and  citizen  perceptions 
of the state is available in most high-income 
and  some  middle-income  countries,  but  is 
rarely  available  in  the  fragile  states,  which 
need it most. Polling surveys are cheap and 
can  be  administered  frequently—and  new 
technologies  are  emerging  to  conduct  sur-
veys  by  cell  phone,  which  this  Report  did 
as  part  of  its  background  research  in  the 
Democratic Republic of Congo.7 The Report 
estimates  indicate  that  most  countries  have 
some polling data—but in fragile states the 
data are collected very infrequently. A part-
nership of the regional barometers, Statistics 

40,  and  the  IFIs  could  support  poorer  and 
more  fragile  countries  in  using  the  polling 
tools that richer countries draw upon.

Ending the stop-go pattern of assistance 

International agencies will also need to think 
carefully  about  how  to  lengthen  the  dura-
tion  of  assistance  to  meet  the  realities  of 
institutional  transformation  over  a  genera-
tion  without  raising  costs.  As  suggested  by 
Commissioner  for  Peace  and  Security, Am-
bassador  Ramtane  Lamamra  and  Under-
Secretary-General  for  Peacekeeping  Opera-
tions Alain Le Roy (box 9.2), the ﬂ exible use 
of  alternative  modalities  for  peacekeeping 
can  aid  substantially  in  this  regard,  includ-
ing over-the-horizon capacities. Building on 
growing cooperation, the multilateral secu-
rity agencies—the African Union Peace and 
Security Council, UN Department of Peace-
keeping  Operations,  the  European  Union 
(EU),  and  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organi-
zation  (NATO)—could  work  with  the  IFIs 
to  conduct  a  thorough  examination  of  the 
costs  and  beneﬁ ts  of  over-the-horizon  de-
ployments and other forms of ﬂ exible peace-
keeping  to  provide  long-term  assistance  in 
fragile situations at reasonable cost. 

Better resourcing for mediation and dip-
lomatic facilitation is also an easy win, since 
it is always low cost and can reduce risks of 
violence  escalation.  This  could  be  linked  to 
efforts to foster a norm that mediation or fa-
cilitation support should be on call for states 
longer than is currently the pattern, so that it 
is available to facilitate ongoing conﬁ dence-
building beyond the immediate resolution of 
a crisis.

For  development  agencies,  ending  the 
stop-go pattern of assistance to programs de-
livering results in citizen security, justice, or 
jobs—or  simply  preserving  social  cohesion 
and human and institutional capacity—can 
increase  impact  without  increasing  overall 
cost.  As  described  earlier,  volatility  greatly 
reduces aid effectiveness and is twice as high 
for fragile and conﬂ ict-affected countries as 
for  other  developing  countries,  despite  the 

 

New directions for international support 

281

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 9. 2  Flexible peacekeeping arrangements
 

   Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security, African Union; WDR Advisory Council Member; 
with Alain Le Roy, United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations 

Societies  trying  to  move  away  from  violence  face  acute 
problems of mistrust, uncertainty, and lack of conﬁ dence in 
the basic institutions of the state. The use of mediation and 
peacekeeping as “commitment mechanisms,” as this Report 
describes them, can help overcome these obstacles to set-
tlement.  It  can  also  extend  the  authority  of  the  state  and 
contribute to the establishment of the rule of law. 

In this context, we welcome the messages in this Report 
about the role that peacekeeping can play in helping states 
move  away  from  violence,  which  broadly  accord  with  our 
experience.  The  Report’s  ﬁ nding  that  the  deployment  of 
international peacekeepers extends the duration of a politi-
cal settlement accords with our experience. The conclusion 
that  it  also  contributes  to  positive  economic  growth  rein-
forces  the  argument  that  development  and  security  go 
hand in hand. We also share the Report’s emphasis on the 
importance of transforming national institutions into guar-
antors of security and prosperity in the long term. 

In order to achieve these goals, peacekeeping needs to 
be given the right capabilities. Although the African Union 
and  the  United  Nations  have  diﬀ erent  mandates  and  face 
diﬀ erent  demands,  we  share  the  challenge  of  managing 
peacekeeping operations deployed to diﬃ  cult areas, with-
out  the  full  range  of  capabilities  needed  to  succeed.  The 
international community learned the hard way in the mid-
1990s  the  human  and  political  costs  of  failing  to  equip 
peacekeepers  with  the  necessary  resources  to  fulﬁ ll  their 
mandates.  In  some  cases,  this  is  a  question  of  scale;  in 
others, quality or ﬂ exibility. Far from the Cold War days of 
static peacekeeping in buﬀ er zones or alongside contested 
borders, contemporary operations are dynamic, operate in 

politically complex environments, and often cover enormous 
areas. 

The  UN  and  the  African  Union  (AU)  operate  together  in 
Sudan and Somalia to try to meet such challenges. The impor-
tant partnership between the two organizations is not without 
complexity and controversy, but represents the shared deter-
mination to meet the immediate challenges we confront.

The WDR points to the fact that uncertainty and weak insti-
tutions that enable violence can endure in a society for several 
decades,  long  after  the  traditional  period  of  intensive  peace-
keeping. In too many cases, peacekeepers had to be recalled 
when a brief period of recovery was followed by a relapse into 
a new cycle of violence. 

The dilemma here is that national authorities and interna-
tional  mandating  bodies  are  often  reluctant  to  contemplate 
longer term peacekeeping engagements. More creative solu-
tions  must  be  found.  These  could  include  combinations  of 
long-term  programs  for  security  sector  development  and 
reform, light monitoring, and over-the-horizon reinforcements. 
Over-the-horizon  arrangements  have  been  used  to  good 
eﬀ ect  in  the  intensive  phase  of  peacekeeping,  for  example, 
with  the  European  Union’s  Operation  Artemis  in  the  Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo. If development and security indeed 
march  hand  in  hand,  so  too  should  peacekeeping  and  eco-
nomic support to the process of transforming national institu-
tions—including  through  joint  programs,  for  example,  on 
security  sector  reform  and  in  the  management  of  natural 
resources. We welcome the Report’s call for a deeper examina-
tion of the costs, beneﬁ ts, and possible arrangements for lon-
ger term security and political support to national actors seek-
ing a more permanent shift away from the risk of violence.

fragile countries’ greater need for persistence 
in building social and state institutions. There 
are  options  for  reducing  volatility  (see  box 
9.3), including providing threshold amounts 
of aid based on appropriate modalities, top-
ping  up  aid  allocations  to  the  most  fragile 
states when speciﬁ c types of programs have 
demonstrated the ability to deliver effectively 
and at scale (as proposed in a recent work-
ing paper by the Centre for Global Develop-
ment),8  and  dedicating  a  target  percentage 
of assistance to larger and longer-term pro-
grams  in  fragile  and  conﬂ ict-affected  states 
under the OECD-DAC (Development Assis-

tance Committee) framework. As outlined in 
chapter 6, a 30 percent decrease in volatility 
could  deliver  value  of  around  US$30  mil-
lion per annum to each fragile and conﬂ ict-
affected state.

Track 3: Reducing external 
stresses: New regional and 
global action

Direct assistance to states needs to be com-
plemented by action at a regional and global 
level to reduce external stresses. The analysis 
in  this  Report  has  consistently  emphasized 

282 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 9. 3  Preventing violence: Prioritizing investment in citizen security and justice reforms

Resolving the donor risk and results dilemma: Learning from the Tinbergen rule 

Paul Collier, Professor of Economics and Director for the Centre for the Study of African Economies, 
Oxford University; WDR Advisory Council Member

In allocating aid, donors currently consider two fundamen-
tal  objectives:  aid  should  follow  need  and  aid  should  be 
well-used. Unfortunately, in fragile states, these two objec-
tives  are  commonly  in  conﬂ ict:  needs  are  far  greater  than 
elsewhere, but governments lack the capacity to spend aid 
well.  The  result  has  often  been  that  aid  volumes  oscillate 
around  an  inadequate  average  as  donors  shift  between 
concern for need and concern for eﬀ ectiveness.

Jan Tinbergen, one of the most revered Nobel laureates, 
formulated  a  simple  principle  which  illuminates  the  donor 
dilemma and points to a resolution. He showed that a given 
number  of  objectives  can  be  achieved  only  if  there  are  at 
least as many independent policy instruments. Donors have 
been attempting to achieve two objectives, meeting need 
and  assuring  eﬀ ectiveness,  with  a  single  instrument—the 
volume of aid. Such an approach is doomed to failure: either 
one of the objectives must be sacriﬁ ced or a second instru-
ment  must  be  introduced.  Since  clearly  neither  objective 
can  be  abandoned,  the  implication  is  that  donors  must 
develop another instrument.

That  instrument  is  the  modality  for  aid  delivery: 
modalities  should  vary  according  to  the  capacity  of 
government.  While  unconditional  and  unmonitored  bud-
get support or unhurried project investments are appropri-
ate  for  secure  and  well-governed  states,  it  is  essential  to 
develop alternative mechanisms for channeling aid inﬂ ows 
in  fragile  situations.  New  types  of  instruments  are  needed 
and  should  recognise  the  spectrum  of  risk,  from  govern-
ments  who  are  well-intentioned  but  face  insecurity  and 
weak institutions, to those who are more abusive. Recurrent 

expenditures can be supported, and indeed often need to be, 
if  governments  are  to  regain  legitimacy  in  the  eyes  of  their 
citizens, but should support actions linked to stabilization and 
be provided only with additional oversight mechanisms which 
track expenditures. Funds through government can be chan-
neled directly to the local level and monitored through com-
munity reporting. Social service provision could be scaled up if 
aid were channeled through public agencies outside the con-
ventional civil service, co-supervised by government and third 
parties  such  as  civil  society,  and  donors.  The  agencies  could 
fund clinics, schools, and public works run by churches, NGOs, 
and local communities, in return for public accountability and 
agreed standards of quality. 

Tinbergen’s rule also says how objectives should be linked 
to instruments. The donor dilemma can be resolved by linking 
the objective of meeting needs to the volume of aid, and the 
objective of using aid well to the choice of delivery modalities. 
Fragile  states  need  large  volumes  of  aid,  but  aid  delivery 
should look very diﬀ erent from contexts in which government 
ministries are eﬀ ective. Spending money eﬀ ectively in fragile 
states  is  not  complicated:  for  example,  community-driven 
approaches, mission schools, and clinics have been operating 
successfully in the most diﬃ  cult environments for many years. 
The needs are manifestly greater than other environments and 
so returns on aid can be commensurately higher. But to estab-
lish  that  those  needs  can  indeed  be  met  cost-eﬀ ectively  and 
build  long-term  institutional  resilience,  delivery  modalities 
that encourage experimentation, are evaluated for results, and 
are adapted to respond quickly to experiences of success and 
failure are required.

WDR Note: Additional approaches for reducing volatility

The Centre for Global Development proposes the scaling up of successful projects in fragile and conﬂ ict-
aﬀ ected states. As outlined in Gelb 2010, this would involve timely monitoring, full transparency, and inde-
pendent  evaluation  of  projects.  Projects  that  demonstrate  early  results  could  then  draw  upon  additional 
ﬁ nancing through a special multi-donor trust fund designated as a tranche for scaling up. By reducing the 
length of the feedback loop in project monitoring and evaluation, this approach would align incentives for 
those  delivering  aid  and  those  receiving  aid  and  reward  successes  early  in  the  project  cycle,  making  this 
approach wholly compatible with output-based aid.

OECD–DAC commitments. A further possibility is to explore a commitment under the OECD-DAC frame-
work for a percentage of aid programs to go into long-term, larger scale support. There is a value to small, 
rapid interventions in fragile situations, and it would not be desirable to lose the ﬂ exibility to provide this type 
of assistance. But the percentage of aid currently in small, fragmented, and short-term assistance appears to 
be too high (see chapter 6) to beneﬁ t long-term institution-building. The Accra Agenda commits donors to 
developing long-term modalities to support the building of “capable, accountable, and responsive states.”

 

New directions for international support 

283

the role of external stresses in increasing the 
risks  of  violence,  and  it  is  therefore  impor-
tant that the recommendations for action do 
not  ignore  this  important  area.  Firm,  prac-
tical,  and  coordinated  action  can  diminish 
the  external  stresses  that  hinder  stability  in 
the short and long term. And support can be 
increased  to  develop  regional  and  interna-
tional “buffers” to absorb and mitigate these 
stresses.  Analysis  for  this  Report  suggests 
three areas for such action: cross-border co-
operation,  strengthening  action  against  the 
trafﬁ cking and illicit ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows that can 
fuel  violence,  and  protecting  fragile  states 
from food and resource shocks.

Cross-border goods: Development, 
security, and administrative pooling

Support for regional goods is underresourced. 
In recognition of the importance of external 
stresses  for  violence,  donors  could  increase 
the proportion of their ﬁ nancial and technical 
support  going  to  cross-border  development 
programming and regional infrastructure, as 
well as for various forms of  regional admin-
istrative  and  economic  cooperation—giving 
priority  to  violence-affected  regions.  Such 
support could take the following forms: 

(cid:129)  Trade  and  transit  infrastructure.  Nu-
merous conﬂ ict and violence-affected re-
gions face obvious gaps in the infrastruc-
ture  for  trade  between  producer  and 
consumer  areas  and  for  ports  and  air-
ports. They include large regions, such as 
Central Africa and Central Asia, but also 
smaller  subnational  areas  that  have  little 
access  to  trade,  such  as  the  northeastern 
states  of  India.  Where  infrastructure  is 
constructed  in  violence-affected  areas, 
care should be taken to use labor-intensive 
technologies  and  provide  for  local  labor 
to  avoid  tensions  over  the  beneﬁ ts.  In 
some  regions,  discussions  about  shared 
economic infrastructure with joint bene-
ﬁ ts could also create an opening for later 
political  or  security  discussions.  In  most 
cases, some simple policy reforms need to 
be undertaken in parallel as these can be 

as great a constraint to cross-border trade 
as lack of infrastructure.

(cid:129)  Cross-border  development  program-
ming. Many  insecure  border  areas  share 
similar  social  and  economic  structures, 
in  which  a  shared  terrain,  ethnicity,  or 
 history  creates  natural  bonds.  Yet  very 
few  countries  take  advantage  of  this  to 
share  lessons  for  development  program-
ming  on  both  sides  of  insecure  border 
 areas.  Community-driven  development 
programs,  for  example,  are  likely  to  face 
 similar strengths and weaknesses in com-
munity  organization,  as  is  the  private 
sector.  Development  sectors  like  health, 
which  has  regional  and  international 
 public-good aspects, can be a nonconten-
tious  form  of  cross-border  cooperation. 
Cross-border development programming 
could simply involve special arrangements 
to share lessons, or it could in some cases 
move  toward  formal  joint  arrangements 
to design and monitor programs.

(cid:129)  Regional security support. Although vio-
lence frequently crosses borders, interna-
tional  responses  remain  largely  within 
them. Two approaches that have been pi-
loted  warrant  further  consideration:  re-
gional  political  missions—including  UN 
ofﬁ ces in Africa and Central Asia, the latter 
of  which  has  a  mandate  for  preventive 
 diplomacy linked to border and customs 
management and counter-trafﬁ cking ini-
tiatives. A second is regional initiatives for 
counter-trafﬁ cking, such as the joint UN/
ECOWAS (Economic Community of West 
African States) West African Coast Initia-
tive on organized crime. 

(cid:129)  Shared regional technical and adminis-
trative capacity. As chapter 7 noted, pool-
ing subregional administrative capacities 
can  allow  states  to  develop  institutional 
capabilities  they  could  not  manage  on 
their own. There are a range of initiatives 
that could be undertaken in this area, de-
pending  on  regional  needs—from  pro-
grams  that  deliver  the  specialized  assis-
tance  for  reform  of  security  and  justice 

284 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

sectors  and  multisectoral  community 
programs  at  a  regional  level,  to  pooled 
 administrative  capacity  to  address  skills 
and  training  for  youth,  as  with  shared 
university facilities. 

ruption issues, such as the International Cor-
ruption Hunter’s Alliance and the Stolen As-
set Recovery Initiative (STAR), three measures 
would  help  in  this  effort  to  reduce  violence 
and the illicit ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows that support it: 

Rather  than  these  somewhat  incremen-
tal  approaches  to  speciﬁ c  cross-border  ini-
tiatives,  international  donors  could  take  a 
larger  step  to  ﬁ nance  regional  approaches. 
The principle of such an initiative would be 
to build on the local political knowledge and 
legitimacy  of  regional  institutions,  in  com-
bination with the technical and ﬁ nancial ca-
pacity of global agencies. Delivered through 
regional  institutions  in  collaboration  with 
global  agencies,  this  approach  could  adapt 
lessons from initiatives that have already suc-
cessfully  pooled  developed  shared  regional 
capacity,  such  as  justice  in  the  Caribbean.9 
It  could  also  draw  lessons  from  existing 
cross-border cooperation, such as the Greater 
Mekong  Subregion,  West  Africa’s  initiatives 
on trafﬁ cking and economic integration, and 
the  European  Union’s  programs  for  previ-
ously  conﬂ ict-affected  border  regions.10  It 
would support political initiatives of regional 
institutions (such as the African Union Bor-
der Programme11 and ASEAN’s subregional 
initiatives) with ﬁ nancial and technical exper-
tise from global partners. Well designed, the 
expansion of such regional initiatives would 
also have the advantage of protecting activi-
ties from some of the aid volatility caused by 
ﬂ uctuations in national governance.

Stemming the trafﬁ cking and illicit 
ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows that can fuel violence

Follow  the  money:  at  the  heart  of  action 
against the illegal trafﬁ cking of drugs and nat-
ural resources is tracking illicit ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows. 
For areas seriously affected by illegal trafﬁ ck-
ing and corruption, such as Central America 
or West Africa, most countries have nothing 
approaching the national capacity needed to 
gather  and  process  information  on  ﬁ nancial 
transactions  or  to  investigate  and  prosecute 
offenders. Along with initiatives that help to 
support a global community to address cor-

(cid:129)  Strengthening  the  capacity  to  conduct 
strategic  analysis  of  these  ﬂ ows  in  key 
countries with the majority of global ﬁ -
nancial transfers. About a dozen ﬁ nancial 
intelligence units in major ﬁ nancial mar-
kets  or  hubs  have  the  integrity,  indepen-
dence,  and  technical  capacity  to  conduct 
such analysis. Concerted efforts to analyze 
suspicious  ﬂ ows  and  exchange  informa-
tion could greatly increase their ability to 
detect illicit ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows. 

(cid:129)  Global  ﬁ nancial  centers  could  increase 
the  openness  of  information  provision 
and  their  cooperation  with  stolen  asset 
recovery processes. As part of this effort, 
global ﬁ nancial institutions could perform 
strategic analysis and make it available to 
countries affected. To respect privacy, this 
analysis could be based on shifts in aggre-
gate ﬂ ows rather than individual account 
information. The analytical tools exist, as 
chapter 7 describes for Australia’s analysis 
of illicit ﬂ ows generated by corruption or 
money-laundering.  But  these  approaches 
have not yet been applied globally.

(cid:129)  Developed  states  and  ﬁ nancial  centers 
could commit to ensuring that investing 
the  proceeds  from  corruption  in  their 
countries  is  a  violation  of  their  anti-
money-laundering  laws.  As  part  of  this 
commitment,  they  could  also  step  up 
their  cooperation  with  law  enforcement 
authorities  in  fragile  states.  This  would 
build  on  recent  precedents  for  joint  and 
parallel  investigations,  such  as  those  be-
tween  the  United  Kingdom  and  Nigeria, 
and the United States and Haiti, described 
in chapter 8.12 

Mechanisms  to  coordinate  the  interna-
tional  spillovers  of  domestic  policies  are 
crucial.  Spillovers  from  successful  action 
against illegal trafﬁ cking in one country can 

 

New directions for international support 

285

affect  another—Colombia’s  actions  against 
drug  cartels  have  had  ripple  effects  across 
Central  America,  Mexico,  and  even  West 
Africa.13 Similar effects can pertain to other 
commodities: a ban or restraints on logging 
in  one  country,  for  example,  will  increase 
demand in other countries that do not have 
similar  policies.  Without  limiting  sovereign 
decisions,  a  platform  for  dialogue  between 
countries  would  help  governments  identify 
potential  impacts  in  advance,  debate  costs 
and beneﬁ ts at a regional level, and consider 
options  to  coordinate  policy  or  take  action 
to mitigate impacts in countries affected by 
the decisions of others. Regional institutions 
could lead such a dialogue, as could a global 
agency such as UNODC. 

Joint  efforts  on  trafﬁ cking  in  natural  re-
sources  can  also  produce  more  effective  ac-
tion.  The  new  Natural  Resource  Charter  is 
an effective way to build on earlier initiatives, 
such  as  the  Kimberley  Process  and  the  Ex-
tractive  Industries  Transparency  Initiative, 
by focusing on widespread communications 
and  citizen  pressure.14  International  market 
regulatory  requirements  are  another  form 
of  consumer country action to combat traf-
ﬁ cking. In timber, these schemes include cer-
tiﬁ cation  requirements  in  the  United  States 
under the Lacey Act, European procurement 
policies  that  require  government  agencies 
to purchase only veriﬁ ably legal timber, and 
forthcoming  EU  due  diligence  regulations 
involving  bilateral  cooperation  with  select 
producer  countries.  Such  market  require-
ment  systems  could  be  strengthened  by 
information-  sharing  arrangements  between 
enforcement  in  producer  and  consumer 
countries  to  assist  consumer  countries  in 
acting against suspect shipments. Consumer 
nations and international actors should also 
provide additional assistance to build capac-
ity  within  producer  nations  to  implement 
effective chain-of-custody systems that keep 
illegally sourced commodities out of the sup-
ply chain. 

Forging  a  new  sense  of  co-responsibility 
for countering trafﬁ cking would also produce 
better analysis of options. For example, there 

would be value in joint efforts between pro-
ducing  and  consuming  countries  to  under-
stand the implications of current debates on 
combining demand-side options on drugs, in-
cluding legalization, with supply-side enforce-
ment. This would require in-depth analysis of 
the health, social, and economic implications 
of legalized drug use under different regula-
tory regimes, as well as trends in consumption 
patterns. It would also require analysis of the 
systems to regulate and control drugs that be-
come legal and to ensure enforcement where 
drugs remain illegal.

New action to protect fragile states from 
food insecurity and resource shocks

Knowledge about the impacts of food, energy, 
and resource shocks is limited. Rising global 
demand  for  food  and  energy  may  impact 
fragile  and  violence-affected  states  severely. 
New analytical efforts are an important ﬁ rst 
step  in  understanding  this  phenomenon. 
One forward step would be for the relevant 
agencies—the World Bank, UN Energy Pro-
gramme,  International  Energy  Agency,  and 
others—to  work  together  on  a  World  Re-
sources Outlook, bringing together the mul-
tiple reports and analysis  already undertaken 
by these agencies independently.15 Such a re-
port could give policy makers the valuable in-
tegrated analysis they currently lack. It could 
examine  the  state  of  scientiﬁ c  knowledge 
about  the  availability  of  key  resources,  in-
cluding oil, food, water, and potentially land, 
together with how climate change will affect 
each of them; the economic dimensions of re-
source availability, including the risk of price 
spikes, inﬂ ationary trends, and how resource 
prices interact with wider trends in the inter-
national economy; and vulnerability to scar-
city trends among poor people and regions 
affected  by  violence. Without  such  analysis, 
the  risk  of  unintended  consequences  from
policy may remain unaddressed—as with bio- 
 fuels, where the possible food security impli-
cations of measures to promote energy secu-
rity were inadequately considered.

286 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

For fragile states unable to support com-
prehensive  food  security  initiatives,  best-ﬁ t 
options  may  be  desirable.  A  reliable  global 
food  stock  system  would  be  ideal,  but  a 
smaller  independent  emergency  reserve—
managed regionally—could bridge the lags in 
food aid response. Held in existing national 
storage  facilities  at  strategic  locations,  such 
a reserve could allow for rapid response. An 
example is the East Asia Emergency Rice Re-
serve program established by the 10 ASEAN 
Member  States,  China,  Japan,  and  the  Re-
public  of  Korea,  to  provide  food  assistance 
and strengthen food security in emergencies 
and for poverty alleviation.16

Effective early warning schemes can also 
be a second-best approach to addressing food 
insecurity. While reducing the likelihood and 
impact of food price shocks would be a ﬁ rst 
best  option,  effective  early  warning  systems 
on food and agriculture can be put in place 
to  identify,  assess,  and  monitor  the  evolu-
tion of conﬂ ict risks and food security levels, 
especially  in  fragile  countries.  Examples  of 
early warning systems that use satellite data 
to anticipate crop failure and food shortages 
are  the  UN-sponsored  Global  Information 
and  Early Warning  System,17  which  aims  at 
improving  food-security  response  planning 
in 22 drought-prone African countries, and 
the  United  States  Agency  for  International 
Development  (USAID)–sponsored  Famine 
Early  Warning  System  Network,18  which 
monitors  food  supply  and  demand  in  all 
countries  with  emphasis  on  80  low-income 
food deﬁ cit nations. 

International trading systems should pro-
tect fragile states from the pressure of inter-
national resource competition in the search 
for  land  or  energy.  Initiatives  addressing 
these issues, such as the Extractive Industry 
Transparency  Initiative  (EITI),  the  Equator 
Principles,19  and  the  Santiago  Principles,20 
have formulated standards to guide engage-
ment  in  certain  sectors,  and  many  institu-
tions  and  large  enterprises  have  produced 
guidelines of their own. But broader efforts to 
build on such ongoing private initiatives are 
needed. In large-scale agro-investing, where 

no industry agreement has been reached on 
self-regulation, the World Bank and the UN 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO), 
the International Fund for Agricultural De-
velopment  (IFAD),  the  UN  Conference  on 
Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD),  and 
other  partners  have  recently  formulated 
a  set  of  principles  for  responsible  agro-
investment  that  stress  respect  for  land  and 
resource rights; food security; transparency; 
good governance; a proper enabling environ-
ment;  consultation  and  participation;  and 
social and environmental sustainability (see 
box 7.9).21

Ahead of potential new impacts from cli-
mate change, international support could be 
provided  to  subregions  where  fragile  coun-
tries  share  river  boundaries.  Depending  on 
the circumstances, this effort could encom-
pass  a  shift  from  agreements  based  on  pre-
cise volume to agreements based on percent-
ages, to account for the potential impact of 
reduced  ﬂ ow,  and  to  agreements  based  on 
sharing the beneﬁ ts from expanded develop-
ment of river basins that beneﬁ t all riparians, 
as well as new agreements where none exist. 
Efforts to foster cross-border or subregional 
water  management  arrangements  can  ease 
regional tensions even if climate impacts do 
not end up affecting ﬂ ow rates.

Track 4: Marshaling support from 
lower-, middle-, and higher-income 
countries and from global and 
regional institutions

The landscape of international assistance in 
fragile  and  violence-affected  countries  has 
changed in the last 20 years, with more aid 
and policy input from middle-income coun-
tries  with  a  history  of  solidarity  support. 
Several regional institutions are also playing 
a  greater  role  in  security  and  development 
issues. Yet discussions of global conﬂ ict and 
violence, the norms of responsible leader ship 
to respond to them, and the shape of inter-
national assistance have been driven more by 
northern than southern actors. The Interna-

 

New directions for international support 

287

tional Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-
building has been created to help address this 
deﬁ cit. The WDR process has also conducted 
wide-ranging  consultations  with  violence-  
affected  lower-  and  middle-income  coun-
tries,  regional  policy  makers,  and  regional 
institutions, as well as with traditional donor 
partners. It found many areas of agreement—
the focus on institution-building and gover-
nance  and  on  citizen  security,  justice,  and 
jobs—but also some areas of difference. 

WDR  consultations  frequently  revealed 
divided  views  among  national  actors,  re-
gional bodies, middle-income countries, and 
OECD actors over what is realistic to expect 
from national leadership in improving gov-
ernance,  over  what  time  period,  and  over 
the “forms”  versus  the “functions”  of  good 
governance  (for  example,  elections  versus 
broader democratic practices and processes, 
and minimizing corruption in practice ver-
sus establishing procurement laws and anti-
corruption commissions).

Perceived double standards were also crit-
icized  by WDR  interlocutors,  who  reﬂ ected 
a sentiment that donor countries and orga-
nizations that have faced their own internal 
governance challenges could approach short-
comings  in  fragile  developing  states  with 
more humility. Developed countries are not 
immune to corruption, bribery, human rights 
abuses, or failures to account adequately for 
public ﬁ nances. Thus, effective implementa-
tion of standards of good governance is also 
a challenge in advanced countries, even more 
so  when  the  international  community  has 
played an executive government or security 
role in violence-affected areas.

Lack of concerted support for the norms 
of  responsible  leadership  is  a  concern,  be-
cause progress in global norms is crucial for 
reducing  the  risk  of  violence.  Regional  and 
global standards, as well as recognition and 
sanction  mechanisms  in  constitutionality, 
human  rights,  and  corruption,  have  pro-
vided  support  and  incentives  for  national 
leadership,  particularly  where  the  capacity 
of  the  domestic  system  to  provide  rewards 
and  accountability  is  weak.  Human  rights 

standards, for example, have been important 
reference points for reformers that led efforts 
to transform authoritarian military regimes 
in  many  regions  toward  more  accountable 
systems, with beneﬁ ts for citizen security and 
broader  development.  The  Lomé  Declara-
tion  in  2000,  establishing African  standards 
and  a  regional  response  mechanism  to  un-
constitutional changes in government, has, as 
described  earlier,  underpinned  a  signiﬁ cant 
decrease in coups since the 1990s and strong 
continental  action  to  uphold  constitutional 
government.22

Modest  actions  that  could  strengthen 
collaboration  among  higher-,  middle-,  and 
lower- income countries on shared problems 
of  violence  and  development,  both  global 
and local, are as follows:

(cid:129)  Increase  both  South-South  and  South-
North exchanges on violence prevention. 
South-South  exchanges  have  enormous 
potential to provide relevant capacity and 
lessons  in  current  fragile  and  violence- 
affected  situations.23  Lower-  and  middle-
income countries that have gone through 
their own recent experiences of transition 
have much to offer to their counterparts—
as  demonstrated  in  this  Report,  where 
Latin American countries offered perspec-
tives  on  urban  violence  prevention  and 
security and justice reforms, China on job 
creation, India on local public works and 
democratic practices, Southeast Asian and 
African  countries  on  community-driven 
development in conﬂ ict areas. Yet, South-
North exchanges are also important. While 
institutional capacities differ, many North-
ern  and  Southern  countries,  provinces, 
and cities face some similar stresses. Pro-
gram  approaches—such  as  addressing 
trafﬁ cking,  reintegrating  ex-gang  mem-
bers  and  disengaged  young  people,  and 
fostering tolerance and social bonds among 
communities  that  are  ethnically  or  reli-
giously divided—will have lessons relevant 
for others. Such exchanges would increase 
understanding that the challenges of vio-
lence are not unique to developing coun-

288 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

tries and that developing countries are not 
alone in struggling to ﬁ nd solutions. 

(cid:129)  Better align international assistance be-
hind regional governance efforts. When 
regional  institutions  take  the  initiative, 
as with the African Union (AU) on consti-
tutionality,  they  have  great  comparative 
advantage in traction with their member 
states. The potential convening role of re-
gional insti tutions was also widely recog-
nized  in  WDR  consultations  by  higher-, 
middle-,  and  lower-income  country  in-
terlocutors alike (see box 9.4). Supporting 
regional platforms to discuss the applica-
tion of governance norms is an effective 
way  to  increase  ownership.  Adopting 
clearer structures to discuss responses to 
major improvements or deteriorations in 
governance (such as coups d’états) among 
bilateral  and  multilateral  actors  would 
also  improve  information-sharing  and 
the  potential  for  coordinated  responses 
without  creating  unacceptable  binding 
obli gations on international  actors.24

(cid:129)  Expand initiatives to recognize respon-
sible leadership. While there is always a 
role  for  frank  and  transparent  criticism, 
approaches from the North that are seen 
as  disproportionately  focused  on  criti-
cism in fragile situations can be divisive. 
Initiatives, such as the Ibrahim Prize for 
African leadership, could be emulated to 
recognize  leaders  in  different  roles  (for 
example, ministers who have a lasting im-
pact  on  corruption  or  military  leaders 
who implement successful security-sector 
reform).  Multistakeholder 
initiatives, 
such  as  the  Extractive  Industries  Trans-
parency  Initiative,  could  consider  provi-
sions  to  recognize  individual  leaders  or 
leadership teams who have improved the 
transparency  of  resource  revenues  and 
expenditures,  whether  in  governments, 
civil society, or companies. 

More  focused  and  realistic  expectations 
built  into  the  timetables  for  governance 
improvements  would  also  help  bridge  gaps 

in  perspectives  among  countries  receiving 
international  assistance,  their  middle-  and 
higher-income  international  partners,  and 
global and regional institutions. This is par-
ticularly  crucial  in  the  light  of  recent  social 
protests that demonstrate strong grievances 
and expectations over governance change—
that were not picked up by standard analyses 
of security and of development progress. The 
indicators described in chapter 8 aim to ad-
dress this deﬁ cit through a focus on whether 
countries are on track to make institutional 
and governance improvements within the re-
alistic generational time frames that the faster 
reformers  have  achieved,  and  how  citizens 
perceive trends in the legitimacy and perfor-
mance of national institutions across the po-
litical security and development domains. 

These  would  be  a  simple  way,  as  Lou-
ise  Arbour  suggests  in  box  9.4,  to  compare 
progress, stagnation, or deterioration. Ensur-
ing  that  such  indicators  measure  outcomes 
rather  than  just  the  form  of  institutions 
(laws  passed,  anti-corruption  commissions 
formed) is also important to ensure that they 
encourage  rather  than  suppress  innovative 
national  action  and  that  they  foster  learn-
ing among low-, middle-, and high-income 
country institutions. The UN Peacebuilding 
Commission—which brings together fragile 
states, donors, troop-contributing countries, 
and  regional  bodies—has  unexploited  po-
tential to advise on realistic timelines. 

A continuing global learning 
platform

This Report draws together many rich strands 
of existing research on security and develop-
ment, adding to them through new quantita-
tive and qualitative work. But its preparation 
has made clear the gaps in knowledge—from 
evolving issues such as the links between or-
ganized  crime  and  political  violence,  glar-
ingly  underresearched,  to  the  lack  of  ﬁ rm 
conceptual  models  and  testing  of  the  pro-
cesses of institutional transformation, and to 
the absence of evaluation data on key policy 

 

New directions for international support 

289

REFLECTIONS FROM ADVISORY COUNCIL MEMBERS: 2011 WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT

BOX 9. 4   The role of regional institutions and initiatives in norm-setting and violence prevention

Reaﬃ  rming consensus on international norms and standards—The role of regional organizations

Louise Arbour, President, International Crisis Group; former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights; 
WDR Advisory Council Member

Whether based on universal values, such as the sanctity of 
human  life,  or  on  international  legal  rules,  there  are  some 
universally accepted norms—reﬂ ected in the Charter of the 
United Nations and other international instruments.

These  norms  are  not  self-implementing,  and  because 
they include the right to cultural diversity, their interpreta-
tion must reﬂ ect local, national, and regional diversity. The 
resistance to the exportation of “Western values” might be 
no more than the rejection of a foreign way of expressing a 
particular norm, rather than a rejection of the norm itself.

Regional  institutions  can  bridge  the  distance  between 
universal norms and local customs. Those customs or prac-
tices must conform, in substance, to the core international 
principles from which the international community derives 
its  cohesion.  Otherwise,  cultural  diversity  can  simply  over-
ride, and undermine, the international framework.

In the justice sector, for instance, uniformity of institutional 
models  and  procedures  may  obscure  radical  diﬀ erences  in 
the actual delivery of justice. But the adjudication of disputes 
based  on  principles  of  fairness,  impartiality,  transparency,  in-
tegrity,  compassion,  and  ultimately  accountability  can  take 
many forms. 

In  their  assistance  to  development,  international  actors 
must resist the exportation of form over substance, and accept 
the regionalization of norms that enhance, rather than impede, 
their true universal character. In the same spirit, regional actors 
must translate, in a culturally relevant way, international norms 
and repudiate nonconforming practices. 

And  all  must  concede  that  the  standards  set  by  universal 
norms are aspirations. Measures of performance should reﬂ ect 
either  progress,  stagnation,  or  regression  in  a  given  country, 
toward a common, universal ideal.

and program options, such as justice and em-
ployment interventions. Priorities for future 
research and policy work are as follows:

(cid:129)  Filling gaps in data. There are gaps in the 
data on violence (particularly criminal vi-
olence) and on citizen trust in national in-
stitutions. Other variables to fully test con-
ceptual models and evaluate policy options 
are also missing. Priorities for following up 
on the WDR’s work would be spending on 
criminal justice systems, institutional per-
formance  indicators  of  capacity  and  ac-
countability in security and criminal jus-
tice systems, and employment data.

(cid:129)  Testing  conceptual  models.  The  WDR 
has  put  forward  hypotheses  drawn  from 
regional  and  country  consultations  that 
are consistent with available cross-country 
data or qualitative case analysis. All would 
beneﬁ t from further testing and research 
to identify detailed pathways of successful 
reform  and  reasons  for  failure.  They  in-
clude the importance of national institu-

tional  transformation  and  governance 
outcomes  for  sustained  violence  preven-
tion;  conﬁ dence-building  as  a  prelude  to 
wider  institutional  transformation;  the 
characteristics  of  inclusive-enough  coali-
tions for reform in fragile situations; how 
these  are  adapted  or  consolidated  over 
multiple  transitions;  and  the  design  and 
beneﬁ ts  of  early  institutional  action  on 
citizen  security,  justice,  and  jobs.  As  dis-
cussed  in  chapter  2  (box  2.5),  more  re-
search is needed on the link between em-
ployment and violence prevention.

(cid:129)  Evaluating  policy  and  program  options. 
There is also a dearth of impact evaluations 
on the relationship between speciﬁ c policy 
and  program  interventions  and  security 
outcomes. At a macropolicy level, the costs 
and beneﬁ ts of second-best reforms in sit-
uations of insecurity and weak institutions 
merit  further  attention—as  do  the  se-
quence of reforms to increase revenues and 
expand government expenditures and the 

290 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

costs and beneﬁ ts of regional integration. 
At  the  program  level,  evaluating  the  im-
portance of rapid development results and 
of  integrated  security- development  ap-
proaches would greatly assist policy mak-
ers. A focused evaluation agenda to analyze 
the impact of programmatic interventions 
to address unemployment in situations of 
conﬂ ict or rising violence would also con-
tribute  to  a  more  proactive  international 
approach  to  job  creation,  including  the 
role of private  sector development. Analy-
sis  of  the  economic  costs  and  beneﬁ ts  of 
ﬂ exible peacekeeping options, as suggested 
by  Commissioner  Lamamra  and  Under- 
Secretary-General Le Roy, can inform fu-
ture policy developments.25

(cid:129)  Tracking  the  evolving  impacts  of  new 
phenomena, including rapidly increasing 
demand  for  energy  and  scarce  resource 
supplies,  as  well  as  climate  change,  on 
areas at risk of violence. 

The future research agenda is rich indeed,26 
and a strong network of public agencies, think 
tanks, universities, and NGOs could produc-
tively collaborate in tackling it. A shared col-
laborative  platform  for  knowledge  on  vio-
lence, fragility, and development would also 
have the advantage of drawing together work 
led by the political and social  sciences, includ-
ing economics, and by the political, security, 
humanitarian, and development agencies in 
this  most  interdisciplinary  of  areas.  Such  a 
platform  could  foster   research  by  institutes 
in fragile and conﬂ ict-affected states and in 
middle-income  countries  that  have  experi-
enced violence, thus helping to produce the 
kind of lessons and learning highlighted here, 
as well as informing a new consensus on crit-
ical norms and their adaptation to national 
contexts.  This  platform  can  also  draw  from 
a  new  research  initiative,  “Democratizing 
Development Economics,” from the research 
group  at  the  World  Bank,  which  promotes 
“Open  Data,  Open  Knowledge,  and  Open 
Solutions” to support South-South learning 
and collaborative research on common chal-
lenges and solutions.27

A compelling agenda for action

Can the international community help build 
resilience in countries facing repeated or new 
threats? Signiﬁ cant areas—North Africa and 
the Middle East; Central Africa, the Horn of 
Africa, and West Africa; Southwest and Cen-
tral Asia; and Central America—currently face 
risks of new or repeated cycles of violence. Will 
the international community be able to help, 
not just to halt one acute episode, but reduce 
the risk of continuing cycles? Business as usual 
is unlikely to deliver sustained results. What is 
needed is a renewed consensus among inter-
national actors in their dialogue with national 
leaders,  based  on  expectations  that  are  both 
principled and realistic. Supporting this con-
sensus at a practical level will require focused 
and timely assistance to institutions that can 
help prevent an escalation of violence. It will 
also require a willingness to try new ways of 
doing  business  in  humanitarian,  develop-
ment,  security,  and  mediation  assistance  in 
order to help build national institutional le-
gitimacy. And it will require decisive action to 
prevent stresses outside these countries from 
overwhelming fragile progress.

All  the  recommendations  of  this  Report 
have  at  their  heart  the  concept  of  shared 
global  risk.  Risks  are  evolving,  with  new 
threats to stability arising from international 
organized crime and global economic insta-
bility. The landscape of international power 
relations  is  also  changing,  as  lower-  and 
middle- income countries increase their share 
of global economic inﬂ uence and their con-
tributions to global policy thinking. A funda-
mental rethink is needed on the approaches 
of international actors to manage global risks 
collectively—and as equal partners. 

The  recommendations  are  not  easy  to 
implement. They require clear political lead-
ership from both developed and developing 
countries and sustained attention to change 
in bilateral development agencies and multi-
lateral institutions. Real change will require a 
strong rationale for political leadership. But 
a dual rationale exists: fragility and violence 
are major obstacles to development, and are 

 

New directions for international support 

291

no  longer  conﬁ ned  to  poor  and  remote  ar-
eas  or  cityscapes.  This  decade  has  seen  the 
increasing penetration of instability in global 
life—in terrorism, an expanding drug trade, 

and  the  rising  numbers  of  internationally 
mobile refugees. Breaking cycles of repeated 
violence is thus a shared challenge demand-
ing urgent action. 

Notes

  1.  Stewart and Brown 2007.
  2.  Ojielo 2007; Odendaal 2010; UNDPA 2010a.
  3.  Following an extensive study carried out by the Ofﬁ ce of the High Representative (the chief civil-
ian peace implementation agency in Bosnia and Herzegovina) at the request of the Peace Imple-
mentation  Council,  the  coordinating  structure  of  the  International  Community  in  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina was “streamlined” in 2002 to eliminate overlapping effort and responsibilities and 
increase effectiveness. As part of this process a Board of Principals was established under the chair-
manship of the High Representative to serve as the main coordinating body for international com-
munity activity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Board of Principals meets once a week in Sara-
jevo and is attended by Ofﬁ ce of the High Representative, NATO-led military Stabilisation Force 
(SFOR), Ofﬁ ce of Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), European Union Police Mission, 
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Euro pean Commission, the World Bank, the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the UN Development Programme (UNDP). See Ofﬁ ce 
of the High Representative and European Union Special Representative 2011.

  4.  Recognizing  the  public-good  beneﬁ ts  of  some  types  of  security  assistance,  as  the  OECD-DAC 
is considering by providing a separate channel for reporting assistance in these areas, could also 
help.

  5.  g7+ is an open grouping of low-income countries experiencing conﬂ ict and fragility. It was estab-
lished in 2008 and comprises the following countries: Afghanistan, Burundi, the Central African 
Republic, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Haiti, Liberia, Nepal, the Solo-
mon Islands, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, and Timor-Leste. 

  6.  A practical example of this type of shift is Ethiopia in 2005, when government and donors agreed 
to move from regular budget support to a program of transfers to local and municipal govern-
ments. The program included measures to ensure that all regions of the country, irrespective of 
how they had voted in elections, received continuing central government support.

  7.  The WDR team, in conjunction with Mobile Accord and with generous donations of SMS (short 
message  service)  by Vodacom  Congo,  carried  out  a  geo-polling  project  known  as  DRC  Speaks! 
The project utilized cell phone technology to conduct the survey. Using SMS through cell phones, 
the  project  allowed  more  than  140,000  Congolese  to  share,  without  any  ﬁ lters,  their  thoughts, 
feelings, and concerns. See section on monitoring progress out of fragility in chapter 6 for more 
information. 

  8.  Gelb 2010.
  9.  See Favaro 2010.
10.  For the Greater Mekong Subregion, see World Bank 2006d; the section on regional stresses and 
support in chapter 7. For West Africa, see Favaro 2008, 2010; box 7.10 in chapter 7. For the Euro-
pean  border  region,  see  Greta  and  Lewandowski  2010;  Otocan  2010;  Council  of  Europe  1995; 
Council  of  Europe  and  Institute  of  International  Sociology  of  Gorizia  2003;  Bilcik  and  others 
2000; box 7.11 in chapter 7.

11.  For the African Union Border Programme Cooperation, see African Union 2007a.
12.  See Messick 2011; box 8.4 in chapter 8.
13.  See Arboleda 2010; UNODC 2010a; WDR team consultations with government ofﬁ cials, civil society 

representatives, and security personnel in Colombia, 2010; feature, chapter 3.

14.  The Natural Resource Charter is a set of common principles and a practical step-by-step guide for 
escaping the “resource curse.” It has no political heritage or sponsorships and was prepared by an 
independent group of global experts on economically sustainable resource extraction, assembled 
by Paul Collier, Director of the Centre for the Study of African Economies at Oxford University. The 
charter aims to foster coordination, both along the decision chain from exploration to ex penditure, 
and among the international actors and stakeholders, by providing a unifying and overarching 

292 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

framework for action. It provides the tools and knowledge base necessary to avoid the misman-
agement of these diminishing riches and ensure they bring lasting beneﬁ t. The charter consists 
of  12  precepts,  detailing  the  broad  princi-ples,  speciﬁ c  recommendations,  and  practical  guid-
ance. It is also an information toolkit to guide governments and societies in their use of natural 
resources so that the opportunities they provide are seized in a way that results in maximum and 
sustained  beneﬁ ts  for  citizens.  The  charter  provides  a  clearinghouse  for  the  collation  and  dis-
semination of information and best practice in the governance and management of resource-rich 
economies. More information on the charter can be found at their website: http://www.natural 
resourcecharter.org/.

15.  Evans 2010.
16.  Brinkman and Hendrix 2010; Bora and others 2010.
17.  FAO 2010.
18.  USAID Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2010.
19.  The  Equator  Principles  (EPs)  are  a  voluntary  set  of  standards  for  determining,  assessing,  and 
managing social and environmental risk in project ﬁ nancing. The EPs are considered the ﬁ nan-
cial  industry “gold  standard”  for  sustainable  project  ﬁ nance  and  are  based  on  the  International 
Finance  Corporation  (IFC)  performance  standards  on  social  and  environmental  sustainability 
and on the World Bank’s Environmental, Health and Safety General Guidelines. The principles are 
intended to serve as a common baseline and framework for the implementation by each adopt-
ing  institution  of  its  own  internal  social  and  environmental  policies,  procedures,  and  standards 
related to its project ﬁ nancing activities. These principles do not create any rights in, or liability 
to, any person, public or private, and institutions adopt and implement the EPs without reliance 
on or recourse to IFC or the World Bank. The Equator Principles can be found in full at http://
www.equator-principles.com/documents/Equator_Principles.pdf. 

20.  The Santiago Principles were developed in 2008 by the International Working Group of Sovereign 
Wealth Funds (SWFs) and represent a collaborative effort by advanced, emerging, and developing 
country economies to set out a comprehensive framework of 24 voluntary “best practices” guide-
lines,  aiming  to  provide  a  clearer  understanding  of  the  operations  of  SWFs.  Their  adoption  on 
a voluntary basis signals strong commitment to the principles, and their implementation should 
further enhance the stabilizing role played by SWFs in the ﬁ nancial markets, and help maintain the 
free ﬂ ow of cross-border investment. To date, 23 countries are members. For more information, 
visit  the  International  Working  Group  of  Sovereign  Wealth  Funds  website:  http://www.iwg-swf 
.org. 

21.  FAO and others 2010.
22.  See Organization of African Unity 2000. Also see the section titled “Interstate and civil wars have 

declined since peaking in the early1990s” in chapter 1.

23.  Of  the  different  forms  that  South-South  cooperation  has  taken,  technical  assistance  has  been 
the  most  common. Although  many  technical  assistance  projects  focus  on  economic  and  social 
development, countries in the Global South have also developed specialized capacities in post-
conﬂ ict peacebuilding. Examples include South Africa’s support to build structural capacities for 
public  service  through  peer  learning  among  public  sector  schools  (Management  Development 
Institutes) at the Ministries for Public Administration in Burundi, Rwanda, and Southern Sudan, 
all countries that have emerged from violent conﬂ ict. Cooperation among 45 municipalities in El 
Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras helps to manage regional public goods such as water in the 
Triﬁ nio region. In Triﬁ nio, regional South-South cooperation has transformed a zone of tensions 
(no-man’s armed borders) into a zone of integration and development. See OECD 2010f.

24.  The view of the African Union with respect to West African countries that have recently experi-
enced coups d’états was that donor support to social programs and poverty reduction programs 
should continue in these countries, but that larger scale support should be paced to support the 
return to a “constitutional path.” In practice, donors were divided between those that suspended 
assistance completely and those that continued assistance with no change (WDR team consulta-
tion with ofﬁ cials in African Union in Addis Ababa, 2010).

25.  An  example  of  recent  advances  in  evaluation  in  fragile  states  includes  the  new  Devel opment 
Impact Evaluation (DIME) Initiative, which focuses on questions of legitimacy and utilization of 
public institutions, public service delivery, local collective action, social capital, and trust in elected 
ofﬁ cials in projects in Aceh (Indonesia), Afghanistan, Angola, Central African Republic, Cambo-
dia, and Guinea. 

 

New directions for international support 

293

26.  This report complements research forthcoming in 2011, including a second issue of the Global 
Burden of Armed Violence from the Geneva Declaration, the next volume of the Human Security 
Report published as this report went to press, and the forthcoming Oxford Handbook of the Eco-
nomics of Peace and Conﬂ ict.

27.  Zoellick 2010a.

Bibliographical Note

This report draws on a wide range of World Bank documents and on numerous outside 
sources. Background analysis was contributed by: Beatriz Abizanda, Aga Khan Development 
Network, Nathalie Alvarado, Sanam Naraghi-Anderlini, Matthew Andrews, Jairo Arboleda, 
Paul  Arthur,  Claus  Astrup,  Alexandra  Avdeenko,  Kathryn  Bach,  Mark  Baird,  Patrick 
Barron,  Peter  Bartu,  Christina  Biebesheimer,  Arthur  G.  Blundell,  Morten  Bøås,  Saswati 
Bora, James Boyce, Henk-Jan Brinkman, Tilman Brück, Rex Brynen, Iride Ceccacci, Brian 
Center,  Pinki  Chaudhuri,  Asger  Christensen,  James  Cockayne,  Tara  Cooper,  Maria  C. 
Correia, David Craig, Christopher Cramer, Martha Crenshaw, Olivia D’Aoust, Victor A.B. 
Davies, Pablo de Greiff, Alex de Waal, Dimitri F. De Pues, Frauke de Weijer, Christopher 
Delgado, Gabriel Demombynes, Deval Desai, Peter Dewees, Sinclair Dinnen, Le Dang Doanh, 
Barry Eichengreen, Gregory Ellis, Sundstøl Eriksen, FAFO, Alexander Evans, Doug Farah, 
Edgardo  Favaro,  James  D.  Fearon,  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  Finland,  Hedda  Flatø, 
Shepard Forman, Paul Francis, Anthony Gambino, Esther Garcia, Scott Gates, Alan Gelb, 
Luigi Giovine, Blair Glencorse, Jack A. Goldstone, Margarita Puerto Gomez, Sonja Grimm, 
Jean-Marie Guehenno, Scott Guggenheim, Debarati Guha-Sapir, Paul-Simon Handy, Bernard 
Harborne, Niels Harild, Emily Harwell, Håvard Hegre, Cullen S. Hendrix, Anke Hoefﬂ er, Karla 
Hoff, Richard Horsey, Fabrice Houdart, Yasheng Huang, Elisabeth Huybens, Inter-American 
Development Bank, Syeda S. Ijaz, Horst Intscher, Kremena Ionkova, Michael Jacobson, Prashant 
Jha, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Michael Johnston, Patricia Justino, 
Tarcisius Kabutaulaka, Gilbert Khadaglia, Anne Kielland, Robert Krech, Christof P. Kurz, 
Sarah Laughton, Constantino Lluch, Norman V. Loayza, Clare Lockhart, Megumi Makisaka, 
Alexandre Marc, Keith Martin, Omar McDoom, Mike McGovern, John-Andrew McNeish, 
Pratap Bhanu Mehta, Kenneth Menkhaus, Richard Messick, Ministry of Rural Development 
of India, Nadir Mohammed, Hannah Nielsen, Håvard Mokleiv Nygård, OECD International 
Network  on  Conﬂ ict  and  Fragility  (OECD/INCAF),  David  Pearce,  Mary  Porter  Peschka, 
Nicola Pontara, Douglas Porter, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Portugal, Monroe Price, Habib 
Rab, Clionadh Raleigh, Martha Ramirez, Anne Soﬁ e Roald, Esther Rojas-Garcia, Paula Roque, 
Narve Rotwitt, Caroline Sage, Yezid Sayigh, Mark Schneider, Richard Scobey, Jake Sherman, 
Sylvana  Q.  Sinha,  Judy  Smith-Höhn,  Joanna  Spear, Anna  Spenceley,  Radhika  Srinivasan, 
Frances Stewart, Håvard Strand, Scott Straus, Nicole Stremlau, Naotaka Sugawara, Deepak 
Thapa, Åge Tiltnes, Monica Toft, Robert Townsend, Bakary Fouraba Traore, Keiichi Tsunekawa, 
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations  Department of 
Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO), the United Nations Department of Political Affairs 
(UNDPA), Bernice van Bronkhorst, Philip Verwimp, Joaquin Villalobos, Sarah von Billerbeck, 
Henriette von Kaltenborn-Stachau, Barbara F. Walter, Jusuf Wanandi, Xueli Wang, Clay Wescott, 
Teresa Whitﬁ eld, Alys Willman, Michael Woolcock, Michael Wyganowski, Kohei Yoshida.

Background  papers  for  the  Report  are  available  either  on  the  World  Wide  Web  at 
www.worldbank.org/wdr2011 or through the World Development Report ofﬁ ce. The views 
expressed in these papers are not necessarily those of the World Bank or of this Report.

295

296 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Many people inside and outside the World Bank gave comments to the team. Valuable com-
ments, guidance, and contributions were provided by Patricio Abinales, Ségolène Adam, James 
W. Adams, Douglas Addison, Ozong Agborsangaya-Fiteu, Sanjeev S. Ahluwalia, Ahmad Ahsan, 
Bryant Allen, Noro Andriamihaja, Edward Aspinall, Laura Bailey, Bill Battaile, Ferid Belhaj, 
Eric Bell, Christina Biebesheimer, Anna Bjerde, Brian Blankespoor, Chris Blattman, Edith H. 
Bowles, Mike Bourke, Sean Bradley, Cynthia Brady, Anne Brown, Gillie Brown, Colin Bruce, 
Paola Buendia, Roisín de Burca, William Byrd, Charles Call, Otaviano Canuto, Michael Car-
nahan, Francis Carneiro, Paloma Anos Casero, Mukesh Chawla, Judy Cheng-Hopkins, Fantu 
Cheru, Punam Chuhan-Pole, Laurence Clarke, Kevin Clements, Cybèle Cochran, Colombia’s 
Departamento Nacional de Planeación (DNP), Daniele Conversi, Louise Cord, Pamela Cox, 
Jeff Crisp, Geoffrey Dabelko, Beth Daponte, Monica Das Gupta, Elisabeth David, Martin David, 
John Davidson, Scott Dawson, Shanta Devarajan, James Dobbins, Joost Draaisma, Gregory 
Keith Ellis, Ibrahim Elbadawi, Obiageli Kathryn Ezekweli, Kene Ezemenari, Judith Fagalasuu, 
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Ezzedine Choukri Fishere, Cyprian F. Fisiy, Ariel Fiszbein, Robert L. 
Floyd, Verena Fritz, Francis Fukuyama, Ivor Fung, Varun Gauri, Madhur Gautam, Germany’s 
Deutscher Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), Coralie Gevers, Indermit S. 
Gill, Chiara Giorgetti, Giorgia Giovannetti, Edward Girardet,  Jack Goldstone, Kelly Green-
hill, Pablo de Greiff, Scott E. Guggenheim, Tobias Haque, Bernard Harborne, David Harland, 
Jenny Hedman, Joel Hellman, Bert Hofman, Virginia Horscroft, Elisabeth Huybens, Elena 
Ianchovichina, Patchamuthu Illangovan, Sana Jaffrey, Martin Jelsma, Emmanuel E. Jimenez, 
Hilde Johnson, Mary Judd, Sima Kanaan, Alma Kanani, Phil Keefer, Caroline M. Kende-Robb, 
Homi Kharas, Young Chul Kim, Mark Kleiman, Steve Knack, Sahr Kpundeh, Aart Kraay, 
Keith Krause, Aurélien Kruse, Arvo Kuddo, Sibel Kulaksiz, Julien Labonne, Tuan Le, Theodore 
Leggett,  René  Lemarchand,  Anne-Marie  Leroy,  Brian  Levy,  Esther  Loening,  Ana  Paula 
Fialho Lopes, Chris Lovelace, Andrew Mack, Charles Maier, Sajjad Malik, David Mansﬁ eld, 
Alexandre Marc, Roland Marchal, Ernesto May, Alastair McKechnie, Dave McRae, Pratap 
Mehta, Piers Merrick, Jeffrey Miron, Peter Moll, Mick Moore, Adrian Morel, Edward Mount-
ﬁ eld,  Robert  Muggah,  Izumi  Nakamitsu,  Eric  Nelson,  Carmen  Nonay, Antonio  Nucifora, 
Liam O’Dowd, the OECD/International Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragility (OECD/INCAF), 
Adyline Waafas Ofusu-Amaah, Patti O’Neill, Robert Orr, Marina Ottaway, Phil Oxhorn, Kiran 
Pandey, Andrew Parker, Martin Parry, Borany Penh, Nadia Piffaretti, Nicola Pontara, Rae 
Porter, Ben Powis, Giovanna Prennushi, Gérard Prunier, Vikram Raghavan, Bassam Rama-
dan, Peter Reuter, Joey Reyes, Dena Ringold, David Robalino, Michael Ross, Mustapha Rouis, 
Jordan Ryan, Joseph Saba, Abdi Samatar, Nicholas Sambanis, Kirsti Samuels, Jane Sansbury, 
Mark Schneider, Colin Scott, John Sender, Yasmine Sherif, Janmejay Singh, David Sislen, Edu-
ardo Somensatto, Radhika Srinivasan, Scott Straus, Camilla Sudgen, Vivek Suri, the Swiss 
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), Almamy Sylla, Stefanie Teggemann, Thomas 
John Thomsen, Martin Tisné, Alexandra Trzeciak-Duval, Anne Tully, Carolyn Turk, Oliver 
Ulich, the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID), the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID), Peter Uvin, Manuel Vargas, Antonius 
Verheijen, Thierry Vircoulon, M. Willem van Eeghen, Axel van Trotsenburg, Juergen Voegele, 
Femke Vos, Tjip Walker, John Wallis, El Ghassim Wane, Dewen Wang, Achim Wennmann, Alys 
Willman, Andreas Wimmer, Susan Wong, Rob Wrobel, Tevﬁ k Yaprak, and Philip Zelikow.

We are grateful to persons in locations across the world who participated and provided 
comments. In addition, we thank guest bloggers and members of the public who committed 
on our blog: http://blogs.worldbank.org/conﬂ ict/.

Despite efforts to compile a comprehensive list, some who contributed may have been 
inadvertently omitted. The team apologizes for any oversights and reiterates its gratitude to 
all who contributed to this Report.

References

The  word  processed  describes  informally  reproduced  works  that  may  not  be  commonly  available 
through libraries.

Abadie, Alberto.  2006. “Poverty,  Political  Freedom,  and  the  Roots  of  Terrorism.”  American  Economic 

Review 96 (2): 50–56.

Abbas,  Hassan.  2008. “From  FATA  to  the  NWFP:  The  Taliban  Spread  Their  Grip  in  Pakistan.”  CTC 

Sentinel 1 (10): 3–5.

———. 2010. “Inside Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province: The Political Landscape of the Insur-
gency.” Counterterrorism Strategy Initiative Policy Paper, New America Foundation, Washington, 
DC.

Abbink, Klaus, and Benedikt Herrmann. 2009. “Pointless Vendettas.” Center for Research in Experimen-

tal Economics and Political Decision-Making, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative 

Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91 (5): 1369–401.

———. 2005. “Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth.” In Handbook of Economic 

Growth, ed. Philippe Aghion and Stephen N. Durlauf. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. New 

York: Cambridge University Press.

Acharya, Amitav, and Arabinda Acharya. 2007. “The Myth of the Second Front: Localizing the ‘War on 

Terror’ in Southeast Asia.” The Washington Quarterly 30 (4): 75–90.

Addison, Tony. 2009. “The Political Economy of the Transition from Authoritarianism.” In Transitional 
Justice  and  Development:  Making  Connections,  ed.  Pablo  de  Greiff  and  Roger  Duthie.  New York: 
 International Center for Transitional Justice.

Advancement  Project.  2009. “Advancement  Project.”  Advancement  Project,  Washington,  DC.  http://

www.advancementproject.org.

African Development Bank. 2008. “Burundi: 2008–2011 Country Strategy Paper.” African Development 

Bank, Tunis.

———. 2010. “The Fragile States Facility (FSF) Guidelines on Administration of the Technical Assis-
tance and Capacity Building (TCB) Program of Pillar III Operations.” African Development Bank, 
Tunis.

———. 2011. “Accompanying States Towards Sustainable Development.” African Development Bank, 

Tunis. http://www.afdb.org.

African  Union.  2006.  “Draft  Policy  Framework  for  Post-conﬂ ict  Reconstruction  and  Development 

(PCRD).” African Union, Addis Ababa.

———. 2007a. “Declaration on the African Union Border Programme and its Implementation Modali-
ties as Adopted by the Conference of African Ministers in Charge of Border Issues Held in Addis 
Ababa.” African Union, Addis Ababa.

———. 2007b. “Framework for Post-conﬂ ict Reconstruction and Technical and Vocational Education 

and Training (TVET).” African Union, Addis Ababa.

Afrobarometer. 2009. “Afrobarometer.” Afrobarometer, Accra.
Afshari, Ali, and H. Graham Underwood. 2009. “The Green Wave.” Journal of Democracy 20 (4): 6–10.
Aga Khan Development Network. 2003. “Speech by His Highness the Aga Khan.” Annual Meeting of 

The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Tashkent, May 5.

297

298 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

———.  2010. “The Aga  Khan  Development  Network: A  Long-Term Approach  to  Development  in 

 Conﬂ ict-prone Areas.” Background note for the WDR 2011.

Agarwal, Sanjay, Rasmus Heltberg, and Myrtle Diachok. 2009. “Scaling up Social Accountability in World 

Bank Operations.” Social Development Department, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Agence  Française  de  Développement,  Bundesministerium  für  Wirtschaftliche  Zusammenarbeit  und 
 Entwicklung, DFID (U.K. Department for International Development), and World Bank. 2005. “Pro-
poor Growth in the 1990s: Lessons and Insights from 14 Countries.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Agence  France-Presse.  1999. “East  Timorese  Rebels Vow  to  Conﬁ ne  Troops  to  Barracks:  UN.”  Agence 

France-Presse, July 28.

Agoglia, John, Michael Dziedzic, and Barbara Sotirin, eds. 2008. Measuring Progress in Conﬂ ict Environ-

ments (MPICE): A Metrics Framework. Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace. 

Alda, Erik, and José Cuesta. 2010. “A Comprehensive Estimation of Costs of Crime in South Africa and Its 

Implications for Effective Policy Making.” Journal of International Development (Online Edition).

Alden, Christopher. 2001. Mozambique and the Construction of the New African State: From Negotiations 

to  Nation Building. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

AllAfrica. 2009. “Liberia: GEMAP Has Succeeded.” AllAfrica.com, October 30.
Altbeker, Antony. 2005. “Paying for Crime: South African Spending on Criminal Justice.” ISS Working 

Paper 115, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria.

Alvarado, Nathalie, and Beatriz Abizanda. 2010. “Some Lessons Learnt in Citizen Security by the IADB.” 

Background note for the WDR 2011.

American Psychological Association. 1996. “Violence and the Family: Report of the American Psycho-
logical  Association  Presidential  Task  Force  on  Violence  and  the  Family.”  American  Psychological 
 Association, Washington, DC.

Amnesty International. 2005. “Israel and the Occupied Territories: Conﬂ ict, Occupation and Patriarchy: 

Women Carry the Burden.” Amnesty International, London.

Anastasijevic, Dejan. 2006. “Organized Crime in the Western Balkans.” Paper presented at the First 
 Annual Conference on Human Security, Terrorism and Organized Crime in the Western Balkan 
 Region, Ljubljana, November 23.

Andean Council of Foreign Ministers. 2001. “Andean Cooperation Plan for the Control of Illegal Drugs 

and Related Offenses.” Andean Community General Secretariat, Cartagena, Colombia.

Anderlini, Sanam. 2000. “Women at the Peace Table: Making a Difference.” UN Development Fund for 

Women, New York.

———. 2010a. “Gender Background Paper.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
———.  2010b. “What  the  Women  Say:  Participation  and  UNSCR  1325.”  International  Civil  Society 
 Action  Network,  Washington,  DC;  Center  for  International  Studies,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
 Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Andersen, Louise. 2010. “Outsiders Inside the State. Post-conﬂ ict Liberia between Trusteeship and Part-

nership.” Journal of Intervention and Statebuilding 4 (2): 129–52.

Andeweg, Rudy B. 2000. “Consociational Democracy.” Annual Review of Political Science 3: 509–36.
Andreas, Peter. 2004. “The Clandestine Political Economy of War and Peace in Bosnia.” International 

Studies Quarterly 48 (1): 29–52.

Andrews, Matthew. 2010. “Good Government Means Different Things in Different Countries.” Gover-

nance 23 (1): 7–35.

Anyanwu,  John  C.  2004. “Economic  and  Political  Causes  of  Civil Wars  in Africa:  Some  Econometric 

Results.” Peace, Conﬂ ict, and Development 4: 1–15.

Arai, Yukiko, Ata Cissé, and Madjiguene Sock. 2010. “Promoting Job Creation for Young People in Multi-
national Enterprises and Their Supply Chains: Liberia.” Employment Sector Report 7, International 
Labour Organization, Geneva.

Arboleda, Jairo. 2010. “Security and Development in Colombia.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
Argandoña, Antonio. 2003. “The Social Dimensions of Labour Market Institutions.” In The Social Di-
mensions of Employment: Institutional Reforms in Labor Markets, ed. Antonio Argandoña and Jordi 
Gual. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Arias, Patricia. 2009. “Seguridad Privada en América Latina: El Lucro y los Dilemas de una Regulación 

Deﬁ citaria.” Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales, Santiago.

Arnson, Cynthia J., and I. William Zartman, eds. 2005. Rethinking the Economics of War: The Intersection 

of Need, Creed and Greed. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. 

 

References 

299

Arzeni, Simone, Enrico Cesanelli, and Stefano Pes. 2004. “Programme de Démobilisation, Réinsertion et 
Réintégration des Ex-combatants (PDRRI): Rapport Final.” International Organization for Migra-
tion, Bissau.

Ashe, Jeffrey, and Lisa Parrott. 2001. “Impact Evaluation: PACT’s Women’s Empowerment Program in 
Nepal: A Savings and Literacy Led Alternative to Financial Institution Building.” Brandeis University; 
Freedom from Hunger, Waltham, MA.

Ashforth, Adam. 2009. “Ethnic Violence and the Prospects for Democracy in the Aftermath of the 2007 

Kenyan Elections.” Public Culture 21 (1): 9–19.

Asian Development Bank. 2006. “Central Asia: Increasing Gains from Trade through Regional Coopera-
tion in Trade Policy, Transport, and Customs Transit.” Asian Development Bank, Mandaluyong City, 
Philippines.

Aspinall, Edward. 2005. The Helsinki Agreement: A More Promising Basis for Peace in Aceh? Washington, 

DC: East-West Center.

Atkinson, Philippa. 2008. “Liberal Interventionism in Liberia: Towards a Tentatively Just Approach?” 

Conﬂ ict, Security and Development 8 (1): 15–45.

Atos Consulting. 2009. “Evaluation of the Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan (LOTFA) Phase 

IV: Report.” Atos Consulting, Paris.

Atran, Scott. 2003. “Genesis of Suicide Terrorism.” Science 299 (5612): 1534–39.
AusAID. 2009. “Australian Aid to Water Supply and Sanitation Service Delivery in East Timor and Indo-

nesia: Evaluation Report.” AusAID, Canberra.

Australian Crime Commission. 2010. “Australian Crime Commission: Unite the Fight Against Nation-

ally Signiﬁ cant Crime.” Australian Crime Commission, Sydney.

Austrian Federal Ministry for European and International Affairs. 2006. “Three Year Programme on 
Austrian Development Policy 2006–2008.” Austrian Federal Ministry for European and International 
Affairs, Vienna.

Axelrod, Robert. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Azam, Jean-Paul, Shantayanan Devarajan, and Stephen A. O’Connell. 2002. “Equilibrium Aid Depen-

dence.” University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France. Processed.

Azam, Jean-Paul, and Alice Mesnard. 2003. “Civil War and the Social Contract.” Public Choice 115 (3–4): 

455–75.

Bagwitz, Daniel, Reinhold Elges, Helmut Grossmann, and Gabriele Kruk. 2008. “Private Sector Develop-
ment in (Post-) Conﬂ ict Situations: Guidebook.” Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusamme-
narbeit, Eschborn, Germany.

Baily, Virginia,  and Veronica  Hoskins.  2007. “Liberia:  Peacebuilding  Fund.”  Africa  Research  Bulletin: 

 Economic, Financial and Technical Series 44 (9): 17550B.

Baird, Mark. 2010. “Service Delivery in Fragile and Conﬂ ict-Affected States.” Background paper for the 

WDR 2011.

Baker, Paul, Friedrich von Kirchbach, Mondher Mimouni, and Jean-Michel Pasteels. 2002. “Analytical 
Tools for Enhancing the Participation of Developing Countries in the Multilateral Trading System in 
the Context of the Doha Development Agenda.” Aussenwirtschaft 57 (3): 343–69.

Baker, Raymond W. 2005. Capitalism’s Achilles Heel: Dirty Money and How to Renew the Free-Market 

System. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

Ball,  Nicole,  and  Malcolm  Holmes.  2002. “Integrating  Defense  into  Public  Expenditure Work.”  U.K. 

Department for International Development, London.

Ballentine, Karen, and Heiko Nitzschke. 2006. “Beyond Greed and Grievance: Policy Lessons from Stud-
ies in the Political Economy of Armed Conﬂ ict.” In Security and Development: Investing in Peace and 
Prosperity, ed. Robert Picciotto and Rachel Weaving. Oxfordshire, U.K.: Routledge.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duﬂ o. 2009. “The Experimental Approach to Development Economics.” 

Annual Review of Economics 1: 151–78.

Bannon, Ian, and Paul Collier. 2003. Natural Resources and Violent Conﬂ ict: Options and Actions. Wash-

ington, DC: World Bank.

Barakat, Sultan. 2006. “Mid-term Evaluation Report of the National Solidarity Programme.” Post-war 
Reconstruction and Development Unit, University of York, York, U.K.; Ministry of Rural Rehabilita-
tion and Development, Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Kabul.

Barron, Patrick. 2010. “Community-Driven Development in Post-conﬂ ict and Conﬂ ict-Affected Areas.” 

Background paper for the WDR 2011.

300 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Barron, Patrick, Paul Arthur, Peter Bartu, and Teresa Whitﬁ eld. 2010. “Sub-national Violence in Middle- 

and Higher-Income Countries.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Barron, Patrick, and Adam Burke. 2008. “Supporting Peace in Aceh: Development Agencies and Interna-

tional Involvement.” Policy Studies 47, East-West Center, Washington, DC.

Barron, Patrick, Macartan Humphreys, Laura Paler, and Jeremy Weinstein. 2009. “Community-Based 
Reintegration in Aceh: Assessing the Impacts of BRA-KDP.” Indonesian Social Development Paper 
12, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Bartoli, Andrea. 2005. “Learning from the Mozambique Peace Process: The Role of the Community of 
Sant’Egidio.” In Analyzing Successful Transfer Effects in Interactive Conﬂ ict Resolution, ed. Ron Fisher. 
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.

Bastick, Megan, Karin Grimm, and Rahel Kunz. 2007. Sexual Violence in Armed Conﬂ ict: Global Overview 
and Implications for the Security Sector. Geneva: Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed 
Forces.

Batchelor, Peter, and Paul Dunne. 1998. “The Restructuring of South Africa’s Defence Industry.” Africa 

Security Review 7 (6): 27–43.

Bateson,  Regina.  2010. “Summary  of  Recent  Research:  Public  Security  in  Post War  Guatemala.”  PhD 

thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT.

Battle, Clare. 2008. “‘Fighting Talk’: The DCED Expert Meeting on Private Sector Development in Post-

conﬂ ict Situations.” The Donor Committee for Enterprise Development, Cambridge, U.K.

Bayer, Resat, and Matthew C. Rupert. 2004. “Effects of Civil Wars on International Trade, 1950–92.” Jour-

nal of Peace Research 41 (6): 699–713.

BBC News. 2002. “What is Loya Jirga?” BBC News, July 1.
———. 2010. “The Salang Tunnel: Afghanistan’s Lifeline.” BBC News, February 10.
BBC World Service Trust. 2010. “Afghan Education Projects.” BBC World Service Trust, London. http://

www.bbc.co.uk.

Beasley, Kenneth W. 2006. “Job Creation in Postconﬂ ict Societies.” Issue Paper 9, Center for Development 

Information and Evaluation, U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, DC.

Beath, Andrew, Christia Fotini, Ruben Enikolopov, and Shahim Ahmad Kabuli. 2010. “Randomized Im-
pact Evaluation of Phase-II of Afghanistan’s National Solidarity Program: Estimates of Interim Pro-
gram Impact from First Follow-up Survey.” World Bank, Washington, DC. http://www.nsp-ie.org/
reportsimpacts.html. 

Beato, Claudio C. 2005. “Case Study ‘Fico Vivo’ Homicide Control Project in Belo Horizonte.” World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 76 

(2): 169–217.

Bedeski, Robert. 1994. The Transformation of South Korea: Reform and Reconstitution in the Sixth Republic 

Under Roh Tae Woo, 1987–1992. London: Routledge.

Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. 1995. “Chapter IV. E. Women and Armed Conﬂ ict.” Fourth 

World Conference on Women, United Nations, Beijing.

Belgium  Development  Agency.  2006.  “Indicative  Cooperation  Programme  (2007–2009).”  Belgium 

 Development Agency, Brussels.

———. 2009. “Indicative Cooperation Programme (2010–2013).” Belgium Development Agency, Brussels.
Bellina, Séverine, Dominique Darbon, Stein S. Eriksen, and Ole J. Sending. 2009. “The Legitimacy of the 
State in Fragile Situations.” Report 20/2009 Discussion, Norwegian Agency for Development Coop-
eration, Oslo; The French Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, Paris.

Ben-Ari, Benyamin. 2010. “An International Band-Aid: UNIFIL II and the Endeavor into Southern Leba-

non.” Publications in Contemporary Affairs, Provo, UT.

Berger, Rachel. 2003. “Conﬂ ict over Natural Resources Among Pastoralists in Northern Kenya: A Look at 

Recent Initiatives in Conﬂ ict Resolution.” Journal of International Development 15 (2): 245–57.

Berman,  Eli.  2009.  Radical,  Religious  and  Violent:  The  New  Economics  of  Terrorism.  Cambridge,  MA: 

 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Berman, Eli, Joseph Felter, Jacob N. Shapiro, and Michael Callen. 2009. “Do Working Men Rebel? Insur-
gency and Unemployment in Iraq and the Philippines.” Working Paper 15547, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Berman,  Eli,  and  Laurence  R.  Iannaccone.  2006. “Religious  Extremism:  The  Good,  the  Bad,  and  the 

Deadly.” Public Choice 128 (1): 109–29.

 

References 

301

Berrebi, Claude. 2007. “Evidence About the Link Between Education, Poverty, and Terrorism among 

Palestinians.” Peace Economics, Peace Science, and Public Policy 13 (1): 1–38.

Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2009. “Repression or Civil War?” American Economic Review 99 

(2): 292–97.

———. 2010. “State Capacity, Conﬂ ict and Development.” Econometrica 78 (1): 1–34.
Bessler, Manuel, Richard Garﬁ eld, and Gerard Mc Hugh. 2004. “Sanctions Assessment Handbook: 
 Assessing  the  Humanitarian  Implications  of  Sanctions.”  UN  Ofﬁ ce  for  the  Coordination  of 
 Humanitarian Affairs; Inter-Agency Standing Committee, New York.

Betancourt,  Theresa  S.,  and  Timothy Williams.  2008. “Building  an  Evidence  Base  on  Mental  Health 

Interventions for Children Affected by Armed Conﬂ ict.” Intervention 6 (1): 39–56.

Bhavnani, Ravi, and Dan Miodownik. 2009. “Ethnic Polarization, Ethnic Salience, and Civil War.” Jour-

nal of Conﬂ ict Resolution 53 (1): 30–49.

Bijleveld, Catrien, Aafke Morssinkhof, and Alette Smeulers. 2009. “Counting the Countless: Rape Vic-

timization during the Rwandan Genocide.” International Criminal Justice Review 19 (2): 208–24.

Bilcik, Vladimir, Alexander  Duleba,  Michal  Klyap,  and  Svitlana  Mitryayeva.  2000. “Role  of  the  Car-
pathian Euroregion in Strengthening Security and Stability in Central and Eastern Europe.” Paper 
presented at the Carpathain Euroregion: Prospects and Challenges workshop, Truskavets, Ukraine, 
November 23–25.

Birdsall, Nancy, Homi Kharas, Ayah Mahgoub, and Rita Perakis. 2010. “Quality of Ofﬁ cial Develop-
ment Assistance Assessment.”  Brookings  Institution;  The  Center  for  Global  Development, Wash-
ington, DC.

BizCLIR (Business Climate Legal and Institutional Reform). 2007. “Overhauling Contract Enforcement: 
Lessons from Rwanda.” BizCLIR Issues Paper 17, U.S. Agency for International Development, Wash-
ington, DC.

Blattman,  Christopher.  Forthcoming. “Post-conﬂ ict  Recovery  in Africa:  The  Micro  Level.”  In  Oxford 
Companion to the Economics of Africa, ed. Shantayanan Devarajan, Ernest Aryeetey, Ravi Kanbur, and 
Louis Kasekende. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel. 2010. “Civil War.” Journal of Economic Literature 48 (1): 

3–57.

Blum, Rachel, and Jerome LeBleu. 2010. “Employment Generation in Post-conﬂ ict Environments: Link-
ing Short- and Long-Term Initiatives.” In Civil Power in Irregular Conﬂ icts, ed. Franklin D. Kramer, 
Thomas Dempsey, Joseph Gregoire, and Susan Merrill. Alexandria, VA: CNA Analysis & Solutions; 
Carlisle, PA: U.S. Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute; Arlington, VA: Association 
of the U.S. Army.

Blundell, Arthur G. 2010. “Forests and Conﬂ ict: The Financial Flows That Fuel War.” Background paper 

for the WDR 2011.

Bøås, Morten. 2009. “Making Plans for Liberia: A Trusteeship Approach to Good Governance.” Third 

World Quarterly 30 (7): 1329–41.

Bøås, Morten, Åage Tiltnes, and Hedda Flatø. 2010. “Comparing the Cases.” Background paper for the 

WDR 2011.

Boko, Sylvain H. 2008. “Social Accountability in Post-conﬂ ict and Fragile States.” Paper presented at the 
Afﬁ liated Network for Social Accountability: Africa Annual Stakeholder Conference, Addis Ababa, 
May 19–20.

Bora, Saswati, Robert Townsend, Iride Ceccacci, and Christopher Delgado. 2010. “Food Security and 

Conﬂ ict.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Bott, Sarah, Andrew Morrison, and Mary Ellsberg. 2005. “Preventing and Responding to Gender-Based 
Violence in Middle- and Low-Income Countries: A Global Review and Analysis.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 3618, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Boudreaux,  Karol  C.  2010. “A  Better  Brew  for  Success:  Economic  Liberalization  in  Rwanda’s  Coffee 

 Sector.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Boudreaux, Karol C., and Jutta Tobias. 2009. “The Role of Entrepreneurship in Conﬂ ict Reduction in the 
Post-genocide Rwandan Coffee Industry: Quantitative Evidence from a Field Study.” Working Paper 
09-24, Mercatus Center, George Mason University, Arlington, VA.

Bourne, Mike. 2007. Arming Conﬂ ict: The Proliferation of Small Arms. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bowden, Anna. 2010. “The Economic Cost of Maritime Piracy.” One Earth Future Foundation, Louis-

ville, CO.

302 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Bowman, Brett, Richard Matzopoulos, Alexander Butchart, and James A. Mercy. 2008. “The Impact of 
Violence on Development in Low- to Middle-Income Countries.” International Journal of Injury Con-
trol and Safety Promotion 15 (4): 209–19.

Boyce, James, and Shepard Forman. 2010. “Financing Peace: International and National Resources for 

Post-conﬂ ict Countries and Fragile States.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Bradbury, Mark. 2008. Becoming Somaliland. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Braithwaite, Valerie, and Margaret Levi, eds. 1998. Trust and Governance. New York: Russell Sage 

 Foundation. 

Brancati, Dawn. 2006. “Decentralization: Fueling the Fire or Dampening the Flames of Ethnic Conﬂ ict 

and Secessionism?” International Organization 60 (3): 651–85.

Brands,  Hal.  2009. “Los  Zetas  and  Mexico’s  Transnational  Drug  War.”  World  Politics  Review  (Online 

 Edition).

Braud,  Pierre-Antoine,  and  Giovanni  Grevi.  2005. “The  EU  Mission  in  Aceh:  Implementing  Peace.” 

 Occasional Paper 61, European Union Institute for Security Studies, Paris.

Bräutigam,  Deborah.  2000.  Aid  Dependence  and  Governance.  Stockholm:  Almqvist  &  Wiksell 

 International.

Briceño-Garmendia, Cecilia, and Vivien Foster, eds. 2010. Africa’s Infrastructure: A Time for Transforma-

tion. Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Brick, Jennifer. 2008. “The Political Economy of Customary Village Organizations in Rural Afghanistan.” 
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Central Eurasian Studies Society, Washington, DC, 
September 18–21.

Brinkman, Henk-Jan, and Cullen S. Hendrix. 2010. “Food Insecurity and Conﬂ ict: Applying the WDR 

Framework.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Bronstein, Hugh. 2007. “Outraged Colombians March Against Rebel Kidnappers.” Reuters, July 5.
Brown,  Michael  E.  1996.  “Introduction.”  In  The  International  Dimensions  of  Internal  Conﬂ ict,  ed.  
Michael E. Brown. Cambridge, MA: Center for Science and International Affairs, John F. Kennedy 
School of Government, Harvard University.

Brück, Tilman, Valpy Fitzgerald, and Arturo Grigsby. 2000. “Enhancing the Private Sector Contribution 
to Post-War Recovery in Poor Countries.” Queen Elizabeth House Working Paper 45, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, U.K.

Brück, Tilman, and Kati Schindler. 2008. “The Impact of Conﬂ ict and Fragility on Households: A Con-
ceptual Framework with Reference to Widows.” Research Paper 2008/83, United Nations University–
World Institute for Development Economic Research Paper, Helsinki.

Brückner, Markus, and Antonio Ciccone. 2010. “International Commodity Prices, Growth and the Out-

break of Civil War in Sub-Saharan Africa.” The Economic Journal 120 (544): 519–34.

Buhaug, Halvard, and Kristian S. Gleditsch. 2008. “Contagion or Confusion? Why Conﬂ icts Cluster in 

Space.” International Studies Quarterly 52 (2): 215–33.

Buhaug, Halvard, and Henrik Urdal. 2010. “An Urbanization Bomb? Population Growth and Social Dis-
order in Cities.” Paper presented at the Urban Affairs Association Annual Conference, Honolulu, HI, 
March 10.

Butchart, Alexander, David Brown, Alexis Khanh-Huynh, Phaedra Corso, Nicolas Florquin, and Robert 
Muggah. 2008. “Manual for Estimating the Economic Costs of Injuries Due to Interpersonal and Self-
Directed Violence.” World Health Organization, Geneva; Department of Health and Human Services, 
Washington, DC; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA.

Butty, James. 2010. “A New Study Finds Death Toll in Congo War Too High.” Voice of America, January 21.
Byron, Dennis, and Maria Dakolias. 2008. “The Regional Court Systems in the Organization of Eastern 
Caribbean States and the Caribbean.” In Small States, Smart Solutions: Improving Connectivity and 
Increasing the Effectiveness of Public Services, ed. Edgardo Favaro. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Cadeado, Calton, and Hipolito Hamela. 2009. “A Suis Generis Case of Power-Sharing in Mozambique.” 

Peace and Development Research, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Campbell, Susanna P., Anja T. Kaspersen, and Erin Weir. 2007. “Integrated Mission Revisited: Synthesis of 

Findings.” Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Oslo.

Carl, Andy, and Lorraine Garasu. 2002. “Weaving Consensus: The Papua New Guinea–Bougainville Peace 

Process.” Conciliation Resources, London.

Carpenter, R. Charli. 2006. “Recognizing Gender-Based Violence against Civilian Men and Boys in Con-

ﬂ ict Situations.” Security Dialogue 37 (1): 83–103.

 

References 

303

Carter,  Stephen,  and  Kate  Clark.  2010. “No  Shortcut  to  Stability:  Justice,  Politics  and  Insurgency  in 

 Afghanistan.” Chatham House, London.

Cederman, Lars-Erik, Andreas Wimmer, and Brian Min. 2010. “Why Do Ethnic Groups Rebel?: New 

Data and Analysis.” World Politics 62 (1): 87–119.

Central American Integration System. 2009. “Central American Integration System.” General Secretariat 

of Central American Integration System, Antiguo Cuscatlán, El Salvador. http://www.sica.int.

Centre for Good Governance. 2009. “Social Audit of NREGS (AP) in Andhra Pradesh.” Centre for Good 

Governance, Hyderabad, India.

Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral. 2010. “Reporte Ejecutivo Plan Nacional de Consolidación.” 

Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral, Bogotá.

Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta C. Saxena. 2008. “Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery.” Ameri-

can Economic Review 98 (1): 439–57.

Chalk, Peter. 2008. “The Maritime Dimensions of International Security: Terrorism, Piracy and Chal-

lenges for the United States.” RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.

Chalmers, Malcolm. 2007. “Spending to Save? An Analysis of the Cost Effectiveness of Conﬂ ict Preven-

tion.” Defense and Peace Economics 18 (1): 1–23.

Chamarbagwala, Rubiana, and Hilcías E. Morán. 2011. “The Human Capital Consequences of Civil War: 

Evidence from Guatemala.” Journal of Development Economics 94 (1): 41–61.

Chandran,  Rahul,  Jake  Sherman,  Bruce  Jones,  Shepard  Forman,  Anne  le  More,  Andrew  Hart,  and 
Yochino  Funaki.  2009. “Rapid  Deployment  of  Civilians  for  Peace  Operations:  Status,  Gaps  and 
 Options.” Center on International Cooperation, New York University, New York.

Chandran, Rahul, Jenna Slotin, and Gigja Sorensen. 2010. “Strategic Planning, Peacebuilding and State-
building: Background Paper for the International Dialogue.” Center on International Cooperation, 
New York University, New York.

Chang, Yun-Shik,  and  Steven  H.  Lee.  2006.  Transformations  in  Twentieth  Century  Korea.  New York: 

Routledge.

Chauveau, Jean-Pierre, and Paul Richards. 2008. “West African Insurgencies in Agrarian Perspective: 

Côte d’Ivoire and Sierra Leone Compared.” Journal of Agrarian Change 8 (4): 515–52.

Cheeseman, Nic, and Blessing-Miles Tendi. 2010. “Power-Sharing in Comparative Perspective: The Dy-
namics of ‘Unity Government’ in Kenya and Zimbabwe.” Journal of Modern African Studies 48 (2): 
203–29.

Chen,  Shaohua,  Martin  Ravallion,  and  Prem  Sangraula.  2008. “Dollar  a  Day  Revisited.”  World  Bank 

Economic Review 23 (2): 163–84.

Chesterman, Simon. 2004. You, the People: The United Nations, Transitional Administration, and State-

Building. New York: Oxford University Press.

Christensen, Clayton M. 2003.The Innovator’s Dilemma: The Revolutionary Book that Will Change the 

Way You Do Business. New York: HarperCollins.

Chuhan-Pole, Punam. 2010. “Yes Africa Can: Success Stories from a Dynamic Continent.” Ofﬁ ce of the 

Chief Economist, Africa Region, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chun, Suk, and Inger Skjelsbæk. 2010. “Sexual Violence in Armed Conﬂ icts.” Policy Brief I/2010, Inter-

national Peace Research Institute of Oslo, Oslo.

CICIG  (Comisión  Internacional  Contra  la  Impunidad  en  Guatemala).  2009.  “Two  Years  of  Work: 

A Commitment to Justice.” CICIG, Guatemala City.

———. 2010. “Mensaje a los Jóvenes de Guatemala Acerca de la Elección de Fiscal General de la Nación.” 

CICIG, Guatemala City.

Cincotta, Richard, Robert Engelman, and Daniele Anastasion. 2003. “The Security Demographic: Popu-

lation and Civil Conﬂ ict after the Cold War.” Population Action International, Washington, DC.

Cingranelli,  David  L.,  and  David  L.  Richards.  1999. “Measuring  the  Level,  Pattern,  and  Sequence  of 

 Government Respect for Physical Integrity Rights.” International Studies Quarterly 43 (2): 407–17.

———. 2010. “CIRI Human Rights Data Project.” Cingranelli-Richards (CIRI) Human Rights Data 

Project, Binghamton, NY. http://ciri.binghamton.edu/.

Clark, John F. 1994. “The National Conference as an Instrument of Democratization in Francophone 

Africa.” Journal of Third World Studies 11 (1): 304–35.

Clark, Phil, and Zachary A. Kaufman. 2011. “Rwanda: Recent History.” In Africa South of the Sahara 

2012, ed. Iain Frame. London: Routledge. 

304 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Clements,  Kevin  P.  2010.  Traditional,  Charismatic  and  Grounded  Legitimacy.  Eschborn,  Germany: 

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit.

Cliffe, Sarah, Scott Guggenheim, and Markus Kostner. 2003. “Community-Driven Reconstruction as an 
Instrument  in War-to-Peace  Transitions.”  Conﬂ ict  Prevention  and  Reconstruction  Series Working 
Paper 7, Social Development Department, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Coalition for International Justice. 2005. “Following Taylor’s Money: A Path of War and Destruction.” 

Coalition for International Justice, Washington, DC.

CODEH (Comité de Defensa para los Derechos Humanos en Honduras). 2008. “Crimen, Delincuencia e 

Impunidad: Manifestaciones de Violencia y Conﬂ ictividad Social.” CODEH, Tegucigalpa.

Coldham,  Simon.  1984. “The  Settlement  of  Land  Disputes  in  Kenya: An  Historical  Perspective.”  The 

Journal of Modern African Studies 22 (1): 59–71.

Colletta, Nat J., and Michelle L. Cullen. 2000. Violent Conﬂ ict and the Transformation of Social Capital: 

Lessons from Cambodia, Rwanda, Guatemala, and Somalia. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Colletta, Nat J., Markus Kostner, and Ingo Wiederhofer. 1996. “Case Studies in War-to-Peace Transition: 
The Demobilization and Reintegration of Ex-combatants in Ethiopia, Namibia and Uganda.” Discus-
sion Paper 331, Africa Technical Department Series, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Colletta, Nat J., and Gebreselassie Tesfamichael. 2003. “Bank Engagement after Conﬂ ict: A Client Per-

spective.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Collier, Paul. 2007. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Failing and What Can Be Done 

about It. New York: Oxford University Press.

Collier, Paul, Lisa Chauvet, and Håvard Hegre. 2007. “The Security Challenge in Conﬂ ict-prone Coun-

tries.” Challenge Paper, Copenhagen Consensus 2008, Copenhagen.

Collier, Paul, Lani Elliott, Håvard Hegre, Anke Hoefﬂ er, Marta Reynal-Querol, and Nicholas Sambanis. 

2003. Breaking the Conﬂ ict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoefﬂ er. 1998. “On Economic Causes of Civil War.” Oxford Economic Papers 50 

(4): 563–73.

———. 2002. “On the Incidence of Civil War in Africa.” Journal of Conﬂ ict Resolution 46 (1): 13–28.
———. 2004. “Greed and Grievance in Civil War.” Oxford Economic Papers 56 (4): 563–95.
Collier, Paul, Anke Hoefﬂ er, and Mans Söderbom. 2008. “Post Conﬂ ict Risks.” Journal of Peace Research 

45 (4): 461–78.

Collier, Paul, and Nicholas Sambanis, eds. 2005. Understanding Civil War: Evidence and Analysis. Wash-

ington, DC: World Bank. 

Commission on Growth and Development. 2008. “The Growth Commission Report: Strategies for 
Sustained Growth and Inclusive Development.” Commission on Growth and Development, Wash-
ington, DC.

Commission on Human Security. 2003. “Human Security Now: Protecting and Empowering People.” 

Commission on Human Security, New York.

Commonwealth Secretariat. 2006. “Guyana General and Regional Elections: Report of the Common-

wealth Observer Group.” Commonwealth Secretariat, London.

Comunità di Sant’Egidio. 2010. “The BRAVO! (Birth Registration for All Versus Oblivion) Programme.” 

Comunità di Sant’Egidio, Rome.

Cooke, Julian, and Mervyn Brown. 2011. “Recent History: Madagascar.” Europa World Online, London. 

http://www.europaworld.com.

Correia, Maria C. 2010. “MDRP and Regionality.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
Cortright, David, George Lopez, and Linda Gerber. 2002. “Sanctions Sans Commitment: An Assessment 
of UN Arms Embargoes.” In Sanctions and the Search for Security Challenges to UN Action, ed. David 
Cortright, George Lopez, and Linda Gerber. Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner.

Council for the Development of Cambodia. 2010. “The Cambodia ODA Database.” Cambodian Reha-

bilitation and Development Board, Government of Cambodia, Phnom Penh. http://cdc.khmer.biz.

Council of Europe. 1995. “Examples of Good Practice of Transfrontier Co-operation Concerning Mem-
bers of Ethnic Groups Residing on the Territory of Several States.” Council of Europe, Strasbourg, 
France.

Council  of  Europe  and  Institute  of  International  Sociology  of  Gorizia.  2003.  “Cross-Border  Co-
operation in the Balkan/Danube Area: An Analysis of Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and 

 

References 

305

Threats.” Council of Europe, Strasbourg, France; Institute of International Sociology of Gorizia, 
Gorizia, Italy.

Cousens, Elizabeth, and David Harland. 2006. “Post-Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina.” In Twenty-First 

Century Peace Operations, ed. William J. Durch. Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.

Cox, Marcus, and Nigel Thornton. 2010. “Applied Knowledge: Managing Results in Conﬂ ict-Affected 
and Fragile States: A Stock-Take of Lessons, Experience, and Practice.” U.K. Department for Interna-
tional Development, London.

Cramer, Christopher. 2002. “Homo Economicus Goes to War: Methodological Individualism, Rational 

Choice and the Political Economy of War.” World Development 30 (11): 1845–64.

———. 2006. Violence in Developing Countries: War, Memory, Progress. Bloomington, IN: Indiana Uni-

versity Press.

———. 2010. “Unemployment and Participation in Violence.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Crawford, Adam. 1999. The Local Governance of Crime: Appeals to Community and Partnerships. New 

York: Oxford University Press.

Crisis Management Initiative. 2011. “Aceh.” Crisis Management Initiative, Helsinki. http://www.cmi.ﬁ /.
Crook, Richard C., and James Manor. 1998. Democracy and Decentralisation in South Asia and West Af-

rica: Participation, Accountability and Performance. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Cross, Tim. 2010. “Youth Violence Prevention around the World: The Youth Build Case Study.” In Be-
yond  Suppression:  Global  Perspectives  on Youth Violence,  ed.  Robert  Cohen,  Joan  S.  Hoffman,  and 
Lyndee Knox. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.

Crown Agents. 2007. “Customs Reform Programme 1997–2006: The Modernisation of Alfândegas de 

Moçambique.” Crown Agents, Sutton, U.K.

Cukier, Wendy. 2002. “Small Arms and Light Weapons: A Public Health Approach.” Brown Journal of 

World Affairs 9 (1): 261–80.

Cumings, Bruce. 2005. “State Building in Korea: Continuity and Crisis.” In States and Development: His-
torical Antecedents of Stagnation and Advance, ed. Matthew Lange and Dietrich Rueschemeyer. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Cunningham,  Wendy,  Lorena  M.  Cohen,  Sophie  Naudeau,  and  Linda  McGinnis.  2008. “Supporting 

Youth at Risk: A Policy Toolkit for Middle-Income Countries.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Curtis, Glenn. E., and Tara Karacan. 2002. “The Nexus among Terrorists, Narcotics Trafﬁ ckers, Weap-
ons Proliferators, and Organized Crime Networks in Western Europe.” Federal Research Division, 
Library of Congress, Washington, DC.

D’Anieri, Paul. 2006. “Explaining the Success and Failure of Post Communist Revolutions.” Communist 

and Post-Communist Studies 39 (3): 331–50.

Dahlberg, Linda L. 1998. “Youth Violence in the United States: Major Trends, Risk Factors, and Preven-

tion Approaches.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 14 (4): 259–72.

Dahlberg, Linda L., and Etienne G. Krug. 2002. “Violence: A Global Public Health Problem.” In World 
Report on Violence and Health, Etienne G. Krug, Linda L. Dahlberg, James A. Mercy, Anthony B. Zwi, 
and Rafael Lozano. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Dale, Pamela. 2009. “Delivering Justice to Sierra Leone’s Poor: An Analysis of the Work of Timap for 

Justice.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Davies, Martyn, Hannah Edinger, Nastasya Tay, and Sanusha Naidu. 2008. “How China Delivers De-
velopment Assistance to Africa.” Centre for Chinese Studies, University of Stellenbosch, Matieland, 
South Africa.

Davies, Stephen, Dimieari von Kemedi, and Mark Drennan. 2005. “Illegal Oil Bunkering in the Niger 

Delta.” Niger Delta Peace and Security Strategy Working Group, Port Harcourt, Nigeria.

de Figueiredo, Rui J. P. Jr., and Barry R. Weingast. 1999. “The Rationality of Fear: Political Opportun-
ism and Ethnic Conﬂ ict.” In Civil Wars, Insecurity and Interventions, ed. Jack Snyder and Barbara F. 
Walter. New York: Columbia University Press.

de Greiff, Pablo. 2006. The Handbook of Reparations. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2010. “Transitional Justice, Security, and Development.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
De Groot, Olaf J. 2010. “The Spillover Effects of Conﬂ ict on Economic Growth in Neighbouring Coun-

tries in Africa.” Defence and Peace Economics 21 (2): 149–64.

De Silva, K. M. 2005.A History of Sri Lanka. New York: Penguin Books.
de Soto, Alvaro, and Graciana del Castillo. 1994. “Obstacles to Peacebuilding.” Foreign Policy 94: 69–83.

306 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

de Soysa, Indra. 2002. “Paradise Is a Bazaar? Greed, Creed, and Governance in Civil War, 1989–99.” Jour-

nal of Peace Research 39 (4): 395–416.

De Stefano, Lucia, James Duncan, Shlomi Dinar, Kerstin Stahl, Kenneth Strzepek, and Aaron T. Wolf. 
2010. “Mapping  the  Resilience  of  International  River  Basins  to  Future  Climate  Change:  Induced 
 Water Variability.” Water Sector Board Discussion Paper 15, World Bank, Washington, DC.

de Waal, Alex, and Julie Flint. 2008. Darfur: A New History of a Long War. London: Zed Books; London: 

International African Institute.

De Wulf, Luc, and José B. Sokol, eds. 2004. Customs Modernization Initiatives: Case Studies. Washington, 

DC: World Bank. 

de Zwart, Frank. 2000. “The Logic of Afﬁ rmative Action: Caste, Class and Quotas in India.” Acta Socio-

logica 43 (3): 235–49.

del Ninno, Carlo, Kalanidhi Subbarao, and Annamaria Milazzo. 2009. “How to Make Public Works Work: 

A Review of Experiences.” Social Protection Discussion Paper 905, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Demirgüc-Kunt, Asli, Leora F. Klapper, and Georgios A. Panos. 2011. “Entrepreneurship in Post-conﬂ ict 

Transition: The Role of Informality and Access to Finance.” Economics of Transition 19 (1): 27–78.

Demombynes, Gabriel. 2010. “Drug Trafﬁ cking and Violence in Central America and Beyond.” Back-

ground paper for the WDR 2011.

Demombynes, Gabriel, and Michael Clemens. 2010. “When Does Rigorous Impact Evaluation Make a 
Difference? The Case of the Millennium Villages.” Working Paper 225, Center for Global Develop-
ment, Washington, DC.

Development Alternatives Incorporated. 2010. “Facility for New Market Development (FNMD).” Devel-

opment Alternatives Incorporated, Bethesda, MD.

DFID  (U.K.  Department  for  International  Development).  2002.  “Conducting  Conﬂ ict  Assessments: 

Guidance Notes.” DFID, Center for Conﬂ ict Analysis and Prevention, London.

———. 2009. “Building the State and Securing the Peace.” DFID, London.
———. 2010. “Working Effectively in Conﬂ ict-Affected and Fragile Situations.” DFID, London.
Di John, Jonathon, and James Putzel. 2009. “Political Settlements.” Governance and Social Develop-
ment Resource Centre, International Development Department, University of Birmingham, Bir-
mingham, U.K.

Dinnen, Sinclair, Douglas Porter, and Caroline Sage. 2010. “Conﬂ ict in Melanesia: Common Themes, 

Different Lessons.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Dixit, Avinash. 1980. “The Role of Investment in Entry Deterrence.” Economic Journal 90 (357): 95–106.
Dobbins, James, Seth G. Jones, Keith Crane, and Beth C. DeGrasse. 2007. The Beginner’s Guide to Nation-

Building. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Dobbins, James, Seth G. Jones, Keith Crane, Andrew Rathmell, Brett Steele, Richard Teltschik, and Anga 
Timilsina. 2005. The UN’s Role in Nation-Building: From the Congo to Iraq. Santa Monica, CA: RAND 
Corporation.

Donovan,  Megan  K.  2008. “The  International  Commission  against  Impunity  in  Guatemala: Will Ac-

countability Prevail?” Arizona Journal of International and Comparative Law 25 (3): 779–824.

Doyle, Michael W., and Nicholas Sambanis. 2006. Making War and Building Peace: United Nations Peace 

Operations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Duailibi, Sergio, William Ponicki, Joel Grube, Ilana Pinsky, Ronaldo Laranjeira, and Martin Raw. 2007. 
“The Effect of Restricting Opening Hours on Alcohol-Related Violence.” American Journal of Public 
Health 97 (12): 2276–80.

Dudley, Steven S. 2010. “Drug Trafﬁ cking Organizations in Central America: Transportistas, Mexican 
Cartels and Maras.” In Shared Responsibility: U.S.-Mexico Policy Options for Confronting Organized 
Crime, ed. Erik L. Olson, David A. Shirk, and Andrew Selee. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Inter-
national Center for Scholars; San Diego, CA: Trans-Border Institute, University of San Diego.

Dufﬁ eld, Mark. 2000. “Globalization, Transborder Trade, and War Economies.” In Greed and Grievance: 
Economic Agendas in Civil Wars, Mats R. Berdal and David M. Malone. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Dupuy, Kendra, and Helga M. Binningsbø. 2008. “Buying Peace with Diamonds? Power-sharing Agree-
ments in Sierra Leone.” CSCW Policy Brief 7, Center for the Study of Civil War, Peace Research Insti-
tute of Oslo, Oslo.

Dwan,  Renata,  and  Laura  Bailey.  2006. “Liberia’s  Governance  and  Economic  Management Assistance 
Program (GEMAP): A Joint Review by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations’ Peacekeeping 

 

References 

307

Best Practices Section and the World Bank’s Fragile States Group.” Fragile States Group, World Bank, 
Washington, DC; Best Practices Section, Department of Peacekeeping Operations, United Nations, 
New York.

Eades, Lindsay M. 1999.The End of Apartheid in South Africa. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Easterly, William, Jozef Ritzen, and Michael Woolcock. 2006. “Social Cohesion, Institutions, and Growth.” 

Economics and Politics 18 (2): 103–20.

Economic Times. 2008. “Australia Announces Paciﬁ c Guest Worker Scheme.” Economic Times, August 17.
Economist Intelligence Unit. 2008a. “Country Proﬁ le: Burundi.” Economist Intelligence Unit, London. 

http://www.eiu.com.

———. 2008b. “Country Proﬁ le: Guinea-Bissau.” Economic Intelligence Unit, London. http://www.eiu 

.com.

———. 2010. “Country Proﬁ les.” Economist Intelligence Unit, London. http://www.eiu.com.
Edis, Richard. 1995. “Mozambique’s Successful Peace Process: An Insider’s View.” Cambridge Review of 

International Affairs 9 (2): 5–21.

Eichengreen, Barry. 2010. “Lessons from the Marshall Plan.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Eide, Espen B., Anja T. Kaspersen, Randolph Kent, and Karen von Hippel. 2005. “Report on Integrated 
Missions: Practical Perspectives and Recommendations.” UN Executive Committee on Humanitar-
ian Affairs, New York.

EITI (Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative). 2009. “What is the EITI?” EITI, Oslo.
Ekeh, Peter. 2002. “A Review of HRW’s and CLEEN’s Report The Bakassi Boys: The Legitimization of 

Murder and Torture on State Sponsored Vigilante Groups in Nigeria.” Dawodu.com, May 27.

El Jack, Amani. 2003. “Gender and Armed Conﬂ ict Overview Report.” Institute of Development Studies, 

University of Sussex, Brighton, U.K.

Elbadawi, Ibrahim, Håvard Hegre, and Gary J. Milante. 2008. “The Aftermath of Civil War.” Journal of 

Peace Research 45 (4): 451–59.

Embassy of the United States in Mexico. 2010. “Borders and Law Enforcement. A Border Community 
United: The U.S.-Mexico Border.” U.S. Department of State, Mexico City. http://mexico.usembassy.
gov/.

Encyclopedia of the Nations. 2010. “Benin-History.” Encyclopedia of the Nations. http://www.nations 

encyclopedia.com/.

Epstein, David L., Robert H. Bates, Jack A. Goldstone, Ida Kristensen, and Sharyn O’Halloran. 2006. 

“Democratic Transitions.” American Journal of Political Science 50 (3): 551–69.

Esteban,  Joan,  and  Debraj  Ray.  2008. “Polarization,  Fractionalization  and  Conﬂ ict.”  Journal  of  Peace 

 Research 45 (2): 163–82.

Estrada, Daniela. 2010. “Unﬁ nished Business.” Inter Press Service News Agency July 30.
Etzioni, Amitai. 1999. The Limits of Privacy. New York: Basic Books.
Europa Publications. 2001. “Europa World Online.” Europa Publications. http://www.europaworld.com.
European Affairs. 2010. “Led by the EU and NATO, International Efforts to Stem Maritime Piracy Begin 

to Pay Off.” European Affairs, European Institute, Washington, DC.

European Commission and Republic of Burundi. 2007. “République du Burundi: Communauté Euro-
péenne: Document de Stratégie Pays et Programme Indicatif National 2008–2013.” European Com-
mission, Lisbon.

European Union. 1951. “Treaty Establishing the European Coal and Steel Community, ECSC Treaty.” 

European Union, Brussels. http://europa.eu.

Europol. 2007. “EU Terrorism Situation and Trend Report 2007.” Europol, The Hague, Netherlands.
Evans, Alex. 2010. “Resource Scarcity, Climate Change and the Risk of Violent Conﬂ ict.” Background 

paper for the WDR 2011.

Even-Zohar, Chaim. 2003. “Sierra Leone Diamond Sector Financial Policy Constraint.” Management 

Systems International, Washington, DC; Peace Diamond Alliance, Freetown, Sierra Leone.

Everett, Silas. 2009. “Law and Justice in East Timor: A Survey of Citizen Awareness and Attitudes regard-

ing Law and Justice.” The Asia Foundation, San Francisco, CA.

Fabio, Sanchez. 2007. Las Cuentas de la Violencia. Bogotá: Grupo Editorial Norma.
Falch, Åshild. 2010. “Women’s Political Participation and Inﬂ uence in Post-conﬂ ict Burundi and Nepal.” 

Peace Research Institute of Oslo, Oslo.

FAO  (Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations).  2010. “Global  Information  Early 

Warning System on Food and Agriculture.” FAO, Rome.

308 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), IFAD (International Fund for Agricul-
tural Development), UNCTAD (UN Conference on Trade and Development), and World Bank. 2010. 
“Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investment That Respects Rights, Livelihoods and Resources.” 
Discussion Note, FAO, Rome; IFAD, Rome; UNCTAD, Geneva; World Bank, Washington, DC.

Farrell, Graham, and Ken Clark. 2004. “What Does the World Spend on Criminal Justice?” HEUNI Paper 

20, European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control, Helsinki.

Favaro, Edgardo, ed. 2008. Small States, Smart Solutions: Improving Connectivity and Increasing the   Ef-

fectiveness of Public Services. Washington, DC: World Bank. 

———. 2010. “Using Regional Institutions to Improve the Quality of Public Services.” Background paper 

for the WDR 2011.

Faye, Michael L., John W. McArthur, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Thomas Snow. 2004. “The Challenges Facing 

Landlocked Developing Countries.” Journal of Human Development and Capabilities 5 (1): 31–68.
Fearon, James D. 1995. “Rationalist Explanations for War.” International Organization 49 (3): 379–414.
———. 2004. “Why Do Some Civil Wars Last So Much Longer than Others?” Journal of Peace Research 

41 (3): 275–301.

———. 2005. “Primary Commodity Exports and Civil War.” Journal of Conﬂ ict Resolution 49 (4): 

483–507.

———. 2006. “Ethnic Mobilization and Ethnic Violence.” In Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, ed. 

Barry R. Weingast and Donald A. Wittman. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2010a. “Governance and Civil War Onset.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
———. 2010b. “Homicide Data.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
Fearon, James D., and David D. Laitin. 1999. “Weak States, Rough Terrain, and Large-Scale Ethnic Vio-
lence Since 1945.” Paper presented at the 1999 Annual Meetings of the American Political Science 
Association, Atlanta, GA, September 2.

———. 2003. “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War.” American Political Science Review 97 (1): 75–90.
Fearon, James D., Macartan Humphreys, and Jeremy Weinstein. 2009. “Can Development Aid Contribute 
to Social Cohesion after Civil War? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Post-conﬂ ict Liberia.” Ameri-
can Economic Review 99 (2): 287–91.

Fenton, Wendy, and Melissa Phillips. 2009. “Funding Mechanisms in Southern Sudan: NGO Perspec-

tives.” Humanitarian Exchange Magazine 42: 25–7.

Férnandez, Carlos Castresana. 2010. “CICIG Review: A Report on CICIG’s Activities.” Paper presented at 
the Central American Regional Workshop on the World Development Report 2011: Conﬂ ict, Secu-
rity, and Development, Mexico City, June 21.

Filippini, Leonardo. 2009. “Criminal Prosecutions for Human Rights Violations in Argentina.” Interna-

tional Center for Transitional Justice, Buenos Aires.

Financial  Action  Task  Force.  2010. “20  Years  of  the  FATF  Recommendations:  1990–2010.”  Financial 

 Action Task Force, Paris; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.

Finegan, T. Aldrich, and Robert A. Margo. 1994. “Added and Discouraged Workers in the Late 1930s: 

A Re-examination.” Journal of Economic History 54: 64–84.

Formisano, Michel. 2002. “Econometría Espacial: Características de la Violencia Homicida en Bogotá.” 

El Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo Económico, Bogotá.

Fortna, Virginia P. 2008. Does Peacekeeping Work? Shaping Belligerents’ Choices after Civil War. Princeton, 

NJ: Princeton University Press.

Foxnews.com. 2001. “The Oklahoma City Bombing: Fast Facts.” FoxNews.com, September 5. http://www. 

foxnews.com/.

French  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs.  2006.  “Framework  Partnership  Document:  France;  Republic  of 

 Burundi (2006–2010).” French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Paris.

Friends Committee on National Legislation. 2009. “Kenya: Temporary Ceaseﬁ re or Lasting Peace?” Policy 

Brief, Friends Committee on National Legislation, Washington, DC.

Frühling, Hugo, Joseph S. Tulchin, and Heather A. Golding, eds. 2003. Crime and Violence in Latin Amer-
ica: Citizen Security, Democracy, and the State. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson International Cen-
ter for Scholars. 

Fukuyama, Francis. 2004. State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st Century. Ithaca, NY: 

Cornell University Press.

Gadir, Ali A., Ibrahim A. Elbadawi, and Atta El-Batahani. 2005. “Sudan’s Civil War: Why Has It Prevailed 
for So Long?” In Understanding Civil War: Evidence and Analysis, ed. Paul Collier and Nicholas Sam-
banis. Washington, DC: World Bank.

 

References 

309

Gaibulloev, Khusrav, and Todd Sandler. 2008. “Growth Consequences of Terrorism in Western Europe.” 

Kyklos 61 (3): 411–24.

Gambino, Anthony W. 2010. “Democratic Republic of Congo.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Gantz, David. 1998. “Globalizing Sanctions Against Foreign Bribery: The Emergence of a New Interna-

tional Legal Consensus.” Northwestern Journal of International Law and Business 18 (2): 457–97.

Garang, John. 1987. John Garang Speaks. London: Kegan Paul International.
Garrasi, Donata. 2010. “Funding Peacebuilding and Recovery: A Comparative Review of System-wide 
Multi-donor  Trust  Funds  and  Other  Funding  Instruments  for  Peacebuilding  and  Post-conﬂ ict 
 Recovery.” U.K. Department for International Development, London.

Garrett, Laurie. 2005. “HIV and National Security: Where Are the Links?” Council on Foreign Relations, 

Washington, DC.

Garzón, Juan C. 2008. “Maﬁ a and Co.: The Criminal Networks in Brazil, Mexico, and Colombia.” Wood-

row Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC.

Gates,  Scott,  Håvard  Hegre,  Håvard  M.  Nygård,  and  Håvard  Strand.  2010. “Human,  Economic,  and 

Social Consequences of Fragility and Conﬂ ict.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Gates,  Scott,  and  Kaare  Strøm.  2008.“Power  Sharing  and  Civil  Conﬂ ict.”  CSCW  Policy  Brief  I/2008, 

Center for the Study of Civil War, Peace Research Institute of Oslo, Oslo.

Gberie,  Lansana.  2003a. “L’Afrique  de  l’Ouest:  Entre  Pierres  et  Étincelles.  L’Économie  Politique  des 

Diamants et la Déstablisation Régionale.” Partenariat Afrique Canada, Ottawa.

———. 2003b. “ECOMOG: The Story of an Heroic Failure.” African Affairs 102 (406): 147–54.
Gelb, Alan.  2010. “How  Can  Donors  Create  Incentives  for  Results  and  Flexibility  for  Fragile  States? 

A Proposal for IDA.” Working Paper 227, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.

Gellner, Ernest. 1983. Nations and Nationalism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Geneva Conventions. 1949. “Geneva Conventions Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time 

of War.” Diplomatic Conference of Geneva of 1949, Geneva.

Geneva Declaration. 2008. “Global Burden of Armed Violence.” Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence 

and Development, Geneva.

———. 2010. “More Violence, Less Development: Examining the Relationship between Armed Vio-
lence and MDG Achievement.” Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and Development, Geneva.
Gerson, Allan, and Nat J. Colletta. 2002. Privatizing Peace: From Conﬂ ict to Security. Ardsley, NY: Trans-

national Publishers.

Gettleman, Jeffrey. 2009. “Radical Islamists Slip Easily Into Kenya.” New York Times, July 21.
GhanaWeb.  2006. “Workshop  on  Conﬂ ict  Resolution  Ends  at  Dodowa.”  GhanaWeb,  April  1.  http://

ghanaweb.net.

Ghani, Ashraf C., and Clare Lockhart. 2008. Fixing Failed States: A Framework for Rebuilding a Fractured 

World. New York: Oxford University Press.

Ghani, Ashraf C., Clare Lockhart, and Michael Carnahan. 2005. “Closing the Sovereignty Gap: An Ap-

proach to State-Building.” Working Paper 253, Overseas Development Institute, London.

Gilpin, Raymond. 2009. “Counting the Costs of Somali Piracy.” Center for Sustainable Economics Work-

ing Paper, United States Institute for Peace, Washington, DC.

Giovine, Luigi, Robert Krech, Kremena Ionkova, and Kathryn Bach. 2010. “Holding on to Monrovia: 
Protecting  a  Fragile  Peace  through  Economic  Governance  and  Short-Term  Employment.”  Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2011.

Gleditsch, Kristian S. 2007.“Transnational Dimensions of Civil War.” Journal of Peace Research 44 (3): 

293–309.

Gleditsch, Kristian S., and Michael D. Ward. 1999. “Interstate System Membership: A Revised List of the 

Independent States since 1816.” International Interactions 25 (4): 393–413.

———. 2000. “War and Peace in Space and Time: The Role of Democratization.” International Studies 

Quarterly 44 (1): 1–29.

Gleditsch, Nils P., Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg, and Håvard Strand. 2002. 

“Armed Conﬂ ict 1946–2001: A New Dataset.” Journal of Peace Research 39 (5): 615–37.

Glenny, Misha. 2008. McMaﬁ a: A Journey through the Global Criminal Underworld. New York: Alfred A. 

Knopf.

Glick,  Reuven,  and  Alan  M.  Taylor.  2005. “Collateral  Damage:  Trade  Disruption  and  the  Economic 
Impact of War.” NBER Working Paper 11565, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 
MA.

310 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Global Terrorism Database. 2010. “Global Terrorism Database.” National Consortium for the Study of 
Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, University of Maryland, College Park, MD. http://www.start.
umd.edu/gtd/.

Goldstein,  Joshua,  and  Juliana  Rotich.  2008. “Digitally  Networked  Technology  in  Kenya’s  2007–2008 
Post-Election Crisis.” Research Publication No. 2008–09, Berkman Center for Internet and Society, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Goldstone, Jack A. 2010. “Representational Models and Democratic Transitions in Fragile and Post-

 conﬂ ict States.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Goldstone, Jack A., Robert H. Bates, David L. Epstein, Ted R. Gurr, Michael B. Lustik, Monty G. Marshall, 
Jay Ulfelder, and Mark Woodward. 2010. “A Global Model for Forecasting Political Instability.” Ameri-
can Journal of Political Science 54 (1): 190–208.

Goldstone, Jack A., and Jay Ulfelder. 2004. “How to Construct Stable Democracies.” Washington Quar-

terly 28 (1): 9–20.

Gómez, Armando C. 2008. “Diagnóstico de la Seguridad Pública y Privada en Guatemala, Honduras y El 

Salvador.” Organization of American States, Washington, DC.

Gomez, Margarita P., and Asger Christensen. 2010. “The Impacts of Refugees on Neighboring Countries: 

A Development Challenge.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Gonçalve, Danyelle N. 2008. “Os Processos de Anistia Política No Brasil: Do Perdão à ‘Reparação.’” Revista 

Ciencia Sociais 39 (1): 38–48.

Goreaux, Louis. 2001. “Conﬂ ict Diamonds.” Africa Region Working Paper Series 13, World Bank, Wash-

ington, DC.

Government of Aceh, Syiah Kuala University, and World Bank. 2008. “Managing Resources for Better 
Outcomes in a Special Autonomy Region: Aceh Public Expenditure Analysis Update 2008.” Govern-
ment of Aceh; Syiah Kuala University; World Bank, Jakarta.

Government of Afghanistan and UNDP (UN Development Programme). 2010. “ARTF Administrator’s 

Report on Financial Status: As of December 21, 2010.” Government of Afghanistan; UNDP, Kabul.

Government of Australia. 2010. “Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre.” Government of 

Australia, West Chatswood, Australia.

Government of Burundi, and UN (United Nations). 2009. “Strategie Integree D’Appui des Nations Unies 
au Burundi 2010-2014: Consolidation de las Paix et Relévement Communautaire.” Government of 
Burundi; UN, Bujumbura.

Government of Nepal, UNDP (UN Development Programme), and UNDG (UN Development Group). 
2010. “Third Consolidated Annual Report on Activities Implemented Under the United Nations Peace 
Fund for Nepal: Report of the Administrative Agent of the United Nations Peace Fund for Nepal for 
the Period 1 January to 31 December 2009.” Government of Nepal; UNDP; UNDG, Kathmandu.

Government of the Republic of Indonesia and Free Aceh Movement. 2005. “Helsinki Memorandum of 

Understanding.” Government of Republic of Indoesia; Free Aceh Movement, Helsinki.

Government of the Republic of Liberia Executive Mansion. 2009. “Liberia Makes Progress on Corrup-
tion,  Transparency  International  Index  Shows.”  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Liberia  Executive 
Mansion, Monrovia. http://www.emansion.gov.lr.

Gowan, Richard. 2007. “EUFOR RD Congo, UNIFIL and Future European Support to the UN.” Paper 
presented at the Security and Defence Agenda: The EU’s Africa Strategy: What are the Lessons of the 
Congo Mission? Brussels, March 7.

Graydon, Carolyn. 2005. “Local Justice Systems in Timor-Leste: Washed Up, or Watch this Space?” Devel-

opment Bulletin 68: 66–70.

Greenberger,  Robert  S.  1995.“Foreigners  Use  Bribes  to  Beat  U.S.  Rivals  in  Many  Deals,  New  Report 

 Concludes.” Wall Street Journal, October 12.

Greene, Owen. 2001. “Enhancing Traceability of Small Arms and Light Weapons Flows: Developing an 
International  Marking  and  Tracing  Regime.”  Biting  the  Bullet  Brieﬁ ng  Paper  5,  British  American 
 Security Information Council; International Alert; Saferworld, London.

Greenfell, Laura. 2006. “Legal Pluralism and the Rule of Law in Timor Leste.” Leiden Journal of Interna-

tional Law 19: 305–37.

Greta, Maria, and Krzysztof Lewandowski. 2010. “Euroregion’s ‘Mission’ and the Success of the Lisbon 

Strategy.” Business and Economic Horizons 1 (1): 14–20.

 

References 

311

Grimm, Sonja. 2010. “Germany’s Post-1945 and Post-1989 Education Systems.” Background note for 

the WDR 2011.

Grindle, Merilee S. 2010.“Good Governance: The Inﬂ ation of an Idea.” Faculty Research Working Papers 

RWP10-023, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Grossman, Herschel I. 1991. “A General Equilibrium Model of Insurrections.” American Economic Re-

view 81 (4): 912–21.

Grygiel, Julie. 2007. “Kosovo Dairy Value Chain Case Study: Guided Case Studies in Value Chain Devel-
opment for Conﬂ ict-Affected Environments.” Micro Report 95, U.S. Agency for International Devel-
opment, Washington, DC.

Guehenno, Jean-Marie. 2010. “Public Security, Criminal Justice, and Reforming the Security Sector.” 

Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Guerrero, Rodrigo. 1999. “Programa Desarrollo, Seguridad y Paz DESEPAZ de la Ciudad de Cali.” Paper 
presented at the Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo Programas Municipales para la Prevención y 
Atención de la Violencia, Rio de Janeiro, July 29–30.

———.  2006. “Violence  Prevention  Through  Multi-sectoral  Partnerships:  The  Cases  of  Cali  and  

Bogotá.” African Safety Promotion: A Journal of Injury and Violence Prevention 4 (2): 88–98.

Guerrero-Serdán, Gabriela. 2009. “The Effects of the War in Iraq on Nutrition and Health: An Analysis 
Using Anthropometric Outcomes of Children.” Households in Conﬂ ict Network Working Papers 55, 
Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton, U.K.

Guggenheim, Scott. 2011. “Community-Driven Development versus Flexible Funding to Communities 

in Conﬂ ict and Post-conﬂ ict Environments.” Background note for the WDR 2011.

Guha-Sapir, Debarati, and Olivia D’Aoust. 2010. “Demographic and Health Consequences of Civil Con-

ﬂ ict.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Gupta, Jyotirindra D. 1970. Language Conﬂ ict and National Development: Group Politics and National 

Language Policy in India. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Gurr, Ted R. 1968. “A Causal Model of Civil Strife: A Comparative Analysis Using New Indices.” Ameri-

can Political Science Review 62 (4): 1104–24.

———. 1970. Why Men Rebel. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gutiérrez Sanín, Francisco. 2008. “Telling the Difference: Guerrillas and Paramilitaries in the Colombia 

War.” Politics and Society 36 (1): 3–34.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output 

per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 83–116.

Hanson, Stephanie. 2010. “Combating Maritime Piracy.” Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, DC.
Harbom, Lotta, and Peter Wallensteen. 2010. “Armed Conﬂ icts, 1946–2009.” Journal of Peace Research 

47 (4): 501–09.

Harborne, Bernard, and Caroline Sage. 2010. “Security and Justice Overview.” Background paper for the 

WDR 2011.

Harborne, Bernard, Mike McGovern, Gilbert Khadaglia, and Paul Francis. 2010. “Avoidance or Preven-

tion.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Harild, Niels, and Asger Christensen. 2010. “The Development Challenge of Finding Durable Solutions 

for Refugees and Internally Displaced People.” Background note for the WDR 2011.

Harriott, Anthony, ed. 2004. Understanding Crime in Jamaica: New Challenges for Public Policy. Kingston, 

Jamaica: University of West Indies Press. 

———. 2008. Organized Crime and Politics in Jamaica: Breaking the Nexus. Kingston, Jamaica: Canoe 

Press, University of West Indies.

Hartzell, Caroline, Mathew Hoddie, and Donald Rothchild. 2001. “Stabilizing the Peace after Civil War: 

An Investigation of Some Key Variables.” International Organization 55 (1): 183–208.

Hartzell,  Caroline  A.  2006.“Structuring  the  Peace:  Negotiated  Settlements  and  the  Construction  of 
 Conﬂ ict Management Institutions.” In Conﬂ ict Prevention and Peacebuilding in Post-War Societies: 
Sustaining the Peace, ed. T. David Mason and James D. Meernik. New York: Routledge.

Harvey,  Paul,  Abby  Stoddard,  Adele  Harmer,  Glyn  Taylor,  with  Victoria  DiDomenico,  and  Lauren 
Brander. 2010. “The State of the Humanitarian System: Assessing Performance and Progress.” Ac-
tive Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action, London.

Harwell, Emily. 2010. “Forests in Fragile and Conﬂ ict-Affected States.” Background paper for the WDR 

2011.

312 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Hassan,  Nasra.  2001. “An Arsenal  of  Believers:  Talking  to  the ‘Human  Bombs.’”  The  New Yorker  No-

vember 19, 2001.

Hayner, Priscilla. 2010. Unspeakable Truths: Transitional Justice and the Challenge of Truth Commissions. 

New York: Routledge.

Hegre, Håvard, and Nicholas Sambanis. 2006. “Sensitivity Analysis of Empirical Results on Civil War 

Onset.” Journal of Conﬂ ict Resolution 50 (4): 508–35.

Heimann,  Fritz,  and  Gillian  Dell.  2010.  “Progress  Report:  Enforcement  of  the  OECD  Anti-Bribery 

 Convention 2010.” Transparency International, Berlin.

Heinemann-Grüder, Andreas, Tobias Pietz, and Shay Duffy. 2003. “Turning Soldiers into a Work Force: 
Demobilization and Reintegration in Post-Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina.” Brief 27, Bonn Interna-
tional Center for Conversion, Bonn, Germany.

Henrich, Joseph, Jean Ensminger, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett, Alexander Bolyanatz, 
Juan C. Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako, Natalie Henrich, Carolyn Lesorogol, Frank Mar-
lowe, David Tracer, and John Ziker. 2010. “Markets, Religion, Community Size, and the Evolution of 
Fairness and Punishment.” Science 327 (5972): 1480–84. 

Heraclides, Alexis. 1990. “Secessionist Minorities and External Involvement.” International Organization 

44 (3): 341–78.

Herbst, Jeffrey. 2000. States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority and Control. Princeton, 

NJ: Princeton University Press.

Herz, John. 1950. “Idealist Internationalism and the Security Dilemma.” World Politics 2 (2): 157–80.
Herzberg, Benjamin. 2004. “Investment Climate Reform: Going the Last Mile: The Bulldozer Initiative in 

Bosnia and Herzegovina.” Policy Research Working Paper 3390, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Heuveline, Patrick, and Bunnak Poch. 2007. “The Phoenix Population: Demographic Crisis and Rebound 

in Cambodia.” Demography 44 (2): 405–26.

Hewitt, J. Joseph, Jonathan Wilkenfeld, and Ted R. Gurr. 2010. Peace and Conﬂ ict 2010. Boulder, CO: 

Paradigm Publishers.

Hines, James R. 1995. “Forbidden Payment: Foreign Bribery and American Business After 1977.” NBER 

Working Paper 5266, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1995. “Anarchy and Its Breakdown.” Journal of Political Economy 103 (1): 26–52.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1651. “Leviathan or The Matter, Forme and Power of a Common Wealth Ecclesiasticall 

and Civil.” Andrew Crooke, London.

Hoefﬂ er, Anke, Sarah von Billerbeck, and Syeda S. Ijaz. 2010. “Post-conﬂ ict Recovery and Peace Building.” 

Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Hoff, Karla. 2010. “Experiments and the Study of Conﬂ ict.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
Hoff, Karla, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2004a. “After the Big Bang? Obstacles to the Emergence of the Rule of 

Law in Post-Communist Societies.” American Economic Review 94 (3): 753–63.

———. 2004b. “The Transition Process in Postcommunist Societies: Toward a Political Economy of 
Property Rights.” In Toward Pro-Poor Policies: Aid, Institutions and Globalization, Bertil Tungod-
den, Nicholas Stern, and Ivar Kolstad. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York: Oxford University 
Press.

———. 2008. “Exiting a Lawless State.” Economic Journal 118 (531): 1474–97.
Horowitz, Donald L. 2000. Ethnic Groups in Conﬂ ict. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Horsey,  Richard,  and  Nikolas  Win  Myint.  2010. “Engaging  with  Countries  in  Situations  of  Political 

 Impasse.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Houdart, Fabrice, and David Pearce. 2011. “World Bank Staff Analysis for the WDR 2011.” Background 

note for the WDR 2011.

Huang, Yasheng, and Xueli Wang. 2010. “Employment and Social Capital Formation in China: Evidence 

from Rural Migrant Worker Surveys.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Hubbard, Michael. 2005. “Changing Customs: Lessons from Mozambique.” International Development 

Department, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K.

Hudson, Andrew and Alexandra W. Taylor. 2010. “The International Commission against Impunity in 
Guatemala: A New Model for International Criminal Justice Mechanisms.” Journal of International 
Criminal Justice 8 (1): 53–74.

Hufbauer, Gary C., Jeffrey J. Schott, Kimberly A. Elliott, and Barbara Oegg. 2007. Economic Sanctions 

Reconsidered. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics.

 

References 

313

Hughes, Richard L., Robert C. Ginnett, and Gordon J. Curphy. 2005. Leadership: Enhancing the Lessons 

of Experience. New York: McGraw-Hill Irwin.

Human Rights Watch. 2009. “Soldiers Who Rape, Commanders Who Condone: Sexual Violence and 

Military Reform in the Democratic Republic of Congo.” Human Rights Watch, New York.

Human Security Report Project. 2005. Human Security Report 2005: War and Peace in the 21st Century. 

New York: Oxford University Press.

———. eds. forthcoming. “Human Security Report 2009/2010: The Causes of Peace and the Shrinking 

Costs of War.” Vancouver: Human Security Report Project.

Hume, Cameron R. 1994. Ending Mozambique’s War: The Role of Mediation and Good Ofﬁ ces. Washing-

ton, DC: United States Institute of Peace.

Hunt, Swanee, and Cristina Posa. 2001. “Women Waging Peace.” Foreign Policy 124: 38–47.
Huntington, Samuel P. 1968. Political Order in Changing Societies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Huyse, Luc, and Mark Salter, eds. 2008. Traditional Justice and Reconciliation after Violent Conﬂ ict: Learning 
from African Experiences. Stockholm: International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. 
Ibáñez, Ana  María,  and Andrés  Moya.  2006. “The  Impact  of  Intra-state  Conﬂ ict  on  Economic Wel-
fare and Consumption Smoothing: Empirical Evidence for the Displaced Population in Colombia.” 
Household in Conﬂ ict Network Working Paper 23, Institute of Development Studies, University of 
Sussex, Brighton, U.K.

ICRC (International Committee of the Red Cross). 2001. “Women Facing War.” ICRC, Geneva.
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2008. “IFC Smart Lessons: Creating Opportunities for Women 

Entrepreneurs in Conﬂ ict-Affected Countries.” IFC, Washington, DC.

Igreja, Victor, and Beatrice Dias-Lambranca. 2008. “Restorative Justice and the Role of Magamba Spirits 
in Post-Civil War Gorongosa, Central Mozambique.” In Traditional Justice and Reconciliation After 
Violent Conﬂ ict: Learning from African Experiences, ed. Luc Huyse and Mark Salter. Stockholm: In-
ternational Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance.

ILO  (International  Labour  Organization).  2009. “Socio-Economic  Reintegration  of  Ex-combatants: 

Guidelines.” ILO, Geneva.

———. 2010. “Local Economic Recovery in Post-conﬂ ict: Guidelines.” ILO, Geneva.
Imai, Kosuke, and Jeremy Weinstein. 2000. “Measuring the Economic Impact of Civil War.” Working 

Paper 51, Center for International Development, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Indian  Ministry  of  Rural  Development.  2005. “The  Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Rural  Employment 

Guarantee Act.” Government of India, New Delhi. http://www.nrega.nic.in/netnrega/home.aspx.

———. 2010. “Background Material for the World Development Report on Conﬂ ict, Security and De-

velopment.” Background note for the WDR 2011.

INEE  (Inter-Agency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies).  2010. “Multiple  Faces  of  Education  in 

Conﬂ ict-Affected and Fragile Contexts.” INEE, New York, Paris, and Geneva.

Institute for State Effectiveness. 2007. “Kosovo: Developing a Strategy for the Future.” Institute for State 

Effectiveness, Washington, DC.

Instituto Universitario en Democracia Paz y Seguridad. 2010. “Observatorio de la Violencia en Hondu-
ras, Muertes Violentas y No Intencionales.” Instituto Universitario en Democracia Paz y Seguridad 
Observatorio Nacional de la Violencia Edición, Tegucigalpa.

Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission. 2010. “Statute of the Inter-American Drug Abuse 

Control Commission (CICAD).” Organization of American States, Washington, DC.

Internal  Displacement  Monitoring  Centre.  2007.  “International  Displacement:  Global  Overview  of 
Trends and Developments in 2006.” Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre of the Norwegian 
Refugee Council, Geneva.

———. 2008. “Internal Displacement: Global Overview of Trends and Developments in 2007.” Interna-

tional Displacement Monitoring Centre of the Norwegian Refugee Council, Geneva.

———. 2010. “International Displacement: Global Overview of Trends and Developments in 2009.” 

 International Displacement Monitoring Centre of the Norwegian Refugee Council, Geneva.

International Alert and Eastern Africa Sub-Regional Support Initiative for the Advancement of Women. 
2007. “Women’s  Political  Participation  in  Countries  Emerging  from  Conﬂ ict  in  the  Great  Lakes 
Region of Africa: Report of the Consultation Workshop.” International Alert; Eastern Africa Sub-
Regional Support Initiative for the Advancement of Women, London.

International Alert and Women Waging Peace. 2004. “Inclusive Security, Sustainable Peace: A Toolkit for 

Advocacy and Action.” International Alert, London.

314 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

International  Center  for  Research  on  Women.  2002. “Women-Initiated  Community  Level  Responses 
to  Domestic  Violence:  Summary  Report  of  Three  Studies.”  International  Center  for  Research  on 
Women, Washington, DC.

International Center for Transitional Justice. 2010. “Truth Seeking.” International Center for Transitional 

Justice, New York. http://www.ictj.org.

International Centre for the Prevention of Crime. 2005. “Urban Crime Prevention and Youth at Risk: 
Compendium of Promising Strategies and Programmes from Around the World.” Paper presented at 
the 11th United Nations Congress on Crime and Criminal Justice, Bangkok, April 18–25.

———. 2008. “Crime Prevention and Community Safety: Trends and Perspectives.” International Centre 

for the Prevention of Crime, Montreal.

International  Crisis  Group.  1999. “Macedonia:  Towards  Destabilization?”  Europe  Report  67,  Interna-

tional Crisis Group, Brussels.

———. 2003. “Serbia After Djindjic.” Europe Brieﬁ ng 46, International Crisis Group, Brussels.
———. 2005. “Aceh: So Far So Good.” Asia Brieﬁ ng 44, International Crisis Group, Brussels.
———. 2007. “Burundi: Finalizing Peace with the FNL.” Africa Report 131, International Crisis Group, 

Brussels.

———. 2008a. “Guinea-Bissau: In Need of a State.” Africa Report 142, International Crisis Group, 

Brussels.

———. 2008b. “Kenya in Crisis.” Africa Report 137, International Crisis Group, Brussels.
———. 2009a. “Congo: Five Priorities for a Peacebuilding Strategy.” Africa Report 150, International 

Crisis Group, Brussels.

———. 2009b. “Guinea-Bissau: Building a Real Stability Pact.” Africa Brieﬁ ng 57, International Crisis 

Group, Brussels.

———. 2009c. “Yemen: Defusing the Saada Time Bomb.” Middle East Report 86, International Crisis 

Group, Brussels.

———. 2009d. “Zimbabwe: Engaging the Inclusive Government.” Africa Brieﬁ ng 59, International Crisis 

Group, Brussels.

International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding. 2010. “Dili Declaration and Annex: State-

ment by the g7+.” International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, Dili.

Intscher, Horst. 2010. “Financial Intelligence Unit Capabilities.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
IRIN (UN Integrated Regional Information Networks). 2005. “Guinea-Bissau: Donors to Firm up Aid 
Pledges after 2005 Presidential Election.” UN Ofﬁ ce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 
Bissau.

———. 2009. “South Africa 2009: Land Reform: Same Problem, Different Approach.” UN Ofﬁ ce for 

the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Johannesburg.

———.  2010. “Kenya-Somalia:  Insecurity  without  Borders.”  UN  Ofﬁ ce  for  the  Coordination  of  Hu-

manitarian Affairs, Garissa/Mandera.

Jahr,  Nicholas.  2010.  “Can  Liberia’s  Anti-corruption  Program  Serve  as  New  Model?”  World  Politics 

 Review, May 14.

Jayaraman, Anuja, Tesfayi Gebreselassie, and S. Chandrasekhar. 2009. “Effect of Conﬂ ict on Age at Mar-

riage and Age at First Birth in Rwanda.” Population Research and Policy Review 28 (5): 551–67.

Jeffries, Richard, and Clare Thomas. 1993. “The Ghanaian Elections of 1992.” African Affairs 92 (368): 

331–66.

Jervis, Robert. 1978. “Cooperation under the Security Dilemma.” World Politics 30 (2): 167–214.
Jeyaseelan, L., Shuba Kumar, Nithya Neelakantan, Abraham Peedicayil, Rajamohanam Pillai, and Nata 
Duvvury. 2007. “Physical Spousal Violence against Women in India: Some Risk Factors.” Journal of 
Biosocial Science 39 (5): 657–70.

Jha, Prashant. 2010. “Politics and Violence in the Tarai.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
Johnston, Michael. 2010. “Anti-Corruption Strategies in Fragile States.” Background paper for the WDR 

2011.

Jones, Bruce D. 1999. “Military Intervention in Rwanda’s Two Wars: Partisanship and Indifference.” In 
Civil Wars, Insecurity, and Intervention, ed. Barbara F. Walter and Jack Snyder. New York: Columbia 
University Press.

Jones, Bruce D., Richard Gowan, and Jake Sherman. 2009. “Building on Brahimi: Peacekeeping in an Era 

of Strategic Uncertainty.” Center on International Cooperation, New York University, New York.

Jones, David S. 2009.“Public Procurement in Cambodia.” In International Handbook of Public Procure-

ment, ed. Khi V. Thai. Boca Raton, FL: Auerbach Publications.

 

References 

315

Jones, Sam. 2008. “Sustaining Growth in the Long Term.” In Post-stabilization Economics in Sub-Saharan 
Africa:  Lessons  from  Mozambique,  ed.  Jean A.  P  Clément  and  Shanaka  J.  Peiris. Washington,  DC: 
International Monetary Fund.

Jordan, David C. 1999. Drug Politics: Dirty Money and Democracies. Norman, OK: University of Okla-

homa Press.

Jornal O Globo. 2010. “Cálculo Mostra ser Viável Beneﬁ ciar com UPPs Moradores de Todas as Favelas 

do Rio.” Jornal O Globo, December 14.

Justino, Patricia, and Philip Verwimp. 2008. “Poverty Dynamics, Violent Conﬂ ict and Convergence in 

Rwanda.” Research Working Paper 4, MICROCON, Brighton, U.K.

Kalyvas, Stathis. 2006. The Logic of Violence in Civil War. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kambuwa, Marvin, and Malcolm Wallis. 2002. “Performance Management and Integrated Development 
Planning in South Africa.” Paper presented at the Twenty-Fourth Round Table Conference of the Afri-
can Association for Public Administration and Management (AAPAM). Maseru, November 25–29.

Kang, David. 2002. Crony Capitalism: Corruption and Development in South Korea and the Philippines. 

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Kanungo,  Prameeta.  2004. “Public  Expenditure  Tracking  Surveys:  Application  in  Uganda,  Tanzania, 

Ghana, and Honduras.” Working Paper 51468, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kaplan, Seth D. 2008.  Fixing Fragile States: A New Paradigm for Development. Westport, CT: Praeger 

Security International.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2010a. “Governance Matters 2009: Worldwide 

Governance Indicators 1996–2008.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———.  2010b. “The Worldwide  Governance  Indicators:  Methodology  and Analytical  Issues.”  Policy 

Research Working Paper 5430, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kawagoe, Toshihiko. 1999. “Agricultural Land Reform in Postwar Japan: Experiences and Issues.” Policy 

Research Working Paper 2111, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kawai, Masahiro, and Shinji Takagi. 2004. “Japan’s Ofﬁ cial Development Assistance: Recent Issues and 

Future Directions.” Journal of International Development 16 (2): 255–80.

Keefer,  Philip.  2008. “Insurgency  and  Credible  Commitment  in  Autocracies  and  Democracies.”  The 

World Bank Economic Review 22 (1): 33–61.

———. Forthcoming. “Why Follow the Leader?  Action, Credible Commitment and Conﬂ ict.” In Ox-
ford Handbook of the Economics of Peace and Conﬂ ict, ed. Michelle Garﬁ nkel and Stergios Skaperdas. 
Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Keefer, Philip, Eric Neumayer, and Thomas Plümper. 2010. “Earthquake Propensity and the Politics of 

Mortality Prevention.” Policy Research Working Paper 5182, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Keita, Kalifa. 1998. “Conﬂ ict and Conﬂ ict Resolution in the Sahel: The Tuareg Insurgency in Mali.” 

 Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, PA.

Kelley, Judith G. 2004. Ethnic Politics in Europe: The Power of Norms and Incentives. Princeton, NJ: Prince-

ton University Press.

Kelly, Jocelyn. 2010. “Rape in War: Motives for Militia in DRC.” USIP Special Report 243, United States 

Institute of Peace, Washington, DC.

Kenya Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation. 2007. “An Estimate of the Economic Costs of Injuries 
Due to Interpersonal and Self-Directed Violence in Kenya, 2007.” Government of Kenya. Nairobi. 
Processed.

Kharas, Homi. 2008. “Measuring the Cost of Aid Volatility.” Wolfensohn Centre for Development Work-

ing Paper 3, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.

Kilcullen, David. 2009. The Accidental Guerrilla: Fighting Small Wars in the Midst of a Big One. New York: 

Oxford University Press.

Killick, Tony, Carlos N. Castel-Branco, and Richard Gerster. 2005. “Perfect Partners? The Performance 
of Programme Aid Partners in Mozambique, 2004.” Programme Aid Partners; U.K. Department for 
International Development, Maputo.

Kimani, Mwaura. 2008. “Kenya: MPs Push for Cut in Cabinet Size.” Norweigian Council of Africa: Africa 

News Update, May 15.

Kimberley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme. 2009. “Kimberley Process Rough Diamond Statistics.” Kimber-

ley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme, Kinshasa.

———. 2010. “The Kimberley Process.” Kimberley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme, Kinshasa. http://www. 

kimberleyprocess.com.

316 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Kimhi, Shaul, and Shemuel Even. 2004. “Who Are the Palestinian Suicide Bombers?” Terrorism and Politi-

cal Violence 16 (4): 815–40.

Kingah, Petronilla K., and Stephen S. Kingah. 2010. “African Traditions and the Modern Human Rights 
Mechanisms: The Case for Women in Cameroon and Africa.” Cameroon Journal on Democracy and 
Human Rights 4 (2): 81–105.

Kingma, Kees. 1997. “Post-War Demobilization and the Reintegration of Ex-combatants into Civilian 
Life.” Paper presented at the USAID Conference: Promoting Democracy, Human Rights, and Reinte-
gration in Post-conﬂ ict Societies, Washington, DC, October 30–31.

Kireyev, Alexei. 2006. “The Macroeconomics of Remittances: The Case of Tajikistan.” IMF Working Paper 

06/2, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Knox, Colin. 1996. “Emergence of Power Sharing in Northern Ireland: Lessons from Local Government.” 

Journal of Conﬂ ict Studies 16 (1): 7–29.

Kohlmann, Evan F. 2004. Al-Qaida’s Jihad in Europe: The Afghan-Bosnian Network. Oxford, U.K.: Berg.
Korski, Daniel, and Richard Gowan. 2009. “Can the EU Rebuild Failing States? A Review of Europe’s 

Civilian Capacities.” European Council on Foreign Relations, London.

Kramer, Annika. 2008. “Regional Water Cooperation and Peacebuilding in the Middle East.” Initiative for 

Peacebuilding; Adelphi Research, Brussels.

Kreimer, Alcira,  John  Eriksson,  Robert  Muscat,  Margaret Arnold,  and  Colin  Scott.  1998. “The World 

Bank’s Experience with Post-conﬂ ict Reconstruction.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Krishnan, Suneeta, Corinne H. Rocca, Allan E. Hubbard, Kalyani Subbiah, Jeffrey Edmeades, and Nancy 
S. Padian. 2010. “Do Changes in Spousal Employment Status Lead to Domestic Violence? Insights 
from a Prospective Study in Bangalore, India.” Social Science and Medicine 70 (1): 136–43.

Krueger, Alan  B.,  and  David  L.  Laitin.  2008. “Kto-Kogo?: A  Cross-Country  Study  of  the  Origins  and 
 Targets of Terrorism.” In Terrorism, Economic Development, and Political Openness, ed. Philip Keefer 
and Norman Loayza. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Krueger, Alan B., and Jitka Maleckova. 2003. “Education, Poverty, and Terrorism: Is There a Causal Con-

nection?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (4): 119–44.

Kubicek, Paul J., ed. 2003. The European Union and Democratization. London: Routledge. 
Kumar, Vimal, and Stergios Skaperdas. 2009. “On the Economics of Organized Crime.” In Criminal Law 

and Economics, ed. Nuno Garoupa. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Kuzio, Taras. 2006. “Civil Society, Youth and Societal Mobilization in Democratic Revolutions.” Commu-

nist and Post Communist Studies 39 (3): 365–86.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1999. “The Quality of 

Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15 (1): 222–79.

Lacina, Bethany, and Nils P. Gleditsch. 2005. “Monitoring Trends in Global Combat: A New Dataset of 

Battle Deaths 2005.” European Journal of Population 21 (2–3): 145–66.

Lacina,  Bethany,  Nils  P.  Gleditsch,  and  Bruce  Russett.  2006. “The  Declining  Risk  of  Death  in  Battle.” 

 International Studies Quarterly 50 (3): 673–80.

Laitin, David D. 1998. Identity in Formation: The Russian-Speaking Populations in the Near Abroad. Ithaca, 

NY: Cornell University Press.

———. 2000. “What Is a Language Community?” American Journal of Political Science 44 (1): 142–55.
———. 2007. Nations, States, and Violence. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lamb, Guy, and Dominique Dye. 2009. “Security Promotion and DDR: Linkages between ISM, DDR, 
and  SSR  within  a  Broader  Peacebuilding  Framework.”  Congeso  Internacional  de  Desarme,  De-
movilización y Reintegración, Cartagena, Colombia; Republic of Colombia, Cartagena, Colombia.
Langer, Arnim. 2005. “Horizontal Inequalities and Violent Group Mobilization in Côte d’Ivoire.” Oxford 

Development Studies 33 (1): 25–45.

Latinobarómetro. 2009. “Latinobarómetro: Opinion Pública Latinoamericana.” Latinobarómetro, San-

tiago. http://www.latinobarometro.org.

Lawson, Sam, and Larry MacFaul. 2010. “Illegal Logging and Related Trade: Indicators of the Global 

Response.” Chatham House, London.

Lemay-Hébert, Nicolas. 2009. “UNPOL and Police Reform in Timor-Leste: Accomplishments and Set-

backs.” International Peacekeeping 16 (3): 393–406.

Leslie, Glaister. 2010. “Confronting the Don: The Political Economy of Gang Violence in Jamaica.” Oc-
casional Paper 26, Small Arms Survey, Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies, 
Geneva.

 

References 

317

Lewis, Dustin A. 2009. “Unrecognized Victims: Sexual Violence against Men in Conﬂ ict Settings under 

International Law.” Wisconsin International Law Journal 27 (1): 1–49.

Li, Quan, and Ming Wen. 2005. “The Immediate and Lingering Effects of Armed Conﬂ ict on Adult Mor-

tality: A Time-Series Cross-National Analysis.” Journal of Peace Research 42 (4): 471–92.

Lijphart, Arend. 1969. “Consociational Democracy.” World Politics 21 (2): 207–25.
———. 1977. Democracy in Plural Societies: A Comparative Exploration. New Haven, CT: Yale University 

Press.

Linn,  Johannes,  and  Oksana  Pidufala.  2008. “The  Experience  with  Regional  Economic  Cooperation 
Organizations: Lessons for Central Asia.” Wolfensohn Center for Development Working Paper 4, 
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.

Lipman, Janna. 2009. “Charles Taylor’s Criminal Network, Exploiting Diamonds and Children.” Gradu-
ate Student Research, Terrorism, Transnational Crime and Corruption Center, George Mason Uni-
versity. Fairfax, VA. Processed.

Lipton, Michael. 2009. Land Reform in Developing Countries: Property Rights and Property Wrongs. New 

York: Routledge.

Llorente, Maria V., and Angela Rivas. 2005. “Case Study of Reduction of Crime in Bogotá: A Decade of 

Citizen’s Security Policies.” Policy Research Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Loayza, Norman, Pablo Fajnzylber, and Daniel Lederman. 2002a. “Inequality and Violent Crime.” Jour-

nal of Law and Economics 45 (1): 1–40.

———. 2002b. “What Causes Violent Crime?”European Economic Review 46 (7): 1323–57.
Lockhart, Clare. 2010. “EU Accession: Norms and Incentives.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
Lockhart, Clare, and Blair Glencorse. 2010. “Afghanistan and Its Neighbors: State-Building and State 

Failure in the Post-Taliban Period.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Lopes,  Ibere.  2009. “Land  and  Displacement  in  Timor-Leste.”  Humanitarian  Exchange  Magazine  43: 

12–4.

Lund, Michael. 2010. Engaging Fragile States: An International Policy Primer. Washington, DC: Woodrow 

Wilson International Center for Scholars.

Lupsha, Peter A. 1991. “Drug Lords and Narco-Corruption: The Players Change but the Game Con-

tinues.” Crime, Law, and Social Change 16 (1): 41–58.

Lustick, Ian S., Dan Miodownik, and Roy J. Eidelson. 2004. “Secessionism in Multicultural States: Does 

Sharing Power Prevent or Encourage It?” American Political Science Review 98 (2): 209–29.

Lutz, Ellen L., and Caitlin Reiger, eds. 2009. Prosecuting Heads of State. New York: Cambridge University 

Press. 

Mac Sweeney, Naoise. 2008. “Private Sector Development in Post-conﬂ ict Countries: A Review of Cur-
rent Literature and Practice.” The Donor Committee for Enterprise Development, Cambridge, U.K.
Mack, Andrew. 2003. “Re-building Business: The World Bank and Private Sector Development in Post-

conﬂ ict Nations.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Macmillan, Ross, and Rosemary Gartner. 1999. “When She Brings Home the Bacon: Labor-Force Par-
ticipation and the Risk of Spousal Violence against Women.” Journal of Marriage and Family 61 (4): 
947–58.

Manning, Carrie, and Monica Malbrough. 2009. “Learning the Right Lessons from Mozambique’s Tran-

sition to Peace.” Taiwan Journal of Democracy 5 (1): 77–91.

Mansﬁ eld, Edward D., and Jack Snyder, eds. 2005. Electing to Fight: Why Emerging Democracies Go to 

War. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Markowski, Stefan, Stephanie Koorey, Peter Hall, and Jurgen Brauer. 2009. “Multi-channel Supply Chain 

for Illicit Small Arms.” Defence and Peace Economics 20 (3): 171–91.

Marsh, Nicholas. 2002. “Two Sides of the Same Coin: The Legal and Illegal Trade in Small Arms.” Brown 

Journal of World Affairs 9 (1): 217–28.

Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer, and Mathias Thoenig. 2008. “Civil Wars and International Trade.” Jour-

nal of the European Economic Association 6: 541–55.

Mas, Ignacio, and Dan Radcliffe. 2010. “Mobile Payments Go Viral: M-PESA in Kenya.” Bill and Melinda 

Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA.

Mason,  Ann.  2003. “Colombia’s  Democratic  Security  Agenda:  Public  Order  in  the  Security  Tripod.” 

 Security Dialogue 34 (4): 391–409.

Mata, Javier F., and Sebastian Ziaja. 2009. “Users’ Guide on Measuring Fragility.” Deutches Institut für 

Entwicklungspolitik, Oslo; UN Development Programme, New York.

318 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Mattero, Minna, and Charmagne Campbell-Patton. 2008. “Measuring the Impact of Youth Voluntary 
Service Programs: Summary and Conclusions of the International Experts’ Meeting.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC; Innovations in Civic Participation, Washington, DC.

Matveeva, Anna. 2007. “The Regionalist Project in Central Asia: Unwilling Playmates.” CSRC Series 2, 
Working Paper 13, Crisis States Research Centre, London School of Economics and Political Science, 
London.

Mayer-Rieckh, Alexander, and Pablo de Greiff, eds. 2007. Justice as Prevention: Vetting Public Employees 
in Transitional Societies. New York: Social Sciences Research Council: International Center for Tran-
sitional Justice. 

Maynard, Kimberly A. 1997. “Rebuilding Community: Psychosocial Healing, Reintegration, and Recon-
ciliation at the Grassroots Level.” In Rebuilding Societies After Civil War: Critical Roles for International 
Assistance, ed. Krishna Kumar. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.

McCall, John C. 2004. “Juju and Justice at the Movies: Vigilantes in Nigerian Popular Videos.” African 

Studies Review 47 (3): 51–67.

McCandless, Erin. 2008. “Lessons from Liberia Integrated Approaches to Peacebuilding in Transitional 

Settings.” ISS Occasional Paper 160, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria.

McCauley, Cynthia D., and Ellen Van Velsor, eds. 2004. The Center for Creative Leadership Handbook of 

Leadership Development. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

McLeod, Darryl, and Maria E. Dávalos. 2008. “Post-conﬂ ict Employment Creation for Stabilization and 

Poverty Reduction.” UN Development Programme, New York.

McNeish, John-Andrew. 2010. “Natural Resource Management: Rethinking Resource Conﬂ ict.” Back-

ground paper for the WDR 2011.

MDRP (Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program). 2006. “Reinsertion: Bridging the 

Gap between Demobilization and Reintegration.” MDRP, Washington, DC.

Mehta, Pratap B. 2010. “Some Notes on Conﬂ icts and Decentralisation in India.” Background note for 

the WDR 2011.

Meidan, Michal. 2006. “China’s Africa Policy: Business Now, Politics Later.” Asian Perspective 30 (4): 69–93.
Mejia, Daniel, and Daniel M. Rico. 2010. “La Microeconomía de la Producción y Tráﬁ co de Cocaína en 
Colombia.” Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá; El Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo Económico, 
Bogotá.

Meléndez, Quiñónez. 2007. “Una Visión sobre la Situación de la Seguridad en Nicaragua, Costa Rica y 

Panamá.” Instituto de Estudios Estrategicos y Politicas Públicas. Managua. Processed.

Melville, Amanda. 2003. “Psychosocial Interventions: Evaluations of UNICEF Supported Projects (1999–

2001).” UN Children’s Fund Indonesia, Jakarta.

Menkhaus, Ken. 2006. “Governance without Government in Somalia: Spoilers, State Building, and the 

Politics of Coping.” International Security 31 (3): 74–106.

———. 2010. “Somalia and the Horn of Africa.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Menon, Nidhiya, and Yana van der Meulen Rodgers. 2010. “War and Women’s Work: Evidence from the 
Conﬂ ict in Nepal.” Working Paper Series 19, Department of Economics and International Businesss 
School, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA.

Messick, Richard. 2011. “Anti-Corruption Approaches in Nigeria and Haiti.” Background note for the 

WDR 2011.

Messner,  Steven  F.,  Lawrence  E.  Raffalovich,  and  Peter  Shrock.  2002. “Reassessing  the  Cross-National 
Relationship between Income Inequality and Homicide Rates: Implications of Data Quality Control 
in the Measurement of Income Distribution.”Journal of Quantitative Criminology 18 (4): 377–95.

Michailof, Serge. 2007. “Review of Technical Assistance and Capacity Building in Afghanistan: Discussion 

Paper for the Afghanistan Development Forum.” World Bank, Kabul.

Michalcik, Vladislav, and Ceara Riggs. 2007. “People Power: Country Studies and Lessons Learned from 
National  Non-Violent  Movements  2003–2005.”  Occasional  Paper  18,  Institute  for  Multi-Track 
 Diplomacy, Washington, DC.

Mills, Rob, and Qimiao Fan. 2006. “The Investment Climate in Post-conﬂ ict Situations.” Policy Research 

Working Paper 4055, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Mobekk, Eirin. 2010. “Gender, Women and Security Sector Reform.” International Peacekeeping 17 (2): 

278–91.

Mondo, Emilio. 1995. “Uganda’s Experience in National Management of Demobilisation and Reintegra-
tion.”  Paper  presented  at  the Workshop  on  Demobilisation  in  South Africa,  Institute  for  Defence 

 

References 

319

Policy; The Hanns Seidel Foundation; and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), 
Pretoria, May 17–18.

Montalvo, José G., and Marta Reynal-Querol. 2005. “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conﬂ ict, and Civil 

Wars.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 796–816.

Montgomery,  Michael.  2010.  “India’s  Diamond  Industry  Strengthening.”  Diamond  Investing  News, 

March 15.

Moran, Mary H., and M. Anne Pitcher. 2004. “The ‘Basket Case’ and the ‘Poster Child’: Explaining the 

End of Civil Conﬂ icts in Liberia and Mozambique.” Third World Quarterly 25 (3): 501–19.

Morel, Adrian, Makiko Watanabe, and Rob Wrobel. 2009. “Delivering Assistance to Conﬂ ict-Affected 
Communities: The BRA-KDP Program in Aceh.” Indonesian Social Development Paper 13, World 
Bank, Jakarta.

Morﬁ t, Michael. 2007. “The Road to Helsinki: The Aceh Agreement and Indonesia’s Democratic Devel-

opment.” International Negotiation 12 (1): 111–43.

Morozzo Della Rocca, Roberto. 2003. Mozambique: Achieving Peace in Africa. Washington, DC: George-

town University Press.

Morozzo Della Rocca, Roberto, and Luca Riccardi. 2003. “The Peace Process in Mozambique.” In Com-
munity and the State in Lusophone Africa, ed. Malyn Newitt, Patrick Chabal, and Norrie Macqueen. 
London: King’s College.

Moser,  Caroline  O.  N.  2009.Ordinary  Families,  Extraordinary  Lives:  Assets  and  Poverty  Reduction  in 

Guayaquil, 1978–2004. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Mosse, Marcelo. 2007. “Corruption and Reform in the Customs in Mozambique.” Centro de Integridade 

Publica, Maputo.

MSR (Multi-Stakeholder Review). 2009. “Multi-Stakeholder Review of Post-conﬂ ict Programming in 

Aceh: Identifying the Foundations for Sustainable Peace and Development in Aceh.” MSR, Jakarta.

Mufson, Steven. 2009. “Nigerian Rebels Drive Up Oil Prices.” Washington Post, June 30.
Mungiu-Pippidi, Alina, and Igor Munteanu. 2009. “Moldova’s ‘Twitter Revolution.’” Journal of Democ-

racy 20 (3): 136–42.

Muñoz, Mercedes G. 2010. “Las Jornadas de Trabajo en Las Empresas de Seguridad Privada: Flexibili-
dad Laboral o un Sistema de Explotación del Sudor?” Diálogos Revista Electrónica de Historia 11 
(2): 233–63.

Murdoch, James C., and Todd Sandler. 2002. “Economic Growth, Civil Wars, and Spatial Spillovers.” 

Journal of Conﬂ ict Resolution 46 (1): 91–110.

———.  2004. “Civil  Wars  and  Economic  Growth:  Spatial  Dispersion.”  American  Journal  of  Political 

 Science 48 (1): 138–51.

Murphy, Helen. 2008. “Colombians Stage ‘Million Voices’ March Against FARC: Update 3.” Bloomberg, 

February 4.

Murray, Christopher J. L., Gary King, Alan D. Lopez, Niels Tomijima, and Etienne G. Krug. 2002. “Armed 

Conﬂ ict as a Public Health Problem.” British Medical Journal 324 (7333): 346–49.

Murshed, S. Mansoob, and Scott Gates. 2006. “Spatial-Horizontal Inequality and the Maoist Insurgency 
in Nepal.” In Spatial Disparities in Human Development, ed. Ravi Kanbur, Anthony Venables, and 
Guanghua Wan . Tokyo: UN University Press.

Murshed, S. Mansoob, and Mohammad Z. Tadjoeddin. 2007. “Reappraising the Greed and Grievance 
Explanations for Violent Internal Conﬂ ict.” Research Working Paper 2, MICROCON, Brighton, 
U.K.

Naim, Moises. 2006. Illicit: How Smugglers, Trafﬁ ckers, and Copycats Are Hijacking the Global Economy. 

New York: Anchor.

Narayan, Deepa, and Patti Petesch, eds. 2010. Moving Out of Poverty: Rising from the Ashes of Conﬂ ict. 

Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Nathan, Laurie. 2005. “The Frightful Inadequacy of Most of the Statistics: A Critique of Collier and 
Hoef ﬂ er on Causes of Civil War.” Discussion Paper 11, Crisis States Research Centre, London School 
of Economics and Political Science, London.

National Academy of Public Administration. 2006. “Why Foreign Aid to Haiti Failed: A Summary Re-
port of the National Academy of Public Administration.” Academy International Affairs Working 
Paper 06-04, National Academy of Public Administration, Washington, DC.

320 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

National  Counterterrorism  Center.  2010. “Worldwide  Incidents  Tracking  System.”  National  Counter-

terrorism Center, McLean, VA. http://wits.nctc.gov.

National Intelligence Council. 2000. “National Intelligence Estimate: Global Infectious Disease Threat 

and Its Implications for the United States.” National Intelligence Council, Washington, DC.

Natural Resource Charter. 2010. “The Twelve Precepts.” Natural Resource Charter, London. http://www. 

naturalresourcecharter.org.

Navarro, Marysa. 2001. “The Personal Is Political: Las Madres de Plaza de Mayo.” In Power and Popular 
Protest: Latin American Social Movements, ed. Susan Eckstein. Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press.

Ndegwa, Stephen, and Brian Levy. 2004. “The Politics of Decentralization in Africa: A Comparative Anal-
ysis.” In Building State Capacity in Africa: New Approaches, Emerging Lessons, ed. Brian Levy and Sahr 
Kpundeh. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Ndulo, Muna B. 2009. “The United Nations Responses to the Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of Women 
and Girls by Peacekeepers during Peacekeeping Missions.” Berkeley Journal of International Law 27: 
127–61.

NEPAD  (The  New  Partnership  for  Africa’s  Development).  2010.  “African  Peer  Review  Mechanism 

(APRM).” NEPAD, Midrand. http://www.nepad.org.

Neumayer, Eric. 2003. “Good Policy Can Lower Violent Crime: Evidence from a Cross-National Panel on 

Homicide Rates, 1980–97.” Journal of Peace Research 40 (6): 619–40.

New York University Center on International Cooperation. 2009. Annual Review of Global Peace Opera-

tions 2009. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.

Nilsson, Desirée. 2008. “Partial Peace: Rebel Groups Inside and Outside of Civil War Settlements.” Journal 

of Peace Research 45 (4): 479–95.

Nilsson,  Desirée,  and Anna  K.  Jarstad.  2008. “From Words  to  Deeds:  The  Implementation  of  Power-

Sharing Pacts in Peace Accords.” Conﬂ ict Management and Peace Science 25 (3): 206–23.

Nitsch, Volker, and Dieter Schumacher. 2004. “Terrorism and International Trade: An Empirical Investi-

gation.” European Journal of Political Economy 20 (2): 423–33.

North, Douglass C. 1989. “Institutions and Economic Growth: An Historical Introduction.” World De-

velopment 17 (9): 1319–32.

———. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. New York: Cambridge Uni-

versity Press.

———. 1995. “The New Institutional Economics and Third World Development.” In The New Institu-
tional Economics and Third World Development, ed. John Harris, Janet Hunter, and Colin M. Lewis. 
London: Routledge.

North, Douglass C., John J. Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social Orders: A Conceptual 

Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Northouse, Peter G. 2008. Introduction to Leadership: Concepts and Practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 

Publications, Inc.

Nossal, Kim R. 1999. “Liberal-Democratic Regimes, International Sanctions, and Global Governance.” 
In Globalization and Global Governance, ed. Raimo Väyrynen. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld 
Publishers.

Nunn, Nathan. 2008. “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 

123 (1): 139–76.

Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon. Forthcoming. “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in 

Africa.” American Economic Review.

Nwana, Harry. 2000. “Who Are the Bakassi Boys?” Vanguard, December 28.
O  Dia  Online.  2010.  “Rio  Assina  Convênio  para  Investimentos  Privados  nas  UPPs.”  O  Dia  Online,  

August 24.

O’Loughlin, John, Frank D. W. Witmer, and Andrew M. Linke. 2010. “The Afghanistan-Pakistan Wars, 
2008–2009:  Micro-geographies,  Conﬂ ict  Diffusion,  and  Clusters  of Violence.”  Eurasian  Geography 
and Economics 51 (4): 437–71.

OAS (Organization of American States). 2001. “Inter-American Democratic Charter.” OAS, Lima.
Odendaal, Andries. 2010. “Local Peacebuilding in Ghana.” Paper presented at the Experience-sharing 

Seminar on Building Infrastructures for Peace, Naivasha, Kenya, February 2–4.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 1996. “Recommendation of the 

Council on the Tax Deductibility of Bribes to Foreign Public Ofﬁ cials.” OECD, Paris.

 

References 

321

———. 2004. “Lessons Learned on Donor Support to Decentralisation and Local Governance.” OECD, 

Paris.

———. 2007. “Enhancing the Delivery of Justice and Security.” OECD, Paris.
———.  2008. “Sierra  Leone.”  In  2008  Survey  on  Monitoring  the  Paris  Declaration:  Making Aid  More 

 Effective by 2010, ed. OECD. Accra: OECD.

———. 2009. “Recommendation of the Council on Tax Measures for Further Combating Bribery of 

Foreign Public Ofﬁ cials in International Business Transactions.” OECD, Paris.

———. 2010a. “Do No Harm: International Support for Statebuilding.” OECD, Paris.
———. 2010b. “Focus on Aid to Agriculture.” OECD, Paris. http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/agriculture.
———. 2010c. “Monitoring the Principles for Good International Engagement in Fragile States and 

Situations: Fragile States Principles Monitoring Survey Global Report.” OECD, Paris.

———. 2010d. “OECD Stat Extracts.” OECD, Paris. http://stats.oecd.org.
———. 2010e. “Second Round of Monitoring: Georgia Monitoring Report.” Anti-Corruption Network 

for Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Istanbul Anti-Corruption Action Plan, OECD, Paris.

———. 2010f. “South-South Cooperation in the Context of Aid Effectiveness: Telling the Story of Part-
ners Involved in More Than 110 Cases of South-South and Triangular Cooperation.” OECD, Paris.

———. 2010g. “The State’s Legitimacy in Fragile Situations: Unpacking Complexity.” OECD, Paris.
———. 2010h. “Towards Clean Minerals from Conﬂ ict Zones.” OECD, Paris.
———. 2010i. “Transition Financing: Building a Better Response.” OECD, Paris.
———.  2011.  “Supporting  Statebuilding  in  Situations  of  Conﬂ ict  and  Fragility:  Policy  Guidance.” 

OECD, Paris.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), and WTO (World Trade Orga-
nization). 2008. “Japan.” In Aid for Trade at a Glance 2007: Country and Agency Chapters, ed. OECD 
and WTO. Paris: OECD; Geneva: WTO.

OECD-DAC  (Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development–Develompent  Assistance 

Committee). 2006. “Whole of Government Approaches to Fragile States.” OECD-DAC, Paris.

———. 2007a. “OECD-DAC Handbook on Security System Reform: Supporting Security and Justice.” 

OECD-DAC, Paris.

———. 2007b. “Principles for Good International Engagement in Fragile States and Situations.” OECD-

DAC, Paris.

———. 2008. “Scaling Up: Aid Fragmentation, Aid Allocation, and Aid Predictability: Report of 2008 

Survey of Aid Allocation Policies and Indicative Forward Spending Plans.” OECD-DAC, Paris.

———. 2010a. “Aid Risks in Fragile and Transitional Contexts: Key Messages from the Forthcoming 
Publication Aid Risks in Fragile and Transitional Contexts.” International Network on Conﬂ ict and 
Fragility, OECD-DAC, Paris.

———. 2010b. “Resource Flows to Fragile and Conﬂ ict-Affected States: Annual Report 2008.” Interna-

tional Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragility, OECD-DAC, Paris.

Ofﬁ ce of the High Representative and European Union Special Representative. 2011. “Basic Informa-
tion.” Ofﬁ ce of the High Representative; European Union Special Representative, Sarajevo. http://
www.ohr.int.

Ojielo, Ozonnia. 2007. “Designing an Architecture for Peace: A Framework of Conﬂ ict Transformation 
in Ghana.” Paper presented at the First Biennial Conference and General Assembly of the Society for 
Peace Studies and Practice, Abuja, January 22–25.

Olcott, Martha B. 2010. “Rivalry and Competition in Central Asia: Bringing People Together to Acceler-
ate Growth and Well-Being in Emerging Markets.” Paper presented at the Eurasia Emerging Markets 
Forum, Thun, Switzerland, January 23–25.

Oliver, Johanna. 1999. “The Esquipulas Process: A Central American Paradigm for Resolving Regional 

Conﬂ ict.” Ethnic Studies Report 17 (2): 149–79.

Orentlicher, Diane. 2004. “Independent Study on Best Practices, Including Recommendations, to Assist 
States in Strengthening Their Domestic Capacity to Combat All Aspects of Impunity.” UN Economic 
and Social Council, New York.

———. 2005. “Report of the Independent Expert to Update the Set of Principles to Combat Impunity.” 

UN Economic and Social Council, New York.

Organization of African Unity. 2000. “Lomé Declaration on the Framework for an OAU Response to 

Unconstitutional Change of Government.” Organization of African Unity, Lomé.

322 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Østby, Gudrun. 2008. “Inequalities, the Political Environment and Civil Conﬂ ict: Evidence from 55 De-
veloping Countries.” In Horizontal Inequalities and Conﬂ ict: Understanding Group Violence in Multi-
ethnic Societies, ed. Frances Stewart. Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.

Otocan, Mariano. 2010. “Euroregion as a Mechanism for Strengthening Transfrontier and Interregional 
Co-operation:  Opportunities  and  Challenges.”  Paper  presented  at  the  European  Commission  for 
 Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) and Council of Europe’s Interregional and Trans-
frontier  Co-operation:  Promoting  Democratic  Stability  and  Development  Seminar,  Trieste,  Italy, 
February 22–25.

Oxford Reference Online. 2001. “The Oxford Companion to the Politics of the World.” Oxford University 

Press. http://www.oxfordreference.com.

Paciﬁ c Island Forum Secretariat. 2005. “The Paciﬁ c Plan for Strengthening Regional Cooperation and 

Integration.” Paciﬁ c Island Forum Secretariat, Fiji.

Padilla, Felix M. 1992.The Gang as an American Enterprise. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Pakistan Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 2010. “Promise, Policy, Performance: Two Years of 

People’s Government 2008–2010.” Government of Pakistan, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Pan, Esther. 2005. “Middle East: Reorganizing the Palestinian Security Forces.” Council on Foreign Rela-

tions, Washington, DC.

Panda, Pradeep, and Bina Agarwal. 2005. “Marital Violence, Human Development and Women’s Prop-

erty Status in India.” World Development 33 (5): 823–50.

Papagianni, Katia. 2009. “Political Transitions after Peace Agreements: The Importance of Consultative 

and Inclusive Political Processes.” Journal of Intervention and Statebuilding 3 (1): 47–63.

Pape, Robert R. 2003. “The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism.” American Political Science Review 97 

(3): 343–61.

Paris, Roland. 2004. At War’s End: Building Peace after Civil Conﬂ ict. New York: Cambridge University 

Press.

Parker, Joan C. 2008.“A Synthesis of Practical Lessons from Value Chain Projects in Conﬂ ict-Affected 

Environments.” Micro Report 105, U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, DC.

Parson, Devin. 2010. “In the Wrong Hands: Los Zetas and the Gun Laws that Help Them Thrive.” Council 

on Hemispheric Affairs, Washington, DC.

Patel, Ana C., Pablo de Greiff, and Lars Waldorf, eds. 2009. Disarming the Past: Transitional Justice and 

Ex-combatants. New York: Social Science Research Council. 

Patel, Seema, and Steven Ross. 2007. “Breaking Point: Measuring Progress in Afghanistan.” Center for 

Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC.

Patrick, Stewart. 2006. “Weak States and Global Threats: Assessing Evidence of Spillovers.” Working Paper 

73, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.

Pavanello, Sara, and Timothy Othieno. 2008. “Improving the Provision of Basic Services for the Poor in 

Fragile Environments.” Overseas Development Institute, London.

Peake, Gordon, and Kaysie Studdard Brown. 2010. “Policebuilding: The International Deployment Group 

in the Solomon Islands.” International Peacekeeping 12 (4): 520–32.

Peixoto, Betânia Totino, Mônica Viegas Andrade, and João Pedro Azevedo. 2007. “Avaliação Do Programa 
Fica Vivo No Município De Belo Horizonte.”Associação Nacional dos Centros de Pós-Graduação em 
Economia, Rio de Janeiro.

———.  2008. “Avaliação  Econômica  do  Programa  Fica Vivo:  O  Caso  Piloto.”  Textos  para  Discussão 

Cedeplar, UFMG td336, Cedeplar, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte.

Peltz, Amelia T. 2006.“Gender Based Violence in Palestine.” MIFTAH (The Palestinian Initiative for the 

Promotion of Global Dialogue and Democracy), Jerusalem.

Perry, Alex. 2008. “Congo: The Forgotten Conﬂ ict.” Time.com, June 18.
Peruvian Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 2003. “Peruvian Truth and Reconciliation Commission 

Report.” Peruvian Truth and Reconciliation Commission, Lima.

Peschka, Mary. 2010. “The Role of the Private Sector in Fragile and Conﬂ ict-Affected States.” Background 

paper for the WDR 2011.

Peterson, Roger, and Sarah Zuckerman. 2010. “Revenge or Reconciliation: Theory and Method of Emo-
tions in the Context of Colombia’s Peace Process.” In Law in Peace Negotiations, ed. Morten Bergsmo 
and Pablo Kalmanovitz. Oslo: Forum for International Criminal and Humanitarian Law.

 

References 

323

Piron,  Laure-Hélène,  and  Zaza  Curran.  2005. “Public  Policy  Responses  to  Exclusion:  Evidence  from 

Brazil, South Africa, and India.” Overseas Development Institute, London.

Plümper, Thomas, and Eric Neumayer. 2006. “The Unequal Burden of War: The Effect of Armed Con-

ﬂ ict on the Gender Gap in Life Expectancy.” International Organization 60 (3): 723–54.

Popkin, Margaret. 2000. Peace Without Justice: Obstacles to Building the Rule of Law in El Salvador. Uni-

versity Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.

Porter, Douglas, Matt Andrews, and Clay Wescott. 2010. “Public Finance Management in Fragile and 

Conﬂ icted Settings.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Porter, Douglas, and Habib Rab. 2010. “Timor-Leste’s Recovery from the 2006 Crisis: Some Lessons.” 

Background note for the WDR 2011.

Posen, Barry. 1993. “The Security Dilemma and Ethnic Conﬂ ict.” Survival 35 (1): 27–47.
Posner, Daniel N. 2004. “Measuring Ethnic Fractionalization in Africa.”  American Journal of Political 

Science 48 (4): 849–63.

Potter, Antonia. 2005. “We the Women: Why Conﬂ ict Mediation is Not Just a Job for Men.” Centre for 

Humanitarian Dialogue, Geneva.

Powell, Jonathan M., and Clayton L. Thyne. 2011. “Global Instances of Coups from 1950 to Present: A 

New Dataset.” Journal of Peace Research 48 (2): 249–59.

Presidencia República de Colombia. 1993. “Decreto Numero 2707 de 1993.” Presidencia República de 

Colombia, Bogotá.

———. 2010. “La Agencia Presidencial para la Acción Social y la Cooperation Internacional.” Presiden-

cia República de Colombia, Bogotá. http://www.accionsocial.gov.co.

Prieto-Rodríguez, Juan, and Cesar Rodríguez-Gutiérrez. 2003. “Participation of Married Women in the 
European Labor Markets and the ‘Added Worker Effect’ in Europe.” Journal of Socio-Economics 32 
(4): 429–46.

Pritchett, Lant, and Frauke de Weijer. 2010. “Fragile States: Stuck in a Capability Trap?” Background 

paper for the WDR 2011.

Putzel,  James.  2003. “The  Philippine-US Alliance  in  Post  September  11  Southeast Asia.”  In  Global 
 Response to Terrorism: 9/11, Afghanistan and Beyond, ed. Mary Buckley and Rick Fawn. London: 
Routledge.

Quinn,  Michael  J.  2007. “Mozambique  1975–1992.”  In  Civil Wars  of  the World:  Major  Conﬂ icts  since 

World War II, Volume 1, ed. Karl DeRouen Jr. and Uk Heo. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Raleigh, Clionadh. 2010. “Conﬂ ict Contagion Patterns.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Raleigh,  Clionadh, Andrew  Linke,  Håvard  Hegre,  and  Joachim  Carlsen.  2010. “Introducing ACLED: 

An Armed Conﬂ ict Location and Event Dataset.” Journal of Peace Research 47 (5): 651–60.

RAND Corporation. 2009. “National Socioeconomic Survey (SUSENAS).” RAND Corporation, Santa 

Monica, CA.

Randel, Judith. 2010. “Experience with Humanitarian Funds.” Paper presented at the OECD-INCAF/EU 

Risk Management Conference, Brussels, June 15.

Randel, Judith, and Tasneem Mowjee. 2006. “Review of Trust Fund Mechanisms for Transition Financ-

ing.” Development Initiatives, Somerset, U.K.

Rehn, Elisabeth, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. 2002. “Violence Against Women.” In Women, War and Peace: 
The Independent Experts’ Assessment on the Impact of Armed Conﬂ ict on Women and Women’s Role 
in Peace Building, ed. Elizabeth Rehn and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. NewYork: UN Development Fund 
for Women.

Republic  of  Burundi.  2006.  “Poverty  Reduction  Strategy  Paper  (PRSP).”  Republic  of  Burundi, 

 Bujumbura.

Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Environment. 1999. “Lebanon’s First National Communication Re-

port.” Government of Lebanon, Beirut.

Republic of Liberia and UN (United Nations). 2007. “United Nations Development Assistance Frame-
work Liberia 2008–2012: Consolidating Peace and National Recovery for Sustainable Development.” 
Republic of Liberia; UN, Monrovia.

Reyntjens, Filip. 2007. “Brieﬁ ng: Democratic Republic of Congo: Political Transition and Beyond.” 

 African Affairs 106 (423): 307–17.

Riascos, Alvaro J., and Juan Vargas. 2004. “Violence and Growth in Colombia: What Do We Know After 
10 Years of Quantitative Research?” Webpondo.org: Recursos para Economistas & Colombia. http://
www.webpondo.org/ﬁ les_ene_mar04/rgc.pdf.

324 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Rich, Patricia. 2010. “Politician’s Assassination Raises Doubts over Mexico Drug Policy.” Open Security: 

Contemporary Conﬂ ict. http://www.opendemocracy.net/opensecurity/security_brieﬁ ngs/290610.

Richards, Paul. 1996. Fighting For the Rainforest: War, Youth and Resources in Sierra Leone. Oxford, U.K.: 

Heinemann Educational Books.

Roberts, Adam. 2010. “Lives and Statistics: Are 90% of War Victims Civilians?” Survival 52 (3): 115–36.
Robinson, Pearl T. 1994.“The National Conference Phenomenon in Francophone Africa.” Comparative 

Studies in Society and History 36 (3): 575–610.

Rodgers, Dennis, Robert Muggah, and Chris Stevenson. 2009. “Gangs of Central America: Causes, Costs, 
and Interventions.” Occasional Paper 23, Small Arms Survey, Graduate Institute of International and 
Development Studies, Geneva.

Rodrik, Dani. 2000. “Institutions for High-Quality Growth: What They Are And How to Acquire Them.” 

NBER Working Paper 7540, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

———. 2008. One Economics, Many Recipes: Globalization, Institutions, and Economic Growth. Princeton, 

NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of In-
stitutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Growth 
9 (2): 131–65.

Rohland, Klaus, and Sarah Cliffe. 2002. “The East Timor Reconstruction Programme: Successes, Prob-

lems and Tradeoffs.” CPR Working Paper 26361, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Roque, Paula, Judy Smith-Höhn, Paul-Simon Handy, Le Dang Doanh, David Craig, and Omar McDoom. 
2010. “Exit Pathways: South Africa, Mozambique, Vietnam, Cambodia, Rwanda.” Background paper 
for the WDR 2011.

Ross,  Michael.  2003. “The  Natural  Resource  Curse:  How  Wealth  Can  Make  You  Poor.”  In  Natural  

Resources and Violent Conﬂ ict, ed. Ian Bannon and Paul Collier. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Rosset, Peter, Raj Patel, and Michael Courville, eds. 2006. Promised Land: Competing Visions of Agrarian 

Reform. Oakland, CA: Food First: Institute for Food and Development Policy. 

Rozema,  Ralph.  2008.  “Urban  DDR  Processes:  Paramilitaries  and  Criminal  Networks  in  Medellín, 

 Colombia.” Journal of Latin American Studies 40 (3): 423–52.

Rubin, Barnett R. 2002. Blood on the Doorstep: The Politics of Preventive Action. Washington, DC: Century 

Foundation: Council on Foreign Relations.

Sage, Caroline, and Deval Desai. 2010. “Public Security, Criminal Justice, and Reforming the Security 

Sector.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Salazar, Hernando. 2007. “Colombians Against Kidnapping.” BBC News, July 15.
Salehyan, Idean. 2007. “Transnational Rebels: Neighboring States as Sanctuary for Rebel Groups.” World 

Politics 59 (2): 217–42.

Salehyan, Idean., and Kristian S. Gleditsch. 2006. “Refugees and the Spread of Civil War.” International 

Organization 60 (2): 335–66.

Sambanis, Nicholas. 2001. “Do Ethnic and Nonethnic Civil Wars Have the Same Causes? A Theoretical 

and Empirical Inquiry (Part I).” Journal of Conﬂ ict Resolution 45 (3): 259–82.

———. 2004. “What Is Civil War? Conceptual and Empirical Complexities of an Operational Deﬁ ni-

tion.” Journal of Conﬂ ict Resolution 48 (6): 814–58.

Samity, Sharmajibee M. 2003.“‘Shalishi’ in West Bengal A Community-Based Response to Domestic Vio-

lence.” Economic and Political Weekly 38 (17): 1665–73.

Sapelli, Claudio. 2000. “The Political Economy of the Chilean Transition to Democracy.” Cuadernos de 

Economía 37 (112): 537–56.

Satyanath, Shanker, Edward Miguel, and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. “Economic Shocks and Civil Conﬂ ict: An 

Instrumental Variables Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (4): 725–53.

Sawyer, Amos. 2004. “Violent Conﬂ icts and Governance Challenges in West Africa: The Case of the Mano 

River Basin Area.” Journal of Modern African Studies 42 (3): 437–63.

Sayigh, Yezid. 2010. “The West Bank and Gaza Strip.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Scanteam. 2007. “Review of Post-crisis Multi-Donor Trust Funds: Final Report.” Scanteam, Oslo.
———. 2010. “Flexibility in the Face of Fragility: Programmatic Multi-Donor Trust Funds in Fragile and 

Conﬂ ict-Affected Situations.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Schelling, Thomas C. 1960. Strategy of Conﬂ ict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1971. “Dynamic Models of Segregation.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1 (2): 143–86.
———. 1978. Micromotives and Macrobehavior. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

 

References 

325

Schelnberger, Anna K. 2005. “Decentralisation as a Means of Conﬂ ict Management: A Case Study of 
Kibaale District, Uganda.” IEE Working Papers 181, Institute of Development Research and Develop-
ment Policy, Ruhr University, Bochum, Germany.

Scheye, Eric. 2009. “State-Provided Service, Contracting Out, and Non-State Networks: Justice and Se-
curity as Public and Private Goods and Services.” The International Network of Conﬂ ict and Fragil-
ity, Development Assistant Committee, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
Paris.

Scheye, Eric, and Diana Chigas. 2009. “Development of a Basket of Conﬂ ict, Security, and Justice Indica-
tors.”  Online  Publication.  http://www.scribd.com/doc/23391272/Conﬂ ict-Security-Justice-Global-
Indicators-Final-Report.

Schiavo-Campo, Salvatore. 2003. “Financing and Aid Management Arrangements in Post-conﬂ ict Situ-

ations.” CPR Working Papers 6, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Schimmelfennig, Frank, and Ulrich Sedelmeier. 2002. “Theorizing EU Enlargement: Research Focus, 

Hypotheses, and the State of Research.” Journal of European Public Policy 9 (4): 500–28.

Schneider, Friedrich, Andreas Buehn, and Claudio E. Montenegro. 2010. “New Estimates for the Shadow 

Economies all over the World.” International Economic Journal 24 (4): 443–61.

Schulze,  Kirsten  E.  2007. “Mission  Not  So  Impossible:  The  Aceh  Monitoring  Mission  and  Lessons 

Learned for the EU.” Internaitonal Policy Analysis, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, Berlin.

Secretaría de Gobierno de Medellín. 2010. “Informe de Indicadores Objetivos sobre Seguridad Ciuda-

dana.” Medellín Como Vamos, Medellín. http://www.medellincomovamos.org.

Seelke, Clare R., Liana Sun Wyler, and June S. Beittel. 2011. “Latin America and the Caribbean: Illicit Drug 

Trafﬁ cking and U.S. Counterdrug Programs.” Congressional Research Service, Washington, DC.

Seely, Jennifer. 2001. “A Political Analysis of Decentralisation: Co-opting the Tuareg Threat in Mali.” 

Journal of Modern African Studies 39 (3): 499–524.

Selvarajan, S. 2008. “Ex-post Economic Analysis of the National Solidarity Programme (NSP).” World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

Shanty,  Frank,  and  Patit  P.  Mishra,  eds.  2008.  Organized  Crime:  From Trafﬁ cking  to Terrorism.  Santa 

Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 

Sharma, Gopal. 2008. “Nepalis Face 16 Hour Daily Power Cuts by February.” Reuters, August 24.
Sharp, Kay, Taylor Brown, and Amdissa Teshome. 2006. “Targeting Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Pro-

gramme (PSNP).” Overseas Development Institute, London.

Shemyakina, Olga. 2006. “The Effect of Armed Conﬂ ict on Accumulation of Schooling: Results from 
Tajikistan.” HiCN Working Papers 12, Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, Brigh-
ton, U.K.

Sherman, Jake. 2010. “Criminal Justice.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Shiawl-Kidanekal, Teferra. 2004. “Conﬂ ict Prevention and Management in Africa.” In Conﬂ ict Preven-
tion: From Rhetoric to Reality, ed. Albrecht Schnabel and David Carment. Lanham, MD: Lexington 
Books.

Shin, Gi-Wook. 2006. “Agrarian Roots of Korean Capitalism.” In Transformations in Twentieth Century 

Korea, ed. Chang Yun-Shik and Steven H. Lee. New York: Routledge.

SIDA (Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency). 2005. “Strategy for Swedish Support 
to the African Great Lakes Region Including Country Strategies for Rwanda, the Democratic Repub-
lic of the Congo and Burundi: November 2004–December 2008.” SIDA, Stockholm.

Siddiqui, Niloufer. 2011. “Broken Justice.” Foreign Policy, February 1.
Silberschmidt, Margrethe. 1999. Women Forget that Men are the Masters: Gender Antagonism and Socio-

Economic Change in Kisii District, Kenya. Uppsala, Norway: Nordiska Afrikainstitutet.

———. 2001. “Disempowerment of Men in Rural and Urban East Africa: Implications for Male Identity 

and Sexual Behavior.” World Development 29 (4): 657–71.

Sirivi, Josie T., and Marilyn T. Havini. 2004. As Mothers of the Land: The Birth of The Bougainville Women 

For Peace And Freedom. Canberra: Pandanus Books, Research School of Paciﬁ c and Asian Studies.

Sirleaf, Ellen Johnson. 2007a. “Challenges for New Leadership Teams in Fragile States.” Capacity Devel-

opment Briefs 21, World Bank Institute, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2007b. “Key Note Address by Her Excellency Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of the Republic of 

Liberia.” UN Institute for Training and Research, Torino Retreat, Turin, Italy, August 31.

Sisk, Timothy D. 2010. “Cooperating for Peace: The Challenge and Promise of Partnerships in Peace 

Operations.” Geneva Centre for Security Policy, Geneva.

326 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Skaperdas, Stergios. 1996. “Contest Success Functions.” Economic Theory 7 (2): 283–90.
Skaperdas, Stergios, Rodrigo Soares, Alys Willman, and Stephen C. Miller. 2009. “The Costs of Violence.” 

World Bank, Washington, DC.

Small Arms Survey Project. 2001. Small Arms Survey 2001: Proﬁ ling the Problem. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford 

University Press.

———. 2005. Small Arms Survey 2005: Weapons at War. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
———. 2006. Small Arms Survey 2006: Unﬁ nished Business. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
———. 2009. Small Arms Survey 2009: Shadows of War. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
———.  2011. “Small Arms  Survey: Weapons  and  Markets.”  Small Arms  Survey,  Geneva.  http://www 

.smallarmssurvey.org/weapons-and-markets.html.

Smith, Anthony L. 2004. “Trouble in Thailand’s Muslim South: Separatism, not Global Terrorism.” Asia-

Paciﬁ c Security Studies 3 (10): 1–4.

Snyder, Jack. 2000. From Voting to Violence: Democratization and Nationalist Conﬂ ict. New York: W.W. 

Norton & Company.

Snyder, Jack, and Robert Jervis. 1999. “Civil War and the Security Dilemma.” In Civil Wars, Insecurity, and 

Intervention, ed. Barbara F. Walter and Jack Snyder. New York: Columbia University Press.

Solow, Robert M. 1990.The Labor Market as a Social Institution. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
South Africa Ministry of Defence. 1996. “White Paper on National Defence for the Republic of South Af-
rica.” Government of South Africa, Pretoria. http://www.info.gov.za/whitepapers/1996/defencwp.htm.
Spear, Joanna, and Bernard Harborne. 2010. “Improving Security in Violent Conﬂ ict Settings.” Back-

ground paper for the WDR 2011.

Spears, Ian S. 2002. “Africa: The Limits of Power-Sharing.” Journal of Democracy 13 (3): 123–36.
Special  Court  for  Sierra  Leone  Ofﬁ ce  of  the  Prosecutor.  2007. “The  Prosecutor  vs.  Charles  Ghankay 
Taylor–Indictment.”  Special  Court  for  Sierra  Leone,  Freetown,  Sierra  Leone.  http://www.sc-sl.org/
CASES/ProsecutorvsCharlesTaylor/tabid/107/Default.aspx.

Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction. 2009. “Hard Lessons: The Iraq Reconstruction Experi-

ence.” U.S. Independent Agencies and Commissions, Washington, DC.

Spence, A. Michael. 1977. “Entry, Investment, and Oligopolistic Pricing.” Bell Journal of Economics 8 (2): 

534–44.

Stanley, William, and David Holiday. 2002. “Broad Participation, Diffuse Responsibility: Peace Imple-
mentation in Guatemala.” In Ending Civil Wars: The Implementation of Peace Agreements, ed. Stephen 
Stedman, Elizabeth Cousens, and Donald Rothchild. Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner.

Statistical Ofﬁ ce of Kosovo. 2010. “Export-Import.” Kosovo Ministry of Public Administration, Pristina, 
Kosovo. http://esk.rks-gov.net/eng/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=46&Itemid=36.
Stedman, Stephen. 1996. “Negotiation and Mediation in Internal Conﬂ ict.” In The International Dimen-
sions of Internal Conﬂ ict, ed. Michael E. Brown. Cambridge, MA: Center for Science and International 
Affairs, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.

Stern, Jessica. 2003. Terror in the Name of God: Why Religious Militants Kill. New York: Harper Collins.
Stewart, Frances. 2005. “Horizontal Inequalities: A Neglected Dimension of Development.” In Wider Per-
spectives on Global Development, ed. UNU-WIDER (United Nations University–World Institute for 
Development Economics Research). Helsinki: UNU-WIDER.

———. 2010. “Horizontal Inequalities as a Cause of Conﬂ ict: A Review of CRISE Findings.” Background 

paper for the WDR 2011.

Stewart,  Frances,  Cindy  Huang,  and  Michael Wang.  2001. “Internal Wars: An  Empirical  Overview  of 
Economic and Social Consequences.” In War and Underdevelopment, ed. Frances Stewart and Valpy 
Fitzgerald. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Stewart, Patrick, and Kaysie Brown. 2007. Greater than the Sum of its Parts?: Assessing ‘Whole of Govern-

ment’ Approaches to Fragile States. New York: International Peace Academy.

Stoddard, Abby, Adele Harmer, and Katherine Haver. 2006. “Providing Aid in Insecure Environments: 

Trends in Policy and Operations.” HPG Brieﬁ ng Paper 23, Overseas Development Institute, London.

Stohl, Rachel, and Suzette Grillot. 2009. The International Arms Trade. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.
Stramm, Andreas, Christoph Jost, Konstanze Kreiss, Katharina Meier, Mike Pﬁ ster, Philipp Schukat, and 
Henning A. Speck. 2006. “Strengthening Value Chains in Sri Lanka’s Agribusiness: A Way to Reconcile 
Competitiveness with Socially Inclusive Growth?” Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik, Bonn, 
Germany.

 

References 

327

Strassler, Robert, ed. 1996. The Landmark Thucydides: A Comprehensive Guide to the Peloponnesian War. 

New York: Free Press. 

STRATFOR. 2009. “Central America: An Emerging Role in the Drug Trade.” STRATFOR, Austin, TX.
Straus, Scott. 2010. “Mali and Its Sahelian Neighbors.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
Strom, Kevin J., and John M. MacDonald. 2007. “The Inﬂ uence of Social and Economic Disadvantage 

on Racial Patterns in Youth Homicide Over Time.” Homicide Studies 11 (1): 50–69.

SUCOFINDO (Superintending Company of Indonesia). 2002. “Sucoﬁ ndo International Certiﬁ cation 

Services.” SUCOFINDO, Jakarta. http://222.124.12.244/sics.htm.

Suhrke, Astri, Torunn Wimpelmann, and Marcia Dawes. 2007. “Peace Processes and State Building: Eco-
nomic and Institutional Provisions of Peace Agreements.” Chr. Michelsen Institute, Bergen, Norway.
Sundberg, Ralph. 2008. “Collective Violence 2002–2007: Global and Regional Trends.” In States in Armed 

Conﬂ ict 2007, ed. Lotta Harbom and Ralph Sundberg. Uppsala, Sweden: Universitetstryckeriet.

Sutton, Adam, Adrian  Cherney,  and  Rob White.  2008.  Crime  Prevention:  Principles,  Perspectives  and 

Practices. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Svensson, Jakob. 2000. “The Cost of Doing Business: Firms’ Experience with Corruption in Uganda.” 

Africa Region Working Paper 6, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Tajima, Yuhki. 2009. “Background Paper on Economic Reintegration.” Congeso Internacional de Desarme, 

Demovilización y Reintegración, Cartagena; Republic of Colombia, Cartagena, Colombia.

Thapa, Deepak. 2010. “Nepal.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.
The Carter Center. 2007. “Final Report to the Guyana Elections Commission on the 2006 General and 

Regional Elections.” The Carter Center, Atlanta, GA.

The Economist. 2010. “Crime and Punishment in Guatemala: Kamikaze Mission: The UN’s Prosecutor 

Resigns, Taking an Enemy with Him.” The Economist, June 17.

The PRS Group. 2010. “International Country Risk Guide.” The PRS Group, East Syracuse, NY. http://

www.prsgroup.com.

The SEEP Network. 2009. “Minimum Standards for Economic Recovery after Crisis.” The SEEP Net-

work, Washington, DC.

Thornton, Gary, Ray Yannone, Larry Martinez, and Vanessa Trevino. 2011. “Los Angeles Almanac.” Los 

Angeles Almanac, Los Angeles, CA. http://www.laalmanac.com.

Timor-Leste Independent Comprehensive Need Assessment Team. 2009. “The Justice System of Timor-
Leste: An Independent Comprehensive Need Assessment.” UN Integrated Mission in East Timor, 
Dili.

Timor-Leste Ministry of Finance. 2010. “Timor-Leste Development Partners Meeting: Background 

 Paper.” Government of Timor-Leste, Dili.

Toft, Monica D. 2003.The Geography of Ethnic Violence: Identity, Interests, and the Indivisibility of Terri-

tory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Torres, Anastasia B. 2002. “Gender and Forced Migration.” Forced Migration Online, Oxford, U.K.
Transparency International. 2011. “Building Integrity and Countering Corruption in Defence and Secu-
rity: 20 Practical Reforms.” Defence and Security Programme, Transparency International, London.
Tsunekawa, Keiichi, and Kohei Yoshida. 2010. “State Building, Economic Development, and Democracy: 

The Japanese Experience.” Background note for the WDR 2011. 

Tukahebwa, Geoffrey B. 2000. “The Role of District Councils in Decentralisation.” In Decentralisation 
and Civil Society in Uganda: The Quest for Good Governance, ed. Apolo Nsibambe. Kampala: Foun-
tain Publishers.

Tulloch, Jim, Fadia Saadah, Rui M. de Araujo, Rui P. de Jesus, Sergio Lobo, Isabel Hemming, Jane Nas-
sim, and Ian Morris. 2003. Initial Steps in Rebuilding the Health Sector in East Timor. Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press.

U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. 2009. “World Refugee Survey 2009.” U.S. Committee for 

Refugees and Immigrants, Arlington, VA.

U.S. Department of State. 2008. “Interagency Conﬂ ict Assessment Framework.” Ofﬁ ce of the Coordina-

tor for Reconstruction and Stabilization, U.S. Department of State, Washington, DC.

———. 2010. “Background Note: Democratic Republic of the Congo.” U.S. Department of State, Wash-

ington, DC.

U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2011. “Petroleum & Other Liquids.” Independent Statistics 

and Analysis, U.S. Energy Information Administration, Washington, DC.

328 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce. 2007. “Stabilizing and Rebuilding Iraq: U.S. Ministry Capacity 
Development Efforts Need an Overall Integrated Strategy to Guide Efforts and Manage Risk.” Report 
to Congressional Committees, U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce, Washington, DC.

———. 2010a. “Maritime Security: Actions Needed to Assess and Update Plan and Enhance Collabora-
tion among Partners Involved in Countering Piracy off the Horn of Africa.” U.S. Government Ac-
countability Ofﬁ ce, Washington, DC.

———.  2010b. “Mérida  Initiative:  The  United  States  Has  Provided  Counternarcotics  and  Anticrime 
Support but Needs Better Performance Measures.” U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce, Wash-
ington, DC.

U.S. Ofﬁ ce of National Drug Control Policy. 1999. “FY1999 Drug Budget Program Highlights.” U.S. Of-
ﬁ ce of National Drug Control Policy, Rockville, MD. http://www.ncjrs.gov/ondcppubs/publications/
policy/budget99/spending.html.

UN (United Nations). 1998. “Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.” UN, Rome.
———. 2000. “UN Security Council Resolution 1325.” UN, New York.
———. 2002. “Women, Peace and Security.” UN, New York.
———.  2004a. “A  More  Secure World:  Our  Shared  Responsibility:  Report  of  the  Secretary  General’s 

High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change.” UN, New York.

———. 2004b. “The Rule of Law and Transitional Justice in Conﬂ ict and Post-conﬂ ict Societies: Report 

of the Secretary General.” UN, New York.

———. 2006a. “Agreement between the United Nations and the State of Guatemala on the Establish-

ment of an International Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala.” UN, New York.

———.  2006b.  “Integrated  Disarmament,  Demobilization  and  Reintegration  Standards.”  UN,  New 

York.

———. 2007. “MDG Monitor: Tracking the Millennium Development Goals.” UN, New York. http://

www.mdgmonitor.org/.

———. 2011. “UN Security Council Resolution 1960.” UN, New York.
———. Forthcoming. “United Nations Review of International Civilian Capacities.” UN, New York.
UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and UNOHCHR (UN Ofﬁ ce of the High Commissioner on Hu-
man Rights). 2010. “Harmful Traditional Practices and Implementation of the Law on Elimination 
of Violence against Women in Afghanistan.” UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; UNOHCHR, 
Kabul.

UN General Assembly. 2005a. “Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation 
for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of the 
International Humanitarian Law.” UN, New York.

———. 2005b. “Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly: 2005 World Summit Outcome.” UN, New 

York.

———.  2006. “Resolution  Adopted  by  the  General  Assembly:  The  United  Nations  Global  Counter-

 Terrorism Strategy.” UN, New York.

———. 2009a. “Activities of the International Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala: Report of 

the Secretary General.” UN, New York.

———. 2009b. “Human Security: Report of the Secretary General.” UN, New York.
———. 2010. “Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly: Follow-up to Paragraph 143 on Human 

Security of the 2005 World Summit Outcome.” UN, New York.

UN Inter-Agency Information and Analysis Unit. 2010. “Electricity in Iraq Factsheet.” UN Inter-Agency 

 Information and Analysis Unit, New York.

UN Inter-Agency Framework for Coordination on Preventive Action. 2010. “The United Nations Inter-
agency Framework Team for Preventive Action.” UN Interagency Framework Team for Preventive 
Action, New York.

UN  Security  Council.  2006.  “Report  of  the  Secretary-General  on  Timor-Leste  pursuant  to  Security 

Council resolution 1690.” UN, New York.

———. 2009. “Ninth Semi-annual Report of the Secretary-General on the Implementation of Security 

Council Resolution 1559 (2004).” UN, New York.

———. 2010a. “Haiti Can Return to ‘Path of Stability’ in Two Years, Given Necessary Support in Weath-

ering Risks of Next 18 Months, Security Council Told.” UN, New York.

———. 2010b. “Statement by the President of the Security Council.” UN, New York.

 

References 

329

UN Veriﬁ cation Mission in Guatemala. 2003. “Fourteenth Report on Human Rights of the United Na-

tions Veriﬁ cation Mission in Guatemala.” UN Veriﬁ cation Mission in Guatemala, Guatemala City.

———.  2004. “Informe  de Veriﬁ cación:  El  Estado  de  Cumplimiento  de  las  Recomendaciones  de  la 
Comisión  para  el  Esclarecimiento  Histórico.”  UN Veriﬁ cation  Mission  in  Guatemala,  Guatemala 
City.

UNDP (UN Development Programme). 2005a. “Central Asia Human Development Report: Bringing 
Down  Barriers:  Regional  Cooperation  for  Human  Development  and  Human  Security.”  Regional 
Bureau for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, UNDP, Bratislava.

———.  2005b. “International  Cooperation  at  a  Crossroads: Aid,  Trade  and  Security  in  an  Unequal 

World.” Human Development Report Ofﬁ ce, UNDP, New York.

———. 2005c. “¿Cuánto Cuesta la Violencia a El Salvador?” UNDP, San Salvador.
———. 2006. “El Costo Económico de la Violencia en Guatemala.” UNDP, Guatemala City.
———. 2008a. “Informe Estadístico de la Violencia en Guatemala: Programa de Seguridad Ciudadana 

y Prevención de la Violencia del PNUD en Guatemala.” UNDP, Guatemala City.

———. 2008b. “Post-conﬂ ict ‘Economic Recovery: Enabling Local Ingenuity.” Bureau for Crisis Preven-

tion and Recovery, UNDP, New York.

———. 2010a. “Building ‘Collaborative Capacity’: UN Development Assistance for Conﬂ ict Prevention 

through Internally Negotiated Solutions to Crises.” Background note for the WDR 2011.

———. 2010b. “The Real Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development.” Human Development 

Report Ofﬁ ces, UNDP, New York.

UNDPA  (UN  Department  of  Political Affairs).  2010a. “Input  to World  Development  Report  on  the 
Theme of Fragility and Conﬂ ict: Conﬂ ict Prevention Efforts in West Africa.” Background note for 
the WDR 2011.

———. 2010b. “Lessons Learned from Guatemala and Guyana.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
UNDPKO (UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations). 2010a. “Haiti Police Reform.” Background 

note for the WDR 2011.

———. 2010b. “List of Operations.” UNDPKO, New York.
———. 2010c. “United Nations Peacekeeping Fact Sheet.” UNDPKO, New York. http://www.un.org/en/

peacekeeping/resources/statistics/factsheet.shtml.

UNFPA (UN Population Fund). 2002. “The Impact of Conﬂ ict on Women and Girls: A UNFPA Strategy 
for Gender Mainstreaming in Areas of Conﬂ ict and Reconstruction.” Paper presented at the Impact 
of Conﬂ ict on Women and Girls: A Consultative Meeting on Mainstreaming Gender in Areas of 
Conﬂ ict and Reconstruction, Bratislava, November 13–15.

UNHCR (UN High Commissioner for Refugees). 2009. “2008 Global Trends: Refugees, Asylum-Seekers, 

Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Persons.” UNHCR, Geneva.

———. 2010. “Global Appeal 2010–2011: Real People, Real Needs.” UNHCR, Geneva.
UNICEF (UN Children’s Fund). 2004. “The Situation of Women and Girls: Facts and Figures.” UNICEF, 

New York. http://www.unicef.org/gender/index_factsandﬁ gures.html.

———. 2007. “Birth Registration and Armed Conﬂ ict.” Innocenti Research Centre, UNICEF, Florence, 

Italy.

UNIFEM (UN Development Fund for Women), UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conﬂ ict, and 
UNDPKO  (UN  Department  of  Peacekeeping  Operations).  2010.  “Addressing  Conﬂ ict-Related 
Sexual Violence: An Analytical Inventory of Peacekeeping Practice.” UNIFEM; UN Action Against 
Sexual Violence in Conﬂ ict; UNDPKO, New York.

UNODC (UN Ofﬁ ce on Drugs and Crime). 2007. “Crime and Development in Central America: Caught 

in the Crossﬁ re.” UNODC, Vienna.

———. 2008. “Crime and its Impact on the Balkans and Affected Countries.” UNODC, Vienna.
———. 2009a. “Transnational Trafﬁ cking and the Rule of Law in West Africa: A Threat Assessment.” 

UNODC, Vienna.

———. 2009b. “World Drug Report 2009.” UNODC, Vienna.
———. 2010a. “The Globalization of Crime: The Threat of Transnational Organized Crime.” UNODC, 

Vienna.

———. 2010b. “World Drug Report 2010.” UNODC, Vienna.
UNODC (UN Ofﬁ ce on Drugs and Crime) and World Bank. 2007. “Crime, Violence, and Develop-
ment: Trends, Costs, and Policy Options in the Caribbean.” UNODC, Geneva; Latin America and the 
 Caribbean Region, World Bank, Washington, DC.

330 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

UNOHCHR (UN Ofﬁ ce of the High Commissioner for Human Rights). 2006. “Rule of Law Tools for 

Post-conﬂ ict States: Truth Commissions.” UNOHCHR, Geneva.

———. 2010. “Voice of Victims: Transitional Justice in Nepal.” UNOHCHR, Geneva.
UNOPS (UN Ofﬁ ce for Project Services). 2009. “Rural Roads Connect Villages to the World.” UNOPS, 

New York.

UNPBSO (UN Peacebuilding Support Ofﬁ ce). 2010. “Background Note: The Role of the PBC in Mar-

shalling Resources for Countries on Its Agenda.” UNPBSO, New York.

UNPOL (UN Police Division). 2011. “Ofﬁ ce of Rule of Law and Security Institutions.” UNPOL, New 

York. http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/sites/police/orolsi.shtml.

UNSTAT (UN Statistics Division). 2010. “United Nations Statistics Division.” UNSTAT, New York. http://

unstats.un.org/unsd/default.htm.

Uppsala  University.  2009.  “Uppsala  Conﬂ ict  Data  Program  Database.”  Uppsala  University,  Uppsala, 

 Sweden. http://www.ucdp.uu.se/gpdatabase.

Urdal, Henrik. 2004. “The Devil in the Demographics: The Effect of Youth Bulges on Domestic Armed 

Conﬂ ict, 1950–2000.” Social Development Papers 14, World Bank, Washington, DC.

USAID (U.S. Agency for International Development). 2009a. “ADS Chapter 320: Branding and Marking.” 

USAID, Washington, DC.

———. 2009b. “Bringing Justice to Rural Colombia.” USAID, Washington, DC.
———. 2010. “USAID Branding.” USAID, Washington, DC. http://www.usaid.gov/branding/.
USAID Burundi. 2005. “Burundi Strategy Statement 2006–2008.” USAID, Bujumbura.
USAID Famine Early Warning Systems Network. 2010. “USAID Famine Early Warning Systems Net-

work.” USAID, Washington, DC. http://www.fews.net.

USAID Guatemala. 2008. “Fact Sheet: 24-Hour Courts Rule of Law Program.” USAID, Pinula, Guatemala.
USAID Rwanda. 2006. “Restoring Hope through Economic Opportunity: Final Report of the Agribusi-

ness Development Assistance to Rwanda (ADAR) Project.” USAID, Kisali.

van de Walle, Nicolas, and Michael Bratton, eds. 1997. Democratic Experiment in Africa: Regime Transfor-

mations in Comparative Perspectives. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 

Van der Elst, Kristel, and Nicholas Davis, eds. 2011. Global Risks 2011: An Initiative of the Risk Response 

Network. Geneva: World Economic Forum, 6th ed. 

Van der Graaf, General Henny. 2001. “Flames of Peace: Disarmament and post-Conﬂ ict Peacebuilding in 
Mali.” In Managing the Remnants of War: Micro-disarmament as an Element of Peacebuilding, ed. Sami 
Faltas and Joseph Di Chiaro III. Bonn, Germany: Bonn International Center for Conversion.

Van Genugten, Willem J. M., and Gerard A. de Groot, eds. 1999. United Nations Sanctions: Effectiveness 

and Effects, Especially in the Field of Human Rights. Antwerp, Belgium: Intersentia. 

Verdú,  Rodrigo  G., Wendy  Cunningham,  Linda  McGinnis,  Cornelia  Tesliuc,  and  Dorte Verner.  2008. 
Youth at Risk in Latin America and the Caribbean. Understanding the Causes, Realizing the Potential. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Verhey, Beth. 2001. “Child Soldiers: Preventing, Demobilizing and Reintegrating.”Africa Region Working 

Paper 23, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Verpoorten, Marijke. 2003. “The Determinants of Income Mobility in Rwanda, 1990–2002.” Katholieke 

Universiteit, Leuven, Belgium. Processed.

Verwimp,  Philip,  and  Jan Van  Bavel.  2005. “Child  Survival  and  Fertility  of  Refugees  in  Rwanda  after 
the Genocide: Special Issue of the Demography of Violent Conﬂ ict.” European Journal of Population 
21 (2–3): 271–90.

Vetschera, Heinz, and Matthieu Damian. 2006. “Security Sector Reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina: The 

Role of the International Community.” International Peacekeeping 13 (1): 28–42.

Villaveces, Andrés, Peter Cummings, Victoria E. Espitia, Thomas D. Koepsell, Barbara McKnight, and 
Arthur  L.  Kellermann.  2000. “Effect  of  a  Ban  on  Carrying  Firearms  on  Homicide  Rates  in  Two 
 Colombian Cities.” Journal of the American Medical Association 283 (9): 1205–09.

Von Kaltenborn-Stachau, Henriette. 2008. “The Missing Link: Fostering Positive Citizen-State Relations 
in Post-conﬂ ict Environments.” Brief for Policy Makers, Communications for Governance and Ac-
countability Program, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Vulliamy,  Ed.  2008. “How  a  Tiny  West  African  Country  Became  the  World’s  First  Narco  State.”  The 

 Observer, March 9.

Wainwright, Elsina. 2005. “How is RAMSI Faring? Progress, Challenges, and Lessons Learned.” Australian 

Strategic Policy Institute, Canberra.

 

References 

331

Walby, Sylvia. 2004. “The Cost of Domestic Violence.” Women and Equality Unit, Department of Trade 

and Industry, London.

Waldman, Matt. 2008. “Falling Short: Aid Effectiveness in Afghanistan.” Agency Coordinating Body for 

Afghan Relief, Kabul.

Wallensteen,  Peter,  Damien  Fruchart,  Paul  Holtom,  Siemon  Wezeman,  and  Daniel  Strandow.  2007. 
“United Nations Arms Embargoes: Their Impact on Arms Flows and Target Behaviour.” Stockholm 
International Peace Research Institute, Stockholm; Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Walter, Barbara, and Andrew H. Kydd. 2002. “Sabotaging the Peace: Politics of Extremist Violence.” In-

ternational Organization 56 (2): 263–96.

Walter, Barbara F. 1997.“The Critical Barrier to Civil War Settlement.” International Organization 51 

(3): 335–64.

———. 1999. “Designing Transitions from Civil War.” In Civil Wars, Insecurity, and Intervention, ed. 

Barbara F. Walter and Jack Snyder. New York: Columbia University Press.

———. 2004. “Does Conﬂ ict Beget Conﬂ ict? Explaining Recurring Civil War.” Journal of Peace Research 

41 (3): 371–88.

———. 2010. “Conﬂ ict Relapse and the Sustainability of Post-conﬂ ict Peace.” Background paper for 

the WDR 2011.

Ward, Jeanne, and Mendy Marsh. 2006. “Sexual Violence Against Women and Girls in War and Its After-
math: Realities, Responses, and Required Resources.” Paper presented at the Symposium on Sexual 
Violence in Conﬂ ict and Beyond, Brussels, June 21–23.

Weingast, Barry. 1997. “The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of Law.” American Politi-

cal Science Review 91 (2): 245–63.

Wennmann, Achim. 2009. “Getting Armed Groups to the Table: Peace Processes, the Political Economy 

of Conﬂ ict and the Mediated State.” Third World Quarterly 30 (6): 1123–38.

Whitﬁ eld, Teresa. 2007. Friends Indeed? the United Nations, Groups of Friends, and the Resolution of Con-

ﬂ ict. Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.

Wilkinson, Steven I. 2000. “India, Consociational Theory and Ethnic Violence.”  Asian Survey 40 (5): 

767–91.

Williams, Rocky. 2005. “Demobilisation and Reintegration: The South African Experience.” Journal of 
Security Sector Management, Rocky Williams Tribute Issue. http://www.ssronline.org/jofssm/issues/
jofssm_sp_04_rocky_ddr.pdf?CFID=2695055&CFTOKEN=53045118.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contract-

ing. New York: Free Press.

Willman, Alys. 2010. “Preventing and Reducing Armed Violence in Urban Areas: OECD Programming 

Note.” Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.

Willman, Alys, and Megumi Makisaka. 2010. “Interpersonal Violence Prevention: A Review of the Evi-

dence and Emerging Lessons.” Background paper for the WDR 2011.

Wilson, Scott. 2002. “Re-opening Mozambique: Lessons Learned from the Feeder Road Programme.” 
International Labour Organization, Geneva; UN Development Programme, Maputo; Swedish Inter-
national Development Cooperation Agency, Stockholm; and Administraçao Nacional de Estradas, 
Maputo.

Wisler, Dominique. 2005. “The Police Reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina.” In After Intervention: Public 
Security  Management  in  Post-Conﬂ ict  Societies:  From  Intervention  to  Sustainable  Local  Ownership, 
ed.  Anja  Ebnother  and  Philipp  Fluri.  Vienna:  Bureau  for  Security  Policy,  Austrian  Ministry  of 
 Defence; Geneva: Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces; and Partnership for 
Peace Consortium of Defense Academies and Security Studies, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
Wolpe, Howard, and Steve McDonald. 2006. “Burundi’s Transition: Training Leaders for Peace.” Journal 

of Democracy 17 (1): 126–32.

Women’s Refugee Commission. 2008. Disabilities Among Refugees and  Conﬂ ict-Affected Populations. 

New York: Women’s Refugee Commission.

Women’s Refugee Commission. 2009. Refugee Girls: The Invisible Faces of War. New York: Women’s Refu-

gee Commission.

Wood, Elisabeth J. 2003. Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salvador. Cambridge, U.K.: Cam-

bridge University Press.

———. 2008. “The Social Processes of Civil War: The Wartime Transformation of Social Networks.” 

American Review of Political Science 11: 539–61.

332 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

World Bank. 1999a. “Aid Coordination and Post-conﬂ ict Reconstruction: The West Bank and Gaza Expe-

rience.” Precís 185, Operations Evaluation Department, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 1999b. Violence in Colombia: Building Sustainable Peace and Social Capital. Washington, DC: 

World Bank.

———. 2000. “The Economics of War-to-Peace Transition.” Post-conﬂ ict Unit Discussion Note 4, World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

———.  2002a.  “East  Timor  SP:  Third  Community  Empowerment  Project.”  World  Bank,  Washing-

ton, DC.

———. 2002b. “Post-conﬂ ict Learning Event.” World Bank, Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania.
———. 2003. “Post-conﬂ ict Workshop.” World Bank, Maputo.
———.  2004. “West  Bank  and  Gaza:  Country  Financial Accountability Assessment.” West  Bank  and 
Gaza Operational Core Services Unit, Middle East and North Africa Region, World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

———. 2005a. “Memorandum of the President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment to the Executive Directors on a Proposal for the World Bank to Administer Two Multi-Donor 
Trust Funds for Sudan.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2005b. “Mozambique Country Economic Memorandum: Sustaining Growth and Reducing Pov-
erty.” Poverty Reduction and Economic Management, Africa Region, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2006a. “Anti-Corruption in Transition 3: Who is Succeeding and Why?” World Bank, Washing-

ton, DC.

———. 2006b. “At Home and Away: Expanding Job Opportunities for Paciﬁ c Islanders Through Labor 

Mobility.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2006c. “Engaging with Fragile States: An IEG Review of World Bank Support to Low-Income 

Countries Under Stress.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2006d. “Labor Migration in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region Synthesis Report: Phase I.” World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2006e. “Project Appraisal Document for a Proposed Loan in the Amount of US$29.3 Million to 

Jamaica for an Inner City Basic Services for the Poor Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2006f. World Development Report 2007: Development and the Next Generation. Washington, DC: 

World Bank.

———. 2007a. “Aid Architecture: An Overview of the Main Trends in Ofﬁ cial Development Assistance 

Flows.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———.  2007b.  “Making  the  Most  of  Scarcity:  Accountability  for  Better  Water  Management  in  the 
Middle  East  and  North  Africa.”  MENA  Development  Reports,  Ofﬁ ce  of  the  Chief  Economist, 
Middle East and North Africa Region. World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2007c. “The Development Potential of Regional Programs: An Evaluation of World Bank Sup-

port of Multicountry Operations.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2007d. “Toward a New Framework for Rapid Bank Response to Crises and Emergencies.” World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008a. “Aceh Poverty Assessment 2008: The Impact of the Conﬂ ict, the Tsunami, and Recon-

struction on Poverty in Aceh.” World Bank, Jakarta.

———. 2008b. “Activities within World Bank Core Competencies in the Context of Crises and Emergen-

cies: A Good Practice and Guidance Note.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008c. “Burundi: Investing in Leadership Development through the Rapid Results Approach.” 

World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008d. “Cash Transfer Programs in Emergency Situations: A Good Practice and Guidance Note.” 

World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008e. “Country Assistance Strategy for the Republic of Burundi for the Period of FY09–FY12 .” 

World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008f. “Republic of Lebanon: Electricity Sector Public Expenditure Review.” World Bank, Wash-

ington, DC.

———.  2008g.  “State  (Trans-)  Formation  in  Timor-Leste:  Building  Institutions  that  Contribute  to 
Peace.” OPCFC Occasional Note 3, Fragile and Conﬂ ict-Affected Countries Unit, World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.

 

References 

333

———.  2008h.  World  Development  Report  2009:  Reshaping  Economic  Geography.  Washington,  DC: 

World Bank.

———. 2009a. “Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund: Newsletter Issue 01.” World Bank, Washing-

ton, DC.

———. 2009b. “Blue Water: Towards a World Bank Group Paciﬁ c Strategy.” World Bank, Washing-

ton, DC.

———. 2009c. “Implementation, Completion and Results Report on an IDA Grant in the Amount of 
SDR 24 Million (US$3 Million Equivalent) and a MDRP Grant in the Amount of US$48.4 Million 
and a European Commission Grant in the Amount of EUR 13.4 Million (US$16.6 Million Equiva-
lent) to the Republic of Angola for an Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Project.” Sus-
tainable  Development  Department,  Fragile  States,  Conﬂ ict  and  Social  Development  Unit,  Africa 
Region, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2009d. “Lebanon: Social Impact Analysis for the Electricity and Water Sectors.” World Bank, 

Washington, DC.

———. 2009e. “Nepal: Bringing the Poorest into Schools.” World Bank, Washington, DC.  http://web.
worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/SOUTHASIAEXT/0,,contentMDK:22324235
~menuPK:158937~pagePK:2865106~piPK:2865128~theSitePK:223547,00.html

———. 2009f. “Rapport sur l’Évaluation de la Gestion Financière des Forces de Défense et de Sécurité 

en République Centrafricaine.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2010a. “Background Brief on Aceh.” Background note for the WDR 2011.
———.  2010b. “Business Warehouse  Data.” World  Bank, Washington,  DC.  http://go.worldbank.org/

Q8GHD25UA0.

———. 2010c. “Crime and Violence in Central America.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2010d. “Enterprise Surveys.” World Bank, Washington, DC. http://www.enterprisesurveys.org.
———. 2010e. Global Monitoring Report 2010: The MDGs after the Crisis. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2010f. “Implementation and Completion and Results Report (IDA Grant Nos. H246, H325, 

H451) to the Republic of Tajikistan.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2010g. “Index of Legislative Instruments Applicable from the Beginning of Afghanistan Interim 

Administration 2001 until 2009.” Background note for the WDR 2011.

———. 2010h. “Integrity Vice Presidency Annual Report: Fiscal 2010.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2010i. “LCSPS Comments to the 2011 WDR on Justice Sector Reform in Latin America.” Back-

ground note for the WDR 2011.

———. 2010j. “Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Southern Sudan: Taking Stock and a Way Forward.” World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2010k. “Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Grant in the Amount of SDR 13.6 MIllion 
(US$29 Million Equivalent) from the Pilot Crisis Response Window Resources (As a Part of a Total 
of US$47 Million Equivalent, including US$27 from Liberia Reconstruction Trust Fund) to the Re-
public of Liberia for the Urban and Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project.” World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.

———. 2010l. “The Global Land Rush: Can it Yield Sustainable and Equitable Beneﬁ ts?” World Bank, 

Washington, DC.

———. 2010m. “Violence in the City: Understanding and Supporting Community Responses to Urban 

Violence.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2010n. “World Development Indicators 2010.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———.  2011a. “In  DR  Congo,  a  Bridge  Proves  Key  to  Lower  Food  Prices.”  World  Bank,  Washing-

ton, DC.

———. 2011b. “World Investment and Political Risk 2010.” World Bank Group Multi lateral Investment 

Guarantee Agency, Washington, DC.

World Bank and ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2010. “Post Crisis Needs Assessment.” World Bank, 

Washington, DC; ADB, Islamabad.

World Bank and AfDB (African Development Bank). 2010. “Providing Budget Aid in Situations of Fra-
gility: A World Bank–African Development Bank Common Approach paper.” World Bank, AfDB, 
Washington, DC.

World  Bank  and  UN  (United  Nations).  2007. “In  Support  of  Peacebuilding:  Strengthening  the  Post 

Conﬂ ict Needs Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC; UN, New York.

334 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

———. 2008. “Georgia: Joint Needs Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC; UN, New York.
World  Bank,  USAID  (U.S.  Agency  for  International  Development),  IFC  (International  Finance  Co-
operation),  and  MIGA  (World  Bank  Multilateral  Investment  Guarantee Agency).  2009. “A  Rough 
Guide to Investment Climate Reform in Conﬂ ict-Affected Countries.” World Bank, USAID, IFC, and 
MIGA, Washington, DC.

WHO  (World  Health  Organization).  2010.  “Violence  and  Injury  Prevention  and  Disability.”  World 

Health Organization, Geneva. http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/en/.

Worsnip, Patrick. 2009. “UN Council Extends Lebanon Force with Same Mandate.”Reuters, August 27.
Wright-Neville,  David.  2004.  “Dangerous  Dynamics:  Activists,  Militants  and  Terrorists  in  Southeast 

Asia.”Paciﬁ c Review 17 (1): 27–46.

Wulf, Herbert, and Tobias Debiel. 2009. “Conﬂ ict Early Warning and Response Mechanisms: Tools For 
Enhancing the Effectiveness of Regional Organisations? A Comparative Study of the AU, ECOWAS, 
IGAD, ASEAN/ARF and PIF.” Crisis States Research Centre Working Paper 49, Development Studies 
Institute, London School of Economics and Political Science, London.

Zakaria, Fareed. 2003. The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad. New York: 

W.W. Norton & Company.

Zamora,  Ruben,  and  David  Holiday.  2007. “The  Struggle  for  Lasting  Reform: Vetting  Processes  in  El 
Salvador.”  In  Justice  as  Prevention: Vetting  Public  Employees  in Transitional  Societies,  ed. Alexander 
Mayer-Rieckh and Pablo de Greiff . New York: Social Science Research Council.

Zoellick, Robert. 2010a. “Democratizing Development Economics: An Address by the Honorable Robert 

Zoellick, President of the World Bank.” Georgetown University, Washington, DC, September 29.

———. 2010b. “Keynote Speech at the International Institute for Strategic Studies 6th Global Strategic 

Review Conference.” International Institute for Strategic Studies, Washington, DC, September 12.

Selected Indicators 2011

Table A1  Security
Technical notes

Selected world development indicators

Introduction
Classiﬁ cation of economies by region and income, FY2010
Table 1  Key indicators of development
Table 2  Poverty
Table 3  Millennium Development Goals: eradicating poverty and improving lives
Table 4  Economic activity
Table 5  Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance
Table 6  Key indicators for other economies
Technical notes

336 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Table A1  Security 

Refugees

Peacebuilding 
and peacekeeping

Military 

expenditures

Youth 

population

Battle-
related 
deaths
(number)

Intentional 
homicides
per 100,000 

people

By 

country 
of asylum

By country 
of origin

 Internally 
displaced 
persons
(number)

Troops, 

police, and 

military 
observers
(number)

2009
18

Operation 

namea

2010

UNAMAc

BINUB

13

2008
200,000
61,700
8,000
65,000
..
..
..
..
..
100,000
..
..
..

108,000 MINURCATd
186,000 MINURCAT

   1,456 

..
..

1,400,000 MONUSCO

 19,008 

7,800
621,000
..
..
..
..
32,000
200,000
..
300,000
..
..
19,000
..
..

UNOCI

 9,080 

UNIOGBIS

6,000 MINUSTAH

 11,797 

UNAMI

233

UNMIK

16

UNMIL

    9,369 

..
500,000
150,000
2,842,000
160,000
400,000
..
30,000
..
..
..
..
6,000
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
503,000

Afghanistan
Angola
Armenia
Bangladesh
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
China
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Côte d'Ivoire
Djibouti
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia, The
Georgia
Ghana
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Iraq
Jordan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Kosovo
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Maldives
Mali
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar

2000–08
26,589
3,535
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4,937
0
0
0
350
4,328
0
0
75,118
116
1,265
0
0
0
0
57
3,555
0
648
0
0
1,174
0
0
244
0
31,599
1,940
124,002
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,487
0
0
0
97
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,833

2000–09
4.5
..
2.5
2.6
32.7
..
1.4
12.6
3.6
..
..
5.9
..
..
..
1.2
..
..
..
3.9
0.7
18.0
0.6
51.8
..
3.3
..
7.1
1.8
46.0
..
..
20.7
18.6
58.0
2.8
1.1
..
1.8
4.8
5.2
..
..
7.8
..
34.8
1.3
..
..
1.1
..
..
..
..
7.7
11.9
0.5
..
0.2

2009
37
14,734
3,607
228,586
230
7,205
..
679
543
24,967
135
99,957
..
27,047
338,495
300,989
..
185,809
111,411
24,604
12,111
116,557
94,406
30
4,751
121,886
10,118
870
13,658
131
15,325
7,898

3
19
185,323
798
35,218
450,756
358,928
..
..
423
..
..
..
6,952
..
5,443
..
13,538
..
26,795
1
141
11
73
3,547
..

2009

2,887,123
141,021
18,000
10,432
17
411
89,070
573
990
94,239
17,025
14,766
24
159,554
55,014
180,558
268
455,852
20,544
23,153
622
1,027
6,990
5,051
209,168
62,889
1,973
15,020
14,893
5,768
10,920
1,109
727
24,116
1,166
19,514
18,213
1,785,212
2,129
9,620
33
..
..
2,612
8,398
10
71,599
274
130
16
2,926
..
39,143
..
5,925
1,495
2,286
136
406,669

% of central 
government 
expenditure

% 
of 
GDP

Natural 
disasters
(number)

Deaths 
from 
natural 
disasters
(number)

% of
 total 

% of 
male 

population 
ages 15–34 

population 
ages 15–34

2009
9.2
..
16.1
10.8
..
6.8
..
7.9
12.1
..
12.8
..
2.1
..
..
17.9
..
..
5.3
8.8
..
..
7.6
2.9
..
..
..
29.3
1.9
3.6
..
..
..
..
3.8
16.3
..
..
16.1
8.9
..
..
..
21.4
3.7
3.1
..
9.9
..
..
14.4
..
..
..
1.9
5.8
11.0
..
..

2009 2000–08b
2.1
4.6
4.0
1.1
1.1
1.0
..
1.6
1.3
3.8
1.2
1.6
0.6
1.8
6.5
2.0
..
1.1
1.3
1.6
3.7
3.3
2.1
0.6
..
1.3
0.7
5.6
0.7
0.4
..
..
..
0.0
0.8
2.8
0.9
6.3
6.1
1.8
..
..
..
3.6
0.4
2.6
0.8
1.1
1.2
..
2.0
..
3.8
..
0.5
1.4
3.4
0.9
..

..
..
..
137
..
..
..
39
..
36
..
..
..
..
..
731
14
126
..
..
..
..
98
28
..
..
..
..
..
41
35
..
..
..
31
365
232
..
..
85
..
..
..
16
..
..
10
..
38
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
52
50
17

2000–09
..
..
..
13,241
..
..
..
916
..
833
..
..
..
..
..
111,029
187
8,164
..
..
..
..
3,189
1,813
..
..
..
..
..
2,216
1,103
..
..
..
435
63,679
182,209
..
..
2,075
..
..
..
323
..
..
103
..
2,390
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
1,545
2,017
138,968

2009
34
34
37
34
36
34
40
36
34
33
39
36
38
35
32
32
33
34
33
36
38
35
37
36
34
33
33
29
36
33
33
35
34
36
37
35
34
37
36
37
36
31
37
38
35
40
33
34
35
48
32
36
35
36
35
39
36
33
37

2009
18
17
19
15
19
17
21
18
17
17
20
18
19
17
15
17
17
17
17
18
17
17
19
17
17
16
17
15
18
16
17
17
18
18
19
18
18
19
19
19
18
16
19
19
18
19
16
17
17
30
16
18
17
18
18
20
18
17
19

 

Selected indicators 2011 

337

Table A1  Security (continued)

Refugees

Peacebuilding 
and peacekeeping

Military 

expenditures

Youth 

population

Battle-
related 
deaths
(number)

Intentional 
homicides
per 100,000 

people

By 

country 
of asylum

By country 
of origin

 Internally 
displaced 
persons
(number)

Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Philippines
Rwanda
Samoa
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands
Somalia
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Low income
Lower middle income

2000–08
11,520
0
128
124
11,107
0
0
5,433
3,800
0
0
184
212
0
3,983
24,807
12,363
0
0
0
0
2,067
0
0
0
0
0
..
5,432
0
247
0
0
0
0
0
0
..
..

2000–09
1.8
13.0
..
1.3
7.3
8.8
12.3
3.8
1.5
..
..
3.0
2.4
..
..
7.4
..
1.0
3.0
2.3
1.0
7.9
..
..
..
1.2
2.9
..
8.7
6.3
2.5
..
1.9
3.9
4.0
7.5
8.4
..
..

2009
108,461
120
325
9,127
1,740,711
9,703
89
95
54,016
..
..
22,151
9,051
..
1,815
251
186,292
759
1,054,466
2,679
118,731
105,297
1
8,531
..
92
60
..
127,345
7,334
555
4
2,357
..
170,854
56,785
3,995
..
..

2009

5,108
1,478
822
15,609
35,132
70
77
993
129,109
..
33
16,305
15,417
66
678,309
145,721
368,195
32
17,914
562
1,204
502
7
18,378
5
2,260
743
..
7,554
24,522
6,669
..
339,289
95,201f
1,934
206
22,449
..
..

2008
50,000
..
..
100,000
50,000
..
..
314,000
..
..
..
10,000
3,000
4,000
1,100,000
500,000
6,000,000
..
65,000
..
..
..
30,000
1,000
..
..
..
..
869,000
..
3,000
..
..
100,000
..
..
880,000
..
..

Troops, 

police, and 

military 
observers
(number)

2009
72

Operation 

namea

2010
UNMIN

UNMISe

   10,592 

UNMIT

1,518 

% of central 
government 
expenditure

% 
of 
GDP

Natural 
disasters
(number)

Deaths 
from 
natural 
disasters
(number)

% of
 total 

% of 
male 

population 
ages 15–34 

population 
ages 15–34

2009
12.8
..
10.6
..
21.8
..
5.0
4.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
18.5
..
..
..
..
..
8.3
..
13.0
..
4.4
..
..
17.1
7.2
..
..
..
..
..
5.7
..
..
16.1

2009 2000–08b
1.6
0.7
..
0.9
2.9
0.5
0.8
0.8
1.5
..
..
1.6
2.3
..
..
3.5
4.2
2.1
4.2
..
1.0
1.8
11.8
2.0
..
1.4
..
..
2.2
2.9
..
..
2.2
..
4.4
1.7
..
1.5
2.1

51
20
..
..
123
25
..
163
..
..
..
..
..
..
53
25
68
..
..
31
67
79
..
..
..
..
..
..
75
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2000–09
3,120
335
..
..
78,582
397
..
10,331
..
..
..
..
..
..
3,161
35,891
3,794
..
..
180
1,466
9,929
..
..
..
..
..
..
1,817
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2009
36
39
33
35
36
35
36
36
36
33
34
35
34
37
32
33
36
38
38
39
36
32
36
37
40
38
39
..
34
30
39
38
38
37
37
38
35
..
..

2009
17
20
17
18
19
18
18
18
18
17
17
17
16
19
16
17
18
20
19
20
18
16
19
18
21
19
19
..
17
15
20
20
19
19
19
19
15
..
..

a. Data are as of October 2010. UNAMA is the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, BINUB is the Bureau Intégré des Nations Unies au Burundi (United Nations Integrated 
Ofﬁ ce in Burundi), MINURCAT is the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, MONUSCO is the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, UNOCI is the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, UNIOGBIS is the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Ofﬁ ce in Guinea-Bissau. MINUSTAH is the United Nations 
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, UNMOGIP is the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan, UNAMI is the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, UNMIK is the Interim 
Administration Mission in Kosovo, UNMIL is the United Nations Mission in Liberia, UNMIN is the United Nations Mission in Nepal, UNMIS is the United Nations Mission in Sudan, and UNMIT 
is the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste. b. Total over the period. c. Political mission administered by the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations. d. Includes 
peacekeepers in Chad. e. Does not include 22,061 troops, police, and military observers from the African Union–United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. f. Only includes refugees under the 
United Nations Refugee Agency mandate.

338 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Technical Notes

Table A1. Security

Battle-related deaths
Best estimates of the sum of battle deaths in civil wars from 
2000 to 2008. For countries with multiple civil wars, the best 
estimate for the total number of battle deaths from all con-
ﬂ icts  is  taken.  Source:  PRIO  Battle  Deaths  Dataset Version 
3.0. Where  best  estimates  were  missing  in  the  PRIO  Battle 
Deaths Dataset Version 3.0, best estimates from the UCDP 
Battle Deaths dataset (v 5) were taken. Where best estimates 
were unavailable from both the PRIO Battle Deaths Dataset 
Version 3.0 as well as the UCDP Battle Deaths dataset (v 5), 
the weighted average of PRIO Battle Deaths Dataset Version 
3.0’s low and high estimates was taken as the best estimate.

Intentional homicides
Denotes the homicide rate per 100,000 people for the latest 
year that data are available from 2000 to 2009. The rates have 
been reconciled into a single ﬁ gure from all sources collecting 
homicide statistics from both the health and the criminal jus-
tice sectors. Data from United Nations Ofﬁ ce on Drugs and 
Crime  (UNOCDC)  Crime  Trends  Survey  (CTS)  and  from 
the World  Health  Organization  were  used  as  the  two  main 
sources  of  homicide  statistics  but  preference  was  given  to 
UNODC’s CTS because of its superior coverage. Regression 
analyses  were  used  to  determine  the  degree  of  correlation 
between other criminal justice/police-based and health-based 
sources and the two main sources of data. Where correlations 
were high with the other sources, these were used to impute 
single missing observations in the main sources of data. Once 
single gaps were ﬁ lled, both data sources were combined into 
a  single  set  of  homicides  based  on  new  regression  analyses 
and later complemented with statistics from national sources. 
Sources: UNODC-CTS; Eurostat (Health and Criminal Jus-
tice); Archer and Gartner Comparative Crime Data (1978); 
World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  and  United  Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF); Pan American Health Organiza-
tion; TransMONEE Database; national sources.

Refugees by country of asylum
Denotes the number of refugees hosted by a country as of 
the end of 2009. Source: United Nations High Commission 
for Refugees (UNHCR).

Refugees by country of origin 
Denotes the number of refugees originating from each coun-
try. Source: UNHCR.

Internally displaced persons
Denotes  the  number  of  internally  displaced  people  in  a 
country as of the end of 2008. Source: U.S. Committee for 
Refugees and Immigrants.

UN Peacekeeping Operation or Political Mission
The name of the United Nations Peacekeeping Operation or 
United Nations Political Mission, if one existed as of Octo-
ber 2010. Source: UN.

UN personnel
The  number  of  United  Nations  troops,  civilian  police,  and 
military observers as of October 2010. Source: UN.

Military expenditure as a percentage of central 
 government expenditure
Military expenditure as a percentage of central government 
expenditure  for  the  year.  Military  expenditures  data  from 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) are 
derived from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
deﬁ nition,  which  includes  all  current  and  capital  expendi-
tures  on  the  armed  forces,  including  peacekeeping  forces; 
defense  ministries  and  other  government  agencies  engaged 
in defense projects; paramilitary forces, if these are judged to 
be trained and equipped for military operations; and military 
space activities. Such expenditures include military and civil 
personnel, including retirement pensions of military person-
nel  and  social  services  for  personnel;  operation  and  main-
tenance;  procurement;  military  research  and  development; 
and military aid (in the military expenditures of the donor 
country). Excluded are civil defense and current expenditures 
for previous military activities, such as for veterans’ beneﬁ ts, 
demobilization, conversion, and destruction of weapons. This 
deﬁ nition cannot be applied for all countries, however, since 
that would require much more detailed information than is 
available about what is included in military budgets and off–
budget  military  expenditure  items.  (For  example,  military 
budgets might or might not cover civil defense, reserves and 
auxiliary forces, police and paramilitary forces, dual-purpose 
forces  such  as  military  and  civilian  police,  military  grants 
in kind, pensions for military personnel, and social security 
contributions  paid  by  one  part  of  government  to  another.) 
Source:  Stockholm  International  Peace  Research  Institute 
(SIPRI), Yearbook: Armaments,  Disarmament  and  Interna-
tional Security. Note: Data for some countries are based on 
partial or uncertain data or rough estimates.

Military expenditure as a percentage of GDP
Military expenditure as a percentage of GDP. Military expen-
ditures data from SIPRI are derived from the NATO deﬁ ni-
tion, which includes all current and capital expenditures on 
the  armed  forces,  including  peacekeeping  forces;  defense 
 ministries and other government agencies engaged in defense 
projects; paramilitary forces, if these are judged to be trained 
and  equipped  for  military  operations;  and  military  space 
 activities.  Such  expenditures  include  military  and  civil  per-
sonnel,  including  retirement  pensions  of  military  personnel 
and social services for personnel; operation and maintenance; 
procurement;  military  research  and  development;  and  mili-

  

Selected indicators 2011 

339

tary aid (in the military expenditures of the donor country). 
Excluded are civil defense and current expenditures for pre-
vious military activities, such as for veterans’ beneﬁ ts, demo-
bilization,  conversion,  and  destruction  of  weapons.  This 
deﬁ nition cannot be applied for all countries, however, since 
that would require much more detailed information than is 
available about what is included in military budgets and off-
budget  military  expenditure  items.  (For  example,  military 
budgets might or might not cover civil defense, reserves and 
auxiliary forces, police and paramilitary forces, dual-purpose 
forces  such  as  military  and  civilian  police,  military  grants 
in  kind,  pensions  for  military  personnel,  and  social  security 
contributions  paid  by  one  part  of  government  to  another.) 
Source:  Stockholm  International  Peace  Research  Institute 
(SIPRI),  Yearbook:  Armaments,  Disarmament  and  Interna-
tional  Security.  Note:  Data  for  some  countries  are  based  on 
partial or uncertain data or rough estimates.

Number of natural disasters
The  sum  of  natural  disasters  in  a  country  from  2000  to 
2008.  This  includes  biological,  hydrological,  meteorologi-
cal, technological, climatological, and geophysical disasters. 
Source: Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disas-
ters (CRED).

Number of deaths from natural disasters
Total number of deaths from all natural disasters in a coun-
try from 2000 to 2009. This includes biological, hydrological, 

meteorological, technological, climatological, and geophysi-
cal disasters. Source: CRED.

Total youth population ages 15 to 34 years
Percentage of total youth population ages 15 to 34 years out 
of total population (both males and females). Source: Calcu-
lations based on data from the United States Census Interna-
tional Database.

Total male youth population ages 15 to 34 years
Percentage of male youth population ages 15 to 34 years out 
of total population. Source: Calculations based on data from 
the United States Census International Database.

Physical Rights Integrity Index
This indicator measures the extent of human rights abuses in 
a country. It is a composite indicator made up of four sub-
components:  torture,  politically  motivated  disappearances, 
extrajudicial  killings,  and  politically  motivated  incarcera-
tion.  The  index  ranges  from  0  (no  government  respect  for 
these four rights) to 8 (full government respect for these four 
rights). Source: CIRI (Cingranelli-Richards) Human Rights 
Data Project, University of Binghamton, New York.

Number of years each leader has been in power. Calcu-
lated  from  the Archigos  Dataset  of  Political  Leaders  (H.  E. 
Goemans, Kristian Skrede Gleditsch, and Giacomo Chiozza) 
and the Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook.

Selected World Development 
Indicators 2011

In this year’s edition, development data are in six tables 

presenting comparative socioeconomic data for more 
than 130 economies for the most recent year for which 
data are available and, for some indicators, for an ear-
lier year. An additional table presents basic indicators for 78 
economies with sparse data or with populations of less than 
3 million. 

The indicators presented here are from more than 800 
included in World Development Indicators 2010. Published 
annually,  World  Development  Indicators  (WDI)  reﬂ ects  a 
comprehensive view of the development process. WDI’s six 
sections recognize the contribution of a wide range of factors: 
progress  on  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs) 
and  human  capital  development,  environmental  sustain-
ability, macroeconomic performance, private sector devel-
opment and the investment climate, and the global links that 
inﬂ uence the external environment for development. 

WDI is complemented by a separately published database 
that gives access to more than 900 time-series indicators for 
237 economies and regions. This database is available at the 
Open Data website (http://data.worldbank.org). 

Data sources and methodology
Socioeconomic  and  environmental  data  presented  here 
are drawn from several sources: primary data collected by 
the  World  Bank,  member  country  statistical  publications, 
research institutes, and international organizations such as 
the United Nations (UN) and its specialized agencies, the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). (See 
the data sources in the technical notes following the tables for 
a complete listing.) Although international standards of cov-
erage, deﬁ nition, and classiﬁ cation apply to most statistics 
reported by countries and international agencies, inevitable 
differences in timeliness and reliability arise from differences 
in the capabilities and resources devoted to basic data collec-
tion and compilation. For some topics, competing sources of 
data require review by the World Bank staff to ensure that the 
most reliable data available are presented. In some instances, 
where available data are deemed too weak to provide reliable 

measures of levels and trends or do not adequately adhere to 
international standards, the data are not shown.

The data presented are generally consistent with those in 
World Development Indicators 2010. However, data have been 
revised and updated wherever new information has become 
available. Differences may also reﬂ ect revisions to historical 
series and changes in methodology. Thus data of different 
vintages  may  be  published  in  different  editions  of  World 
Bank publications. Readers are advised not to compile data 
series from different publications or different editions of the 
same publication. Consistent time-series data are available 
on the Open Data website (http://data.worldbank.org). 

All dollar ﬁ gures are in current U.S. dollars unless oth-
erwise  stated.  The  various  methods  used  to  convert  from 
national currency ﬁ gures are described in the technical notes 
following the tables.

Because the World Bank’s primary business is providing 
lending  and  policy  advice  to  its  low-  and  middle-income 
members, the issues covered in these tables focus mainly on 
those economies. Where available, information on the high-
income economies is also provided for comparison. Read-
ers may wish to refer to national statistical publications and 
publications of the OECD and the European Union (EU) for 
more information on the high-income economies.

Classification of economies and 
summary measures
The summary measures at the bottom of most tables include 
economies  classiﬁ ed  by  income  per  capita  and  by  region. 
Gross national income (GNI) per capita is used to determine 
the following income classiﬁ cations: low income, US$995 or 
less in 2009; middle income, US$996 to US$12,195; and high 
income,  US$12,196  and  above.  A  further  division  at  GNI 
per capita US$3,945 is made between lower-middle-income 
and upper-middle-income economies. The classiﬁ cation of 
economies based on per capita income occurs annually, so 
the country composition of the income groups may change 
annually. When these changes in classiﬁ cation are made on 
the basis of the most recent estimates, aggregates based on 
the new income classiﬁ cations are recalculated for all past 

341

342 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Technical notes
Because data quality and intercountry comparisons are often 
problematic, readers are encouraged to consult the technical 
notes that follow the tables, the list of classiﬁ cation of econo-
mies by region and income that follows this discussion, and 
the footnotes to the tables. For more extensive documenta-
tion, see WDI 2010.

Symbols
..  means that data are not available or that aggregates cannot 
be calculated because of missing data in the years shown. 
0  or 0.0 means zero or small enough that the number would 
round to zero at the displayed number of decimal places.
in dates, as in 2003/04, means that the period of time, usu-
ally 12 months, straddles two calendar years and refers to 
a crop year, a survey year, or a ﬁ scal year.

/ 

$  means current U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted.
>  means more than.
<  means less than.

Readers  may  ﬁ nd  more  information  in  WDI  2010,  and 
orders can be made online, by phone, or fax as follows:

For  more  information  and  to  order  online:  http://data
.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators. 

To order by phone: 1-800-645-7247

To order by fax: 1-703-661-1501

To order by mail: The World Bank, P.O. Box 960, Herndon, 
VA 20172-0960, USA

periods to ensure that a consistent time series is maintained. 
See the classiﬁ cation of economies at the end of this discus-
sion for a list of economies in each group (including those 
with populations of less than 3 million).

Summary measures are either totals (indicated by a t if 
the aggregates include estimates for missing data and non-
reporting countries, or by an s for simple sums of the data 
available),  weighted  averages  (w),  or  median  values  (m) 
calculated for groups of economies. Data for the countries 
excluded from the main tables (those presented in table 6) 
have been included in the summary measures, where data are 
available; otherwise, it is assumed that they follow the trend 
of reporting countries. This approach gives a more consistent 
aggregated measure by standardizing country coverage for 
each period shown. Where missing information accounts for 
a third or more of the overall estimate, however, the group 
measure is reported as not available. The section on statisti-
cal methods in the technical notes provides further informa-
tion on aggregation methods. Weights used to construct the 
aggregates are listed in the technical notes for each table.

Terminology and country coverage
The term country does not imply political independence but 
may refer to any territory for which authorities report sepa-
rate social or economic statistics. Data are shown for econo-
mies as they were constituted in 2009, and historical data are 
revised to reﬂ ect current political arrangements. Throughout 
the tables, exceptions are noted. Unless otherwise noted, data 
for China do not include data for Hong Kong SAR, China; 
Macao SAR, China; or Taiwan, China. Data for Indonesia 
include Timor-Leste through 1999 unless otherwise noted. 
Montenegro declared independence from Serbia and Monte-
negro on June 3, 2006. When available, data for each country 
are shown separately. However, some indicators for Serbia 
continue  to  include  data  for  Montenegro  through  2005; 
these data are footnoted in the tables. Moreover, data for 
most indicators from 1999 onward for Serbia exclude data 
for Kosovo, which in 1999 became a territory under inter-
national administration pursuant to UN Security Council 
Resolution 1244 (1999); any exceptions are noted. Kosovo 
became a World Bank member on June 29, 2009, and its data 
are shown in the tables where available. 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

343

Classiﬁ cation of economies by region and income, FY2011
East Asia and the Paciﬁ c 
American Samoa
Cambodia
China
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Lao PDR
Malaysia
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Mongolia
Myanmar
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela, RB

UMC
LIC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC

Europe and Central Asia 
Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kosovo
Kyrgyz Republic
Lithuania
Macedonia, FYR
Moldova
Montenegro
Romania
Russian Federation
Serbia
Tajikistan
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan

UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LIC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC

Middle East and North Africa
Algeria
Djibouti
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Libya
Morocco
Syrian Arab Republic
Tunisia
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.

UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC

UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC

South Asia 
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa 
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Côte d´Ivoire
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LMC
LMC

LMC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
UMC
UMC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LMC
LIC
LMC
LMC
UMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC

High-income OECD
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep.
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Other high income
Andorra
Aruba
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Barbados
Bermuda
Brunei Darussalam
Cayman Islands
Channel Islands
Croatia
Cyprus
Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Faeroe Islands
French Polynesia
Gibraltar
Greenland
Guam
Hong Kong SAR, China
Isle of Man
Kuwait
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Macao SAR, China
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
Northern Mariana Islands
Oman
Puerto Rico
Qatar
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Taiwan, China
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United Arab Emirates
Virgin Islands (U.S.)

Source: World Bank data.
This table classiﬁ es all World Bank member economies and all other economies with populations of more than 30,000. Economies are divided among income groups according to 2009 GNI 
per capita, calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. The groups are low income (LIC), US$995 or less; lower middle income (LMC), US$996–3,945; upper middle income (UMC), 
US$3,946–12,195; and high income, US$12,196 or more.

344 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Table 1.   Key indicators of development 

Population

composition 

ages 0–14

Population
Average
annual % 
growth
2000–09

2.6
0.3
1.5
2.9
1.0
0.0
1.5
0.5
1.0
1.6
–0.4
0.6
3.3
1.9
0.2
1.2
–0.7
3.3
2.8
1.7
2.3
1.0
1.8
3.2
1.1
0.6
0.6
1.5
2.9
2.1
1.7
2.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
1.5
1.1
1.9
0.4
3.6
2.6
0.3
0.7d
–1.2 
0.0
2.2
0.4
2.5
2.0
1.7
2.0
–0.2
1.4
1.3
1.5
2.5
1.7
1.9
0.6
0.1
2.4
0.7
2.6
0.4
0.9
1.7
1.3
3.7
2.0
–0.5
2.8
2.8
1.8
2.4
2.6
1.0

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Millions

2009

30
3
35
18
40
3
22
8
9
162
10
11
9
10
4
194
8
16
8
15
20
34
4
11
17
1,331
7
46
66
4
5
21
4
10
6
10
14
83
6
5
83
5
63d
4
82
24
11
14
10
10
7
10
1,155
230
73
31
4
7
60
128
6
16
40
49
5
6
4
4
6
3
20
15
27
13
3
107

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Density
people 
per sq. km

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2009

44
115
14
14
15
109
3
101
105
1,229
48
354
78
9
74
23
70
56
314
82
40
4
7
9
23
142
6,696
41
28
11
89
65
82
135
129
206
49
82
296
49
81
17
114d
62 
235 
103 
87 
128 
40 
358 
65 
112 
383 
125 
44 
70 
64 
338 
203 
350 
66 
6 
68 
502 
28 
27 
410 
39 
4 
54 
33 
158 
82 
10 
3 
55 

 Afghanistan
 Albania
 Algeria
 Angola
 Argentina
 Armenia
 Australia
 Austria
 Azerbaijan
 Bangladesh
 Belarus
 Belgium
 Benin
 Bolivia
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Brazil
 Bulgaria
 Burkina Faso
 Burundi
 Cambodia
 Cameroon
 Canada
 Central African Republic
 Chad
 Chile
 China
     Hong Kong SAR, China
 Colombia
 Congo, Dem. Rep.
 Congo, Rep.
 Costa Rica
 Côte d´Ivoire
 Croatia
 Czech Republic
 Denmark
 Dominican Republic
 Ecuador
 Egypt, Arab Rep.
 El Salvador
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 Finland
 France
 Georgia
 Germany
 Ghana
 Greece
 Guatemala
 Guinea
 Haiti
 Honduras
 Hungary
 India
 Indonesia
 Iran, Islamic Rep.
 Iraq
 Ireland
 Israel
 Italy
 Japan
 Jordan
 Kazakhstan
 Kenya
 Korea, Rep.
 Kyrgyz Republic
 Lao PDR
 Lebanon
 Liberia
 Libya
 Lithuania
 Madagascar
 Malawi
 Malaysia
 Mali
 Mauritania
 Mexico

age 

%

2009

46
24
27
45
25
20
19
15
24
31
15
17
43
36
15
26
13
46
38
33
41
17
41
46
23
20
12
29
47
40
26
41
15
14
18
31
31
32
32
42
44
17
18
17
14
38
14
42
43
36
37
15
31
27
24
41
21
28
14
13
34
24
43
17
29
38
25
43
30
15
43
46
29
44
39
28

Gross national
income (GNI)a
$ 
per 
capita
2009

$ 

billions 
2009

PPP national
income (GNI)b
$ 
per 
capita 
2009

$ 

billions 
2009

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10.6  
12.5  
154.2  
64.5  
304.7  
9.5  
957.5  
391.8  
42.5  
95.4  
53.5  
488.8  
6.7  
16.0  
17.7  
1,557.2  
43.7  
8.0  
1.2  
9.7  
22.8  
1,423.0  
2.0  
6.9  
159.9  
4,778.3  
219.2  
225.2  
10.7  
6.7  
28.5  
22.4  
61.2  
181.5  
325.8  
45.5  
53.4  
172.0  
20.8  
1.5  
27.0  
243.9  

2,754.6
11.1e
3,484.7 
16.6 
323.1 
36.8 
3.8 
.. 
13.6 
130.1 
1,368.7 
513.4 
330.6 
69.7 
197.2 
191.6 
2,112.5 
4,830.3 
22.3 
107.1 
30.7 
966.6 
4.6 
5.6 
33.6 
0.6 
77.2 
38.1 
7.9 
4.2 
198.7 
8.9 
3.2 
958.8 

370  
3,950  
4,420  
3,490  
7,570  
3,100  
43,770  
46,850  
4,840  
590  
5,540  
45,310  
750  
1,620  
4,700  
8,040  
5,770  
510  
150  
650  
1,170  
42,170  
450  
610  
9,420  
3,590  
31,420  
4,930  
160  
1,830  
6,230  
1,060  
13,810  
17,310  
58,930  
4,510  
3,920  
2,070  
3,370  
300  
330  
45,680  
42,680
2,530e
42,560 
700 
28,630 
2,620 
370 
..f
1,820 
12,980 
1,180 
2,230 
4,530 
2,210 
44,310 
25,740 
35,080 
37,870 
3,740 
6,740 
770 
19,830 
870 
880 
7,970 
160 
12,020 
11,410 
420 
280 
7,230 
680 
960 
8,920 

32.1 c
25.8 
283.6c
91.9 
568.8 
16.7 
835.7 
322.5 
79.3 
256.2 
119.6 
394.0 
13.5 
42.0 
32.9 
1,988.1 
93.2 
18.4 
3.3 
27.4 
43.0 
1,268.2 
3.3 
13.8 
227.9 
9,018.8 
307.5 
388.1 
19.6 
10.8 
50.1c
34.5 
84.9 
247.7 
208.5 
81.8c
109.5 
471.9 
39.2c
3.1 c
77.4 
183.8 
2,192.9
20.6e
3,026.7 
35.3 
320.8 
64.4c
9.5 
..
27.9c
186.1 
3,768.1 
933.2 
837.7 
105.1 
148.1 
201.2 
1,886.6 
4,245.7 
34.8 
163.2 
62.7 
1,331.4 
11.7 
13.9 
55.9 
1.2 
105.5c
55.9 
20.1 
11.6 
371.8 
15.4 
6.5 
1,515.5 

1,110 c
8,170 
8,130c
4,970 
14,120 
5,420 
38,210 
38,550 
9,030 
1,580 
12,380 
36,520 
1,510 
4,260 
8,740 
10,260 
12,290 
1,170 
390 
1,850 
2,200 
37,590 
750 
1,230 
13,430 
6,770 
44,070 
8,500 
300 
2,940 
10,940c
1,640 
19,170 
23,610 
37,720 
8,100c
8,040 
5,690 
6,360c
640 c
930 
34,430 
33,980
4,700e
36,960 
1,480 
28,440 
4,590c
940 
..
3,730c
18,570 
3,260 
4,060 
11,490 
3,340 
33,280 
27,040 
31,330 
33,280 
5,840 
10,270 
1,570 
27,310 
2,200 
2,210 
13,230 
290 
16,430c
16,740 
1,050 
760 
13,530 
1,190 
1,960 
14,110 

Gross

domestic
product
per capita
% growth
2008–09

Life expectancy

at birth

Male
Years
2008

Female
Years
 2008

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

–0.4
1.8
0.6
–2.3
–0.1
–14.6
–0.8
–3.8
8.0
4.4
0.4
–3.7
0.6
1.6
–3.2
–1.1
–4.6
0.1
0.6
–3.7
0.1
–3.7
0.5
–1.1
–2.5
8.5
1.6
–0.9
0.0
5.6
–2.8
1.4
–5.8
–4.8
–5.5
2.0
–0.7
2.8
–3.0
–1.0
5.9
–8.2
–3.2
–4.1e
–4.7 
1.4 
–2.4 
–2.1 
–2.6 
1.3 
–3.9 
–6.2 
6.2 
3.4 
0.5 
1.6 
–6.5 
–1.1 
–5.7 
–5.1 
0.4 
–0.2 
–0.5 
–0.1 
1.5 
4.5 
7.2 
0.3 
0.1 
–14.6 
–2.2 
4.8 
–3.3 
1.9 
–3.4 
–7.5 

44
74
71
45
72
70
79
78
68
65
65
77
60
64
73
69
70
52
49
59
51
79
45
47
76
71
79
69
46
53
77
56
72
74
77
70
72
68
67
57
54
76
78
68
78
56
78
67
56
59
70
70
62
69
70
64
78
79
79
79
71
61
54
77
63
64
70
57
72
66
59
52
72
48
55
73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44
80
74
49
79
77
84
83
73
67
77
83
63
68
78
76
77
54
52
63
52
83
49
50
82
75
86
77
49
55
81
59
80
81
81
75
78
72
76
62
57
83
85
75
83
58
82
74
60
63
75
78
65
73
73
72
82
83
85
86
75
72
55
83
72
66
74
60
77
78
62
54
77
49
59
78

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Adult
literacy

rate

% ages 15 
and older

2008

..
99
73
70
98
100
..
..
100
55
100
..
41
91
98
90
98
29
66
78
76
..
55
33
99
94
..
93
67
..
96
55
99
..
..
88
84
66
84
65
36
..
..
100
..
66
97
74
38
..
84
99
63
92
82
78
..
..
99
..
92
100
87
..
99
73
90
58
88
100
71
73
92
26
57
93

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

345

..

$ 

Gross national
income (GNI)a
$ 
per 
capita
2009
1,590g
2,790h
440 
..f
440 
49,350 
26,830 
1,000 
340 
1,140 
86,440 
1,020 
6,710 
1,180 
2,270 
4,150 
1,790 
12,260 
20,940 
8,330 
9,370 
460 
17,700 
1,030 
5,990 
340 
37,220 
16,130 
..f
5,770 
31,870 
1,990 
1,220 
48,930 
56,370 
2,410 
700 
500i
3,760 
440 
3,720 
8,730 
3,420 
460 
2,800 
..j
41,520 
47,240 
9,360 
1,100 
10,150 
1,010 
..k
1,060 
970 
..f

billions 
2009
5.7g
90.7h
10.0  
 
13.0  
815.8 
114.5 
5.8 
5.2 
175.8 
417.3 
172.9 
23.2 
7.9 
14.4 
120.9 
164.5 
467.5 
222.6 
178.9 
1,329.7 
4.6 
439.0 
12.9 
43.8 
1.9 
185.7 
87.4 
.. 
284.5 
1,464.7 
40.4 
51.6 
455.2 
431.1 
50.9 
4.8 
21.3i
254.7  
2.9  
38.8  
653.1  
17.5  
15.0  
128.8  
 
2,567.5  
14,502.6  
31.3  
30.5  
288.1  
88.0  
 
25.0  
12.6  
 

..

..

billions 

2009

..

10.9g
144.8h
20.1  
 
34.7  
669.6  
112.8  
14.1c
10.1 
305.7 
270.6 
459.4 
43.3c
15.3c
28.1 
237.5 
326.1 
703.5 
243.1 
310.6 
2,609.0 
10.6 
595.4 
22.4 
83.6 
4.5 
248.6 
117.1 
.. 
496.4 
1,453.6 
95.9 
84.6 
358.7 
319.9 
97.5 
13.5 
57.5i
518.0 
5.6 
81.5 
1,027.3 
35.7c
39.0 
284.8 
.. 
2,310.5 
14,345.3 
43.2 
80.2c
351.1 
249.1 
..

 
55.1  
16.5  
 

Table 1.   Key indicators of development (continued) 

 Moldova
 Morocco
 Mozambique
 Myanmar
 Nepal
 Netherlands
 New Zealand
 Nicaragua
 Niger
 Nigeria
 Norway
 Pakistan
 Panama
 Papua New Guinea
 Paraguay
 Peru
 Philippines
 Poland
 Portugal
 Romania
 Russian Federation
 Rwanda
 Saudi Arabia
 Senegal
 Serbia
 Sierra Leone
 Singapore
 Slovak Republic
 Somalia
 South Africa
 Spain
 Sri Lanka
 Sudan
 Sweden
 Switzerland
 Syrian Arab Republic
 Tajikistan
 Tanzania
 Thailand
 Togo
 Tunisia
 Turkey
 Turkmenistan
 Uganda
 Ukraine
 United Arab Emirates
 United Kingdom
 United States
 Uruguay
 Uzbekistan
 Venezuela, RB
 Vietnam
 West Bank and Gaza
 Yemen, Rep.
 Zambia
 Zimbabwe
 World
 Low income
 Middle income
   Lower middle income
   Upper middle income
 Low and middle income
   East Asia & Paciﬁ c
   Europe & Central Asia
   Latin America & 
 
the Caribbean
   Middle East & North Africa
   South Asia
   Sub-Saharan Africa
 High income

 

Millions

2009
4
32
23
50
29
17
4
6
15
155
5
170
3
7
6
29
92
38
11
21
142
10
25
13
7
6
5
5
9
49
46
20
42
9
8
21
7
44
68
7
10
75
5
33
46
5
62
307
3
28
28
87
4
24
13
13
6,775s
846
4,813
3,811
1,002
5,659
1,944
404

572
331
1,568
840
1,117

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Population
Average
annual % 
growth
2000–09

–1.4
1.2
2.5
0.8
2.0
0.4
1.2
1.3
3.6
2.4
0.8
2.3
1.7
2.5
1.9
1.3
1.9
–0.1
0.4
–0.5
–0.3
2.5
2.3
2.6
–0.3
3.3
2.4
0.1
2.3
1.3
1.5
0.9
2.1
0.5
0.8
2.7
1.3
2.8
0.9
2.6
1.0
1.3
1.4
3.2
–0.7
3.9
0.5
0.9
0.1
1.3
1.7
1.3
3.3
2.9
2.4
0.1
1.2w
2.2
1.2
1.2
0.9
1.3
0.8
0.1

1.2
1.8
1.6
2.5
0.7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Density
people 
per sq. km

2009
110 
71 
28 
76
201
487
16
47
12
166
16
215
46
15
16
23
303
125
116
94
9
394
12
63
83
78
6,943
112
14
40
91
312
17
22
191
112
49
48
132
119
66
96
11
161
80
54
254
33
19
64
32
278
654
43
17
32
52w
48
61
122
21
58
122
18

28
38
324
35
33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

composition 

age 

%

Population

ages 0–14

2009
17
28
44
27
37
18
20
35
50
43
19
37
29
40
34
30
34
15
15
15
15
42
32
44
18
43
16
15
45
31
15
24
39
17
15
35
37
45
22
40
23
27
29
49
14
19
17
20
23
29
30
26
45
44
46
40
27w
39
27
28
25
29
23
19

28
31
32
43
17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

PPP national
income (GNI)b
$ 
per 

$ 

..

capita 
2009
3,060g
4,450h
880  
 
1,180  
40,510  
26,430  
2,450c
660 
1,980 
56,050 
2,710 
12,530c
2,270c
4,430 
8,140 
3,540 
18,440 
22,870 
14,460 
18,390 
1,060 
24,000 
1,790 
11,420 
790 
49,850 
21,600 
.. 
10,060 
31,630 
4,720 
2,000 
38,560 
41,830 
4,620 
1,950 
1,350i
7,640 
850 
7,820 
13,730 
6,990c
1,190 
6,190 
.. 
37,360 
46,730 
12,910 
2,890c
12,370 
2,850 
.. 
2,340  
1,280  
 
10,633w
1,199  
6,357  
4,758  
12,479  
5,586  
5,989  
12,628  

..

Gross

domestic
product
per capita
% growth
2008–09
–6.4g
3.7h
3.9 
11.8
2.8
–4.5 
–1.6 
–2.3 
–2.9 
0.6 
–2.8 
1.5 
0.8 
2.1 
–5.5 
–0.2 
–0.9 
1.6 
–2.8 
–8.4 
–7.8 
2.4 
–2.2 
–1.1 
–2.5 
1.5 
–4.2 
–6.4 
.. 
–2.8 
–4.5 
2.8 
1.7 
–5.7 
0.5 
1.5 
1.7 
2.5i
–2.8
0.0
2.1
–5.9
6.6
3.6
–14.6
–3.2
–5.6
–3.3
2.5
6.3
–4.8
4.2
..
0.8
3.7
..

–3.0w
2.5
1.4
5.6
–3.4
1.3
6.6
–6.2

  Life expectancy

  at birth

Male
Years
2008
65
69
47
59
66
78
78
70
51
47
78
66
73
59
70
71
70
71
76
70
62
48
71
54
71
46
78
71
48
50
78
70
57
79
80
72
64
55
66
61
72
70
61
52
63
77
78
76
72
65
71
72
72
61
45
44
67w
56
67
66
68
65
70
65

70
69
63
51
77

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Female
Years
 2008
72
74
49
64
67
82
82
76
52
48
83
67
78
63
74
76
74
80
82
77
74
52
75
57
76
49
83
79
51
53
84
78
60
83
85
76
69
56
72
64
76
74
69
53
74
79
82
81
80
71
77
76
75
65
46
45
71w
58
71
70
75
69
74
74

77
73
65
53
83

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Adult
literacy

rate

% ages 15 
and older

2008
98
56
54
92
58
..
..
78
29
60
..
54
94
60
95
90
94
100
95
98
100
70
86
42
..
40
95
..
..
89
98
91
69
..
..
84
100
73
94
65
78
89
100
75
100
90
..
..
98
99
95
93
94
61
71
91
83w
66
83
80
93
80
93
98

91
74
61
62
98

..
59,219.0t
425.7  
16,231.0  
8,757.7  
7,483.6  
16,671.5  
6,109.6  
2,746.1  

..
8,741w 72,038.7t
1,014.5  
30,593.8  
18,130.0  
12,500.6  
31,607.3  
11,640.7  
5,104.6  

503  
3,373  
2,298  
7,471  
2,946  
3,143  
6,793  

3,970.9  
1,189.2  
1,704.9  
919.8  
42,583.9  

6,936  
3,594  
1,088  
1,096  
38,139  

5,920.5  
2,623.1  
4,658.6  
1,675.7  
40,723.8  

10,342  
7,927  
2,972  
1,996  
36,473  

–2.9
1.6
5.4
–1.2
–3.9

 

Note: For data comparability and coverage, see the technical notes.  Figures in italics are for years other than those speciﬁ ed.
a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method.  b. PPP is purchasing power parity; see the technical notes.  c. The estimate is based on regression; others are extrapolated from the latest 
International Comparison Program benchmark estimates.  d.  Data exclude the French overseas departments of French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Réunion. e. Data exclude Abkhazia 
and South Ossetia.  f. Estimated to be low income (US$995 or less).  g. Excludes data for Transnistria.  h. Data include Former Spanish Sahara i. Data refer to mainland Tanzania only. 
 j. Estimated to be high income (US$12,196 or more).  k. Estimated to be lower middle income (US$996–3,945).

346 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Table 2  Poverty  

National poverty line

Population below national poverty line

Survey 
year

2007
2002
1988

1998–99 

1995
2000
2002

1999
2000

2001–02 
1998
1997
1998
1998
2004
2001

1995–96 
2003

2002
2004–05 
2005
1989

2002

2000
1999
1995–96
2000
1993–94 
1995–96 

2002

1998–99 

2000
1994
1987
1998–99 
1993
1993–94 
1996

1997
2001
1997

2003
1997–98 

Survey
year

2005
1995

2001

2001
2005
2004

2003
2007

2002–03 
2001
2003

2007
2007

2006

2006

2004

2004

2007
2006
1999–2000 
2006

1999–2000 

2003

2005–06 

2006

1995
2004
1997
1999–2000 
2004

2002
2002
2005/06 

2005
2002–03 

National

%

42.0
25.4
12.2
..
..
55.1
..
..
68.1
48.9
30.5
..
29.0
45.2

19.5
22.0
36.0
54.6
68.0
34.7
40.2e
..

..
43.4
18.7e

.. 
..
55.7
71.3
42.3
31.7
..
11.2
..
..
36.5e
52.2e
22.9
38.8e, g
53.0
45.5
..
..
52.1
..
39.5
..
56.2
40.0
65.0
52.5
14.5
36.0
17.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
21.3
17.6
52.0
..
49.9
38.6
..
..
..

National

%

.. 
18.5
22.6
..
.. 
50.9
..
..
49.6
40.0
17.4
..
39.0
37.7

.. 
21.5
12.8
46.4
.. 
30.1
39.9e
..

..
.. 
13.7e

.. 
..
45.1
.. 
.. 
23.9
..
11.1
..
..
48.5e
38.3e
16.7
30.7e, g

.. 
44.2
..
..
54.5
..
28.5
..
51.0
.. 
.. 
50.7
17.3
28.6
16.7
..
..
..
..
..
..
14.2
15.4
46.6
..
43.1
33.5
..
..
..

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and 
  Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African 
  Republic
Chad
Chile
China
  Hong Kong 
  SAR, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d´Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

..
<2 
6.6
54.3
4.5
10.6
6.3
..
..
57.8d
<2 
..
47.3
19.6

<2 
7.8
2.6
70
86.4
40.2
51.5
..

82.8
61.9
<2 

28.4f
..
15.4
59.2
54.1
2.4
24.1
<2 
<2 
..
5
9.8
<2 
11
..
55.6
..
..
15.1
..
39.1
..
16.9
36.8
54.9
22.2
<2 
49.4f
21.4f
<2 
..
..
..
..
..
<2 
3.1
19.6
..
21.8
49.3d
..
83.7
..

%

..
<0.5 
1.8
29.9
1
1.9
1.1
..
..
17.3d
<0.5 
..
15.7
9.7

<0.5 
1.6
<0.5 
30.2
47.3
11.3
18.9
..

57
25.6
<0.5 

8.7f
..
6.1
25.3
22.8
<0.5
6.7
<0.5 
<0.5 
..
0.9
3.2
<0.5 
4.8
..
16.2
..
..
4.7
..
14.4
..
6.5
11.5
28.2
10.2
<0.5 
14.4f
4.6f
<0.5 
..
..
..
..
..
<0.5 
<0.5 
4.6
..
4.4
14.9d
..
40.8
..

Survey
year

2002a
1988a
2000a
2005b, c
2003a
2001a

2000a
2005a

2003a
2005c

2004a
2005c
2001a
1998a
1998a
2004a
1996a

1993a
2002–03a
2003c

2002a

2003c
2005–06a
2005a
2005c
1998a
2001a
1993c

2005c
2005c
1999–00a
2005c

1999–00a

2002a

1998–99a

2002c
1994a
2001c
2005c
2002a
1993–94a
2005a
1998a

2002–03a
2003a
1997a

2004a
1997–98a

2007a

International poverty line

Population 

below

$2.00 a day

%

..
8.7
23.8
70.2
11.3
43.4
27.1
..
..
85.4d
<2 
..
75.3
30.3

<2 
18.3
7.8
87.6
95.4
68.2
74.4
..

90.7
83.3
5.3

51.1f
..
26.3
79.5
74.4
8.6
49.1
<2 
<2 
..
15.1
20.4
19.3
20.5
..
86.4
..
..
34.2
..
63.3
..
29.8
63.8
72.1
34.8
<2 
81.7f
53.8f
8.3
..
..
..
..
..
11
17.2
42.7
..
51.9
79.9d
..
94.8
..

Survey
year

2005a
1995a

2006b, c
2007a
2005a

2005a
2007a

2007c

2007a
2007c
2003a
2003a
2006a
2007a
2001a

2003a

2006c

2005a

2006c

2007c
2002
2005a
1996c

2007c
2007c
2004–05a
2007c

2005a

2005a

2006a

2006c
2003a

2006c
2004a
2004–05a
2007a
2005a

2006a
2007a
2005–06a

2007a
2002–03a

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

..
<2 
6.8
.. 
3.4
3.7
<2 
..
..
49.6d
<2 
..
.. 
11.9

<2 
5.2
<2 
56.5
81.3
25.8
32.8
..

62.4
.. 
<2 

15.9f
..
16
.. 
.. 
<2 
23.3
<2 
<2 
..
4.4
4.7
<2  
6.4
..
39
..
..
13.4
..
30
..
11.7
70.1
..
18.2
<2  
41.6f
29.4
<2  
..
..
..
..
..
<2 
<2 
19.7
..
3.4
44d
..
.. 
..

%

..
<0.5 
1.4
..  
1.2
0.7
<0.5 
..
..
13.1d
<0.5 
..
.. 
5.6

<0.5 
1.3
<0.5 
20.3
36.4
6.1
10.2
..

28.3
.. 
<0.5 

4f
..
5.7
.. 
..  
<0.5
6.8
<0.5 
<0.5 
..
1.3
1.2
<0.5
2.7
..
9.6
..
..
4.4
..
10.5
..
3.5
32.2
..
8.2
<0.5 
10.8f
7.1
<0.5  
..
..
..
..
..
<0.5 
<0.5 
6.1
..
<0.5 
12.1d
..
.. 
..

Population 

below

$2.00 a day

%

..
7.8
23.6
..  
7.3
21
<2 
..
..
81.3d
<2 
..
.. 
21.9

<2 
12.7
<2 
81.2
93.4
57.8
57.7
..

81.9
.. 
2.4

36.3f
..
27.9
.. 
..  
4.3
46.8
<2 
<2 
..
12.3
12.8
18.4
13.2
..
77.5
..
..
30.4
..
53.6
..
24.3
87.2
.. 
29.7
<2 
75.6f
60
8
..
..
..
..
..
3.5
<2 
39.9
..
27.5
76.8d
..
.. 
..

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

347

Table 2  Poverty (continued)  

National poverty line

Population below national poverty line

Survey 
year

1999
1997–98 
1989
1998
1996
2002
2001
1990–91 
1996–97 
2004–05 
1995–96 

1998
1989–93 
1985

1993
1997
1996
1990
2003
1994
1996

1995
1998
1999–2000 

1992

1989

2004

2000

1995–96 

2003
1991
1994
1987–89 
1990
1994

2002–03
2000

 2000–01 
1989
1998

1998
1998
1990–91 

Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe

National

%

..
71.3e
65.3
15.5
63.8
50.0
50.6
62.4
13.1
69.4
32.0
41.8
..
..
47.9
63.0
43.0
..
28.6
37.3
37.5
20.5i
52.2
32.1
14.6
..
25.4
31.4
60.3e
..
33.4
..
82.8
..
16.8
..
38.0e
..
25.0
..
..
..
..
72.4
38.6
9.8
32.3
7.4
28.3
..
38.8e
31.5
..
..
..
.. 
31.5
31.3
37.4
..
41.8
72.9
25.8

Survey
year

2005
2004–05 

2000
2004
2002
1998–99 
2002–03  

2003–04 

2001

1992–93

 1998–99
2003

2004
1997
2001

2002
2002
2005–06 

2003–04 

2008

2002

2007
2000–01 
1998

1995
2002

2005–06 
2003

2003
1997–99 
2002

2004
1995–96 

National

%

..
68.7e
52.4
.. 
.. 
46.3
47.0
48.5
19.0
55.2
.. 
30.9
..
..
45.8
.. 
34.1
..
32.6
36.8
.. 
.. 
51.6
25.1
14.8
..
28.9
19.6
56.9e
..
.. 
..
70.2
..
.. 
..
22.0e
..
22.7
..
..
..
..
53.5
35.7
13.6
.. 
7.6
27.0
..
31.1e
19.5
..
..
..
.. 
27.2
52.0
28.9
..
..  
68.0
34.9

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

%

<2 
76.3
83.1
<2 
61.2
23.4
<2 
8.1
6.3
81.3
..
68.4
..
..
19.4
78.2
68.5
..
35.9
9.2
35.8
9.3
8.2
22
<2 
..
2.9
<2 
63.3
..
44.2
<2 
62.8
..
<2 
..
21.4
..
16.3
..
..
..
..
36.3
72.6
<2 
38.7
6.5
2
63.5
57.4
<2 
..
..
..
<2 
.. 
18.4
24.2
..
12.9
64.6
..

Survey
year

2002a
2001a
1997–98a
1997c
2001a
1995–96a
2006a
2004a
2000a
1996–97a

1995–96a

2001c
1994a
1996–97a

2001–02a
2004c
1996a
2005c
2005c
2003a
2002a

2002a
2002a
1984–85a

2001a
2003a
1989–90a

1992c

1995a

1995–96a

2003a
1991–92a
2002a
2006a
1995a
2002a
1993c
2002a
2005a

2005b, c

2003c
2004a

1998a
2002–03a

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

<0.5 
41.4
46
<0.5 
25.8
7.1
<0.5 
1.7
0.9
42
..
26.7
..
..
6.7
38.6
32.1
..
7.9
2.7
12.3
3.4
2
5.5
<0.5 
..
0.8
<0.5 
19.7
..
14.3
<0.5 
44.8
..
<0.5 
..
5.2
..
3
..
..
..
..
10.3
29.7
<0.5 
11.4
1.3
<0.5
25.8
22.7
<0.5 
..
..
..
<0.5 
.. 
8.8
5.1
..
3
27.1
..

International poverty line

Population 

below

$2.00 a day

%

<2 
88.7
93.5
6.8
82
48.3
4.8
28.9
24.3
92.9
..
88.1
..
..
37.5
91.5
86.4
..
73.9
18
57.4
18.4
19.4
43.8
<2 
..
13
3.7
88.4
..
71.3
<2 
75
..
<2
..
39.9
..
46.7
..
..
..
..
68.8
91.3
15.1
69.3
20.4
9.6
85.7
79.8
<2 
..
..
..
4.5
.. 
31.7
52.5
..
36.3
85.1
..

Population 

below
$1.25 
a day

%

<2 
67.8
73.9
<2 
51.4
21.2
4
2.4
2.5
74.7
..
55.1
..
..
15.8
65.9
64.4
..
22.6
9.5
.. 
6.5
7.7
22.6
<2 
..
<2 
<2 
76.6
..
33.5
<2 
53.4
..
<2
..
26.2
..
14
..
..
..
..
21.5
88.5
<2 
.. 
2.6
2.6
24.8
51.5
<2 
..
..
..
<2 
.. 
3.5
21.5
..
17.5
64.3
..

Poverty
gap at
$1.25 
a day

%

<0.5 
26.5
32.3
<0.5 
18.8
5.7
1.8
0.5
0.5
35.4
..
19.7
..
..
5.2
28.1
29.6
..
4.4
3.1
..  
2.7
2.3
5.5
<0.5 
..
<0.5 
<0.5 
38.2
..
10.8
<0.5 
20.3
..
<0.5
..
8.2
..
2.6
..
..
..
..
5.1
46.8
<0.5 
.. 
<0.5 
<0.5 
7
19.1
<0.5 
..
..
..
<0.5 
.. 
1.2
4.6
..
4.2
32.8
..

Survey
year

2004a
2005a
2004–05a, h
2004c
2006a
2000a
2008c
2007a
2007a
2002–03a

2003–04a

2005c
2005a
2003–04a

2004–05a
2006c

2007c
2007c
2006a
2005a

2007a
2007a
2000a

2005a
2008a
2003a

1996c

2000a

2002a

2004a
2000–01a
2004a

2000a
2006a
1998a
2005a
2008a

2007c

2006c
2006a

2005a
2004–05a

Population 

below

$2.00 a day

%

<2 
89.6
90.4
7.8
77.1
44.1
8.2
11.5
14
90
..
77.6
..
..
31.8
85.6
83.9
..
60.3
17.8
.. 
14.2
17.8
45
<2 
..
4.1
<2 
90.3
..
60.3
<2 
76.1
..
<2
..
42.9
..
39.7
..
..
..
..
50.8
96.6
11.5
.. 
12.8
8.2
49.6
75.6
<2 
..
..
..
4.3
.. 
10.2
48.4
..
46.6
81.5
..

Note: For data comparability and coverage, see the technical notes.  
a. Expenditure base. b. Covers urban area only. c. Income base. d. Adjusted by spatial consumer price index information. e. Due to security concerns, the survey covered only 56 percent of 
rural villages and 65 percent of the rural population. f. Weighted average of urban and rural estimates. g. Covers rural area only. h. Due to change in survey design, the most recent survey is not 
strictly comparable with the previous one. i. Survey covers Asunción metropolitan area. 

348 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Table 3  Millennium Development Goals: Eradicating poverty and improving lives 

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Share of
poorest 
quintile

of child

malnutrition

Prevalence 

in national
consumption 
or income %

Vulnerable
employment

% of 

employment

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China

Hong Kong SAR, China

Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d´Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico

1995–2008b

2008

.. 
7.8c
6.9c
2.0c
3.6d,e
8.6c
..
8.6e
13.3c
9.4c
8.8c
8.5e
6.9c
2.7c
6.7c
3.0e
8.7c
7.0c
9.0c
6.5c
5.6c
7.2e
5.2c
6.3c
4.1e
5.7e
5.3e
2.3e
5.5c
5.0c
4.4e
5.0c
8.8c
10.2e
8.3e
4.4e
3.4e
9.0c
4.3e
..
9.3c
9.6e
7.2e
5.4c
8.5e
5.2c
6.7e
3.4e
5.8c
2.5e
2.5e
8.6c
8.1c
7.4c
6.4c
..
7.4e
5.7e
6.5e
..
7.2c
8.7c
4.7c
7.9e
8.8c
8.5c
..
6.4c
..
6.8c
6.2c
7.0c
6.4e
6.5c
6.2c
3.8c

..
..
..
..
19f
..
9
9
53
..
..
10
..
..
..
27
9
..
..
..
..
10 f
..
..
24
..
7
46
..
..
20
..
16 f
13
5
42
34 f
25
36
..
52 f
9
6
62
7
..
27
..
..
..
..
7
..
63
43
..
12
7
19
11
..
..
..
25
47
..
..
..
..
9
..
..
22
..
..
30

Achieve 
universal
primary 
education

Primary 
completion

rate %

Promote 
gender
equality
Ratio of 

girls to boys
enrollments  
in primary 

and secondary 

school %

Reduce
child

mortality

Improve 
maternal 
health

 

 Under-ﬁ ve
mortality 
rate per 
1,000

Maternal
mortality 
rate per 
100,000 
live births

Combat HIV/AIDS
and other diseases

Ensure environmental

sustainability

prevalence

tuberculosis

HIV 

% of 

population
ages 15–49

Incidence 

of

per 

100,000 
people

Carbon 
dioxide

 emissions
 per capita
 metric 
tons

Access to 
improved 
sanitation 
facilities 

% of 

population

Develop 
a global

partnership for
development

Internet 
users 
per 100 
peoplea

2008

2008

2009

2008

..
..
114
..
102
98
..
99
121
54
96
86
65
98
..
..
90
38
45
79
73
96
35
31
95
96
..
110
53
73
93
48
102
95
101
91
106
95
89
47
52
98
..
100
104
82
101
80
55
..
90
95
94
106
117
..
99
99
101
..
100
105g
..
99
92
75
87
58
..
92
71
54
96
57
64
104

58
..
..
..
105
104
97
97
98
106
101
98
..
99
102
103
97
85g
91
90
84
99
69
64
99
104
..
104
76
..
102
..
102
101
102
103
100
..
98
77
85
102
100
96
98
96
97
94
77
..
107
98
92
98
116
..
103
101
99
100
102
98g
96
97
100
87
103
86
105
100
97
99
103
78
103
102

199
15
32
161
14
22
5
4
34
52
12
5
118
51
14
21
10
166
166
88
154
6
171
209
9
19
..
19
199
128
11
119
5
4
4
32
24
21
17
55
104
3
4
29
4
69
3
40
142
87
30
6
66
39
31
44
4
4
4
3
25
29
84
5
37
59
12
112
19
6
58
110
6
191
117
17

1,400
31
120
610
70
29
8
5
38
340
15
5
410
180
9
58
13
560
970
290
600
12
850
1,200
26
38
..
85
670
580
44
470
14
8
5
100
140
82
110
280
470
8
8
48
7
350
2
110
680
300
110
13
230
240
30
75
3
7
5
6
59
45
530
18
81
580
26
990
64
13
440
510
31
830
550
85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2007

..
..
0.1
2.1
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
..
0.2
0.2
1.2
0.2
<0.1
0.6
..
1.6
2.0
0.8
5.1
0.4
6.3
3.5
0.3
0.1h
..
0.6
..
3.5
0.4
3.9
<0.1
..
0.2
1.1
0.3
..
0.8
1.3
2.1
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.1
1.9
0.2
0.8
1.6
2.2
0.7
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.2
..
0.2
0.1
0.4
..
..
0.1
..
<0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
1.7
..
0.1
0.1
11.9
0.5
1.5
0.8
0.3

2008

2007

2008

2008

190
16
58
290
30
73
7
0
110
220
43
9
92
140
51
46
43
220
360
490
190
5
340
290
11
97
91
36
380
390
11
410
25
9
7
73
72
20
32
97
370
7
6
110
5
200
6
63
300
250
64
16
170
190
20
64
9
6
7
22
6
180
330
88
160
150
14
280
17
71
260
320
100
320
320
19

0.0
1.4
4.1
1.4
4.6
1.6
17.7
8.3
3.7
0.3
6.9
9.7
0.5
1.4
7.7
1.9
6.8
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.3
16.9
0.1
0.0
4.3
5.0
5.8
1.4
0.0
0.4
1.8
0.3
5.6
12.1
9.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
1.1
0.1
0.1
12.1
6.0
1.4
9.6
0.4
8.8
1.0
0.1
0.2
1.2
5.6
1.4
1.8
7.0
3.3
10.2
9.3
7.7
9.8
3.8
14.7
0.3
10.4
1.2
0.3
3.2
0.2
9.3
4.5
0.1
0.1
7.3
0.0
0.6
4.5

37
98
95
57
90
90
100
100
45
53
93
100
12
25
95
80
100
11
46
29
47
100
34
9
96
55
..
74
23
30
95
23
99
98
100
83
92
94
87
14
12
100
100
95
100
13
98
81
19
17
71
100
31
52
..
73
99
100
..
100
98
97
31
100
93
53
..
17
97
..
11
56
96
36
26
85

1.7
23.9
11.9
3.1
28.1
6.2
70.8
71.2
28.2
0.3
32.1
68.1
1.8
10.8
34.7
37.5
34.7
0.9
0.8
0.5
3.8
75.3
0.4
1.2
32.5
22.5
67.0
38.5
..
4.3
32.3
3.2
50.5
57.8
83.3
21.6
28.8
16.6
10.6
4.1
0.4
82.5
67.9
23.8
75.5
4.3
43.1
14.3
0.9
10.1
13.1
58.5
4.5
7.9
32.0
1.0
62.7
47.9
41.8
75.2
27.4
10.9
8.7
75.8
16.1
8.5
22.5
0.5
5.1
54.4
1.7
2.1
55.8
1.6
1.9
22.2

% of 

children 
under age 5
2000–08b

32.9
6.6
11.1
27.5
2.3
4.2
..
..
8.4
41.3
1.3
..
20.2
5.9
1.6
2.2
1.6
37.4
38.9
28.8
16.6
..
21.8
33.9
0.5
6.8
..
5.1
28.2
11.8
..
16.7
..
2.1
..
3.4
6.2
6.8
6.1
34.5
34.6
..
..
2.3
1.1
13.9
..
17.7
22.5
18.9
8.6
..
43.5
19.6
..
7.1
..
..
..
..
3.6
4.9
16.5
..
2.7
31.6
4.2
20.4
5.6
..
36.8
15.5
..
27.9
23.2
3.4

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

349

Table 3  Millennium Development Goals: Eradicating poverty and improving lives (continued) 

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Share of
poorest 
quintile

of child

malnutrition

Prevalence 

in national
consumption 
or income %

Vulnerable
employment

% of 

employment

% of 

children 
under age 5
2000–08b

1995–2008b

2008

Achieve 
universal
primary 
education

Primary 
completion

rate %

Promote 
gender
equality
Ratio of 

girls to boys
enrollments  
in primary 

and secondary 

school %

Reduce
child

mortality

Improve 
maternal 
health

 

 Under-ﬁ ve
mortality 
rate per 
1,000

Maternal
mortality 
rate per 
100,000 
live births

2008

2008

2009

2008

6.7c
6.5c
5.4c
..
6.1c
7.6e
6.4e
3.8e
5.9c
5.1c
9.6e
9.1c
2.5e
4.5c
3.4e
3.6e
5.6c
7.3c
5.8e
7.9c
5.6c
5.4c
..
6.2c
9.1c, i
6.1c
5.0e
8.8e
..
3.1c
7.0e
6.8c
..
9.1e
7.6e
..
7.8c
7.3c
6.1c
5.4c
5.9c
5.4c
6.0c
6.1c
9.4c
..
6.1e
5.4e
4.3e
7.1c
4.9e
7.1c
..
7.2c
3.6c
4.6c

32
51
..
..
..
9
12
45
..
..
6
62
28
..
47
40     f
45
19
19
31
6
..
..
..
23
..
10
11f
..
3
12
41f
..
7
10
..
..
88 f
53
..
..
35
..
..
..
..
11
..
25
..
30
..
36
..
..
..
..w
..
..
..
26
..
..
19

3.2
9.9
21.2
29.6
38.8
..
..
4.3
39.9
27.2
..
31.3
..
18.1
..
5.4
26.2
..
..
3.5
..
18.0
5.3
14.5
1.8
28.3
3.3
..
32.8
..
..
21.1
31.7
..
..
10.0
14.9
16.7
7.0
22.3
3.3
3.5
..
16.4
4.1
..
..
1.3
6.0
4.4
..
20.2
2.2
43.1
14.9
14.0
22.4w
28.1
22.2
25.0
..
23.5
11.9
..

91
81
59
99
..
..
..
75
40g
..
98
60
102
..
95
101
92
96
..
96
95
54
95
56
100
88
..
96
..
86
107
98
57g
94
94
114
98
83
87
61
93
93
..
56
99
105
..
95
104
95
95
..
82
61
93
..
88w
63
92
90
100
87
99
96

102
88
87
99
..
98
103
102
74
85
99
80
101
..
99
99
102
99
101
99
98
100
91
96
102
84
..
100
53
100
103
..
89g
99
97
97
91
..
103
75
103
93
..
99
99
101
101
100
98
98
102
..
104
..
95
97
96w
91
97
95
101
96
102
97

17
38
142
71
48
4
6
26
160
138
3
87
23
68
23
21
33
7
4
12
12
111
21
93
7
192
3
7
180
62
4
15
108
3
4
16
61
108
14
98
21
20
45
128
15
7
6
8
13
36
18
24
30
66
141
90
61w
118
51
57
22
66
26
21

 
 
 
 

32
110
550
240
380 
9 
14
100 
820 
840 
7 
260 
71 
250 
95 
98 
94 
6 
7 
27 
39 
540 
24 
410 
8 
970 
9 
6
1,200 
410 
6 
39 
750 
5 
10 
46 
64 
790 
48 
350 
60 
23 
77 
430 
26 
10 
12 
24 
27 
30 
68
56
..
210
470
790
260w
580
200
230
82
290
89
32

Combat HIV/AIDS
and other diseases

Ensure environmental

sustainability

prevalence

tuberculosis

HIV 

% of 

population
ages 15–49

Incidence 

of

per 

100,000 
people

Carbon 
dioxide

 emissions
 per capita
 metric 
tons

Access to 
improved 
sanitation 
facilities 

% of 

population

Develop 
a global

partnership for
development

Internet 
users 
per 100 
peoplea

2007

0.4
0.1
12.5
0.7
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.8
3.1
0.1
0.1
1.0
1.5
0.6
0.5
..
0.1
0.5
0.1
1.1
2.8
..
1.0
0.1
1.7
0.2
<0.1
0.5
18.1
0.5
..
1.4
0.1
0.6
..
0.3
6.2
1.4
3.3
0.1
..
<0.1
5.4
1.6
..
0.2
0.6
0.6
0.1
..
0.5
..
..
15.2
15.3
0.8w
2.3
0.6
0.4
1.5
0.9
0.2
0.6

2008

2007

2008

2008

170
120
420
400
160
7
8
46
180
300
6
230
47
250
47
120
280
25
30
130
110
390
19
280
18
610
39
12
390
960
17
66
120
6
5
22
200
190
140
440
24
30
68
310
100
6
12
5
22
130
33
200
19
88
470
760
140w
300
140
150
100
160
140
94

1.3
1.5
0.1
0.3
0.1
10.6
7.7
0.8
0.1
0.6
9.1
1.0
2.2
0.5
0.7
1.5
0.8
8.3
5.5
4.4
10.8
0.1
16.6
0.5
..j
0.2
11.8
6.8
0.1
9.0
8.0
0.6
0.3
5.4
5.0
3.5
1.1
0.1
4.1
0.2
2.3
4.0
9.2
0.1
6.8
31.0
8.8
19.3
1.9
4.3
6.0
1.3
0.6
1.0
0.2
0.8
4.6w
0.3
3.3
2.8
5.3
2.9
4.0
7.2

79
69
17
81
31
100
..
52
9
32
100
45
69
45
70
68
76
90
100
72
87
54
..
51
92
13
100
100
23
77
100
91
34
100
100
96
94
24
96
12
85
90
98
48
95
97
100
100
100
100
..
75
89
52
49
44
61w
35
57
50
84
54
59
89

23.4
33.0
1.6
0.2
1.7
87.0
71.4
3.3
0.5
15.9
82.5
11.1
27.5
1.8
14.3
24.7
6.2
49.0
42.1
28.8
31.9
3.1
31.3
8.4
44.9
0.3
69.6
66.0
1.1
8.6
55.4
5.8
10.2
87.7
75.9
17.3
8.8
1.2
23.9
5.4
27.1
34.4
1.5
7.9
10.5
65.2
76.0
75.8
40.2
9.0
25.7
24.2
9.0
1.6
5.5
11.4
23.9w    
2.3
17.0
13.7
29.9
15.0
19.4
26.4

Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income

Lower middle income
Upper middle income
Low and middle income

East Asia & Paciﬁ c
Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & 
  the Caribbean
Middle East & North Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

32
37
..
..
12

4.5
12.2
41.0
25.2
..

101
95
79
64
98

102
96
91
88
99

High income
Note: For data comparability and coverage, see the technical notes.  Figures in italics are for years other than those speciﬁ ed.
a. Data are from the International Telecommunication Union's (ITU) World Telecommunication Development Report database. Please cite ITU for third-party use of these data. b. Data are 
for the most recent year available. c. Refers to expenditure shares by percentiles of population, ranked by per capita expenditure. d. Urban data. e. Refers to income shares by percentiles of 
population, ranked by per capita income. f. Limited coverage. g. Data are for 2009. h. Includes Hong Kong SAR, China. i. Includes Montenegro. j. Includes Kosovo and Montenegro. k. Includes 
emissions not allocated to speciﬁ c countries.

23
33
71
130
7

86
88
290
650
15

0.5
0.1
0.3
5.0
0.3

47
44
180
350
15

2.7
3.7
1.2
0.8
12.5

79
84
36
31
99

29.0
18.9
4.7
6.5
68.3

350 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Table 4  Economic activity 

Gross domestic 

product

Average 
annual
% growth

Agricultural
productivity

Agricultural value 
added per worker

Value added as % of GDP

Household

ﬁ nal

consumption
expenditure

General

government ﬁ nal

consumption
expenditure

Gross
capital
formation

External
balance of
 goods and
services

2000 $

Agriculture

Industry

Services

% of GDP

% of GDP

   % of GDP % of GDP

GDP

implicit
deﬂ ator
average

Annual
% growth

2009

2000–09

1990–92

2005–07

2009

2009

2009

2009

 2009

   2009

   2009

2000–09

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Hong Kong SAR, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d´Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania

10,624  
11,834  
140,577  
69,067  
308,741  
8,714  
924,843  
384,908  
43,019  
89,378  
48,984  
468,552  
6,656  
17,340  
17,122  
1,571,979  
47,100  
8,141  
1,325  
10,028  
21,837  
1,336,067  
2,006  
6,680  
163,670  
4,984,731  
215,355  
230,844  
10,779  
8,695  
29,225  
23,042  
63,034  
190,274  
309,596  
46,598  
57,249  
188,334  
22,174  
1,654  
28,537  
237,512  
2,649,390  
10,737  
3,346,702  
15,619  
329,924  
36,788  
4,103  
6,693  
14,632  
128,964  
1,310,171  
540,277  
331,015  
65,837  
227,193  
194,790  
2,112,780  
5,067,526  
22,788  
109,155  
30,200  
832,512  
4,578  
5,939  
34,450  
876  
62,360  
37,206  
9,052  
4,975  
191,601  
8,996  
3,031  

..
5.3
4.0
13.1
5.4
10.5
3.3
2.0
17.9
5.9
8.3
1.7
4.0
4.1
5.0
3.6
5.3
5.4
3.0
9.0
3.4
2.5
0.8
10.4
4.1
10.9
5.2
4.7
5.2
4.0
5.1
0.8
3.9
4.1
1.2
5.5
5.0
4.9
2.6
1.3
8.5
2.5
1.5
7.4
0.9
5.6
3.6
3.8
2.5
0.7
4.9
2.9
7.8
5.3
5.4
–0.3
4.0
3.5
0.5
1.1
7.1
8.8
4.4
4.2
4.6
6.9
4.5
0.0
5.4
6.3
3.9
4.9
5.1
5.3
4.7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.. 
837 
1,823 
176 
6,919 
1,607a
20,676 
13,607 
1,000a
255 
2,042a
.. 
429 
703 
.. 
1,611 
2,686 
126 
117 
.. 
409 
28,541 
322 
209 
3,618 
269 
.. 
3,342 
209 
.. 
3,158 
652 
5,545a
3,256 
15,190 
2,055 
1,801 
1,826 
1,774 
.. 
.. 
19,011 
22,126 
2,359a
13,863 
352 
7,668 
2,304 
156 
.. 
1,227 
3,943 
359 
519 
2,042 
.. 
.. 
.. 
11,714 
20,350 
2,348 
1,776a
379 
5,804 
684a
382 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
210 
86 
398 
405 
671 

.. 
1,663 
2,232 
222 
11,192 
4,510 
30,830 
20,744 
1,198 
387 
4,017 
35,974 
661 
732 
10,352 
3,315 
8,015 
182 
70 
366 
703 
46,138 
404 
.. 
6,160 
459 
.. 
3,001 
162 
.. 
5,132 
875 
14,804 
5,945 
34,613 
3,829 
1,879 
2,758 
2,404 
118 
187 
35,783 
47,679 
1,871 
27,015 
388 
8,383 
2,736 
311 
.. 
1,842 
8,136 
530 
657 
2,931 
.. 
15,308 
.. 
26,800 
41,492 
2,440 
1,730 
367 
14,501 
1,018 
495 
31,410 
.. 
.. 
4,635 
182 
126 
583 
515 
414 

32 
21 
12 
10 
10 
21 
3 
2 
8 
19 
10 
1 
.. 
12 
9 
7 
6 
33 
.. 
35 
19 
.. 
56 
24 
4 
10 
0 
9 
43 
5 
7 
25 
7 
2 
1 
6 
8 
11 
14 
24 
47 
3 
2 
10 
1 
33 
3 
11 
11 
.. 
13 
4 
17 
14 
10 
.. 
2 
.. 
2 
1 
3 
5 
28 
3 
29 
35 
5 
61 
2 
4 
24 
36 
9 
37 
13 

26 
20 
55 
54 
32 
35 
29 
31 
60 
29 
45 
23 
.. 
29 
27 
27 
30 
22 
.. 
24 
31 
.. 
15 
36 
43 
46 
8 
36 
24 
68 
28 
25 
29 
37 
26 
30 
49 
35 
27 
19 
14 
33 
20 
21 
30 
25 
20 
29 
33 
.. 
31 
29 
28 
47 
44 
.. 
34 
.. 
27 
29 
34 
40 
20 
36 
19 
28 
18 
17 
78 
31 
18 
21 
55 
24 
47 

42 
59 
34 
36 
58 
45 
68 
67 
32 
53 
45 
76 
.. 
58 
64 
66 
64 
44 
.. 
41 
50 
.. 
30 
40 
53 
43 
92 
55 
33 
27 
65 
50 
64 
60 
73 
64 
43 
53 
59 
56 
39 
64 
78 
69 
69 
42 
77 
59 
57 
.. 
55 
66 
55 
39 
45 
.. 
64 
.. 
71 
69 
63 
54 
52 
61 
51 
37 
78 
22 
20 
64 
59 
44 
36 
39 
41 

98 
84 
41 
.. 
59 
81 
57 
53 
37 
80 
57 
54 
.. 
74 
85 
64 
73 
75 
91 
83 
72 
55 
93 
69 
60 
34 
60 
66 
74 
40 
80 
72 
58 
51 
49 
94 
63 
82 
92 
86 
88 
52 
57 
82 
56 
74 
71 
89 
84 
.. 
83 
67 
58 
56 
45 
.. 
47 
57 
59 
56 
86 
42 
73 
55 
86 
66 
89 
202 
23 
65 
85 
68 
54 
77 
61 

10 
10 
14 
.. 
13 
11 
17 
18 
14 
5 
15 
23 
.. 
11 
20 
20 
8 
22 
29 
3 
9 
19 
4 
7 
12 
11 
8 
9 
8 
14 
7 
9 
18 
22 
27 
6 
14 
7 
11 
31 
10 
22 
23 
15 
18 
19 
17 
6 
5 
.. 
21 
9 
12 
3 
11 
.. 
16 
24 
20 
18 
17 
11 
17 
15 
23 
8 
15 
19 
9 
19 
4 
13 
13 
10 
20 

28 
29 
41 
17 
23 
31 
28 
23 
22 
24 
38 
24 
25 
18 
20 
17 
26 
18 
16 
21 
18 
23 
11 
18 
19 
45 
20 
23 
30 
26 
17 
11 
28 
22 
22 
8 
27 
19 
13 
11 
20 
22 
22 
29 
19 
30 
21 
15 
14 
29 
34 
22 
35 
28 
33 
.. 
26 
16 
21 
24 
18 
39 
21 
31 
22 
37 
19 
20 
28 
27 
34 
22 
24 
22 
26 

–36 
–25 
4 
9 
4 
–24 
–2 
5 
28 
–10 
–8 
–1 
–14 
–3 
–25 
0 
–8 
–15 
–36 
–8 
–6 
2 
–8 
6 
7 
5 
11 
2 
–12 
21 
–3 
8 
–4 
6 
2 
–8 
–4 
–8 
–16 
–28 
–18 
4 
–2 
–23 
6 
–25 
–9 
–11 
–3 
–29 
–30 
1 
–5 
–10 
11 
.. 
11 
2 
0 
2 
–22 
8 
–11 
–1 
–31 
–12 
–23 
–142 
40 
0 
–24 
–3 
17 
–9 
–7 

6.9
3.4
8.6
40.5
12.9
4.5
4.0
1.7
9.9
5.2
23.3
2.1
3.4
6.8
4.0
8.1
5.8
2.5
10.4
4.8
1.9
2.3
2.7
5.3
6.3
4.3
–1.7
6.7
27.2
6.1
10.2
3.4
3.9
2.2
2.3
13.7
9.1
8.3
3.8
18.0
10.8
1.0
2.1
7.0
1.1
18.3
3.1
5.2
20.1
15.2
6.6
4.9
5.3
11.1
16.4
11.6
2.0
1.4
2.5
–1.1
4.8
14.6
6.3
2.2
8.3
8.9
2.6
10.3
17.9
4.0
11.3
17.7
3.9
4.5
10.6

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

351

Table 4  Economic activity (continued) 

Gross domestic 

product

Average 
annual
% growth

Agricultural
productivity

Agricultural value 
added per worker

Value added as % of GDP

Household

ﬁ nal

consumption
expenditure

General

government ﬁ nal

consumption
expenditure

Gross
capital
formation

External
balance of
 goods and
services

2000 $

Agriculture

Industry

Services

% of GDP

% of GDP

   % of GDP % of GDP

GDP

implicit
deﬂ ator
average

Annual
% growth

2009

2000–09

1990–92

2005–07

2009

2009

2009

2009

 2009

   2009

   2009

2000–09

Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzaniab
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income

High income

Lower middle income
Upper middle income
Low and middle income

East Asia & Paciﬁ c
Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & 
 
the Caribbean
Middle East & 
  North Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

874,902  
5,405  
90,859  
9,790  
..  
12,531  
792,128  
125,160  
6,297  
5,384  
168,994  
381,766  
166,545  
24,711  
7,893  
15,015  
126,734  
160,476  
430,076  
227,676  
161,110  
1,230,726  
5,064  
369,179  
13,059  
42,594  
1,942  
182,232  
87,642  
..  
285,983  
1,460,250  
41,979  
54,677  
406,072  
500,260  
52,177  
4,978  
21,623  
263,856  
2,855  
39,561  
617,099  
19,947  
15,736  
113,545  
261,348  
2,174,530  
14,256,300  
36,093  
32,817  
326,498  
91,854  
..  
26,365  
12,748  
..  
58,228,178 t
419,652  
16,095,002  
8,805,089  
7,280,007  
16,526,605  
6,345,309  
2,585,329  

3,976,530  

1,059,429  
1,634,623  
926,544  
41,718,726  

2.2
5.6
5.0
7.9
..
3.7
1.7
2.9
3.2
4.4
6.4
2.1
5.3
6.9
3.4
3.4
6.0
4.9
4.4
0.7
5.6
5.9
6.8
3.7
4.2
5.0
9.5
6.5
5.8
..
4.1
2.8
5.5
7.3
2.3
2.0
4.4
8.2
6.8
4.6
2.5
4.9
4.9
13.9
7.5
5.6
7.0
1.9
2.1
4.1
6.9
4.9
7.6
–0.9
3.9
5.4
–5.7
2.9 w
5.5
6.4
8.5
4.3
6.4
9.4
5.8

3.7

4.7
7.3
5.1
2.0

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

2,274 
1,349a
1,788 
117 
.. 
245 
24,752 
19,148 
.. 
242 
.. 
19,077 
765 
2,341 
555 
1,648 
879 
905 
1,605 
4,642 
2,129 
1,917a
193 
8,476 
251 
.. 
.. 
22,695 
.. 
.. 
2,149 
9,583 
697 
526 
22,319 
19,369 
2,778 
370a
261 
480 
345 
2,975 
2,198 
1,272a
175 
1,232a
10,414 
21,236 
20,353 
6,278 
1,427a
4,584 
229 
.. 
412 
189 
271 
801w
244 
493 
368 
2,132 
463 
307 
2,012 

3,022 
1,276 
2,306 
174 
.. 
241 
39,634 
25,946 
2,334 
.. 
.. 
38,445 
890 
4,011 
643 
2,136 
1,390 
1,148 
2,629 
6,135 
6,179 
2,913 
215 
17,419 
223 
.. 
.. 
50,828 
8,149 
.. 
3,149 
17,939 
823 
844 
41,905 
22,884 
4,479 
501 
324 
654 
394 
3,424 
3,223 
2,087 
191 
2,010 
29,465 
27,450 
45,285 
9,370 
2,231 
7,386 
335 
.. 
.. 
227 
239 

1,035 w

278 
743 
569 
3,232 
674 
491 
2,806 

2,213 

3,274 

1,846 
372 
305 
13,758 

2,824 
534 
322 
23,429 

4 
11 
20 
29 
.. 
34 
2 
.. 
20 
.. 
33 
1 
21 
6 
36 
24 
7 
15 
5 
2 
7 
5 
39 
2 
16 
13 
51 
0 
3 
.. 
3 
3 
14 
27 
2 
1 
21 
22 
45 
12 
.. 
8 
9 
12 
38 
10 
2 
1 
1 
10 
21 
.. 
22 
.. 
.. 
21 
.. 
3 w
27 
10 
13 
6 
10 
11 
7 

6 

11 
18 
13 
2 

38 
10 
27 
24 
.. 
16 
25 
.. 
30 
.. 
41 
46 
24 
17 
45 
19 
36 
33 
31 
24 
26 
37 
13 
69 
21 
29 
22 
26 
35 
.. 
31 
29 
28 
36 
27 
27 
34 
24 
17 
44 
.. 
30 
28 
54 
30 
52 
61 
24 
21 
26 
32 
.. 
39 
.. 
.. 
58 
.. 
28 w
26 
36 
39 
33 
36 
46 
33 

32 

43 
28 
30 
26 

58 
79 
53 
47 
.. 
50 
73 
.. 
50 
.. 
27 
53 
55 
77 
20 
57 
56 
53 
64 
74 
67 
58 
48 
28 
63 
58 
27 
74 
63 
.. 
66 
68 
58 
37 
71 
71 
45 
54 
37 
44 
.. 
62 
63 
34 
32 
38 
38 
76 
77 
64 
47 
.. 
39 
.. 
.. 
21 
.. 
69 w
47 
54 
47 
61 
54 
43 
59 

62 

46 
55 
57 
73 

65 
98 
63 
86 
.. 
81 
46 
58 
90 
.. 
.. 
39 
79 
73 
71 
74 
64 
83 
64 
67 
61 
49 
86 
39 
81 
78 
84 
43 
47 
.. 
61 
57 
67 
58 
47 
59 
72 
93 
73 
56 
.. 
63 
72 
49 
83 
65 
46 
64 
71 
68 
56 
60 
63 
.. 
.. 
74 
.. 
61 w
81 
57 
50 
63 
57 
41 
60 

66 

55 
62 
66 
62 

13 
20 
15 
13 
.. 
11 
25 
19 
13 
.. 
.. 
19 
11 
11 
11 
9 
8 
11 
16 
21 
15 
18 
10 
26 
10 
21 
14 
10 
20 
.. 
21 
19 
16 
17 
26 
11 
14 
28 
16 
12 
9 
13 
15 
10 
12 
18 
10 
22 
16 
9 
16 
14 
6 
.. 
.. 
8 
.. 
17 w
9 
13 
11 
16 
13 
11 
16 

15 

13 
12 
17 
18 

7.8
11.0
2.0
7.9
..
6.6
2.1
2.6
8.3
3.0
15.3
4.6
8.6
2.4
6.5
10.5
3.4
5.1
2.7
2.8
15.9
15.9
10.5
7.5
3.0
16.4
9.5
1.2
3.4
..
7.2
3.7
10.7
10.0
2.0
1.1
8.0
20.9
9.5
3.2
1.4
3.2
15.3
13.0
5.7
16.4
10.2
2.6
2.9
7.7
24.7
25.0
8.2
3.4
13.0
16.5
232.0

25 
19 
36 
22 
.. 
30 
21 
24 
32 
.. 
.. 
23 
20 
26 
20 
18 
25 
14 
20 
22 
31 
23 
23 
25 
29 
19 
15 
29 
38 
.. 
19 
30 
25 
25 
19 
22 
16 
22 
17 
29 
.. 
27 
15 
11 
24 
19 
20 
17 
18 
23 
20 
22 
38 
.. 
.. 
20 
.. 
22 w
24 
28 
36 
21 
28 
40 
21 

20 

28 
32 
21 
21 

–2 
–36 
–14 
–20 
.. 
–22 
8 
–1 
–35 
.. 
4 
19 
–10 
–10 
1 
–1 
3 
–6 
–2 
–10 
–7 
11 
–18 
10 
–20 
–16 
–13 
18 
–4 
.. 
–1 
–6 
–8 
0 
7 
9 
–2 
–43 
–6 
3 
–21 
–3 
–1 
30 
–19 
–1 
23 
–3 
–5 
0 
7 
3 
–7 
.. 
.. 
–1 
.. 
0 w

–15 
0 
–1 
1 
0 
4 
3 

–1 

5 
–6 
–4 
0 

Note: For data comparability and coverage, see the technical notes. Figures in italics are for years other than those speciﬁ ed. a. Data for all three years are not available. b. Data refer to 
mainland Tanzania only. 

352 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Table 5  Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance 

Merchandise trade

Manufactured

exports

High-

technology

exports

Exports

$

millions

Imports

$

millions

% of total 

% of

merchandise 

manufactured

exports

exports

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China

Hong Kong SAR, China

Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d´Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep.
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova

2009

530
1,088
43,689
39,000
55,750
698
154,043
137,217
21,570
15,081
21,282
369,760
1,000
4,850
3,953
152,995
16,435
800
65
4,550
3,100
315,552
110
2,700
53,024
1,201,534
329,739g
32,853
3,200
5,700
8,777
9,300
10,474
113,319
93,102
5,460
13,724
21,150
3,797
15
1,490
62,586
474,972
1,135
1,120,927
5,530
19,886
7,360
980
549
5,235
83,965
155,249
119,776
78,050
39,500
114,662
47,670
404,653
580,845
6,366
43,189
4,335
363,534
1,439
1,070
4,187
165
35,300
16,288
1,150
960
157,433
2,100
1,360
229,707
1,298

2009

4,200
4,548
39,103
17,000
38,771
3,304
165,471
143,527
6,469
21,833
28,564
351,035
1,800
4,410
8,811
133,609
23,300
1,900
410
5,390
3,800
330,268
300
2,100
42,378
1,005,688
352,688
32,898
3,300
2,700
11,395
6,500
21,203
104,982
82,893
12,230
15,093
44,946
7,255
515
7,310
60,037
551,092
4,378
931,434
8,140
59,398
11,521
1,400
2,140
7,830
77,550
243,636
91,720
51,450
37,000
61,871
49,150
410,385
550,679
14,075
28,374
9,670
323,085
3,037
1,430
16,574
640
10,150
18,193
2,900
1,600
123,832
2,600
1,410
241,515
3,278

2009

2008

35
70
2
..
33
33
19
81
3
88
48
77d
..
6
61
39
53
..
18
96
..
50
..
..
12
94
79g
28
..
..
47
12
67
87
67
70
9
37
72
..
9
81
79
55
82
19
54
43
32
..
35
80
67
41
..
0
86
94
83
89
73
14
37
87
34
..
71
..
..
55
57
10
70
22
0
76
23

..
4
1
..
9
2
12
11
1
1
2
8
0
4
4
12
7
..
8
..
3
15
..
..
6
29
22
4
..
..
39
16
9
14
16
8
5
1
4
..
6
21
20
3
14
1
10
4
0
..
1
24
6
11
6
0
26
16
7
18
1
22
5
33
2
..
0
..
..
11
1
2
40
3
..
19
4

Current
account
balance

$

millions

2009

..
–1,875
..
6,408
8,635
–1,326
–47,786
8,731
10,178
3,345
–6,402
1,298
–535
2,015
–2,764
–24,302
–4,340
..
–212
–1,051
–1,137
–22,612
..
..
4,217
426,107
18,278
–5,146
..
–2,181
–2,729
1,670
–3,154
–2,147
12,490
–4,437
1,120
–3,349
–1,596
..
–1,806
3,444
–51,857
–1,257
168,019
–1,198
–37,043
–217
–434
–232
–1,977
409
–36,088
10,746
..
15,519
–6,499
7,189
–66,199
142,194
–1,265
–3,405
–1,978
42,668
–631
107
–7,555
–1,187
35,702
1,492
..
..
38,914
–1,066
..
–5,238
–439

Foreign
direct

investment
net inﬂ ows

Net 
ofﬁ cial

development
assistancea

$

millions

2009

$

 per capita

2008

185
978
2,847
2,205
4,009
777
47,281
7,287
473
674
1,884
34,087
93
423
235
25,949
4,489
171
10
530
340
19,898
42
462
12,702
78,193
48,449
7,260
951
2,083
1,347
381
2,906
2,666
7,712
2,067
316
6,712
431
0
94
2,570
59,989
764
35,841
1,685
3,340
566
141
38
500
–5,858
34,577
4,877
3,016
1,070
25,233
3,894
28,976
11,834
2,382
12,601
141
1,506
189
190
4,804
378
2,674
307
1,384
60
1,609
109
–38
11,418
86

168
123
9
20
3
98
..
..
27
13
11
..
74
65
128
2
..
66
63
51
27
..
59
38
4
1
..
22
26
129
15
30
90
..
..
15
17
17
38
29
41
..
..
206
..
55
..
39
32
92
77
..
2
5
1
322
..
..
..
..
128
21
35
..
68
80
257
330
10
..
44
61
6
76
97
1
82

Domestic 

credit
provided 
by banking 

sector

% of GNIb % of GDP

External debt

Total

$ 

millions

Present
value

2008

2,200
3,188
5,476
15,130
128,285
3,418
..
..
4,309
23,644
12,299
..
986
5,537
8,316
255,614
38,045
1,681
1,445
4,215
2,794
..
949
1,749
64,277
378,245
..
46,887
12,199
5,485
8,812
12,561
..
..
..
10,484
16,851
32,616
10,110
962
2,882
..
..
3,380
..
4,970
..
15,889
3,092
1,935
3,430
..
230,611
150,851
13,937
..
..
..
..
..
6,577
107,595
7,441
..
2,464
4,944
24,395
3,484
..
31,719
2,086
963
66,182
2,190
1,960
203,984
3,787

2008

2009

4
21
3
24
48
27
..
..
12
20
24
..
10e
14e
44
19
91
14e
80e
42
4e
..
41e
19e
41
10
..
23
100e
74e
33
76e
..
..
..
24
34
20
47
38e
8e
..
..
24
..
20e
..
42
49e
17e
12e
..
18
35
4
..
..
..
..
..
32
106
19
..
42e
83
95
340e
..
78
20e
9e
35
11e
41e
20
67

3
67
–12
32
27
17
144
..
17
59
31
..
19
55
58
118
67
15
35
16
7
178
17
8
116
145
125
43
9
–18
54
23
75
58
211
39
20
78
50
113
37
..
..
33
..
..
..
40
..
26
56
81
73
37
45
–25
..
78
..
379
109
34
40
112
14
10
165
145
–63
64
11
30
116
11
..
46
40

Net

migration

thousands

2005–10c

1,000
–75
–140
80
30
–75
500
160
–50
–570
0
200
50
–100
–10
–229
–50
–65
323
–5
–19
1,050
5
–75
30
–1,731f
113
–120
–100
–50
30
–145
10
226
30
–140
–350
–340
–280
55
–300
55
500
–250
550
–51
150
–200
–300
–140
–100
75
–1,000
–730
–500
–577
200
85
1,650
150
250
–100
–189
–30
–75
–75
–13
248
20
–100
–5
–20
130
–202
10
–2,430
–172

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

353

Table 5  Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance (continued) 

Merchandise trade

Manufactured

exports

High-

technology

exports

Exports

$

millions

Imports

$

millions

% of total 

% of

merchandise 

manufactured

exports

exports

Current
account
balance

$

millions

Foreign
direct

investment
net inﬂ ows

Net 
ofﬁ cial

development
assistancea

$

millions

$

 per capita

Domestic 

credit
provided 
by banking 

sector

External debt

Total

$ 

millions

Present
value

% of GNIb % of GDP

2009

2009

2009

2008

2009

2009

2008

2008

2008

2009

Net

migration

thousands

2005–10c

–425
–20
–500
–100
100
50
–200
–28
–300
135
–1,416
11
0
–40
–625
–900
–120
200
–200
250
15
150
–100
0
60
500
20
–250
700
1,750
–300
135
150
100
800
–200
–300
300
–5
–20
–44
–25
–135
–80
343
948
5,052
–50
–400
40
–200
–10
–135
–85
–700
..js
–2,737
–13,203
–9,231
–3,972
–15,941
–3,781
–1,671

–1,089
–2,376
–1,810
15,894

99
14
..
53
..
156
71
12
27
..
46
85
26
21
19
46
60
..
41
26
..
1
26
39
11
94
54
..
215
..
43
16
133
181
37
28
17
146
30
75
53
..
11
82
115
229
272
34
..
20
95
..
19
19
..

185 w
32
78
127
61
77
145
38

36
73
78
245

72

–5,214

13,848
1,950
6,620
680
498,648
24,936
1,391
900
52,500
120,710
17,695
885
4,530
3,191
26,885
38,335
134,452
43,192
40,500
303,978
205
188,500
2,180
8,345
205
269,832g
55,933
..
62,627
218,027
7,360
7,800
130,742
172,742
10,400
1,010
2,970
152,498
780
14,449
102,139
6,595
3,560
39,782
175,000
350,728
1,056,895
5,386
9,850
57,595
56,574
..
9,270
4,238
1,700
12,465,631t
76,234
3,708,999
2,090,954
1,617,007
3,785,241
1,747,818
650,221

32,804
3,750
4,600
3,550
445,802
25,583
3,454
1,550
39,000
68,506
31,720
7,785
3,480
6,940
21,706
45,802
146,626
69,238
54,075
191,868
1,750
92,200
5,210
15,582
505
245,785
55,186
..
71,950
290,240
9,883
8,200
118,758
155,595
16,300
2,569
6,347
133,801
1,400
19,100
140,869
6,750
4,410
45,487
140,000
479,890
1,603,768
6,907
7,615
42,220
68,936
..
9,300
3,791
2,900
12,553,525t
124,812
3,509,321
2,027,292
1,476,640
3,634,105
1,492,279
624,980

676,338

669,803

65
12
..
67
55
22
35
7
5
20
76
10
..
11
16
86
80
72
79
17
4
9
41
66
..
70 g
86
..
47h
73
67
0
76
90
35
..
25
75
62
75
80
..
27
70
4
72
67
26
..
67
55
..
2
8
34
70w
50
64
78
53
64
80
34

60

9
4
..
..
22
9
4
8
0
20
2
0
..
9
2
66
5
8
7
7
7
1
5
..
..
51
5
..
5
5
2
0
16
23
1
..
1
25
0
5
2
..
1
3
3
19
27
4
..
3
9
..
0
2
3
17w
3
17
22
9
16
28
6

12

–4,570
–1,171
..
–10
42,819
–3,694
–1,513
–351
22,889
53,531
–15,663
–4
..
–196
247
8,552
–7,207
–23,380
–7,139
48,971
–379
22,765
–1,311
–2,413
–193
27,181
–2,810
..
–11,295
–78,683
–215
–1,314
30,232
23,636
66
–180
–2,307
20,284
–222
–1,711
–13,961
..
–875
–1,801
..
–28,690
–419,870
259
..
8,561
–10,706
535
–1,251
–1,046
..

1,333
881
323
38
31,938
470
434
739
5,787
6,870
2,387
1,773
424
274
4,760
1,948
11,546
2,808
6,310
37,134
119
10,499
208
1,921
74
16,809
–31
108
5,628
6,451
404
2,923
10,708
24,803
1,434
16
645
5,956
50
1,595
7,955
1,355
604
4,816
..
24,799
134,710
1,139
750
–3,105
7,600
52
129
699
60
1,116,269s
12,033
346,573
177,941
168,632
358,605
102,488
85,053

73,902

24
15e
35
21
..
..
32e
13e
6
..
24
54
21
29
28
37
46
..
57
30
8e
..
16e
70
10e
..
..
..
16
..
35
78e
..
..
..
23
14e, i
31
51e
58
40
5
10e
63
..
..
..
40
15
21
29
..
18
6e
177

39
89
11
25
..
..
131
41
9
..
9
8
46
21
16
1
..
..
..
..
96
–5
87
142
66
..
..
85
23
..
36
58
..
..
7
43
55
–9
51
46
27
4
52
13
..
..
..
10
7
2
30
659
13
86
49
19w
45
11
11
13
23
5
20

16

20,825
3,432
7,210
3,685
..
..
3,558
966
11,221
..
49,337
10,722
1,418
4,163
28,555
64,856
218,022
..
104,943
402,453
679
..
2,861
30,918
389
..
..
2,949
41,943
..
15,154
19,633
..
..
..
1,466
5,938
64,798
1,573
20,776
277,277
638
2,249
92,479
..
..
..
11,049
3,995
50,229
26,158
..
6,258
2,986
5,199
..s
129,218
3,329,192
1,342,220
1,986,972
3,458,409
771,628
1,138,859

894,367

Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi  Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income

Lower middle income
Upper middle income
Low and middle income

East Asia & Paciﬁ c
Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & 
 
the Caribbean
Middle East & 
  North Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

273,042
197,030
241,607
8,682,510

290,458
316,340
248,900
8,926,538

..
68
33
72

4
5
3
18

28,095
38,311
30,756
757,664

73
8
49
0

131,545
326,311
195,699
..

High income
Note: For data comparability and coverage, see the technical notes.  Figures in italics are for years other than those speciﬁ ed. 
a. The distinction between ofﬁ cial aid, for countries on the Part II list of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC), 
and ofﬁ cial development assistance was dropped in 2005. Regional aggregates include data for economies not listed in the table. World and income group totals include aid not allocated by 
country or region. b. The numerator refers to 2008, whereas the denominator is a three-year average of 2006–08 data. c. Total for the ﬁ ve-year period. d. Includes Luxembourg. e. Data are from 
debt sustainability analysis for low-income countries. f. Includes Taiwan, China. g. Includes reexports. h. Data on total exports and imports refer to South Africa only. Data on export commodity 
shares refer to the South African Customs Union (Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and  South Africa). i. GNI refers to mainland Tanzania only.  j. World total computed by the UN sums to zero, but 
because the aggregates shown here refer to World Bank deﬁ nitions, regional and income group totals do not equal zero.

354 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Table 6  Key indicators for other economies  

Population

age 

composition

Gross national income 

(GNI)a

 American Samoa
 Andorra
 Antigua and Barbuda
 Aruba
 Bahamas, The
 Bahrain
 Barbados
 Belize
 Bermuda
 Bhutan
 Botswana
 Brunei Darussalam
 Cape Verde
 Cayman Islands
 Channel Islands
 Comoros
 Cuba
 Cyprus
 Djibouti
 Dominica
 Equatorial Guinea
 Estonia
 Faeroe Islands
 Fiji
 French Polynesia
 Gabon
 Gambia, The
 Gibraltar
 Greenland
 Grenada
 Guam
 Guinea-Bissau
 Guyana
 Iceland
 Isle of Man
 Jamaica
 Kiribati
 Korea, Dem. Rep.
 Kosovo
 Kuwait
 Latvia
 Lesotho
 Liechtenstein
 Luxembourg
 Macao SAR, China
 Macedonia, FYR
 Maldives
 Malta
 Marshall Islands
 Mauritius
 Mayotte
 Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
 Monaco
 Mongolia
 Montenegro
 Namibia
 Netherlands Antilles
 New Caledonia
 Northern Mariana Islands
 Oman
 Palau
 Puerto Rico
 Qatar
 Samoa
 San Marino

Thousands

2009

67
85
88
107
342
791
256
333  
64
697
1,950
400
506
55
150
659
11,204
871
864
74
676
1,340
49
849
269
1,475
1,705
31
56
104
178
1,611
762
319
80
2,700
98
23,906
1,805
2,795
2,255
2,067
36
498
538
2,042
309
415
61
1,275
197
111
33
2,671
624
2,171
198
250
87
2,845
20
3,967
1,409
179
31

Population
Average 
annual

% 

growth
2000–09

Density
people 

per

sq. km.
2008

%

ages 0–14

2009

$ 

millions

2009

1.7 
3.3d
1.4 
1.8 
1.3 
2.2 
0.2 
3.2 
0.4 
2.4 
1.4 
2.0 
1.6 
3.5 
0.2 
2.2 
0.1 
1.1 
1.9 
0.3 
2.7 
–0.2 
0.7 
0.6 
1.5 
2.0 
3.0 
0.8 
0.0h
0.3 
1.5 
2.3 
0.1 
1.4 
0.6 
0.5 
1.7 
0.5 
0.7 
2.7 
–0.6 
1.0 
1.0 
1.5 
2.2 
0.2 
1.4 
0.7 
1.9 
0.8 
2.9j
0.4 
0.3 
1.2 
–0.6 
1.9 
1.0 
1.8 
2.6 
1.9 
0.7 
0.4 
9.2 
0.1 
1.3k

331  
178 
197 
586 
34 
1,092 
593 
14 
1,284 
18 
3 
74 
124 
209 
787 
346 
102 
93 
37 
98 
24 
32 
35 
46 
73 
6 
166 
3,103 
0h
305 
325 
56 
4 
3 
141 
248 
119 
198 
165 
153 
36 
68 
223 
189 
18,659 
80 
1,017 
1,287 
331 
625 
511 
158 
16,358 
2 
46 
3 
244 
13 
186 
9 
44 
446 
111 
63 
517 

..
..
..
19
26
26
17
35
..
31
33
27
36
..
16
38
18
18
36
..
41
15
..
31
26
36
42
..
..
28
28
43
30
21
..
29
..
22
..
23
14
39
..
18
13
18
28
16
..
23
39
37
..
26
19
37
21
26
..
31
..
20
16
39
..

..
3,447
1,058
..
7,136
19,712
..
1,205
..
1,406
12,159
10,211
1,520
..
10,242
571
..
21,366 g
1,106
359
8,398
18,846
..
3,356
..
10,869
743
..
1,857
577
..
826
1,109
13,789
3,972
13,481
185
..
5,842
116,984
27,936
2,139
4,034
37,056
18,142
8,983
1,197
6,826
186 
9,236 
.. 
246 
6,670 
4,361 
4,089 
9,323 
.. 
.. 
.. 
49,833 
182 
.. 
.. 
508 
1,572 

PPP gross national

income (GNI)b
 $
per 
capita
2009

$

millions

2009

Gross

domestic
product 

per 

capita 
% growth 
2008–09

Life expectancy

at birth

Male
years
2008

Female
years
2008

Adult
literacy

rate
% 
ages
15 and 
older
2008

.. 
.. 
1,550e
.. 
.. 
25,967 
.. 
1,917 e
.. 
3,697 
25,065 
19,598 
1,785 
.. 
.. 
860 
.. 
22,248 g
2,143 
624e
13,088 
25,316 
.. 
3,878 
.. 
18,381 
2,273 
.. 
.. 
803e
.. 
1,706 
2,313 e
10,653 
.. 
19,749e
328e
.. 
.. 
142,710 
37,236 
4,027 
.. 
28,694 
26,890 
21,550 
1,620 
9,259 
.. 
16,924 
.. 
311e
.. 
8,895 
8,194 
13,908 
.. 
.. 
.. 
67,892 
.. 
.. 
.. 
764e
.. 

.. 
.. 
17,690e
.. 
.. 
33,480 
.. 
5,950 e
.. 
5,300 
12,860 
50,920 
3,530 
.. 
.. 
1,300 
.. 
28,050 g
2,480 
8,470e
19,350 
18,890 
.. 
4,570 
.. 
12,460 
1,330 
.. 
.. 
7,720e
.. 
1,060 
3,030 e
33,390 
.. 
7,320e
3,350e
.. 
.. 
53,590 
16,510 
1,950 
.. 
57,640 
52,410 
10,550 
5,230 
22,640 
.. 
13,270 
.. 
2,810e
.. 
3,330 
13,130 
6,410 
.. 
.. 
.. 
24,370 
.. 
.. 
.. 
4,270e
.. 

.. 
1.6 
–9.5 
.. 
1.5 
4.1 
.. 
0.4 
0.4 
5.8 
–7.4 
–1.3 
1.4 
.. 
5.7 
9.6 
.. 
2.4 g
3.2 
–1.3 
–7.8 
–14.1 
.. 
–3.1 
.. 
–2.7 
1.8 
.. 
0.8 
–7.1 
.. 
0.7 
3.1 
–7.0 
7.4 
–3.1 
0.0 
.. 
3.4 
1.9 
–17.6 
1.3 
1.0 
–5.2 
10.4 
–0.8 
–4.4 
3.1 
–2.2 
1.6 
.. 
–15.4 
9.7 
–2.7 
–7.3 
–0.9 
.. 
.. 
.. 
10.4 
–2.6 
.. 
–0.7 
–5.5 
0.4 

..
..
..
72
71
74
74
74
76
64
54
75
68
..
77
63
77
77
54
..
49
69
77
67
72
59
54
..
66
74
73
46
64
80
..
69
59
65
67
76
67
44
80
78
79
72
70
77
..
69
72
68
..
63
72
60
73
72
..
74
66
75
75
69
79

..
..
..
77
76
78
80
78
82
68
54
80
74
..
82
68
81
82
57
..
51
80
81
71
77
62
58
..
71
77
78
49
70
83
..
75
63
69
72
80
78
46
85
83
83
77
73
82
..
76
80
69
..
70
77
62
79
81
..
78
72
83
77
75
85

..
..
99
98
..
91
..
..
..
53
83
95
84
99
..
74
100
98
..
..
93
100
..
..
..
87
45
..
..
..
..
51
..
..
..
86
..
100
..
94
100
90
..
..
93
97
98
92
..
88
..
..
..
97
..
88
96
96
..
87
..
90
93
99
..

$
per 
capita
2009

..c
41,130 
12,070 
..f
21,390 
25,420 
..f
3,740 
..f
2,020 
6,240 
27,050 
3,010 
..f
68,610 
870 
..c
26,940 g
1,280 
4,870 
12,420 
14,060 
..f
3,950 
..f
7,370 
440 
..f
32,960 
5,550 
..f
510 
1,450 
43,220 
49,310 
4,990 
1,890 
..i
3,240 
43,930 
12,390 
1,030 
113,210 
74,430 
35,360 
4,400 
3,870 
16,690 
3,060 
7,240 
..c
2,220 
203,900 
1,630 
6,550 
4,290 
..f
..f
..f
17,890 
8,940 
..f
..f
2,840 
50,670 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

355

Table 6  Key indicators for other economies (continued)  

the Grenadines

 São Tomé and Príncipe
 Seychelles
 Slovenia
 Solomon Islands
 St. Kitts and Nevis
 St. Lucia
 St. Vincent and 
 
 Suriname
 Swaziland
 Timor-Leste
 Tonga
 Trinidad and Tobago
 Turks and Caicos Islands
 Tuvalu
 Vanuatu
 Virgin Islands (U.S.)

Thousands

2009

163
88
2,043
523
50
172

109
520
1,185
1,134
104
1,339
33
..
240
110

Population
Average 
annual

% 

growth
2000–09

Density
people 

per

sq. km.
2008

1.7 
0.9 
0.3 
2.6 
1.3 
1.1 

0.1 
1.2 
1.0 
3.7 
0.6 
0.4 
6.1 
.. 
2.6 
0.1 

167 
189 
100 
18 
189 
279 

280 
3 
68 
74 
144 
260 
34 
348 
19 
314 

Population

age 

composition

Gross national income 

(GNI)a

%

Ages 0–14

2009

41
..
14
39
..
26

27
29
39
45
37
21
..
..
39
21

$ 

millions

2009

185 
746 
48,063 
478 
501 
890 

558 
2,454 
2,787 
2,706 
339 
22,076 
.. 
.. 
628 
.. 

$
per 
capita
2009

1,140 
8,480 
23,520 
910 
10,100 
5,170 

5,110 
4,760 
2,350 
2,460 
3,260 
16,490 
..f
..l
2,620 
..f

PPP gross national

income (GNI)b
 $
per 
capita
2009

$

millions

2009

Gross

domestic
product 

per 

capita 
% growth 
2008–09

Life expectancy

at birth

Male
years
2008

Female
years
2008

Adult
literacy

rate
% 
ages
15 and 
older
2008

302 
1,480e
53,821
976e
677e
1,527e

965e
3,447 e
5,428 
5,162 e
476e
33,599e
.. 
.. 
1,029e
.. 

1,850 
16,820e
26,340
1,860e
13,660e
8,880e

8,840e
6,690 e
4,580 
4,700 e
4,580e
25,100e
.. 
.. 
4,290e
.. 

2.4 
–8.7 
–8.8 
–4.5 
–8.8 
–4.9 

–2.8 
4.2 
–1.0 
–1.3 
–0.8 
–4.8 
.. 
.. 
1.4 
.. 

64
68
76
65
..
70

70
66
46
60
69
66
..
..
68
76

68
79
83
67
..
76

74
73
45
62
75
73
..
..
72
82

88
92
100
..
..
..

..
91
87
..
99
99
..
..
81
..

Note: For data comparability and coverage, see the technical notes. Figures in italics are for years other than those speciﬁ ed. a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. b. PPP is 
purchasing power parity; see the technical notes. c. Estimated to be upper middle income (US$3,946–12,195). d. Data are for 2003–09. e. The estimate is based on regression; others are 
extrapolated from the latest International Comparison Program benchmark estimates. f. Estimated to be high income (US$12,196 or more). g. Data are for the area controlled by the government 
of the Republic of Cyprus. h. Less than 0.5. i. Estimated to be low income (US$995 or less) j. Data are for 2002–07. k. Data are for 2004–07. l. Estimated to be lower middle income (US$996–3,945).

356 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Technical notes
These technical notes discuss the sources and methods used 
to compile the indicators included in this edition of Selected 
World Development Indicators. The notes follow the order 
in which the indicators appear in the tables. 

Sources
The data published in the Selected World Development Indi-
cators  are  taken  from  World  Development  Indicators  2010. 
Where possible, however, revisions reported since the clos-
ing date of that edition have been incorporated. In addition, 
newly  released  estimates  of  population  and  gross  national 
income (GNI) per capita for 2009 are included in table 1 and 
table 6.

The World Bank draws on a variety of sources for the sta-
tistics published in the World Development Indicators. Data on 
external debt for developing countries are reported directly 
to the World Bank by developing member countries through 
the Debtor Reporting System. Other data are drawn mainly 
from the United Nations and its specialized agencies, from 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and from country 
reports to the World Bank. Bank staff estimates are also used 
to improve currentness or consistency. For most countries, 
national accounts estimates are obtained from member gov-
ernments through World Bank economic missions. In some 
instances  these  are  adjusted  by  staff  to  ensure  conformity 
with international deﬁ nitions and concepts. Most social data 
from national sources are drawn from regular administrative 
ﬁ les, special surveys, or periodic censuses. 

For more detailed notes about the data, please refer to the 

World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2010.

Data consistency and reliability 
Considerable effort has been made to standardize the data, 
but  full  comparability  cannot  be  ensured,  and  care  must 
be taken in interpreting the indicators. Many factors affect 
data availability, comparability, and reliability: statistical sys-
tems in many developing economies are still weak; statistical 
methods,  coverage,  practices,  and  deﬁ nitions  differ  widely; 
and  cross-country  and  intertemporal  comparisons  involve 
complex technical and conceptual problems that cannot be 
unequivocally resolved. Data coverage may not be complete 
because of special circumstances or for economies experienc-
ing problems (such as those stemming from conﬂ icts) affect-
ing the collection and reporting of data. For these reasons, 
although the data are drawn from the sources thought to be 
most  authoritative,  they  should  be  construed  only  as  indi-
cating  trends  and  characterizing  major  differences  among 
economies  rather  than  offering  precise  quantitative  mea-
sures  of  those  differences.  Discrepancies  in  data  presented 
in  different  editions  reﬂ ect  updates  by  countries  as  well  as 
revisions  to  historical  series  and  changes  in  methodology. 

Thus readers are advised not to compare data series between 
editions or between different editions of World Bank publi-
cations. Consistent time series are available from the Open 
Data website (http://data.worldbank.org).

Ratios and growth rates 
For ease of reference, the tables usually show ratios and rates 
of growth rather than the simple underlying values. Values 
in their original form are available from the Open Data web-
site  (http://data.worldbank.org).  Unless  otherwise  noted, 
growth  rates  are  computed  using  the  least-squares  regres-
sion method (see the section on “Statistical methods” later 
in this dicussion). Because this method takes into account all 
available observations during a period, the resulting growth 
rates reﬂ ect general trends that are not unduly inﬂ uenced by 
exceptional  values.  Constant  price  economic  indicators  are 
used to exclude the effects of inﬂ ation in calculating growth 
rates. Data in italics are for a year or period other than that 
speciﬁ ed in the column heading—up to two years before or 
after for economic indicators and up to three years for social 
indicators, because the latter tend to be collected less regu-
larly and change less dramatically over short periods. 

Constant price series 
An economy’s growth is measured by the increase in value 
added produced by the individuals and enterprises operating 
in that economy. Thus, measuring real growth requires esti-
mates of gross domestic product (GDP) and its components 
valued in constant prices. The World Bank collects constant 
price  national  accounts  series  in  national  currencies  that 
are  recorded  in  the  country’s  original  base  year.  To  obtain 
comparable series of constant price data, it rescales GDP and 
value added by industrial origin to a common reference year, 
2000 in the current version of the WDI. This process gives 
rise to a discrepancy between the rescaled GDP and the sum 
of the rescaled components. Because allocating the discrep-
ancy would give rise to distortions in the growth rate, it is 
left unallocated.

Summary measures 
The  summary  measures  for  regions  and  income  groups, 
presented at the end of most tables, are calculated by simple 
addition when they are expressed in levels. Aggregate growth 
rates and ratios are usually computed as weighted averages. 
The summary measures for social indicators are weighted by 
population or by subgroups of population, except for infant 
mortality, which is weighted by the number of births. See the 
notes on speciﬁ c indicators for more information. 

For  summary  measures  that  cover  many  years,  calcula-
tions  are  based  on  a  uniform  group  of  economies  so  that 
the  composition  of  the  aggregate  does  not  change  over 
time.  Group  measures  are  compiled  only  if  the  data  avail-

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

357

able  for  a  given  year  account  for  at  least  two-thirds  of  the 
full group, as deﬁ ned for the 2000 benchmark year. As long 
as this criterion is met, economies for which data are miss-
ing are assumed to behave like those that provide estimates. 
Readers  should  keep  in  mind  that  the  summary  measures 
are estimates of representative aggregates for each topic and 
that nothing meaningful can be deduced about behavior at 
the country level by working back from group indicators. In 
addition, the estimation process may result in discrepancies 
between subgroup and overall totals. 

Table 1. Key indicators of development
Population is based on the de facto deﬁ nition, which counts 
all residents, regardless of legal status or citizenship. Except 
for refugees who are not permanently settled in the country 
of asylum, such refugees are generally considered part of the 
population of the country of origin. The values shown are 
midyear estimates.

Average annual population growth rate is the exponen-
tial rate of change for the period (see the section on statisti-
cal methods). 

Population  density  is  midyear  population  divided  by 
land area in square kilometers. Land area is a country’s total 
area, excluding area under inland water bodies.

Population age composition, ages 0–14 refers to the per-

centage of the total population that is ages 0–14.

Gross national income (GNI) is the broadest measure of 
national income. It measures total value added from domes-
tic and foreign sources claimed by residents. GNI comprises 
gross domestic product plus net receipts of primary income 
from foreign sources. Data are converted from national cur-
rency  to  current  U.S.  dollars  using  the  World  Bank  Atlas 
method. This approach involves using a three-year average of 
exchange rates to smooth the effects of transitory exchange 
rate ﬂ uctuations. (See the section on statistical methods for 
further discussion of the Atlas method.)

GNI per capita is GNI divided by midyear population. It 
is  converted  into  current  U.S.  dollars  by  the Atlas  method. 
The World Bank uses GNI per capita in U.S. dollars to clas-
sify  economies  for  analytical  purposes  and  to  determine 
borrowing eligibility. 

PPP GNI is GNI converted into international dollars using 
purchasing  power  parity  (PPP)  conversion  factors.  Because 
exchange rates do not always reﬂ ect differences in price levels 
between countries, this table converts GNI and GNI per cap-
ita estimates into international dollars using PPP rates. PPP 
rates provide a standard measure allowing comparison of real 
levels of expenditure between countries, just as conventional 
price indexes allow comparison of real values over time. The 
PPP conversion factors used here are derived from the 2005 
round of price surveys covering 146 countries conducted by 
the International Comparison Program. For OECD countries, 

data come from the most recent round of surveys, completed 
in 2005. Estimates for countries not included in the surveys 
are derived from statistical models using available data. For 
more  information  on  the  2005  International  Comparison 
Program, go to http://www.worldbank.org/data/icp.

PPP  GNI  per  capita  is  PPP  GNI  divided  by  midyear 

 population.

Gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  per  capita  growth  is 
based on GDP measured in constant prices. Growth in GDP 
is considered a broad measure of the growth of an economy. 
GDP in constant prices can be estimated by measuring the 
total  quantity  of  goods  and  services  produced  in  a  period, 
valuing them at an agreed set of base year prices, and sub-
tracting  the  cost  of  intermediate  inputs,  also  in  constant 
prices.  See  the  section  on  statistical  methods  for  details  of 
the least-squares growth rate.

Life expectancy at birth  is  the  number  of  years  a  new-
born infant would live if patterns of mortality prevailing at 
its birth were to stay the same throughout its life. Data are 
presented for males and females separately.

Adult literacy rate is  the  percentage  of  persons  ages  15 
and  older  who  can,  with  understanding,  read  and  write  a 
short,  simple  statement  about  their  everyday  life.  In  prac-
tice, literacy is difﬁ cult to measure. To estimate literacy using 
such  a  deﬁ nition  requires  census  or  survey  measurements 
under  controlled  conditions.  Many  countries  estimate  the 
number of literate people from self-reported data. Some use 
educational  attainment  data  as  a  proxy  but  apply  different 
lengths of school attendance or level of completion. Because 
deﬁ nition and methodologies of data collection differ across 
countries, data need to be used with caution.

Table 2. Poverty
The World Bank periodically prepares poverty assessments 
of countries in which it has an active program, in close col-
laboration  with  national  institutions,  other  development 
agencies,  and  civil  society  groups,  including  poor  people’s 
organizations.  Poverty  assessments  report  the  extent  and 
causes of poverty and propose strategies to reduce it. Since 
1992  the  World  Bank  has  conducted  about  200  poverty 
assessments, which are the main source of the poverty esti-
mates  using  national  poverty  lines  presented  in  the  table. 
Countries report similar assessments as part of their Poverty 
Reduction Strategies.

The  World  Bank  also  produces  poverty  estimates  using 
international  poverty  lines  to  monitor  progress  in  poverty 
reduction  globally.  The  ﬁ rst  global  poverty  estimates  for 
developing  countries  were  produced  for  World  Develop-
ment Report 1990: Poverty Using Household Survey Data for 
22 Countries (Ravallion, Datt, and van de Walle 1991). Since 
then the number of countries that ﬁ eld household income 
and expenditure surveys has expanded considerably. 

358 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

National and international poverty lines
National poverty lines are used to make estimates of poverty 
consistent  with  the  country’s  speciﬁ c  economic  and  social 
circumstances and are not intended for international com-
parisons  of  poverty  rates.  The  setting  of  national  poverty 
lines  reﬂ ects  local  perceptions  of  the  level  of  consumption 
or income needed not to be poor. The perceived boundary 
between  poor  and  not  poor  rises  with  the  average  income 
of  a  country  and  so  does  not  provide  a  uniform  measure 
for comparing poverty rates across countries. Nevertheless, 
national poverty estimates are clearly the appropriate mea-
sure for setting national policies for poverty reduction and 
for monitoring their results. 

International  comparisons  of  poverty  estimates  entail 
both conceptual and practical problems. Countries have dif-
ferent  deﬁ nitions  of  poverty,  and  consistent  comparisons 
across countries can be difﬁ cult. Local poverty lines tend to 
have higher purchasing power in rich countries, where more 
generous standards are used, than in poor countries. Inter-
national poverty lines attempt to hold the real value of the 
poverty line constant across countries, as is done when mak-
ing comparisons over time, regardless of average income of 
countries. 

Since the publication of World Development Report 1990 
the  World  Bank  has  aimed  to  apply  a  common  standard 
in  measuring  extreme  poverty,  anchored  to  what  poverty 
means in the world’s poorest countries. The welfare of peo-
ple living in different countries can be measured on a com-
mon  scale  by  adjusting  for  differences  in  the  purchasing 
power of currencies. The commonly used $1 a day standard, 
measured in 1985 international prices and adjusted to local 
currency  using  purchasing  power  parities,  was  chosen  for 
World Development Report 1990 because it was typical of the 
poverty lines in low-income countries at the time. Later this 
$1-a-day line was revised to $1.08 a day measured in 1993 
international prices. More recently, the international poverty 
lines were revised using the new data on PPPs compiled by 
the 2005 round of the International Comparison Program, 
along with data from an expanded set of household income 
and expenditure surveys. The new extreme poverty line is set 
at $1.25 a day in 2005 PPP terms, which represents the mean 
of the poverty lines found in the poorest 15 countries ranked 
by per capita consumption. The new poverty line maintains 
the  same  standard  for  extreme  poverty—the  poverty  line 
typical of the poorest countries in the world—but updates it 
using the latest information on the cost of living in develop-
ing countries.

Quality and availability of survey data
Poverty estimates are derived using surveys ﬁ elded to collect, 
among other things, information on income or consumption 
from a sample of households. To be useful for poverty esti-
mates, surveys must be nationally representative and include 

sufﬁ cient information to compute a comprehensive estimate 
of total household consumption or income (including con-
sumption or income from own production), from which it 
is possible to construct a correctly weighted distribution of 
consumption or income per person. Over the past 20 years 
the number of countries that ﬁ eld surveys and the frequency 
of  the  surveys  have  expanded  considerably.  The  quality  of 
data  has  improved  greatly  as  well.  The  World  Bank’s  pov-
erty monitoring database now includes more than 600 sur-
veys  representing  115  developing  countries.  More  than  1.2 
million randomly sampled households were interviewed in 
these surveys, representing 96 percent of the population of 
developing countries.

Measurement issues using survey data
Besides  the  frequency  and  timeliness  of  survey  data,  other 
data  issues  arise  in  measuring  household  living  standards. 
One  relates  to  the  choice  of  income  or  consumption  as  a 
welfare indicator. Income is generally more difﬁ cult to mea-
sure accurately, and consumption comes closer to the notion 
of standard of living. Also, income can vary over time even if 
the standard of living does not. However, consumption data 
are  not  always  available:  the  latest  estimates  reported  here 
use consumption for about two-thirds of countries. Another 
issue is that even similar surveys may not be strictly compa-
rable because of differences in number of consumer goods 
they  identify,  differences  in  the  length  of  the  period  over 
which respondents must recall their expenditures, or differ-
ences  in  the  quality  and  training  of  enumerators.  Selective 
nonresponses are also a concern in some surveys.

Comparisons of countries at different levels of develop-
ment also pose a potential problem because of differences in 
the  relative  importance  of  the  consumption  of  nonmarket 
goods.  The  local  market  value  of  all  consumption  in  kind 
(including own production, which is particularly important 
in underdeveloped rural economies) should be included in 
total consumption expenditure, but may not be. Surveys now 
routinely include imputed values for consumption in-kind 
from  own-farm  production.  Imputed  proﬁ t  from  the  pro-
duction of nonmarket goods should be included in income, 
but sometimes it is omitted (such omissions were a bigger 
problem in surveys before the 1980s). Most survey data now 
include  valuations  for  consumption  or  income  from  own 
production, but valuation methods vary.

Deﬁ nitions
Survey year  is  the  year  in  which  the  underlying  data  were 
collected. 

Population  below  national  poverty  line,  national  is 
the  percentage  of  the  population  living  below  the  national 
poverty  line.  National  estimates  are  based  on  population-
weighted subgroup estimates from household surveys.

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

359

Population  below  $1.25  a  day  and  population  below 
$2.00 a day are the percentages of the population living on 
less than $1.25 a day and $2.00 a day at 2005 international 
prices. As a result of revisions in PPP exchange rates, poverty 
rates for individual countries cannot be compared with pov-
erty rates reported in earlier editions. 

Poverty gap is the mean shortfall from the poverty line 
(counting the nonpoor as having zero shortfall), expressed 
as a percentage of the poverty line. This measure reﬂ ects the 
depth of poverty as well as its incidence.

Table 3. Millennium Development Goals: Eradicating 
poverty and improving lives
Share  of  poorest  quintile  in  national  consumption  or 
income is the share of the poorest 20 percent of the popula-
tion  in  consumption  or,  in  some  cases,  income.  It  is  a 
distributional  measure.  Countries  with  more  unequal  dis-
tributions of consumption (or income) have a higher rate of 
poverty for a given average income. Data are from nationally 
representative  household  surveys.  Because  the  underlying 
household  surveys  differ  in  method  and  type  of  data  col-
lected,  the  distribution  data  are  not  strictly  comparable 
across countries. The World Bank staff has made an effort to 
ensure that the data are as comparable as possible. Wherever 
possible, consumption has been used rather than income. 

Vulnerable  employment  is  the  sum  of  unpaid  family 
workers  and  own-account  workers  as  a  percentage  of  total 
employment. The proportion of unpaid family workers and 
own-account workers in total employment is derived from 
information  on  status  in  employment.  Each  status  group 
faces  different  economic  risks,  and  unpaid  family  workers 
and  own-account  workers  are  the  most  vulnerable—and 
therefore  the  most  likely  to  fall  into  poverty.  They  are  the 
least likely to have for mal work arrangements, are the least 
likely  to  have  social  protection  and  safety  nets  to  guard 
against  economic  shocks,  and  often  are  incapable  of  gen-
erating sufﬁ cient savings to offset these shocks. 

Prevalence of child malnutrition is the percentage of chil-
dren under age ﬁ ve whose weight for age is less than minus 
two  standard  deviations  from  the  median  for  the  interna-
tional  reference  population  ages  0–59  months.  The  table 
presents data for the new child growth standards released by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2006. Estimates of 
child malnutrition are from national survey data. The pro-
portion of children who are underweight is the most com-
mon  indicator  of  malnutrition.  Being  underweight,  even 
mildly,  increases  the  risk  of  death  and  inhibits  cognitive 
development in children. Moreover, it perpetuates the prob-
lem from one generation to the next, because malnourished 
women are more likely to have low-birthweight babies.

Primary  completion  rate  is  the  percentage  of  students 
completing the last year of primary school. It is calculated by 
taking the total number of students in the last grade of pri-

mary school, minus the number of repeaters in that grade, 
divided by the total number of children of ofﬁ cial gradua-
tion age. The primary completion rate reﬂ ects the primary 
cycle as deﬁ ned by the International Standard Classiﬁ cation 
of Education, ranging from three or four years of primary 
education (in a very small number of countries) to ﬁ ve or 
six years (in most countries) and seven (in a small number 
of  countries).  Because  curricula  and  standards  for  school 
completion  vary  across  countries,  a  high  rate  of  primary 
completion does not necessarily indicate high levels of stu-
dent learning.

Ratio of girls to boys enrolled in primary and second-
ary school is the ratio of the female gross enrollment rate in 
primary and secondary school to the male gross enrollment 
rate.

Eliminating  gender  disparities  in  education  would  help 
to increase the status and capabilities of women. This indi-
cator  is  an  imperfect  measure  of  the  relative  accessibility 
of  schooling  for  girls.  School  enrollment  data  are  reported 
to the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁ c, and Cultural 
Organization  Institute  for  Statistics  by  national  education 
authorities. Primary education provides children with basic 
reading, writing, and mathematics skills along with an ele-
mentary understanding of such subjects as history, geogra-
phy, natural science, social science, art, and music. Secondary 
education  completes  the  provision  of  basic  education  that 
began at the primary level, and aims at laying foundations 
for  lifelong  learning  and  human  development,  by  offering 
more subject- or skill-oriented instruction using more spe-
cialized teachers.

Under-ﬁ ve  mortality  rate  is  the  probability  per  1,000 
children  under  ﬁ ve  years  of  age  that  a  newborn  baby  will 
die before reaching age ﬁ ve, if subject to current age-speciﬁ c 
mortality rates. The main sources of mortality data are vital 
registration  systems  and  direct  or  indirect  estimates  based 
on sample surveys or censuses. To make under-ﬁ ve mortality 
estimates comparable across countries and over time and to 
ensure consistency across estimates by different agencies, the 
United  Nations  Children’s  Fund  (UNICEF)  and  the World 
Bank developed and adopted a statistical method that uses all 
available  information  to  reconcile  differences.  The  method 
ﬁ ts  a  regression  line  to  the  relationship  between  mortality 
rates and their reference dates using weighted least squares.

Maternal  mortality  rate  is  the  number  of  women  who 
die  from  pregnancy-related  causes  during  preg nancy  and 
childbirth,  per  100,000  live  births.  The  values  are  modeled 
estimates.  The  modeled  estimates  are  based  on  an  exercise 
by the WHO, UNICEF, the United Nations Popula tion Fund, 
and the World Bank. For countries with complete vital reg-
istration  systems  with  good  attribution  of  cause-of-death 
information,  the  data  are  used  as  reported.  For  countries 
with  national  data,  either  (1)  from  complete  vital  registra-
tion systems with uncertain or poor attribution of cause-of- 

360 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

death information, or (2) from household surveys, reported 
maternal  mortality  was  adjusted  usually  by  a  fac tor  of 
underenumeration and misclassiﬁ cation. For countries with 
no empirical national data (about 35 percent of countries), 
maternal  mortality  was  esti mated  with  a  regression  model 
using  socioeconomic  information,  including  fertility,  birth 
attendants, and GDP. 

Prevalence of HIV is the percentage of people ages 15–49 
who are infected with HIV. Adult HIV prevalence rates reﬂ ect 
the rate of HIV infection in each country’s population. Low 
national  prevalence  rates  can  be  very  misleading,  however. 
They often disguise serious epidemics that are initially con-
centrated in certain localities or among speciﬁ c population 
groups and threaten to spill over into the wider population. 
In many parts of the developing world, most new infections 
occur in young adults, with young women especially vulner-
able.  The  Joint  United  Nations  Programme  on  HIV/AIDS 
and  WHO  estimate  HIV  prevalence  from  sentinel  surveil-
lance, population-based surveys, and special studies. 

Incidence of tuberculosis is the estimated number of new 
tuberculosis  cases  (pulmonary,  smear  posi tive,  and  extra- 
pulmonary).  Tuberculosis  is  one  of  the  main  causes  of 
death from a single infectious agent among adults in devel-
oping  countries.  In  high-income  countries  tubercu losis  has 
reemerged  largely  as  a  result  of  cases  among  immigrants. 
The estimates of tuberculosis incidence in the table are based 
on  an  approach  in  which  reported  cases  are  adjusted  using 
the ratio of case notiﬁ cations to the estimated share of cases 
detected by panels of 80 epidemiologists convened by WHO.
Carbon dioxide emis sions are those stemming from the 
burning of fossil fuels and the manufacture of cement and 
include  carbon  dioxide  produced  during  consumption  of 
solid, liquid, and gas fuels and gas ﬂ aring divided by midyear 
population  (Carbon  Dioxide  Information  Analysis  Center, 
World Bank). 

Access  to  improved  sanitation  facilities  is  the  percent-
age of the population with at least adequate access to excreta 
disposal facilities (private or shared, but not public) that can 
effectively  prevent  human,  animal,  and  insect  contact  with 
excreta. Facilities do not have to include treatment to ren der 
sewage outﬂ ows innocuous. Improved facilities range from 
simple but protected pit latrines to ﬂ ush toilets with a sewer-
age  connection.  To  be  effective,  facilities  must  be  correctly 
constructed and properly maintained. 

Internet  users  are  people  with  access  to  the  worldwide 

network.

Table 4. Economic activity
Gross  domestic  product  is  gross  value  added,  at  purchas-
ers’  prices,  by  all  resident  producers  in  the  economy  plus 
any taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the value 
of  the  products.  It  is  calculated  without  deduction  for  the 
depreciation of fabricated assets or for the depletion or deg-

radation of natural resources. Value added is the net output 
of  an  industry  after  adding  up  all  outputs  and  subtracting 
intermediate inputs. The industrial origin of value added is 
determined by International Standard Industrial Classiﬁ ca-
tion (ISIC) revision 3. The World Bank conventionally uses 
the U.S. dollar and applies the average ofﬁ cial exchange rate 
reported by the IMF for the year shown. An alternative con-
version factor is applied if the ofﬁ cial exchange rate is judged 
to  diverge  by  an  exceptionally  large  margin  from  the  rate 
effectively applied to transactions in foreign currencies and 
traded products. 

Gross domestic product average annual growth rate is 

calculated from constant price GDP data in local currency.

Agricultural  productivity  is  the  ratio  of  agricultural 
value added, measured in 2000 U.S. dollars, to the number of 
workers in agriculture. Agricultural productivity is measured 
by value added per unit of input. Agricultural value added 
includes that from forestry and ﬁ shing. Thus interpretations 
of land productivity should be made with caution.

Value added is the net output of an industry after add-
ing up all outputs and subtracting intermediate inputs. The 
industrial  origin  of  value  added  is  determined  by  the  ISIC 
revision 3.

Agriculture  value  added  corresponds  to  ISIC  divisions 

1–5 and includes forestry and ﬁ shing.

Industry  value  added  comprises  mining,  manufacturing, 

construction, electricity, water, and gas (ISIC divisions 10–45).
Services value added correspond to ISIC divisions 50–99.
Household  ﬁ nal  consumption  expenditure  is  the  mar-
ket value of all goods and services, including durable prod-
ucts (such as cars, washing machines, and home computers), 
purchased  by  households.  It  excludes  purchases  of  dwell-
ings  but  includes  imputed  rent  for  owner-occupied  dwell-
ings. It also includes payments and fees to governments to 
obtain permits and licenses. Here, household consumption 
expenditure  includes  the  expenditures  of  nonproﬁ t  insti-
tutions  serving  households,  even  when  reported  separately 
by the country. In practice, household consumption expen-
diture may include any statistical discrepancy in the use of 
resources relative to the supply of resources. 

General  government  ﬁ nal  consumption  expenditure 
includes all government current expenditures for purchases 
of goods and services (including compensation of employ-
ees). It also includes most expenditures on national defense 
and security, but excludes government military expenditures 
that are part of government capital formation.

Gross capital formation consists of outlays on additions 
to  the  ﬁ xed  assets  of  the  economy  plus  net  changes  in  the 
level of inventories and valuables. Fixed assets include land 
improvements  (fences,  ditches,  drains,  and  so  on);  plant, 
machinery, and equipment purchases; and the construction 
of  buildings,  roads,  railways,  and  the  like,  including  com-
mercial  and  industrial  buildings,  ofﬁ ces,  schools,  hospitals, 

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

361

and private dwellings. Inventories are stocks of goods held 
by  ﬁ rms  to  meet  temporary  or  unexpected  ﬂ uctuations  in 
production or sales, and “work in progress.” According to the 
1993 System of National Accounts, net acquisitions of valu-
ables are also considered capital formation.

External  balance  of  goods  and  services  is  exports  of 
goods and services less imports of goods and services. Trade 
in  goods  and  services  comprise  all  transactions  between 
residents of a country and the rest of the world involving a 
change in ownership of general merchandise, goods sent for 
processing and repairs, nonmonetary gold, and services.

GDP  implicit  deﬂ ator  reﬂ ects  changes  in  prices  for  all 
ﬁ nal demand categories, such as government consumption, 
capital  formation,  and  international  trade,  as  well  as  the 
main component, private ﬁ nal consumption. It is derived as 
the ratio of current to constant price GDP. The GDP deﬂ a-
tor may also be calculated explicitly as a Paasche price index 
in  which  the  weights  are  the  current  period  quantities  of 
 output.

National accounts indicators for most developing coun-
tries are collected from national statistical organizations and 
central banks by visiting and resident World Bank missions. 
Data for high-income economies come from the OECD. 

Table 5. Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance
Merchandise exports show the free on board (f.o.b.) value 
of  goods  provided  to  the  rest  of  the  world  valued  in  U.S. 
 dollars. 

Merchandise imports show the c.i.f. value of goods (the 
cost of the goods including insurance and freight) purchased 
from  the  rest  of  the  world  valued  in  U.S.  dollars.  Data  on 
merchandise  trade  come  from  the  World  Trade  Organiza-
tion in its annual report.

Manufactured  exports  comprise  the  commodities  in 
SITC  sections  5  (chemicals),  6  (basic  manufactures),  7 
(machinery and transport equipment), and 8 (miscellaneous 
manufactured goods), excluding division 68.

High-technology exports are products with high research 
and  development  intensity.  They  include  high-technology 
products  such  as  aerospace  products,  computers,  pharma-
ceuticals, scientiﬁ c instruments, and electrical machinery.

Current  account  balance  is  the  sum  of  net  exports  of 

goods and services, net income, and net current transfers.

Foreign direct investment (FDI) is net inﬂ ows of invest-
ment to acquire a lasting management interest (10 percent or 
more of voting stock) in an enterprise operating in an econ-
omy other than that of the investor. It is the sum of equity 
capital,  reinvestment  of  earnings,  other  long-term  capital, 
and short-term capital, as shown in the balance of payments. 
Data on FDI are based on balance of payments data reported 
by  the  IMF,  supplemented  by  World  Bank  staff  estimates 
using  data  reported  by  the  United  Nations  Conference  on 
Trade and Development and ofﬁ cial national sources.

Net  ofﬁ cial  development  assistance  (ODA)  from  the 
high-income members of the OECD is the main source of 
ofﬁ cial external ﬁ nance for developing countries, but ODA 
is  also  disbursed  by  some  important  donor  countries  that 
are  not  members  of  the  OECD’s  Development  Assistance 
Committee  (DAC).  DAC  has  three  criteria  for  ODA:  it  is 
undertaken  by  the  ofﬁ cial  sector;  it  promotes  economic 
development  or  welfare  as  a  main  objective;  and  it  is  pro-
vided on concessional terms, with a grant element of at least 
25  percent  on  loans  (calculated  at  a  10  percent  discount 
rate).

Ofﬁ cial  development  assistance  comprises  grants  and 
loans,  net  of  repayments,  that  meet  the  DAC  deﬁ nition  of 
ODA and that are made to countries and territories on the 
DAC  list  of  aid  recipients.  The  new  DAC  list  of  recipients 
is  organized  on  more  objective  needs-based  criteria  than 
its  predecessors,  and  includes  all  low-  and  middle-income 
countries, except those that are members of the Group of 8 
or the European Union (including countries with a ﬁ rm date 
for EU admission).

Total external debt is debt owed to nonresidents repay-
able in foreign currency, goods, or services. It is the sum of 
public,  publicly  guaranteed,  and  private  non-guaranteed 
long-term  debt,  use  of  IMF  credit,  and  short-term  debt. 
Short-term debt includes all debt having an original matu-
rity of one year or less and interest in arrears on long-term 
debt. 

Present value of debt is the sum of short-term external 
debt plus the discounted sum of total debt service payments 
due on public, publicly guaranteed, and private nonguaran-
teed long-term external debt over the life of existing loans. 

Data  on  external  debt  are  mainly  from  reports  to  the 
World  Bank  through  its  Debtor  Reporting  System  from 
member  countries  that  have  received  International  Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development loans or International 
Development Association credits, with additional informa-
tion from the ﬁ les of the World Bank, the IMF, the African 
Development  Bank  and  African  Development  Fund,  the 
Asian  Development  Bank  and  Asian  Development  Fund, 
and the Inter-American Development Bank. Summary tables 
of  the  external  debt  of  developing  countries  are  published 
annually in the World Bank’s Global Development Finance.

Domestic credit provided by banking sector includes all 
credit to various sectors on a gross basis, with the exception 
of credit to the central government, which is net. The bank-
ing  sector  includes  monetary  authorities,  deposit  money 
banks,  and  other  banking  institutions  for  which  data  are 
available  (including  institutions  that  do  not  accept  trans-
ferable  deposits  but  do  incur  such  liabilities  as  time  and 
savings  deposits).  Examples  of  other  banking  institutions 
include savings and mortgage loan institutions and building 
and loan associations. Data are from the IMF’s International 
Finance Statistics.

362 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 1 1

Net  migration  is  the  net  total  of  migrants  during  the 
period.  It  is  the  total  number  of  immigrants  less  the  total 
number of emigrants, including both citizens and nonciti-
zens. Data are ﬁ ve-year estimates. Data are from the United 
Nations  Population  Division’s  World  Population  Prospects: 
The 2008 Revision.

Table 6. Key indicators for other economies
See the technical notes for Table 1. 

Statistical methods 
This  section  describes  the  calculation  of  the  least-squares 
growth rate, the exponential (endpoint) growth rate, and the 
World Bank’s Atlas methodology for calculating the conver-
sion factor used to estimate GNI and GNI per capita in U.S. 
dollars.

Least-squares growth rate 
Least-squares growth rates are used wherever there is a suf-
ﬁ ciently long time series to permit a reliable calculation. No 
growth rate is calculated if more than half the observations 
in a period are missing. 

The least-squares growth rate, r, is estimated by ﬁ tting a 
linear regression trendline to the logarithmic annual values 
of the variable in the relevant period. The regression equa-
tion takes the form 

ln Xt = a + bt,

which is equivalent to the logarithmic transformation of the 
compound growth equation,

Xt = Xo (1 + r)t.

In this equation, X is the variable, t is time, and a = log Xo 
and b = ln (1 + r ) are the parameters to be estimated. If b* 
is the least-squares estimate of b, the average annual growth 
rate, r, is obtained as [exp(b*)–1] and is multiplied by 100 to 
express it as a percentage. 

The calculated growth rate is an average rate that is repre-
sentative of the available observations over the entire period. 
It does not necessarily match the actual growth rate between 
any two periods. 

Exponential growth rate 
The  growth  rate  between  two  points  in  time  for  certain 
demographic  data,  notably  labor  force  and  population,  is 
calculated from the equation 

r = ln (pn /p1)/n,

where pn and p1 are the last and ﬁ rst observations in the period, 
n is the number of years in the period, and ln is the natural 
logarithm operator. This growth rate is based on a model of 
continuous, exponential growth between two points in time. 
It does not take into account the intermediate values of the 

series. Note also that the exponential growth rate does not 
correspond to the annual rate of change measured at a one-
year interval, which is given by

(pn – pn–1)/pn–1.

World Bank Atlas method 
For certain operational purposes, the World Bank uses the 
Atlas conversion factor to calculate GNI and GNI per capita 
in  U.S.  dollars.  The  purpose  of  the Atlas  conversion  factor 
is to reduce the impact of exchange rate ﬂ uctuations in the 
cross-country  comparison  of  national  incomes.  The  Atlas 
conversion factor for any year is the average of a country’s 
exchange rate (or alternative conversion factor) for that year 
and its exchange rates for the two preceding years, adjusted 
for the difference between the rate of inﬂ ation in the country 
and that in Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, and 
the Euro Area. A country’s inﬂ ation rate is measured by the 
change in its GDP deﬂ ator. The inﬂ ation rate for Japan, the 
United Kingdom, the United States, and the Euro Area, rep-
resenting international inﬂ ation, is measured by the change 
in the SDR deﬂ ator. (Special drawing rights, or SDRs, are the 
IMF’s unit of account.) The SDR deﬂ ator is calculated as a 
weighted average of these countries’ GDP deﬂ ators in SDR 
terms, the weights being the amount of each country’s cur-
rency in one SDR unit. Weights vary over time because both 
the composition of the SDR and the relative exchange rates 
for each currency change. The SDR deﬂ ator is calculated in 
SDR terms ﬁ rst and then converted to U.S. dollars using the 
SDR to dollar Atlas conversion factor. The Atlas conversion 
factor is then applied to a country’s GNI. The resulting GNI 
in U.S. dollars is divided by the midyear population to derive 
GNI per capita.

When ofﬁ cial exchange rates are deemed to be unreliable 
or  unrepresentative  of  the  effective  exchange  rate  during  a 
period, an alternative estimate of the exchange rate is used in 
the Atlas formula. 

The  following  formulas  describe  the  calculation  of  the 

Atlas conversion factor for year t:

=

e

*
t

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

1
3

e

−

2

t

⎛
⎝⎜

p
t
p
t

−

2

/

$

S
p
t
$
S
p
−
t
2

⎞
⎠⎟ +

e

−
1

t

⎛
⎝⎜

p
t
p
t

−
11

/

$

S
p
t
S
$
p
−
t
1

⎞
⎠⎟ +

e

t

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

and the calculation of GNI per capita in U.S. dollars for year t:

Yt

$ = (Yt/Nt)/et*,

where et* is the Atlas conversion factor (national currency to 
the U.S. dollar) for year t, et is the average annual exchange 
rate (national currency to the U.S. dollar) for year t, pt is the 
S$ is the SDR deﬂ ator in U.S. dollar 
GDP deﬂ ator for year t, pt
$ is the Atlas GNI per capita in U.S. dollars 
terms for year t, Yt
in year t, Yt is current GNI (local currency) for year t, and Nt 
is the midyear population for year t.

 

Selected World Development Indicators 2011 

363

Alternative conversion factors 
The World Bank systematically assesses the appropriateness 
of ofﬁ cial exchange rates as conversion factors. An alterna-
tive conversion factor is used when the ofﬁ cial exchange rate 
is judged to diverge by an exceptionally large margin from 
the rate effectively applied to domestic transactions of for-

eign currencies and traded products. This factor applies to 
only a small number of countries, as shown in the primary 
data  documentation  table  in World  Development  Indicators 
2010.  Alternative  conversion  factors  are  used  in  the  Atlas 
methodology and elsewhere in Selected World Development 
Indicators as single-year conversion factors.
 

Index

Boxes, ﬁ gures, notes, and tables are i by b, f, n, and t following page numbers. Features are specially noted.

A
accountability of institutions. See also transparency

deﬁ ned, xvi, 84
dual accountability, 26, 26f, 200–202, 201f, 270
early policy announcements and, 22
importance of, 10, 84, 85b, 249
military and, 149
to taxpayers, 26

Aceh

Aceh Peace Process Support Program (European Commission), 

138 (feature)

Aceh Peace-Reintegration Board (BRA), 138 (feature)
ASEAN role, 18, 233, 234b
building inclusive-enough coalitions, 12, 120, 137 (feature)
commitment mechanisms to lock in signals, 138 (feature)
community-driven programs, 138 (feature)
delivering early results, 138 (feature)
economic and human costs of violence, 63
Monitoring Mission, 18, 38 (feature), 138 (feature), 252
Reintegration and Livelihood Survey (World Bank), 138 

(feature)

signals for conﬁ dence-building, 137–38 (feature)
social accountability, 157
success in preventing violence, 108

adaptability of institutions, 110–12, 111b, 119, 196–97. See also 

best-ﬁ t approaches

AfDB (African Development Bank), 197, 213n91
Afghanistan

community-based programs, 24 (feature), 133–34b, 141n54, 

261b

cross-border violence, 67 (feature)
drug production and trafﬁ cking, 10

ﬁ nancing rebels, 54

early results crucial to conﬁ dence-building, 253
education reform, 169
foreign troops and security stresses, 218
humanitarian aid, phasing from international to local 

institutions, 266b

international ideological movements and local grievances, 5
international support for, 183

for local initiatives, 194

investment in conﬂ ict prevention, 273b
mistrust of siding with either Taliban or NATO, 100b
M-Paisa, 162, 177n87

multidonor trust funds for, 33, 202, 203b
National Rural Access Program, 161
National Solidarity Program, 18, 24 (feature), 131, 133b, 136, 

141n50, 169, 170b, 255, 261b

organized criminal violence, 67 (feature)
Pashtun tribal areas on Pakistan border, 219
passage of laws and regulations, 175n44
radio “edutainment” programs, 213n111
road and trafﬁ c access, 161
special envoys to, 183, 208n7
technical assistance, 196
trafﬁ cking ﬁ nancing rebels, 54
violence, 53, 54t
women’s empowerment, 169, 170b

Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF), 33, 203b
Africa. See also speciﬁ c countries and regions

Chinese trade with and investment in, 183
climate change coalition obtaining adaptation funding (2010), 

232, 242n50

employment and security as most pressing needs in, 128
mediation used in, 187b
mobile phones, 158b
regional infrastructure challenge, 235m

African Development Bank (AfDB), 197, 213n91
African National Congress (ANC), 14, 120, 121
African Union (AU)

African Peer Review Mechanism, 233
Border Program, 35, 44n101, 219
extra-constitutional changes of government and coups d’état, 

norms for dealing with, 190

GEMAP, agreement to, 126b
Peace and Security Commission, 187b
peacekeeping capacity of, 182, 281b
sanctions, 190
support to social and poverty reduction programs in 

West African countries, 44n105, 292n24
Aga Khan Development Network (AKDN), 194b
agenda for international action, 290–91
agreements to abstain from violence. See also elite pacts; speciﬁ c 

declarations and agreements

lack of creditability, 75b

agriculture sector, support for, 162, 230, 257
AKDN (Aga Khan Development Network), 194b
amnesties for war crimes, 187

365

366 

I N D E X

Amnesty International, 114 (feature)
ANC. See African National Congress
Angola

Guinea-Bissau assistance, 207 (feature)
reintegration budget, 202

Annan, Koﬁ , 187b
Anti-Corruption Interagency Council, 156
Arbour, Louise, 37, 39 (feature), 288, 289b
Argentina

conﬁ dence-building, 12
“disappeared,” women’s role in demanding information on, 

124, 140n26

early results crucial to conﬁ dence-building, 253
inclusive-enough coalition-building needing military support, 

139n14

security personnel standards, 151
transitional justice, 166, 255
transition from military rule, 154

Armed Conﬂ ict Database, 70n62
arms trade and trafﬁ cking, 220–21, 220t, 241nn19–22
arraignment courts, 155b
ARTF (Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund), 33, 203b
ASEAN

crisis prevention and recovery experience, 38 (feature), 44n102, 

271

East Asia Emergency Rice Reserve program, 286
Food Security Information System (AFSIS), 230b
as model of regional cooperation, 238 (feature)
Myanmar disaster situation (2008), 186, 233, 234b
political leadership role of, 233, 234b
subregional initiatives, 35

ASEAN-EU Aceh monitoring mission. See Aceh
Asia. See also speciﬁ c countries and regions

mediation rarely used in, 187b

Asian Development Bank, 25, 229, 236, 239 (feature), 243n68
assessment tools

international tools, 272t
post-conﬂ ict/post-crisis needs assessment, 250
strengthening, 23, 250
use of, 22–23

asset expansion programs, 162, 257
assistance programs, international. See humanitarian aid; 

international support

Association of Southeast Asian Nations. See ASEAN
AU. See African Union
audits

donor funds released upon, 202
social audits of government records, 175n61

AusAID, 185

Fragile States Unit, 209n14

Australia

B
Bakassi Boys (Nigeria), 136b
Balkans

fears of oppression and civil conﬂ ict, 74
modern organized violence, 67 (feature)

bargainers and proposers/responders, 82b
Becker, Gary, 79b
Belize, violent crime arising in post-conﬂ ict state, 4f
Bellerive, Jean-Max, 153
best-ﬁ t approaches

adapted to local conditions, 8, 13, 22, 106, 145, 196–97, 259–60
advantages of, 248
for citizen security, justice, and jobs, 256t
deﬁ ned, xvii, 117n17
duration of, 169
experimental, ﬂ exible approach, 171
food aid response, 286
job creation, 161–63
judicial reforms, 155
preferred to best practices, 107b, 147
procurement arrangements, 199
trade-offs in, 258

best practices, success not guaranteed by use of, 146–47
birth registration programs, 154–55
Bolivia, drug trafﬁ cking and, 10, 223b
border areas and insecurity, 218–20. See also regional and 

cross-border initiatives

Bosnia and Herzegovina

“Bulldozer Initiative” of 2002, 157
currency board, 168
developmental progress, 53
economic goals met through justice and inclusion, 132b
education reform, 169
High Judicial and Prosecutorial Councils, 154
international aid for, 183
law enforcement personnel, vetting of, 151
mass rape, 60
MDG progress, 6
regulatory simpliﬁ cation, 257
religious and ideological grievances, 67–68 (feature)
streamlining of peace agency implementation, 291n3
success in preventing violence, 11
World Bank support for negotiations, 186

Botswana, success of aid from single or dominant donor, 199
The Bottom Billion (Collier), xi, 105b
Brahimi, Lakhdar, 15, 165b
Brancati, Dawn, 178n112
branding of aid programs, 191, 210n50
BRAVO (Birth Registration for All versus Oblivion) program, 154
Brazil

cross-governmental operation in Solomon Islands (Regional 

Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands, RAMSI), 185

International Deployment Group (IDG), 212n86

Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Center (AUSTRAC), 

229b, 242n42

Autodefensas Unidas de Colombia (AUC) guerillas, 151
Azam, Jean-Paul, 119

Fica Vivo program, 186
indirect vs. direct costs of violence, 65b
multisector response to homicide rate, 148, 148b
NGO Viva Rio, 197, 213n92
police paciﬁ cation units, 152
victims of political violence, reparations for, 125–26

break from past. See commitment mechanisms

 

Index 

367

Breaking the Conﬂ ict Trap (Collier), 105b
bribes. See corruption
“Brookings Process,” 210n52
budgets, 33, 127, 128b, 149, 160b, 214n116, 256. See also 

transparency

Burkina Faso

AU Border Program pilot project, 219
developmental comparison with Burundi, 63, 64f

Burundi

community-based programs, 24 (feature), 261b
deaths from political violence, 70n62
development consequences of violence, compared to Burkina 

Faso, 63, 64f

duration of aid for, 193
integrating former rebels into national army, 100b, 132b
poverty reduction, international or joint national-international 

strategies, 193

rapid-results approach, 170
volatility in international aid to, 195b

Business Edge of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), 

177n88

business regulation, 157

C
cabinets, size of, 121, 124
California

gang-related homicides in Los Angeles, 123b
legalizing drugs, 43n86

Cambodia

community-based programs, 24 (feature), 261b
duration of donor projects in, 196
EC survey of assistance to, 25
qualiﬁ ed contractors not interested in bidding on projects, 197

Canada

private security industry in, 135
regional cooperation to manage public goods, 212n90
U.S. deportation of maras, 78b
violence, 172–73b

rising despite political peace, 58f

weak institutions failing, 10, 76b

Central Asia. See also speciﬁ c countries

external pressures and external assistance, 238–40 (feature)

Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation program, 239 

(feature)

Central Asia Regional Information and Coordination Center, 239 

(feature)

Centre for Global Development, 34, 282b
Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue (Aceh, Indonesia), 186
Centro de Coordinación de Acción Integral (CCAI, Colombia), 

114 (feature)

Chad, camps for displaced populations, 61
Chad College, 101b
Chambas, Mohamed Ibn, 208b
Charte du Nord (Côte d’Ivoire), 82
children

infant mortality rates in countries affected by violence, 63, 63f
as victims of deadly diseases, 210n49
as victims of violence, 60

Chile

building inclusive-enough coalitions, 12, 121, 122, 127
civilian oversight of judiciary, 154
conﬁ dence-building, 12
early results crucial to conﬁ dence-building, 253
political transitions and peacemaking, 13
security personnel standards, 151
success in preventing violence, 11
transitional justice, 166
transition from military rule, 154

Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Center 

China

(FINTRAC), 242n42

Stabilization and Reconstruction Task Force (START), 185, 

209n14

capacity of institutions. See institutional capacity
“capture the narrative,” 124
Caribbean and modern organized violence, 67 (feature), 76b
Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Fund, 236b
Carnegie Commission Report on Preventing Deadly Conﬂ ict, 186
cash transfer programs, 162, 177n92
Cederman, Lars-Erik, 81
Celtel (mobile phones company), 158b
Central Africa. See also speciﬁ c countries

spillover effects in, 77b
Central African Republic

overtaxing of capacity by “too much, too soon” reform, 146
public ﬁ nancial management (PFM) reviews, 174n14
volatility in international aid to, 195b

Central America. See also speciﬁ c countries

corruption and, 34, 57
depth of institutional transformation, 172–73 (feature)
drug trafﬁ cking and, 34, 57, 223b
gangs and rebels, 55, 57, 69n26
peace processes involving neighboring countries, 218, 233

economic reform, 146b
infrastructure investment supporting private sector 

development, 200

social networks of migrant workers, 79b
Township and Village Enterprises, 146
trade with and investment in Africa, 183
China Road and Bridge Corporation, 227b
CICIG (International Commission Against Impunity). 

See Guatemala
citizen security, 148–53

cross-border insecurity, 20, 218–20
deﬁ ned, xvi, 116n13
developmental progress and, 6, 7t, 41n51
economic costs of, 5
global effects of lack of, 66
importance of, 45, 252
interdisciplinary approaches, 131, 132b
investing in as essential to reduce violence, xii, 273b, 282b
linking to justice, 256–57
local level and community policing, 152
nonstate actors not good ﬁ t for, 135
role of security forces and, 19, 149
security stresses, 73–78, 74t

368 

I N D E X

citizen security (continued)

selected indicators, 336–37t
transnational ideological threats, 222–26

citizen security, justice, and jobs

importance of, 128, 147–48, 148b, 248
international support for, 199–200

serious gaps, 205

roadmap for breaking cycles of violence, 13
track for improving global response for security and 

development, 2, 28–31, 29f

in WDR framework for building resilience to violence, 45f, 47t, 

103, 106

civilian oversight of security, 150b, 151, 154, 256, 275
civilian surge capacity, 196, 212n86
civil society

conﬁ dence-building and, 13
premature load-bearing and, 101b
service delivery by, 134

civil wars

GDP losses due to, 5–6
natural resource rich countries and, 54
number of, 51, 52b, 269
recurring, 57, 58t. See also repeated cycles of violence

classiﬁ cation of economies, 341–42, 343t
climate change

African states, coalition obtaining adaptation funding (2010), 

232, 242n50

food insecurity and, 230
impact on conﬂ ict risk, 35
water stress and, 230

CMI. See Crisis Management Initiative
coalitions. See inclusive-enough coalitions
cocaine. See drug trafﬁ cking
“cocooning” efforts to bypass national organizations and 

institutions, 145

coercion to maintain national stability, 8
Cold War and civil wars as dominant form of violence, 183
“collaborative capacities,” 41n40, 209n32
collaborative coalitions, 2, 16–18
Collier, Paul, xi, 33, 105b, 117n34, 282b, 291n14
Colombia

absence of state governance in regions of, 7
assassinations of government and political ﬁ gures ordered by 

drug cartels, 101

assessment tools, use of, 23
border security with Ecuador, 220
community-based programs, 24 (feature), 261b
conﬁ dence-building, 15, 114 (feature), 254b

quick, visible results for, 130b

court reform, 155b
Democratic Security Policy, 149, 150b
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) 

program, 151

drug trafﬁ cking and, 10, 43n86, 223b, 285
international support for, 184
justice sector reform, 22, 154
lessons learned from, 113–14 (feature)
multisector response to homicide rate, 148, 148b

Politica Nacional de Rehabilitación (PNR), 130b, 141n45
redeployment of security forces, 251
security goals through multisectoral intervention, 132b
success in preventing violence, 11, 113–14 (feature), 121, 122, 

250

color revolutions, 117n27
Commission on Human Security report (2003), 45, 116n16
commitment mechanisms

adaptability of, 119
deﬁ ned, xvii, 209–10n35
international support for, 188–90
signals of break with past and, 104, 124–27, 126b, 138 (feature)

community-driven development (CDD)

adapted to country context, 30
capacity-building through, 131, 132–33
citizen security, justice, and jobs, 19, 30
cross-border development programming, 283
donor risk management and, 202
evaluations of effectiveness of, 141n49
in post-conﬂ ict environments, 122, 138 (feature)
state-society relations strengthened through, 133–34b

community empowerment programs, 255
Community of Sant’Egidio, 154, 182b
complementary programs for institutional transformation, 18–19
conditional cash transfers, 162
conﬁ dence, deﬁ ned, xv
conﬁ dence-building, 119–42

as basic principle for violence prevention, 247–48
basic tools for, 17 (feature), 250–55, 251t
commitment mechanisms. See commitment mechanisms
deﬁ ned, 41–42n52, 116n14
delivery of early results. See early results
differentiating tools to match country circumstances, 253–55
inclusive-enough coalitions, 120–27, 185–88. See also inclusive-

enough coalitions

international support for, 185–93, 272t
lessons from national reformers, 119
roadmap for breaking cycles of violence, 11, 12–13, 18–20
track for improving global response for security and 

development, 28
trade-offs for, 253–55
in WDR framework for building resilience to violence, 45f, 

46–47t, 103–6

conﬂ ict diamonds, 25, 34, 43n87, 220, 220t, 221b, 240n13, 241n14
“conﬂ ict trap,” 117n34
contracting out, 134, 142n59, 202, 227b
conversation on violence, xix–xx, xxii, 2
coordinating international aid, 271. See also international support
corruption

anti-corruption initiatives, 19, 42n61, 156–57, 258, 260, 262b, 

284

bilateral cooperation against, 264b
credibility of new regimes in legacies of, 126, 248
in developed countries, 36
ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows and ﬁ nancial system weaknesses, 25, 227–29, 

284–85

private sector anti-corruption mechanisms, 157, 158b
regional and cross-border initiatives, 20

 

Index 

369

standards and harmonization, 229
transnational, 226–27
violence associated with, 6–7, 252

Costa Rica

community policing, 152
court reform, 155b
economic costs of violence, 65b

cost-beneﬁ t analysis for criminal violence, 81
costs of violence, 5, 65b, 66, 186. See also human costs of violence
Côte d’Ivoire

militants and gangs, 54
multisectoral community approaches, 260
social inequalities and civil war, 82, 83

Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) frameworks, 

87b, 95n65, 117n19

country-speciﬁ c strategies, framework for, 248–50, 249t
coups d’état

donor support to social and poverty reduction programs in 

West African countries with, 44n105, 292n24

international community’s norms for dealing with, 190
reduction of number of in Africa, 36, 68n5

court system reform. See justice and fairness
criminal justice functions and dispute resolution, 153–56, 199, 276
crisis escalation, recognizing signs of, 252
Crisis Management Initiative (CMI), 43n80, 137 (feature), 186
cross-border initiatives. See regional and cross-border initiatives
cross-border insecurity, 20, 218–20
culture of democracy, 165b
Cyclone Narghis recovery efforts of ASEAN, 38 (feature)

D
data gaps for studying violence

climate change’s impact on conﬂ ict risk, 35
continuing global learning platform, 288–90
future research agenda, 290
international aid ﬂ ows, 280
justice and fairness issues, 82
labor market data in developing countries, 79b, 93n27
methodology and, xix
weak institutions at risk for onset and recurrence of civil war, 

73, 84

data sources and methodology, 341
death rates

in Central America, 172 (feature)
former Soviet Union during transformation of government, 

101, 102b

infant mortality rates in countries affected by violence, 63, 63f
from wars, 2, 3f, 51, 52b, 68n2, 338

debt relief, 183
decision-cycle-oriented feedback loops, 171
decision making, hierarchy of, 255
de Greiff, Pablo, 140n33
de jure vs. de facto outcomes, 145
delivery mechanisms, 31, 104–6
Democratic Charter of 2001 (OAS), 51
Democratic Republic of Congo

diamond trade. See conﬂ ict diamonds
early results crucial to conﬁ dence-building, 253
EU Operation Artemis in, 281b
fragmentation of international aid to, 199, 211n66
lootable natural resources of, 54, 57, 81
payments to ex-combatants, 110
peacekeeping force, deployment of, 192
polling by SMS (short message service), 205, 214n132, 291n7
road and trafﬁ c access, 161
Rwanda–DRC agreement (2007), 218
school management by religious organizations, 134
security forces committing human rights abuses, 149
stabilization policy to curb hyperinﬂ ation, 168
women-run small businesses, 177n98
women’s organizations, role in sexual violence prevention, 152

democratization

culture of democracy, 165b
risks for civil war with, 101

demographics, key indicators for, 354–55t
Deng Xiaoping, 146b
deportation from U.S.

of gang members back to Central America, 173 (feature)
of maras, 78b
Desai, Nitin, 165b
DESEPAZ (Colombia), 113 (feature), 132b
developed countries

anti-corruption initiatives, 229
double standards of, 36, 287
organized crime within, 76b

development. See also developmental consequences of violence

global system of, 2
key indicators of, 344–45t
national vs. regional administration of, 219

developmental consequences of violence, 5, 60–66

GDP losses, 64–65, 65b
international scope, 66
poverty/wealth gap and, 60, 60f
spillover effects, 65–66
trade and, 6, 64, 71n73

Development Assistance Committee framework, 34, 200
Development Impact Evaluation (DIME) Initiative, 292n25
devolution and decentralization, 164–66, 167b
diamonds. See conﬂ ict diamonds; natural resources
differentiating strategy and programs to country context, 21–23, 

48, 48t, 111–12

Dili Declaration (May 2010), 198
diplomacy, global system of, 2
Dirty War (Argentina), 124
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) programs, 

151–52. See also reintegration of ex-combatants

displaced populations and refugees, 61, 66, 127, 338
dispute resolution, 134, 155, 175n35. See also justice and fairness
domestic violence, 152, 169
donor behavior, change of, 26, 194–96, 212n74. See also 

international support

donor risk management, 31–34, 202–4, 278–80, 282b. See also dual 

absence of state governance in regions of, 7
criminal gangs supporting political activities, 5

accountability

Dos Santos Cruz, Carlos Alberto, 129b

370 

I N D E X

double compacts, 193, 211n67, 265
double standards of developed countries, 36, 287
Doyle, Michael W., 210n35
DRC Speaks! (geo-polling project using cell phones), 214n132, 

291n7

drivers of conﬂ ict, 9f
drug consumption, 57, 222

legalization, 222, 224–25b

drug-related violence

assassinations of government and political ﬁ gures ordered by 

drug cartels, 101

in Central America, 10b, 34, 53
in West Africa, 5, 34, 56b

drug trafﬁ cking

economics of cocaine trafﬁ cking, 222b
external stresses and, 34, 172 (feature), 217, 220t
importance in fragile states, 221
interdiction efforts against cocaine trafﬁ cking, 223b
internal stresses and, 74
legalization, 222, 224–25b
policy impact on producing, transit, and consuming countries, 

43n86

dual accountability, 26, 26f, 200–202, 201f, 270
dynamics of change and differences among countries, 48, 99, 

111–12. See also differentiating strategy and programs to 
country context; transforming institutions

E
early results

balance of quick, visible results vs. longer-term institution-

building, 129–31, 130–31b

basic tools for, 255–58
conﬁ dence-building and, 104–6, 128–36, 248
deﬁ ned, xvii
delivery of, 19, 138 (feature), 253
interdisciplinary approach, 131, 132b
international support for, 190–93

early warning system for food insecurity, 230b, 286
East Asia Emergency Rice Reserve program, 286
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, 236b
Eastern Caribbean Civil Aviation Authority, 236b
Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, 235, 236b
Eastern Caribbean Telecommunications Authority, 236b
ECOM (soft commodity trading company), 213n111
economic activity by country, 350–51t
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)

GEMAP, agreement to, 126b, 206 (feature)
Guinea-Bissau assistance, 207 (feature)
Liberia and planning for transition, 32 (feature), 206 (feature)
mediation initiatives of, 29, 186, 233
pressure on countries with coups d’états, 16
West African Coast Initiative on organized crime, 283

economic reforms, 167–68

interdisciplinary approaches, 131, 132b

economic stresses, 6, 7t, 74t, 78–81, 90t
economic theories of violence, 75–76b
economic theory and impunity, 116n9
ECOWAS. See Economic Community of West African States

ECSC (European Coal and Steel Community), 237b, 238 (feature)
Ecuador’s border security with Colombia, 220
education

reform, 169
religious organizations managing schools, 134
responsibility decentralized to local level, 135b, 142n57

Egmont Group initiative, 228, 241–42n39
EITI. See Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Ekeh, Peter, 136b
elections, 8, 101, 120, 164, 251
electricity

Ghana supplying to Liberia, 32 (feature), 191b
importance for jobs and security, 128, 158, 160, 160b, 257

elite cooperation in elections, 164
elite pacts

deﬁ ned, xv, 72
as strategy to prevent violence, 86
vicious cycle of violence and, 88

El Salvador

deportation of maras from U.S., 78b
economic costs of violence, 65b
homicide rates, 58
military stalemate and reforms, 173 (feature)
transition moment, 173 (feature)
violent crime arising in post-conﬂ ict state, 2, 4f, 54t
women guerrillas involved in land reform, 163

employment. See jobs
energy. See also electricity; oil
consumption patterns, 230

Equator Principles, 286, 292n19
escaping violence and developing resilience. See transforming 

institutions

“Esquipulas Process,” ending Nicaraguan war (1987), 218
Ethiopia

allocation of budget support to local and municipal 

governments, 43n92, 291n6

development progress, 51
MDG progress, 6
Productive Safety Net Programme, 161, 176n73

ethnic differences. See also justice and fairness

horizontal inequality and onset of civil violence, 75b, 81–82, 

94nn46–47

European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), 237b, 238 (feature)
European Commission

Aceh Peace Process Support Program, 138 (feature)
on duration of aid programs, 196
public ﬁ nancial management (PFM) reviews, 174n14
survey of assistance to Cambodia, 25

European Union

Congo force from, 194
Guinea-Bissau assistance, 207 (feature)
long-standing regional programs, 25
mediation used in, 187b
model of cross-border regional cooperation, 44n100, 219–20, 

235, 237b, 242n51, 284

Operation Artemis in Democratic Republic of Congo, 281b
programs for previously conﬂ ict-affected border regions, 35
travel restrictions imposed by Zimbabwe’s leaders, 189

 

Index 

371

exclusion of groups. See also inclusive-enough coalitions

challenges of, 249
due to past abuses, 121, 124, 127, 140n27, 162
ideologically motivated groups capitalizing on themes of 

injustice and exclusion, 222

linked to violence, 252
public attitudes toward, 168–69

expectations

deﬁ ned, xv
of rapid change, 8, 108–10
unrealistic due to levels of mistrust, 99–101, 100b

external stresses, xi, 216–43

core tools to address, 263t
cross-border insecurity, 218–20
cross-border security linked to development, 263
deﬁ ned, 72
deportation of maras from U.S., 78b
diminishing, 107
economic stresses, 226–29

illicit international ﬁ nancial ﬂ ows, 227–29
transnational corruption, 226–27

external support and resistance to, 11, 15–16, 106–7
gang culture, 173 (feature)
mobilizing external support, 262–65
national action to address, 17 (feature)
reducing

international support, 262–65
regional action, 281–86

regional stresses, 233–37. See also regional and cross-border 

initiatives

resource stresses, 229–32
role of, 10, 11
track for improving global response for security and 

development, 28, 34–35

trafﬁ cking, 220–22, 220t
transnational ideological movements, 222–26
vulnerability to, 9f
in WDR framework for building resilience to violence, 45f, 47t, 

103

weak institutions and vulnerability, 101–3

external support and resistance to external stresses. See external 

stresses

Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), 34, 37, 188, 

210n38, 285, 286, 288

F
Fafo surveys

on human costs of violence, 59
on land dispute resolution by traditional authorities, 134, 

141–42n56

fairness. See justice and fairness
Famine Early Warning System Network, 230b, 286
FAO. See Food and Agriculture Organization
FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia), 79b, 113 

(feature), 121, 252, 253

feudalism, 90 (feature)
ﬁ nance

ﬂ ows and ﬁ nancial system weaknesses, 25, 227–29, 284–85
key indicators of, 352–53t

Financial Action Task Force (FATF), 228, 241n38
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FINCEN, U.S.), 242n42
ﬁ nancial intelligence units (FIUs), 241–42n39, 242n43
ﬁ nancial support for security and justice reforms, 29
Fixing Failed States (Ghani & Lockhart), 42n71, 211n67
ﬂ exibility in approaches to progress, 171
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), 34, 231, 232b, 286
food insecurity, 229–30, 230b, 285–86
food shocks (2008–09), 8, 81, 86f, 103
Foreign Exchange Transaction Reports, 242n43
forestry industry. See timber industry
former Soviet Union and increased violence due to government 

transformation, 101, 102b

fragile countries

affected by conﬂ ict and violence, 39n3, 68n8, 87b
aid programs in, 25, 183
child welfare in, 63
corruption. See corruption
external stresses for. See external stresses
food shocks, 81, 103, 285–86. See also food insecurity
global tendency to ignore, 217
landlocked or island nations, 233–34
mistrust and expectations of, 100b
resisting independence, 166
Sub-Saharan Africa’s regional infrastructure challenge, 235m
technical assistance, 196

Fragile States Facility (FSF), 213n91
fragility

composed of weak capacity, accountability, and legitimacy of 

institutions, 85, 87b

deﬁ ned, xvi, 95n65
innovative thinking about, 95n68
in WDR framework for building resilience to violence, 45f

fragmentation of aid. See international support
framework for building resilience. See WDR framework (2011)
Free Aceh Movement, 108, 120, 137 (feature)
Freedom House, 114 (feature), 208n1

G
g7+, 43n91, 197, 291n5
gangs

dispute resolution mechanism of, 133–34
global rise of, 53f
homicides related to, 123b, 172 (feature)
links to employment, respect, and identity, 79
multisectoral programs of prevention at community level, 148
reasons for membership, 79b

gaps in data. See data gaps for studying violence
Garang, John, 78
GDP. See gross domestic product
GEMAP. See Governance and Economic Management Assistance 

Fearon, James D., 10, 78, 84, 85b, 94n39, 105b, 119, 141n49
fears of oppression, 74
feasible results indicators to demonstrate progress, 17 (feature)

Program

gender-based violence, 60–61, 61t, 152
gender issues. See women

372 

I N D E X

Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and Development (2008), 59
geographical location. See justice and fairness
Georgia

coordination between humanitarian and development partners, 

193

corruption crack down, 156

Germany

recognition of past crimes, 166
systematic and gradual reform, 259

Ghana

conﬁ dence-building, 12
Consultative Assembly, 121
electricity supplied to Liberia, 32 (feature), 191b
National Architecture for Peace, 189b
peace committees, 23
refugees seeking shelter in, 66
success in preventing violence, 11, 108, 120, 121, 122, 189b

Ghani, Ashraf, 42n71, 193, 211n67
global conversation on violence, xix–xx, 2
Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for 

Tax Purposes, 228

Global Information and Early Warning System, 230b, 286
globalization

changes in, xii
leading to external stresses. See external stresses

Goldstone, Jack A., 81
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program 

(GEMAP), 42n61, 126b, 206 (feature)

Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) countries, 35, 43n98, 236, 

243n68, 263, 284

greed or grievance as motive for violence, 75b
Green Climate Fund, 242n50
grievance as motive for violence, 75b, 88
Grifﬁ ths, Martin, 187b
gross domestic product (GDP)

losses due to civil war and violent crime, 64–65, 65b
losses due to neighboring conﬂ icts, 5, 65
military expenditures as percentage of, 338–39
paired with political instability as predictor of civil war onset, 

93n9

Groups of Friends, 218, 240n6
Guatemala

anti-corruption initiatives, 42n62
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, 173 (feature), 179n143
court reform, 155b
deportation of maras from U.S., 78b
economic costs of violence, 65b
gang membership, reasons for, 79b
GDP losses due to violence, 5
homicide rates, 58
International Commission Against Impunity (CICIG), 18, 

42n62, 189, 190b, 210n46, 252, 265

multisectoral community approaches, 260
peace accords, 173 (feature), 209n29
private security industry, 135
violent crime arising in post-conﬂ ict state, 2, 4f
women’s courts, 155
women’s equality, 209n29

Guéhenno, Jean-Marie, 149, 151
Guinea, value chain projects in, 176n67
Guinea-Bissau

assistance programs, 207 (feature)
reintegration budget, 202
UN Peacebuilding Commission in, 184
volatility in international aid to, 195b, 207 (feature)

Gusmão, Xanana, 125

H
Haiti

anti-corruption initiatives, 20, 264b
conﬁ dence-building, 129b
corruption, 227
disarmament project (2003–04), 212n79
disaster’s effect on institutional transformation, 103
election violence, 67 (feature)
international aid for, 183
justice sector reform, 22
multidonor trust funds for, 202
NGOs operating in, 183, 197
overtaxing of capacity by “too much, too soon” reform, 146
police reforms, 13, 153, 153b
polling of citizen perceptions, 259
reforms prior to 2010 disaster, 110b
volatility in international aid to, 195b

health issues

associated with violence, 66
disease focus of humanitarian aid, 210n49
reform, 169

Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative (World Bank/IMF), 

206 (feature)

heroin. See drug trafﬁ cking
Herzegovina. See Bosnia and Herzegovina
high-income countries. See developed countries
Hoefﬂ er, Anke, 84
Holst Fund (Palestinian Authority), 33
homicide rates. See death rates
Honduras

deportation of maras from U.S., 78b
homicide rates, 58
judicial branch, 175n45
private security industry, 135
violent crime arising in post-conﬂ ict state, 4f

human costs of violence, 6, 59–60, 59f
humanitarian aid

disease focus of, 210n49
duration of assistance, 33, 191–92
growth of, 183
phasing from international to national and local institutions, 

19, 29–30, 265, 266b, 272t
in post-conﬂ ict environments, 2
rapid relief from, 191
trade-offs with, 265

human rights abuses

civil wars and, 64, 82, 82b
institutional accountability and, 88
military and, 149

 

Index 

373

prosecutions for, 51
signaling early intent to redress, 125

Human Rights Watch, 136b
human security. See citizen security
humility, 246
Humphreys, Macartan, 141n49
Al-Hussein, Zeid Ra’ad, 273b

I
IADB. See Inter-American Development Bank
Ibrahim, Mo, 158b
Ibrahim Prize for African leadership, 37, 288
IBRD (International Bank for Reconstruction and 

Development), xi

ICRG. See International Country Risk Guide
IDA (International Development Association), 196
identity. See justice and fairness
ideological grievances, 5, 67–68 (feature)
ideology-based groups and transnational ideological threats, 

83, 83f, 222–26, 241n30. See also terrorism and 
terrorist attacks

IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development), 232b
IFC. See International Finance Corporation
IFIs (international ﬁ nancial institutions), role in developmental 

underpinnings of violence prevention, 275–76, 280

Ijaz, Syeda S., 84
illegal drug trade. See drug trafﬁ cking
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 

1996 (U.S.), 78b

IMF. See International Monetary Fund
immunization drives, 210n49
impunity and use of violence, 114, 116n9
inclusion. See inclusive-enough coalitions; justice and fairness
inclusive-enough coalitions, 16–18, 120–27

adapted to local context, 118, 122
conﬁ dence-building and, 12–13, 104, 111, 248
deﬁ ned, xvii
international support for, 185–88
lessons learned, 124
types of coalitions and strategies, 120–24

India

link between income inequality and criminal violence, 79
risk for civil conﬂ ict and, 6, 22
vulnerability to criminal activities and, 7

infant mortality rates in countries affected by violence, 63, 63f
informal employment, 162, 257
infrastructure investment, 158–61, 200, 234, 235m, 257
institutional capacity

Central American reform, 173 (feature)
challenges of, 249
changes in international capacity, 30
“collaborative capacities,” 209n32
deﬁ ned, xvi, 84
early policy announcements and, 22
importance of, 84
indicators of, 95n65
justice reform and, 154
operational gaps in capacity, 210n52, 270–71
strong capacity indicators but low governance indicators, 

116n4

trust and capacity to deliver change, 100
violence and, 88
weak capacity and early results possible, 131–36

institutional challenges, types of, 249
institutional legitimacy as key to stability, xi–xii, 7

early results achieved despite, 131–36
Western model not necessarily relevant, 8

institutional transformation. See transforming institutions
institutions, deﬁ ned, xvi, 41n36
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), 23, 199, 271
interdisciplinary approaches, 131, 132b
interlinked violence, 54–55
internal international agencies. See international support
internal stresses

deﬁ ned, 72
economic stresses, 74t, 78–81, 90t
justice and fairness, 74t, 81–84, 90t
security stresses, 73–78, 74t, 90t

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 

(IBRD), xi

International Commission against Impunity (CICIG). See 

Guatemala

“back to basics” job creation programs, 19
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 161, 176n73

Indonesia. See also Aceh

International Commission on Property Rights for the Poor, 232
International Committee of the Red Cross, 154
international comparison of economic risks for political conﬂ ict, 

“back to basics” job creation programs, 19
building inclusive-enough coalitions, 12, 120, 137 (feature)
community-based programs, 24 (feature), 261b
corruption crack down, 156
multidonor trust funds for, 202
political transitions and peacemaking, 13
rapid-results approach, 171
success in preventing violence, 11, 108

Indonesian Reconstruction Agency, 265
industrialized countries. See developed countries
inequality. See also justice and fairness

horizontal inequality and onset of civil violence, 75b, 79, 

94nn46–47

horizontal vs. vertical inequality, 179n131

80b

International Corruption Hunters Alliance, 34, 229, 284
International Country Risk Guide (ICRG), 64, 78, 95n65
International Development Association (IDA), 196
International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, 31, 36, 

286–87

International Finance Corporation (IFC), 177n88, 200, 213n111, 

292n19

international ﬁ nancial institutions (IFIs), role in developmental 

underpinnings of violence prevention, 275–76, 280

International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), 232b
International Institute for Strategic Studies, xi
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 188, 206–7 (feature)
International Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragility (OECD), 10, 84

374 

I N D E X

International Organization for Migration, 232
international support, 2, 27 (feature), 180–214

agenda for action, 290–91
branding of aid programs, 191, 210n50
for citizen security, justice, and jobs, 28, 29f, 199–200
for commitment mechanisms, 188–90
for conﬁ dence-building, 185–93
data gaps and development of indicators, 280
donor risk management, 31–34, 202–4. See also dual 

accountability
duration of, 193–96
for early results, 190–93
evolving international architecture, 181–85, 205
government misgivings about working with, 131
for inclusive-enough coalitions, 185–88
internal international agency systems, 197–99

procedural conformism, 205
reforming, 31–34, 32 (feature), 276–81

key indicators of, 352–53t
lessons learned from, 205
marshaling support from other countries and from global and 

regional institutions, 250, 286–88

mobilizing for external stresses, 16–17, 20–21, 264–65
monitoring results, 204–5
new directions for, 268–93
in post-conﬂ ict phase, 184, 184f
preventing repeated cycles of violence, 270–76

capacity, operational gaps in, 210n52, 270–71
employment, 274
justice and jobs, structural gaps in, 271–74
police and justice, 274–76
principles for combined operations, 271

recovery instead of prevention as focus of, 183–85
reducing external stresses, 281–86
reducing risks of violence, 35–38
roadmap for breaking cycles of violence, 20–21
track for improving global response for security and 

development, 28, 36–37, 47t

for transforming institutions, 193–200
violence with international links, 22
volatility and fragmentation in, 194, 195b, 199, 208b, 211n66, 

212n74, 217

ending stop-go pattern of assistance, 280–81, 282b

Internet use, effect on governance, 109–10, 117n26
interstate wars, number of, 51, 52b
invasions and occupations, 218
Iran, citizen pressure through technology, 110
Iraq

Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), 8, 196
elections, 164
electricity crisis during reconstruction, 160b
foreign troops and security stresses, 218
multidonor trust funds for, 202
privatized security, failure of, 135
restoration of conﬁ dence and “surge” (2006–07), 8
spillover effect of occupation of, 78

Israeli-Palestinian violence, 186

J
Jamaica

criminal gangs supporting political activities, 5
indirect vs. direct costs of violence, 65b
inner-city community infrastructure and services for the poor, 

132b

militants and gangs, 54

Japan

infrastructure investment supporting private sector 

development, 200

land reform, 162, 257
speed in transforming institutions, 13
women’s courts, 156

jobs. See also citizen security, justice, and jobs

“back to basics” job creation programs, 19, 257
best-ﬁ t approaches, 161–63
developing capacity for, 30–31
exploitative employment as risk, 79
international support for, 200, 271–74
investing in as essential to reduce violence, xii, 79, 289
low skill levels, 161
prioritization of, 274
private sector jobs, 157–58
reintegration of ex-combatants, 138 (feature)
self-employment, 162
social cohesion and, 6
transitional employment, 200
women, employment of, 163–64
youth unemployment, 6, 30, 274

Jordan, camps for displaced populations, 61
justice and fairness. See also citizen security, justice, and jobs; social 

cohesion

conﬁ dence-building and, 140n33
corruption. See corruption
court reform, 154–55, 155b, 175n45
criminal justice functions and dispute resolution, 153–56, 199, 

276

deﬁ ned, xvi
developing capacity for, 30, 88
Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, 235
economic goals met through, 132b
ideologically motivated groups capitalizing on themes of 

injustice and exclusion, 222

international support to ﬁ x structural gaps in, 271–74
investing in as essential to reduce violence, xii
linking to security, 256–57
prioritizing investment in, 273b, 274–76, 282b
stresses and vulnerability to violence, 74t, 81–84, 94nn46–47

factor in civil war, 6, 7t

transitional justice approaches, 140n34, 166–67

K
Kagame, H.E. Paul, 158b
Kazakhstan, regional cooperation and stresses, 238–40 (feature)
Kecamatan Development Program, 138 (feature), 157
Keefer, Philip, 78, 119

 

Kenya

contested elections (2007), 110
criminal gangs supporting political activities, 5
economic costs of violence, 65b
elections, 120, 164
mediation, 187b
militants and gangs, 54
organized criminal violence, 67 (feature)
violence, 54t

Kimberley Process Certiﬁ cation Scheme to stem sale of conﬂ ict 

diamonds, 25, 34, 43n87, 220, 221b, 240n13, 285

Kleiman, Mark A.R., 224b
Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of, Internet’s effect on 

governance, 117n26

Korea, Republic of

conﬁ dence-building, 12
land reform, 162, 257
speed in transforming, 13, 110
success of aid from single or dominant donor, 199
transition moment, 22, 107

Kosovo

“back to basics” job creation programs, 19
community policing, 152
early results crucial to conﬁ dence-building, 253
refugees from, 66
technical assistance, 196
value chain development in dairy industry, 158, 159b, 257
World Bank support for negotiations, 186
Kuwait invasion (1990), spillover effect of, 78
Kyrgyz Republic, regional cooperation and stresses, 238–40 

(feature)

L
labor migration. See migration
Lacey Act, 285
Laitin, David D., 105b
Lamamra, Ramtane, 281b, 290
landlocked or island nations, 35, 233–34
land reform, 162, 257
land-use issues, 230–31, 232b
Large Cash Transaction Reports, 242n43
Las Madres de la Plaza, 123–24, 140n26
Latin America. See also speciﬁ c countries

coordinating political, security, and development responses to 

violence, 148b

court reform, 155b
employment and security as most pressing needs in, 128
women’s human rights activism, 123–24

Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan (LOTFA), 33, 203b
law enforcement personnel

army vs. police, unclear roles of, 149, 200
community policing, 152
prioritizing reform of, 274–76
UN standardized training of, 199
U.S. vs. EU structures, 213n107
vetting of, 151
women participating as, 151–52, 174n25, 188

Index 

375

layered approach to problem solving, xii, 2
leadership

agreements between strong leaders. See elite pacts
conﬁ dence-building and, 106, 119
initiatives to recognize, 37, 288
qualities of effective leadership, 139n9
seizing opportunities to prevent violence, 252

Lebanon

camps for displaced populations, 61
electricity restored during civil war, 13, 160, 160b
UN peacekeeping operation, 221
women’s courts, 155

legalization of drugs, 222, 224–25b
legal reform. See justice and fairness
legitimacy

deﬁ ned, xvi, 84
functioning of, 95n67
lack of legitimate institutions and risk of recurring violence, 

85–89, 85b

trust and, 151

Le Roy, Alain, 281b, 290
lessons learned

from Central Asia’s regional cooperation institutions, 239–41 

(feature)

from Colombia, 113–14 (feature)
from international support, 205, 271
from national reformers, 119

Levi, Margaret, 41n49, 116n1
Liberia

anti-corruption initiatives, 19, 126, 126b, 156, 260, 262b
assistance programs, 206–8
community-driven development (CDD), evaluations of 

effectiveness of, 141n49

conﬁ dence-building, quick, visible results for, 130b
coordination between humanitarian and development 

partners,  193

dual key authority in revenue earning and expenditure, 42n61
early results crucial to conﬁ dence-building, 253
economic goals met through security intervention, 132b
electricity assistance from Ghana, 32 (feature), 191b
Emergency Employment Plan, 161
Governance and Economic Management Action Plan, 252
Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program 

(GEMAP), 18, 188–89, 202, 262b

international support and government planning for transition, 

193, 206–7 (feature), 250

mass rape, 60
qualiﬁ ed contractors not interested in bidding on projects, 197
refugees from, 66
spillover effects on neighboring countries, 65
success in preventing violence, 11
transition moment, 22
women

economic empowerment of, 19
peace negotiations, role of, 123
security tasks, participation in, 152

World Bank/IMF Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative, 

206 (feature)

376 

I N D E X

Liberian Women’s Initiative, 13
Liberian Women’s Mass Action for Peace movement, 123
Libya uprising (2011), effect on oil prices, 5, 66
Linn, Johannes, 240 (feature)
local conﬁ dence building, 14, 122, 122b
Lockhart, Clare, 42n71, 193, 211n67
Lomé Agreement (1999), 121
Lomé Declaration (2000), 36, 51, 287
Lord’s Resistance Army (Uganda), 67 (feature), 218
low-income countries

civil wars in, 78
labor-intensive programs, 161
reasons why change becomes so difﬁ cult for, 99

Loya Jirga (Afghanistan), 165b, 177–78n103

M
Macmillan Limited, 227b
macroeconomic policy, 168
Madagascar

community monitoring in health sector, 157
land-use issues, 230–31

Mali

AU Border Program pilot project, 219
land dispute resolution, 155
nongovernmental interventions for peace, 139n21
success in preventing violence, 120
violence, 54t

Mandela, Nelson, 14, 120
marginalized groups. See exclusion of groups
Matveeva, Anna, 240 (feature)
MDGs. See Millennium Development Goals
MDTFs. See multidonor trust funds
media, role of, 124
mediation, increased support for, 182–83, 186, 187b

heavy mediation start-up budget (HMSB), 209n23
light mediation start-up budget (LMSB), 209n23
links to sustained mediation, 272t

mediators and special envoys, 29, 187b, 213n96
Mehta, Pratap, 168
Melanesia

gang violence associated with ethnic groups, 54
ritualized warfare, 68–69n14

men, impact of violent conﬂ ict on, 60–61, 61t, 138 (feature)
Mérida Initiative, 57, 192
Mesnard, Alice, 119
Meteoro program (Colombia), 15
methodological note, xix–xx, 341
Mexico

economic costs of violence, 65b
violence levels, 10

Middle East and North Africa

institutional capacity vs. accountability, 84
peace processes involving neighboring countries, 233
violence in, xi, 5, 53

middle-income countries

aid and support for fragile countries from, 183, 269
consumption patterns in food and energy, 230
as examples of recent successful transitions, xii

labor-intensive programs, 161
lessons for, 22
lessons from recent transformations of, 197
reasons why change so challenging for, 99
socioeconomic consequences of violence in, 63

migration, 163, 258, 259
Miguel, Edward, 6, 81
military expenditures, 338
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)

job creation as low priority, 200
low-income countries or countries engaged in conﬂ ict and, xi, 

1, 5, 50, 63, 277

monitoring results, 21, 259
poverty reduction, 348–49t
violence as constraint on meeting, 61–63, 62f, 70n57

Min, Brian, 81
Miron, Jeffrey A., 225b
mistrust, need to eliminate. See trust
mobile phones, 110, 158b, 214n132
money-laundering. See corruption
monitoring results, 21, 204–5, 259, 260t
Montaño, Jorge, 10, 76b
MONUC (UN Peacekeeping Force in the Democratic Republic of 

Congo), 192, 194

Mozambique

anti-corruption initiatives, 19, 260, 262b
civil liberties rating of, 208n1
corruption crack down, 156
development progress, 51
duration of donor projects in, 196
Feeder Roads Program, 161
international support, beneﬁ ts of, 182b
macroeconomic reforms, 168
MDG progress, 6
peace agreement, 182b
security goal met by economic intervention, 132b
signal of break with past, 125
success in preventing violence, 11

Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program, 218, 219b
multidonor trust funds (MDTFs), 33, 202, 203b, 212n79
Multilateral Development Banks supporting private sector 

development, 200

multisectoral approaches

community programs, 29, 255
transforming institutions, 148–49

Myanmar

Cyclone Nargis (2008) disaster situation, 186, 233, 234b, 271
devolution and decentralization, 166
drug trafﬁ cking, 57
Internet use, effect on governance, 117n26
regional cooperation with Thailand, 233

N
Naidoo, Jay, 14, 115b
Namibia, Women and Child Protection Unit within police force, 152
natural disasters

effect on institutional transformation of Haiti, 103
food insecurity and, 230b

 

Index 

377

Myanmar disaster situation (2008), 186
number of, 339
South-South exchanges and, 186
World Bank rapid response to crisis and emergencies, 

208n10

Natural Resource Charter, 34, 188, 210n39, 285, 291–92n14
natural resources

exploitation of, 10, 67 (feature)
external stresses, 229–32
standards for responsible use of, 188, 285–86
wealth of, and civil wars, 54, 78, 81
World Resources Outlook, 285

neighborhood as factor in conﬂ ict risk, 40n33
Nepal

community-based programs, 24 (feature), 261b
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, 55, 91–92 (feature)
economic empowerment, 163, 258
educational responsibility decentralized to local level, 135b
interlinked security, economic, and political stresses leading 

to warfare, 90–92 (feature)

PBF funding to, 192
Peacebuilding Commission, 33
value chain projects, 176n67
women’s economic empowerment, 19, 163b, 258

Nestlé, 213n111
Netherlands

duration of aid for Burundi, 193
security sector reform, 185

New Partnership for Africa’s Development, 233
Nicaragua

deportation rate from U.S., 78b
“Esquipulas Process,” ending war (1987), 218
transition moment, 22, 125, 173 (feature)
violent crime arising in post-conﬂ ict state, 4f
women

economic empowerment, 19
security tasks, participation in, 152

Nigeria

anti-corruption initiatives, 20, 264b
corruption, 227
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission, 264b
oil trafﬁ cking from, 241n15
organized criminal violence, 67 (feature)
vigilantism, 135, 136b
war with Biafra, 166

Nilsson, Desirée, 119
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). See also civil society

aid programs in fragile countries, 25, 134
data collection and analysis, role in, 280
donor risk management and, 202
government misgivings about working with, 131
health system reform, role of, 169
local coalition building and, 122
proliferation of international NGOs, 183
time frames for support from, 193

NORAD (Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation), 229
Norconsult, 227b
North, Douglass, 86, 105b

Northern Ireland

criminal gangs supporting political activities, 5
multisectoral community approaches, 260
political transitions and peacemaking, 13
social inequalities and civil war, 83
success in preventing violence, 11, 259
trafﬁ cking ﬁ nancing rebels, 54
violence, 54t

O
OECD countries

security and development assistance from, 26
terrorist threats in, 55

OECD Handbook on Security System Reform, 175n37
Ofﬁ ce of the Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization 

(U.S.), 185, 209n14, 212n86

oil

prices, effect of terrorist attacks, 5, 66, 94n39
revenues, wealth-sharing arrangements for, 127
trafﬁ cking in, 220t, 241n15

opportunity for change. See transition moments
optimism, 110, 110b, 116n3
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

(OECD), 25. See also OECD countries

Anti-Bribery Convention, 226
anti-corruption initiatives, 229
International Network on Conﬂ ict and Fragility, 26

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development–

Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC), 149, 
166, 282b, 291n4

Organisation pour l’Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des 

Affaires, 236b

Organization of American States (OAS), 51, 190
organized criminal violence

data gaps for studying. See data gaps for studying violence
deﬁ ned, xv, 39n1
drug-related violence and, 10
inequality between rich and poor and, 22
nature of modern organized violence, 67–68 (feature)
rise of in post-conﬂ ict countries, 2, 4f
stress posed by, 76b
Oshima, Kenzo, 273b
Otpor movement, 117n25
oversight mechanisms, 31. See also civilian oversight of security

P
Paciﬁ c Islanders’ migration, 163
Paciﬁ c Islands Forum’s Paciﬁ c Plan for Regional Integration and 

Cooperation, 235

Pakistan

assessment tools, use of, 23
budget allocations as signals of political reform, 127, 128b
conﬁ dence-building, visible results for, 130–31b
cross-border violence, 67 (feature)
devolution and decentralization, 166
Frontier Crimes Regulation, 127
IFC programs for small and medium entrepreneurs, 213n111
international ideological movements and local grievances, 5

378 

I N D E X

Pakistan (continued)

practical policy and program tools, 16–23, 246–67

international long-term support for local initiatives, 194
organized criminal violence, 67 (feature)
Pashtun tribal areas on Afghanistan border, 219
post-crisis needs assessment, 250
violence, 53, 54t

Palestinian territories

Holst Fund, 33
Palestinian Authority, accountability and transparency of, 157
security forces, 149
spillover effect of military operations in West Bank and 

Gaza, 78

Panama, violent crime arising in post-conﬂ ict state, 4f
Papua New Guinea

nongovernmental interventions for peace, 139n21
organized criminal violence, 67 (feature)
violence, 54t
women’s role in peace process, 123
parenting behavior and training, 169
partisanship of state institutions, 7
Pashtun tribal areas (Afghanistan-Pakistan border), 219
past crimes, justice for, 166–67
patronage

dismantling of, 8, 123
regimes using to maintain their power, 8, 258
state legitimacy and, 95n67

PCNAs (Post Conﬂ ict Needs Assessments), 192–93
peacekeeping, global system of, 2, 28, 183. See also United Nations

ﬂ exible peacekeeping arrangements, 281b

performance legitimacy, deﬁ ned, 84
Peru

drug trafﬁ cking and, 10, 223b
mass rape, 60

Philippines, violence in, 54, 54t
Physical Rights Integrity Index, 64, 339
physical terrain features making rebellion easier, 40n33, 93n2
Pidufala, Oksana, 240 (feature)
pirates

costs on trade and economic activity, 5, 65
Somalian, 1, 67 (feature), 263

Pitsuwan, Surin, 38 (feature), 234b
police. See law enforcement personnel
policy options. See practical policy and program tools
political legitimacy, deﬁ ned, 84
political stresses. See inequality; justice and fairness
Political Terror Scale, 82b
political theories of violence, 75–76b
Portillo, Alfonso, 190b
Post Conﬂ ict Needs Assessments (PCNAs), 192–93
post-conﬂ ict phase, 2, 3t

failure to address repeated cycles of violence, 23
international support in, 184, 184f
organized violence rising in, 2, 4f
recovery and lingering risk for violence, 64
security forces in, 149–51

poverty

key indicators of, 346–47t
rising in countries affected by violence, 4f, 5, 60, 60f

basic principles, 247–48
basic tools

for conﬁ dence-building, 17 (feature), 250–55, 251t
for early results, 255–58

core tools, 17 (feature)
country-speciﬁ c strategies, framework for, 248–50, 249t
framework for tailoring country-speciﬁ c strategies, 248–50
lessons of what succeeds, 18–19
linking early results to transforming institutions, 255–60

failure to use tools to full potential, 192–93
ﬁ tting program design to context, 259–60, 261b
managing trade-offs, 258–59
monitoring results, 259

reducing external stresses and mobilizing external support, 

262–65

in WDR framework, 47t

pragmatism, 171
preemptive strike as accepted risk, 74
“premature load-bearing” of institutions, 100, 101b
prevention of violence. See also speciﬁ c countries and regions

international support’s focus on recovery instead of prevention, 

183–85

as part of transition, 108
repeated cycles of violence, 270–76
through citizen security, justice, and jobs, 28, 29f. See also 

citizen security, justice, and jobs

“Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investment that Respects 

Rights, Livelihoods and Resources,” 232b

prioritization of institutional transformation. See sequencing and 

prioritizing reforms

prisoner’s dilemmas, 116n9
private sector

anti-corruption mechanisms, 157, 158b
crime and violence prevention initiatives, 152, 200
jobs, 157–58
outreach to, in coalition building, 122

private security companies, 135, 136b
privatization of state assets, 168
procurement procedures, 198–99, 198b
proposers/responders and bargainers, 82b
publication of cost estimates for projects, 198b
public attitudes toward excluded groups, 168–69
public ﬁ nance for employment, 161–63
public ﬁ nancial management (PFM) reviews, 174n14
public-private partnerships, 13, 253
public services, quality of, 235, 236t

R
racial inequality. See justice and fairness
rainfall shocks and violence, 6, 81
Ramirez de Rincon, Marta Lucia, 15, 150b
RAMSI (Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands), 

153, 185

rape, 60–61
rapid economic and social change as drivers for conﬂ ict, 75b
rapid-results approach, 170, 196
recovering countries, deﬁ ned, 70n50

 

Index 

379

reducing risks of violence, 23–39. See also practical policy and 

differentiating strategy and programs to country context, 

program tools

citizen security, justice, and jobs, 28–31
external stresses and international support, 34–35
international support, 35–38
tracks for, 28–39
transforming institutions, 31–34

refugees. See displaced populations and refugees
regional and cross-border initiatives

21–23, 111–12

external stresses and international support, 15–16
international support, 20–21. See also international support
monitoring results, 21
practical policy and program tools, 16–23. See also practical 

policy and program tools

regional and cross-border initiatives, 20
transforming institutions, 8–12. See also transforming 

aligning international assistance behind, 37–38, 38 (feature), 

institutions

190, 210n48, 288

complementing global level to reduce external stresses, 25, 

“rules of warfare,” nations observing, 109
Russia

281–86

cooperation to manage public goods, 212n90, 236b, 291n4
cross-border trade, 283–84
development programming, 35, 219–20
layered approach to problems, xii, 2, 20
reafﬁ rming consensus on international norms and standards, 

39 (feature)

regional norms, essential in preventing violence, 117n25, 

289b

regional stresses, 216–18, 233–37
security support, 283
shared regional technical and administrative capacity, 283–84

Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI), 

153, 185

“regional subsidiarity,” 233
reintegration of ex-combatants, 100b, 132b, 138 (feature), 142n70, 

149, 162, 192, 202

religious differences. See justice and fairness
RENAMO (Mozambican National Resistance), 125
reparations for victims of political violence, 125–26, 140nn33–34
repeated cycles of violence, 2–8, 3–4f, 3t, 57–71

decline in wars, 51–53, 52b
deﬁ ned, xv
developmental consequences of, 60–66. See also developmental 

consequences of violence

failure to address in post-war assistance, 23
global effects of, 66
international support for preventing, 270–76
modern violence and, 53–58
need to address, 252
in WDR framework, 46t

repeated spiral in transforming institutions, 12, 12f, 107–8
research needs. See data gaps for studying violence
resilience of institutions, 98, 103–8. See also conﬁ dence-building; 

transforming institutions

in WDR framework, 45f, 46–47t, 103f

“Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conﬂ ict Affected 

and High-Risk Areas,” 220

restoring conﬁ dence. See conﬁ dence-building
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. See FARC
road maintenance, 132b, 161, 206 (feature)
roadmap for breaking cycles of violence, 8–23

citizen security, justice, and jobs, 13. See also citizen security, 

justice, and jobs

collaborative coalitions, 16–18
conﬁ dence-building, 12–13, 18–20. See also conﬁ dence-building

aid for post-conﬂ ict Tajik regime, 163, 177n93
increased violence due to government transformation, 

101, 102b

Rwanda

anti-corruption institutions, 158b
“back to basics” job creation programs, 19
community-based programs, 24 (feature), 261b
contract enforcement regime, 157
development progress, 51
equality for women, 177n98
fears of oppression and civil conﬂ ict, 74
justice system, 167
mass rape, 60
MDG progress, 6
participation of previously excluded groups, 127, 162
transition moment, 22
value chain development in coffee industry, 158, 159b, 257

Rwanda–DRC agreement (2007), 218

S
SALW (small arms and light weapons), trade in, 221, 

241nn19–22

Sambanis, Nicholas, 93n9, 210n35
sanctions, effectiveness of, 189, 190, 210n41, 226
Santiago Principles, 286, 292n20
Satyanath, Shankar, 6, 81
schools. See education
“second best” solutions, 107b, 117n17, 248, 289
second-chance programs, 161
secrecy jurisdictions, 228, 242n44
security. See citizen security
“security dilemma,” 74
self-employment, 162
sequencing and prioritizing reforms, 145–48

after security, justice, and jobs, 164
as core tool, 255–56
deﬁ ned, xvii
investment in citizen security and justice reforms, 273b, 282b
“too fast” process, effect of, 144, 145–46
“too slow” process, effect of, 144

Sergenti, Ernest, 6, 81
sexual violence, 60–61, 61t
shared regional administrative capacity, 35
Sharif, Sheikh, 263
shura (Arabic word for “consultation” or “council”), 134b, 141n54
Siemens Group, 227b

380 

I N D E X

Sierra Leone

coordination of aid programs, 196
devolution and decentralization, 166
justice reform, 154
lootable natural resources of, 54
organized criminal violence, 67 (feature)
reintegration budget, 202
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), 255
success in preventing violence, 11, 120–21
women

economic empowerment, 19
victims of domestic violence, 152

success in preventing violence, 11, 108, 115b, 120, 121
systematic and gradual reform, 259
violent crime arising in post-conﬂ ict state, 2

Southern African Development Community (SADC), 230b
Southern Sudan, emergence of, 53
Southern Sudan Multidonor Trust Fund, 202, 203b, 204
South-North exchanges, xii, 36, 287–88
South-South exchanges

beneﬁ ts of, 197, 292n23
increases in, xii, 36, 208n6, 287–88
natural disaster situations and, 186
technical assistance, 44n104, 212n90, 292n23

signaling, 137–38 (feature), 251. See also commitment mechanisms

Soviet Union (former) and increased violence due to government 

deﬁ ned, xvii
need to address crisis situations, 186

Singapore

conﬁ dence building, 14
housing programs, 257
local level, trust of, 122, 122b
post-independence development, 13
security, justice, and jobs, 148b

Sirleaf, Ellen Johnson, 32 (feature), 79, 126, 126b, 197
small arms and light weapons (SALW), trade in, 221, 241nn19–22
smuggling. See trafﬁ cking
social accountability, 157, 258
social audits of government records, 175n61
social cohesion. See also inclusive-enough coalitions

creating sense of fairness and social justice, 127, 140n41
ﬁ rearms and illicit drugs, effect of, 7
jobs and, 6
value chains and, 176n67

Social Cohesion Program—a joint UNDP-UNDPA program, 188
social inequality. See inequality; justice and fairness
Solomon Islands

militants and gangs, 54
organized criminal violence, 67 (feature)

Somalia

low conﬂ ict interludes in, 8
outreach to Ethiopia, 263
peacekeeping missions in, 281b
pirates off shore of, 1, 65, 67 (feature), 263

Somaliland, nongovernmental interventions for peace, 139n21
South Africa

apartheid and strong state capacity, 116n4
assessment tools, use of, 23
conﬁ dence-building, 14, 115b, 254b
constitutional reform and development of trust, 22
early results crucial to conﬁ dence-building, 253
elections, 164, 251
expertise for reconstruction and development, 250
guaranteeing employment to former adversaries, 100b, 127
international assistance from

to Burundi, Rwanda, and Southern Sudan, 212n90
to Guinea-Bissau, 207 (feature)

National Peace Accords, 251
nongovernmental interventions for peace, 139n21
security services, 151
signals on political reform, 125, 127

transformation, 101, 102b

special independent agencies, 252
spillover effects, 65–66, 67 (feature)

in Central Africa, 77b
regional cooperation to deal with, 218, 284–85
in South America, 220

spiral. See repeated spiral in transforming institutions
Sri Lanka

school programs and UNICEF aid, 192
social inequalities and civil war, 83

stakeholders

types of, 249
understanding urgency of action, 252

Statistics 40 (poll barometer), 280
Stedman, Stephen, 119
Stewart, Frances, 168
Stolen Assets Recovery Initiative (StAR), 34, 229, 284
stop-go aid in fragile states, 27f
strategic communication, need for, 252
stresses. See also external stresses; internal stresses

deﬁ ned, xv
types of, 249
vulnerability to violence and, 9f, 73–95

economic stresses, 78–81
justice, 81–84
reducing risks of violence, 34–35
roadmap for breaking cycles of violence, 15–16

Sub-Saharan Africa’s regional infrastructure challenge, 235m
subsidiarity, 233, 271
Sudan

Agreement on Wealth Sharing, 127
camps for displaced populations, 61
devolution and decentralization, 166, 178n106
multidonor trust funds for, 202, 203b, 204
peacekeeping missions in, 281b
qualiﬁ ed contractors not interested in bidding on projects, 197
slow deployment of UN Mission, 192
women’s role in peace process, 123

Suspicious Transaction Reports, 242n43
SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication) banking system, 229b

T
Tajikistan

international long-term support for local initiatives, 194

 

Index 

381

regional cooperation and stresses, 238–40 (feature)
violence, 54t

Taliban in Pakistan and Afghanistan, 83, 134
Tamil minority in Sri Lanka, 83
tax deduction for bribes, 226
Taylor, Charles, 65, 67 (feature), 156
technical assistance, 29, 196, 212n90, 292n23
technology advances, effect on governance, 109–10, 252
Teleco, 264b
temporary labor migration, 162–63
temporary pacts in conﬂ ict areas, 8
terminology, 342
terrorism and terrorist attacks

bilateral counterterrorism and counter-crime programs, 184, 222
costs of incidents within a country, 65
costs of transnational attacks on economic growth, 5, 66
deﬁ nition of terrorism, 69n18, 241n29
ﬁ nancing, 228, 241n38
global threat of, 53, 55, 55f
hijacking and kidnapping in Colombia, 15
ideology-based groups, support for, 83, 83f, 222–23, 226, 

241n30

media coverage of, 53, 53f
social inequalities and injustice and, 83
UN General Assembly comprehensive strategy for 

counterterrorism, 222

Thailand

indirect vs. direct costs of violence, 65b
regional cooperation with Myanmar, 233

theories of violence prevention and WDR framework (2011), 

105b, 289

third-party guarantors and assistance, 100b, 188, 235–36, 252
Timap for Justice (nonproﬁ t in Sierra Leone), 154
timber industry, 156, 220, 220t, 241nn16–17, 285
time for transition to institutional resilience, 13, 110, 247

speed. See transforming institutions

Timor-Leste

army vs. police, unclear roles as source of violence, 149
ASEAN role, 233, 234b
budget debates, 251
building inclusive-enough coalitions, 12, 120, 122, 187
health system reform, 20, 169, 179n137, 192
humanitarian aid, phasing from international to local 

institutions, 266b

international support and government planning for transition, 193
justice system, 156, 257
outreach to Indonesia, 263
participation of previously excluded groups, 127, 140n27, 162
Petroleum Law, 156
signal of break from past, 125
success in preventing violence, 11
transfers to victims of violence, 258
transition moment, 22

Tinbergen, Jan, 282b
Tinbergen’s rule, 282b
Togo

evidence of deteriorating situation in, 186
refugees from, 66

“too much, too soon” syndrome. See sequencing and prioritizing 

reforms

Touré, Amadou Toumani, 120
trade

cross-border trade, 283–84
key indicators of, 352–53t
losses due to violence, 6, 64, 71n73
piracy, costs of, 5, 65

trade-offs

for conﬁ dence-building, 253–55, 258–59
for international delivery capacity, 265
risk of action vs. risk of inaction, 277

tradition and state legitimacy, 95n67
trafﬁ cking. See also conﬂ ict diamonds; drug trafﬁ cking

counter-trafﬁ cking initiatives, 283, 284–85
ﬁ nancing rebel groups, 54
global rise of, 53f
stress posed by, 76b, 217, 220–22, 220t, 240–41nn13–22

transforming institutions

adaptability, 110–12, 111b. See also best-ﬁ t approaches
bottom-up and top-down programming, 255
breaking cycles of violence through, 8–12
challenges for, 99–103, 105b
communication technologies and, 110
complementary programs for, 18–19
continuous process of, 169–71
core tools, 17 (feature), 256t
corruption, 156–57
criminal justice functions and dispute resolution, 153–56
deﬁ ned, xvii
delivering citizen security, justice, and jobs, 13, 272t. See also 

citizen security, justice, and jobs

devolution and decentralization, 164–66
dual accountability and managing risks of action, 200–205
economic reforms, 167–68
education reform, 169
elections, 164
escaping violence and developing resilience, 98, 103–8, 103f
conﬁ dence-building, 104–6. See also conﬁ dence-building
external support and resistance to external stresses, 106–7. 

See also external stresses

repeated spiral, 12, 12f, 107–8

as essential for stability, xii
expectations for, 99–101, 108–10
health reform, 169
infrastructure investment, 158–61
international support for, 193–200, 272t
lack of legitimate institutions and risk of recurring violence 

requiring solutions of, 86
past crimes, justice for, 166–67
“premature load-bearing” of institutions, 100, 101b
prioritization of. See sequencing and prioritizing reforms
private sector jobs, 157–58
public attitudes toward excluded groups, 168–69
public ﬁ nance for employment, 161–63
security and, 13, 148–53
speed of, 10, 11t, 15, 101, 105b, 108–10, 109b. See also 

sequencing and prioritizing reforms

382 

I N D E X

transforming institutions (continued)

supporting, 193–200

adapting to local context, 196–97
time and patience, 193–96

track for reducing risks of violence, 31–34
transitions from humanitarian aid, 19
trust issues and rising expectations, 99–101
vulnerability to external stress, 101–3
in WDR framework for building resilience to violence, 45f, 

46–47t

women’s economic empowerment, 163–64

transition moments

breaking away from fragility and conﬂ ict, 107, 115b
deﬁ ned, xvii
differences among types of, 22
taking advantage of, 249

transparency

of budget and expenditures, 156–57, 251
at grassroots, 127
trade-offs with collusion, 198b

Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index, 

126b, 226

treaties working in concert with UN missions, 210n35
triangular cooperation, 197
trust. See also conﬁ dence-building

civil wars and, 64
deﬁ ned, 41n49, 116n1
early policy announcements and, 22, 125
lack of visible improvements and, 124
legitimacy and, 151
regional services sharing and, 235
transforming institutions and, 8, 98, 99–101
unrealistic due to levels of mistrust, 100b

violence prevention through establishing, 149
truth-telling process, 126, 166, 178n117, 178n119
Turkmenistan, regional cooperation and stresses, 238–40 (feature)
Twitter revolution, 109

U
Uganda

cross-border violence, 67 (feature)
mass rape, 60
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey on education funds, 127
Veterans Assistance Program, 202

Ultimatum Game, 82b
UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 30, 154, 191–92
UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 34, 232b, 

286

UN Department of Political Affairs (UNDPA)

conﬁ dence-building programs, 186
innovative programs, 271
mediation budget, 209n23
peace and development advisers, 213n96
regional ofﬁ ces, 25
violence reduction programs, 23

UN Development Programme (UNDP)

adapting community-level programs to country context, 24 

(feature)

citizen security, justice, and jobs, delivery of, 199
humanitarian aid, 30
innovative programs, 271
multisectoral approaches, 132b
peace and development advisers, 213n96
preventive tools of, 23
South-South facilities, 197

UNDP-UNDPA Social Cohesion Program, 188
unemployment linked to violence, 7, 30–31, 78, 79, 79b, 252
UNIFEM (United Nations Development Fund for Women), 188
United Kingdom

anti-money laundering laws, 227
Department for International Development (DFID)

duration of aid from, 193
Program Risk Assessment Matrix, 213n97
Stabilization Unit, 185, 209n14

direct costs of violence, 65b
Multilateral Agency Review, 185
Serious Organized Crime Agency (SOCA), 242n42

United Nations

Children’s Fund. See UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
Conference on Trade and Development. See UN Conference on 

Trade and Development (UNCTAD)

Convention Against Corruption, 26, 226
Convention Against Genocide, 26
criminal justice, need to play leadership role in, 276
crisis prevention and recovery experience, 271
Department of Disarmament Affairs, 221
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO), 192, 199
Department of Political Affairs. See UN Department of Political 

Affairs (UNDPA)

Development Programme. See UN Development Programme 

(UNDP)

General Assembly comprehensive strategy for counterterrorism, 

222

High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 154
Independent Review of Civilian Capacities, 197, 199
integrated missions, 208–9n11, 270
interagency initiative on Ecuador-Colombia border, 219
Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan, 194
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), 151
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), 152
Mission in Sudan, 192
Ofﬁ ce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 280, 285
operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), 182
Peacebuilding Commission, 37, 184, 288
Peacebuilding Committee and Peacebuilding Support Ofﬁ ce, 

209n14

Peacebuilding Fund, 192
Peacebuilding Support Ofﬁ ce in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), 

207 (feature)

Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, 194
Peacekeeping Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo 

(MONUC), 192, 194

peacekeeping missions, 18, 28, 152, 182, 194, 200, 210n35, 218, 

271, 281b, 338

peacekeeping operation in Lebanon, 221
Regional Center for Conﬂ ict Resolution, 239 (feature)

 

Index 

383

Secretariat procurement systems, 197
Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges, 

and Change, 69n18

Security Council. See UN Security Council
Special Program for the Economies of Central Asia, 239 

(feature)

Standing Police Capacity and Ofﬁ ce of Rule of Law and 

Security Institutions, 199, 275

United Nations–World Bank–European Union post-crisis needs 

assessment, 23, 250

University of the South Paciﬁ c, 236b
UN Security Council

conﬂ ict settlement provisions on democratic processes, 187
drug trafﬁ cking, threat of, 220
GEMAP, agreement to, 126b
international tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania, 167
peacekeeping functions under mandate of, 30, 200

urbanization, effect of, 7
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), 159b, 191

Famine Early Warning System Network, 230b, 286
Ofﬁ ce of the Transition Initiatives, 213n97

Uzbekistan, regional cooperation and stresses, 238–40 (feature)

V
value chains, support for, 157–58, 159b, 176n66, 257
vetting of personnel

judges and prosecutors, 154
law enforcement and security personnel, 151

vicious cycle of conﬂ ict, 6–8, 72. See also repeated cycles of 

violence

vicious cycle of weak institutional legitimacy, 10, 84–89, 85b, 89f
vigilantism, 135, 136b
violence

aid volatility increases and, 27f
breaking cycles of. See roadmap for breaking cycles of violence
civil wars. See civil wars
combination of stresses resulting in, 7
cycles of. See repeated cycles of violence
data gaps. See data gaps for studying violence
economic and political theories of, 75–76b
effects of, generally, 50
global conversation on, xix–xx
interlinked, 54–55
21st century version of, 2, 53, 54t
types of threat, 249
vulnerability to, 73–95. See also vulnerability to violence
Violence and Social Orders (North, Wallis, & Weingast), 105b
violence prevention theories and WDR framework (2011), 105b
virtuous cycle in WDR framework, 46t, 98, 108
Viva Rio (NGO), 197, 213n92
Voices of the Poor project, 78–79, 147
von Billerbeck, Sarah, 84
vulnerability to violence, 73–95

domestic stresses. See internal stresses
external stresses. See external stresses
multiple stresses raising risks of, 73–84
vicious cycle of weak institutional legitimacy, 10, 84–89, 85b
in WDR framework, 46t

W
WACI (West Africa Coast Initiative), 44n99
Wallis, John, 86, 105b
Walter, Barbara, 10, 82b, 84, 85b
war crimes

amnesty for, 187
justice for, 166–67
recognition of, 166
reparations. See reparations for victims of political violence

wars. See also civil wars

interstate wars, number of, 51, 52b

water availability and riparian conﬂ ict, 230, 231b
water treaties, 230
WDR Advisory Council (2011), xx, xxib
on anti-corruption mechanisms, 158b
on civilian oversight of defense, 150b
on conﬁ dence-building, 14–15, 115b, 129b
on economic reform in China, 146b
on external stresses, 10
on ﬂ exible peacekeeping arrangements, 281b
on international agency reform, 32 (feature)
on local-level politics, 122b
on mediation as cost-effective approach, 187b
on organized crime and drug trafﬁ cking, 76b
on pacing institutional transformation, 165b
on prioritizing investment in citizen security and justice 

reforms, 273b

on regional initiatives and norms and standards, 38 (feature), 

234b, 289b

on security, justice, and jobs, 148b
on South African transition, 115b
on uneven international support in West Africa, 208b

WDR framework (2011), 45–48

as roadmap for WDR report, 46–47t
spiral of, repeated cycles to bolster institutional resilience, 45f, 

46, 103–4, 103f

theories of violence prevention and, 105b, 289

weak institutions

as factor in repeated cycles of violence, 10, 84–89, 85b, 89f
vulnerability to external stress, 101–3

wealth-sharing arrangements, 127
Weingast, Barry, 86, 105b
Weinstein, Jeremy, 141n49
West Africa

anti-drug initiatives, 44n99, 285
corruption, 34
coups d’état and failure of local mechanisms to resolve, 16
cross-border cooperation on trafﬁ cking and economic 

integration, 35

cross-border violence, 67 (feature)
donor support to social and poverty reduction programs in 

countries with recent coups d’état, 44n105

drug trafﬁ cking, 10, 34, 56b, 57, 76b, 285
instability and political violence, 56b
international support in post-conﬂ ict phase, 184, 184f
organized crime, 67 (feature)
traditional community meetings, 252

384 

I N D E X

West Africa (continued)

trafﬁ cking and economic integration initiatives, 284
on uneven international support in, 208b
West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI), 44n99
West Africa Telecommunications Regulatory Agreement, 236b
West Bank and Gaza

Facility for New Market Development (FNMD), 176n68
foreign troops and security stresses, 218
international aid for, 183, 212n79
multidonor trust funds for, 202, 212n79
Palestinian security forces, 149

WFP (World Food Programme), 30, 192
WGI. See Worldwide Governance Indicators
“whole-of-government” and “whole-of-systems” initiatives, 25, 

185, 209nn12–13, 270
Wilkinson, Steven I., 178n112
Wimmer, Andreas, 81
wishful thinking, 110, 110b
women

economic empowerment of, 19, 163–64, 163b, 258
equality for, 168–69, 170b, 177n98, 258

peace accords requiring, 209n29

international approaches to coalition building excluding, 188
political reform, participation in, 123–24
security tasks, participation in, 151–52, 174n25, 188, 258
as victims of violence, 60, 175n35

women’s courts, 155–56
World Bank

Aceh Reintegration and Livelihood Survey, 138 (feature)
anti-corruption initiatives, 227b, 229
collaboration with UN peacekeeping missions, 271
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) 

frameworks, 87b, 95n65

Department of Institutional Integrity, 227, 227b
diplomatic support for negotiations, 186
duration of aid for post-conﬂ ict countries, 193
Environmental, Health and Safety General Guidelines, 292n19
on foreign investment in land, 231
imprimatur of good ﬁ nancial practice from, 188
indicators of institutional strength used by, 85
on labor-intensive programs in low- and middle-income 

countries, 161

land-use issues, 231, 232, 232b
legal and judicial issues, support for, 199
Liberia and planning for transition, 206 (feature)
publication of cost estimates for projects, 198b
public ﬁ nancial management (PFM) reviews, 174n14
rapid response to crisis and emergencies, 208n10
regional lending by, 25
road maintenance in Liberia, 132b
South-South facilities, 197
Statebuilding and Peacebuilding Fund (SPF), 192

World Bank Group’s Enterprise Surveys, 160
World Bank/IMF Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative, 206 

(feature)

World Bank Institute Rule of Law rating (2008), 235
World Bank/UN Conference on Trade and Development 

(UNCTAD)/Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
initiative, 34

World Development Indicators 2010, 341
World Development Report (2009), 234
World Development Report 2007: Development and the Next 

Generation, 78

World Food Programme (WFP), 30, 192
World Health Organization (WHO), 30
Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI), 78, 85b, 95n65
Wu Jianmin, 146b
Wunlit Covenant (Sudan), 123

Y
Yemen, conﬂ icts within, 55, 68 (feature)
Yeo, George, 14, 122b, 148b
YouthBuild International, 162
youth population, 339
youth unemployment, 6, 30, 79, 274

Z
Zemun gang (Balkans), 67 (feature)
Zimbabwe

evidence of deteriorating situation in, 186
in-kind support from bilateral donor for, 202
travel restrictions imposed by EU on, 189

Zoellick, Robert B., xii

ECO-AUDIT

Environmental Benefits Statement

The  World  Bank  is  committed  to  pre-
serving  endangered  forests  and  natural 
resources.  The  Office  of  the  Publisher 
has  chosen  to  print  World  Development 
Report  2011  on  recycled  paper  with  50 
percent  postconsumer  fiber  in  accordance 
with  the  recommended  standards  for  paper 
usage  set  by  the  Green  Press  Initiative,  a 
nonprofit  program  supporting  publishers 
in  using  fiber  that  is  not  sourced  from 
en dangered  forests.  For  more  information, 
visit www.greenpressinitiative.org.

Saved:
(cid:129) 284 trees
(cid:129)  10 million Btu of total 

energy

(cid:129) 28,900 pounds of net 
greenhouse gases
(cid:129) 130,319 gallons of 
   wastewater
(cid:129) 8,261 pounds of 
   solid waste

With more than 1.5 billion people living in countries affected by conﬂ ict, the
World Development Report 2011 (WDR) looks into the changing nature of violence 
in the 21st century. Interstate and civil wars characterized violent conﬂ ict in the 
last century; more pronounced today is violence linked to local disputes, political 
repression, and organized crime. The Report underlines the negative impact of 
persistent conﬂ ict on a country’s or a region’s development prospects, and notes 
that no low-income, conﬂ ict-affected state has yet achieved a single Millennium 
Development Goal.

The risk of major violence is greatest when high levels of stress combine with 
weak and illegitimate national institutions. Societies are vulnerable when their 
institutions are unable to protect citizens from abuse, or to provide equitable 
access to justice and to economic opportunity. These vulnerabilities are exacer-
bated in countries with high youth unemployment, growing income inequality, 
and perceptible injustice. Externally driven events such as inﬁ ltration by foreign 
combatants, the presence of trafﬁ cking networks, or economic shocks add to the 
stresses that can provoke violence.

The WDR 2011 draws on the experiences of countries that have successfully 
managed to transition away from repetitive violence, pointing to a speciﬁ c 
need to prioritize actions that build conﬁ dence between states and citizens, 
and develop institutions that can provide security, justice, and jobs. Government 
capacity is central, but technical competence alone is insufﬁ cient: institutions and 
programs must be accountable to their citizens if they are to acquire legitimacy. 
Impunity, corruption, and human rights abuses undermine conﬁ dence between 
states and citizens and increase the risks of violence. Building resilient institutions 
occurs in multiple transitions over a generation, and does not mean converging 
on Western institutional models.

The WDR 2011 draws together lessons from national reformers escaping from 
repetitive cycles of violence. It advocates a greater focus on continuous 
preventive action, balancing a sometimes excessive concentration on post-
conﬂ ict reconstruction. The Report is based on new research, case studies, 
and extensive consultations with leaders and other actors throughout the 
world. It proposes a toolkit of options for addressing violence that can be 
adapted to local contexts, as well as new directions for international policy 
intended to improve support for national reformers and to tackle stresses that 
emanate from global or regional trends beyond any one country’s control. 

 ISBN 978-0-8213-8439-8

 SKU 18439

