Part Two
shaping economic geography

In the past generation, there has been a slow revolution in economic thought, brought 
about by the recognition of imperfectly competitive markets, due mainly to increasing 
returns to scale, spillovers, and circular causation. A new way of thinking has transformed 
the classical analysis of industrial organization, economic growth, and international 
trade, and has delivered what were at fi rst controversial, but now widely accepted, 
implications for the progress of developing countries. Part two of the Report illustrates 
the interplay between scale economies, factor mobility, and transport costs to explain 
the formidable forces that shape the spatial transformation described in part one. 
Chapters 4, 5, and 6 are the stops in a tour of the “engine room,” each spotlighting a 
diff erent facet of the interactions among agglomeration, migration, and specialization.

WDR09_09_Part02.indd   125
WDR09_09_Part02.indd   125

10/9/08   11:26:00 AM
10/9/08   11:26:00 AM

CHAPTER 4

Scale Economies 
and Agglomeration

The most celebrated example in eco-

nomics  is  perhaps  the  simplest. 
On  the  ﬁ rst  page  of The  Wealth  of 
Nations,  published  in  1776,  Adam  Smith 
wrote  of  the  beneﬁ ts  of  dividing  labor  to 
make pins. A single unskilled worker with-
out  the  beneﬁ t  of  machines  might  make 
fewer  than  20  pins  in  a  day.  But  in  a  pin 
factory that Smith visited, 10 workers, who 
divided among themselves the 18 operations 
involved  in  making  a  pin,  were  produc-
ing 48,000 pins a day. Rather than strug-
gling to produce just a few pins a day, each 
worker was turning out almost 5,000. Later 
in Smith’s classic work are two important 
qualiﬁ ers: the gains from dividing labor are 
limited by market size, and not all activities 
exhibit increasing returns to scale. 

The ability to transport products wid-
ens  the  market,  so  cities  are  located  near 
the most natural and efﬁ cient of transport 
systems—waterways.  Places  blessed  with 
this  natural  infrastructure  often  do  well, 
while other places must bide their time. As 
Smith wrote,

There are in Africa none of those great inlets, 
such as the Baltic and Adriatic seas in Europe, 
the  Mediterranean  and  Euxine  seas  in  both 
Europe  and  Asia,  and  the  gulphs  of  Arabia, 
Persia,  India,  Bengal,  and  Siam  in  Asia,  to 
carry  maritime  commerce  into  the  interior 
parts  of  that  great  continent:  and  the  great 
rivers  of  Africa  are  at  too  great  a  distance 
from  one  another  to  give  occasion  to  any 
considerable inland navigation.1 

Besides,  not  all  activities  exhibit  scale 
economies,  and  some  do  not  need  large 
markets  to  thrive.  Subsistence  farming  is 

one such occupation, fruitfully carried out 
in villages. But such trades as manufactur-
ing and commerce can be carried out only 
in bigger settlements, because they require 
access to both workers and customers. 

Caveats notwithstanding, the beneﬁ ts of 
producing large quantities in a single plant 
or place have increased as transport costs 
have fallen in the two centuries since Smith 
visited the pin factory. Those who doubt the 
awesome potential of scale economies and 
how access to world markets helps exploit 
them  should  visit  Dongguan,  a  city  half-
way between Guangzhou and Shenzhen in 
Southeast China. Until the 1980s it was a 
collection of sleepy villages in China’s Pearl 
River delta. Since then it has rushed head-
long  into  the  world  of  increasing  returns 
(see box 4.1). Every year, millions of peo-
ple in the developing world enter this new 
realm and the implications, for them and 
for  policy  makers,  are  nothing  short  of 
revolutionary.

This chapter summarizes the experience 
of entrepreneurs over the last two centuries 
in exploiting economies of scale in produc-
tion. It focuses on “agglomeration econo-
mies,” whose exploitation requires locating 
in areas densely populated by other produc-
ers. It next provides a brief synopsis of about 
two decades of work by economists seeking 
to  understand  these  scale  economies—
work  that  has  diminished  the  disconnect 
between research and the real world, and 
that yields valuable policy insights. It then 
assesses whether policy makers in the devel-
oping world have been learning from this 
experience and analysis. 

126

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   126
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   126

10/8/08   2:11:46 PM
10/8/08   2:11:46 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

127

BOX 4.1    Scale economies in an almost unreal world: the story of Dongguan, China 

In 1978 what today is the city of Dong-
guan in China’s Guangdong province 
was but a collection of villages and small 
towns spread over 2,500 square kilome-
ters on the Pearl River, midway between 
Guangzhou to the north and Shenzhen 
and Hong Kong, China, to the south. The 
area’s population of 400,000 relied on 
fi shing and farming and—though not 
the poorest in China—was not especially 
prosperous.

Today Dongguan is home to about 7 

million people. More than 5 million of its 
residents are migrants who work in the 
thousands of factories that dot the city, 
churning out a wide range of products 
in such huge volumes that recent media 
accounts have assigned Dongguan the 
label of “factory of the world.” Dong-
guan’s economy has grown at more than 
20 percent annually since 1980, and in 
2004 its gross domestic product (GDP) 
was about $14 billion—greater than 
Iceland’s. If one includes only registered 
urban residents (as in offi  cial statistics), 
Dongguan’s GDP per capita of $9,000 in 
2004 made it the wealthiest city in China. 
Even if the city’s fl oating population of 
migrant workers is included, its GDP per 
capita in 2004 was still more than $2,000. 

Dongguan’s development since the 
1970s, and particularly in the last decade, 
exemplifi es (perhaps in exaggerated 
fashion) the economic forces shaping 
East Asia’s middle-income economies 
(see the table below).

Location and favorable factor prices 
undoubtedly spurred Dongguan’s early 
growth. For the fi rst decade and a half 
after China’s reforms began, small and 
medium enterprises from both Hong 
Kong, China, and Taiwan, China, were 
attracted to Dongguan by plentiful sup-
ply of land and low-cost labor, and by its 
proximity to both Guangzhou and Hong 
Kong, China. Despite these factors, Dong-
guan’s rapid growth in the 1990s can 
best be understood through economies 
of scale, whether in the production of 
intermediate goods or diff erentiated 
products, and agglomeration effects, 
within and across industries. Combined 
with reductions in transport costs and 
improvements in logistics, technological 
progress demonstrates that such eff ects 
have emerged as important characteris-
tics of global production.

The internal scale economies are obvi-
ous. In 2005 a single plant in Dongguan 
manufactured more than 30 percent of 

the magnetic recording heads used in 
hard disk drives worldwide. Another pro-
duced 60 percent of the electronic learn-
ing devices sold in the U.S. market. A 
third produced nearly 30 million mobile 
phones, more than enough to provide 
a mobile phone for every man, woman, 
and child in Peru or República Bolivari-
ana de Venezuela.

Agglomeration or external scale econ-

omies are equally visible. The knowl-
edge spillovers and lower logistics costs 
from locating close to input providers 
and export traders have produced glob-
ally important industry clusters for knit-
ted woolens, footwear, furniture, and 
toys. But the cluster that has dominated 
the industrial landscape of Dongguan 
since the mid-1990s is telecommunica-
tions, electronics, and computer com-
ponents. Of the parts and components 
used in manufacturing and processing 
personal computers, 95 percent can be 
sourced in Dongguan, and for several 
products, Dongguan’s factories account 
for more than 40 percent of global pro-
duction.

Contributed by Shubham Chaudhuri.
Source: Gill and Kharas 2007.

Dongguan in numbers
Average annual GDP growth, 1980–2005 (%)
Population: registered residents (millions)
GDP per registered resident (US$)
Exports (US$, billions) 
Government revenues (US$, billions)
Electricity consumption (kWh, billions)

Environmental impact indicators
Sulfur dioxide emissions (tons, thousands)
Sulfur dioxide emissions meeting standards (%)
Industrial solid wastes (tons, thousands)

22.0
1.6
8,999
35.2
1.0
35.2

199.4
92.9
28.6

GDP (US$, billions)
Population: total, estimated (millions)
GDP per capita (US$)
Imports (billion US$)
Government expenditures (US$, billions)
Water consumption (ft3, billions)

Industrial waste water (tons, millions)
Industrial water discharge meeting standards (%)
Industrial solid wastes meeting standards (%)

Global market share in 2002 of computer and electronics components manufactured in Dongguan (%)
Magnetic heads and computer cases 
Copper-clad boards and disk drives
AC capacitators and ﬂ y-back transformers 

Scanners and mini-motors
Keyboards
Motherboards

40
30
25

14.2
7.0
2,070
29.3
1.2
1.5

225
90.1
86.5

20
16
15

Source: Dongguan Government 2005.

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   127
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   127

10/8/08   2:11:48 PM
10/8/08   2:11:48 PM

128 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

The main ﬁ ndings:

•  Developing  economies  are  entering  a 
new  realm  of  agglomeration. A  century 
of  experience  indicates  that  as  countries 
develop from agricultural to industrial to 
service-oriented production, entrepreneurs 
and workers leave behind not just their vil-
lages and their agrarian occupations, but 
also a world in which scale does not mat-
ter much. More and more of them enter 
not just larger and denser settlements, but 
also a world in which scale matters—where 
production  and  distribution  enjoy  scale 
economies, especially those associated with 
places. Proximity matters more, not just for 
access to markets for goods and services, 
but also for access to ideas. 

•  A portfolio of places is needed for eco-
nomic  growth.  Research  over  the  last 
generation indicates that different forms 
of human settlement facilitate agglom-
eration economies for different forms of 
production. A somewhat-oversimpliﬁ ed 
(but not altogether incorrect) generaliza-
tion would be that market towns facili-

tate scale economies in marketing and 
distributing agricultural produce, medi-
um-size cities provide localization econ-
omies for manufacturing industries, and 
the largest cities provide diverse facilities 
and foster innovation in business, gov-
ernment, and education services. 

•  Policy makers have often misjudged the 
potency of market forces. Many policy 
makers  perceive  cities  as  constructs  of 
the state—to be managed and manipu-
lated to serve some social objective. In 
reality, cities and towns, just like ﬁ rms 
and farms, are creatures of the market. 
Just as ﬁ rms and farms deliver ﬁ nal and 
intermediate goods and services, towns 
and cities deliver agglomeration econo-
mies to producers and workers. So city 
administrators  are  better  advised  to 
learn what their city does, and to help it 
do this well, rather than try to abruptly 
change  the  course  of  their  city’s  des-
tiny. Planners and policy makers should 
see their role as prudent managers of a 
portfolio of places, to get the most from 
agglomeration economies.

Table 4.1    A dozen economies of scale 
Type of economy of scale

Internal

Technological

Static

Localization

1. Pecuniary

2. Static technological
3. Dynamic technological
4. “Shopping”
5. “Adam Smith” 
specialization

6. “Marshall” labor pooling

External or 
agglomeration 

Dynamic

7.  “Marshall-Arrow-Romer” 

learning by doing

8. “Jane Jacobs” innovation

Static

9. “Marshall” labor pooling

Urbanization

10. “Adam Smith” division 
of labor

Dynamic

11. “Romer” endogenous 
growth

12. “Pure” agglomeration

Source: Adapted from Kilkenny 2006.
a. For a formalization, see Krugman 1991a.

Example
Being able to purchase intermediate inputs at volume discounts
Falling average costs because of ﬁ xed costs of operating a plant
Learning to operate a plant more efﬁ ciently over time
Shoppers are attracted to places where there are many sellers
Outsourcing allows both the upstream input suppliers and downstream 
ﬁ rms to proﬁ t from productivity gains because of specialization
Workers with industry-speciﬁ c skills are attracted to a location where 
there is a greater concentration.a
Reductions in costs that arise from repeated and continuous production 
activity over time and which spill over between ﬁ rms in the same place
The more that different things are done locally, the more opportunity there 
is for observing and adapting ideas from others 
Workers in an industry bring innovations to ﬁ rms in other industries; similar 
to no. 6 above, but the beneﬁ t arises from the diversity of industries in one 
location.
Similar to no. 5 above, the main difference being that the division of labor 
is made possible by the existence of many different buying industries in the 
same place
The larger the market, the higher the proﬁ t; the more attractive the location 
to ﬁ rms, the more jobs there are; the more labor pools there, the larger the 
market—and so on
Spreading ﬁ xed costs of infrastructure over more taxpayers; diseconomies 
arise from congestion and pollution

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   128
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   128

10/8/08   2:11:48 PM
10/8/08   2:11:48 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

129

This chapter discusses, in general terms, 
the implications of experience and analy-
sis for reshaping urbanization strategies in 
the developing world. Chapter 7 continues 
this task of reframing the debate over urban 
strategies.

A guide to scale economies
The  beneﬁ ts  of  increasing  scale  can  be 
either internal or external to an individual 
ﬁ rm or farm. External economies are syn-
onymous with “agglomeration economies,” 
which include the beneﬁ ts of localization 
(being  near  other  producers  of  the  same 
commodity  or  service)  and  urbanization 
(being close to producers of a wide range 
of commodities and services). Consump-
tion externalities also are associated with 
agglomeration,  but  these  are  not  yet  well 
studied in the literature.2 So, this chapter 
deals with production-related scale econo-
mies (see table 4.1).3
•  Internal economies arise from the larger 
size of a plant to better exploit ﬁ xed costs 
(numbers  1  through  3  in  table  4.1).  A 
larger steel mill can get volume discounts 
from suppliers—implying ﬁ xed costs of 
transport and trade—and reap the ben-
eﬁ ts of dividing labor within the ﬁ rm. 

•  Localization  economies  arise  from 
a  larger  number  of  ﬁ rms  in  the  same 
industry and the same place (numbers 4 
through 7 in table 4.1). Spatial proximity 
helps because immediate access to com-
petitors in the same sector allow ﬁ rms 
to  stay  abreast  of  market  information 
in negotiating with customers and sup-
pliers.4 Clustered ﬁ rms can also share a 
larger and more dependable pool of spe-
cialized labor. 

•  Urbanization  economies  arise  from  a 
larger number of different industries in 
the same place (numbers 8 through 11 
in table 4.1). A management consulting 
company can beneﬁ t from locating near 
business schools, ﬁ nancial service pro-
viders, and manufacturers.

Agglomeration  economies  depend  not 
just on size (a big city or industry) but also 
on urban interactions. They are tradition-
ally  classiﬁ ed  as  localization  economies 
arising  from  within-industry  economic 

BOX 4.2    Sharing, matching, and learning

Three reasons explain why fi rms in a 
particular industry often locate close 
to each other. Geographic concentra-
tion helps in— 
•  Sharing. Broadening the market 
for input suppliers, allowing them 
to exploit internal economies of 
scale in production (average costs 
decline as the scale of production 
rises). This sharing of inputs also 
permits suppliers to provide highly 
specialized goods and services tai-
lored to the needs of their buyers. 
The result is higher profi ts for all, 
accompanied by easier access to a 
broader range of inputs.

•  Matching. Expanding the availabil-

ity of the range of skills required 
by employers to facilitate better 
matching to their distinctive needs. 
At the same time, workers fi nd it 
less risky to be in locations with 
many possible employers.

•  Learning. Accelerating spillovers of 

knowledge and allowing workers 
and entrepreneurs to learn from 
each other. 

The ability to go beyond industry-

specifi c sharing, matching, and 
learning (localization economies) 
to citywide processes (urbanization 
economies) requires additional mech-
anisms. These include the eff ects of 
cumulative causation and the inter-
penetration of production and trade 
across industries. They also include 
gains from the cross-fertilization of 
ideas. The concentration of workers 
and suppliers leads to a concentra-
tion of consumer demands.

If economies of scale are large 

and unexhausted, and if fi rms can 
compete not only on price but also 
through product diff erentiation, 
strong centripetal forces come into 
play. In addition, by formally intro-
ducing distance (the cost of shipping 
inputs and outputs), the framework 
used in this Report provides useful 
insights into the centrifugal forces 
that explain spatial dispersion in a 
country. 

Sources: Gill and Kharas 2007, based on 
Duranton and Puga 2004.

interactions,  and  as  urbanization  econo-
mies, arising from between-industry inter-
actions.5 The reasons for producers to gain 
from  proximity  to  others  depend  on  the 
sharing of capital inputs, information, and 
labor. They also depend on improving the 
matches between production requirements 
and types of land, labor, and intermediate 
inputs—and learning about new techniques 
and products (see box 4.2). 

Internal scale economies are higher in 
heavier industries
Internal  increasing  returns  to  scale  are 
found in manufacturing and services, based 
on  various  sources  of  data.  The  internal 
scale  economies  range  from  negligible  or 
low among light industries, to high among 
heavy and high-technology industries (see 
table 4.2). Based on engineering estimates, 
a  summary  of  sector-speciﬁ c  studies  that 
examines the minimum efﬁ ciency scale of 
production and cost-saving ﬁ nds signiﬁ cant 
increasing returns in motor vehicles, other 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   129
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   129

10/8/08   2:11:48 PM
10/8/08   2:11:48 PM

130 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Based on engineering estimates to 
examine cost gradients and changes in 
minimum efﬁ ciency scale (Junius 1997, 
cited from Prateen 1988 and Emerson and 
others 1988)

Data source
Based on trade data (Antweiler and 
Treﬂ er 2002)

Table 4.2    Internal scale economies are low in light industries and high in heavy industries
Findings
Constant returns to scale: apparel, leather, 
footwear, textiles, wood products 
High increasing returns to scale: machinery, 
pharmaceuticals, instruments, iron and steel, 
petroleum and coal products
Constant returns or low increasing returns to 
scale: leather goods, footwear and clothing, 
timber and wood, textiles 
High increasing returns to scale: Motor vehicles, 
other means of transportation, chemicals, 
engineering, printing and publishing
Low increasing returns to scale: footwear, 
apparel, food products, leather 
High increasing returns to scale: tobacco, 
pharmaceuticals, ofﬁ ce and computing 
machinery, railroad equipment
Low increasing returns to scale: apparel, leather 
products, textiles 
High increasing returns to scale: electric, gas, 
and sanitary services, motor vehicles and 
equipment, chemicals, tobacco
Low increasing returns to scale: textiles, milk 
products, lumber mills, ﬁ sh oil and meal products 
High increasing returns to scale: basic metal, 
transport equipment, cement products, ﬁ xtures, 
beverages
Low increasing returns to scale: clothing, 
knitting, leather, textiles 
High increasing returns to scale: petroleum, 
basic and fabricated metal, transport equipment 

Based on markups in manufacturing 
industries for 14 OECD countries (Junius 
1997, cited from Oliveira and others 1996)

Based on markups of prices over marginal 
costs for two-digit sectors in the United 
States covering 1953–84 (24 sectors) 
(Roeger 1995)

Based on production function estimates 
for 1963 Census of Manufacturing 
Establishments in Norway (27 industries) 
(Griliches and Ringstad 1971)

Based on cost and proﬁ t data in (167 
industries) four-digit SIC manufacturing 
industries for 1970 in Canada (Baldwin 
and Gorecki 1986) and labor productivity 
and output estimates for 90 four-digit 
industries in Canada between 1965 and 
1970 (Gupta 1983)
Based on estimates of ﬁ rm-level 
production function estimates for 6,665 
plants in Chile during 1979–86 (Levinsohn 
and Petrin 1999)

Low increasing returns to scale: apparel, wood 
products 
High increasing returns to scale: other 
chemicals, food products, printing and publishing

Source: WDR 2009 team.
Note: OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; SIC = Standard Industrial 
Classiﬁ cation.

transport equipment, chemicals,  machinery, 
engineering, and paper and printing. In the 
three-digit  product  category,  the  highest 
returns to scale are in books, bricks, dyes, 
and  aircraft.6  By  contrast,  internal  scale 
economies are negligible in rubber and plas-
tics, leather and leather goods, footwear and 
clothing, and textiles.7

Based on cost and value added estimates, 
different sources point to similar ﬁ ndings. 
A  sample  of  5,000  manufacturing  ﬁ rms 
in Norway shows evidence of scale econo-
mies at the individual industry level.8 For 
Canadian industries at the four-digit level, 
returns to scale average 10 percent for 107 

manufacturing sectors, with clothing, knit-
ting, leather, and textiles at the lower end of 
the spectrum.9 Increasing output cuts costs 
in  U.S.  manufacturing,  in  the  industries 
of  middle-income  countries  (Chile),  and 
in the European car, truck, and consumer 
durables industries.10,11

Based on trade data, a third of all goods-
producing  industries  have  increasing 
returns to scale.12,13 Manufacturing indus-
tries with the highest plant-level economies 
and industry-level externalities are petro-
leum and coal products, petroleum reﬁ n-
ing, pharmaceuticals, machinery, and iron 
and steel. Industries with constant returns 
include footwear, leather, textiles, apparel, 
and furniture.

Markups are another source of informa-
tion.  Because  increasing  returns  to  scale 
confer market power on ﬁ rms, markups of 
price over marginal cost can be a proxy for 
plant-level scale economies. Studies ﬁ nd a 
range of markups for U.S. manufacturing, 
from 15 percent in apparel to more than 200 
percent in the electric, gas, and sanitary ser-
vices. For 36 manufacturing sectors across 
19  member  countries  of  the  Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD), the highest markups are in 
tobacco,  drugs  and  medicines,  and  ofﬁ ce 
and computing machinery—and the lowest 
in footwear, apparel, and wood products.14
While  manufacturing  data  dominate 
the literature, increasing returns in services 
also are evident. The best-studied sector is 
electric power generation, where the inter-
nal increasing returns to scale are consider-
able.15 The highest markups are in utilities 
and  sanitary  services.16  Scale  economies 
also  are  found  in  banking  and  ﬁ nance.17 
A study of commercial banks in 75 coun-
tries  shows  that  banks  with  larger  loans 
and deposits have lower average costs—and 
that banks operating in larger ﬁ nancial sys-
tems require less proportionate increases in 
ﬁ nancial capital and have lower risk man-
agement costs.18

Localization economies arise from 
input-sharing and competition within 
the industry
Localization  economies  come  from  geo-
graphically  concentrated  groups  of  ﬁ rms, 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   130
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   130

10/8/08   2:11:48 PM
10/8/08   2:11:48 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

131

linked by the technology they use, the mar-
kets  they  serve,  the  products  and  services 
they  provide,  and  the  skills  they  require. 
Competitive pressures that force ﬁ rms in the 
same sector to innovate or fail also lead to 
productivity growth. Conditions tend to be 
competitive when upstream and downstream 
ﬁ rms and associated institutions in a par-
ticular industry (say, electronic machinery 
or petrochemicals)—including universities 
and trade associations—“cluster” together. 
Other channels for localization economies 
are  the  less  easily  measured  “Marshall-
Arrow-Romer externalities,”19 which come 
mainly from knowledge spillovers.

Proximity  to  similar  ﬁ rms  inﬂ uences 
the  location  decisions  of  ﬁ rms.  Consider 
the hosiery industry in the United States. 
Shortly after 1900 New York City became 
the U.S. center for garment production and 
distribution.  But  after  World  War  II  gar-
ment  production  moved  south,  to  North 
Carolina.20  Many  knitting  and  weaving 
mills moved to be closer to the supply of 
yarn  and  to  take  advantage  of  cheaper 
power, labor, and land.

Today,  the  hosiery  industry,  localized 
in North Carolina, boasts many brands—
among them, Sheer Energy, Silken Mist, Just 
My Size, and No Nonsense—all competing 
in a $2 billion market. According to the U.S. 
Census  Bureau,  about  150  establishments 
producing  women’s  full-length  and  knee-
length hosiery in the early 2000s, half the 
nation’s total, were located in North Caro-
lina.  They  shipped  $973  million  worth  of 
hosiery,  about  75  percent  of  the  national 
total, and employed 13,497 people, including 
11,567 production workers.21 Adding men’s 
socks and stockings, more than half of a $6 
billion industry is in North Carolina.

One  reason  textile  producers  went  to 
North Carolina was to exploit productiv-
ity gains from proximity to upstream yarn 
producers. The yarn and pantyhose indus-
tries  are  tightly  knit—in  relationships 
delicately  stitched  together  at  each  step 
of  production—but  ﬁ ercely  competitive. 
Macﬁ eld, a textile giant and a leading pro-
ducer of yarns for pantyhose, socks, outer-
wear, upholstery, and industrial products 
operates  ﬁ ve  plants  in  North  Carolina 
and employs about a quarter of the yarn 

industry’s labor force. About six of every 
10 pairs of sheer hosiery sold in the United 
States were knitted with Macﬁ eld yarn.22 
Together with other large North Carolina 
producers (Uniﬁ , Regal, and Spanco), they 
make up more than three-quarters of the 
industry’s  $3.7  billion  worth  of  textured 
yarn  products.23  The  localization  of  the 
yarn and hosiery industries in North Car-
olina is a powerful manifestation of intra-
industry external economies.

Urbanization economies come 
from industrial diversity that 
fosters innovation
As  cities  grow,  urbanization  economies 
become more important.24 Urban diversity 
can foster the exchange of ideas and tech-
nology to produce greater innovation and 
growth.25 Firms in different industries can 
share indivisible facilities or public goods, 
a wider variety of intermediate input sup-
pliers, a larger pool of narrowly specialized 
workers, and risks. The evidence of greater 
importance of across-industry knowledge 
spillovers can be seen in established cities. 
In fairly mature cities, such as Los Ange-
les, and Philadelphia, competition and city 
diversity help employment growth, indica-
tive of urbanization economies of between-
sector  innovation.26  On  New  York’s  Wall 
Street and in the city of London, ﬁ nancial 
ﬁ rms, insurance companies, and banking 
syndicates beneﬁ t from being close to one 
another.  And  co-location  stimulates  the 
growth of other specialist services, such as 
legal, software, data processing, advertising, 
and management consulting ﬁ rms. These 
clustered  firms,  by  providing  a  thicker 
market  for  highly  educated  individuals, 
beneﬁ t  from  drawing  on  the  same  large 
pool of human capital. They also gain from 
the generation and diffusion of knowledge 
amongst one another.

Evidence of urban agglomeration econ-
omies  comes  primarily  from  developed 
countries.27  But  there  is  also  evidence  of 
external  economies  in  developing  coun-
tries, wherever data are available. A survey 
of 12,400 manufacturing ﬁ rms in 120 cit-
ies in China points to the higher produc-
tivity  of  ﬁ rms  in  more  populous  cities.28 
Agglomeration  economies  in  Indonesian 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   131
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   131

10/8/08   2:11:48 PM
10/8/08   2:11:48 PM

132 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 4.3    Agglomeration economies in Indonesia

Much of the rigorous evidence of 
agglomeration economies comes 
from developed countries. An excep-
tion is Indonesia, where recent 
research helps to identify the deter-
minants of industrial concentration. 
The analysis focuses on four broad 
groups—chemicals (including 
petroleum, rubber, and plastics); 
textiles (including garments, leather, 
and footwear); nonmetallic miner-
als (including glass, ceramics, and 
cement); and machinery (including 
electrical and nonelectrical machines, 
transportation equipment, and 
instruments). It sheds light on how 
the size and type of scale economies 
infl uence the extent and pattern 
of agglomeration in a developing 
country.

Localization economies—the ben-

efi ts of locating near other fi rms in 
the same industry—have been more 
important than urbanization econo-
mies for manufacturing, and static 
agglomeration economies are more 
important than dynamic (or learning 
related) externalities. The sector-
specifi c fi ndings of tests for static 
externalities show that

•  Localization economies are strong 

for textiles and chemicals. 

•  Urbanization economies are strong 

for nonmetallic minerals and 
machinery, though weak during 
some periods. 

Activities subject to urbanization 

and dynamic economies are poor 
candidates for policies that seek to 
spread out economic mass within 
a country (see chapter 8 for a more 
detailed discussion). Such fi rms prefer 
to stay put, since this helps learning, 
and they thrive in fairly large and 
diverse cities. The agglomeration 
economies for textiles and chemicals 
(largely static and local) indicate that 
policies to deconcentrate production 
in these industries might succeed 
if accompanied by improvements 
in infrastructure and governance in 
the areas chosen for relocation. The 
agglomeration economies make the 
nonmetallic minerals and machinery 
(essentially static and urban) likely 
to resist relocation to smaller urban 
centers.

Source: Kuncoro, forthcoming. 

manufacturing between 1980 and 2003 vary 
over time; however, in the broadest terms, 
these beneﬁ ts are mainly static rather than 
dynamic and somewhat more likely to arise 
from localization than from urbanization 
(see box 4.3).

A different realm
Countries develop by shifting their econo-
mies  from  traditional  subsistence-based 
agricultural activities to higher-value manu-
facturing and services. Along the way, ﬁ rms 
rather  than  farms  become  the  dominant 
production unit. The production of differ-
entiated manufactured goods and services 
increases  as  a  share  of  the  economy’s  out-
put. Between 1900 and 2000 the share of the 
global population in industrial or service-
dominant urban localities rose from 15 per-
cent to 47 percent. The global employment 
share  in  agriculture  among  working-age 

people fell from just over 55 percent in 1960 
to about 33 percent in 2004. Production tech-
nology shifts away from constant returns to 
increasing returns to scale. And over time, 
scale-augmenting  technical  change  boosts 
scale economies. Imperfect and monopolis-
tic competition become the dominant forms 
of market structure.

The world is more urban, and the con-
centration of economic mass in the densest 
urban centers is greater as well. In 1900 the 
number of people in the largest 100 cities 
added up to just 4.3 percent of the world’s 
population. The same 100 cities now have 
7.5 percent of the total, and the largest 100 
cities, almost 10.5 percent. Despite ample 
open space, almost all recent development 
in  the  United  States  has  been  less  than  1 
kilometer  from  earlier  developments.29 
Even  today,  only  about  2  percent  of  the 
land area of the United States is built up or 
paved. Only agglomeration economies can 
explain this extreme clustering of ﬁ rms and 
workers in cities.

As producers seek scale economies, 
agriculture disperses but 
manufacturing clusters
As economies develop, farms spread out to 
exploit scale economies in production. In 
the United States about 1,500 kilograms of 
agricultural products are produced annu-
ally  to  feed  each  American,  whereas  the 
Chinese make do with about 600 kilograms 
per  person.  In  2005  the  average  cropland 
in the United States was 20.4 hectares per 
farmer, in Australia it was 45 hectares, and 
in Canada it was 47 hectares. Average farm 
size  in  Brazil  is  about  19  hectares.30  But 
scale economies in agriculture are generally 
difﬁ cult to obtain in low-income countries. 
The cropland per farmer was a fraction of 
that in developed countries: 0.16 hectares in 
China, 0.30 in Bangladesh and Indonesia, 
and 1.20 in Nigeria.31 

As  economies  develop,  manufactur-
ing and services become more important, 
ﬁ rms  cram  in  closer  together  to  harness 
agglomeration  economies.  In  France,  the 
United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States, 
75–95  percent  of  industry  is  localized 
(clustered or concentrated relative to over-
all  economic  activity),  while  less  than  15 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   132
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   132

10/8/08   2:11:49 PM
10/8/08   2:11:49 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

133

percent is dispersed.32 In the United States 
more than a third of aerospace engines are 
produced  in  three  cities:  Hartford  with 
about 18 percent of total employment, and 
Cincinnati  and  Phoenix  with  another  18 
percent  together.33  Over  time  the  spatial 
concentration  of  industries  in  U.S.  states 
has  increased.34  Using  continuous  space 
without considering administrative bound-
aries and based on concentration of plants, 
more  than  half  of  the  United  Kingdom’s 
122 four-digit industries are localized, and 
only 24 percent are dispersed. The rest are 
randomly distributed.35

Spatial  clustering  is  more  pronounced 
with  high-skill  and  high-technology 
industries (electronic computing machin-
ery, process control instruments, semicon-
ductors,  and  pharmaceuticals)  than  light 
industries. This is consistent with the doc-
umented ﬁ ndings of higher-scale effects in 
heavier industries. High-skill and high-tech 
industries have more capital-intensive pro-
duction technology. They are also likely to 
beneﬁ t more from the various mechanisms 
that generate external economies (discussed 
earlier). 

In the Republic of Korea the ranking of 
industries by their localization economies 
follows the ranking of industries by their 
spatial  concentration  across  cities.  Heavy 
and  transport  industries  (metals,  chemi-
cals, and transport equipment) tend to be 
concentrated  in  a  few  highly  specialized 
cities to take advantage of local scale exter-
nalities,  while  traditional  or  light  indus-
tries with low scale externalities (food and 
textiles)  are  more  dispersed.36  High-tech 
industries  (computers,  aircraft,  medical 
instruments,  and  electronic  components) 
tend  to  be  more  concentrated  than  dura-
ble-good,  machinery-related  industries 
(metal works, industrial, refrigeration, and 
machinery and equipment).37 Cities in the 
Republic of Korea have also become more 
specialized.38 

Services become even more densely 
clustered than manufacturing
As countries move to a more mature phase 
of  development,  their  economies  become 
more  knowledge  based  and  service  ori-
ented. The spatial concentration of activity 

also rises (see chapter 2).39,40 The important 
types of agglomeration economy change as 
development progresses. In particular, as an 
economy becomes more knowledge based, 
knowledge spillovers, which require prox-
imity,  become  more  important.  Evidence 
suggests that knowledge industries are spa-
tially concentrated.41

Services  are  even  more  spatially  con-
centrated  than  manufacturing—for  two 
reasons. First, they tend to use less land per 
employee.  Banks,  insurance  companies, 
hospitals, and schools can operate comfort-
ably in high-rise buildings that economize 
on land and allow for high density. Second, 
because  of  external  economies,  business 
services  have  even  greater  potential  for 
agglomeration, as ﬁ rms serve one another: 
every bank needs advertising, every adver-
tising ﬁ rm a bank account. The potential 
for  codependence  and  agglomeration  is 
thus intrinsic to services.42

Services are prominent among the most 
agglomerated  industries  in  the  United 
States.43 Larger cities have been amassing 
service jobs from areas less than 20 kilo-
meters  away.44  Between  1972  and  1992, 
jobs  in  the  United  States  became  more 
spatially concentrated, driven primarily by 
the rising localization of service activities 
in  larger  cities,45  as  small  and  medium-
size counties lost jobs to the more urban 
areas.46  For  instance,  in  Suffolk  County, 
Massachusetts, which includes Boston, 35 
percent of the workforce is in business ser-
vices, nearly twice the national average of 
18 percent.47 In the United Kingdom nearly 
60 percent of all venture capital ofﬁ ces are 
in London.48 London-based venture capital 
ofﬁ ces favor investment in London-based 
small and medium enterprises to get bet-
ter information: they can easily visit and 
monitor these enterprises. As communica-
tion costs fall, services become more trad-
able, allowing providers to take advantage 
of  narrower  specialization  and  agglom-
eration economies. For instance, ﬁ nancial 
services  can  be  disaggregated  into  more 
reﬁ ned categories of retail banking, con-
sumer  credit  and  ﬁ nancing,  commercial 
and corporate banking, investment bank-
ing,  and  so  on.  And  within  investment 
banking,  there  is  further  specialization 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   133
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   133

10/8/08   2:11:49 PM
10/8/08   2:11:49 PM

134 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

in  mergers  and  acquisitions,  corporate 
ﬁ nance, ﬁ xed income, debt management, 
and the like.

Cities facilitate scale economies 
of all types
A plant in an isolated location can beneﬁ t 
from internal scale economies, but unless 
it is situated in an area of density, it cannot 
enjoy the competitive beneﬁ ts associated 
with localization or urbanization econo-
mies.  Towns  and  cities  bring  together 
large pools of skilled labor and suppliers 
of  specialized  intermediate  inputs  and 
by doing so, enhance employer-employee 
and buyer-seller matches. Input-sharing is 
an important channel for agglomeration 
economies.49  Density  of  activity  allows 
more  reﬁ ned  specialization  and  a  wider 
variety  of  intermediate  inputs.  Averag-
ing  across  industries,  a  ﬁ rm’s  relocation 
from a less-dense location (of 499 or fewer 
neighboring employees in the same indus-
try) to a denser location (of 10,000–24,999 
neighboring employees) results in a 3 per-
cent  increase  in  purchased  input  inten-
sity.50 The composition of a city emerges 
from the scope for agglomeration econo-
mies  and  their  interaction  with  other 
aspects of microeconomic behavior. 

Large cities with more ﬁ rms allow work-
ers  to  hedge  against  sector-speciﬁ c  risks. 
Smaller specialized cities expose workers to 
greater industry-speciﬁ c shocks but provide 
favorable  match-specific  advantages.  In 
both cases the concentration of economic 
activity  lowers  the  search  costs  between 
ﬁ rms and workers, which results in fewer 
unﬁ lled  vacancies,  lower  risk  of  job  loss, 
and  shorter  durations  of  unemployment. 
The  large  variety  and  quantity  of  inputs 
to share in cities also implies better qual-
ity-matching. For instance, because of the 
better matching possible, married couples 
with university education, are increasingly 
found in large cities, up from 32 percent in 
1940 to 50 percent in 1990.51 Cities make 
it  easier  for  producers  to  ﬁ nd  inputs  and 
for customers to experiment and discover 
new  possibilities.  Examples  of  easy  dif-
fusion of information and social learning 
range  from  the  congregation  of  diners  in 
certain restaurants, to the propagation of 

rumors, to the word-of-mouth learning in 
neighborhoods.52 

Learning  mechanisms  also  explain 
agglomeration  in  cities.53  As  Alfred  Mar-
shall  implied,  when  knowledge  spillovers 
exist, “The mysteries of the trade become 
no mysteries but are as it were in the air.”54 
Knowledge spillovers are difﬁ cult to mea-
sure,  because  they  can  seldom  be  traced 
through  transactions.  With  patent  cita-
tions,  however,  it  is  possible  to  identify  a 
paper trail for some knowledge spillovers. 
U.S. patent citations are spatially concen-
trated,  with  citations  5  to  10  times  more 
likely to come from the same standard met-
ropolitan statistical area as originator pat-
ents.55 Another strand of research focuses 
on  workers  as  the  primary  vehicles  of 
knowledge, implying that economies with 
substantial labor mobility across industries 
will  exhibit  a  greater  spread  of  ideas  and 
growth.56

Agglomeration economies are ampliﬁ ed 
by density and attenuated by distance
Cities  obviously  reﬂ ect  the  demand  for 
density. People choose to live close to one 
another,  paying  high  rents  and  tolerating 
crime  and  congestion.  This  density  helps 
reduce distances of all types. Cities are thus 
a natural market creator and a conduit for 
internal and external scale economies. Firms 
are drawn to dense areas concentrated with 
people and infrastructure by the possibil-
ity of serving a large local market from a 
large plant at low transport costs.57 Increas-
ing return-to-scale production technology 
leads to large factories with many workers. 
The  sizable  workforce  forms  a  large  local 
market. By reducing transport costs, cities 
with a large local demand attract ﬁ rms in 
different  industries.  So  a  self-reinforcing 
process of agglomeration that begins with 
the expanding local market further raises 
industry productivity.

Plants in dense economic environments 
tend  to  be  larger.58  As  local  market  scale 
increases, ﬁ rms are more likely to outsource 
their service functions to local suppliers.59 
This outsourcing further encourages com-
petition and diversity in the local business 
service market, which reinforces outsourc-
ing. Firms are attracted to locations with 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   134
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   134

10/8/08   2:11:49 PM
10/8/08   2:11:49 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

135

large concentrations of other ﬁ rms in their 
industry and with large demand.60 The large 
and  growing  academic  literature  suggests 
that  doubling  city  size  will  increase  pro-
ductivity by 3–8 percent.61 In the Republic 
of Korea, a plant in a city with 1,000 work-
ers  could,  without  altering  its  input  mix, 
increase output by 20–25 percent simply by 
relocating to a city that has 15,000 work-
ers in the same industry.62 And the spatial 
concentration of people reduces the cost of 
producing knowledge because information 
transmission, competition, spying, imita-
tion,  learning,  innovation,  and  the  com-
mercialization of new ideas are easier.63 In 
the United States a staggering 96 percent of 
innovations occur in metropolitan areas.64 
Agglomeration  economies  are  influ-
enced  by  geographic  scope,  and  the  den-
sity of economic activity and the distance 
between  economic  agents  influence  the 
productivity  gains  from  scale  economies 
(see table 4.3). For example, doubling the 
density of economic activity in European 
Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Sta-
tistics (NUTS1) regions can increase total 
factor productivity growth by 0.42 percent-
age  points  a  year.65  Evidence  from  Brazil 
and the United States indicates that dou-
bling  the  distance  to  dense  metropolitan 
centers reduces productivity by 15 percent; 
doubling the distance from 280 to 550 kilo-
meters  reduces  proﬁ ts  by  6  percent.  The 
concept  of  distance  can  be  generalized, 
in this context, from distance in physical 
space  to  distance  in  industrial  space.  For 
example, spillovers between industries are 
more likely if industries share related sci-
entiﬁ c facilities.66 Furthermore, the extent 
to  which  distance  attenuates  agglomera-
tion economies differs for different types 
of agglomeration. For example, knowledge 
spillovers that rely on face-to-face commu-
nication decay more quickly with distance 
than the home market effect.67

A portfolio of places
Adam Smith introduced scale economies, 
factor  mobility,  and  transport  costs  as 
central  to  understanding  the  nature  and 
causes of the wealth of nations. But until 
the 1980s most economists were happier to 
anchor their inquiries on another concept 

Table 4.3    Scale economies amplify with density and attenuate with distance
Finding

Data sources

Scale economies amplify with density . . .

Doubling economic density increases 
productivity by 6 percent
Doubling employment density increases 
productivity by 4.5–5.0 percent

A one-standard-deviation increase in the 
share of own-industry local employment 
in the ﬁ rst period will raise that industry’s 
employment level by 16–31 percent in a later 
period
A 10-percent increase in local own-industry 
employment results in 0.6–0.8 percent 
increase in plant output, for the same level 
of inputs

1988 data on output per worker in U.S. states 
(Ciccone and Hall 1996)
Data for the late 1980s on nonagricultural 
private value added per worker in European 
NUTS regions (Ciccone 2002)
Data on ﬁ ve traditional manufacturing 
industries in 224 U.S. metropolitan areas 
between 1970 and 1987 (Henderson, Kuncoro, 
and Turner 1995)

Republic of Korea city-industry data for 1983, 
1989, 1991–93 (Henderson, Lee, and Lee 2001)

and attenuate with distance.

Increasing distance from the city center by 
1 percent leads to a 0.13 percent decline in 
productivity
Doubling the distance to a regional market 
center lowers proﬁ ts by 6 percent

Doubling travel time to a city center reduces 
productivity by 15 percent
Own-county (lagged and contemporaneous) 
effect on plant productivity, but no effect from 
neighboring county
Effects of own-industry employment on new 
plant openings attenuate rapidly within the 
ﬁ rst ﬁ ve 1-mile concentric rings

Source: WDR 2009 team.

1980 data for 356 new manufacturing ﬁ rms in 
Brazil (Hansen 1990)

Firm data in auto-component and agricultural 
machinery in Brazil and the United States 
(Henderson 1994)
Data for eight industries in Brazil (Sveikaukas 
and others 1985)
Plant-level data on productivity, 1972–92, in 
742 U.S. counties (Henderson 2003b)

12 million U.S. establishments from Dun & 
Bradstreet Marketplace database (Rosenthal 
and Strange 2003)

introduced in The Wealth of Nations, that 
of the “invisible hand” of perfect competi-
tion.68 But perfect competition is an artiﬁ -
cial theoretical construct: it assumes a large 
number of inﬁ nitesimal ﬁ rms with negli-
gible inﬂ uence over market prices, even in 
the immediate vicinity of the ﬁ rm’s loca-
tion. Its assumption of constant returns to 
scale further implies the so-called problem 
of “backyard capitalism.”69 That is, in the 
world of constant returns to scale, small-
scale production is as efﬁ cient as large-scale 
production, so every household should be 
producing a fully diversiﬁ ed range of goods 
and services in its own backyard. Economics 
professors, when pressed by students to give 
a real-world example of such an industry, 
would offer subsistence agriculture—small 
farms producing wheat or rice, whose pro-
duce could not be distinguished from those 
of others. Never mind that most  people no 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   135
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   135

10/8/08   2:11:49 PM
10/8/08   2:11:49 PM

136 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

longer worked on small farms in countries 
that had grown out of poverty. It led to con-
venient characterizations of the economy in 
which all ﬁ rms and workers were identical, 
so one ﬁ rm or worker could be considered 
representative of all. Scale economies were 
inconvenient—they required acknowledg-
ing that specialization differentiated people 
and products.

Occasionally, the contradiction between 
internal  increasing  returns  and  perfect 
competition would surface, but because of 
the technical difﬁ culties it raised, it quickly 
would be buried again.70 Then, during the 
1970s, two economists at Princeton Univer-
sity proposed a technical solution to model 
increasing returns to scale, opening a door 
for  researchers  to  the  same  realm  that  so 
many  ﬁ rms  and  workers  had  inhabited 
since the industrial revolution.71

Table 4.4    Thirty years of theoretical advance recognize the importance of scale economies
Subject 
Industrial 
organization, 
1970s
Urban 
economics, 
1970s
International 
trade, 1980s

Key publications
Spence 1976; Dixit 
and Stiglitz 1977

Main insights
Increasing returns to scale and imperfect 
competition can be incorporated into formal 
economic models
External economies within cities and systems 
of cities; different levels of agglomerations are 
related to city functions
Increasing returns and imperfect competition 
explain intraindustry trade between countries 
with similar endowments; initial endowments may, 
through trade and specialization, inﬂ uence the 
long-run rate of growth; trade unleashes forces of 
both convergence and divergence
Increasing returns-to-scale activities are 
characterized by agglomeration and imperfect 
competition, while constant returns-to-scale 
activities remain dispersed and competitive, 
helping to explain spatial distribution of economic 
activity and growth of cities
Perfect competition and knowledge-related 
or human capital–related externalities imply 
aggregate increasing returns and explain why 
growth rates may not fall over time and why wealth 
levels across countries do not converge
Imperfect competition explains why the incentive 
to spend on R&D does not fall, and knowledge 
spillovers explain why R&D costs fall over time, 
resulting in more and better products that fuel 
growth
Imperfect competition and Schumpeterian entry 
and exit of ﬁ rms, with entrants bringing new 
technologies, explain how a country’s growth 
and optimal policies vary with distance to the 
technology frontier; knowledge accumulation in 
cities leads to growth

Mills 1972; Diamond 
and Mirrless 1973; 
and Henderson 1974
Krugman 1980, 1981; 
Ethier 1982; Helpman 
and Krugman 1985; 
Grossman and 
Helpman 1995

Krugman 1991; 
Fujita, Krugman, 
and Venables 1999; 
Henderson 1999

Romer 1986; Lucas 
Jr. 1988

Romer 1990; 
Grossman and 
Helpman 1991; Aghion 
and Howitt 1992

Aghion and Howitt 
2005; Rossi-Hansberg 
and Wright 2007; 
Duranton 2007

Economic 
geography, 
1990s

Endogenous 
growth, 1980s

Endogenous 
growth, 1990s

Endogenous 
growth, 2000s

Source: Adapted from Gill and Kharas 2007.

By the late 1980s scale economies were 
standard  features  of  the  explanations  for 
international  trade.  By  the  early  1990s, 
growth theorists had accepted the need to 
incorporate imperfect competition among 
ﬁ rms  into  aggregate  formulations  of  an 
economy. By the mid-1990s, theorists were 
beginning to show how these ideas could be 
used to understand the spatial distribution 
of economic activity, including the rise of 
towns and cities. With the new economic 
geography,  researchers  came  to  realize 
that  the  dichotomy  between  internal  and 
external  economies  is  often  false.  Why? 
Because, in modeling the microfoundations 
of agglomeration economies, the source of 
external economies have often been found 
in the interaction of internal scale econo-
mies with other inﬂ uences, such as trans-
port costs.

Recognizing scale economies: recent 
theoretical advances
The  literature  on  the  microeconomic 
foundations  of  agglomeration  economies 
ﬂ ourished in the last 20 years by combin-
ing models in the paradigms summarized 
in  table  4.4  and  insights  about  urban 
economics  that  emphasize  the  tension 
between  beneﬁ ts  from  the  concentration 
of economic activity and costs arising from 
that  spatial  concentration.72  In  general, 
researchers  have  progressively  recognized 
that economic growth has different impacts 
on ﬁ rms and workers depending on their 
sector and location. The underlying reason 
is the love for variety in consumption and 
the economies of scale in production; the 
proximate reasons are product differentia-
tion,  monopolistic  power,  specialization, 
and location externalities.

The formal recognition of scale econo-
mies, externalities, and imperfect competi-
tion makes economic theory conform more 
closely to the world in which policy makers 
live. The policy implications of this work 
arise  from  the  way  economic  production 
relates to trade, ideas, and cities.

•  Intraindustry  trade.  The  main  insight 
coming  from  a  formal  recognition  of 
increasing returns to scale and product 
differentiation  is  that  trade  may  take 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   136
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   136

10/8/08   2:11:49 PM
10/8/08   2:11:49 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

137

place between economies that are similar 
in factor endowments: both interindus-
try and intraindustry trade may proﬁ t-
ably take place. The main implication is 
that countries may, in theory, encourage 
some activities and ensure comparative 
advantage.

•  Idea-driven  economies.  The  insight  is 
that the nonrival nature of ideas makes 
them different from other factors of pro-
duction, such as capital, land, and labor, 
in that the market may underinvest in 
the  creation  of  new  ideas.  The  main 
implication is that governments should, 
theoretically, subsidize some strands of 
research and development (R&D), such 
as those that will ensure the continuance 
of the comparative advantage a country 
has acquired in certain areas.

•  City-based growth. The main insight is 
that  activities  that  display  increasing 
returns generated by factors external to 
a ﬁ rm tend to be concentrated in cities, 
while those displaying constant returns 
remain more dispersed. The main impli-
cation is that policies to keep cities busi-
ness-friendly and livable become more 
important as economies develop.

Urban  systems  exhibit  some  stylized 
patterns.  Larger  cities  tend  to  be  more 
diversified  and  service  oriented:  they 
innovate,  invent,  breed  new  ﬁ rms,  and 
expel  mature  industries.73  Smaller  cities 
tend  to  be  industrially  specialized:  they 
produce or manufacture and receive relo-
cated  industries  from  diversiﬁ ed  cities.74 
The  relative  city-size  distribution  and 
industrial  concentration  in  speciﬁ c  cit-
ies tend to be stable over time. An urban 
system tends to be made up of a few large 
diversiﬁ ed cities and many smaller, more 
specialized, cities. 75 

The stylized observation in most coun-
tries is an urban hierarchy of a few large 
cities  and  many  smaller  cities  with  var-
ied  economic  functions.76  At  the  global 
level, “world cities” at the top of the hier-
archy,  such  as  New  York,  London,  Paris, 
and Tokyo, are characterized by a diverse 
industrial  structure,  predominantly  ser-
vice based, and a labor force with a wide 
range of skills.77

Smaller cities specialize, receiving 
industries as they mature and relocate
Even  after  controlling  for  natural  com-
parative  advantage,  externalities  are  still 
important  in  explaining  the  patterns  of 
specialization  and  diversity  among  cities 
(see table 4.5). The production of nontradi-
tional items is more concentrated in diverse 
U.S. cities, while standardized traditional 
goods are concentrated in smaller special-
ized cities. Similarly, in Japan, smaller cit-
ies are specialized, while low-tech activity 
and  standardized  high-tech  production 
processes are located offshore. Likewise, in 
the Republic of Korea, large cities are more 
service oriented and smaller cities, manu-
facturing oriented.78

Mid-size  cities  tend  to  specialize  in 
mature industries, not new ones, and larger 
cities specialize in services not manufactur-
ing.79 Improved infrastructure and falling 
transport costs have encouraged standard-
ized  manufacturing  production  to  move 
out  of  high-rent  centers  to  smaller   cities. 

Scale economies from labor pooling are stronger 
in newer and expanding markets, while those from 
knowledge spillovers and specialized asset-sharing are 
more important in mature markets
For mature capital goods industries, there is evidence 
of localization economies but none of urbanization 
economies; for new high-tech industries, there 
is evidence of both localization and urbanization 
economies
For all industries both localization and urbanization 
effects are important. For traditional industries most 
effects die out after four or ﬁ ve years, but for high-tech 
industries, the effects can persist longer. The biggest 
effects are typically from conditions of three to four 
years ago, in the county and metropolitan area
The historical industrial environment of cities matters. In 
fairly mature cities urbanization economies encourage 
industrial growth
For high-tech industries a 1-standard-deviation increase 
in diversity of the local manufacturing base increases 
productivity by 60 percent, but diversity has no effect on 
standard industries (such as textiles, or food).

Source: WDR 2009 team.

Table 4.5    Agglomeration economies vary by city size and proﬁ le, and by the industry life cycle
Main ﬁ nding
Localization economies are more important for heavy 
industries; urbanization economies are more important 
for light industries
Localization economies become less important, giving 
way to urbanization economies, as cities expand in size

Data
Data for two-digit manufacturing 
industries in Japan (Nakamura 
1985)
Cross-sectional data for the 
United States and Brazil 
(Henderson 1986)
Annual ﬁ rm employment data 
for four U.S. metropolitan areas 
and three two-digit industries 
(Hammond and Von Hagen 1994)
Panel data of 742 urban counties 
for 1970–87 (Henderson, Kuncoro, 
and Turner 1995). 

Data for ﬁ ve traditional and three 
new high-tech manufacturing 
industries in 224 metropolitan 
areas between 1970 and 1987 
(Henderson 1997)

Growth data for the largest 
industries (1956–87) in 170 U.S. 
cities (Glaeser and others 1992)
City-industry data for the Republic 
of Korea, 1983, 1989, 1991–93 
(Henderson, Lee, and Lee 2001)

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   137
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   137

10/8/08   2:11:50 PM
10/8/08   2:11:50 PM

138 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Production  in  large  cities  focuses  on  ser-
vices,  nonstandardized  manufacturing, 
and R&D.80 The relocation of manufactur-
ing to the suburbs has been documented in 
Colombia, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, 
and Thailand.81 It is common to ﬁ nd that 
services do not deconcentrate from city cen-
ters to their surrounding suburbs.82 

Large cities diversify, incubate new 
ideas and ﬁ rms, and push out mature 
industries 
New ﬁ rms often start in diverse cities, but 
they  move  to  specialized  ones  after  they 
mature.  Of  all  new  plants  in  France,  for 
example, 84 percent were created in cities 
with  above-median  diversity.83  Some  72 
percent of ﬁ rm relocations are from an area 
with above-median diversity to an area with 
above-median specialization. In the United 
States almost all product innovations are in 
metropolitan areas. Industrial diversity and 
city size are both good for innovative out-
put.84 Trial plants are based in large cities 
in  Japan,  but  mass  production  plants  are 
in small cities or rural areas. Young ﬁ rms 
appear to need a period of experimentation 
to  determine  their  ideal  production  pro-
cess.85  In  the  early  learning  phase,  diver-
siﬁ ed cities act as “nurseries” for ﬁ rms to 
try out a variety of processes. Once a ﬁ rm 
identiﬁ es its ideal process, it can begin mass 
production in specialized cities, where all 
ﬁ rms share similar processes or specializa-
tions (see box 4.4).

The  different  economic  functions  that 
cities  serve  can  be  seen  in  the  clustering 
of headquarters from different sectors and 
concentrations of business services in a few 
large  cities  while  production  plants  from 
each sector congregate in smaller special-
ized cities. In 1950 there was little differ-
ence across U.S. cities in their proportions 
of  managers  and  production  workers. 
Although the largest cities already housed 
more managers, there was no clear ranking 
by city size. By 1980, however, the differences 
across cities had increased substantially, and 
a clear ranking by size had emerged. Larger 
cities had become specialized in manage-
ment  and  information-intensive  activity, 
which  beneﬁ t  from  face-to-face  contacts, 
and smaller cities had become specialized 

in  production.  This  pattern  became  even 
more marked during the 1990s.86 

Many business and economic historians 
have argued that the extra costs of coordi-
nating and monitoring multilocation ﬁ rms 
relative to integrated ﬁ rms have come down 
signiﬁ cantly following key developments in 
transport  and  communication  technolo-
gies, as well as new management practices.87 
Technological  progress  in  transport  and 
telecommunication made it less costly for 
ﬁ rms to separate their production facilities 
from their headquarters and management 
facilities. Firms can locate their production 
facilities in environments with same-sector 
specialization, and their headquarters in a 
metropolis  with  a  concentration  of  busi-
ness  service  employment.  Furthermore, 
the  reduced  communication  costs  that 
make  transportation  of  service  industry 
outputs  (through  electronic  transmittal) 
cheaper  did not  imply  the  “death  of  dis-
tance” and the fading of cities into obscu-
rity, contrary to many predictions.88 In this 
context,  while  distance  has  become  less 
important for transmitting information, it 
has become more important for transmit-
ting  knowledge.  Telecommunication  can 
be a complement to, but it is certainly not 
a strong substitute for, face-to-face interac-
tions, which involve several forms of com-
munication simultaneously, notably body 
language and verbal conversation (see box 
4.5).89 The geographic distribution of com-
mercial Internet domains suggests that the 
Internet  is  a  complement  to  face-to-face 
interactions (primarily within-city) as well 
as a substitute for longer-distance commu-
nication, such as phone or postal mail.90 

Activities that cities specialize in are 
stable, and so are city-size distributions
Externalities  imply  that  history  matters. 
That is, modern-day location patterns for 
an industry are strongly inﬂ uenced by the 
historical industrial environment of cities 
and  thus  by  the  localization  economies. 
Such  intangibles  include  the  local  stock 
of  knowledge  relevant  for  an  industry  or 
a labor force with speciﬁ c acquired skills. 
Two otherwise-identical enterprises in the 
same city could beneﬁ t differently from the 
local agglomeration depending on how long 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   138
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   138

10/8/08   2:11:50 PM
10/8/08   2:11:50 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

139

BOX 4.4    When sowing and reaping happen in different places: rising interdependence of cities

Urban specialists and economists have 
long debated whether specialized or 
diverse cities are more conducive to 
growth. Cities that are narrowly special-
ized create greater economies of agglom-
eration, so a fi rm’s productivity increases 
with proximity to similar fi rms. Mean-
while, a diverse mix of activities makes 
cities more likely to grow, particularly in 
new sectors. The main conclusion: both 
diversity and specialization are important, 
but at diff erent points in a fi rm’s life cycle. 
A “balanced” urban system is not one in 
which all cities are similarly specialized or 
diversifi ed, but one in which both diversi-
fi ed and specialized cities coexist. 

For young fi rms, urban diversity is more 

important. A new businessman may not 
know all the details of the product to be 
made, what components to use, where to 
source them, which workers to hire, and 
how to fi nance the venture. Firms using 
similar technologies in diff erent sec-
tors are more likely to share information 
about new practices and technologies 
than fi rms in the same sector. For fi rms in 
more standardized or mature industries, 
urban specialization is more important. 
These fi rms typically benefi t less from 
the fl exibility from urban diversity, and 
by locating in a specialized environment; 
they can better reap the benefi ts of urban 
agglomeration economies. For example, 
auto fi rms in Detroit lower their costs 
by sharing parts suppliers, and garment 
manufacturers in cities like San Pedro Sula 
in Honduras benefi t from thick labor mar-
kets that help workers move between fac-

tories as the market adjusts to the whims 
and fancies of fashion. 

Clusters of similar fi rms are sometimes 

promoted as the best environment for 
innovation. But studies fi nd instead 
that diverse metropolises do better in 
breeding new products and processes. 
For example, the adoption of computer-
controlled machinery for cutting metals 
has been faster in situations in which 
many fi rms (ranging from furnace 
manufacturers to aircraft producers) have 
similar technical needs but are not direct 
competitors. Firms for which innovating is 
important (such as electronics producers) 
prefer diversity during the early innova-
tive phases, and then they relocate to 
specialized cities for mass production. For 
manufacturing and services, unlike agri-
culture, “sowing” and “reaping” can take 
place in diff erent locations.

Just as product development and mass 

production increasingly take place at 
diff erent locations, so too does manage-
ment and production. Half a century ago 
the diffi  culties associated with managing 
businesses from a distance made fi rms 
keep their headquarters and manage-
ment offi  ces close to their factories. Fall-
ing transport and communications costs 
have made it much easier to manage pro-
duction from far away (see chapter 6). 

As a result, many fi rms have separated 

management and production spatially, 
searching for the best possible conditions 
for each. For headquarters, this means 
locations with other headquarters where 
these fi rms can, for example, share legal 

services or advertising agencies; for pro-
duction facilities, this means places with 
other such plants. Headquarters are usu-
ally in bigger cities, because professional 
services tend to exhibit greater economies 
of agglomeration, are less land-intensive, 
and employ highly educated employees 
willing to pay for big-city amenities. If land 
markets work well, the ensuing increase in 
land prices prompts production establish-
ments to relocate to smaller, more special-
ized towns and cities. 

Cities in the United States provide a 

good illustration. In 1950 the ratio of man-
agers to production workers was similar 
across cities of diff erent sizes. By 1990, 
however, cities with between 75,000 and 
250,000 people had 20 percent fewer 
managers per production worker than 
the national average; cities with 1.5 to 5 
million people had 20 percent more man-
agers per production worker; and those 
larger than 5 million people were 50 per-
cent above the national average. A similar 
trend can be seen in other countries such 
as France and Germany.

Policy makers should be aware of these 
developments. Since this growing interde-
pendence manifests itself in plant reloca-
tions away from large cities, governments 
may be tempted to take away resources 
from them. This would kill the goose that 
lays the golden eggs, since such reloca-
tions to smaller specialized cities are just a 
later part of a life cycle of fi rms that large, 
diverse cities helped give birth to.

Contributed by Diego Puga.

each has been in the city. Similarly, two oth-
erwise identical cities would offer different 
types of external economies depending on 
their histories.91

The inﬂ uences of history and special-
ization  are  consistent  with  the  observed 
stability in the relative city-size distribu-
tion  and  the  industrial  concentration  in 
speciﬁ c cities over time. Within countries 
the relative sizes of cities tend to remain 
unchanged.  Among  urban  specialists, 
this phenomenon is often represented as a 
recurring relationship between a city’s size 
relative to the largest city in the country, 

known  as  Zipf ’s  law:  a  city’s  population 
size relative to the primate city is inversely 
proportional  to  its  rank  in  the  national 
hierarchy of cities.92 There is also persis-
tence  in  the  industrial  concentration  in 
speciﬁ c cities.93

Among  mature  industries  the  persis-
tence in employment patterns across cities 
is high over time, and the convergence in 
individual industry employment across cit-
ies is slow. This persistence occurs despite 
high plant and employment turnover rates 
for  individual  manufacturing  industries, 
and  despite  strong  evidence  that  plants 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   139
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   139

10/8/08   2:11:50 PM
10/8/08   2:11:50 PM

140 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 4.5     Cities continue to thrive as telecommunication 

costs fall 

As telecommunications improve, 
cities become more important as a 
platform for interactions and knowl-
edge transfers. Recent studies in the 
United States and Japan document 
the complementary roles of telecom-
munications and face-to-face interac-
tions: people closer to one another 
physically call each other more often. 

One interpretation is that face-

to-face interactions generate more 
demand for telephone interactions. 
Since the mid-1980s, when faxes and 
e-mail became prevalent, business 
travel has risen more than 50 percent. 
Another evidence of increased face-
to-face interactions with falling tele-
communication costs is the phenom-
enal growth of co-authored articles 
in economics—from 12 percent in 
the 1960s to 56 percent in the 1990s. 
Local, out-of-state, and international 

co-authorships all rose. Better tele-
communications increase long-range 
interactions, but not at the expense 
of local interactions. 

As ideas become more complex 
and diffi  cult to communicate, the 
value of intensive face-to-face inter-
action rises, and cities become even 
more important. And if cities are 
centers of telecommunication tech-
nology, improvements in information 
technology will increase their eco-
nomic role. The rise of the New York 
multimedia industry may signal the 
comparative advantage of large cities 
in facilitating the diffi  cult information 
fl ows in cutting-edge industries. In 
the developing world, the rise of Ban-
galore is a case in point. 

Sources: Gaspar and Glaeser 1998; Huber 
1995; Sassen 1991; and Gottman 1977. 

relocate as local wages and demand condi-
tions change.94 Historically, some cities have 
undergone  major  sectoral  overhauls,  but 
they have tended to be the exceptions.95 

The persistence of an industry’s employ-
ment concentration in speciﬁ c cities, which 
implies the “lock-in” of industrial structure, 
can be explained by localization economies. 
These  cities  can  better  compete  for  and, 
over time, retain plants and employment in 
that industry. A larger scale of own-indus-
try activity historically means that ﬁ rms in 
that locality today will operate more pro-
ductively with greater accumulated knowl-
edge about technology, sources of supply of 
different quality inputs, and local culture 
and  its  effect  on  the  legal,  business,  and 
institutional  climate.  These  localization 
advantages are relevant for more traditional 
manufacturing industries.96 They explain 
the longevity of many industrial clusters in 
certain locations—such as the world-class 
cutlery cluster in Solingen, Germany, since 
1348.97

There is also evidence of persisting con-
centration of particular services in speciﬁ c 
cities. The American mutual fund industry 

began in Boston in 1924, when the Mas-
sachusetts Investment Trust was founded. 
Today,  Boston  is  still  home  to  almost 
a  third  of  U.S.  employment  in  mutual 
fund and asset management services. The 
Hartford  insurance  industry  began  even 
earlier,  in  the  late-eighteenth  century. 
Local  merchants  insured  each  other’s 
overseas  trading  expeditions  by  sharing 
their  proﬁ ts  and  losses.  These  informal 
arrangements  eventually  grew  into  large 
insurance  companies,  starting  with  the 
Hartford Fire Insurance Company in 1810. 
Other major Hartford insurers, including 
Aetna, Connecticut General, and Travel-
ers, were founded in the early and middle 
1800s.  Hartford  is  still  known  today  as 
the  “insurance  city,”  with  a  wide  range 
of related services such as life insurance, 
medical  insurance,  ﬁ re/marine/casualty 
insurance, and pension funds.98 

Apprehension of market forces
Over the past century, producers and work-
ers in the developing world have sought, and 
often  found,  their  fortunes  in  towns  and 
cities. In the past three decades, researchers 
have analyzed and increasingly understood 
the gains from urban agglomerations of all 
shapes and sizes. But it is not yet clear that 
policy makers appreciate the sheer strength 
of these market forces and the beneﬁ ts that 
come from harnessing them. 

More than half the developing world’s 
governments surveyed in 2005 by the UN 
Population  Division  expressed  a  desire 
to make major changes to the spatial dis-
tribution  of  their  populations.  Almost 
three-quarters of developing country ofﬁ -
cials  expressed  a  strong  desire  to  imple-
ment  policies  to  reduce  migration  into 
urban  areas  or  to  take  actions  to  reverse 
rural-urban  migration  trends.99  Many  in 
developed  countries  are  equally  fearful 
of  urbanization  in  developing  countries. 
“The explosive growth of cities around the 
world—especially the rise of huge, nation-
sized  Third  World  metropolises—has 
U.S. scientists and ofﬁ cials worried. Chief 
among their concerns: “megacities increas-
ingly will serve as incubators of diseases, 
economic disruptions, and endless politi-
cal crises.”100 This worry was reﬂ ected in 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   140
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   140

10/8/08   2:11:50 PM
10/8/08   2:11:50 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

141

Figure 4.1    The urban premium for household consumption can be considerable

the goal of the 2006 World Urban Forum, 
held  to  discuss  “mega-cities  with  mega 
problems.”101 The prevalent view was that 
“cities in the developed world have histori-
cally  been  engines  of  economic  growth. 
But many cities in the Third World are so 
dysfunctional that they have become drags 
on economic progress.”102

Some of the favored solutions: slow the 
massive migration to cities, decongest the 
largest  cities  in  the  developing  world  by 
establishing new cities, and make the big-
gest cities centers for cleaner high-technol-
ogy activities. These solutions all represent 
a potentially costly misreading of the mar-
ket forces that drive the spatial transforma-
tions for economic development.

A misplaced fear of urbanization
Economic activities in urban areas account 
for as much as 80 percent of GDP in more 
urban  and  industrialized  countries.  The 
urban  share  of  economic  activity  in  less 
developed  countries  is  about  50  percent. 
Just  the  10  largest  metropolitan  areas  in 
Mexico,  which  account  for  a  third  of  the 
country’s population, generate 62 percent 
of its national value added.103 In Vietnam, 
where the share of the urban population is 
30  percent,  the  share  of  cities  in  national 
output  is  70  percent.  In  China  120  cities 
account for three-quarters of the country’s 
GDP.104  Clearly  cities  make  a  dominant 
contribution to economic production, even 
in poor and middle-income countries.

There is also ample evidence that urban 
areas  in  developing  countries,  including 
those  in  the  poorest  countries  in  Africa, 
deliver  external  economies.  Consumption 
in  urban  and  rural  households  in  a  broad 
cross-section of developing countries shows 
that people with similar observable charac-
teristics enjoy higher consumption attribut-
able purely to their urban location. The gains 
range from 2 percent in Hungary, the Krygyz 
Republic, and Poland, to 30 percent in Costa 
Rica, Ethiopia, India, Romania, and Tanza-
nia, and to more than 80 percent in Angola, 
Bolivia, and Rwanda (see ﬁ gure 4.1). 

These  magnitudes  make  it  futile  for 
policy makers to try to restrict the ﬂ ow of 
people to urban areas. Even when restric-
tions  have  stemmed  migration  ﬂ ows,  the 

Maldives
Bolivia
Angola
Rwanda
Guinea
Peru
Burundi
Paraguay
Gambia, The
Mexico
Senegal
Honduras
Cambodia
Mali
Vietnam
Brazil
El Salvador
Guatemala
Nepal
Zambia
Djibouti
Chad
Bhutan
Uganda
Colombia
Ghana
Thailand
Mauritania
Philippines
Cameroon
Burkina Faso
South Africa
Morocco
Bangladesh
Sri Lanka
Russian Federation
Malawi
Madagascar
Ethiopia
India
Indonesia
Tanzania
Nicaragua
Swaziland
Côte d’Ivoire
Timor-Leste
Guyana
Moldova
Costa Rica
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
Chile
Ecuador
Benin
Nigeria
Mongolia
Georgia
Bulgaria
Pakistan
Armenia
Romania
Turkey
Jordan
Croatia
Ukraine
Mozambique
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Tajikistan
Poland
Hungary
Kyrgyz Republic

0

0.2

0.4

to rural consumption levels
Source: WDR 2009 team calculations, using 120 household surveys in 75 countries.

0.8

0.6
Ratio of urban consumption premiums

1.2

1.0

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   141
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   141

10/8/08   2:11:50 PM
10/8/08   2:11:50 PM

142 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

economic  costs  have  been  high.  China’s 
policies  to  restrict  rural-urban  migration 
until the late 1990s stunted urbanization, 
with between half and two-thirds of Chi-
nese  cities  remaining  too  small.  For  the 
typical  city  in  China,  being  too  small  is 
estimated to result in a loss of about 17 per-
cent in net output per worker; for at least a 
quarter of the cities, these losses may range 
between 25 and 70 percent.105

A misplaced preoccupation with size, 
not function, of cities
A city’s prospects for prosperity and even 
survival  are  determined  by  how  nimbly 
the same piece of land is adapted to chang-
ing market demands. Given that land is an 
immobile factor critical to the production 
of any activity, the real estate choices that 
cities  provide  inﬂ uence  the  magnitude  of 
external  economies  and  the  nature  and 
specialization  of  city  economies.  To  be 

BOX 4.6     Hong Kong, China: market forces led the way, 

government followed

Hong Kong, China, with a land area 
of about 1,000 square kilometers, 
less than a quarter the size of Rhode 
Island, started out as a fi shing village. 
In the 1200s Hong Kong, a hilly and 
barren island, saw its fi rst population 
boom as Chinese fl ed the mainland to 
escape war and famine. People made 
a living on salt production, pearl 
diving, and fi shery trades. Between 
the 1650s and the 1800s, Hong Kong 
was also a military outpost and naval 
base, and its economy continued to 
rely on trade. By the end of World 
War II in 1945, the population in Hong 
Kong, China, had been reduced to 
less than half the prewar total of 1.6 
million. 

In the 1950s and 1960s, Hong Kong 

took up manufacturing buttons, 
artifi cial fl owers, umbrellas, textiles, 
enamels, footwear, and plastics. 
Squatter camps provided homes for 
the masses. The camps led to disas-
ters—like the Shek Kip Mei fi re—until 
the governor responded by putting 
up multistory residential buildings. 
Conditions in public housing were 
basic, with communal cooking facili-

ties. For many decades, the private 
sector showed more commitment to 
and interest in urban redevelopment.

Between 1960 and 1980 the gov-
ernment experimented with urban 
renewal and comprehensive redevel-
opment to improve environmental 
conditions, traffi  c circulation, and 
community facilities. Over subse-
quent decades, the fl exibility in land 
use planning and the participation 
of the private sector would prove 
crucial to satisfying the demands on 
land for housing, commerce, industry, 
transport, recreation, and commu-
nity use. This combination enabled 
Hong Kong, China, to fl ourish into the 
regional center of business and fi nan-
cial services that it is today. 

Consistent with the tradition of min-
imal government intervention in Hong 
Kong, China, the private sector has 
been the driving force behind urban 
transformation. The government con-
tracted out urban redevelopment to a 
specialist organization dominated by 
private development interests.

Source: Adams and Hastings 2001.

attractive  to  investors,  a  city  must  satisfy 
the  demands  of  its  dominant  or  growing 
industries  for  both  real  estate  and  facili-
ties. For example, professional services and 
ﬁ nancial services require large amounts of 
ofﬁ ce space, which can be more efﬁ ciently 
provided  vertically  in  high-rise  office 
buildings.  Manufacturing  requires  large 
amounts  of  land  for  factories  to  produce 
goods, and for warehouses to store products 
and materials. And the recreation, tourism, 
and  entertainment  sectors  require  highly 
visible,  pedestrian-friendly  areas  of  cities 
and retail space. 

The ability and ease of a city to adapt its 
land to different uses according to chang-
ing  market  needs  will  enable  its  sustain-
able  growth.  The  last  800  years  in  Hong 
Kong, China, and the last 300 in New York 
show the importance of markets in signal-
ing and implementing this urban renewal 
(see boxes 4.6 and 4.7). In New York the 
mercantile  trade  grew  out  of  the  early 
shipping industry. In turn, the mercantile 
trade industry would help give birth to the 
city’s modern ﬁ nance industry. Traders in 
New York City in the late-nineteenth cen-
tury thrived by sharing access not only to 
physical transportation infrastructure (the 
harbor, canals, and railroads), but also to 
intermediate inputs of specialized services 
not available elsewhere (such as scheduled 
sailings,  wholesalers,  and  ship  brokers). 
Later,  these  inputs  to  trade  became  the 
foundations for shared inputs in ﬁ nance, 
with  maritime  insurance  underwriting 
the  subsequent  basis  for  other  forms  of 
investment.106

Cities that provide ﬂ uid land and property 
markets and other supportive institutions—
such as protecting property rights, enforcing 
contracts, and ﬁ nancing housing—will more 
likely ﬂ ourish over time as the needs of mar-
kets change. Successful cities have relaxed 
zoning laws to allow  higher-value users to 
bid for the valuable land—and have adopted 
ﬂ exible land use regulations to adapt to their 
changing roles overtime. 

The  beneﬁ ts  of  agglomeration  econo-
mies  arise  from  the  density  of  economic 
activity.  These  are  the  advantages  for  an 
information  technology  startup  locat-
ing in Silicon Valley or a bookstall owner 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   142
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   142

10/8/08   2:11:51 PM
10/8/08   2:11:51 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

143

BOX 4.7     Reinvention and renewal: how New York became a great city

New Amsterdam was founded as a Dutch 
colony in 1614. It passed into British hands 
and became New York in 1664. Manhat-
tan, the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens, and 
Staten Island were brought together 
in 1898 in the form we know today. 
Throughout its history, New York has con-
tinually rebuilt, reinvented, and renewed 
itself. Once a fur-trapping and shipping 
hub because of its natural harbor, New 
York City is today a global fi nancial cen-
ter and a regional powerhouse in mass 
media, arts, information and communica-
tion technology (ICT) innovation, and 
medical research. The New York metro-
politan area is home to more than 18.7 
million people with a GDP of $1,133 bil-
lion, making it the second-largest urban 
agglomeration in the world, after Tokyo. 
New York had a gross metropolitan prod-
uct of $950 billion in 2005, making it the 
largest regional economy in the United 
States. If it were a country, New York City 
would be the world’s seventeenth larg-
est, ahead of Switzerland. At more than 
$56,000, it has the second highest per 
capita production in the world.

A tour of four neighborhoods reveals 

the city’s versatility and vibrancy.

SoHo. In the 1700s SoHo was farmland. 

By the early 1800s it was primarily resi-
dential, inhabited by the wealthy and, 
soon after, by the middle class. In due 
time rapid development attracted many 
businesses. Hotels, theaters, stores, man-
sions, minstrel halls, casinos, and brothels 
appeared along Broadway. Starting in 
the 1880s the textile industry settled in 
the area. By the 1950s artists fl ocked to 
the area because of low rents, a result of 
people, industry, and commerce shifting 
uptown. In October 1962 the City Club of 

New York characterized SoHo as a com-
mercial slum. But today the area, once 
called Hell’s Hundred Acres, is a busy 
commercial and retail district and home 
to New York University.a

Wall Street. The fi nancial district is 
one of the city’s best-known and old-
est neighborhoods. Today’s Wall Street 
neighborhood is part of Manhattan Com-
munity District 1, which extends south 
from Canal Street to the tip of Manhattan 
at Battery Park and includes Governor’s 
Island. It is home to the New York Stock 
Exchange and the NASDAQ, the world’s 
two largest stock exchanges.

The street’s name was originally De Wall 
Straat in reference to the Walloons, Belgian 
farmers who were the majority of the 
residents living in New Netherland around 
Fort Amsterdam in 1630. The beaver belt 
was the single most important commodity 
in New Netherland. Trade encouraged new 
activity in the production of food, timber, 
tobacco, and eventually slaves. In the late-
eighteenth century there was a button-
wood tree at the foot of Wall Street under 
which traders and speculators gathered 
to trade informally. In 1792 this arrange-
ment was formalized with the Buttonwood 
Agreement, which laid the groundwork for 
the New York Stock Exchange.

Meatpacking district. In 1969, when 
Vincent Inconiglios moved to a loft on 
Gansevoort Street in the meatpacking 
district, it was a no man’s land. The neigh-
borhood was defi ned by a stench that 
overpowered the senses. Down the street 
from Mr. Inconiglios was a pickle fac-
tory, and an importer of Spanish melons 
occupied the shop downstairs. The area 
was teeming with barrels of bones, meat, 
and men in bloody white coats. Within 

a generation, the transformation in the 
meatpacking district was as stark as the 
contrast between night and day.b Today, 
more than 35 wholesale meat companies 
still operate there. But the area is now 
also home to world-class restaurants, art 
galleries, a fashionable retail corridor, 
and night clubs that take advantage of 
the enormous former factory spaces. 
Real estate prices have skyrocketed. Mr. 
Inconiglios paid $50 a month when he 
moved to the meatpacking district. In 
2007 the Carlyle Group and Sitt Asset 
Management acquired a pair of buildings 
on West 14th Street for $70 million.c 
Williamsburg. This neighborhood 

reinvented itself from a booming trade 
port to a rich industrial town after the 
Civil War. With the construction of the 
Williamsburg Bridge in 1903, many Jewish 
families who lived in Manhattan’s Lower 
East Side crossed the East River to a bet-
ter life in Williamsburg. When industries 
left the area in the 1960s and 1970s, Wil-
liamsburg became an immigrant ghetto. 
But the cheap rent also made the neigh-
borhood an artistic hub. The neighbor-
hood evolved into a mix of Italian, Polish, 
Hispanic, and Hasidic residents. In 2005 
New York City approved zoning changes 
that would allow for open spaces, parks, 
aff ordable housing, and light industry. 
Today, prices average $700–$900 per 
square foot, and prominent waterfront 
developments range in the millions.d 

Sources: Seeman and Siegfried 1978; Shaw 
2007; Biedermann 2007; Lynch and Mulero 
2007.
a. Seeman and Siegfried 1978. 
b. Shaw 2007. 
c. Biedermann 2007. 
d. Lynch and Mulero 2007.

locating close to other bookstalls on Dada-
bhai  Naoroji  Road  in  Mumbai,  India. 
While  the  ﬁ nancial  sector  of  London  is 
largely concentrated in a few square miles 
of  the  City  and  Canary  Wharf,  ﬁ nancial 
firms  also  benefit  from  being  located 
anywhere in Greater London. Firms ben-
eﬁ t from locating close to other ﬁ rms in 
either the same or different industries and 
unless all of them move together, they will 
become less proﬁ table, even if the location 

they  are  moving  to  has  lower  wages  and 
cheaper land. 

But bigger city size and economic den-
sity bring their own problems. For people 
and  ﬁ rms,  city  living  comes  at  a  price  in 
both developing and developed countries. 
Trafﬁ c  in  central  London  moves  at  only 
11  miles  per  hour107—the  same  speed  as 
horse drawn carriages a hundred years ago. 
 Beijing  is  notorious  for  its  pollution-in-
duced smog. Land in Mumbai is among the 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   143
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   143

10/8/08   2:11:51 PM
10/8/08   2:11:51 PM

144 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

most expensive in the world. High levels of 
crime are an accepted feature of city living 
around the world. Millions of city dwellers 
live in overpopulated slum housing, with 
little  or  no  access  to  basic  amenities  and 
services. These are the costs of density, the 
diseconomies of agglomeration. 

The main source of diseconomies is the 
paucity of land in places where agglomera-
tion economies take hold. Land is limited 
and as economic growth occurs, it has to 
be  used  with  increasing  intensity.  Take 
Manhattan in New York City, which has an 
area of less than 35 square miles. In 1800 
it  had  a  population  density  of  just  under 
3,000 people per square mile. By 1850 this 
had risen to about 23,500, peaking in 1910 
with  a  population  density  of  more  than 
100,000.  Today,  the  population  density  is 
about 70,000. With land in ﬁ xed supply, its 
use eventually can offset any further ben-
eﬁ ts  from  agglomeration  economies.  The 
way to offset the ﬁ xed supply of a factor of 
production is to substitute other factors for 
it, and the rise of skyscrapers in many large 
urban areas is an illustration of this substi-
tution of capital for land. The building of 
subway systems in many of the developed 
countries’ larger cities is another example. 
But such substitution has its limits, and the 
increasing shortage of land in cities leads to 
higher rents and congestion costs for work-
ers and ﬁ rms. 

Better  transport  can,  by  reducing  the 
economic distance to density, in essence 
make land a less-binding resource. Indeed, 
with the long-term decline in transporta-
tion costs, cities have expanded. In 1680 
London  was  only  4  square  miles  and, 
because  of  the  difﬁ culties  of  traveling, 
more than 450,000 people were crammed 
into this small area. By 1901 the city had 
expanded  to  24  square  miles,  and  the 
average population density had fallen to 
79,000. In 2001 London’s 627 square miles 
had a population density of 13,203 people 
per square mile. An expanding city meant 
that  millions  of  commuters  have  to  be 
transported from the suburbs, large vol-
umes of retail goods have to be delivered 
to  shops,  and  manufactured  products 
have  to  be  shipped  out.  All  of  this  leads 
to  congestion  or  diseconomies  of  scale 

that reduce the gains from agglomeration 
economies.

But  restricting  the  growth  of  cities  is 
not the answer. There is no evidence that 
the  agglomeration  economies  of  megaci-
ties have been exhausted. Indeed, evidence 
suggests that the growth of vehicles in the 
developing countries is increasing with per 
capita income along a path similar to that 
followed  by  the  richer  countries.108  The 
problem  has  more  to  do  with  the  spatial 
structure  of  the  city  and  investments  in 
infrastructure.  Vehicle  ownership  is  ris-
ing 15 to 20 percent annually in much of 
the  developing  world.109  But  most  coun-
tries have not matched this growth with a 
parallel expansion of transportation infra-
structure,  so  trafﬁ c  congestion  is  severe. 
Cities in developing countries only devote 
half as much land space to roads as in the 
United States. But it is not just a matter of 
increasing  this  capacity.  In  cities  such  as 
Bangkok and Manila, it is the management 
and the use of road space that is important. 
Part of the problem is that in many cities 
the  responsibility  for  road  infrastructure 
has devolved from central to local govern-
ments, which do not always have the neces-
sary resources. 

Combined with the differing propensi-
ties of industries to beneﬁ t from agglomer-
ation economies, the resulting constraints 
explain  why  the  spatial  distribution  of 
economic activity within a country is not 
restricted  to  a  single  center,  but  rather 
consists  of  multiple  centers  of  differing 
sizes. For policy makers the challenge is to 
best relax the constraints generated by the 
congestion and overcrowding of land and 
resources  so  that  the  beneﬁ ts  of  agglom-
eration can be maximized. In many cases 
these  constraints  have  been  tightened  by 
misguided land use policies and planning 
failures,  only  adding  to  congestion  (see 
chapter 7). 

A misplaced fascination 
with “new” cities
The land Chicago was built on is not all 
that  different  from  the  more  sparsely 
developed places around Lake Michigan. 
Yet the difference in economic production 
and household earnings between Chicago 

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   144
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   144

10/8/08   2:11:51 PM
10/8/08   2:11:51 PM

 

Scale Economies and Agglomeration 

145

and  other  settlements  on  the  lakefront 
in  Wisconsin  and  Indiana  is  stark.  And 
along  the  10-hour  drive  through  Texas 
on Interstate Highway 75, wages and land 
rents spike in Fort Worth, Austin, and San 
Antonio and drop off sharply at points in 
between. It is hard to reconcile these huge 
differences in economic density with the 
minor differences in physical geography; 
it is as if the areas of Fort Worth and San 
Antonio cast a shadow over the points in 
between. A better understanding of eco-
nomic geography, characterized by exter-
nal  economies,  is  required  to  harness 
economic forces. But it is not always obvi-
ous that developing country governments 
understand economic geography or appre-
ciate these forces.

A  survey  of  new  city  initiatives  in  the 
Arab  Republic  of  Egypt,  Brazil,  Hun-
gary, India, and República Bolivariana de 
Venezuela  is  sobering.  Brazil  transferred 
its capital city from the coast to the mid-
western interior more than 900 kilometers 
away. República Bolivariana de Venezuela 
picked Ciudad Guayana in the 1950s, a city 
in the southern part of the country, to be 
the industrial “growth pole” of the central 
and southern region and to attract people 
and jobs from the already rapidly growing 
metropolitan region in the north. In many 
formerly  planned  economies,  the  more 
common practice was building industrial 
towns  to  accelerate  industrialization.  In 
Hungary,  Dunaujvaro  was  designed  as  a 
“steel town,” Tiszaújváros as a “chemistry 
town,” and Kazincbarcika as a “mining and 
heavy  industry  town.”  The  Soviet  Union 
built Magnitogorsk into a steel town in an 
area with huge reserves of iron ore to chal-
lenge its capitalist rivals. 

Some new towns were built around met-
ropolitan  areas  to  alleviate  the  pressures 
that  the  large  cities  faced.  Navi  Mumbai 
was  established  in  1972  with  the  hope  of 
developing a twin city for Mumbai, and to 
decongest Mumbai. Egypt started a com-
prehensive new town construction program 
around Cairo and away from Cairo to create 
a “new population map of Egypt” starting 
in the 1970s, and the construction is still 
ongoing. Many of these cities were created 

for economic reasons, but some were cre-
ated for political reasons. Have these new 
towns and cities, met their goals? Generally 
not. 

•  New  cities  do  better  when  they  are 
located near larger successful cities. But 
they often suffer from the same govern-
ment-related  failures  that  led  the  gov-
ernment to establish them, especially the 
failure to manage large cities well. That is, 
governments that do badly in managing 
large old cities also do badly in managing 
small new cities. 

•  New cities attract residents, sometimes 
even  more  than  anticipated,  but  often 
not  the  people  intended.  That  is,  gov-
ernments  can  set  up  (noncapital)  cit-
ies, and they sometimes become viable, 
but not for the reasons the government 
envisaged. 

•  These  cities  attract  people  because  of 
the circular causation that the new eco-
nomic  geography  emphasizes:  work-
ers  and  entrepreneurs  come  to  seek 
markets,  and  then  more  people  come 
because this is where the markets are. 
But  there  may  be  huge  opportunity 
costs, because the counterfactual could 
be more organic growth of settlements. 
That is, it makes sense for private agents 
to come to these cities since others are 
already there, but large efﬁ ciency losses 
may result from the country’s point of 
view. Once a “bad” location is picked, 
it may not fail entirely because of cir-
cular causation, but that means the eco-
nomic costs of the mistake are greater, 
not smaller, since the country will pay 
these costs for a long time. 

•  New noncapital cities that seem to suc-
ceed  are  those  where  the  purpose  and 
location are chosen over time by markets 
and  in  cases  in  which  the  government 
hastens the pace of growth by coordinat-
ing investments in infrastructure, hous-
ing, and general governance. 

For these reasons, cities and towns should 
be seen as market agents that, just like ﬁ rms 
and farms, serve market needs.

WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   145
WDR09_10_Ch04.indd   145

10/8/08   2:11:51 PM
10/8/08   2:11:51 PM

CHAPTER 5

Factor Mobility 
and Migration

The largest movement of people in the 

world occurs every year around the 
beginning of February, as millions in 
China travel to be with their families for the 
Lunar New Year. In 2006, to mark the Year 
of the Dog, about 11 million people traveled 
out of Shanghai alone, and 10 million trav-
eled into the city; 60 million people traveled 
on the last day of the festivities. In Febru-
ary 2008 ice and snow storms frustrated the 
plans  of  an  estimated  200  million  people 
trying  to  travel  across  China  to  be  with 
their families for the New Year. Similarly, in 
the United States during the Thanksgiving 
period, millions take to the roads, airports, 
bus and train stations. The number of trips 
longer than 50 miles increases by half, with 
about 10 million people a day traveling over 
the holiday weekend, almost twice the daily 
average during the rest of the year.1 The ris-
ing  volume  of  holiday  travelers  in  almost 
every country, rich or poor, is a telling reﬂ ec-
tion of just how many people live and work 
in a place other than where they were born.
This  chapter  is  about  the  mobility  of 
labor  and  capital,  how  their  movements 
help to concentrate economic activity, and 
how these ﬂ ows mitigate differences in wel-
fare that can accompany economic concen-
tration. It emphasizes movements of labor, 
especially, for two reasons. First, although 
many countries and regions are still thirsty 
for investment, national reforms and inter-
national  agreements  since  the  1970s  have 
eliminated most restrictions on the ﬂ ow of 
capital. The scarcity of capital in some places 
now has less to do with actual barriers and 
more  to  do  with  unfavorable  investment 

conditions.2 In a globalizing economy capi-
tal is mobile and will move quickly. Labor, 
by contrast, tends to be less mobile for cul-
tural and linguistic reasons. Second, a strong 
policy consensus supports the free ﬂ ow of 
capital for foreign direct investment, even if 
this consensus is not always fully manifested 
in the policies of the many countries where 
external  and  internal  obstacles  remain. 
Relative to capital, labor is subject to more 
political  restrictions  and  to  explicit  and 
implicit barriers. Some novel insights come 
from considering agglomeration economies 
and human capital together. Based on these 
insights, this chapter makes a case for facili-
tating the voluntary movement of people.

Textbooks  teach  us  that  the  factors  of 
production—capital  and  labor—move 
to places where they will earn the highest 
returns, and that these are the places where 
each factor is scarce. But by recognizing that 
increasing returns to scale are important, 
policies can be made better. Unlike unskilled 
labor  and  physical  and  ﬁ nancial  capital, 
skilled labor—embodying human capital, 
a  person’s  education,  and  endowment  of 
skills  and  talent—earns  higher  economic 
returns where it is abundant, not scant. This 
explains  the  clustering  of  talented  people 
in  cities,  the  migration  of  entrepreneurs 
to leading areas within countries, and the 
rising number of skilled migrants moving 
to wealthy countries, all places where their 
skills  seem  plentiful  but  are  nonetheless 
highly rewarded. Recognizing the growing 
beneﬁ ts to human capital in areas where it 
has already accumulated changes the think-
ing about how governments should try to 

146

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   146
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   146

10/10/08   9:36:00 AM
10/10/08   9:36:00 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

147

raise  growth  and  achieve  spatial  conver-
gence in living standards.

But  policy  makers  in  many  developing 
countries—particularly in South Asia and in 
Sub-Saharan Africa—have been conditioned 
by an early literature on migration to worry 
about the specter of rising urban unemploy-
ment, overburdened city services, social ten-
sions  in  economically  vibrant  areas,  and  a 
“brain drain.” As a result, many countries still 
restrict the movement of people. Yet direct 
and indirect restrictions, although not effec-
tive at stemming the ﬂ ow of people, create 
unnecessary friction and impose the cost of 
forgone opportunities for economic growth 
and convergence in living standards.

Although researchers are now less skep-
tical  about  the  beneﬁ ts  of  labor  migra-
tion,  policy  makers  in  both  developing 
and  developed  countries  are  not  so  sure. 
What can they learn from each other? This 
chapter documents the disconnect between 
the  implications  of  recent  research  and 
the  migration  policies  in  developing  and 
developed countries, showing how they are 
changing.

Keep in mind three points:

•  The  facts  about  labor  migration  can  be 
surprising. Although international migra-
tion still captures the greatest attention in 
the media, by far the largest ﬂ ows of people 
are between places in the same country, 
and not from villages to cities, but from 
economically  lagging  to  leading  rural 
areas.3 Although the movement of people 
to cities is on the rise, particularly in South 
and East Asia, the most sustained pattern of 
internal mobility within developing coun-
tries  has  been  from  lagging  rural  areas, 
like Western Kenya and Bihar in India, to 
leading rural areas in those countries, like 
the Central Highlands and Punjab, and a 
large share of this migration is temporary.4 
And  when  people  move  across  national 
borders, they do not go far.5 Most interna-
tional migration takes place within world 
regional  “neighborhoods,”  particularly 
between developing countries.6

•  Movements  of  capital  and  labor  are 
driven by the beneﬁ ts of agglomeration. 
Early migration theories were based on 
surplus  labor,  ﬁ xed  “exogenous”  rates 
of growth, and job creation—and these 

theories  viewed  the  outmigration  of 
skilled people as both socially traumatic 
and an economic loss. New theories rec-
ognize that migration, when driven by 
economic forces, is a positive and selec-
tive  process.  The  interactions  between 
agglomeration  and  labor  migration 
power places forward.

•  The policy challenge is not how to keep 
households  from  moving,  but  how  to 
keep them from moving for the wrong 
reasons. Instead of trying to ﬁ ght the pull 
of agglomeration economies on workers 
and their families, governments should 
work to eliminate the factors that push 
people out of their home areas. By doing 
so they can improve the quality of migra-
tion  and  encourage  economic  growth. 
Labor mobility driven by economic rea-
sons  leads  to  greater  concentration  of 
people and talent in places of choice and 
adds more to agglomeration beneﬁ ts in 
these places than to congestion costs.

From mercantilism to globalization 
to autarky, and back again
Restrictions  on  the  ﬂ ow  of  capital,  labor, 
and goods fragmented the world economy 
between the two world wars, but globalization 
picked up speed after the end of the Cold War 
in 1990, loosening the restrictions and inte-
grating the world economy. Capital mobil-
ity  within  and  across  countries  increased. 
International  labor  mobility—particularly 
unskilled  labor—declined  after  the  mass 
movements  in  the  nineteenth  century  and 
only recently began to rise. But the mobility 
of people within countries has accelerated. 
So, for the movement of labor over the last 
century, distance has diminished, but divi-
sions not only have increased (many more 
borders) but indeed may have become more 
obstructive (many more restrictions).

Capital ﬂ ows—up sharply since the 1970s
The mobility of capital across borders, par-
ticularly  investment  capital,  has  increased 
since  the  1970s.  The  world  is  returning  to 
an age of capital mobility abandoned at the 
onset of World War I. From 1880 to 1914, a 
growing share of the world economy oper-
ated  under  the  classic  gold  standard  and  a 
global ﬁ nancial market centered in London. 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   147
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   147

10/10/08   9:36:01 AM
10/10/08   9:36:01 AM

148 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

The gold-standard ﬁ xed exchange rates and 
underpinned  a  stable  and  credible  regime 
that enforced discipline on countries. Interest 
rates tended to converge and capital to ﬂ ow 
with relative ease across borders, constrained 
only by the limits of technology. Many rapidly 
industrializing countries outside Europe—in 
the Americas and in Asia—took part in an 
increasingly global economy.7

The  fluid  economic  environment  was 
destroyed by two world wars and the global 
economic retraction in between. From 1914 
to 1945, monetary policy was used to pursue 

national  aims,  domestic  policy  goals,  and 
“beggar-thy-neighbor”  trade  strategies  that 
encouraged  strict  capital  controls.  Interna-
tional capital ﬂ ows petered out, and invest-
ment from abroad was viewed with suspicion. 
So prices and interest rates across countries fell 
out of sync. Even during the Bretton Woods 
era  from  the  end  of  World  War  II  to  1971, 
as countries attempted to rebuild the global 
economy,  fears  of  mobile  capital  that  had 
taken hold during the interwar years proved 
difﬁ cult  to  dispel.  Indeed,  capital  controls 
were sanctioned to prevent currency crises. 

Figure 5.1    International capital flows have surged since the 1970s
Gross private capital flows

Percentage of GDP
35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1970

Sub-Saharan Africa

World
Middle East & North Africa
Europe & Central Asia

South Asia

Latin America & Caribbean

East Asia & Pacific

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Source: World Bank 2007j.

Figure 5.2    A large share of capital now flows as direct investment
Foreign direct investment, net inflows

Percentage of GDP
5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5
0.0

Sub-Saharan Africa

World
Middle East & North Africa
Europe & Central Asia

South Asia

Latin America & Caribbean

East Asia & Pacific

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Year

Source: World Bank 2007j.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   148
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   148

10/16/08   9:49:18 AM
10/16/08   9:49:18 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

149

But the growing volume of trade made 
it difﬁ cult to constrain the ﬂ ow of capital, 
and in the early 1970s, the constraints began 
to loosen. Fixed exchange rates were aban-
doned, creating an international economic 
environment that could accommodate capi-
tal ﬂ ows and market development. Political 
stability,  structural  reforms,  and  regula-
tory structures lowered the risks to foreign 
investment  in  developing  countries,  and 
capital markets responded with enthusiasm 
(see  ﬁ gures  5.1  and  5.2).  By  2000,  capital 
mobility returned to levels seen in 1914.8 

Capital has become the most mobile fac-
tor of production. Converging real interest 
rates, declining spreads between deposit and 
lending rates, and shrinking risk premiums 
on the sovereign debt of developing coun-
tries are evidence of an international envi-
ronment in which capital can go where it 
wants to, even if it does not always go where 
people wish it would. Indeed, recent com-
parisons of the marginal product of capital 
between  high-income  and  lower-income 
countries  show  little  evidence  of  friction 
preventing the ﬂ ow of capital to poor coun-
tries. Instead, the lower capital ratios in poor 
countries are explained by lower efﬁ ciency 
and a lack of complementary factors.9

Labor ﬂ ows across borders—blocked for 
much of the twentieth century
In a pattern similar to that of capital ﬂ ows, 
from  a  peak  in  the  late-nineteenth  cen-
tury, the mobility of labor across borders 
declined for most of the twentieth century, 
with  the  rise  of  economic  barriers  at  the 
onset  of  the  Great  Depression  and  World 
War  II.  Geographers  have  long  recorded 
the  movement  of  humankind,  from  the 
earliest migrations out of Africa to Europe 
and Asia,10 to the resurgence of movement 
across borders. They categorize the modern 
history of international migration into four 
distinct  periods:  mercantile,  industrial, 
autarkic, and postindustrial.11

During the mercantile period, from 1500 
to 1800, the movement of people around the 
world was dominated by Europeans. Agrarian 
settlers,  administrators,  artisans,  entrepre-
neurs, and convicts emigrated out of Europe 
in  large  numbers.  During  the  industrial 
period that followed—sometimes referred to 
as the ﬁ rst period of economic globalization, 

an estimated 48 million emigrants, between 
10  and  20  percent  of  the  population,  left 
Europe (see table 5.1).12 Unlike international 
migration  today,  the  movement  of  people 
across borders in the ﬁ rst and second periods 
of labor migration was not driven by a lack 
of economic growth or development in the 
sending  countries.  Indeed,  the  ﬁ rst  coun-
try to industrialize and the most advanced 
at the turn of the twentieth century—Great 
Britain—was by far the largest sending coun-
try. Economic analysis shows a positive cor-
relation between emigration and the extent of 
industrialization in the sending country.13

A long period of autarky and economic 
nationalism began in 1910. Unprecedented 
restrictions were placed on trade,  investment, 
and immigration, stiﬂ ing the international 
movement of capital and labor. The trickle 
of international migrants consisted mainly 
of refugees and displaced persons, unrelated 
to economic development.

The  postindustrial  period  of  migration 
began  in  the  1960s,  characterized  by  new 

Table 5.1    In the late-nineteenth century most international migrants came from better-off Europe 
Top sending countries in 1900 and 2000

Top emigrant-sending 
countries in 1900
British Isles
Norway
Portugal
Italy
Spain
Sweden
Denmark
Switzerland
Finland
Austria-Hungary
Germany
Netherlands
Belgium
Russian 
Federation–Poland
France
Europe
Japan
Total (Europe and Japan)

Percentage of 

sending country’s 
population in 1900

Top emigrant-

sending countries 

in 2000

Percentage of 

sending country’s 
population in 2000

40.9
35.9
30.1
29.2
23.2
22.3
14.2
13.3
12.9
10.4
8.0
3.9
2.6

2.0
1.3
12.3
0.9
11.1

Mexico
Afghanistan
Morocco
United Kingdom
Algeria
Italy
Bangladesh
Germany 
Turkey
Philippines
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
Pakistan
India
United States
China

Total (of countries 
listed)

10.0
9.9
9.0
7.1
6.7
5.7
5.0
4.9
4.5
4.3
3.5
2.4
0.9
0.8
0.5

1.9

Sources: Massey 1988, Parsons and others 2007, in Ozden and Schiff 2007.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   149
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   149

10/10/08   9:36:02 AM
10/10/08   9:36:02 AM

150 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

forms, no longer dominated by ﬂ ows out of 
Europe. People began to move from lower-
income countries to wealthy countries, with 
a surge in migrant labor from Latin America, 
Africa, and Asia. In the 1970s, countries that 
had been major sources of migrating labor 
to  Northern  Europe  and  the  Americas—
such  as  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Spain—began 
to receive immigrants from Africa and the 
Middle East. The growing wealth of oil-rich 
countries in the late 1970s made economies 
in the Persian Gulf new destinations. And by 
the 1980s, migration to East Asian countries 
spread beyond Japan to Hong Kong, China; 
the Republic of Korea; Malaysia; Singapore; 
Taiwan, China; and Thailand.

Today, about 200 million people are for-
eign born, roughly 3 percent of the world 
population.14  The  ﬂ ows  of  new  interna-
tional  migrants  have  varied—from  a 
2-percent increase between 1970 and 1980, 
to 4.3 percent from 1980 to 1990, and to 
1.3 percent from 1990 to 2000. Poor and 
middle- income  countries  now  send  the 
most emigrants, led by Bangladesh, China, 
the Arab Republic of Egypt, India, Mexico, 
Morocco,  Pakistan,  the  Philippines,  and 
Turkey (see table 5.1). But Italy, Germany, 
and  the  United  Kingdom  still  rank  near 

the  top,  each  accounting  for  between  3 
million and 4 million emigrants.

The  volume  and  ﬂ ow  of  international 
migration is no longer mainly associated 
with  population  growth  or  demographic 
pressure.  Unlike  the  1960s  and  1970s, 
international  immigrants  are  not  from 
the  poorest,  least  developed  countries. 
Voluntary  international  movements  of 
people  tend  to  originate  from  countries 
with rapidly growing economies and fall-
ing fertility rates. Emigration today is the 
outcome less of desperation and more of 
integration.15

The pattern of international migration is 
also shifting, from South-North to South-
South.16  Although  the  top  three  receiving 
countries are members of the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment  (OECD)—the  United  States,  Ger-
many,  and  France,  in  that  order—Côte 
d’Ivoire, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, 
Jordan,  and  Pakistan  are  now  among  the 
top 15 destinations. But migration of labor 
from the low- and middle-income countries 
of the South to the wealthy countries of the 
North is still large, 37 percent of interna-
tional migrants in 2000. Movement between 
Northern countries made up 16 percent of 

Table 5.2    Close to home: the largest international ﬂ ows of labor are between neighboring countries
Percentage of world migrants recorded as a bilateral movement between pairs of countries/regions, circa 2000

Destination countries/regions

Countries/
regions of origin
USA
Canada
EU15 & EFTA
AU and NZ
Japan
HI MENA
LAC
ECA
MENA
AFR
EAP
SAS
Total

USA
n.a.
0.54
2.22
0.06
0.28
0.10
10.22
1.27
0.47
0.41
3.32
0.83
19.71

Canada

0.16
n.a.
0.98
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.36
0.39
0.17
0.12
0.71
0.31
3.25

UE15 & 
EFTA
0.34
0.10
5.59
0.16
0.06
0.06
1.45
4.75
2.85
1.58
1.09
1.13
19.14

AU & 
NZ
0.04
0.02
1.13
0.23
0.02
0.01
0.05
0.26
0.10
0.10
0.63
0.12
2.72

Japan
0.02
n.a.
0.01
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.13
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.54
0.01
0.74

HI 

MENA
0.03
0.01
0.14
n.a.
n.a.
0.12
0.10
0.92
1.49
0.25
0.48
2.66
6.22

LAC
0.43
0.02
0.68
n.a.
0.04
n.a.
2.07
0.07
0.04
0.02
0.06
0.02
3.45

ECA
0.04
0.01
0.78
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.17
16.98
0.16
0.11
0.14
0.13
18.56

MENA
0.05
n.a.
0.16
n.a.
n.a.
0.72
0.08
0.33
1.79
0.18
0.14
2.07
5.53

AFR
0.03
0.01
0.39
0.01
n.a.
0.01
0.14
0.34
0.28
7.00
0.09
0.14
8.44

EAP
0.15
0.01
0.20
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.14
0.18
0.05
0.03
3.86
0.37
5.10

SAS
0.02
0.01
0.19
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.25
0.41
0.12
0.16
0.27
5.67
7.15

Total
1.29
0.74
12.47
0.55
0.50
1.14
15.15
25.88
7.52
9.97
11.32
13.46
100

Source: Parsons, Skeldon, Walmsley, and Winters 2007. 
Notes:  AFR = Africa; AU = Australia; EAP = East Asia and Paciﬁ c; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; EU15 = European Union 15; EFTA = European Free Trade Association; 
HI MENA = High-income countries in the Middle East and North Africa region; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; NZ = New Zealand; SAS = South Asia; n.a. = not applicable.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   150
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   150

10/10/08   9:36:02 AM
10/10/08   9:36:02 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

151

migration and that between Southern coun-
tries accounted for 24 percent, with Argen-
tina, China, Côte d’Ivoire, India, the Islamic 
Republic  of  Iran,  Jordan,  Pakistan,  and 
South Africa as important destinations.

There is a strong tendency for labor to 
move between countries in the same world 
neighborhoods,  particularly  for  South-
South migration (see table 5.2). Migration 
of  labor  is  usually  from  countries  with  a 
shared land border.17 While only 30 percent 

of immigrants to the United States, 20 per-
cent to France, and 10 percent to Germany 
come from countries with which they share 
a border, 81 percent of immigrants to Côte 
d’Ivoire, 99 percent to the Islamic Republic 
of Iran, and 93 percent to India are from 
neighboring countries.

International  migrants  tend  to  stay 
within regional neighborhoods, particularly 
in developing world regions, most notably in 
Sub-Saharan Africa (see ﬁ gure 5.3). Almost 

Figure 5.3    Migrants from East Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East and North Africa go mainly to OECD countries, but most in South Asia and 
Sub-Saharan Africa stay close to home 

Destination of emigrants from countries in East Asia & Pacific

Destination of emigrants from countries in Europe & Central Asia

Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

OECD

countries

Other

high-income
countries

Within
region

Other

developing
countries

Unidentified
countries

Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

OECD

countries

Other

high-income
countries

Within
region

Other

developing
countries

Unidentified
countries

Destination of emigrants from countries in Latin America & Caribbean

Destination of emigrants from countries in Middle East & North Africa

Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

OECD

countries

Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

OECD

countries

Other

high-income
countries

Within
region

Other

developing
countries

Unidentified
countries

Other

high-income
countries

Within
region

Other

developing
countries

Unidentified
countries

Destination of emigrants from countries in South Asia

Destination of emigrants from countries in Sub-Saharan Africa

Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

OECD

countries

Other

high-income
countries

Within
region

Other

developing
countries

Unidentified
countries

Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

OECD

countries

Other

high-income
countries

Within
region

Other

developing
countries

Unidentified
countries

Source: Ratha and Xu 2008.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   151
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   151

10/10/08   9:36:03 AM
10/10/08   9:36:03 AM

152 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 5.1    Regional labor mobility has been falling in Sub-Saharan Africa 

The rate of labor migration within devel-
oping regions is highest in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, but it has fallen since the 1960s. 
More than 60 percent of emigrants from 
Sub-Saharan countries move to other 
countries in the region. The higher rate of 
labor movement within the region rela-
tive to other developing world regions is 
partly a consequence of the large number 
of land borders, but also of the relative 
permeability of these borders and the dif-
fi culty of monitoring the fl ow of people 
crossing them, despite numerous legal 
restrictions.

Migrants represented just over 3.5 

percent of the population in Sub-Saharan 
Africa in 1960 but only 2.3 percent by 
2000. In 1960 the stock of migrants rela-
tive to the population was much higher in 
Southern Africa than in other corners of 
the region, but it has since fallen to about 
the level of migrants in Western Africa 
(see the table below). In Eastern Africa 
and Central Africa the stock of migrants 
has fallen signifi cantly.

Voluntary migration across borders 
in Sub-Saharan Africa is motivated by 
the same reasons that prompt people 

to move within a country: to pursue job 
opportunities and to diversify risks to 
income. Indeed, the economic rationale 
for movement from a lagging to a leading 
area of the same country is virtually indis-
tinguishable from that for moving across 
a border in a region like Sub-Saharan 
Africa, where these movements are over 
relatively small distances and for the most 
part unmonitored. But many migrants 
also move across borders within a frame-
work of formal agreements between 
countries. Since the 1960s, a web of 
bilateral and multilateral agreements has 
grown in an attempt to reap the benefi ts 
and control the costs of labor mobility 
within subregional neighborhoods.
In West Africa governments have 

attempted to manage population move-
ments within the Economic Community 
of West African States (ECOWAS), which 
has had the most infl uence on the fl ow 
and composition of migration in Sub-
 Saharan Africa. Established in 1975, 
ECOWAS includes a protocol allowing the 
free movement of people and the right 
of residence and establishment for the 
citizens of its member countries.

Sub-Saharan Africa’s stock of migrants has fallen since 1960
Per 1,000 population, by regional neighborhood

Neighborhood
Eastern Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa
Western Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

1960
37.3
40.7
49.7
28.0
35.6

1970
31.6
44.2
40.6
27.3
32.8

1980
35.3
35.9
33.3
34.6
35.0

1990
31.2
20.6
34.5
28.5
29.0

2000
17.9
16.0
30.6
30.0
23.0

Source: UN Population Division, in Lucas 2006.

The Southern African Development 
Community (SADC), a loose alliance of 
nine countries of Southern Africa formed 
in 1980, coordinated development proj-
ects to lessen economic dependence on 
South Africa during the Apartheid era. 
Part of this alliance was a provision for the 
fl ow of labor between member countries. 
The recent anti-immigrant violence in 
South Africa is a setback for regional inte-
gration and migration. 

Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda have 

formed the East African Community (EAC), 
a regional intergovernmental organiza-
tion for interterritorial cooperation with 
roots extending to 1948 before indepen-
dence. The EAC, gaining strength as a 
framework for economic integration since 
1999, recently introduced East African 
passports and temporary passes to speed 
the movement of labor.

The movement of labor across borders 

in Sub-Saharan Africa’s neighborhoods 
could be encouraged. During economic 
contractions, policy makers in these neigh-
borhoods feel the same xenophobic politi-
cal pressures as governments in rich coun-
tries do to favor native workers and ration 
public services to nonnatives. Less than 
one-third of governments in Sub-Saharan 
Africa have ratifi ed the International Con-
vention on the Protection of the Rights of 
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their 
Families. To really reap the benefi ts from 
labor mobility for faster economic growth 
with convergence across Sub-Saharan Afri-
ca’s regional neighborhoods, much more 
can be done to welcome migrants and 
open channels for the fl ow of remittances 
to their home countries.
Source: Lucas 2006.

17 percent of recorded international migra-
tion around 2000 occurred within Europe 
and Central Asia, though a large part of this 
resulted from border changes and changes 
in the deﬁ nition of who was “foreign born” 
in these countries. The second highest rate 
of labor mobility between countries in the 
same region was for Sub-Saharan Africa (see 
box 5.1).

Cross-border  migration  within  subre-
gional neighborhoods ﬂ ows to countries that 

act as economic engines of growth in devel-
oping  regions—to  Côte  d’Ivoire  in  West 
Africa, to South Africa in Southern Africa, 
to Thailand from countries in the Greater 
Mekong Region in South Asia (see box 5.2), 
and to Argentina from Bolivia, Chile, Para-
guay,  and  Peru.  Distance  is  not  the  whole 
story. Divisions, in the form of language and 
culture, also determine the pattern of inter-
national migration, with more than half of 
migrations  occurring  between  countries 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   152
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   152

10/10/08   9:36:03 AM
10/10/08   9:36:03 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

153

with a common language. Of course, a com-
mon  language  and  other  cultural  factors 
reinforce the neighborhood effects.

Immediately after World War II—when 
economies  were  growing  rapidly,  wage 
inequality was falling, and the volume of 
labor movement across borders was low—
international  migration  was  not  really  a 
thorny  political  issue.  But  after  1975—as 
growth  in  high-income  countries  slowed, 
wage inequality increased, and the volume 
of international migrants swelled—immi-
gration became a heated topic of debate in 
electoral  politics.  Indeed,  selective  “man-
aged immigration” policies ﬁ rst introduced 
in Australia and Canada in the 1980s are 
becoming  popular  in  other  high-income 
destination countries.18

With  the  return  to  globalization  since 
the end of the Cold War, the movement of 
labor across borders resumed, but govern-
ments still restrict the number and inﬂ u-
ence the characteristics of immigrants. This 
contrasts sharply with the “ﬁ rst era of glo-
balization” in the nineteenth century, when 
the ﬂ ows of labor were free of obstruction. 
Restrictions on immigration arise and are 
sustained by wage inequality in receiving 
countries,  rather  than  by  unemployment 
or absolute wages. They are more likely to 
be tightened when international labor ﬂ ows 
increase and to be loosened in periods of 
domestic support for trade.19

Internal labor mobility—growing 
rapidly, despite restrictions
With  improvements  in  transport  tech-
nology  and  infrastructure,  the  mobility 
of  labor  within  countries  rose  steadily 
throughout  the  twentieth  century,  accel-
erating  in  its  last  two  decades.  The  vol-
ume  and  velocity  of  internal  voluntary 
migration, of concern to policy makers for 
decades, are growing despite predictions to 
the contrary.20 Declining agriculture and 
rising  manufacturing  have  changed  the 
distribution  of  labor  in  low-income  and 
emerging  middle-income  countries  since 
the  mid-twentieth  century  in  South  Asia 
and Sub-Saharan Africa, and long before 
in East Asia and Latin America. Migration 
of labor from lagging to leading rural areas 
remains the dominant internal movement 

BOX 5.2     Cross-border migration in the Greater Mekong 

Subregion

The Greater Mekong Subregion 
(GMS), with 315 million people, com-
prises Cambodia, the Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thai-
land, Vietnam, and the Guangxi and 
Yunnan provinces of China. Despite 
marked disparities in economic 
development among its members, 
the subregion is extremely dynamic, 
with annual growth rates averaging 
above 6 percent in recent years. 
Thailand’s higher wages, faster 
growth, and more favorable social 
and political climate attract people 
trying to escape poverty in Cambodia, 
Lao PDR, and Myanmar. For Thailand 
the migrants are a reservoir of cheap 
and fl exible labor and a boost to its 
competitiveness in some sectors. And 
Thailand alone is estimated to have 1.5 
million to 2 million regular and irregu-
lar migrants from the GMS. Removing 
them could reduce Thailand’s GDP by 
around 0.5 percentage points a year. 
By some estimates, more than half 

of migrants enter Thailand holding 
legal documentation and then over-
stay, becoming illegal. Migrants are 
disproportionately young, of working 
age, and male. Those from Myanmar 
are, on average, less educated and less 
literate than the average for the popu-
lations of origin, indicating a push to 
migrate, or negative self-selection. 
But self-selection is positive among 
migrants from Cambodia, who have 
slightly higher education attainment 
than the population back home.

Remittances from Thailand to 

Cambodia, Lao PDR, and Myanmar 
are estimated at $177 million to $315 
million a year. In Cambodia they 
are important for 91 percent of the 
households interviewed in one of the 
main sending provinces. 

Much of this migration, however, 

will remain irregular and unregu-
lated, increasing the vulnerability 
of migrants, the majority of whom 
do not use social services because 
they fear deportation. One of the 
biggest problems is ensuring access 
to schooling for children, who also 
suff er from a lack of health care. 
For the same reasons that migrant 
adults rarely receive health treat-
ment, migrant children rarely receive 
vaccinations.

Despite the benefi ts of labor mobil-

ity, facilitating legal fl ows of people 
has been slow. Sending countries 
generally lack the capacity to man-
age the mass export of labor and to 
protect the rights of their nationals 
abroad. Receiving countries have 
fairly weak migration frameworks, 
often implemented hastily as an 
“after-the-fact” response to large 
numbers of migrants. The absence of 
an adequate legal and policy frame-
work, typical of regional neighbor-
hoods in developing country regions, 
increases the costs (and risks) of 
migration and reduces its benefi ts. 

Source: World Bank 2006e.

in most of the developing world,21 except 
in  Latin  America,  where  movements 
between cities dominate.22 Rural-to-rural 
migration, difﬁ cult to document, has been 
largely ignored.23

Migration from rural areas to cities has 
been  gaining  importance  since  the  mid-
1970s, especially in the urbanizing econo-
mies of South and East Asia, with the rapid 
rise  of  manufacturing  and  services.  In 
India, where movements from poor to rich 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   153
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   153

10/10/08   9:36:04 AM
10/10/08   9:36:04 AM

154 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 5.3    From facilitating to restricting to (again) facilitating labor mobility in China

In the second half of the twentieth cen-
tury, China undertook some of the most 
active internal migration policies ever 
observed, initially to great economic 
benefi t, but increasingly to the detriment 
of growth and development. Now, these 
policies are changing again. 

In the 1950s the government sought 
to stimulate industrialization through 
policies that encouraged rapid urbaniza-
tion. Households were given incentives 
to move to cities, and rural workers 
responded en masse, answering the 
demand to participate in reconstruction 
and industrial development. As a result 
of these eff orts, the urban population of 
China had by 1953 grown by a third, to 78 
million. The fi rst Five-Year Plan (1953–58) 
promoted urban development, creating 
forces that pulled people to the cities, 
complemented by the collectivization of 
agriculture and the establishment of the 
commune system.

In apparent response to a larger-than-
expected fl ow from villages, the govern-
ment tried to stem the fl ow, centralizing 
hiring, restricting travel, and rationing 
grain in cities. But these measures failed to 
slow the outfl ow of Chinese rural workers, 
and the pressure on cities grew so much 
that the government mobilized to move 

millions back to the countryside. Then, 
with the Great Leap Forward (1958–60), 
the government abandoned all attempts 
to control the fl ow of labor, again seek-
ing to accelerate industrial development, 
motivating another surge of workers to 
China’s cities. By 1960 China’s urban popu-
lation had doubled from that in 1949.

In the 1960s and fi rst half of the 1970s, 
the urban population fell, a consequence 
of the relocation of intellectuals and 
urban elites to the countryside during the 
Cultural Revolution (1966–76). Then, with 
an abrupt shift in policy in 1976, the fl ow 
of people to the cities surged anew. 
In the early 1980s the government 

became particularly preoccupied with the 
speed of urbanization. Although rural-to-
urban migration was responsible for only 
20 percent of the growth of China’s cities 
from 1949 to 1980, evidence of burdened 
infrastructure and services in Shanghai 
and Beijing occupied the attention of 
policy makers. 

The hukou household registration system 
became the main policy tool to regulate the 
fl ow of workers. It has four tenets: 

•  Migration, especially to urban areas, 
should be allowed only if compatible 
with economic development. 

•  Rural-to-urban migration must be con-

trolled strictly.

•  Movements between settlements of 
similar population size need not be 
controlled.

•  Flows from larger to smaller settle-

ments or between rural areas should be 
encouraged. 

Under the hukou, each individual has 

an offi  cial place of residence, and the 
documents verifying residence are similar 
to a passport. People are allowed to work 
legally, to receive social security benefi ts 
including health coverage, and to access 
food rations only in their place of resi-
dence. A change in offi  cial place of resi-
dence can be granted only by permission, 
similar to a local authority granting a visa. 
But some forms of legal temporary migra-
tion would be allowed to meet shifts in 
labor demand.

As the government’s preoccupation 

with the size of China’s cities and the 
pace of urban growth changed, the 
hukou was tightened or loosened—for 
example, by relaxing the residency 
requirement to receive food rations 
or extending the rights of temporary 
migrants. Despite the controls, lax 

China’s industrial growth and concentration has been accompanied by massive movements of workers
Internal labor migration between 1995–2000

Migration from
western region

to

coastal region

WESTERN
WESTERN
WESTERN
REGION
REGION
REGION

LIAONING

I  M O N G O L

N E

BEIJING
Beijing

QINGHAI

XIA 

G
N
I
N

GANSU
WESTERN
WESTERN
WESTERN
REGION
REGION
SICHUAN

SHAANXI

CHONGQING

GUIZHOU

YUNNAN

GUANGXI

TIANJIN
HEBEI
COASTAL
COASTAL
COASTAL
REGION
REGION
REGION

SHANDONG

JIANGSU

SHANGHAI

ZHEJIANG
COASTAL
COASTAL
COASTAL
REGION
REGION
REGION
FUJIAN

TAIWAN

GUANGDONG

HONG KONG

MACAO

Migration from
central region

to

coastal region

HEILONGJIANG

JILIN

LIAONING

BEIJING

Beijing

HEBEI

TIANJIN

SHANXI

SHANDONG

HENAN

HUBEI

JIANGSU

ANHUI

SHANGHAI

HUNAN

JIANGXI

ZHEJIANG
COASTAL
COASTAL
REGION
REGION
REGION
FUJIAN

TAIWAN

GUANGDONG

HONG KONG

MACAO

Migration within the

coastal region

Migration totals
2,000,000

1,000,000
500,000
250,000
100,000

LIAONING

BEIJING

Beijing

HEBEI

TIANJIN
COASTAL
COASTAL

SHANDONG

JIANGSU

SHANGHAI

ZHEJIANG
COASTAL
COASTAL
REGION
REGION
FUJIAN

TAIWAN

GUANGDONG

HONG KONG

MACAO

HAINAN

HAINAN

HAINAN

Source: Huang and Luo forthcoming, using data from the Population Census of China.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   154
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   154

10/10/08   9:36:04 AM
10/10/08   9:36:04 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

155

BOX 5.3    From facilitating to restricting to (again) facilitating labor mobility in China—continued

enforcement allowed large fl ows of 
migrant workers to settle in cities under 
“temporary” status. Indeed, in the past 
30 years, the labor force requirements to 
fuel China’s spectacular growth perfor-
mance have relied on migrants who are 
temporary under law but in fact perma-
nent residents. 

Today the movement of people from 

rural areas to cities is again surging. 
One in fi ve rural workers migrates, and 
migrants account for a third of urban 
employment. In 2005 average incomes in 
cities were three times the rural average. 
The mechanization of farming has added 

to the pool of surplus labor. And China’s 
industries are in constant need of low-
cost labor. 

Recognizing the growth dividend from 
allowing labor to fl ow freely, the govern-
ment has been loosening the hukou in 
recent years, even facilitating migration. 
Migration restrictions have declined. The 
labor market has become more effi  cient. 
And mobility decisions are much more 
responsive to economic factors.a Begin-
ning with pilot programs in selected 
municipalities, migrants from rural areas 
will be given access to health and social 
protection services, training, labor market 

information, and job search assistance, 
and recourse to legal action in cases of 
employer abuse.

Recent research suggests that the 

restrictions have taken a toll: many Chi-
nese cities are smaller than they should 
be.b In many areas, such as Chengdu and 
Chongqing, governments are again facili-
tating a rapid rural-urban migration (see 
chapter 7). 

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Poncet 2006.
b. Au and Henderson 2006a.

rural  agricultural  areas  have  historically 
been the dominant form of internal migra-
tion, movements from villages to cities have 
increased  sharply  in  recent  years.  Migra-
tion  from  the  poor  Indian  state  of  Bihar 
has doubled since the 1970s, mainly to cit-
ies, and not to the agriculturally prosper-
ous states in India’s Northwest, as before. 
In Bangladesh two-thirds of all migration 
from rural areas is to cities. And in China, 
with  the  easing  of  residency  restrictions, 
migration  from  rural  areas  to  cities  now 
predominates (see box 5.3).

Uniform measures of internal migration 
are rare. Because there are so few household 
surveys that regularly measure labor mobil-
ity, and the questions asked about migra-
tion  vary,  comparable  indicators  can  be 
calculated for only a few countries. Ques-
tions  about  migration  are  more  likely  to 
be asked in countries that experience large 
movements of labor and with governments 
that are concerned about migration. Among 
the  countries  included  in  table  5.3,  for 
example, are stable nations (such as Argen-
tina  and  Costa  Rica),  where  migration  is 
more likely to reﬂ ect economic motives, as 
well as countries that have recently experi-
enced conﬂ ict (such as Bosnia and Herze-
govina, the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Rwanda, and Sierra Leone), where internal 
mobility is also due to ﬂ ight from the threat 
of violence.

Skills—the motor of internal and 
international migration
A rush of labor matching the migrations out 
of Europe at the turn of the twentieth cen-
tury has not yet taken place, and perhaps it 
never will. But unlike the ﬂ ow of unskilled 
labor,  that  of  skilled  labor—with  human 
capital—has been on the rise. Globalization 
and selective migration policies are likely to 
ease travel for skilled labor within countries 
and across borders.

Within countries, education attainment 
continues  to  determine  who  moves  and 
who does not—certainly from rural areas 
to  cities.  People  with  more  education  are 
more likely to migrate in their own country 
(see ﬁ gures 5.4 and 5.5).24 Many temporary, 
seasonal migrants with little or no educa-
tion  also  migrate.25  But  education  boosts 
the velocity of labor mobility, by opening 
employment  opportunities  farther  aﬁ eld 
and shortening the job search at migrants’ 
destination.26 

Education also increases the likelihood 
of  people  moving  abroad.  The  interna-
tional  migration  of  skilled  workers  rela-
tive to that of unskilled workers has been 
rising since the 1970s for every developing 
world  region  (see  ﬁ gure  5.6).  The  high-
est  proportions  of  skilled  emigrants  (as 
a  percentage  of  the  educated  workforce) 
are from Africa, the Caribbean, and Cen-
tral  America.  Many  Central  American 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   155
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   155

10/10/08   9:36:07 AM
10/10/08   9:36:07 AM

156 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 5.3    Rates of labor mobility vary widely across countries in the developing world

Country and year of 
survey (ranked by 
stock of migrants)
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina 2001
Paraguay 2001
Bolivia 2005
Morocco 1998
Azerbaijan 1995
Honduras 2003
Venezuela, R. B. de 
2004
Congo, Dem. Rep. 
of 2005
Dominican Republic 
2004
Armenia 1999
Mauritania 2000
Albania 2005
Ecuador 2004
Vietnam 1992
Rwanda 1997
Colombia 1995

Internal 
migrants 

(% of 

working-age 
population)

52.5

39.0
37.7
33.4
33.2
29.0
28.3

27.1

26.9

24.5
24.2
23.9
22.7
21.9
21.5
20.1

Recent migrants 
(less than ﬁ ve 
years, % of total 

working-age 
population)

12.8

7.3
5.0
6.0
19.4
5.5
3.0

7.8

4.0

22.4
2.9
4.1
5.3
3.1
5.9
5.3

Recent 
migrants 

(% of internal 

migrants)

24.5

18.7
13.3
18.1
58.4
19.2
10.7

28.9

14.9

91.7
12.0
17.3
23.4
14.3
27.6
26.3

Country and year of 
survey (ranked by 
stock of migrants)
Costa Rica 2001
Brazil 2001
Sierra Leone 2003
Nicaragua 2001
Guatemala 2006
Haiti 2001
Argentina 2006
Kyrgyz Republic 1997
Romania 1994
Croatia 2004
Bulgaria 2001
Cambodia 2004
Tajikistan 2003
Mongolia 2002
Kazakhstan 1996
Madagascar 2001
Mozambique 1996
Malawi 2005
Micronesia 2000

Internal 
migrants 

(% of 

working-age 
population)

Recent migrants 
(less than ﬁ ve 
years, % of total 

working-age 
population)

Recent 
migrants 

(% of internal 

migrants)

19.9
19.5
19.0
18.6
17.5
17.5
17.2
16.2
15.1
14.7
14.3
14.2
9.9
9.8
9.3
9.3
8.1
2.7
1.2

2.5
3.3
3.7
3.1
3.3
2.8
1.4
4.7
1.9
1.2
1.4
2.8
1.5
0.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
1.1
0.3

12.4
16.7
19.3
16.9
19.1
15.8
8.1
29.2
12.8
8.0
10.0
19.4
15.7
0.4
14.7
0.0
0.2
43.2
23.6

Source: WDR 2009 team, estimates using household surveys.
Note: Internal migrants are individuals who are not living in the same district in which they were born. This deﬁ nition does not count returnees as migrants—that is, persons who 
moved away from their place of birth in the past, but returned by the time of the survey. Recent migrants migrated in the ﬁ ve years before the year of the survey.

Figure 5.4    In Latin America and the Caribbean internal migrants are more educated than those who stay 
behind
Education comparison between internal migrants and nonmigrants at place of origin and at time of migration

Percentage
40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Costa Rica Honduras  Venezuela,

R.B. de

Paraguay Guatemala Nicaragua Dominican
Republic

Brazil

Haiti

Migrants, primary
Nonmigrants, primary

Education level attained

Migrants, secondary
Nonmigrants, secondary

Migrants, post-secondary
Nonmigrants, post-secondary

Source: WDR 2009 team drawing from selected household surveys.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   156
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   156

10/10/08   9:36:07 AM
10/10/08   9:36:07 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

157

and island nations in the Caribbean had 
more than half their university-educated 
citizens living abroad in 2000. And close 
to 20 percent of skilled workers have left 
Sub-Saharan Africa.27 This could be taken 
as evidence that human capital is becom-
ing more mobile internationally—or that 
“selective” immigration policies in wealthy 
countries  are  biasing  the  composition  of 
international migration toward those with 
skills. But the increase in the migration of 
skilled  labor  is  due  to  the  rise  in  higher 
levels of education worldwide, most nota-
bly for countries sending the majority of 
international migrants. In relative terms, 
the cross-border movement of skilled labor 
has remained fairly constant as a share of 
the stock of skilled labor in sending coun-
tries. Rather than human capital becom-
ing  more  mobile,  more  human  capital  is 
simply available, propelling larger volumes 
of migration.28

The rapid development of telecommu-
nications and other forms of information 
and communication technology has sepa-
rated the mobility of human capital from 
the  mobility  of  labor.  In  a  trend  likely 
to  accelerate,  more  services  in  the  pro-
duction processes of industries based in 
wealthy countries are being located “off-
shore” in low- and middle-income coun-
tries,  where  human  capital  is  cheaper. 
What began with the export of software 
development  and  maintenance  services 
from  the  Indian  city  of  Bangalore  to 
firms across the world has developed into 
a burgeoning trade in services requiring 
a  wide  array  of  skills,  from  simple  cus-
tomer  communications—particularly 
from countries like India and the Philip-
pines, where English is widely spoken—to 
financial accounting and computer main-
tenance. There is, as yet, no evidence that 
the  export  of  “disembodied”  human 
capital over telephone lines and the Inter-
net will substitute for the flow of skilled 
workers.  But  by  creating  the  possibility 
of separating human capital from labor, 
information  and  communication  tech-
nology has further increased the mobility 
of skills relative to people.

Figure 5.5    Internal migrants are more schooled than workers in the places to which they move
Comparison between internal migrant and nonmigrant workers at migrant’s place of destination

Nonmigrant, primary completed
Migrant, primary completed 
Nonmigrant, secondary completed
Migrant, secondary completed

Tajikistan

Colombia

Venezuela, R.B. de

Albania

Congo, Rep. of

Croatia

Mongolia

Malawi

Brazil

Vietnam

Argentina

Micronesia

Haiti

Bolivia

Dominican Republic

Kyrgyz Republic

Paraguay

Bulgaria

Madagascar

Costa Rica

Guatemala

Honduras

Nicaragua

Cambodia

Mozambique

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Source: WDR 2009 team drawing from selected household surveys.

Percentage

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   157
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   157

10/10/08   9:36:08 AM
10/10/08   9:36:08 AM

158 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Figure 5.6    Migration from developing countries is becoming more skilled

Latin America & Caribbean

Sub-Saharan Africa

Percentage of emigrants
100

Percentage of emigrants
100

80

60

40

20

0

Low skill

Medium skill

Highly skilled

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

80

60

40

20

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

Europe & Central Asia

Middle East & North Africa

Percentage of emigrants
100

Percentage of emigrants
100

80

60

40

20

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

East Asia & Pacific

80

60

40

20

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

South Asia

Percentage of emigrants
100

Percentage of emigrants
100

80

60

40

20

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

80

60

40

20

0

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year

Source: Docquier 2006. 

Labor mobility: learning from a 
generation of analysis
Until  recently,  two  strands  of  economic 
literature—labor migration and economic 
growth, each with a powerful impact on 
developing-country  policy  makers—
have  evolved  along  separate  tracks  and 
diverged. But as shown in the arguments 
and  evidence  on  agglomeration  econo-
mies  in  chapter  4,  the  two  phenomena 
are closely intertwined in the real world. 

Labor  mobility  and  voluntary  migration 
for economic gain are the human side of 
the agglomeration story.

As for ﬁ rms, localization and urbaniza-
tion economies arise from knowledge spill-
overs between people in proximity. For this 
reason, people are often more economically 
productive  when  they  are  around  others, 
especially  for  people  with  skills.  Migra-
tion and agglomeration feed off each other. 
Whether this is agglomeration in leading 
places within a geographic area, in leading 
areas within countries, or in leading coun-
tries within regions, human capital ﬂ ows to 
economically leading places. At every spa-
tial scale, migration is the way that people 
who invest in education and skills realize 
the returns on their investment.

An important insight of the agglomera-
tion literature—that human capital earns 
higher  returns  where  it  is  plentiful—has 
been  ignored  by  the  literature  on  labor 
migration. Preoccupied with urban unem-
ployment and squalor in the fast-growing 
cities of the South, early research on labor 
migration advocated restrictions.29 Govern-
ments often acted on these prescriptions, 
instituting  migration  abatement  policies, 
but to little effect: ﬂ ows from the country-
side to cities and from lagging  to leading 
provinces  continued  unabated.  The  only 
effect of restrictions may have been forgone 
economic growth and slower spatial con-
vergence in living standards.

Increasing returns to scale and spillovers 
from clustering—especially human capital-
related spillovers—make clear the growth 
and welfare payoffs of policies that facili-
tate  movements  of  labor  from  lagging  to 
leading places. The implications for policy 
are  powerful.  Rather  than  an  impending 
destructive tide of humanity, the swelling 
ﬂ ows of people from villages to cities could 
be  a  boon  for  economic  growth  and  the 
convergence  of  welfare.  Moving  from  the 
local spatial scale, to the national, and then 
to the international, the beneﬁ ts from clus-
tering are the same—and the problems fac-
ing policy makers grow and become more 
complex. Put plainly, they do not want to 
lose people and human capital. 

Economic  theory  now  recognizes  that 
governments should not try to hold on to 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   158
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   158

10/10/08   9:36:08 AM
10/10/08   9:36:08 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

159

people.  The  pull  of  agglomeration  forces 
in  prosperous  places  is  simply  too  strong 
for any opposing measure to be sustained. 
Another aspect of the pull of agglomeration 
has been well studied by economists but is 
often overlooked by governments. Migrants 
who move to cities, to leading areas, or to 
leading  countries  are  rarely  disconnected 
from  their  home  places.  Most  migrants 
maintain strong and active links with their 
home communities and send remittances. 
And they do much more than remit capital. 
They send back information and technical 
assistance, and when a place is ready, they 
often bring back ideas, knowledge, expecta-
tions of good governance, and links to lead-
ing markets. Sending governments that put 
the right policies in place can capture these 
beneﬁ ts for faster growth and faster conver-
gence in living standards.

Migration theory now recognizes the 
beneﬁ ts of agglomeration
Economists’ notions about what motivates 
people to move and what such movements 
mean  come  from  theories  of  economic 
growth and convergence. Whether couched 
in a classical framework30 or in the recent 
models  of  “endogenous  growth,”31  where 
people are free to move, they will move to 
compete away differences in wages between 
locations. Since higher wages at the desti-
nation reﬂ ect an initial shortage of workers 
relative to capital—or a large endowment 
of capital per worker—the arrival of new 
migrants  will  slow  the  accumulation  of 
capital per worker and the growth of wages. 
In  contrast,  the  accumulation  of  capital 
per  worker  in  the  places  migrants  leave 
will speed up as they go, accelerating wage 
growth for workers who stay behind. By this 
mechanism, incomes in different locations 
are predicted to eventually converge.

The  ﬁ rst  theories  of  labor  migration 
originated  in  the  analysis  of  economic 
growth  in  developing  countries.32  These 
early  theories  partitioned  a  developing 
economy into a traditional agrarian rural 
sector  and  a  modern  manufacturing  sec-
tor centered in urban areas. The main idea 
was that with economic development, par-
ticularly  with  progressive  mechanization 
of agriculture, labor in rural areas is always 

in  surplus.  But  in  the  growing  modern 
manufacturing sector it is not. So, in rural 
areas, every additional worker, irrespective 
of innate talents or education attainment, 
has  zero  marginal  productivity,  but  each 
potentially has a positive marginal produc-
tivity in manufacturing. This opens a gap 
in  earnings  and  an  incentive  for  labor  to 
migrate from rural areas to cities in search 
of manufacturing jobs. Agriculture supplies 
an unlimited labor force to manufacturing, 
and the transfer of labor between the two 
sectors  takes  place  through  rural-urban 
migration. This migration continues until 
the “disguised unemployment” of workers 
in rural areas is absorbed into manufactur-
ing in urban areas.

Movements  from  rural  to  urban  areas 
were  considered  desirable  when  accom-
panied  by  economic  growth.  In  what  has 
become known as the Todaro class of migra-
tion models,33 prospective migrants decide 
whether to move by comparing the expected 
future income streams they could earn in 
the city and in the rural home, after taking 
into account the costs of actually moving 
and searching for a job.34 A key feature of 
the early Todaro models is that the econo-
my’s rate of growth—and by extension the 
rate  of  employment  creation  in  the  mod-
ern  manufacturing  sector—was  assumed 
to be constant and set independent of the 
model. This classical framework—with an 
exogenously determined rate of economic 
growth  and  constant  rate  of  employment 
creation  in  the  manufacturing  sector—
explained  rising  urban  unemployment  in 
cities like Nairobi. But it also created what 
came to be known as the Todaro Paradox: 
any  policy  to  improve  urban  economies 
could lead to more urban unemployment 
because  the  improvements  would  induce 
even more migration from rural areas.

Few economic models have had as much 
impact  on  policy  makers  in  developing 
countries  as  these  early  labor  migration 
theories. Across the developing world, but 
especially in South Asia and Sub-Saharan 
Africa, the Todaro Paradox provided a basis 
for strong disincentives and even outright 
restrictions  on  the  movement  of  labor.35 
The Todaro model suggested that prohibit-
ing internal migration over and above what 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   159
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   159

10/10/08   9:36:09 AM
10/10/08   9:36:09 AM

160 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 5.4     Labor and social policies restrain migration in 

Eastern Europe—not good for growth

Internal migration increased in 
several countries in Eastern Europe 
and Central Asia at the beginning 
of the transition away from planned 
economies. But this may have been 
a one-time phenomenon. Much of 
the sudden increase in migration in 
the Commonwealth of Independent 
States appears to have been driven 
by the return of people to their eth-
nic homelands and the departure of 
workers from areas they had been 
sent to by central planners. More 
than 1 million people relocated from 
Siberia and the Russian North and Far 
East to the more central parts of the 
Russian Federation, about 12 percent 
of the populations of these areas. 
These movements may have run 
their course. Migration has slowed 
despite diff erences in income and 
the quality of life. Internal migrants in 
the Czech Republic, Poland, and the 
Slovak Republic represent less than 
0.5 percent of the working popula-
tion, much less than 1.5 percent in 
Germany, and nearly 2.5 percent in 
France, the Netherlands, and the 
United Kingdom.

People of working age in Europe’s 
economically depressed areas mainly 
don’t move because extensive 
unemployment benefi ts and social 
assistance reduce the pressure to 
migrate from declining areas. Under 
Poland’s unemployment insurance, 
qualifi ed workers receive fairly gen-
erous benefi ts for periods ranging 
from six months in areas with low 
unemployment to 18 months in areas 
with high unemployment. In addition, 

unemployed workers close to the 
retirement age receive preretirement 
benefi ts linked to their pensions. Low-
income households are also eligible 
for guaranteed temporary social 
assistance benefi ts. Housing policies 
may discourage migration. During 
the transition, homes typically were 
transferred to their occupants at little 
or no cost. So the cost of remaining 
in one’s home is low. At the same 
time, rent control discourages new 
construction, driving up the cost of 
housing in regions that are expanding 
economically. The high cost of hous-
ing in economically prosperous places 
can whittle away at the income gains 
workers might expect from migration.

Also discouraging migration are 
uniform national minimum wages 
unadjusted for costs of living, col-
lective bargaining arrangements, 
and job protection laws. In other 
regions where the informal economy 
is dominant, labor market regulation 
is less binding. But in the formerly 
planned economies of Central and 
Eastern Europe, minimum wage and 
job protection regulations matter. In 
Poland, where the minimum wage 
is relatively high, national wage-
setting appears to inhibit the migra-
tion of workers from economically 
depressed areas. Elsewhere in the 
region, where legislated minimum 
wages are relatively low, they do not 
appear to have a similar eff ect on 
internal labor mobility.

Sources: Dillinger 2007, Paci and others 
2007.

is required for full employment in manu-
facturing  could  increase  national  welfare 
because  output  in  both  agriculture  and 
manufacturing can be maintained at opti-
mal levels. 

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, how-
ever,  economists  began  to  question  the 
classical  models,  pointing  out  the  weak-
nesses  of  the  Todaro  framework,  which 
failed  to  capture  the  dynamic  nature  of 

labor movements. It minimized differences 
in the appetite for risk among prospective 
migrants. It did not account for differences 
in  education  attainment  and  how  these 
differences  can  inﬂ uence  job  searches.  It 
ignored pertinent motivations and house-
hold characteristics that could inﬂ uence a 
family’s choice of who will migrate. And it 
neglected  the  possibility  of  migration  for 
jobs  in  the  urban  informal  economy  and 
the pull these could exert independently of 
the modern manufacturing sector.36

In parallel, some economists in the mid-
1980s began to think differently about eco-
nomic growth, mainly by reformulating the 
way classical growth models treated techni-
cal progress. Human capital and ideas were 
different from other factors of production—
they exhibited increasing returns to scale.37 
And  because  the  generation  of  ideas  and 
human capital are in essence social activ-
ities—clustering  people  in  a  way  that  has 
no comparison in the process of accumu-
lating physical capital—these models could 
explain why cities are important. They also 
could  explain  why  human  and  ﬁ nancial 
capital  do  not  move  from  where  they  are 
already abundant—rich countries, leading 
areas in countries, and cities—to where they 
seems to be scarce—poor countries, lagging 
areas, and rural communities.38

If there are external effects from cluster-
ing  human  capital,  cities  can  jump-start 
and maintain economic growth. Although 
urban specialists had long held this view,39 
it  was  sufﬁ ciently  novel  for  economists. 
Researchers in urban economics enthusias-
tically took up the hunt for the theorized 
positive external effects from human capi-
tal  spillovers.  Theoretical  and  empirical 
studies sought to quantify what happens to 
productivity, wages, and land prices when 
the aggregate stock of human capital in a 
city increases.40 Evidence began to emerge 
of social returns to education accruing to 
speciﬁ c geographic areas, supporting argu-
ments in favor of a greater concentration of 
economic activity, if not the clustering of 
labor speciﬁ cally.41

These  arguments  did  not  themselves 
spill over into the mainstream labor migra-
tion literature until the turn of the century. 
This  should  come  as  little  surprise:  the 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   160
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   160

10/10/08   9:36:09 AM
10/10/08   9:36:09 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

161

fundamental assumptions for the classical 
migration  models  are  at  odds  with  those 
embraced by the new growth theorists and 
by those emphasizing agglomeration econ-
omies (see box 5.5).

Migration, growth, and welfare: 
divergence or convergence?
In a world with increasing returns to scale, 
will selective, voluntary migration lead to 
economic  divergence  or  convergence?  A 
large volume of empirical work from devel-
oped  and  developing  countries  bolsters 
an emerging consensus that governments 
should not see voluntary internal popula-
tion movements as a threat. Indeed, internal 
migration  offers  societies  an  opportunity 
for economic growth and the convergence 
of welfare. 

In contrast to the emerging consensus on 
migration within countries, the beneﬁ ts and 
costs of international migration are still the 
subject of debate. The preeminence of place 
in determining the return on an individ-
ual’s investment in human capital is most 
dramatically observed in the difference the 
simple  act  of  crossing a border can make 
to earned income. An adult male Bolivian 
with nine years of schooling in Bolivia will 
earn roughly US$460 per months in dol-
lars  that  reﬂ ect  purchasing  power  at  U.S. 
prices. But a person with the same educa-
tion,  talent,  and  drive  would  earn  about 
2.7  times  that  much  if  he  worked  in  the 
United States. A similar Nigerian educated 
in Nigeria would earn eight times as much 
by working in the United States rather than 
in his native country. This “place premium” 
is large throughout the developing world.42 
Although  the  benefits  to  an  individual 
from migrating from a poor country to a 
wealthy  country  are  clear,  is  the  acceler-
ated ﬂ ow of skilled labor out of developing 
countries more likely to help or to hinder 
their  growth  and  convergence  prospects? 
The answer is disputed.

But what is not disputed is the growing 
volume  of  internationally  remitted  earn-
ings, which now outpace all other capital 
ﬂ ows to poor and middle-income countries. 
In 2007 the ﬂ ows of remittances to many 
developing  countries  surpassed  those  of 
foreign direct investment and equity for the 

ﬁ rst time.43 And these are only the ﬂ ows of 
remittances that governments and research-
ers can observe—just a fraction of what is 
actually sent through formal and informal 
channels. Allowing the freer ﬂ ow of skilled 
and unskilled labor across national borders 
would probably do more to reduce poverty 
in developing countries than any other sin-
gle policy or aid initiative.44

BOX 5.5     From Lewis to Lucas: the economic perspective on 

migration has changed

The insights from economists that have 
had the greatest impact on how policy 
makers view migration share similar ori-
gins, in theories of economic growth. 
The evolution of economic thought 
on migration—and particularly on the 
growth payoff  from clustering labor 
and talent in cities—spans the work 
of two Nobel Laureate economists, W. 
Arthur Lewis and Robert E. Lucas, Jr.

Lewis laid the foundations for 
the study of labor migration with 
his two-sector model of economic 
growth in developing countries. But 
theorists studying economic growth 
since Lewis took a diff erent path from 
those who used his insights to focus 
narrowly on labor migration.

The classical migration models 

inspired by Lewis assumed an exog-
enously determined and constant 
rate of economic growth. In sharp 
contrast, the new growth theorists—
inspired by Lucas’s contention that 
there are positive external spillovers 
from clustering human capital—
internalized growth in models that 
allowed for increasing returns to 
scale. The classical theories modeled 
each additional migrant as lower-
ing the probability of employment, 
contributing to urban unemploy-
ment, and raising congestion costs. 
The new growth theorists and later 
the proponents of urban agglom-
eration economies could imagine in 
that migrant an additional source of 
human capital to drive the agglom-
eration engine of growth.

In 2002 Lucas bridged the gaps 

between these diverging strands of 
the development literature, in a theo-

retical study of migration from rural to 
urban areas in low- and middle-income 
countries.a He posited a transfer of 
labor from a traditional sector, employ-
ing a land-intensive technology, to a 
modern human capital- intensive sec-
tor, with an unending potential for eco-
nomic growth. In Lucas’s model, cities 
are places where new immigrants can 
accumulate skills required by modern 
production technologies. In the con-
clusion to the paper, referring to the 
attraction to cities driven by gains from 
agglomeration, he writes:
“Even in the rapidly growing economies 
of the post-colonial world, the passage 
from a 90 percent agricultural economy to 
one that is 90 percent urban is a matter of 
decades. Since everyone has the option to 
migrate earlier rather than later, something 
must occur as time passes that makes the 
city a better and better destination.”b

The new insight from theories that 
acknowledged spillovers from cluster-
ing human capital is that, while the 
returns to scale in agriculture are con-
stant, the returns to scale in manufac-
turing and services are increasing. The 
policy implications of adopting one 
view or the other are profoundly diff er-
ent. A policy maker persuaded by the 
classical view would restrict the move-
ment of labor, particularly fl ows of 
migrants from villages to towns and cit-
ies. In contrast, a policy maker who rec-
ognizes the external benefi ts of human 
capital would do exactly the opposite, 
facilitating migration and clustering, 
particularly of workers with skills.

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Lucas Jr. 2004. 
b. Lucas Jr. 2004. 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   161
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   161

10/10/08   9:36:09 AM
10/10/08   9:36:09 AM

162 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Labor  migration  promotes  growth. 
Within countries, the accumulated empiri-
cal  evidence  shows  that  labor  migration 
increases the earnings prospects of people 
who move. It also shows that labor migra-
tion  contributes  to  aggregate  growth  by 
improving the distribution of labor, driv-
ing concentration. And by clustering skills 
and talent, migration drives agglomeration 
spillovers. In the United Kingdom the esti-
mated  long-run  wage  premium  for  men 
who  migrate  is  about  14  percent,  and  for 
women  about  11  percent.45  Wage  premi-
ums ranging from 7 percent to 11 percent 
have been found among internal migrants 
in the United States.46 These gains for indi-
vidual migrants translate into gains for the 
broader economy. In many countries high 
rates of internal labor mobility have been 
associated  with  periods  of  sustained  eco-
nomic growth, as in the United States from 
1900 to 2000,47 Brazil from 1950 to 1975,48 
Japan from 1950 to 1975,49 the Republic of 
Korea from 1970 to 1995,50 and China from 
1980 to 2005. Among a selection of develop-
ing countries with comparable measures of 
internal migration drawn from household 
surveys,  a  positive  association  is  found 
between internal labor mobility and eco-
nomic growth (see ﬁ gure 5.7).

Figure 5.7    Internal labor mobility and economic growth often go together

Migrants as % of population
30

25

20

15

10

5

0
–15

–10

–5

0

5

10

Growth of GDP per capita in year before survey

Source: WDR 2009 team estimates using selected household surveys.
Note: Marker shows land area of country. Marker in the upper-left-hand corner is República Bolivariana de 
Venezuela in 2004.

Research in Bangladesh, China, the Phil-
ippines, and Vietnam suggests that internal 
migration has helped to drive growth.51 In 
Brazil  internal  migration  has  raised  pro-
ductivity by allowing producers to reap the 
beneﬁ ts  of  agglomeration.52  Conversely, 
in China, restrictions on the movement of 
labor impede growth by constraining city 
size. Because Chinese cities are kept artiﬁ -
cially smaller than they might otherwise be, 
the country has experienced welfare losses 
from forgone higher growth rates.53 And in 
India past restrictions on the movement of 
labor may have kept the size of Indian cit-
ies inefﬁ ciently small, at a cost in forgone 
growth (see box 5.6).54 Internal migrants 
are clearly economically active. In 24 of the 
35 countries with comparable survey indi-
cators, migrants are as or more likely than 
locally native people of working age to be 
employed (see ﬁ gure 5.8).

In  today’s  developed  countries,  lead-
ing and lagging areas converged.  As  for 
earnings and living standards between the 
leading and lagging areas, historical evi-
dence of the impact of the internal labor 
movement during the nineteenth century 
in  today’s  developed  countries  supports 
convergence.

At  the  start  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
the majority of nonindigenous people in the 
United States lived on the eastern seaboard. 
By century’s end, more than 2 million square 
miles had been added to the country’s origi-
nal land area (see “Geography in Motion 1: 
Overcoming Distance in North America”). 
Robust institutions were critical in settling 
such a large land mass. The U.S. Constitu-
tion  along  with  the  Northwest  Ordinance 
(1787)  provided  the  framework  for  trans-
forming unsettled areas into states. Factor 
mobility  was  enhanced  by  the  commerce 
clause  in  the  Constitution,  explicitly  pro-
hibiting state governments from restraining 
trade across state boundaries. State and local 
governments  provided  public  goods  and 
infrastructure to attract settlers. In the 1820s 
real  wages  of  “common”  (unskilled)  non-
farm labor were about 33 percent higher in 
the Midwest than in the Northeast. Between 
1820 and 1860, the Midwest’s share of the 
unskilled  northern  labor  force  rose  from 
23 to 45 percent. As the Midwest’s share of 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   162
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   162

10/10/08   9:36:10 AM
10/10/08   9:36:10 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

163

BOX 5.6    Implicit barriers to mobility: place-based entitlement and divisions in India

Policy barriers to internal mobility in India 
are imposed by omission rather than by 
commission, exemplifying the implicit 
obstacles to migration in many develop-
ing countries. Current policies do not 
allow communities to fully capture the 
benefi ts of labor mobility. The costs and 
risks of migration would be signifi cantly 
lowered by greater fl exibility in the way 
households use public services and 
social entitlements, and in the deploy-
ment of targeted assistance for mobile 
populations. Negative attitudes held by 
government and ignorance of the ben-
efi ts of population mobility have caused 
migration to be overlooked as a force in 
economic development.

Recent evidence shows that population 
mobility in India—having stabilized in the 
1970s and 1980s—is rising. India’s 1961 
census classifi ed 33 percent of the popula-

tion as internal migrants—people living 
and working in a place other than where 
they were born. The share of migrants is 
larger in cities (about 40 percent of the 
population) than in rural areas (about 30 
percent). But by far the largest fl ows of 
migrants—within districts, across districts, 
and across states—are from lagging rural 
to leading rural areas. Since the 1960s 
rural-to-rural migration fl ows typically 
have been more than twice the volume as 
the next largest fl ows, from rural areas to 
cities. Rural-rural migration accounted for 
roughly 62 percent of all movements in 
1999–2000. Workers from lagging states 
like Bihar, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Uttar 
Pradesh routinely travel to the developed 
green revolution states of Gujarat, Maha-
rashtra, and Punjab to work on farms. 
In India both distance and division 

limit labor mobility. The highest levels of 

Internal migrants in India flow to prospering Delhi and Maharashtra
Internal migrant flows reported in 2001 census

MAHARASHTRA

HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

PUNJAB
PUNJAB
PUNJAB

HAHARYANRYANAA
HARYANA

DELHI
DELHI
DELHI

DELHI

UTTARANCHAL
UTTARANCHAL

UTTARANCHAL

SIKKIM
SIKKIM
SIKKIM

HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

PUNJAB
PUNJAB
PUNJAB

HAHARYANRYANAA
HARYANA
131,895
131,895

DELHI
DELHI
DELHI

UTTARANCHAL
UTTARANCHAL
UTTARANCHAL

SIKKIM
SIKKIM
SIKKIM

RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN

UTUTTARTAR
UTTAR
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN

UTUTTARTAR
UTTAR
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

GUJARAT
GUJAR
GUJARAATT

MADHYA PRADESH
MADHMADHYA PRADES
YA PRADESHH

CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 

MAHARASHTRA

12,505,916

ANDHRA
ANDHRA
ANDHRA
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

BIHAR
BIHAR
BIHAR

JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND

WESTWEST
WEST
BENGAL
BENGAL
BENGAL

ORISSA
ORISSA
ORISSA

MADHMADHYA PRADES
YA PRADESHH
MADHYA PRADESH

GUJARAT
GUJAR
GUJARAATT

MAHARASHTRA
MAHARASHTRA
MAHARASHTRA

CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 

BIHAR
BIHAR
BIHAR

JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND

WESTWEST
WEST
BENGAL
BENGAL
BENGAL

ORISSA
ORISSA
ORISSA

ANDHRA
ANDHRA
ANDHRA
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

GOA

KARNATAKA
KARNKARNATAKATAKAA

GOA

KARNKARNATAKATAKAA
KARNATAKA

PUNJAB

HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

1,712,627 PUNJAB
PUNJAB
PUNJAB
PUNJAB

UTTARANCHAL
UTTARANCHAL
UTTARANCHAL

UTTAR PRADESH

HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
HIMACHAL
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

PUNJAB
PUNJAB
PUNJAB

HAHARYANRYANAA
HARYANA

DELHI
DELHI
DELHI

UTTARANCHAL
UTTARANCHAL
UTTARANCHAL

SIKKIM
SIKKIM
SIKKIM

UTUTTARTAR
UTTAR

PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

8,969,367

BIHAR
BIHAR
BIHAR

RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN

MEGHALAYA

GUJARAT
GUJAR
GUJARAATT

MADHYA PRADESH
MADHMADHYA PRADES
YA PRADESHH

MAHARASHTRA
MAHARASHTRA
MAHARASHTRA

JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND

WEST
WESTWEST
BENGAL
BENGAL
BENGAL

ORISSA
ORISSA
ORISSA

CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 

HAHARYANRYANAA
HARYANA

DELHI
DELHI
DELHI

RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN
RAJASTHAN

UTUTTARTAR
UTTAR
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

SIKKIM
SIKKIM
SIKKIM

BIHAR
BIHAR
BIHAR

JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND
JHARKHAND

WEST
WESTWEST
BENGAL
BENGAL
BENGAL

ORISSA
ORISSA
ORISSA

GUJARAT
GUJAR
GUJARAATT

MADHMADHYA PRADES
YA PRADESHH
MADHYA PRADESH

CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 
CHHATTISGARH 

MAHARASHTRA
MAHARASHTRA
MAHARASHTRA

ANDHRA
ANDHRA
ANDHRA
ANDHRA
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

GOA

GOA

12,505,916

KARNATAKA
KARNATAKA
KARNATAKA
KARNATAKA

Number of within-state migrants

KARNATAKA
KARNATAKA
KARNATAKA
KARNATAKA
Migration totals
1,000,000
500,000
Source: WDR 2009 team, based on census data from the Census of India.

ANDHRA
ANDHRA
ANDHRA
ANDHRA
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH
PRADESH

100,000
50,000

movement are recorded within the same 
district. The fl ow of migrants across state 
lines is a trickle. Since 2001 there has 
been a slowdown in permanent or long-
term migration (see the map below). The 
share of lifetime (permanent) interstate 
migrants—at about 4 percent—is much 
lower than the total migrant population. 
Most of these permanent migrants live in 
cities. In addition to geographic distance, 
the strong diff erences in culture and lan-
guage can discourage movement far from 
a person’s home place.

Although offi  cial data sets indicate 
a slowdown in permanent rural-urban 
migration, microstudies fi nd that circular 
migration is emerging as a dominant 
form of migration among the poor. 
Short-term migrants have been esti-
mated to number 12.6 million but recent 
microstudies suggest that the fi gure is 30 
million and rising.

The economic benefi ts of migration 
are not always recognized by policy        
makers. Two forms of policy have been 
attempted to counter migration in India. 
The fi rst response has been to increase 
rural employment, in an attempt to stem 
movement out of rural areas. This policy 
implicitly assumes that deteriorating 
agriculture leads to out-migration and 
that improved employment opportuni-
ties in lagging rural areas can reduce 
or reverse migration. These measures 
include the recently introduced National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Program, 
which promises 100 days of wage labor 
to one adult member in every rural 
household who volunteers for unskilled 
work, numerous watershed development 
programs that aim to improve agricultural 
productivity, and programs to develop 
small and medium towns. 

The second policy response is implicit. 

MEGHALAYA

Because of the perceived negative 
eff ects, local governments remain hos-
tile toward migrants, while employers 
routinely disregard laws to protect their 
rights and needs. In many cases welfare 
policies and social services are designed 
for a sedentary population. This is best 
exemplifi ed by location-specifi c entitle-
ments to social services, housing subsi-
dies, food rations, and other public ame-
nities especially important to working 
poor people.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   163
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   163

10/10/08   9:36:11 AM
10/10/08   9:36:11 AM

164 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Figure 5.8    Internal migrants are more likely to work than natives
Comparison of internal migrants and native workers

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

% employed

Malawi
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Azerbaijan
Mauritania
Armenia
Morocco
Tajikistan
Haiti
Micronesia
Bulgaria
Kazakstan
Croatia
Mongolia
Albania
Venezuela, R.B. de
Guatemala
Dominican Republic
Honduras
Nicaragua
Sierra Leone
Romania
Colombia
Argentina
Ecuador
Brazil
Bolivia
Paraguay
Costa Rica
Mozambique
Madagascar
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Vietnam
Kyrgyz Republic
Cambodia
Rwanda

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

% unemployed

Employed natives (top axis)
Employed migrants (top axis)

Unemployed natives (bottom axis)
Unemployed migrants (bottom axis)

Source: WDR 2009 team using household surveys.

the labor force increased, its wage advantage 
eroded to roughly 17 percent in the 1850s, 
and to 10 percent in the four decades after 
the Civil War. State data on farm wages point 
to a long-term narrowing of geographic wage 
differences  in  response  to  internal  migra-
tion, a process that can be dated back even 
before the Civil War.55

In France wage differences between the 
Paris metropolitan area and the countryside, 

large in the mid-nineteenth century, eroded 
as labor poured into the city. More gener-
ally, wage differences across French dépar-
téments  narrowed  signiﬁ cantly  over  the 
second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century. 
Across  Canadian  cities,  wage  differences 
evolved  precisely  as  would  be  expected  if 
Canadian migrants treated the entire coun-
try as a single labor market.56 And across 
England  wage  differences  did  not  erode 
much  during  industrialization.  This  was 
not because the labor force was immobile, 
as history shows English labor moved freely 
from low- to high-wage areas. Rather, it was 
because the forces that sustained industrial 
development  in  various  parts  of  England 
were so persistent that internal migration 
in any one period was not enough to cause 
wage gaps to decline.57

Throughout the twentieth century, labor 
mobility continued to be integral to con-
centration and convergence across the two 
geographically expansive and economically 
prosperous  countries  of  North  America. 
In  the  United  States  labor  mobility  was 
greater than in Europe, distributing labor 
from low- to high-wage states, converging 
state per capita incomes through most of 
the twentieth century.58 With the notable 
exception of the U.S. South (see box 5.7), 
regional  convergence  in  wage  rates  coin-
cided  with  cross-regional  labor  market 
institutions and information ﬂ ows.59 Simi-
larly, in Canada, labor mobility continued 
to  narrow  per  capita  income  differences 
among  Canadian  provinces  from  1910  to 
1921. And when internal migration petered 
to a trickle between 1921 and 1960, conver-
gence in income also slowed.60

Disparities  in  income  and  welfare 
between places were higher in the 15 coun-
tries of Western Europe where labor mobil-
ity  has  been  much  lower  than  in  North 
America  throughout  the  twentieth  cen-
tury. The variation in employment across 
subnational  areas  of  the  United  States  is 
much  lower  than  that  across  subnational 
economic  areas  of  the  European  Union 
(EU).  In  parts  of  the  EU  where  employ-
ment is highest, the employment rate is 60 
percent higher than where it is lowest. In 
the United States the difference is only 22 
percent.61  The  greater  equity  in  employ-
ment  outcomes  in  the  United  States  is  a 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   164
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   164

10/10/08   9:36:11 AM
10/10/08   9:36:11 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

165

direct consequence of higher labor mobil-
ity and a more tightly integrated national 
labor market.62

Convergence,  after  divergence,  in 
developing countries. More recent empir-
ical  studies  show  the  positive  impact  of 
net migration on income convergence in 
Japan.63  So  do  estimates  from  India,  the 
Russian Federation, and the United King-
dom.64 These studies may underestimate 
the full impact of migration on the con-
vergence in living standards by failing to 
take  into  account  the  differing  skills  of 
migrants ﬂ owing in and out of areas, and 
by  ignoring  the  indirect  negative  impact 
of  housing  and  labor  market  rigidities. 
Analysis  that  distinguishes  between  (1) 
the ﬂ ow of skilled and unskilled migrants 
and  (2)  the  levels  of  human  capital  in 
migrants’ places of origin and destination 
shows a large impact of labor mobility on 
convergence.

Much of the empirical evidence of the 
impact  of  internal  migration  from  low- 
and  middle-income  countries  is  consis-
tent  with  expected  convergence,  after  an 
initial divergence. As Japan grew, regional 
income  inequality  followed  a  bell-shaped 
curve, initially increasing in 1955–61, but 
then falling in 1961–75. Research attributes 
the  convergence  to  labor  migration.65  In 
China after the economic reforms of 1978, 
income  differences  between  subprovin-
cial areas initially widened after economic 
reforms  from  1978–96,  but  later  declined 
with greater integration and internal labor 
migration.66 In India and Indonesia higher 
internal  labor  mobility  is  associated  with 
lower  income  inequality,67  and  migra-
tion increased equality in Mexico. But in 
Chile, lower-than-expected rates of inter-
nal  migration  may  be  to  blame  for  high 
income inequality.68 And in Brazil, where 
both social inequality and spatial mobility 
of  labor  are  high,  some  research  suggests 
that inequality would be even higher if not 
for internal migration.69

Most early research on internal migra-
tion and convergence across areas within 
countries  focused  only  on  a  small  part 
of migration as an economic force: labor 
market adjustments and changes in wage 
differences  between  areas.  The  impact 
of  remittances  was  ignored.  Yet  in  Sub-

BOX 5.7     Why did the U.S. South take so long to catch up? 

Division. 

Researchers have long questioned 
why wages and incomes in the U.S. 
South were so diff erent from the rest 
of the country for so long. Although 
wages and incomes in the South 
have caught up, particularly since the 
Great Depression, the process seems 
to have been remarkably slow before 
the 1940s (see “Geography in Motion 
1: Overcoming Distance in North 
America”).

Before the New Deal, the southern 

labor market was isolated from the 
rest of the country, with large wage 
gaps. Yet, there was little migration 
out of the southern states, even 
among African Americans who suf-
fered the lowest wages and the most 
social discrimination and political 
disenfranchisement. Before the 1920s 
demand for low-skilled labor in the 
industrializing North was satisfi ed 
by migrating workers from Europe. 
Employers in northern factories 
showed a preference for low-skilled 
European immigrants over blacks, 
and the abundance of European 
migrants made it aff ordable to 
indulge this preference. This would 
change with the restrictions on 
movement across borders, tightened 
in the 1930s.

Until World War II, there were few 
established fl ows of either informa-
tion or labor between the South 
and the North. Given the cumulative 
dependence of migration corridors, 
this impeded the movement of 
low-skilled workers of all races out 
of southern states. Southern work-

ers found opportunities by moving 
westward.

Even when the fl ows of migrants 

from the South to the North began to 
grow, wage and income diff erences 
persisted. Scholars explain that the 
Great Migration of rural southern 
blacks to northern cities involved a 
disproportionately educated seg-
ment of the population. After World 
War II, the selective migration of 
African Americans moderated, with 
return migration associated with eco-
nomic growth in the South.

With the gradual buildup of infor-

mation and migration corridors 
between North and South, the elimi-
nation of legal racial discrimination in 
the wake of the civil rights movement, 
and the improvement in the educa-
tion of African Americans students 
with the racial integration of schools, 
the wages and incomes in southern 
states gradually converged with those 
in northern states. Indeed, since the 
1970s, labor migration between the 
North and the South and other areas 
of the United States has been a safety 
valve easing economic pressure dur-
ing recessions. The diff ering impact 
of economic downturns across areas 
of the country have spurred large 
movements of workers from states 
where the economy was contracting 
to other, more prosperous areas. In 
the early 1990s, a sizable number of 
workers migrated from the Northeast 
to states in the South.
Sources: Rosenbloom and Sundstrom 
2003; Margo 2004; and Vigdor 2006.

 Saharan  Africa,  remittances  account  for 
15  percent  of  rural  income.  In  Uganda 
labor  mobility  has  a  positive  effect  on 
household  expenditure.  Comparable 
households enjoy much higher per capita 
spending if they migrate within their own 
district or to another district than if they 
stay in their native area. The incomes of 
Ugandans  who  migrate  from  lagging  to 
leading areas are 10 to 60 percent higher 
than nonmigrants in origin or destination 
areas.70 In Tanzania, in the Kagera region 
between 1991 and 2004, internal migration 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   165
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   165

10/10/08   9:36:12 AM
10/10/08   9:36:12 AM

166 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

added 36 percentage points to consump-
tion growth.71

Remittances from internal migration have 
a positive impact in other developing regions 
as well. In Bangladesh temporary migrants to 
Dhaka send up to 60 percent of their income 
to  family  members  in  their  home  places, 
covering  a  large  share  of  the  household 
budgets of migrant-sending households. In 
several Latin American countries remitted 
earnings not only augment the consumption 
of receiving households, but also lower the 
incidence of poverty in their communities72 

Table 5.4    Most migrants move for economic reasons, but many are pushed out by 
poor services

Percentage of internal migrants reporting reason for migration

To seek 

employment 
or join family 

For education, 
health, or better 
living conditions

For sociopolitical
or other reasons 

Malawi
Morocco
Romania
Ecuador
Nicaragua
Albania
Mozambique
Vietnam
Armenia
Tajikistan
Kazakstan
Bolivia
Dominican Republic
Cambodia
Paraguay
Guatemala
Bulgaria
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Kyrgyz Rep
Madagascar
Bosnia & Herzegovina
Rwanda
Azerbaijan
Mongolia
Sierra Leone
Mauritania

95
91
87
86
84
82
81
80
78
78
77
77
76
75
74
72
71
69
69
62
55
54
44
41
23
23

1
2
10
12
5
11
4
7
1
10
14
17
21
2
24
24
28
6
28
28
1
5
5
28
3
74

4
7
3
2
11
7
15
13
21
12
9
6
3
24
2
4
0
25
3
11
43
41
52
30
74
4

Source: WDR 2009 team estimates using household survey data.
Note: “Sociopolitical” refers to different circumstances and events, depending on the country and year 
speciﬁ ed, that lead to involuntary internal displacement.

and increase the investment in education.73 
And in East Asia remittances from migrant 
family  members  increase  investment  in 
education  and  capital-intensive  household 
enterprises  in  the  Philippines.74  In  China 
the ministry of agriculture expects that the 
remittances  of  migrant  workers  will  soon 
be more than earnings from agriculture for 
rural households.

For the communities left behind, inter-
nal  migration  is  critical  for  overcom-
ing  poverty  and  smoothing  household 
consumption  in  the  wake  of  unexpected 
shocks. Indeed, World Development Report 
2008 Agriculture for Development identiﬁ es 
internal migration as an important “path-
way  out  of  poverty”  for  rural  households 
that can no longer rely solely on agriculture 
for their livelihood.75 Even in situations in 
which supporting the permanent resettle-
ment from villages to cities may be fairly 
costly,  within  the  means  of  only  better-
off  households,  seasonal  and  temporary 
migration can more immediately mitigate 
downward shocks to consumption in rural 
areas  than  even  the  best-designed  social 
assistance program.76

Members  of  rural  households  in  Ban-
gladesh migrate to cities to diversify house-
hold income when harvests are lower than 
expected.  Internal  migration  in  China 
raises  the  consumption  of  households  in 
migrants’  home  communities,  and  the 
increase is greater for poorer households. 
And  the  out-migration  of  Chinese  work-
ers allows those who remain in rural areas 
to  work  more.  The  gains  associated  with 
internal migration increase housing wealth 
and consumer durables as well as agricul-
tural  production.77  Indeed,  the  selective 
phenomenon that determines who moves 
seems to work both ways. Those with higher 
academic achievement choose to migrate to 
jobs in China’s cities, and people who are 
better at farming choose to stay.78

Pulled  or  pushed?  The  development 
beneﬁ ts of migration are seen when peo-
ple  move  voluntarily.  Large  numbers 
of  people—particularly  in  the  poorest 
c ountries—are  also  forced  to  move  by 
deteriorating  living  conditions  and  con-
ﬂ ict.  People  are  “pushed”  off  their  land 
when  agriculture  is  in  decline,  by  the 
pressures of population growth, and when 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   166
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   166

10/10/08   9:36:12 AM
10/10/08   9:36:12 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

167

environmental  change  makes  continued 
cultivation  of  certain  areas  no  longer 
viable.  Historically,  droughts  have  had 
sudden and prolonged impacts on the dis-
tribution of the population, particularly in 
Sub-Saharan Africa79 and South Asia.80 

Another  important  “push”  that  pro-
pels  internal  migration—mundane,  but 
no  less  critical—is  the  lack  of  adequate 
public services (see table 5.4 and box 5.8). 

In  many  developing  countries,  schools, 
health  care  centers,  hospitals,  and  public 
and private amenities are located in areas 
of economic activity. With a concentration 
of  economic  mass,  public  services  can  be 
withdrawn from smaller towns and villag-
es.81 Several studies document the migra-
tion to large economic centers by people in 
search of better education and health ser-
vices.82 This movement, though voluntary, 

BOX 5.8    Migrating to economic density: rational decisions or bright lights?

Twenty percent of poor men born in Brazil’s 
Northeast—one of the country’s lagging 
areas—now live in its prosperous South-
east. A large demographic shift occurred 
from villages to towns and cities in the 
1970s, and from towns to cities in the 1990s. 

Economists have long argued that 
migration decisions are motivated by 

the possibility of earning higher wages. 
But since many migrants do not fi nd jobs 
after moving, this attraction may be irra-
tional. Some policy makers in developing 
countries believe that rather than adding 
to the economy in their new neighbor-
hoods, migrants subtract from them by 
worsening the problems of livability. This 

Brazilians move to the prosperous Southeast
Internal migration of adults, ages 25–35, based on reported region of birth in 1991 and 2001 
censuses

N O R T H

762 (1991)
788 (2000)

BRAZIL

NORTHEAST

CENTER-WEST

45,672 (1991)
57,131 (2000)

2,839 (1991)
4,117 (2000)

Brasília

SOUTHEAST

Population that did not migrate

1991

2000

14,697 (1991)
17,228 (2000)

SOUTH

300,000
200,000

100,000

30,000

1991

2000

15,000
10,000
5,000
2,000

Source: WDR 2009 team, based on census data from the Instituto Brasileiro de Geograﬁ a e Estatística.

belief has resulted in deterrents ranging 
from disincentives to draconian regula-
tions to limit the movement of people.
Recent empirical evidence from four 
decades of Brazilian census data shows 
something diff erent. Working-age men 
migrated not only to look for better jobs 
but also to get better access to basic public 
services such as piped water, electricity, 
and health care. Results from models of 
migration behavior that focus only on the 
migrant’s desire to move in search of better 
jobs can be biased, because places with 
better public services also have more job 
opportunities. Firms like to locate where 
workers would like to live. By ignoring 
the importance of public services, some 
econometric estimates may overstate a 
migrant’s willingness to move in response 
to wage diff erences.

To determine how much public services 

matter, a rich data set of public services 
at the municipality level was combined 
with individual records from the Brazilian 
census to evaluate the relative importance 
of wage diff erences and public services 
in the migrant’s decisions to move. Pre-
dictably, wage diff erences are the main 
factor infl uencing migration choices. For 
the better off , basic public services are 
not important in the decision to move. 
But for the poor, diff erences in access to 
basic public services mattered. In fact, 
poor migrants are willing to accept lower 
wages to get access to better services. A 
Brazilian minimum wage worker earning 
R$7 per hour (about US$2.30 in February 
2008) was willing to pay R$420 a year to 
have access to better health services, R$87 
for better water supply, and R$42 for elec-
tricity. Poor migrants are rational.

Contributed by Somik Lall and Christopher 
Timmins.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   167
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   167

10/10/08   9:36:13 AM
10/10/08   9:36:13 AM

168 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 5.9     Too early to tell? The impact of African emigrants 

on Africa

The brain drain is debated most 
heatedly for Sub-Saharan Africa. Con-
cern is justifi ed, but emigrants and 
diaspora groups have contributed 
much to Africa’s development.

Early accounts of voluntary migra-
tion from Africa tell of small numbers 
of Africans going abroad to study 
in religious schools and monaster-
ies in Europe in the 1700s. Many of 
these students translated the Bible 
into African languages. In doing so, 
they produced some of the earli-
est attempts to introduce written 
text to what were predominantly 
oral- language traditions. One such 
student, Jacobus Capitein, who emi-
grated from what would become 
Ghana to study in the Netherlands, is 
credited for spreading the use of the 
written word in his native country.

Another Ghanaian, Kwegyir Aggrey, 
from a later generation of emigrants, 
traveled to the United States to study 
at Columbia University. With the sup-

port of American philanthropists, 
he returned to Ghana to found the 
country’s fi rst nondenominational 
school, which would later become 
the University of Ghana. Many of the 
region’s seats of learning have similar 
origins. 

Most of Africa’s independence 
leaders were part of what might 
have been termed a brain drain in 
the 1930s and 1940s. Kamuzu Banda, 
Jomo Kenyatta, Julius Nyerere, and 
others were from a generation of stu-
dents who emigrated to the United 
States and Europe and formed plans 
to fi ght for independence. 

The economic and social contribu-
tion of these emigrants to their coun-
tries of origin are diffi  cult to quantify 
but impossible to deny, and have 
made all the diff erence to the devel-
opment prospects of Sub-Saharan 
Africa.

Source: Easterly and Nyarko 2008.

is more likely to add to congestion costs in 
cities than to agglomeration beneﬁ ts.

International brain drains—or gains? 
There  is  concern  about  the  volume  of 
skilled workers leaving Sub-Saharan Africa 
and the Caribbean. As a percentage of the 
total stock of highly educated people, the 
number of skilled emigrants looks high. On 
the whole, though, most skilled migrants 
to  high-income  countries  come  from  the 
larger  middle-income  countries  like  Bra-
zil and India. Migration prospects in these 
countries induce more human capital accu-
mulation, increasing not only the number 
of skilled migrants but also the skills of the 
global workforce generally.83 A “brain gain” 
is  likely  when  the  rate  of  emigration  of 
skilled workers from a country is between 
5  and  10  percent.  Concern  arises  for  the 
stunted  development  prospects  of  some 
countries  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  Central 
America,  and  the  Caribbean,  where  the 
emigration of skilled labor is much higher. 
In 2000 the rate of skilled emigration from 
Sub-Saharan Africa was 13.1 percent, from 

Central  America  it  was  16.9  percent,  and 
from the Caribbean it was 42.8 percent.84

Critics of the “brain drain–brain gain” 
debate point out that it ignores real-world 
patterns of international migration. Skilled 
workers  do  not  “drain  away”  as  much  as 
“circulate”  among  countries  in  the  world 
economy.  The  beneﬁ ts  of  attracting  and 
retaining skilled people do not have to be 
distributed  in  a  zero-sum  game  among 
countries.  In  addition  to  the  large  ﬂ ows 
of international remittances, many skilled 
migrants work hard to return to their coun-
tries with improved prospects as entrepre-
neurs, armed with capital, new skills, and 
ideas. Several political, academic, and busi-
ness leaders in developing countries began 
as emigrants (see box 5.9). Cross-country 
research on the determinants of economic 
growth has not found evidence of a nega-
tive impact associated with the emigration 
of people with skills.85

Practical policies for managing 
migration
Not everyone chooses to migrate. Moving 
can  be  a  costly,  difﬁ cult,  and  disruptive 
decision. Indeed, a generation of research 
shows that the movements of labor—from 
villages to towns, between towns and cit-
ies, across borders in the same region, and 
from poor to distant wealthy countries—
are selective. Migrants are not the same as 
people who stay behind. And while many 
individuals move in search of a better job 
or  higher  education,  many  others—par-
ticularly  those  in  the  rural  areas  of  low- 
and middle-income countries—seek basic 
schooling and health care for their families. 
But this migration is economically inefﬁ -
cient. By overlooking the provision of basic 
social services in outlying areas—such as 
schools, primary health centers, and even 
basic  public  infrastructure—policy  mak-
ers can unwittingly inﬂ uence the choice to 
migrate,  motivating  households  to  move 
for reasons other than to exploit economic 
opportunities.  While  the  move  is  welfare 
improving for these families, the economy 
may end up worse off.

By focusing more attention on provid-
ing  education,  health,  and  social  services 
in  outlying,  economically  lagging  areas, 

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   168
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   168

10/10/08   9:36:14 AM
10/10/08   9:36:14 AM

 

Factor Mobility and Migration 

169

Table 5.5    What does a practical policy toward migration do? Recognize agglomeration beneﬁ ts.

Internal migration

Cross-border migration within 
regional neighborhoods

Cross-border migration 
outside regional 
neighborhoods

Source: WDR 2009 team.

Migration of unskilled labor
Neutral, but discouraging if agglomeration economies 
are unlikely. Policies should encourage migration 
for economic reasons and discourage migration in 
search of public services. Remove explicit and implicit 
restrictions as well as place-based service entitlements.
Supportive, particularly for welfare and diversiﬁ cation 
gains from remitted earnings.

Supportive, particularly for welfare gains from remitted 
earnings.

Migration of skilled labor
Strongly supportive, particularly to capture agglomeration 
gains where these are likely. Invest in services in peripheral 
areas to build portable human capital. Increase the ﬂ ow of 
labor market information, so migrants arrive better informed 
of employment possibilities.
Supportive, where markets in regional neighborhoods are 
integrated and gains from agglomeration can spill over to the 
sending country.
Neutral, as there is a possible foregone agglomeration 
from an accelerated brain drain, but possible gains from 
knowledge transfer of return migrants, and strong incentives 
for human capital investment from the prospect of migrating.

governments  can  go  a  long  way  toward 
eliminating some of the reasons households 
are  pushed  to  migrate.  These  efforts  can, 
in turn, improve the quality of migration. 
Labor mobility that leads to greater concen-
tration of people and talent in locations of 
choice will contribute more to agglomera-
tion beneﬁ ts than it adds to congestion.

The impact of policies on the welfare of 
migrants and the broader economy should 
fuel  skepticism  of  attempts  to  restrict 
labor mobility. Encouragingly, there is a 
growing  shift  away  from  restrictions  on 
population mobility and toward facilita-
tion and encouragement. But other than 
allowing people to move and settle where 
they will earn the highest return on their 
labor  and  human  capital,  can  govern-
ments do more to help capture the ben-
eﬁ ts of agglomeration?

Migration results from forces that “pull” 
as well as those that “push” individuals to 
leave.  One  big  pull  is  the  agglomeration 
economies  in  cities.  But  people  are  also 
pushed out by the lack of social services. In 
Africa disparities in school enrollment and 
neonatal  care  between  cities,  towns,  and 
villages are attributable to the near absence 
of schools and health facilities in outlying 
areas.86 Evidence from Central Asia shows 
that  in  the  isolated  parts  of  Tajikistan, 
schools are inadequately heated, drinking 
water is scarce, and arrangements to clear 
garbage and sewage are lacking.87 In China 
the government is emphasizing a more even 
distribution of basic services to address the 
gaps in living standards between the coast 
and the interior. By prioritizing education, 
health, and social services in outlying areas 

over  other  investments,  governments  can 
eliminate some of the reasons households 
are  pushed  to  migrate.  These  efforts  can 
shape  the  composition  of  migration  in  a 
way that growing concentrations are more 
likely to add to agglomeration economies, 
rather than pile up congestion costs.

By  recognizing  the  selective  nature  of 
voluntary labor migration, and the implica-
tions of increasing returns to scale, the eco-
nomic arguments and empirical evidence 
in this chapter support a more positive view 
of labor mobility than that held by policy 
makers in poor and middle-income coun-
tries in the past. From this perspective, a 
practical policy stance will differ according 
to  the  human  capital  endowment  of  pro-
spective migrants and whether the agglom-
eration spillovers from clustering talent can 
be captured and taxed by governments (see 
table 5.5). 

All the evidence on the beneﬁ ts of educa-
tion suggests that policy makers should be 
concerned about the rapid loss of talent to 
countries far outside their regions. But the 
potential  costs  in  forgone  human  capital 
from outright restrictions on skilled emigra-
tion are high. A far more practical and sus-
tainable policy stance would operate along 
two tracks. First, raise the private, individual 
costs of acquiring human capital to match 
the private individual returns from migra-
tion of skilled workers abroad. Second, reap 
the beneﬁ ts from diaspora communities in 
the world’s prosperous places, by encourag-
ing their economic and political participa-
tion at home, and by making it easy for them 
to  retain  citizenship,  vote,  and  eventually 
resettle if they so choose.

WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   169
WDR09_11_Ch05.indd   169

10/10/08   9:36:15 AM
10/10/08   9:36:15 AM

CHAPTER 6

Transport Costs 
and Specialization

The  sharpest  insights  sometimes 

come from piecing together bits of 
information  that  separately  can  be 
innocuous  and  unsurprising.  In  the  mid-
1970s overseas transport costs had fallen to 
a fraction of what they were in 1900, thanks 
to such inventions as steam power and the 
telegraph. And the share of trade between 
neighboring countries in Europe had risen 
relative to their trade with countries more 
distant. In 1910 British exports were spread 
quite evenly between Europe (35 percent), 
Asia  (24  percent),  and  other  regions  (31 
percent).  By  1996,  60  percent  of  Britain’s 
exports went to Europe and only 11 percent 
to Asia.1 

Singly,  neither  fact  is  surprising. 
Together, they are exactly the opposite of 
what  standard  economics  would  predict. 
After all, transport costs should be a larger 
part  of  the  cost  of  goods  shipped  from 
half  a  world  away  than  for  goods  traded 
with neighbors. So a fall in transport costs 
should have meant more trade with distant 
partners  than  with  neighbors,  not  less. 
What had happened? 

Research  in  the  1980s  provides  the 
answer.2  Two  waves  of  globalization—a 
euphemism for falling transport and trade 
costs—were  responsible.  During  the  ﬁ rst 
wave  from  about  1840  to  World  War  I, 
transport costs fell enough to make large-
scale  trade  possible  between  places  based 
on their comparative advantage. So Britain 
traded machinery for Indian tea, Argentine 
beef, and Australian wool; trade increased 
between  distant  and  dissimilar  coun-
tries. During the second wave after 1950, 

transport costs fell low enough that small 
differences  in  products  and  tastes  fueled 
trade  between  similar  countries,  at  least 
in Europe and North America. Neighbors 
traded  different  types  of  beer  and  differ-
ent parts of cars, such as wheels and tires. 
Trade in parts and components grew to take 
advantage of specialization and economies 
of scale. The ﬁ rst wave of globalization was 
characterized  by  “conventional,”  inter-
industry trade that exploited differences in 
natural endowments, the second by a “new 
international trade” driven by economies of 
scale and product differentiation.

Transport  costs  and  scale  economies 
interact to produce the trade ﬂ ows observed 
in the past half-century.3 The main insight 
from  research  is  that  the  relationships 
between transport costs, production loca-
tions,  and  trade  patterns  are  nonlinear. 
Falling transport costs ﬁ rst led to countries 
trading more with countries that were dis-
tant but dissimilar. When they fell further, 
they  led  to  more  trade  with  neighboring 
countries. Similarly, when transport costs 
fell from moderate levels, production con-
centrated in and around large markets. 

In East Asia, as the costs of transporting 
goods by sea and air fell, the production of 
manufactured goods spread from Japan to 
neighboring economies such as Hong Kong, 
China; the Republic of Korea; and Taiwan, 
China. Production then moved to South-
east Asia, and now it has moved to China. 
With  a  fall  in  telecommunication  costs, 
large cities in the United States and Europe 
reaped  the  rewards  of  growing  markets. 
But as the costs of telecommunications fell 

170

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   170
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   170

10/8/08   11:11:46 AM
10/8/08   11:11:46 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

171

 further, services such as accounting and call 
centers moved to smaller cities in Europe 
and North America, and then, as they fell 
further,  to  cities  in  distant  India  and  the 
Philippines. 

Intraindustry  trade—the  exchange  of 
broadly  similar  goods  and  services—is 
perhaps  the  most  important  economic 
development  since  World  War  II.  Coun-
tries trade Samsung, Motorola, and Nokia 
phones; casings for television remotes; and 
buttons  and  stitching  for  textiles.  Such 
trade is now more than half of global trade, 
up  from  a  quarter  in  1962.  The  share  of 
intraindustry trade has gone up for all types 
of goods and services, from such primary 
goods as oil and natural gas, to such inter-
mediate inputs as auto parts and computer 
help-lines, to such ﬁ nal goods as food and 
beverages (see ﬁ gure 6.1, panel a). 

This is important because of the border-
related  divisions  identiﬁ ed  in  chapter  3. 
These divisions are barriers to movements 
of  capital  and  labor.  If  all  that  countries 
could trade were ﬁ nal goods, such as televi-
sions and cars, then convergence in living 
standards would be slow at best. With trade 
in  intermediate  inputs,  the  potential  for 
specialization and trade increases signiﬁ -
cantly. The efﬁ ciencies generated through 
specialization and scale economies in pro-
duction  and  transportation  have  indeed 
beneﬁ ted the world. But these beneﬁ ts have 
not been shared evenly (see ﬁ gure 6.1, panel 
b). East Asia, North America, and Western 
Europe  account  for  much  of  the  world’s 
intraindustry trade. 

This chapter explains why these regions 
account for this trade and what this means 
for developing countries. In good measure 
the reasons have to do with the interactions 
between  scale  economies  and  transport 
costs.  Transport  and  trade  costs  inﬂ uence 
trade volumes. A 10-percent increase in trade 
costs is estimated to reduce trade volumes 
by 20 percent.4 Trade in intermediate goods 
is especially sensitive to transport costs. If 
the share of imported intermediate inputs 
in ﬁ nal demand is large, small changes in 
transport costs can have large effects on the 
volume of trade ﬂ ows—the “trade friction” 
increases. For instance, a 5-percent increase 
in transport costs can produce trade friction 
equivalent to an ad valorem tax of almost 

50  percent,  when  the  share  of  intermedi-
ate inputs in value added is 70 percent.5 As 
transport costs fall, then, trade in intermedi-
ates would also increase rapidly.

“Circular  causation”  also  affects  trans-
port.  Trade  volumes  inﬂ uence  transport 
costs. On the trans-Paciﬁ c route, cost dif-
ferences between a “Panamax” unit of 4,000 

Figure 6.1    Intraindustry trade is becoming more important for all types of goods, but not in all 
world regions 
Evolution of global intraindustry trade, by 3-digit product group, 1962–2006

Grubel-Lloyd Index, 3-digit
0.6

a. By type of goods

Intermediate goods

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1962

Final goods

Primary goods

1966

1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

2006

Year

b. By region

Southern Africa

Western Africa

Central Africa

Northern Africa

Central Asia, Caucasus & Turkey

Eastern Africa

Western Asia

South Asia

Central America & Caribbean

South America

Eastern Europe & Russian Federation

Northeast Asia

Southeast Asia & Pacific

Western Europe

Australia & New Zealand

North America

0

1962
1975
1990
2006

0.2

0.3

0.1
0.6
Grubel-Lloyd Index, 3-digit, intraregional trade

0.4

0.5

0.7

Source: Brülhart 2008, for this Report.
Note: The Grubel-Lloyd Index is the fraction of total trade that is accounted for by intraindustry trade.

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   171
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   171

10/8/08   11:11:48 AM
10/8/08   11:11:48 AM

172 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

TEU (20-foot equivalent units, a measure of 
shipping  tonnage)  and  a  mega  post-Pana-
max unit of 10,000 TEU are 50 percent. But 
exploiting  these  cost  advantages  requires 
large  trade  volumes  and  high  capacity, 
because  economies  of  scale  are  available 
not  just  in  the  production  of  goods  and 
services but also in their transport. It costs 
about $400 to ship a container to the United 
States from China, about $800 to ship from 
India, and $1,300 to ship from Sierra Leone.6 
China’s enormous trade is almost certainly a 
reason for low transport costs, just as falling 
transport costs have encouraged countries to 
move production to China. Scale economies 
in transport mean that falling transport costs 
and increasing trade reinforce one another. 
The  Northern  Hemisphere  is  heavily 
trafﬁ cked,  with  ever-strengthening  trade 
links as intraindustry trade ﬂ ourishes (see 
map 6.1). But ships sail through or around 
Central  America,  South  Asia,  and  Sub-
 Saharan  Africa,  going  only  to  countries 
that  have  natural  resources  such  as  oil. 
Trade  passages  between  South  America 
and the most prosperous parts of the world 
are  narrow  roads,  not  the  busy  express-
ways  between  East  Asia,  North  America, 

and Western Europe. Global air and Inter-
net trafﬁ c maps show a similar imbalance. 
These developments should be disconcert-
ing for developing countries not integrated 
into these self-reinforcing production and 
trade networks. Scale economies in produc-
tion and transport will make it more difﬁ -
cult, not easier, for developing countries to 
enter these highly competitive markets. 

A  world  of  nonlinear  relationships 
and cumulative causation is a world with 
thresholds. Knowing how developing coun-
tries can get past these thresholds depends 
on where they are, what they produce, and 
the costs that traders must pay. In the devel-
oped world, the total trade and transport 
costs as a share of the value of goods can be 
split into 20 percent transport costs, 45 per-
cent border-related trade costs, and 55 per-
cent retail and wholesale distribution costs. 
These  costs  multiply,  piling  up  to  a  170 
percent tax on the value of goods and ser-
vices traded.7 What they show is that lower 
international transport costs have reduced 
distance but that trade costs due to inter-
national division remain high. Meanwhile, 
transport costs due to internal distance have 
stayed high even in the developed world.

Map 6.1    Busy seafaring in the North, little landfall in the South 
Intensity of shipping routes during one year beginning October 2004

Equator

Shipping routes
Container ports

Sources: Data from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Voluntary Observing Ships’ (VOS) scheme, processed by Halpern and others 2008. 
Note: Container ports shown are the 20 largest by TEU of total containers handled in 2005 (Heideloff and Zachcial 2006).

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   172
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   172

10/8/08   11:11:48 AM
10/8/08   11:11:48 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

173

Developing  countries  can  learn  how 
countries  have  reduced  transportation 
costs, including how trade has been stim-
ulated  and  new  technologies  developed. 
From the analysis of the past two decades, 
they can learn how spatial concentration of 
production may change as transport costs 
fall. What does this mean for latecomers to 
economic development? The main points: 

(cid:129)  Better  transport  technologies  devel-
oped  over  the  past  two  centuries  have 
increased the volume of trade and radi-
cally  altered  its  nature.  Before  World 
War I transport costs declined enough to 
make large-scale trade possible, but only 
between  countries  that  were  dissimilar. 
They happened to be countries that were 
distant, because big differences in climate 
and natural endowments usually meant 
the countries were in different parts of 
the  world  (Indonesia  and  the  Nether-
lands, for example). During the second 
wave following World War II, transport 
costs fell enough for small differences in 
products and tastes to fuel trade. This led 
to a rise in trade between countries that 
are similar (for instance, Argentina and 
Brazil), which often happen to be neigh-
bors.8  As  transport  costs  fall,  physical 
geography matters less. But with econo-
mies  of  scale  in  production,  economic 
geography matters more. 

(cid:129)  A  decline  in  transport  costs—with 
increasing returns to scale—generally 
means  more  spatial  concentration  of 
production.  Recent  thinking  in  eco-
nomics has emphasized the importance 
of transport costs in development. With 
high transport costs, large economies of 
scale will remain unexploited, and pro-
duction inefﬁ cient. Efﬁ cient production 
is  more  specialized.  When  transport 
costs fall, spatial differences in produc-
tion and economic growth will increase, 
both within and between countries. 

(cid:129)  Developing countries should pay more 
attention  to  transport  and  communi-
cations  regulations  to  reduce  trans-
port and trade costs. The new economic 
geography has inadvertently contributed 
to an exclusive policy focus on “hard” 
infrastructure. The most critical policy-

related aspects—the naturally monopo-
listic  nature  of  transport—have  been 
assumed  away.  Developing  countries 
should do more to address the negative 
effects of market structure in the trans-
port sector. And for some aspects of the 
agenda,  they  will  need  international 
support. 

What has happened: two centuries 
of experience
Falling  transport  costs  in  the  100  years 
or so before World War II brought closer 
economic integration within and between 
countries.  Then,  as  in  the  twentieth  cen-
tury,  the  fall  was  caused  by  large  infra-
structure investments and breakthroughs 
in transport technology. 

From the early nineteenth century to the 
beginning of World War I, the global econ-
omy went through what economic historians 
call the “ﬁ rst era of globalization.” Domes-
tically,  canals  and  then  railways  greatly 
reduced  transport  costs,  leading  to  larger 
integrated  home  markets  and  to  converg-
ing  prices  for  manufactured  and  agricul-
tural goods. The routing of these transport 
links greatly inﬂ uenced the rise and decline 
of  urban  agglomerations.  Internationally, 
steamships  lowered  maritime  transport 
costs and increased the speed and reliability 
of service. The results were narrower inter-
country price differences, expanding trade 
on routes that the new shipping technology 
could serve, and the emergence of large-scale 
interindustry trade. 

Domestic transport. Inland waterways 
and  railways  reduced  intercity  and  inter-
area  transport  costs  dramatically  in  the 
ﬁ rst half of the nineteenth century. Before 
the railway era, which started around 1830 
in  Europe,  most  transportation  was  on 
roads  or—50  to  75  percent  cheaper—on 
water. In the United States massive invest-
ment  in  canal  construction  completely 
changed interregional trade and shaped a 
new  urbanization  pattern.  The  construc-
tion  of  the  Erie  Canal  between  1817  and 
1825 reduced the cost of transport between 
Buffalo and New York City by 85 percent, 
cutting the journey time from 21 days to 
8. Productivity in the U.S. internal trans-
portation sector grew at an annual average 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   173
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   173

10/8/08   11:11:53 AM
10/8/08   11:11:53 AM

174 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

of  4.7  percent  in  the  four  decades  before 
the Civil War. British navigable waterways 
quadrupled between 1780 and 1820. French 
canal construction boomed similarly, and 
continental European countries made a big 
step toward overcoming division when the 
Congress  of  Vienna  recognized  the  free-
dom  of  navigation  on  the  Rhine  in  1815. 
Steamships appeared on important rivers 
and lakes in the early nineteenth century, 
drastically reducing travel times. 

The  major  nineteenth-century  devel-
opment  in  transport  was  the  expansion  of 
railroads,  which  quickly  surpassed  inland 
waterways  and  “performed  the  Smithian 
function of widening the market.”9 Cities no 
longer  just  provided  public  services—they 
attracted industries with increasing returns 
to scale, reaping productivity effects from the 
more specialized inputs and larger labor mar-
kets. In the United States the expansion of the 
railways had strong effects on the geographic 
distribution  of  economic  activity.  Illinois, 
Michigan, and Ohio had marked increases in 
population, construction, and manufactur-
ing with the new rail lines within and across 
their borders. One canal after another was 
abandoned. In 1850 boats carried six times 
the freight of railroads; by 1890 railroads car-
ried ﬁ ve times the freight of boats. The drop 
in transport costs narrowed price differences 
for agricultural goods between local markets 
dramatically. The spread in the wheat price 
between New York City and Iowa fell from 69 
percent to 19 percent from 1870 to 1910, and 
between New York City and Wisconsin from 
52 percent to 10 percent.10

Railways expanded less in Europe than 
in the United States, reﬂ ecting the national 
scope of rail systems and the smaller size 
of European countries.11 The higher freight 
transport intensity of U.S. rail propelled a 
further productivity increase. In 1910 the 
labor  productivity  in  American  railways 
was  3.3  times  that  in  Britain,  a  gap  that 
had doubled since 1870.12 Russian railway 
construction took off after the mid-1860s, 
spreading wheat and rye production with 
the narrowing of regional price differences. 
The  export  share  of  Russian  agriculture 
increased from 29 percent of the grain pro-
duced in European Russia to more than 42 
percent between 1906 and 1910.13 

India’s  rail  expansion  had  even  bigger 
impacts.  In  the  1860s  the  prices  in  some 
districts were 8 to 10 times higher than in 
others, and famines were common. The rail 
system reduced transport costs by about 80 
percent, and the coefﬁ cient of variation of 
wheat and rice prices fell from more than 
40 percent in 1870 to below 20 percent in 
the  decade  before  World  War  I.14  Lower 
transport costs had little effect on indus-
trial development, however. At the turn of 
the  eighteenth  century,  modern  industry 
employed 2 to 3 percent of India’s indus-
trial workers (about 10 percent of the work-
force). Modern factories were concentrated 
in two maritime trading hubs, Bombay and 
Bengal.15

International  transport.  The  invest-
ments in domestic transport created large 
and  integrated  home  markets.  Tariff  bar-
riers remained low, and international trade 
beneﬁ ted from technical and organizational 
progress, mostly in shipping. Ocean ship-
ping rates differed substantially for routes 
and  commodities,  reﬂ ecting  cost  differ-
ences  in  harbor  technologies,  ship  types, 
and stowage opportunities.16 But overall the 
trade costs for grain, the main internation-
ally traded good, fell by 40 percent between 
1880 and 1914 within Europe and between 
the United States and Europe. This substan-
tially reduced the price differences between 
exporting and importing countries. 

Liverpool  wheat  prices  exceeded  Chi-
cago prices by 58 percent in 1870, 18 per-
cent in 1895, and 16 percent in 1913.17 For 
nonagricultural  products,  the  reduction 
in  price  differences  was  no  less  impres-
sive. The  Boston-Manchester cotton textile 
price gap fell from 14 percent in 1870 to –4 
percent  in  1913,  while  the  pig  iron  price 
gap between Philadelphia and London fell 
from  85  percent  to  19  percent.18  Interna-
tional  prices  also  converged  in  European 
trade.  The  steamboat  initially  shifted  the 
relative importance of trade relations from 
European  and  Asian  routes  to  the  North 
Atlantic routes. Steamships could not serve 
Asia  until  the  opening  of  the  Suez  Canal 
because coal was not available on the long 
route around Africa.19

During  this  ﬁ rst  era  of  globalization, 
increasing competition from abroad due to 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   174
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   174

10/8/08   11:11:53 AM
10/8/08   11:11:53 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

175

declining transport costs gave rise to pro-
tectionist trade policies. In North America, 
during  the  Civil  War,  tariffs  reduced  the 
ﬁ nancial  burden  on  the  federal  govern-
ment, and they remained high after the war 
ended.  Continental  Europe  shifted  away 
from liberal trade policies in the late 1870s 
in response to cheap American and Russian 
grain. Tariffs were reintroduced on ﬁ nished 
manufactured and agricultural goods.

Increasing “transport intensity” and 
intraindustry trade in the modern era
Freight  costs  have  about  halved  since  the 
mid-1970s,20  driven  by  investments  in 
transport  infrastructure,  better  capacity 
use,  and  technological  progress.  Recent 
trends differed from those in the ﬁ rst era of 
globalization:21
(cid:129)  The major cost declines have been in road 
and  air  transport.  Maritime  transport 
went through the containerization revo-
lution without reducing costs overall.

(cid:129)  The surge in international trade has been 
within industries, not between them, as 
in the ﬁ rst episode of falling trade costs.
(cid:129)  Reduced  trade  friction  has  been  less  a 
consequence  of  falling  transport  costs 
than of a drop in freight costs as a share 
of the value of goods traded. Most of the 
increase in trade has been in easily sub-
stitutable goods.22

(cid:129)  Transport reforms and falling trade bar-
riers  have  contributed  substantially  to 
the fall in transport costs.

(cid:129)  Falling  communication  costs,  interact-
ing with falling transport costs, have been 
instrumental in fragmenting production 
processes  and  outsourcing  intermedi-
ate goods production. Relative wage dif-
ferences  have  become  more  important 
because  of  the  lower  costs  of  managing 
production processes over long distances.

Road  transport  costs.  Road  transport 
costs have fallen substantially, by almost 40 
percent over the past three decades, despite 
higher  energy  and  wage  costs.  (Compre-
hensive  statistics  on  prices  for  transport 
services do not exist, and the implementa-
tion of price indexes as part of the system 
of national accounts is still in its infancy. 

Empirical  assessment  therefore  depends 
on the estimation of transport costs.) One 
study in France shows that truck transport 
costs fell by 33 percent between 1978 and 
1998,23  with  substantial  regional  varia-
tion  due  to  the  differences  in  the  quality 
of roads and the charges for road use. The 
main contributors were the deregulation of 
the trucking industry (a reduction of 21.8 
percentage  points)  and  the  lower  vehicle 
costs (–10.9 percentage points). Transport 
infrastructure (–3.2 percentage points) and 
declining fuel costs (–2.8 percentage points) 
were much less important. 

Rail  freight  costs.  Rail  costs  fell  much 
less  than  road  costs.  Technical  progress 
was  uneven  across  rail  submarkets,  and 
the monopoly power of large, mostly state-
owned  enterprises  slowed  cost  reductions 
(see box 6.1). Obligations to serve regions 
with  small  transport,  for  instance,  have 

BOX 6.1     Biggest in the world: size and social obligations 

of Indian Railways

The railway industry exhibits increas-
ing returns to scale in two ways. First, 
network economies and economies 
of density lead to size advantages at 
the fi rm level. Second, rail transport 
operations are almost universally 
combined with the supply of infra-
structure services, granting rail fi rms 
a natural monopoly, at least locally. 
Given the importance of the railways 
for economic development and the 
enormous market power of rail fi rms, 
it is not surprising that many rail com-
panies are state owned.

The biggest of these mammoths 

is Indian Railways. The Guinness 
Book of World Records lists it as the 
world’s largest commercial or utility 
employer, with more than 1.6 million 
employees. It moves more than 16 
million passengers and more than 
1 million tons of freight each day. In 
2002 it ran 14,444 trains daily, 8,702 
of them for passengers, and owned 
216,717 wagons, 39,263 coaches, and 
7,739 locomotives. 

Founded in 1853 as a system of 42 

rail systems, it was nationalized as 
one unit in 1951. Vertical integration 
of Indian Railways is not confi ned 

to the bundling with infrastructure 
services. It owns and runs factories for 
locomotives, coaches, and even their 
parts. Long transport distances on the 
Indian subcontinent should give the 
railways a stronger competitive edge 
over roads. Indeed, Indian Railways 
makes 70 percent of its revenues and 
most of its profi ts from freight, cross-
subsidizing the loss-making passenger 
sector. The overpricing of freight ser-
vices is one reason it has lost business 
to roads in recent years.

Curtailing the potential to provide 
low-cost freight transport over long 
distances are extensive social obliga-
tions. Net social service obligations in 
2005–06 were more than Rs 47 billion, 
plus welfare costs of Rs 9.6 billion. The 
service obligations include shipping 
essential commodities (sugar cane, 
livestock, paper) below cost, hav-
ing freight subsidize passenger and 
other coaching services, and opening 
new unprofi table lines. A major part 
of the passenger transport defi cits 
covered by freight are urban and 
suburban losses in Chennai,  Kolkata, 
and  Mumbai.
Source: WDR 2009 team.

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   175
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   175

10/8/08   11:11:53 AM
10/8/08   11:11:53 AM

176 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

motivated demands for public subsidies and 
cross-subsidies from proﬁ table routes. 

Rail costs are speciﬁ c to the commod-
ity shipped. For the United States, this has 
been shown to depend on price discrimina-
tion by the freight railroads among shippers 
of different commodities.24 There was no 
uniform  development  of  rail  freight  rates 
from 1981 to 2004. Markups for coal and 
grain  have  increased  signiﬁ cantly.  Mark-
ups in intermodal trafﬁ c have been lower 
because of competition from trucking and 
rail-to-rail  competition  between  major 
cities.  Decreasing  or  ﬂ at  rates  had  been 
observed  for  shipping  chemical  products 
and automobiles. This mainly indicates the 
high value of these goods. Freight demand 
is a derived demand, and the prices shippers 
are willing to pay increase with the value of 
the shipments.

Air  transport  costs.  With  the  arrival 
of the jet engine, air transport costs came 
down  quickly  from  the  mid-1950s  to  the 
early  1970s.  Jet  engines  were  faster,  more 
reliable,  and  more  fuel  efﬁ cient  than  the 
piston engines they replaced (see box 6.2). 
Quality-adjusted real prices of aircraft fell 
by 13 to 17 percent annually from 1957 to 
1972.25 Technical progress slowed consider-
ably after 1972, but prices were still falling 
by 2 to 4 percent a year from 1972 to 1983. 
Between 1955 and 2004, air freight prices 
fell  from  $3.87  per  ton-kilometer  to  less 
than  $0.30,  in  2000  U.S.  dollars.  Average 
revenue per ton-kilometer fell 8.1 percent 
a year in 1955–72 and 3.5 percent a year in 
1972–2003. Despite this signiﬁ cant decline 
in nominal air freight rates, the trade fric-
tion in air transport did not fall as dramati-
cally. The price of air shipping in real U.S. 
dollars per kilogram increased 2.9 percent 
annually from 1973 to 1980, in part due to 
oil  price  increases,  and  then  declined  by 
2.5  percent  annually  from  1980  to  1993. 
The post-1980 decline varied substantially 
among routes, with longer routes and North 
America showing the largest drops.26 After 
2001 the real price of inbound air freight 
to the United States rose sharply, possibly 
reﬂ ecting higher security costs.

Maritime transport costs. Two submar-
kets have developed differently over the past 
decades. Tramp shipping is used for large 

quantities of bulk commodities on charter, 
with  shipping  prices  set  in  spot  markets. 
There are no ﬁ xed schedules or routes, so 
shipping is determined by current market 
demand. Liner shipping is used for general 
cargo on ﬁ xed trade routes and on a ﬁ xed 
timetable. The liner trade is organized into 
cartels, or conferences, which discuss and 
coordinate prices and market shares.

Technical  progress  and  institutional 
changes have reduced prices in both sub-
markets.  The  most  important  are  the 
growth  of  open  registry  shipping,  the 
scale effects from the enormous increase 
in maritime transport demand, the intro-
duction  of  containers,  and  the  resulting 
changes  in  port  logistics.  Open  registry 
shipping is the practice of registering ships 
under  ﬂ ags  of  convenience  (Liberia  and 
Panama) to circumvent higher regulatory 
and manning costs imposed by wealthier 
nations. Open registry ﬂ eets did 5 percent 
of world shipping tonnage in 1950, 31 per-
cent in 1980, and 48 percent in 2000.27 It 
is estimated that vessel expenses for open 
registry  ships  are  12  to  27  percent  lower 
than  those  of  traditional  registry  ﬂ eets, 
with most of the cost differences coming 
from labor costs.28 

Cost reductions because of scale effects 
come from greater vessel capacity and insti-
tutional  changes.  The  rapid  expansion  of 
maritime transport demand seems to have 
accommodated these changes and reduced 
the  danger  of  preemptive  competition.29 
The  increase  in  vessel  size  seems  to  have 
allowed  for  hub-and-spoke  economies—
smaller vessels move cargo to a hub, where 
shipments are aggregated into much larger 
and  faster  ships  for  longer  hauls.  Prime 
examples  are  Hong  Kong,  China;  Rotter-
dam; and Singapore.

Vessels for bulk commodities, refriger-
ated produce, and automobiles are proﬁ table 
on individual routes. Since the mid-1980s, 
dedicated  “juice  tankers”  have  cemented 
Brazil’s  dominant  position  in  the  global 
export market for orange juice, almost all 
produced  in  São  Paulo  State.  Standard-
ized containers provide cost savings across 
transport  modes—long- distance  truck, 
inland waterways, rail, and short-distance 
truck—because  goods  do  not  need  to  be 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   176
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   176

10/8/08   11:11:53 AM
10/8/08   11:11:53 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

177

BOX 6.2    The jet engine

An estimated 320 million people meet 
annually at professional and corporate 
events after traveling by air. Of the world’s 
$12 trillion of merchandise trade, 35 per-
cent by value was shipped by air in 2006.a 
The estimated economic rate of return 
from investments in aviation infrastruc-
ture and services is 56 percent in Kenya, 
28 percent in Jordan, and 19 percent in 
Cambodia.b The reason for all this is the jet 
engine, perhaps the most signifi cant inno-
vation in long-distance transport ever. 
The jet is safer, easier to maintain, better 
suited for longer distances, and more 
fuel effi  cient than the propeller. Since it 
revolutionized air travel in the 1960s, it has 
become so closely identifi ed with aircraft 
propulsion that one wonders how the air-
craft industry managed to make so much 
progress with pistons.

But as with many path-breaking 

inventions in transport technology, the 
gestation period between invention 
and economic success was long. Frank 
Whittle in Great Britain, in 1929, and Hans 
von Ohain, a German physicist, in 1933, 
independently developed concepts for 
jet propulsion. Jet engine technology 
progressed quickly after World War II. The 
breakthrough in commercial passenger 
travel arrived with the Boeing 707 and 
Douglas DC-8. Earlier jet aircraft were 
noisy and had higher operating costs 
than advanced piston-engine aircraft. 
They could compete only on speed and 
greater seat capacity. But in the early 
1960s, technology improvements (the so-
called by-pass engine) rang in the end of 
propeller-powered long-distance travel. 
Within fi ve years, prices per ton-kilometer 
fell by about 40 percent.

Jet aircraft have a much higher power-

to-weight ratio, which enables longer 
range, faster travel, and bigger payloads. 
Higher quality and lower cost had a large 
impact in many sectors.

•  Supporting buyer-supplier networks over 
long distances. Most global trade is by 

maritime shipping, but air transport 
fi lls an important niche in just-in-time 
production systems. While shipments 
by sea are routine, fi rms use air cargo 
to fi ne-tune intermediate input fl ows 
and to ship goods with high value-to-
weight ratios. Even for Brazil, known 
for its primary goods exports, air cargo 
in 2000 accounted for 0.2 percent of 
total export volume by weight, but 
almost 19 percent by value.c Inciden-
tally, Brazil is also home to the world’s 
third-largest airplane maker, Embraer. 
Prime examples of sectors benefi ting 
from air transport are semiconductors 
and fashion. Shipments of semicon-
ductors are so highly correlated with 
air freight overall that they are con-
sidered a key leading indicator for the 
sector’s health. Product cycles in the 
fashion industry have shortened so 
much that one Spanish clothing chain 
ships merchandise straight from fac-
tory to store, replacing designs twice 
a week. The need to respond quickly 
to changing customer tastes has led to 
the relocation of some of its produc-
tion from East Asia to Spain and nearer 
countries like Morocco and Turkey. 
From there, clothes are sent to stores 
elsewhere in the world: “Planes from 
Zaragoza, Spain, land in Bahrain with 
goods for Inditex stores in the Middle 
East, fl y on to Asia, and return to Spain 
with raw materials and half-fi nished 
clothes.”d

•  Enabling exports of perishable goods 
over long distances. Inexpensive and 
frequent air service has allowed coun-
tries like Chile, Colombia, and Kenya 
to sell agricultural and horticultural 
products to markets in Europe, the 
Middle East, and North America. A 
prime example is Kenya, which today 
has a third of the global market for cut 
fl owers. Naivasha in central Kenya hosts 
a highly effi  cient cluster of growers, 
showing that localization economies 
also exist in agriculture. Flowers picked 

in the morning arrive on Amsterdam’s 
markets by evening. Horticulture is now 
among the top three export earners 
(with tourism and tea). In 2007 the sec-
tor’s free on-board (FOB) export value 
was 43 billion Kenyan shillings (about 
US$650 million), and the Kenya Flower 
Council estimates that the livelihood of 
1.2 million people depends directly or 
indirectly on the industry. By contrast, 
Bangladesh’s lack of cold storage facili-
ties and refrigerated air cargo capacity 
has blunted its opportunities to export 
high-value fruits and vegetables to the 
Middle East.e

•  Mass tourism in developing countries. 
In 2005 tourism receipts in low- and 
 middle-income countries were about 
$200 billion,f thanks mostly to inex-
pensive air travel. Charter fl ights 
provide even larger cost reductions 
through packaging with other ser-
vices and high-capacity use. Airport 
construction in tourist areas gener-
ates clusters of development with 
a high density of complementary 
services and thick and specialized 
labor markets. Between 1990 and 
2005, tourist arrivals in Sub-Saharan 
Africa increased by 8 percent a year—
from 6.8 million to 23.6 million—and 
tourism receipts, from $4.1 billion to 
$14.5 billion. Tourist arrivals in China 
grew almost 10 percent annually. 
 Cambodia now receives more than 
2 million tourists a year, Vietnam 
about 4 million—16 times as many as 
in 1990.

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. International Air Transport Association 
2007b.
b.International Air Transport Association 
2007a.
c. Sanchez and others 2003.
d. Rohwedder and Johnson 2008.
e. Dixie 2002.
f. World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) 
2006.

unloaded and reloaded (see box 6.3). Con-
tainerization reduces direct port costs for 
storage and stevedoring. It also reduces the 
indirect capital costs of idle capacity during 
long port stops, which previously made up 

half to two-thirds of a ship’s lifetime.30 And 
it allows for larger and faster ships, which 
reduce the costs per ton-mile while the ship 
is steaming. These cost reductions on the 
ocean leg have more than compensated for 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   177
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   177

10/8/08   11:11:53 AM
10/8/08   11:11:53 AM

178 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 6.3    The big box

About 90 percent of nonbulk cargo 
worldwide is transported in contain-
ers stacked on trucks, rail wagons, and 
freight ships. In 2007 more than 18 million 
containers made more than 200 million 
trips. Containerization has even changed 
how port and ship capacity or maritime 
transport services are measured. Cargo 
shipped is now measured in TEU or 
40-foot equivalent units (FEU). A TEU is 
the measure of a box 20 feet long and 8 
feet wide, with a maximum gross mass of 
24 metric tons.

The revolution is popularly attributed 
to Malcom McLean.a He owned a truck-
ing fi rm in New Jersey and had a simple 
insight: packages being shipped gener-
ally need to be opened only at origin and 
destination, but unloading and repacking 
costs a lot of money. In 1956 he inaugu-
rated the Sea-Land Service, with his con-
verted tanker ship, the Ideal-X, setting sail 
from Newark, New Jersey, for Houston, 
Texas, carrying 58 aluminum truck bodies 
in frames installed atop its deck. 

The idea did not spread widely until 

more than a decade later, when the U.S. 
armed forces needed effi  cient military 
transport to Vietnam. Against consider-
able resistance, McLean won contracts to 
build a container-port at Cam Ranh Bay 
and to run containerships from California 
to Vietnam. Without the containers, the 
U.S. military would have had a tough 
time feeding, housing, and supplying 
the 540,000 soldiers, sailors, marines, 
and air force personnel in Vietnam in 
1969. From almost nothing in 1965, Sea-
Land’s Defense Department revenues 
rose to $450 million between 1967 and 
1973. Routes to Okinawa and Subic Bay 
in the Philippines were added later, but 
McLean’s business remained restricted to 
military logistics. 

The Japanese government was the fi rst 
to support the expansion of containeriza-
tion. In 1966 the Shipping and Shipbuild-
ing Rationalization Council urged the 
Ministry of Transport to eliminate exces-
sive competition to benefi t from the new 
technology. It persuaded the government 
to build container terminals in the Tokyo-
Yokohama and Osaka-Kobe areas. The 
fi rst container cranes began operation 
in 1968. But highway regulations barred 
full-size containers, and the Japanese 
National Railway was not equipped to 
carry containers longer than 20 feet. 

In the United States, Matson Navigation 
won government approval to operate an 
unsubsidized container service between 
the U.S. West Coast and Hawaii and East 
Asia. The company had visions of unload-
ing cargo at Oakland directly onto special 
trains that would carry it east. On the 
return trip, the company planned to carry 
military cargo for the U.S. bases in Japan 
and the Republic of Korea. Business could 
not start before Matson entered a joint 
venture with a Japanese partner, and the 
containership that completed its maiden 
voyage in 1968 from Japan to the United 
States was owned by Nippon Yusen Kai-
sha Line. Six weeks later, McLean’s Sea-
Land Services started a regular service 
between Yokohama and the U.S. west 
coast. 

Once the infrastructure facilities were in 
place, container traffi  c took off . By the end 
of 1968 the Japan–U.S. route was crowded 
with containerships, seven companies 
competing for fewer than 7,000 tons of 
eastbound freight each month. The speed 
of expansion was determined by port and 
rail infrastructure. In the United States, rail 
intermodal traffi  c tripled between 1980 
and 2002, from 3.1 million trailers and con-
tainers to 9.3 million.

Container transport has continued to 
increase at enormous rates. The boxes 
keep getting larger, with the standard 
FEU size giving way to 48-foot and 
53-foot boxes that allow trucks to haul 
more freight on each trip. The world’s 
fl eet is expanding steadily, with the 
capacity of pure containerships rising by 
10 percent annually between 2001 and 
2005. The size of the vessels has been 
increasing, too. Dozens of vessels able to 
carry 4,000 FEU joined the fl eet in 2006, 
and even larger ones were on order. The 
Emma Maersk (396 meters long), launched 
in 2006, can carry more than 14,500 TEU. 
Of all traffi  c, 26 percent now originates in 
China.

Geography and topography limit the 

ever-increasing size of ships: Because 
the Panama Canal lost more traffi  c with 
the old locks unable to accommodate 
vessels larger than 5,000 TEU, it now is 
being expanded to allow ships up to 
12,000 TEUs to pass. Most of the con-
tainer ships are too large for the Suez 
Canal as well. Container ships have 
an absolute size, limited by the depth 
of the Straits of Malacca, linking the 
Indian Ocean to the Pacifi c Ocean. This 
“Malacca-max” size constrains a ship to 
dimensions of 470 meters long and 60 
meters wide.

And what happened to Malcom 

McLean’s company? Sea-Land grew and 
was the biggest shipping company in 
1995. The Danish company Maersk was 
second, followed by Evergreen. Four 
years later, Sea-Land was acquired by 
Maersk. By 2000 Maersk-SeaLand had 
a slot capacity of about 850,000 TEU. 
McLean’s big box is here to stay.

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Levinson 2006.

higher  investment  costs  and  higher  costs 
for slack time in ports.31

But  containerization  has  also  concen-
trated  shipping  capacity  in  a  few  global 
ports. Most developing countries have been 
slow to containerize, because of their small 
trade volumes and different factor prices. 
Where capital is scarce and labor abundant, 
the capital cost of specialized cranes, stor-
age areas, and rail heads is higher, and the 

port  cost  savings  of  containers  are  much 
lower. 

How did this technological change affect 
shipping costs? When adjusted for inﬂ ation, 
the real price for tramp services in 2004 was 
about half the real price in 1960.32 But when 
deﬂ ated using the commodity price index, 
there are large ﬂ uctuations but no down-
ward trend. This means that the trade fric-
tion resulting from transport costs for bulk 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   178
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   178

10/8/08   11:11:54 AM
10/8/08   11:11:54 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

179

commodities  typically  shipped  by  tramp 
trip charters has not gone down—the price 
of transporting a dollar’s worth of iron ore 
or wheat has not fallen. Liner prices show a 
steady rise before peaking in 1985, based on 
long time-series from the German Ministry 
of Transport. The price index for liner ship-
ping  emphasizes  general  cargo,  including 
containerized shipping and manufactured 
merchandise.  It  also  covers  loading  and 
unloading expenses, which are particularly 
relevant because reductions in cargo han-
dling costs are thought to be a major source 
of gains from containerization. Measured 
relative to the German GDP deﬂ ator, liner 
prices declined until the early 1970s, rose 
sharply from 1974 to reach their peak in the 
1983–85 period, and declined afterward. 

These trends in shipping costs run coun-
ter to public perceptions of continually fall-
ing trade costs. Two possible explanations: 
First,  these  price  trends  do  not  capture 
the  true  cost  savings  of  containerization, 
since  they  do  not  factor  in  the  total  cost 
of  door-to-door  transportation.  In  1956 
the loading of loose cargo cost $5.83 a ton. 
When containers were introduced in that 
year, the loading cost was less than $0.16 
a  ton.33  So  the  main  savings  came  from 
lower intermodal transfer costs. Contain-
erization allowed goods to be packed only 
once and shipped over long distances using 
maritime, rail, and road transport. Second, 
the quality of transport and logistics ser-
vices increased markedly, particularly their 
speed and reliability. The absence of a more 
signiﬁ cant price decrease is thus explained, 
at least in part, by a greater willingness to 
pay for higher quality services.

Small declines in transport costs, 
but a big easing in trade friction
Cost information suggests that international 
transport costs have not dropped as much 
as is commonly believed. Real prices of air 
and maritime transport have not fallen or 
risen much since the 1970s and early 1980s. 
But the ad valorem transport charge—the 
cost of transport as a share of the value of 
the traded good—has gone down. Explain-
ing the decline are changes in the composi-
tion of traded goods and the composition 
of  trading  partners.34  One  change  is  the 

reduced  weight-value  ratio  in  all  inter-
national  transport.  A  second  is  the  lower 
price of air transport relative to maritime 
transport.  Goods  that  traditionally  have 
been transported by sea are now shipped by 
air. After accounting for the changes of the 
weight-value  ratios,  the  modal  shift,  and 
the changes of routes, the ad valorem tax 
equivalent of maritime transport fell more 
than that of air transport (see ﬁ gure 6.2).35 
Changes in the composition of goods and 
trading partners reduced the market fric-
tion of transport, not its costs.

Logistics, time, and international trade. 
Transport services are not a homogeneous 
good, and transport costs are not product- 
or place-neutral. The revenue ﬁ gures and 
price  indexes  do  not  indicate  quality  or 
speed. Shipping containers from Europe to 
U.S. destinations still requires two or three 
weeks—from Europe to Asia ﬁ ve weeks. But 
air shipping requires a day or less to almost 
anywhere in the world. With the decline in 
air transport costs, the price of speed has 
fallen dramatically. 

This matters for trade. Every day in ocean 
travel  that  a  country  is  distant  from  the 
importer reduces the probability of sourc-
ing  manufactured  goods  from  that  coun-
try by 1 percent.36 And exporting ﬁ rms are 
willing to pay 1 percent of the value of the 
good per day to avoid time losses associated 
with maritime transport. With the recent 
increase  in  the  intensity  of  international 
trade, the demand for speed has increased. 
Goods with the highest time sensitivity have 
seen the fastest increase in trade. Examples 
are perishable agricultural goods and those 
with  short  product  cycles  such  as  fashion 
articles, where consumer preferences shift, 
or electronics, where the latest technology 
earns a premium. Such cycles are important 
not  just  for  Europe,  North  America,  and 
Northeast  Asia  but  also  for  China,  India, 
and Southeast Asia. 

Faster transport can speed the changes in 
the geography of trade. Production locations 
for  textiles  and  electronics  were  initially 
driven by wage costs. But with short product 
cycles, shorter transport times may outweigh 
higher  wage  costs,  leading  to  relocations. 
Some apparel production outsourced from 
the  United  States  to  Asia  has  relocated  to 

Figure 6.2    Air freight costs are 
down less than ocean freight costs

Air freight

% of value shipped
15

Fitted ad valorem rate

10

5

0
1974

Unadjusted ad valorem rate

1984

1994

2004

Ocean freight

% of value shipped
10

Fitted ad valorem rate

8

6

1984

2004

Unadjusted
ad valorem rate

1994

4
1974
Source: Hummels 2007.
Note: The unadjusted ad valorem rate 
is the ratio of freight costs to import 
good value. The fitted ad valorem rate is 
derived from a regression and controls for 
changes in the mix of trade partners and 
products.

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   179
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   179

10/8/08   11:11:54 AM
10/8/08   11:11:54 AM

180 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

higher wage locations in the Caribbean and 
Mexico.37  Short  product  cycles,  and  more 
generally  uncertain  demand,  are  forces 
for  agglomeration  as  ﬁ rms  need  to  locate 
near suppliers.38 But with more predictable 
demand,  faster  speed  might  contribute  to 
outsourcing stages of production (compo-
nent production, research and development 
[R&D],  and  assembly)  to  other  countries 
according to comparative advantage. 

Communication  costs.  The  cost  of  a 
three-minute  phone  call  from  New  York 
to London fell from $293 dollars in 1931 
(in 1993 dollars) to around $1 in 2001 for a 
much better connection—and to just a few 
cents today (see ﬁ gure 6.3). The Internet 
and  other  telecommunication  advances 
have lowered communication costs, reduc-
ing even more the trade friction for physi-
cal goods, especially intraindustry trade. 
But they have had an equal if not greater 
impact on the trade in services. Yet many 
tasks  that  require  intensive  communica-
tion hardly have been affected. Direct per-
sonal interaction and face-to-face contact 
remain an important agglomerative force, 
especially  and  paradoxically  in  the  most 
 communication-intensive industries.

Lower communication costs facilitate the 
coordination  of  international  production 

Figure 6.3    The costs of communicating have fallen 
to a fraction of what they were a decade ago
Average cost of a telephone call to the United States

US$ per 3 minutes
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Year

East Asia & Pacific
Europe & Central
Asia
High-income,
OECD countries

Latin America
& Caribbean
Middle East
& North Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Source: World Bank 2007j.

networks.39 But there are two more direct 
effects. The ﬁ rst is to reduce search costs. 
Because  knowledge  about  potential  cus-
tomers  or  suppliers  in  foreign  countries 
is imperfect, trade relations start with the 
search  for  trading  partners.  The  search 
depends on the quality of the communica-
tion infrastructure, which is largely a ﬁ xed 
cost and therefore increases the intensity of 
international trade as it reduces the search 
cost for trading partners.40 The second is 
to reduce variable trade costs. These costs 
arise from the need of consumers and pro-
ducers to interact on product speciﬁ cations, 
quality control, and timing.41 They are low 
for homogenous goods traded on organized 
exchanges or with reference prices. But they 
are  high  for  differentiated  goods.42  Since 
these kinds of goods are most prominent in 
trade  within  more  disaggregated  produc-
tion processes, the line for communication 
costs played a big role in the recent surge in 
intraindustry trade (see ﬁ gure 6.1).

Low communication costs make it pos-
sible to control production processes over 
long distances by computer-aided control 
systems and online communication, reduc-
ing the need to co-locate management and 
technical staff with unskilled workers. This 
allows  vertically  integrated  companies  to 
outsource  production  to  low-wage  coun-
tries. But it also facilitates the breakup of 
production  processes  into  supply  chains 
of  different  companies  distributed  across 
countries and continents.43 

Low communication costs are particu-
larly  important  for  offshoring  tasks  that 
do  not  require  the  shipment  of  physical 
products,  such  as  business,  professional, 
and technical services, including account-
ing, bookkeeping, computer programming, 
and information and data processing. U.S. 
imports of these services increased by more 
than 66 percent in real terms between 1997 
and 2004. The shift of jobs to foreign coun-
tries has stirred fears among white-collar 
workers  of  massive  labor  market  adjust-
ments  and  has  reduced  political  support 
for open trade regimes.44 Contrary to these 
fears, business service imports in rich coun-
tries have remained fairly low. In the United 
States, the import share of computing and 
business services reached only 0.4 percent 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   180
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   180

10/8/08   11:11:54 AM
10/8/08   11:11:54 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

181

in 2003, and exports of these services are 
even higher. 

The  biggest  outsourcers,  in  relation 
to local value added of these services, are 
small countries like Angola, Mozambique, 
Papua  New  Guinea,  and  the  Republic  of 
Congo.  Among  the  advanced  economies, 
Germany,  a  country  with  high  absolute 
imports in business services ($39 billion in 
2002), ranks 59th with a share of 2.9 per-
cent.  The  United  States,  with  the  highest 
absolute import value in business services 
($41 billion in 2002), ranks 115th. But the 
United  States  was  the  biggest  exporter  of 
services  ($58  billion  in  2002)  and  so  was 
a  substantial  net  exporter.  Ireland  shows 
that trade in immaterial services tends to 
be  within  industries  rather  than  between 
them. It is the largest exporter of computer 
and information services and the fourth-
largest  importer.  Still  its  ratio  of  exports 
to the local value added of computer and 
information services was only 16 percent (9 
percent of GDP). 

So the relocation of back-ofﬁ ce services 
to foreign countries is not a large threat to 
employment in advanced countries. Trade 
balances in business services in almost all 
developed countries have been positive and 
increasing from 1981 to 2001. India, seen 
to attract many business services from rich 
countries, had a smaller increase in output 
in this sector from 1995 to 2001 than did the 
United Kingdom.45 In short, the impression 
that  services  drive  economic  dispersion 
across countries is not conﬁ rmed by the evi-
dence. Trade in these services has increased 
a lot, but for both imports and exports. For 
most countries, the share in local services 
remains  small.  And  when  business  has 
been outsourced, much of it has remained 
concentrated in a few places. Low commu-
nication costs have had little effect on cre-
ative activities and high-value services that 
require frequent personal interaction. 

Transport costs and scale 
economies: two decades of analysis
The  evolution  of  transport  costs,  a  criti-
cal  factor  in  economic  geography,  helps 
explain the experience in the previous sec-
tion. A fall in transport costs increases the 
concentration of people and ﬁ rms because 

it allows more efﬁ cient sharing of facilities 
and services. Recent research also explains 
two  somewhat  unexpected  consequences 
of falling transport costs: (1) at the inter-
national level, trade increases with nearby 
countries, not with those farther away, and 
(2) within countries, improving transport 
infrastructure may lead to more concentra-
tion of economic activity, not less. 

Research has been far less successful in 
showing  why  falling  transport  costs  may 
make it more difﬁ cult for developing coun-
tries and lagging regions to break into world 
trade—indeed,  increasing  returns  in  the 
transport sector have often been ignored in 
formal models. But just as falling transport 
costs facilitate economies of scale in pro-
duction, higher production and trade pro-
duce economies of scale in transport.

Falling transport costs create bumpy 
economic landscapes
Before the recent accelerated drop in trans-
port  costs,  natural  or  “ﬁ rst-nature”  geo-
graphic  conditions  (such  as  waterways) 
largely  determined  the  location  of  settle-
ments and the spatial arrangement of pro-
duction  and  trade.  Shared  investments 
then created increasing returns to scale that 
shaped  economic  geography.  Such  invest-
ments could include local health and educa-
tion facilities or markets and other services 
that reduce trade and transaction costs—
such  as  enforcing  property  rights,  resolv-
ing contract disputes, or identifying market 
opportunities. The more the people who use 
a facility or communal service, the lower the 
costs per user. The larger the settlement, the 
more the people who share the ﬁ xed costs. 
To use the service, people and goods have 
to travel. So as transport costs fall, access 
increases, scale increases and the unit cost of 
provision drops. This is how transport costs 
deﬁ ne the geographic size of markets and 
the reach and scale of communal services.

As more facilities and services are pro-
vided centrally in larger cities, smaller com-
munities become less attractive and spatial 
disparities  emerge—the  size  distribution 
of  towns  and  cities  changes.  First-nature 
geography  and  the  lumpiness  of  urban 
infrastructure  investments  result  in  irre-
versible dynamics that determine how the 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   181
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   181

10/8/08   11:11:54 AM
10/8/08   11:11:54 AM

182 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

economic  landscape  ﬁ rst  becomes  rough, 
then bumpy. 

Economic  historians  had  long  recog-
nized that these processes, driven by chang-
ing transport costs, are critical for economic 
development.46 And geographers and plan-
ners  formalized  the  effect  of  indivisible 
communal facilities in differentiating city 
functions  and  sizes  in  the  “central  place 
theory.”47  Economists  went  beyond  ﬁ rst-
nature  geography  and  public  goods.  They 
realized that increasing returns to scale in 
the production of manufactured goods and 
ideas further inﬂ uence the distribution of 
economic  activities  in  geographic  space. 
With  urbanization,  manufacturing  and 
allied services become the drivers of growth, 
as discussed in chapter 4. These forces inter-
act  with  transport  costs  to  determine  the 
spatial evolution of economies, at all spatial 
scales—international, national, and local. 

Falling transport costs increase trade 
between neighbors
The growing demand for varieties of simi-
lar  goods  helps  explain  the  paradox  that 
falling  transport  costs  have  led  to  more 
trade  between  countries  that  are  close  by 
and  have  similar  characteristics.  In  fact, 
over the past 40 years, distance has become 
a larger deterrent to trade while divisions—
border effects—have become less of a deter-
rent (see ﬁ gure 6.4).

Traditional trade theory did not consider 
the increasing returns to scale and the dif-
ferentiation of demand. It predicted more 
intensive trade in goods that are different, 

Figure 6.4    Distance has become more of a deterrent, divisions less
Coefficients for distance and national borders in trade models, 1960–2005

Distance coefficient

Border effect coefficient

Distance

Division

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

400

200

100

0.6

1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

50
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Year

Source: Mayer 2008 for this Report.

favoring trade between countries with differ-
ent endowments. Countries traded because 
they could not produce the imported prod-
ucts  themselves—bananas  from  Central 
America to Europe for cars in return. But 
with  differentiated  goods,  trade  is  within 
classes of goods rather than between them. 
Countries trade because they want slightly 
different versions of similar goods—Japan 
and  Sweden  trade  Toyotas  for  Volvos.  In 
other  words,  in  the  old  trade  theory  and 
with high transport costs, countries trade 
only  what  they  need  to.  In  the  new  trade 
theory and with scale economies, a love of 
variety, and low transport costs, countries 
trade because they want to.

International  trade  surged  between 
(often  nearby)  countries  of  the  North-
ern  Hemisphere  in  the  1960s  and  1970s, 
even  though  these  countries  have  essen-
tially similar resource endowments. Trade 
between rich and poor countries was ini-
tially dwarfed by these developments. In the 
beginning of the 1980s intraindustry trade 
between medium- and high-income coun-
tries  expanded—and  later  between  other 
categories of countries (see ﬁ gure 6.5). The 
differentiation of demand—that is, the love 
of variety—and intraindustry trade did not 
remain conﬁ ned to rich countries. 

Accompanying the surge in intraindus-
try  trade  was  a  large  increase  in  trade  in 
intermediate goods relative to ﬁ nal goods. 
Intraindustry trade in intermediate goods 
requires  an  especially  efﬁ cient  transport 
sector. The ability to coordinate and con-
trol  production  processes  in  real  time  by 
computerized systems has been central to 
the  vertical  disintegration  of  production 
processes in the high-income countries and 
the outsourcing to medium-income coun-
tries.48 So lower transport costs, changes in 
goods  traded,  and  lower  communication 
costs reinforce each other.

One might expect that goods with low 
value-to-weight  ratios  would  be  traded 
mainly  over  short  distances.  But  prod-
uct  cycles  for  knowledge-intensive  intra-
industry  goods  and  for  consumer  items 
such as electronic gadgets and fashion arti-
cles have become shorter. This greater time 
sensitivity helps explain why the distance-
 dependence  of  trade  goes  up  rather  than 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   182
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   182

10/8/08   11:11:55 AM
10/8/08   11:11:55 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

183

down.  If  countries  want  to  beneﬁ t  from 
current  trends  of  globalization,  regional 
coordination of infrastructure investment 
and transport policies becomes even more 
important.49

How  do  increasing  returns  to  scale  in 
production, the love of variety for consumer 
and intermediate inputs, and lower trans-
port costs drive concentrations of economic 
activities in geographic space? First, differ-
entiated  products  and  increasing  returns 
to scale will increase productivity more in 
larger  areas  or  countries  than  in  smaller 
ones, even if they have identical per capita 
resources and access to the same technol-
ogy.  The  important  dimension  of  size  is 
the volume of overall demand or economic 
mass, not the size of the land area. When 
such agglomeration forces are considered, 
both Hong Kong, China, and Singapore are 
viewed as “large.” 

Second,  the  larger  a  region,  the  more 
varieties or intermediates will be produced 
locally.  Compared  with  smaller  regions, 
fewer goods have to be imported, saving on 
transport costs. People with equal nominal 
incomes thus have a higher real income in 
the  larger  regions,  and  ﬁ rms  realize  cost 
savings. 

Third, the higher real incomes will lead 
to in-migration, putting pressure on local 
wages. Lower wages will attract more ﬁ rms, 
making the larger market even larger and 
leading to a new round of circular causa-
tion of ﬁ rm relocation, higher real incomes, 
and a larger market. Chapter 9 discusses in 
more detail how developing countries can 
address  the  challenging  task  of  regional 
integration, learning from the experiences 
with  institutional  cooperation,  regional 
infrastructure, and coordinated incentives 
around the world. 

Falling transport costs lead to 
concentration within countries
The  productivity  and  income  beneﬁ ts  of 
agglomeration,  driven  largely  by  lower 
transport costs, are often difﬁ cult for plan-
ners and policy makers to accept. But they 
explain the second counterintuitive impli-
cation of falling transport costs. There is 
a strong belief that an equal distribution 
of transport infrastructure will induce an 

Figure 6.5    Global intraindustry trade is no longer confined to rich countries

Grubel-Lloyd Index, 5-digit
0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1962

1966

1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

2006

Year

High-income to high-income
Medium-income to high-income
Low-income to medium-income

Low-income to high-income
Low-income to low-income
Medium-income to medium-income

Source: Brülhart 2008 for this Report.
Note: The Grubel-Lloyd index is the fraction of total trade that is accounted for by intraindustry trade.

equal geographic distribution of economic 
activities. High concentration is seen as a 
problem,  and  the  spatial  redistribution 
of economic mass is expected to promote 
overall  development.  Massive  transport 
infrastructure investments have been the 
central policy instrument to induce ﬁ rms 
to  move  to  lagging  regions.  But  the  out-
comes were usually the opposite—the tar-
get regions lost production and workers to 
the leading regions (see box 6.4).

Knowledge-sharing  is  another  force 
shaping the economic geography of coun-
tries and areas. Technical know-how can 
be used by more users at no or small extra 
cost.  It  is  embedded  in  an  experienced 
workforce, and the accumulated stock of 
knowledge  leads  to  innovation.  Larger 
local  labor  markets  increase  knowledge 
spillovers  between  workers  and  thus 
increase productivity nonlinearly.50 In big 
cities the beneﬁ ts may not fully material-
ize because congestion and fragmentation 
hinder  interaction.  But  well-functioning 
urban  transport  systems  can  increase 
the effectiveness of the labor market and 
spread  the  results  of  learning  on  the  job 
(see box 6.5).

Falling transport costs enhance localiza-
tion economies in the production of knowl-
edge  and  information—say,  for  business, 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   183
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   183

10/8/08   11:11:55 AM
10/8/08   11:11:55 AM

184 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 6.4    Italy’s intervento straordinario: an unexpected response to falling transport costs

Regional disparities are caused by the 
unequal distribution of infrastructure, 
and infrastructure investment in lag-
ging areas will reduce these imbalances. 
That is the common assumption. But, 
frequently, the industries intended to 
prosper from these investments move 
elsewhere, accompanied by a mass out-
migration of workers. A prime example is 
the Italian regional policy to reduce the 
development diff erences between the 
North and the South. The Mezzogiorno 
has become a generic term for a region 
that suff ered from the good intentions of 
regional policy.a

A short-term intervento straordinario was 
managed by a special agency, the Cassa per 
il Mezzogiorno, set up in 1950. It was sup-
ported by the International Bank for Recon-
struction and Development (IBRD), led by 
Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, who developed the 
Big Push Model of economic development 
in the 1940s. The development impact 
was to come from massive infrastructure 
investment, with much emphasis on road 
building and railways. It soon became obvi-
ous that short-term success would not be 
achievable, leading to repeated redefi ni-
tions of the strategic directions. By the mid-
1950s, the Cassa shifted its focus to sup-
porting industry investment, concentrating 
on “nuclei” and priority areas. 

The result was that through the 1950s 

about 2 million workers left the target 
regions. By the end of the 1960s, the 
emigration was perceived to be the main 
development problem, and infrastructure 
investment and subsidies were concen-

trated on the areas where emigration was, 
in fact, highest.b From the beginning of the 
1980s, when the original mandate of the 
Cassa ended, it was kept alive by 11 minis-
terial decrees. In 1986 the “extraordinary 
intervention” was refi nanced up to 1993. 
The total annual expenditures of the 
Cassa rose to a peak of 3,750 billion lire 
(US$4.5 billion) in 1976, declining to 2,650 
billion lire (US$2.1 billion) in 1991, and col-
lapsing afterward. The money had little 
eff ect on economic indicators in the Mez-
zogiorno (see box table). 

The unemployment rate fell until the 

beginning of the 1970s because of the out-
migration of millions of workers to Northern 
Italy and other countries. It then more than 
doubled up to the end of the 1980s, indicat-
ing a rapidly growing dependence of the 
South on fi scal transfers from the North.
Scandals surrounding the Cassa per il 
Mezzogiorno were disclosed as part of 
tangentopoli (“bribesville”) by the eff orts 

Economic development of the Mezzogiorno

of the mani puliti (“clean hands”) of the 
country’s judiciary. These scandals con-
tributed to the dissolution of the Christian 
Democratic Party and the Socialist Party 
and to the emergence of the Northern 
League, which demanded the separation 
of the North from the South to end the 
waste in the Mezzogiorno. An intervention 
to make the country more uniform may 
have increased internal divisions. 

Chapter 8, “Unity, Not Uniformity,” 

discusses how countries have promoted 
national integration by using a calibrated 
blend of spatially blind institutions, con-
nective infrastructure, and spatially tar-
geted interventions. 

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Boltho, Carlin, and Scaramozzino 1997; 
Sinn and Frank 2001.
b. By that time, some critics of the Mezzo-
giorno policy demanded that funds
assist outmigration (Lutz 1962).

1951–60

1961–70

1971–80

1981–90

1990

The South’s share of the national total (%)
Population
GDP per capita
Fixed investment

37.2
54.5
26.0

Unemployment
South
Center-North

9.1
6.8

Source: Faini, Giannini, and Galli 1993.

36.0
56.6
29.0

6.4
4.5

35.1
58.6
31.2

9.6
5.2

36.1
58.2
29.0

16.3
7.6

36.6
56.7
26.9

19.7
6.5

professional, and technical services. Lower 
communication  costs  might  be  expected 
to lead to a footloose tradable service sec-
tor.  But  most  communication-intensive 
industries  remain  strongly  agglomerat-
ed.51 A main reason for the persistence of 
agglomeration  economies  in  knowledge 
production is that verifying the quality of 
information  requires  understanding  and 
relationships  of  trust.  Informal  networks 
work as screening devices to build up trust 
in a group of knowledge producers.52 And 
lower  urban  transport  costs  increase  the 
size of networks. 

What to do: transport policies in 
the developing world
What  do  these  events  and  insights  mean 
for developing countries? Trade costs have 
fallen because of lower transport and com-
munication costs, higher quality, and faster 
speed. But all countries have not beneﬁ ted 
equally. Transport costs have fallen faster 
where the demand for transport services is 
greater. Increasing scale in traded produc-
tion has raised competitiveness and allowed 
scale  economies  in  the  transport  sector. 
The  resulting  lower  trade  and  transport 
costs  encourage  trade  and  allow  greater 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   184
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   184

10/8/08   11:11:55 AM
10/8/08   11:11:55 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

185

BOX 6.5    Mobility with density in Hong Kong, China

Hong Kong, China, in the second half of 
the 1970s, had real growth of about 10 
percent a year, an infl ux of immigrants, 
and roaring demand for private cars. Car 
registrations more than doubled in a 
decade. The results were huge time losses 
for passengers and freight transporters 
and health costs of air pollution. The 
Transport Department in Hong Kong, 
China, reacted with draconian measures. 
In 1979, it defi ned a transport policy 
to increase road capacity, expand and 
improve the mass transit system, and bet-
ter manage the road capacity.

The government trebled the annual 

license fee for cars, doubled the fi rst 
registration fee (to 70 to 90 percent 
of the import price of a vehicle), and 
doubled fuel taxes. Private and public 
vehicle ownership fell quickly. In 1985 the 
share of private cars in registered cars 
had fallen to 50 percent, 10 percent of 
them taxis.a The public transport system 
consists of a 74-kilometer underground 
mass-transit railway, a 34-kilometer heavy 
rail line (linking Kowloon with China), 
a 32- kilometer light-rail system in the 
northwest of the New Territories, and a 

16-kilometer tram in the North Side of 
Hong Kong Island. Five private bus com-
panies operate franchised services with 
more than 6,000 buses. They are comple-
mented by minibuses (public light buses) 
with fi xed fares and exclusive rights to 
provide service on certain routes. Entry to 
this submarket is strictly regulated, with 
a maximum number of minibuses set for 
the city’s quarters.b Switching between 
diff erent modes or submodes does not 
lead to big time losses.

Road pricing failed politically in 1985. 

One reason was the opening of the 
Island Route of the Mass Transit Railway, 
which carried about a quarter of all 
public transport boardings in 1988, and 
the Island Eastern Corridor a year ear-
lier. Both eased congestion. Today, road 
charges in Hong Kong, China, are seen 
as a device not to reduce congestion 
but to curtail air pollution and main-
tain the city’s attractiveness. It ranks 
fifth in the infrastructure index of the 
global competitiveness report, with a 
score of 6.2 out of 7, and first in product 
market efficiency and financial market 
 sophistication. 

The experience in Hong Kong, China, 

provides these lessons for the rapidly 
growing cities in the developing world:
•  There is a limit to mobility and acces-

sibility by private car in megacities. Even 
without congestion charging and the 
pricing of parking, strong fi scal disincen-
tives can contain motorization in a phase 
of rapid income growth and limit the 
share of private cars in urban transport.

•  Buses, and particularly minibuses, can be 
regulated to avoid congestion and high 
travel costs. Even with regulation, almost 
all public transport can be profi table.

•  Along with policies to contain motor-

ization, new traffi  c management instru-
ments can make more eff ective use of 
existing infrastructure.
Chapter 7 discusses, for countries at 

various stages of urbanization, the insti-
tutions, infrastructure, and incentives 
that can facilitate concentration without 
congestion.

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Hau 1990.
b. Cullinane 2002.

specialization  and  exchange.  Some  coun-
tries such as China and Chile have broken 
into  international  markets  and  beneﬁ ted 
from  lower  transport  costs.  But  most  of 
the others have not. In much of Africa, this 
cumulative causation has hurt, not helped, 
because agglomeration economies in Afri-
ca’s divided neighborhoods remain small. 

By increasing local market interactions 
and  reducing  intercity  and  interarea  dis-
tances and international divisions, transport 
policies in developing countries can get these 
virtuous circles started. Improving physical 
infrastructure  is  an  indispensable  part  of 
transport policy. Indeed, chapters 7, 8, and 
9 discuss the need for spatially connective 
infrastructure  in  the  local,  national,  and 
international contexts. But other important 
aspects of transport and communications 
policies are often neglected. 

The new economic geography has high-
lighted  what  transport  costs  do  for  eco-
nomic  growth.  Inadvertently,  though,  it 

has  contributed  to  an  exaggerated  focus 
of  transport  policy  on  physical  improve-
ments. And by using techniques that essen-
tially assumed away the internal workings 
of transport—the goods to be transported 
are seen as an iceberg to be hauled from one 
place  to  another,  and  transport  costs  are 
the  part  of  the  iceberg  that  melts  away—
the most critical policy-related aspects also 
have been assumed away. The fundamental 
features that deserve the attention of policy 
makers are the scale economies in the trans-
port sector that tend to create monopolistic 
behavior, and the circular causation between 
lower transport costs and greater trade and 
trafﬁ c. Another underemphasized aspect is 
the external cost of transport and commu-
nications, notably the congestion, pollution, 
and safety-related hazards. 

The two neglected policy priorities are 
(1)reducing the negative effects of market 
structure  in  the  transport  sector  and  (2) 
improving  trade  facilitation  and  regional 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   185
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   185

10/8/08   11:11:55 AM
10/8/08   11:11:55 AM

186 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

coordination. Both will promote agglom-
erative forces and will sometimes provide 
greater  payoffs  than  more  physical  infra-
structure investments. A third policy pri-
ority is to address the negative externalities 
in transport. 

Regulating transport to get the beneﬁ ts 
of scale economies
Markets for transport services rarely are per-
fectly  competitive,  with  major  differences 
between the different modes. Competition 
in the trucking industry increased because of 
deregulation,53 but there is a tendency toward 
consolidated ownership in many countries. 
In  railways  and  airlines,  markets  remain 
dominated by state-owned enterprises.54 In 
the  airline  and  maritime  transport  indus-
tries, market segmentation allows providers 
to  discriminate  between  different  goods.55 
These  observations  suggest  ﬁ rm-level  size 
advantages in transport operations. 

Transport providers consolidate power 
by owning infrastructure. In 1980 the top 
20 percent of the world’s carriers controlled 
just 26 percent of the global port slot capac-
ity. By 1992 this had increased to 42 per-
cent, and by 2003, to 58 percent. It may be 
even higher today. 

Infrastructure services are not provided 
in competitive markets because the indivis-
ibility of infrastructure facilities naturally 
precludes  competition.  At  early  stages  of 
development, the demand for ports, roads, 
and  telecommunication  equipment  does 
not exhaust minimum capacities. As trafﬁ c 
increases, so does productivity. This is ulti-
mately balanced by increasing time losses 
caused  by  congestion—as  diseconomies 
of scale set in. Recent developments have 
made  the  advantages  of  large  ports  and 
airports even more pronounced—and the 
technological progress in shipping has rein-
forced  the  cost  advantages  of  large  ports 
(see  box  6.3).  Assessing  the  size  of  these 
scale  effects  is  a  daunting  task,  but  stud-
ies have conﬁ rmed economies of scale and 
spotlighted  the  indivisibility  of  transport 
infrastructure.56

A second reason for limited competition 
arises from “network economies.” Adding 
a  link  to  a  road  or  rail  network  does  not 
just provide the beneﬁ ts of connecting two 

places—it  increases  the  value  of  all  other 
related  connections  by  enhancing  overall 
connectivity. These effects can be large. One 
estimate of the infrastructure-productivity 
link for India found a sizable externality of 
transport infrastructure. By providing a 5 
percent rate of return on road infrastructure 
investment over and above the direct payoff, 
the network-related beneﬁ ts accounted for 
almost a quarter of the overall increase in 
infrastructure productivity.57

The absence of effective regulation limits 
competition in the transport sector and can 
reduce the construction of new infrastruc-
ture. It may cause underinvestment in main-
tenance of existing infrastructure. A number 
of studies have conﬁ rmed the tendency to 
underprovide transport and telecommuni-
cation  infrastructure  in  developing  coun-
tries.58  Underinvestment  in  infrastructure 
maintenance  can  be  even  more  severe. 
Actual expenditures for road maintenance 
in Africa, for example, appear to have sys-
tematically fallen short of planned ﬁ gures.59 
It was estimated that $45 billion was lost in 
road stock value during the 1970s and 1980s, 
which could have been avoided by spending 
$12 billion for preventive road maintenance. 
Badly maintained roads increase transport 
costs  by  increasing  costs  of  maintaining 
vehicles and reducing their speed. The direct 
costs  of  badly  maintained  roads  are  thus 
higher  than  the  losses  in  cost-based  road 
asset values as recorded by the road admin-
istrations. On top of this, higher transport 
costs  slow  the  spatial  transformation  and 
reduce gains from specialization.

The  monopolistic  sector  also  encour-
ages corruption. In smaller markets, users 
often have no substitutes for the services of 
large ports and airports. The higher these 
substitution costs, the higher the potential 
for high markups or bribes, depending on 
whether  the  infrastructure  is  private  or 
public.  How  much  rent-seeking  increases 
transport costs is difﬁ cult to estimate. But 
a  recent  World  Bank  study  that  reviewed 
the main road corridors in all the regions 
of  Sub-Saharan  Africa  reveals  big  gaps 
between prices for transport services and 
their  costs  (see  table  6.1).  The  surplus  is 
shared among bribes, regulatory rents, and 
transport company proﬁ ts. 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   186
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   186

10/8/08   11:11:56 AM
10/8/08   11:11:56 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

187

Table 6.1    Prices, costs, and proﬁ t margins are all high on Africa’s transport corridors

Corridor (countries)
West Africa 
(Burkina Faso, Mali, and 
Ghana)

Route 
(gateway–destination)
Tema/Accra–Ouagadougou

Tema/Accra–Bamako

Central Africa 
(Cameroon, Central African 
Republic, and Chad)

Douala–N’Djaména

Douala–Bangui

East Africa 
(Kenya and Uganda)

Ngaoundéré–N’Djaména

Ngaoundéré–Moundou

Mombasa–Kampala

Mombasa–Nairobi

Southern Africa
(South Africa, Zambia, and 
Tanzania)

Lusaka–Johannesburg 

Lusaka–Dar-es-Salaam

Pricea 

(US$ per kilometer)

Variable cost 

(US$ per kilometer)

Fixed cost 

(US$ per kilometer)

Proﬁ t marginb 

(percent)

3.53 
(2.01)
3.93 
(1.53)
3.19 
(1.10)
3.78 
(1.30)
5.37 
(1.44)
9.71 
(2.58)
2.22 
(1.08)
2.26 
(1.36)
2.32 
(1.59)
2.55 
(0.08)

1.54 
(0.59)
1.67 
(0.23)
1.31 
(0.32)
1.21 
(0.35)
1.83 
(0.25)
2.49 
(0.64)
0.98 
(0.47)
0.83 
(0.17)
1.54 
(0.41)
1.34 
(0.52)

0.66 
(0.64)
0.62 
(0.36)
0.57 
(0.30)
1.08 
(0.81)
0.73 
(0.44)
1.55 
(0.43)
0.35 
(0.14)
0.53 
(0.19)
0.34 
(0.40)
0.44 
(0.51)

80

80

73

83

118

163

86

66

18

62

Source: World Bank 2008d. 
a. Some indicative prices are set by some ministries of transportation in Africa but are not used. Prices set by freight allocation bureaus in Central Africa may be more respected. 
b. Data should be interpreted cautiously since some companies may omit some costs or, on the contrary, double count some costs.

Transport  infrastructure  and  service 
providers are not the only ones extracting 
bribes and enjoying extranormal proﬁ ts. 
The  Improved  Road  Transport  Gover-
nance Initiative in West Africa monitors 
road practices harmful to trade on inter-
state trunk roads between Burkina Faso, 
Ghana, Mali, and Togo (see map 6.2). In 
Mali,  truckers  face  4.6  checkpoints,  pay 
$25,  and  waste  38  minutes  for  every  100 
kilometers traveled. Internal or distance-
related  costs  are  compounded  by  costs 
imposed by the divisions of international 
borders. 

National efforts and regional 
coordination to facilitate trade
Trade  facilitation  has  become  the  most 
important  policy  instrument  to  achieve 
gains  from  international  trade—improv-
ing  the  efﬁ ciency  of  ports,  harmonizing 
standards, reducing bureaucratic burdens 
to cross borders, and coordinating behind 
the border regulatory norms (see box 6.6). 
Since  August  2004,  trade  facilitation  has 
moved  to  the  center  of  the  Doha  Round 

Map 6.2    Crossing borders or climbing walls?
Checkpoints on priority transport corridors

Ségou

Bamako

M A L I

Sikasso

Ouahigouya

B U R K I N A

F A S O

Ouagadougou

N I G E R

Niamey

Bobo
Dioulasso

B E N I N

G H A N A

GUINEA

Korhogo

C Ô T E   D ' I V O I R E

Bouaké

Checkpoints
Police
Customs
Gendarmerie
Other: Transport department,
trade unions, forestry department,
health

Subject road network

Abidjan

TOGO

N I G E R I A

Ibadan

Kumasi

Tema
Accra

Sekondi-
Takoradi

Lomé

Porto-
Novo

Lagos

Source: Improved Road Transport Governance Project, USAID West African Trade Hub 2007.

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   187
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   187

10/8/08   1:54:50 PM
10/8/08   1:54:50 PM

188 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 6.6    Neighborhoods matter, but so do trade and transport policies

Proximity to prosperous places can be 
a blessing, and to poor places, a curse. 
The box map illustrates the advantage 
of being in good neighborhoods. It 
shows the foreign market potential 
across the world, using an index that 
combines geographic proximity (dis-
tance) and policies to reduce trade barri-
ers (divisions). 

But good location is not enough. Even 

within the geographically fortunate 

neighborhoods of Central America, 
North Africa, and Southeast Asia, Mexico, 
Tunisia, and Malaysia have the highest 
market access. Their rankings in the 
World Bank’s Doing Business indicators—
especially those related to trading across 
borders—are among the highest in their 
regions. Unsurprisingly, their recent 
growth performance has been impres-
sive, and their living standards have 
improved. 

Algeria and Indonesia have the same 

location as Tunisia and Malaysia, but they 
do not do as well in business and trade 
policies. Their market access indicators 
are accordingly lower than those of their 
neighbors. Sri Lanka and Ghana also do 
not do well in market access; they have 
good business and trade policies, but are 
not fortunate in location.

Sources: Mayer 2008; World Bank 2007d.

Being near prosperous places is important, but not enough
Foreign market potential, 2003

Foreign market potential
relative to U.S. Level

< 0.760
0.760–1.110
1.111–1.670
1.671–4.570
> 4.571
No data

Sources: Mayer 2008 for this Report.
Note: To compute foreign market potential, each country is assigned a score for the size of international markets with which it can trade. This is computed by weighting 
the GDP of other countries by the inverse of a measure that combines physical distance, transport costs, and barriers to trade to show how difﬁ cult it is to access these 
markets. The measure, which is expressed relative to the foreign market potential of the United States, essentially combines the two spatial dimensions of distance and 
division into a composite of potential market access that does not include the effect of the home market (density). This map is a complement to map 9.2 showing Real 
Market Access.

of  the  World  Trade  Organization.  Recent 
World Bank studies have identiﬁ ed several 
measures of trade facilitation as the main 
entry points for policy reform:
(cid:129)  Port  efﬁ ciency—an  average  of  the  efﬁ -
ciency of port, inland waterway, and air 
transport facilities, based on data from 
the World Competitiveness Report 

(cid:129)  Customs  regimes—the  hidden  import 
barriers  other  than  published  tariffs 
and quotas, and irregular side payments 

or  bribes  connected  with  import  and 
export permits

(cid:129)  Information  technology  (IT)  infrastruc-
ture—a  measure  of  the  speed  and  the 
cost of Internet access and the contribu-
tion of the Internet to the reduction of 
inventory costs

Improving trade facilitation capacity in 
75 countries to half the global average could, 
as one study suggests, yield a $377 billion 
increase  in  world  trade.60  Another  study 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   188
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   188

10/8/08   11:11:56 AM
10/8/08   11:11:56 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

189

showed that new and old EU member coun-
tries would beneﬁ t from trade facilitation 
measures in what were then the accession 
member countries, Bulgaria, Romania, and 
Turkey.61 If these countries reached half the 
trade facilitation standards of the EU-15 in 
terms of port efﬁ ciency, IT infrastructure, 
customs regimes, and harmonized regula-
tion, it would lead to $10 billion in overall 
trade  gains.    Among  the  four  dimensions 
of  trade  facilitiation,  improvement  of  IT 
infrastructure would result in the highest 
trade  gains  (40  percent)  followed  by  port 
efﬁ ciency improvements (30 percent).

Port  efﬁ ciency  improvements  require 
both  institutional  and  infrastructure 
investments. Maritime transport accounts 
for 90 percent of world trade by volume.62 
Access  to  a  well-run  port  may  not  guar-
antee  export-oriented  agglomerations, 
but  these  agglomerations  certainly  will 
not  emerge  without  it.  Private  participa-
tion  will  be  feasible  where  trade  volumes 
are sufﬁ ciently high, but public support is 

needed elsewhere. This is also true for other 
hub infrastructure such as airports, which 
are increasingly important for trade in low-
weight,  high-value  goods  and  to  support 
booming export-oriented services that need 
efﬁ cient air travel. In 2007 passenger trafﬁ c 
at Bangalore’s airport jumped 35 percent.

With the fall of effective rates in inter-
national  freight  transport,  time  costs  in 
international transport have become more 
important  relative  to  the  direct  money 
costs.63 International transport suffers from 
the extra time cost of border-crossing pro-
cedures. These time costs depend not just 
on the customs and ﬁ scal rules of crossing 
the border but also on a host of behind-the-
border elements concerning regulation and 
the supply of services.64 

Among the poorest performers: the time 
costs of transport range from 46 days in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo to 104 days in 
Uzbekistan, set against the Organisation for 
Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD) average of 9.8 days (see table 6.2). 

Documents  for exports

 Documents for imports

Table 6.2    Time costs for crossing borders are highest in Central Asia, Central Africa, East Africa, and Southern Africa
Country
Iraq
Kazakhstan
Tajikistan
Uzbekistan
Chad
Afghanistan
Angola
Kyrgyz Republic
Eritrea
Niger
Mongolia
Central African Republic
Azerbaijan
Zambia
Haiti
Zimbabwe
Congo, Rep. of
Lao PDR
Burundi
Rwanda
Congo, Dem. Rep. of

Country
Uzbekistan
Chad
Iraq
Tajikistan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Afghanistan
Burundi
Eritrea
Rwanda
Niger
Zimbabwe
Central African Republic
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Venezuela, R.B. de
Mali
Zambia
Congo, Rep. of
Mongolia
Angola
Azerbaijan

Days
102
89
82
80
78
67
64
64
59
59
58
57
56
53
52
52
50
50
47
47
46

10
12
10
7
6
12
12
13
9
8
10
8
9
8
8
9
11
9
9
9
8

11
9
10
11
14
13
11
10
13
9
10
13
18
9
9
11
11
12
10
9
14

 Days
104
102
101
83
76
75
71
71
69
69
68
67
66
66
65
65
64
62
59
58
56

Sources: World Bank 2007d.

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   189
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   189

10/8/08   11:11:56 AM
10/8/08   11:11:56 AM

190 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Most of the slowest border crossings occur 
in  Sub-Saharan  African  or  Central  Asian 
countries,  many  of  which  are  landlocked. 
Having  little  control  over  other  aspects  of 
trade  costs,  such  as  transport  over  land  to 
the nearest port, landlocked countries could 
be more aggressive with the trade facilitation 
policies that they do have control to improve. 
They could also beneﬁ t from a more explicit 
regional perspective. A variety of transit rules 
are recognized by international law and dec-
larations, such as the “Almaty Programme of 
Action.”65 Corridor facilitation and monitor-
ing initiatives, such as those envisaged under 
the Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Program, 
could reduce the risk of coordination failures, 
but enforcement has been weak.66 

Even for fairly small coastal countries, 
regional approaches can be beneﬁ cial. Since 
increases in trade produce scale economies 
in  transport,  hub  infrastructure  is  most 
beneﬁ cial if it is shared by as many market 
participants as possible. Few countries in 
West or East Africa, if any, can support a 
medium-size, deep-water container port on 
their own. But a shared port with a large 
catchment  area  would  be  more  likely  to 
support agglomeration, if costs and access 
are  distributed  among  coastal  countries 
and their landlocked neighbors. Sharing is 
not easy, however, because of the domestic 
bias of national infrastructure policies. 

Addressing the negative externalities 
of transport
Efﬁ cient transport provides external ben-
eﬁ ts that go beyond simple time savings or 
lower maintenance; these beneﬁ ts are often 
underappreciated.  But  transport  also  has 
external costs that usually are not internal-
ized by transporters and traders.67 Conges-
tion  and  greenhouse  gas  emissions  affect 
both developed and developing countries, 
but the direct health-related costs of pollu-
tion and poor safety are generally highest in 
developing countries.

Congestion.  The  lumpiness  of  trans-
port infrastructure implies that there is no 
smooth  and  immediate  supply  response 
when demand increases. With overcapacity, 
the extra cost could be spread over a larger 
number of users. With insufﬁ cient capacity, 
congestion causes time and quality losses, 

the case in many rapidly growing develop-
ing countries. Estimating the costs of con-
gestion  is  not  straightforward,  because  it 
occurs  mostly  during  certain  times  of  the 
day,  often  caused  by  speciﬁ c  bottlenecks 
in the network. One study of Washington, 
D.C.,  congestion  put  these  costs  at  $0.065 
per mile.68

Emissions. With growing concerns about 
climate change, the transport sector—a vis-
ible consumer of fossil fuels—has been get-
ting more scrutiny. The largest share of these 
emissions is generated in industrialized coun-
tries. But with rising motorization in many 
developing countries, the world’s vehicle ﬂ eet 
will rapidly grow, and so will emissions. Most 
estimates of greenhouse gas emissions from 
transport are close to 13.5 percent of the total 
(see ﬁ gure 6.6). One integrated assessment 
study puts the population-weighted expected 
global costs of a 2.5° C warming in 2100 at 2 
percent of world GDP.69 Half of this is caused 
by abrupt climate change, including the pos-
sible spread of tropical disease, especially in 
Africa. Other costs are incurred in agricul-
ture (less than 10 percent) and from rising 
seas (6 percent). 

What  would  internalizing  these  costs 
mean  for  the  overall  costs  of  transport? 
Estimates vary. A meta-analysis of earlier 
estimates suggests a current upper bound 
of $50 per ton of carbon.70 The Stern Review 
(2007) puts the total damage from future 
warming at 5–20 percent of world GDP in 
perpetuity and infers a current social cost 
equivalent of $311 per ton of carbon. With 
a gallon of gasoline containing 0.0024 tons 
of  carbon,  damage  of  $50  per  ton  of  car-
bon would translate into $0.12 per gallon 
of gasoline (or $0.03 per liter) and damage 
of $300 into $0.72 a gallon ($0.19 a liter). 
Internalizing  the  carbon  dioxide  (CO2) 
costs  of  transport  would  thus  increase 
transport costs by an amount well within 
historical gasoline price variations. Efforts 
to increase fuel efﬁ ciency have been under 
way for the past three decades, aided at least 
as much by fuel taxes and efﬁ ciency regula-
tions as by the rising price of oil.

Pollution. Gasoline vehicles emit carbon 
monoxide  (CO),  nitrogen  oxides  (NOx), 
and hydrocarbons (HC). CO reduces oxy-
gen in the bloodstream, causing breathing 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   190
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   190

10/8/08   11:11:57 AM
10/8/08   11:11:57 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

191

Figure 6.6    Transport accounts for about one-seventh of CO2 emissions 
Sources of greenhouse gas emissions, 2005

Sector

End use/activity

Gas

Transportation

13.5%

Y

G

R

E

N

E

Electricity & heat

24.6%

Other fuel
combustion

9.0%

Industry

10.4%

Fugitive emissions

Industrial processes

3.9%

3.4%

Land use change

18.2%

Agriculture

13.5%

Waste

3.6%

Road

Air
Rail, ship, & other transport

Residential buildings

Commercial buildings

Unallocated fuel combustion

Iron & steel
Aluminum/non-ferrous metals
Machinery
Pulp, paper & printing
Food & tobacco

Chemicals

Cement

Other industry

T&D losses
Coal mining

Oil/gas extraction, refining
& processing

Deforestation
Afforestation
Reforestation
Harvest/management
Other

Agricultural energy use

Agriculture soils

Livestock & manure

Rice cultivation
Other agriculture
Landfills
Wastewater, other waste

9.9%

1.6%
2.3%

9.9%

5.4%

3.5%

3.2%
1.4%
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%

4.8%

3.8%

5.0%

1.9%
1.4%

6.3%

18.3%
-1.5%
-0.5%
2.5%
-0.6%

1.4%

6.0%

5.1%

1.5%
0.9%
2.0%
1.6%

Carbon dioxide

(CO2)  77%

HFCs, PFCs,

SF6  1%

Methane
(CH4)  14%

Nitrous oxide

(N2O)  8%

Source: World Resources Institute; see Baumert, Herzog, and Pershing 2005.

difﬁ culty and cardiovascular damage. HC 
and NOx combine to form ozone, making 
breathing  harder  and  reducing  visibility. 
NOx and HC also react to form ﬁ ne par-
ticulate  matter  (PM2.5),  small  enough  to 
enter  lung  tissue  and  increase  mortality 
risks.  Vehicle  emissions  of  all  local  pol-
lutants have fallen in developed countries, 
but they remain high elsewhere. Diseases 
related  to  air  pollution  contribute  to  the 
premature death of more than half a mil-
lion  people  each  year,  imposing  a  cost  of 
up to 2 percent of GDP in many developing 
countries. Transport may be responsible for 
about a quarter of this impact, mainly from 
private and commercial vehicles.71

Accidents. Similar to local air pollution, 
developed  countries  with  high  but  stable 
motorization  have  reduced  road  fatalities 

and injuries. But in developing and transi-
tion  countries,  these  rates  are  increasing. 
The  rate  of  road  fatalities  in  the  Russian 
Federation, for example, is ﬁ ve times that 
of the Netherlands. Some 1.2 million peo-
ple die in road accidents each year, and 90 
percent occur in low- and middle-income 
countries.  World  Bank  projections  sug-
gest an increase by more than 80 percent 
between 2000 and 2020 in these countries, 
but a decrease of 30 percent in high-income 
countries. For every death, there are many 
cases of injury and disablement. Projected 
health  losses  from  trafﬁ c  accidents  as  a 
share  of  the  total  health  losses  are  high-
est  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa 
(5  percent)—expected  to  rise  to  8  per-
cent—followed by Latin America and the 
Caribbean and East Asia and the Paciﬁ c (3 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   191
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   191

10/8/08   11:11:57 AM
10/8/08   11:11:57 AM

192 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 6.7    Unclogging Latin America’s arteries: transport costs now matter more than tariffs 

For the last two decades, the trade policy 
agenda of Latin America has been domi-
nated by traditional market access and 
policy barriers issues. It has paid off . Tariff s 
have come down a lot. Most-favored-na-
tion tariff s fell from more than 40 percent 
in the mid-1980s to close to 10 percent by 
2000. Still, trade agreements continue to 
dominate policy discussions in the region. 

But transport costs are now more 

important than tariff s. Simple averages 
of import ad valorem freight range from 
6.5 percent in Argentina to 12 percent in 
Colombia for intraregional freight, and 
from 7.5 percent in Uruguay to 25 percent 
in landlocked Paraguay. Freight costs 
in Latin America and the Caribbean for 
exports to the United States are—with 
the exception of Bolivia, Mexico, and 
República Bolivariana de Venezuela—
even higher than intraregional freight. 
Low port effi  ciency and weak compe-

tition in the maritime transport sector 
seem to be the culprits (see fi gure to the 
right). On average, transport costs in Latin 
America would decline by 20 percent if 
countries in the region had U.S. levels of 
port effi  ciency. 

A reduction of transport costs would 

bring about substantial benefi ts. A 
10-percent decrease in trade costs would 
increase the region’s imports by 50 per-
cent and intraregional exports by more 
than 60 percent. The benefi ts of better 
transport policies seem to be much larger 
than lower tariff s. Compared with a similar 

reduction in tariff s, the benefi ts of a fall in 
transport costs for intraregional exports 
are almost fi ve times larger and lead to 
an increase in the number of products 
exported to the region, which is nine times 
bigger than a similar reduction in tariff s. 
Source: Inter-American Development Bank, 
forthcoming. 

Transport costs now matter more for trade 
Percentage change in transport costs by making port efficiency, tariff rates, and number of 
shippers the same as U.S. levels, base year 2005

Percent
50

40

30

20

10

0

Port efficiency
Tariff
Number of shippers

Peru

Ecuador

Latin America
& Caribbean

Uruguay

Chile

Brazil

Source: Inter-American Development Bank, forthcoming.

percent), then Africa, Eastern Europe and 
Central Asia, and South Asia (2 percent). 

Fatality risks are highest where motor-
ization rates are rapidly increasing, because 
of  long  lags  in  implementing  road  safety 
measures.  The  transport  sector  can  thus 
impose  a  cost  on  development.  To  what 
extent accident costs are “external” depends 
on how well insurance markets can cover 
the  external  costs,  but  even  where  those 
markets do not work well, road safety mea-
sures can protect pedestrians, cyclists, and 
other drivers from the reckless. 

Transport: an increasingly 
important sector
For  most  modes  of  transport,  costs  have 
declined in many markets. Still, those costs 
are becoming a larger share of overall trade 
costs because of steeper declines in tariffs 
in regions such as Latin America and the 
Caribbean (see box 6.7). And with fuel costs 
rising, transport’s share will rise even more. 

What is needed for transport to continue to 
contribute to development? 

Poor  countries  become  big  producers 
before they become big consumers. Income 
generation by importing intermediate goods 
and raw materials and exporting processed 
goods will be important. The relocation of 
intermediate production processes to mid-
dle-  and  low-income  countries  indicates 
the enormous potential beneﬁ ts from inte-
gration into world markets even for these 
countries,  limited  mainly  by  transport 
and communications costs. But achieving 
this raises difﬁ cult institutional questions. 
The provision of access to foreign markets 
implies that some of the beneﬁ ts of trans-
port policies will accrue to foreign coun-
tries. Coordinating international transport 
policies thus requires a growing conﬁ dence 
in  reciprocal  support  for  international 
transport. 

The increasing returns to scale in trans-
port add two more coordination problems. 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   192
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   192

10/8/08   11:11:57 AM
10/8/08   11:11:57 AM

 

Transport Costs and Specialization 

193

The  scale  of  least-cost  port  and  airport 
investments calls for hub-and-spoke trans-
port systems in which neighboring coun-
tries share facilities. Because ownership of 
large infrastructure facilities provides mar-
ket power, the sharing of facilities requires 
credible agreements. Increasing returns in 
transport operations—with maritime ship-
ping supplied by a small number of ﬁ rms 
and  logistics  services  being  consolidated 
in  fewer  hands—may  require  regulatory 
regimes  to  realize  the  potential  for  lower 
transport  costs.  The  mutual  dependence 
of transport policy and competition policy 
implies a global effort, such as that started 
by some multilateral organizations.

Transport and communication costs will 
remain  a  principal  inﬂ uence  on  the  speed 
and efﬁ ciency of the spatial transformations 
needed  for  growth.  Countries  at  different 
stages of transformation will have to formu-
late different policies for reducing transport 
costs. East, South, and Central Asia illustrate 
the contrasts:
(cid:129)  Developing countries in East Asia are now 
closer to world markets, as Japan and the 
Republic  of  Korea  have  prospered,  and 

their  transport  costs  to  North  America 
and Western Europe have fallen. They have 
joined the growing trade in intermediate 
and ﬁ nal manufactured goods. Countries 
such as Tunisia can do the same. 

(cid:129)  In South Asia, falling trade and commu-
nication  costs  have  helped  India  enter 
western  markets  for  intermediate  ser-
vices, eliminating some of the disadvan-
tages of being distant. Countries such as 
South Africa can do the same, exploiting 
their home market potential. 

(cid:129)  In  Central  Asia—with  economies  that 
are small, landlocked, and dependent on 
exports of primary products such as oil 
and gas—reducing transport costs will 
be more difﬁ cult. It will also be difﬁ cult 
for smaller countries in divided neigh-
borhoods, such as Burkina Faso, Malawi, 
Niger, and Rwanda. These countries will 
need aggressive measures to lessen the 
trade  friction,  enforceable  agreements 
with neighbors to share expensive infra-
structure,  and  selected  investments  to 
encourage  agglomeration  and  reduce 
the  transport  costs  for  primary  goods 
exports. 

WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   193
WDR09_12_Ch06.indd   193

10/8/08   11:11:57 AM
10/8/08   11:11:57 AM

Geography in motion
Geography in motion

Distance and Division in East Asia

When Admiral Zheng He brought a giraffe to Nanjing in 1415, it was believed to be a heavenly beast, associated with great peace 
and prosperity. It also marked the heyday of Chinese inﬂ uence in East Asia and the region’s wealth relative to the rest of the world. 
China at the time was probably the world’s largest economy, enjoying the highest standard of material, living with ﬂ ourishing art 
and education and advances in a range of technologies. Its naval skills had enabled voyages to places as far away as Africa.

China alone may have accounted 

for  one-third  of  global  manu-
facturing. This was not to last. 
A  hundred  years  later,  a  new  emperor 
destroyed  Zheng  He’s  navigation  logs 
and  slashed  the  navy  to  one-tenth  its 
size,  believing  that  the  costs  of  for-
eign  expeditions  outweighed  the  ben-
eﬁ ts.  China  entered  centuries  of  self-
 imposed isolation, broken in infamous 
and  damaging  fashion  by  the  British 
during  the  Opium  Wars  of  the  nine-
teenth century. 

East Asia’s age of isolationism
China was not alone in trying to shut 
out  the  rest  of  the  world.  In  Japan, 
Tokugawa  Iemitsu  issued  the “Closed 
Country Edict of 1635” and the “Exclu-
sion of the Portuguese, 1639,” effectively 
shutting off Japan to external inﬂ uences 
for the next two centuries. The edicts 
not only prevented foreign entry into 
Japan  but  also  banned  Japanese  from 
going abroad. The dislike of all things 
Western  extended  to  technology.  In 
an  extraordinary  attempt  to  preserve 
its culture and social hierarchy, Japan 
gradually abolished the gun in favor of 
the more elegant and symbolic samurai 
sword.

These  extreme  examples  show  the 
vast division between countries in East 
Asia,  especially  after  the  seventeenth 
century. Scholars do not agree fully on 
the economic effects of such division. 
Some  have  argued  that  reductions  in 
living standards were signiﬁ cant during 

the Qing and Tokugawa periods. Others 
believe that it is more apt to character-
ize  these  societies  as  having  stagnant 
rather than declining economies. In any 
event, wage levels in Japan and China at 
the start of the nineteenth century were 
well below those in London or Amster-
dam, even in real terms, perhaps by as 
much as 50 percent.1 Adam Smith had 
already recognized this: “The difference 
between the money price of labour in 
China and Europe is still greater than 
that between the money price of sub-
sistence;  because  the  real  recompence 
of  labour  is  higher  in  Europe  than  in 
China.”2

Smith was correct. Even before the 
Industrial Revolution, parts of Europe 
had advanced beyond Asia in their liv-
ing standards. He was also right in writ-
ing about China as a uniﬁ ed economy. 
The  mandarins  of  China  kept  excep-
tional records of wages paid to armorers 
and other craftsmen providing services 
to  the  government.  These  show  little 
regional difference despite the vast dis-
tances within imperial China. Only the 
less dense, sparsely populated northern 
areas had somewhat higher wages.

By the middle of the nineteenth cen-
tury, real wages in Canton and Tokyo, 
the most advanced cities in Asia, were 
only as high as in small European cit-
ies like Milan and Leipzig. Elsewhere in 
East  Asia  living  standards  were  lower 
still.  The  old  Chinese  tributary  states 
had been colonized, and Asian countries 
were  further  divided  (see  map  G3.1). 

Shortly thereafter, most of Europe went 
through  the  Industrial  Revolution, 
and the “great divide” between Europe 
and  Asia  widened,  with  widespread 
advances in European wages and gross 
domestic  product  (GDP).  According 
to Angus Maddison (2006), East Asia’s 
share of global GDP, constant at around 
40 percent between 1500 and 1800, fell 
to less than 15 percent by 1950.

Fifty years of Asian integration
Fast forward to today. East Asian econo-
mies  have  become  integrated  through 
a  dense  array  of  regional  production 
networks.  These  supply  chains  started 
with outsourcing by Japanese multina-
tionals in the 1980s, as wages and land 
costs  in  the  dense  production  area  of 
Tokyo grew prohibitive for competitive 
manufacturing. In fact, economic con-
gestion in Hong Kong, China; Japan; the 
Republic of Korea; and Taiwan, China, 
has resulted in spillovers—ﬁ rst to mid-
dle-income countries in Southeast Asia, 
and then to China, as the barriers of eco-
nomic ideology were reduced. Recently, 
supply  chains  have  centered  on  China 
and  the  great  assembly  operations  in 
Guangdong and Shenzhen. As China has 
matured, it too has become an exporter 
of intermediates and capital equipment. 
China is now the main trading partner 
for Japan and the Republic of Korea and 
sources more than half its rapidly grow-
ing imports from East Asia. 

Intraregional  trade  in  East  Asia 
today  approximates  that  within  the 

WDR09_13_GIM03.indd   194
WDR09_13_GIM03.indd   194

10/8/08   11:15:15 AM
10/8/08   11:15:15 AM

Geography in Motion

195

Map G3.1    Asia divided: conflict in the middle of the nineteenth century

Chinese territory lost

Chinese tributaries lost

Taiping rebels, 1853–64

RUSSIA

TO RUSSIA

M A N C H U R I A

Sakhalin

MARITIME 
PROV.

Vladivostok

Hokkaido

TO JAPAN

S I N K I A N G

Muslim rebellion
1862-77

T I B E T

NEPAL

SIKKIM

BHUTAN

MONGOLIA
(Russian sphere:
independant 1911)

LIAOTUNG PENINSULA

(Russia)

Port Arthur
(Lüshun)(Russia) 

Peking
(Beijing)

Tientsin
(Tianjin)

Nien rebellion
1853-68

KOREA

Dairen
(Dalian) 
Weihaiwei
(Weihai)
(United Kingdom)
Kiaochow Bay

(Germany)

CHINA

Chungking
(Chongqing)

Nanking

Shanghai
Ningpo

Hankow

Foochow
(Fuzhou)

Taiwan

Honshu

JAPAN

Shikoku

Kyushu

Okinawa

Canton
(Guangzhou)

Kowlong &
Hong Kong
(United Kingdom)

Kwang-Chow
Bay (France)
Hainan

TO BRITAIN

BURMA

INDO-
CHINA

SIAM

Andman
Islands

Source: www.fordham.edu/halsall.

Luzon

Mindoro

Samar

PHILIPPINES

Palawan

Mindanao

TO FRANCE

European  Union  (EU),  growing  con-
sistently faster than that between East 
Asia  and  other  regions  in  the  world. 
East Asian countries are the source for 
almost two-thirds of all foreign invest-
ment in the region. Even technology is 
starting to originate within the region, 
especially in key export industries such 
as electronics. East Asian countries are 
busily driving down divisions between 
each other in the form of trade barri-
ers and other border costs. They started 
with world-class logistics in ports and 
airports—albeit  sometimes  restricted 
to  special  economic  zones.  And  they 
have  continued  with  improvements 

in soft infrastructure, such as customs 
reforms and visa exemptions within the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN). 

The falling division between coun-
tries  in  East  Asia  has  coincided  with 
rapid growth across a diverse spectrum 
ranging from Lao People’s Democratic 
Republic  with  a  per  capita  income 
of  $500  in  2006  to  Singapore  with  a 
per capita income of almost $30,000. 
Within  East Asia,  incomes  are  slowly 
converging: poor countries are grow-
ing  faster  than  rich  countries.  Most 
East  Asian  countries  have  followed 
similar paths, starting with agricultural 

intensiﬁ cation  and  rural  industrial-
ization, followed by urban expansion 
and manufactured exports. There has 
been  learning  from  abroad—of  new 
technologies and of new institutions. 
Exports have become more technolog-
ically complex. Middle-income coun-
tries  have  specialized  in  component 
production, while rich Asian countries 
have added more value through inno-
vation, branding, and greater techno-
logical sophistication.

As the region has grown, it has devel-
oped a dynamic that reinforces growth. 
ASEAN, China, Japan, and the Republic 
of Korea are an economic mass compa-
rable  to  North  America  in  the  1990s. 
As  the  center  of  gravity  of  the  global 
economy shifts toward the Paciﬁ c Rim, 
global  market  access  for  everyone  in 
East Asia has improved.

The degree of intraregional trade in 
East Asia may be considered surprising 
given  the  history  of  divisive  political 
relationships between many East Asian 
countries. In the Western Hemisphere, 
the economic effects of conﬂ ict between 
countries  were  overcome  by  formal 
institutions  of  codiﬁ ed  legal  systems 
and political agreements that governed 
arm’s-length  commercial  transactions 
and that could be readily expanded to 
accommodate  rapid  growth  in  com-
merce  and  ﬁ nance.  In  East  Asia  these 
institutions have been slower to develop. 
Instead,  a  long  history  of  social  net-
works,  communities,  and  informal 
institutions—with roots in the migra-
tions  over  millennia  of  people  from 
Southeastern China to Southeast Asia—
provides  the  trust  to  support  modern 
international integration of goods and 
money (see map G3.2).

The integration ahead—
the twin challenges of 
distance and division
Peering  into  the  future,  the  region 
faces  challenges  on  its  path  of  rapid 
integration.

The shift in economic density toward 
the north poses a special challenge for 
Southeast  Asia.  How  can  it  remain 

WDR09_13_GIM03.indd   195
WDR09_13_GIM03.indd   195

10/8/08   11:15:26 AM
10/8/08   11:15:26 AM

196 

Geography in motion

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Map G3.2    Asia integrated: trade at the end of the twentieth century

Total imports
(US$ billions)

>250
100–250
10–75
75–100
<10

CHINA
CHINA
CHINA

REREPP. OF. OF
REP. OF
KOREA
KOREA
KOREA

JAJAPPANAN
JAPAN

TAIWAN,
TAIWAN,
TAIWAN,
CHINA
CHINA
CHINA

HONG
HONG
HONG
KONG,
KONG,
KONG,
CHINA
CHINA
CHINA

THAILAND
THAILAND
THAILAND

VIETNAM
VIETNAM
VIETNAM

MALMALAAYYSIASIA
MALAYSIA

SINGAPORE
SINGAPORE
SINGAPORE

Bilateral import flows (US$ billions)
>150

100–150

50–100

Source: Gill and Kharas 2007.

25–50

10–25

PHILIPPINES
PHILIPPINES
PHILIPPINES

INDONESIA
INDONESIA
INDONESIA

signiﬁ cant as an economic force in the 
region? One answer perhaps lies in the 
development of world-class cities. The 
major  metropolises  of  Southeast  Asia 
need to develop themselves into “sticky 
places,” attracting and retaining global 
talent.  Meanwhile,  the  integration  of 
Australia  and  India  into  the  region 
might alter the dynamics of place, offset-
ting to some degree the northward drift 
of Asia’s economic center of gravity.

The problems encountered by coun-
tries distant from the major markets of the 
region are echoed in lagging areas within 
countries. Signiﬁ cant poverty remains in 

East Asia, with high poverty rates in areas 
like western China, southern and eastern 
Philippines,  Thailand’s  northeast,  and 
Vietnam’s  central  highlands.  The  gap 
between per capita incomes in the richest 
and poorest provinces of China—negli-
gible under the imperial dynasties of the 
past—has swelled to 13.1:1 (compared 
with 2.1:1 in the United States). Although 
many have moved closer to prosperous 
areas,  overcoming  the  geographic  dis-
tances  that  isolate  these  populations  is 
still seen as a major challenge.

Within  East Asian  countries,  peo-
ple  are  moving  to  the  markets,  and 

markets are developing where people 
are concentrated. Urbanization is large 
and rapid in most countries, perhaps 
adding 25 million city dwellers every 
year for the next two decades. Most of 
these  people  will  move  to  small  and 
medium-size cities of less than 1 mil-
lion people, not to major metropolitan 
areas. Managing these small cities efﬁ -
ciently and integrating them into the 
national  economies  will  be  a  crucial 
task for reducing distance and sustain-
ing growth.

Meanwhile,  East  Asia  still  faces 
strategic questions about how to bring 
down  divisions  between  countries  in 
the  region.  ASEAN’s  two-speed  pro-
cess shows how hard it is for countries 
with different incomes and economic 
structures to integrate deeply. No for-
mal  process  of  economic  integration 
brings  together  all  the  economies  of 
the  region.  A  ﬁ rst  attempt  to  start  a 
regional dialogue was at the East Asia 
Summit in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in 
December 2005. The summit called for 
ﬁ nancial stability, energy security, pov-
erty eradication, and narrowing gaps 
between countries. It underscored the 
challenges that still divide the region: 
cross-border migration, environmen-
tal spillovers, diversity of governance 
standards,  and  cultural  understand-
ing. Other interesting experiments to 
foster  regional  integration  are  under 
way,  such  as  within  ASEAN+3,  but 
the institutional leadership to forge a 
common  future  is  fragmented.  Even 
so,  leading  scholars  have  noted  that 
“the emergence of an integrated East 
Asia is inevitable and necessary.”3 The 
challenge is ﬁ guring out how to make 
this happen quickly.

Contributed by Homi Kharas.

WDR09_13_GIM03.indd   196
WDR09_13_GIM03.indd   196

10/8/08   11:15:27 AM
10/8/08   11:15:27 AM

Part Three
reframing the policy debates

Can crowded cities in developing countries pull people in and power them out of poverty? 
Does migration help those who move and those left behind? How can trade help the 
world’s wealthy and most destitute? What can policy makers do to address the three big 
challenges facing the developing world—a billion slum dwellers, a billion people living 
in remote and underserved areas, and the “bottom billion”? Part three of the Report 
provides the answer: economic integration. How? By using spatially blind institutions, 
spatially connective infrastructure, and spatially targeted incentives and calibrating the 
response to the diffi  culty of integration. Chapter 7 explains what economic integration 
means for metropolises, cities, towns, and villages. Chapter 8 proposes how integration 
between economically leading and lagging areas can benefi t everyone. Chapter 9 
lays out the diffi  cult steps needed to successfully integrate the world’s most isolated 
countries. In doing so, the chapters in part three revisit and reframe long-standing policy 
debates on urbanization, territorial development, and international integration.

WDR09_14_Part03.indd   197
WDR09_14_Part03.indd   197

10/9/08   11:27:17 AM
10/9/08   11:27:17 AM

CHAPTER 7 Concentration 

without Congestion 
Policies for an inclusive urbanization

A team of urban experts, as part of 

a routine exercise in 1974, forecast 
the size of the world’s most popu-
lous cities in 2000. Kinshasa, the Democratic 
Republic of Congo’s capital, would grow to 9 
million, more than London today. Pakistan’s 
Karachi would expand to 16 million, almost 
as large as New York City. The forecasts were 
way off (see ﬁ gure 7.1). Kinshasa’s popula-
tion is about half of London’s today, Kara-
chi’s  about  half  of  New  York  City’s.  Why 
were the experts, generally good at forecast-
ing national populations, so wrong in pre-
dicting city sizes?

The reason: forecasting the spatial dis-
tribution of people in a country is not the 
same  thing  as  predicting  the  size  of  its 
population. As shown in earlier chapters, 
spatial  transformations—the  growth  of 
cities and leading areas—are linked closely 
to changes in the economy, especially the 
sectoral  transformations  that  accompany 
growth and the opening of an economy to 
foreign trade and investment. So predict-
ing the size of a city is economic forecasting,
a hazardous occupation. Take Guangzhou 
in China. Its population in 2000 was more 
than  a  third  larger  than  the  4.5  million 
predicted in 1974. Beijing’s was half the 19 
million  predicted.  The  experts  could  not 
have  foreseen  China’s  economic  liberal-
ization and growth, which quickly would 
change the country’s spatial structure. Sim-
ply extrapolating past trends, they should 
instead  have  examined  the  market  forces 
of agglomeration, migration, and special-
ization—and the government policies that 
help or hinder them. 

Projections  now  suggest  that  cities  in 
developing  countries  will  double  in  three 
decades,  adding  another  2  billion  people. 
Indeed, large cities in developing countries 
will grow bigger to provide the urbanization 
economies sought by entrepreneurs, workers, 
and innovators. But this will happen mostly 
in economies that are doing well. Medium-
size  cities  remain  the  backbone  of  urban 
systems, providing the localization econo-
mies that producers with more specialized 
needs seek. But they will ﬂ ourish only where 
economies are industrializing. Smaller cities 
and towns continue to serve and to depend 
on surrounding rural settlements. But they 
will grow rapidly only in areas where farms 
and village economies are doing well. 

The  spatial  transformations  that  lead 
to  the  rise  of  cities  and  towns  will  not  be 
orderly.  Informal  settlements—slums  and 
shantytowns—may form and expand as the 
rising  demands  of  workers  and  ﬁ rms  out-
strip the capacities of governments to insti-
tute  well-functioning  land  markets  and  to 
invest in infrastructure and accommodation. 
If today’s developed countries are a guide, it 
takes  many  decades  to  address  within-city 
disparities  and  to  absorb  informal  settle-
ments into more organized city structures. 
Trying to restrict rural-urban migration can 
be counter productive. Why? Because limiting 
density and diversity stiﬂ es innovation and 
productivity. 

Policy makers, if they are not careful, can 
end up harming these transformations. By 
not instituting ﬂ exible regulation and versa-
tile land use conversion, they can make urban 
areas inhospitable to ﬁ rms and investors. By 

198

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   198
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   198

10/9/08   4:27:09 PM
10/9/08   4:27:09 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

199

not  providing  adequate  water,  sanitation, 
schools, and health care in rural areas, they 
can prematurely push villagers to towns and 
cities. By not investing enough in the infra-
structure of rapidly growing cities, they can 
encourage  congestion.  More  generally,  by 
not responding appropriately to the needs of 
spatial transformations for different types of 
places, they cannot reap the full beneﬁ ts of 
density and diversity, which congestion and 
division can undermine.

To help nations beneﬁ t from urbaniza-
tion, this chapter proposes a policy frame-
work—informed  by  the  stylized  facts  of 
spatial transformations (chapter 1) and the 
insights  about  agglomeration  economies 
that drive these changes (chapter 4). It out-
lines the policy priorities and their sequenc-
ing, using the experiences of countries that 
have urbanized well and of those that have 
struggled. The main messages: 
(cid:129)  Rural-urban  transformations  are  best 
facilitated when policy makers recognize 
the  economic  interdependence  among 
settlements.  Within  a  country’s  hierar-
chy  of  cities,  towns,  and  villages,  each 
specializes in a different function and has 
strong interrelationships with others. So 
the policy discussion should be framed 
not at the extremes of the national level 
or the individual settlement. Instead, it 
should be framed at the level of what is 
termed an “area,” usually a state or prov-
ince. Policy makers should see themselves 
as managers of the portfolio of places in 
such an area. An area approach can also 
inform national urbanization strategies. 
While area-speciﬁ c urban shares in the 
population will determine priorities for 
all  levels  of  government  (central,  pro-
vincial, and municipal), a nation’s urban 
share can be a good guide to the overall 
complexity of its challenges.

(cid:129)  Policy  challenges  become  more  com-
plex  with  urbanization.  Cities  and 
towns  provide  ﬁ rms  and  families  the 
beneﬁ ts of proximity, but the compact-
ness  of  activity  produces  congestion, 
pollution, and social tension, which can 
offset those beneﬁ ts. Whether a policy 
is  desirable  depends  on  if  it  addresses 
the market’s failures and abets concen-
tration. In countries or areas with low 

Figure 7.1    The growth of cities has been grossly overestimated

Dhaka
Guangzhou
Tokyo
Hong Kong, China
Hyderabad
Istanbul
Bangalore

Moscow
Delhi
Lagos
Tianjin
Chicago
Osaka-Kobe
Leningrad
Buenos Aires
Mumbai
New York–Newark
Ahmedabad
Los Angeles
Paris
Manila
Bogotá
Shanghai
Kolkata
São Paulo
Jakarta
London
Cairo
Karachi
Chennai
Mexico City
Bangkok
Lima-Callao
Rio de Janeiro
Kinshasa
Seoul
Beijing
Tehran
Baghdad

–60

–40

–20

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Prediction error relative to population in 2000, %

Source: Satterthwaite 2007.
Note: Comparison of predictions in 1974 with estimates of city populations in 2000. Bar indicates the extent to 
which the city population was overpredicted in 1974 relative to its size in 2000. A negative number indicates 
that a city size was greater in 2000 than predicted.

urban shares, for example, trafﬁ c con-
gestion and slums may not be the major 
policy problems. But in rapidly urban-
izing areas, congestion can quickly set 
in.  And  metropolitan  areas  may  need, 
in addition, to address within-city divi-
sions posed by shantytowns and slums. 
(cid:129)  Prioritizing and sequencing of policies 
can help governments facilitate inclu-
sive  urbanization  even  in  the  early 
stages of development. Each dimension 
of  the  integration  challenge  requires 
a  different  family  of  instruments.  For 
areas of incipient urbanization, the pol-
icy challenge is one-dimensional: build 
density with spatially blind institutions. 
For areas of intermediate urbanization, 
it is two-dimensional: build density and 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   199
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   199

10/9/08   4:27:10 PM
10/9/08   4:27:10 PM

200 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

reduce economic distance with spatially 
connective infrastructure. And for areas 
of  advanced  urbanization,  it  is  three-
dimensional:  build  density,  overcome 
distance,  and  address  the  economic 
and  social  divisions—caused,  say,  by 
slums—with  spatially  targeted  inter-
ventions. But at every stage, policy mak-
ers should emphasize the spatially blind 
institutions  that  encourage  density  in 
the right places. 

The  chapter  first  summarizes  how 
urbanization policies can help places facili-
tate agglomeration economies. It next out-
lines a framework for economic integration 
to guide the management of a portfolio of 
places, using the experience of places that 
have  urbanized  successfully.  It  then  dis-
cusses examples of the framework in action 
in today’s developing countries. 

BOX 7.1     Are the policy messages of this Report antirural? 

No.

The economic geography of nations 
does not conform to a simple 
urban-rural split. A continuum of 
density gives rise to a portfolio of 
interrelated places. Symbiosis is the 
rule. At the head is a country’s lead-
ing city, and below it, a spectrum 
of settlements—secondary cities, 
small urban centers, towns, and 
villages. 

A low-income country’s portfolio 
of places consists of primarily rural 
areas. At this phase of incipient 
urbanization, the mainstay of a strat-
egy to facilitate spatial transforma-
tions necessary for economic growth 
is a set of spatially blind policies: 
•  Versatile and well-implemented 
regulations governing land mar-
kets to enforce property rights, 
safeguard land tenure, improve 
land transfers, ease land use con-
version to refl ect market needs, 
and bolster land taxation 

•  Basic and social service provision 
to improve education and health, 
increase productivity, and encour-
age mobility 

•  Sound macroeconomic policies to 

reduce market distortions, elimi-
nate biases against agriculture, 
improve the business climate, 
stimulate competitiveness, and 
promote investment and adopt 
new technologies.
Such “aspatial” policies promote rural 
development—both in agriculture and 
the nonfarm economy—so that every 
place becomes better equipped to par-
ticipate in industry and services. 
These policies will dispropor-

tionately benefi t rural households 
because the rural nonfarm economy 
typically accounts for 30–50 percent 
of rural employment. Likewise, rural 
households engage in diverse eco-
nomic activities, with nonagricultural 
sources contributing 35–42 percent 
of household income. Growth in the 
nonfarm sector will stimulate growth 
in agriculture as inputs become 
cheaper, profi ts are reinvested in agri-
culture, and technological change 
allows better farming methods.a 
Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Feder and Lanjouw 2001.

Principles for managing a portfolio 
of places
Debates  about  urbanization  often  evoke 
images  of  overcrowded  cities,  visible  con-
centrations of poverty, and appalling envi-
ronmental degradation. This can result in a 
general policy stance to control urban growth 
and curb rural-urban migration. Geographi-
cally targeted interventions to clear or clean 
up slums that proliferated during low- and 
middle-income  stages  of  development  can 
end up dominating the discussion. 

This chapter reframes the urbanization 
debate.  Historical  evidence  suggests  that 
urbanization in developing countries will 
continue to be rapid at early stages of eco-
nomic growth—much of the rise in urban 
shares  takes  place  before  nations  get  to 
upper-middle incomes. But the rising den-
sity is to be welcomed if it produces agglom-
eration economies. The debate should not 
be mainly about the pace of urbanization, 
the  amount  of  rural-urban  migration,  or 
the ways to eradicate slums with targeted 
interventions. Instead, it should be about 
the efﬁ ciency and inclusiveness of the pro-
cesses that transform a rural economy into 
an urban one. And it should be about how 
policy  can  best  address  the  coordination 
failures  that  arise  at  each  stage  of  urban-
ization. “The poor are gravitating to towns 
and cities, but more rapid poverty reduc-
tion will probably require a faster pace of 
urbanization, not a slower one—and devel-
opment policy makers will need to facilitate 
this process, not hinder it.”1 And because a 
rural-urban transformation involves both 
the urban and the rural, urbanization strat-
egies  must  include  measures  to  improve 
rural lives and livelihoods (see box 7.1). 

The principle: maximize agglomeration 
economies across the portfolio of places
Concentration, associated with rising density, 
brings potential beneﬁ ts from “thick” mar-
kets. But it also brings congestion and squa-
lor. The main aim of urban policy is to help 
settlements deliver agglomeration economies 
while reducing the grime, crime, and time 
costs  that  come  with  rising  concentration. 
At different stages of urbanization, the bind-
ing constraints to promoting concentration 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   200
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   200

10/9/08   4:27:11 PM
10/9/08   4:27:11 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

201

while controlling congestion differ, as do the 
priorities at each stage of urbanization.

(cid:129)  Incipient.  Areas  of  incipient  urbaniza-
tion—with urban shares of about 25 per-
cent—are predominantly agricultural or 
resource based, with low economic den-
sity.  The  priority  is  simply  to  facilitate 
agglomeration  forces  and  to  encourage 
internal  economies  of  scale  for  plants, 
mills, and factories in towns. Because it is 
not yet clear which places will be favored 
by markets and for what purposes, neu-
trality  between  places  should  be  the 
watchword for policy makers. 

(cid:129)  Intermediate.  As  urbanization  pro-
gresses,  economic  alliances  strengthen 
within  and  between  urbanized  areas. 
Many ﬁ rms and plants in the same sec-
tor colocate to take advantage of sharing 
inputs and knowledge spillovers. In such 
areas—with urban population shares of 
about  50  percent—the  promotion  of 
localization  economies  is  the  highest 
priority.  Efﬁ ciency  in  production  and 
transport is the watchword. 

(cid:129)  Advanced. For highly urbanized areas, 
productivity  and  consumption  bene-
ﬁ ts arise from urbanization economies 
associated with the diversity and inten-
sity  of  economic  activity.  While  func-
tionality is the goal for industrial towns 
and cities, the watchword for postindus-
trial metropolises, with urban shares of 
about 75 percent, is livability. 

The policy rule: sequence and calibrate
The spatial dimensions of density, distance, 
and division spotlight the policy challenge 

in each of these types of place. In predomi-
nantly  rural  neighborhoods,  the  policy 
challenge  is  one  dimensional  and  corre-
sponds to the need to build density. In areas 
where urbanization has gathered momen-
tum, the challenge is two dimensional. It 
incorporates the need to promote density 
and overcome problems of distance caused 
by congestion. In areas of advanced urban-
ization, the challenge is three dimensional. 
For metropolises, again, there is a need to 
encourage density and overcome distance. 
To this should be added the need to elimi-
nate divisions within cities, which segregate 
the poor in informal slums from the rest, in 
formally settled parts (see ﬁ gure 7.2). 

The unit for deliberating government 
action: an area
Different  parts  of  a  country  urbanize  at 
different  speeds.  Unevenness  is  the  rule, 
not an exception. And there are synergies 
and  economic  interdependencies  among 
settlements  of  different  sizes.  Refram-
ing  urbanization  policies  to  better  meet 
the  economic  imperatives  at  all  stages  of 
the  rural-urban  transformation  requires 
rethinking  the  spatial  scale  for  deciding 
policy  priorities  and  design.  This  Report 
makes the case for considering policies at 
an appropriate geographic scale: an “area,” 
or state or province, generally the middle 
tier of government between the  central and 
municipal. The scale should be big enough 
to permit both rural-urban and interurban 
linkages. The experience of Beijing, Shang-
hai  municipality,  and  Guangdong  prov-
ince supports a deliberately designed area 
approach to urban strategy. Two other areas 

Figure 7.2    The dimensions increase with the level of urbanization 

One-dimensional area

(density)

Two-dimensional area
(density + distance)

Three-dimensional area

(density + distance + division)

Incipient urbanization

Intermediate urbanization

Advanced urbanization

Villages

DENSITY
Towns

Towns

DENSITY

DENSITY

Core
city

DISTANCE

Source: WDR 2009 team.

Metropolis

Large city
DIVISION

DISTANCE
Secondary

cities

DENSITY

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   201
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   201

10/9/08   4:27:11 PM
10/9/08   4:27:11 PM

202 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

in western China—Chengdu and Chongq-
ing—are now taking the same approach to 
urbanization, with some success. 

An area approach does not rule out the 
aggregation of urbanization strategies to a 
national  level.  High-density  areas  tend  to 
have  populations  concentrated  in  metro-
politan cities, intermediate-density areas in 
medium-size cities, and low-density areas in 
small towns and villages. In the same way, 
more urbanized countries have more of their 
people in high-density areas, and less urban-
ized countries have some high-density areas, 
but  most  people  are  in  low-density  areas. 
Urbanization  policies  should  incorporate 
this unevenness of economic development.

A country’s aggregate urban share can 
be  a  good  indicator  of  the  complexity  of 
the urbanization challenges it faces. In the 
simplest case, one area may characterize an 
entire country, as for Singapore. For larger 
countries,  a  careful  aggregation  can  help 
determine the priorities at different levels 
of government. 

(cid:129)  In countries where urbanization is incipi-
ent, such as Ethiopia, with three-fourths of 
its population in rural areas, the integra-
tion challenge is unidimensional: facilitat-
ing density. To be sure, the capital cities and 
a handful of other cities even in predomi-
nantly rural nations face multi dimensional 
challenges in their spatial transformation. 
But the top priority is the set of aspatial 
policy instruments that apply universally 
to all places—establishing market institu-
tions to regulate land use and transactions, 
and delivering such basic services as secu-
rity, schools, streets, and sanitation. So in 
the countries of Sub-Saharan Africa and 
Central Asia, the role of national govern-
ments is pivotal in laying the foundations 
of inclusive urbanization. 

(cid:129)  Where urbanization is intermediate—as 
in many parts of the countries of East 
and South Asia such as India and Chi-
na—central  and  provincial  adminis-
trations must also build transport and 
communication infrastructure.

(cid:129)  Where urbanization is more advanced, 
as  in  the  countries  of  Latin  America, 
North Africa, and Eastern Europe, cen-
tral, state, and municipal governments 
must synchronize efforts to facilitate the 

geographic transformations for the push 
from middle to high incomes. 

A framework for integration
As urbanization advances, the policy impera-
tives change, with the instruments spanning 
the spectrum from spatially blind to spatially 
targeted. While the policy debates overempha-
size the most spatially explicit of government 
actions, such as slum-upgrading programs, 
successful urbanization aimed at integrating 
every nation’s portfolio of places requires the 
use of the full range of instruments—institu-
tions, infrastructure, and incentives. 

Spatially blind “institutions” to 
facilitate economic density
The responsibility for building institutions 
that will be the bedrock for urbanization in 
all parts of the country lies mainly with the 
central government. Chief among them are 
those governing the management of land. In 
this Report, “institutions” encompass three 
broad sets of measures: law and order (espe-
cially  the  deﬁ nition  and  enforcement  of 
property rights), the universal provision of 
basic services, and macroeconomic stability 
(see “Navigating This Report” for details). 
These are core mandates for the central gov-
ernment, and delivering them—or failing 
to—will  alter  the  geographic  distribution 
of economic activities forever.

The institutions governing land markets 
include a comprehensive land registry; cred-
ible mechanisms for contract enforcement 
and conﬂ ict resolution; ﬂ exible zoning laws; 
and  versatile  subdivision  regulations  that 
help, rather than hinder, the conversion of 
land for different uses. The transformation 
of the agricultural sector from one based on 
communal land rights to individual prop-
erty rights is the sine qua non for urbaniza-
tion. The evidence clearly shows that once 
property rights have been established and 
density  is  increasing,  land  regulation  and 
planning  can  ensure  the  efﬁ cient  coordi-
nation  of  different  land  uses.  But  if  regu-
lations  are  overzealous,  they  can  hinder 
the  beneﬁ ts  of  density  and  agglomeration 
economies. Similarly, rigid land use conver-
sion rules, which may be a consequence of 
inﬂ exible regulations, can be detrimental to 
density, as are overly restrictive minimum 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   202
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   202

10/9/08   4:27:11 PM
10/9/08   4:27:11 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

203

building standards. The fourth institution 
is adequate housing ﬁ nance.

Institutions  for  fluid  land  markets 
remain  important.  The  property  rights 
embodied  in  land  titles  are  essential  for 
converting assets into usable wealth.2 The 
practical problems of titling, not least the 
cost  of  implementation,  should  not  deter 
strengthening the legal framework for indi-
vidual property ownership. Indeed, formal 
titles are necessary for functioning land and 
property markets. Although customary sys-
tems of tenure still permit informal trans-
actions, the absence of formal titles hinders 
the  conversion  of  land  to  areas  of  higher 
economic return. Informality is a brake on 
land development, constraining an efﬁ cient 
spatial transformation. 

Consider  preindustrial  Europe.  With 
more secure individual property rights to 
land, English cities grew rapidly.3 Indeed, 
England may have been the ﬁ rst to indus-
trialize  because  it  introduced  such  rights 
before  other  European  countries.  The 
Nobel prize–winning economist Douglass 
North uses this to spotlight what land insti-
tutions  can  do  for  long-run  growth  and 
development.4

The  “enclosure”  movement  made  indi-
vidual  private  property  rights  possible. 
Starting around 1500 open commons were 
fenced, hedged, or otherwise closed off and 
deeded  or  titled  to  individuals.  By  1545 
around 40 percent of England’s surface area 
belonged to private individuals. The Enclo-
sure Act of 1604 fostered the conversion of 
open  commons  into  private  plots,  which 
continued until the early twentieth centu-
ry.5 Most researchers agree that enclosures in 
England increased agricultural productivity, 
which released labor from the land, and pro-
vided the food surplus to support the rapidly 
increasing urban population.6 This allowed 
England to become, for a time, the “work-
shop of the world.”7 More evidence on how 
aspatial  institutions  initiate  urbanization 
comes from Denmark (see box 7.2).

Another  example  of  what  widespread 
private property rights can do for growth, 
and for density, comes from North America 
and the countries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean. In the early period of European 
settlement, Canada and the United States 
were  seen  as  having  economic  potential 

similar  to  that  of  other  parts  of  the  New 
World (see “Geography in Motion: Over-
coming Distance in North America”). After 
winning  the  Anglo-French  Seven  Years’ 
War  of  1756–63,  the  British  vigorously 
debated whether to claim the small Carib-
bean islands of Guadeloupe (1,628 square 
kilometers) or Canada (9.8 million square 
kilometers) as the spoils of victory.8 

The development trajectories of North 
America and Latin America would diverge 
radically.  In  Latin  America,  the  Spanish 
colonialists  gave  large  tracts  of  land  to  a 
handful of individuals, along with the right 
to tax the local populace. Customary com-
munal  property  rights  determined  land 
use, making people less willing to move. In 
North America, by contrast, there were few 
barriers to the acquisition of land, creating 

BOX 7.2     Land reform to jump-start urbanization: 

aiding villeins in Denmark

In central Copenhagen a “pillar 
of freedom” commemorates land 
reform. The monument honors the 
fi nal abolition, in 1788, of “villenage,” 
a form of serfdom common in West-
ern Europe in the Middle Ages. At the 
beginning of the eighteenth century 
less than 1 percent of agricultural 
land was farmed by land-owning 
peasants, and large amounts of land 
were common property. Required to 
work for landlords, “villeins” could 
not move without their landlord’s 
consent. But starting in 1760, most 
communal land was transformed into 
private holdings. Between 1788 and 
1807, landlords sold around half of 
their land to tenants. By 1835 almost 
65 percent of the land was owner 
occupied.a A few decades later, Den-
mark experienced a “take-off ” into 
industrialization and urbanization. 
This urbanization did not mean 

rural squalor. Structural, techno-
logical, and institutional changes 
reduced the value of tenancy to 
landlords, increasing the economic 
leverage of tenants. In a 1784 decree 
the century-old obligation of land-
lords to collect taxes on behalf of 
the state was waived on land the 
landlord sold to their former tenants. 

In 1788 the abolition of villeinage 
further improved the bargaining 
power of tenants. Policy interven-
tions in the credit market also helped. 
In 1786 two public credit institutions 
were established to provide loans for 
land purchases, complementing an 
already rather active and effi  cient pri-
vate credit market. The result: credit 
did not constrain many prospective 
buyers.b 

Market-based transactions, facili-
tated by government land policies, 
formed a large class of owner-
occupier farmers, later a driving force 
behind Denmark’s 1849 Constitution 
and emerging democracy. By pro-
moting education for the poor and 
for rural residents, they also spread 
basic services and gave a strong 
impetus to industrialization and small 
towns.c Denmark’s population rose 
sharply—in preindustrial societies, 
a growing population is a sign of 
prospering agriculture. After 1890 
agriculture fed a surge of industrial 
growth in small townsd instrumental 
in Denmark’s industrialization.e 

Contributed by Thomas Markussen.
a. Henriksen 2003. b. Henriksen 2003. 
c. Henriksen 2003. d. Pedersen 1990. 
e. Christensen 2004, p. 1.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   203
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   203

10/9/08   4:27:12 PM
10/9/08   4:27:12 PM

204 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

land markets and a predominantly owner-
operated agricultural sector on the western 
frontier.9 The U.S. Homestead Act of 1862 
gave  individuals  the  right  to  160  acres  of 
unoccupied public land, the early founda-
tion of a strong property rights system.

Contemporary  research  conﬁ rms  the 
role  of  well-enforced  individual  property 
rights.  A  study  of  80  countries  ﬁ nds  that 
institutional  quality  does  more  for  long-
run growth than either geographic factors 
or a country’s openness to trade.10 Another 
study of 75 countries ﬁ nds that security of 
property rights, as measured by an index 
of  expropriation  risks,  aids  development. 
And  when  such  institutional  effects  are 
accounted for, physical geography has weak 
effects on a country’s average income.11 

In  incipient  urbanization  areas  or  in 
nations where the rural share is high, the 
institutions  governing  property  rights 
may  be  both  the  base  and  the  mainstay 
of the policies for a rapid and sustainable 
urbanization. By contrast, when there is no 
secure individual land and property rights, 
land  transactions  and  urbanization  may 
become  divisive.  Consider  China,  where 
land is collectively owned in rural areas and 
farmers do not enjoy clearly deﬁ ned or fully 
protected land property rights. There, the 
conversion of land to industrial use gener-
ates social conﬂ ict because farmers perceive 
land conﬁ scation as inappropriate without 
fair compensation. The problems are simi-
lar in many Sub-Saharan African countries, 
where 90 percent of the land is communal.
Land  use  and  building  regulations 
become  important  as  urbanization 
advances. Governments regulate land mar-
kets for two reasons. First, regulation can 
ensure the appropriate separation of land 
between different uses, such as preventing 
the location of heavily polluting industries 
in residential areas. Second, it can ensure 
the integration of private and public uses of 
land, such as providing space for transport 
infrastructure in densely populated areas. 
But land use regulation can be overzealous, 
upsetting the delicate balance between the 
public interest and private opportunity. 

A city’s future depends on investor conﬁ -
dence in its prospects and its responsiveness 
to future changes in the demand for land. 

Overly  stringent  regulations  undermine 
investor conﬁ dence and unnecessarily dis-
tort housing markets. Consider Mumbai.12 
Overly restrictive land and building regula-
tions have put unnecessary upward pressure 
on land and property prices, hampering the 
city’s  competitiveness.  Height  regulations 
hold  Mumbai’s  buildings  to  only  between 
a ﬁ fth and a tenth of the number of ﬂ oors 
allowed in major cities in other countries. 
The city’s topography should exhibit a high-
density pattern similar to that in Hong Kong, 
China, but it is instead mostly a low-rise city 
(see box 7.3). Half of all poor workers com-
mute less than 2 kilometers to work.

Stringent restrictions on land use con-
version  produce  shortages  of  affordable 
housing,  hurting  migrants  to  a  city.  For 
this reason, the average ratio of the median 
house price to the median annual house-
hold  income  in  many  African  and  Asian 
cities is twice that in many large U.S. cit-
ies.13 Bangladesh has a per capita income of 
$1,230, less than 3 percent of the U.S. per 
capita income of $44,070.14 But in Dhaka 
prime  land  prices  are  similar  to  those  in 
New York City. As much as 20 percent of 
the city’s inner area is underserviced. Tracts 
of  centrally  located,  publicly  owned  land 
remain  idle  and  underdeveloped,  while 
the  rest  is  allocated  for  low  value-added 
uses—a cantonment, public housing, and 
residential areas for government workers. 
Stringent  land  development  parame-
ters—including  minimum  plot  sizes  and 
road widths, setbacks, and land for commu-
nal facilities—exclude a majority of house-
holds from formal land ownership. Indeed, 
although the underlying plot might be titled, 
the dwelling may be rendered illegal because 
of the failure to meet ofﬁ cial construction 
standards.  Without  a  downward  revision 
of  standards,  the  beneﬁ ts  of  legal  title  are 
lost. Such legal codes also contribute to red 
tape and excessive housing costs.15 In Addis 
Ababa high construction standards have rel-
egated many low-income households, which 
might otherwise possess a tradable title, to 
the ownership of “illegal property.”16 

In 1979, the federal government in Bra-
zil, by passing a national land use regulation 
setting  a  minimum  lot  size  of  125  square 
meters and frontage of 5 meters, effectively 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   204
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   204

10/9/08   4:27:12 PM
10/9/08   4:27:12 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

205

BOX 7.3    Bombay ﬁ ghts the markets, and more than half of Mumbai’s residents live in slums

The city of Mumbai, once known as Bom-
bay, provides sobering lessons. In the 
1960s and 1970s, city planners decided 
that Bombay’s population should be 
controlled at about 7 million. Land regu-
lations and infrastructure policies were 
designed accordingly. But people fl ooded 
into the city anyway, and today the city is 
more than twice the intended size, with 
the highest population density of any 
metropolitan area in the world. Estimates 
indicate that 54 percent of Mumbai’s 16 
million people now live in slums, and 
another quarter in degraded apartments. 

The Floor Space Index (FSI)a regula-

tions in Mumbai were introduced in 1964, 
stipulating the maximum building space 
for every square meter of the plot of land. 
In Mumbai it was set at 4.5. The standard 
practice in cities with limited land is to 
raise the permitted FSI over time to accom-
modate urban growth, as in Manhattan; 
Singapore; Hong Kong, China; and Shang-
hai. Instead, the Municipal Corporation 

of Greater Mumbai went the other way, 
lowering the permitted FSI to 1.33 in 1991. 
Almost all buildings in Mumbai with an 
FSI exceeding 4.5 were built before 1964. 
Under the rules that existed until recently, 
new buildings, including those in the cen-
tral business district, were subject to the 
FSI of 1.33. As a consequence, space con-
sumption in Mumbai averages 4 square 
meters, much less than the 12 square 
meters in Shanghai and the more than 
20 square meters in Moscow. And about 
half of its residents are huddled within 2 
kilometers of the city center (see the fi gure 
below).

Meanwhile, high housing costs account 

for as much as 15–20 percent of the 
income of a low-income family. Rent 
control regulations freeze 30 percent of 
Mumbai’s housing stock, leaving it dilapi-
dated because landlords see little point 
in investing. Weak property rights imply 
that only 10 percent of the housing stock 
has legal title, so land redevelopment 

is curtailed. The government relies on 
property taxes and on infl ated real estate 
prices for revenue, so it has little incentive 
to fi ght the groups that resist relaxation 
of building height restrictions. 

The result is a vicious circle of supply 
shortages and high land prices. Mumbai 
slipped from 25th place to 40th in the 
league table of “best cities for business” 
between 1995 and 1999. It remains 
India’s premier business city—it topped 
Chennai and Bangalore in investment 
in 2007 and was the top destination for 
domestic migrants. But how quickly it 
reforms its regulations and builds infra-
structure will decide how long it will 
keep this position. 

Source: WDR 2009 team; Bertaud 2003. 
a. The FSI is the ratio of the total fl oor space 
in a building to the area of the plot on which 
it is built. For example, suppose a building 
covers half of a plot that is 1,000 square 
meters in size. If this building has 10 fl oors, it 
exhibits an FSI of 5.

Land should be used better in Mumbai, and people should not live so close to work

Sea

% of households
35

km2
30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

All households

Poor households

0–1

1–2

2–3

3–5 5–10 10–15 15–20 20–30 >30

Distance to work (km)

Source: Baker and others 2005.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Distance from central business district (km)

Source: Bertaud 2003.

Undeveloped land outside
municipal limits
Undeveloped land inside
municipal limits
Transport

Airport
Port
Industries
Slums
Built-up area

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   205
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   205

10/9/08   4:27:13 PM
10/9/08   4:27:13 PM

206 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

excluded many low-income residents from 
access  to  land  in  the  formal  sector.  Many 
suburban low-income developments could 
not meet the 125-square-meter requirement, 
but were built on land owned by developers. 
Outside  the  formal  sector,  such  develop-
ments could not be legally supplied public 
services. So more than half the population 
in regional capitals, such as Recife and Sal-
vador, lives in slums or informal areas.17,18 
After democratization in 1988, cities were 
encouraged to service the informal sector. 
Although  the  national  minimum  lot  size 
requirement remained in place, areas could 
be  designated  as  Special  Zones  of  Social 
Interest  and  exempted  from  the  require-
ment as part of a package to secure tenure 
and improve services. 

Land  market  restrictions  can  have 
adverse  spillovers  on  the  urban  economy 
and blunt the instruments intended to aid 
urbanization. Unless basic institutions for 
land  markets  and  social  services  are  in 
place, infrastructure development will be 
hindered, and spatially targeted interven-
tions will likely be ineffective. 

Regulations for housing ﬁ nance affect 
urbanization.  Since  the  deregulation  of 
ﬁ nancial systems in the second half of the 
1980s, market-based housing ﬁ nancing has 
expanded  rapidly.  Residential  mortgage 
markets are now equivalent to more that 40 
percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 
developed countries. But those in develop-
ing countries are much smaller, averaging 
less than 10 percent of GDP.19 The public 
role should be to stimulate well-regulated 
private involvement. For example, private 
initiatives  of  the  type  developed  by  the 
Grameen  Bank  in  Bangladesh,  Bancosol 
in Bolivia, and the Housing Development 
and  Finance  Corporation  in  India  show 
that  uncollateralized  lending  can  nour-
ish housing ﬁ nance even in countries with 
budding ﬁ nancial systems and weak legal 
and regulatory structures. Establishing the 
legal  foundation  for  simple,  enforceable, 
and prudent mortgage contracts is a good 
start.  When  a  country’s  ﬁ nancial  system 
is more developed and mature, the public 
sector can encourage a secondary mortgage 
market, develop ﬁ nancial innovations, and 
expand the securitization of mortgages.20 

Occupant-owned  housing,  usually  a 
household’s  largest  single  asset  by  far,  is 
important in wealth creation, social secu-
rity,  and  politics.  People  who  own  their 
house or have secure tenure have a larger 
stake  in  their  community  and  thus  are 
more likely to lobby for less crime, stronger 
governance, and better local environmental 
conditions.21 

Spatially connective infrastructure 
to reduce distance to density
Policies to unify land markets and facilitate 
labor  mobility  remain  important  for  the 
buildup of economic density at all stages of 
urbanization. But they are not enough for 
dealing with the more complex challenges 
of  advancing  urbanization.  In  Seoul  and 
Shanghai, downtown trafﬁ c averages 8 kilo-
meters an hour; in Bangkok, Manila, and 
Mexico  City,  it  averages  10  kilometers  an 
hour or slower; in Kuala Lumpur and São 
Paulo, it averages 15 kilometers an hour or 
slower. Workers in Jakarta, Kinshasa, Lagos, 
and Manila spend on average 75 minutes 
commuting to work.22 For such areas, con-
gestion can eat away the beneﬁ ts of rising 
density. Spatially connective infrastructure 
must join the spatially blind institutions as 
priorities for inclusive urbanization.

Connective infrastructure needs insti-
tutions. Successful cities react to growing 
trafﬁ c congestion with spatially connective 
infrastructure.  But  preceding  such  infra-
structure in all successful cities (or accom-
panying it in the fastest urbanizers) is a ﬂ uid 
land market and an empowered local gov-
ernment. The sequencing of policies should 
be spatially blind measures to create condi-
tions suitable for economic concentration, 
followed by connective policies to deal with 
congestion.

The United Kingdom in the nineteenth 
century  is  illustrative.  With  systems  of 
governance  varying  widely  across  towns, 
the Reform Act of 1832 and the Municipal 
Corporations  Act  of  1835  brought  about 
regularization of municipal government.23 
Municipal authorities could take over pri-
vately  owned  sewerage,  water,  and  gas 
systems. By the 1880s they had started pur-
chasing land to compete with private utili-
ties, transport, and other services. In doing 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   206
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   206

10/9/08   4:27:13 PM
10/9/08   4:27:13 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

207

so, they uniﬁ ed the hodgepodge of preexist-
ing private systems, separating sewage and 
drainage  systems  from  the  water  systems, 
and extending the reach of basic services to 
poor areas.24 The Land Enquiry Commis-
sion recognized that “municipal land own-
ership, town planning and the building up of 
the system of transit will go hand in hand and 
each will help the other.”25 By the end of the 
nineteenth century, institutions governing 
land markets were maturing and adapting 
to the changing urban requirements.26

With  this  as  background,  the  United 
Kingdom’s urbanization was rapid. In 1830 
the average GDP per capita was $1,749 (in 
1990 international prices), roughly equiva-
lent  to  Honduras,  Mozambique,  or  Paki-
stan in 2003.27 The urban share rose from 
28 percent in 1830 to 69 percent in 1910.28 
At the top of the urban hierarchy: London, 
whose population grew from 2 million in 
1830 to 6.6 million in 1900.29 

Institutions  and  infrastructure  must 
evolve continually. As areas urbanize and 
nations  develop,  the  networks  for  public 
transit become more complex, and institu-
tions such as legislation governing land use 
must also adapt. Building a new transport 
network requires the purchase of contigu-
ous plots of land, and holdouts can extract 
huge  rents  or  thwart  the  project  entirely. 
Compulsory purchases (“eminent domain” 
in the United States) may be necessary, with 
the  safeguard  of  just  compensation  for 
land owners. Another safeguard is that the 
acquired land be for “public use,” although 
how widely this should be interpreted can 
be contentious.

The United States, by the mid- nineteenth 
century,  had  a  reasonably  well-defined 
system  of  property  rights.  As  New  York’s 
transportation  network  expanded,  and 
the needs of the city changed over the past 
century, its institutions evolved. The 1916 
Zoning  Resolution  has  been  amended  to 
respond  to  shifts  in  population  and  land 
use. Waves of immigration helped swell the 
city’s population from 5 million in 1916 to 
almost 8 million in 1960. New mass transit 
routes and growth corridors were created. 
And  with  the  rise  of  the  mass-produced 
automobile, car registrations in New York 
State exploded from 93,000 in 1915 to about 

2 million in 1930.30 To address ever more 
complex  urbanization,  the  City  Planning 
Commission  was  created  in  1938.  After 
studies and public debate, the 1916 Zoning 
Resolution was replaced in 1961. The new 
resolution  incorporated  parking  require-
ments and emphasized open space.

Although  based  on  the  leading  plan-
ning  theories  of  the  day,  aspects  of  those 
zoning  policies  have  revealed  shortcom-
ings over the years. The emphasis on open 
space has sometimes resulted in buildings 
that overwhelm their surroundings. Since 
then, new approaches have been developed 
to make land use conversion more respon-
sive  to  changing  needs.  A  more  ﬂ exible 
approach at the Department of City Plan-
ning encourages a mix of uses that creates 
lively  urban  streetscapes  that  can  sustain 
increased density.31

New York City provides an example of 
the  changing  spatially  blind  institutions 
necessary for spatially connective policies. 
Indeed, their interaction enabled the den-
sity  of  Manhattan,  the  Bronx,  Brooklyn, 
and Queens to increase from 230 people per 
square kilometer in 1820 to more than 5,000 
in 1900 and about 12,000 today. 

Successful  urbanization  requires  con-
necting ever wider areas. Inevitably, density 
brings crowding. New York shows the enor-
mous beneﬁ ts of an efﬁ cient metro system in 
reducing congestion while encouraging den-
sity. The key is an integrated system of mass 
transport (see box 7.4). Dense city centers 
and skyscrapers are feasible only when thou-
sands of ofﬁ ce workers can be transported 
efﬁ ciently to downtown ofﬁ ces. 

Long-term  success  does  not  rule  out 
occasional bouts of congestion, but it does 
require ﬂ exible institutions. A British pam-
phlet published in 1860 observed that 

[F]rom day to day, and from year-to-year, the 
streets  of  London  become  more  and  more 
crowded, and must . . . come to a dead-lock 
between  Westminster  and  the  City,  unless 
some more efﬁ cient remedy can be provided. 
The  great  City  lies  as  it  were  handcuffed, 
panting  and  exhausted  under  the  weight  of 
its own wealth.32 

London’s congestion appeared no closer 
to resolution in 1939, with trafﬁ c averaging 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   207
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   207

10/9/08   4:27:14 PM
10/9/08   4:27:14 PM

208 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 7.4    Widening the reach of New York City 

New York’s subway system has 
become one of the busiest and most 
extensive in the world, serving nearly 
5 million passengers every day with 
26 train lines operating on 800 miles 
of track. As New York City spread into 
a wider metropolitan area, commuter 
bus networks and rail lines grew. 
New York City’s commuter rail system 
is the most extensive in the United 
States, with about 250 stations and 
20 rail lines serving more than 150 
million commuters annually.a

Public transportation in New York 

City began in the late 1820s with 
horse-drawn omnibuses. The fi rst 
steam-driven cable car line opened 
in 1883. In 1909 electric trolleybuses 
replaced them, and for 70 years trol-
leybuses ran in all fi ve boroughs of 
New York City. The fi rst elevated line 
(“el”) opened in 1868. By 1880 most 
Manhattan residents were within a 
19-minute walk of an “el,” which took 
passengers above the congested 
streets. 

The mid-1880s saw rapid immigra-

tion. Overcrowding was rife. As in 
London, an underground rail network 
was seen as necessary. But it took a 
blizzard in March 1888, completely 
paralyzing the streets, to provide 
the impetus for an underground rail 
system. The subway was designed 
both to move people about within 
Manhattan, and to connect tracts of 
undeveloped land. 

After years of political wrangling, 
a plan for a subway was approved in 
1894. In 1904, the Interborough Rapid 
Transit Company opened and carried 

more than 100,000 passengers on 
the day of the opening ceremony. 
Subway trains, at close to 40 miles an 
hour, were much faster than trolleys 
(6 miles an hour) and elevated trains 
(12 miles an hour). More people could 
now be moved at faster speeds. 

It has been a never-ending struggle 

to expand the transport system fast 
enough to accommodate population 
growth. Most of the subway system 
in use today was built between 1913 
and 1931; the number of annual rail 
passengers jumped from 500 million 
in 1901 to 2.5 billion in 1929.b In 1940 
the city unifi ed the three indepen-
dent subway lines under public own-
ership, allowing for a more integrated 
approach to transport development. 
The payoff  is inclusive and sustain-
able urbanization. New York’s Metro-
politan Transportation Authority has 
served a 5,000-square-mile region 
since 1968. According to the 2000 
U.S. census, New York City is the only 
locality in the United States where 
fewer than half of all households own 
a car—the fi gure is even lower in 
Manhattan at fewer than a quarter—
compared with 92 percent nationally. 
One in every three users of mass tran-
sit in the United States and two-thirds 
of the nation’s rail riders live in New 
York City and its suburbs.c
Source: WDR 2009 team.
Note: a. The New York City Transit 
Museum Teacher Resource Center, and 
the Port Authority of New York and New 
Jersey Offi  cial Web site. b. The New York 
City Transit Museum Teacher Resource 
Center. c. The New York City Transit 
Museum Teacher Resource Center.

8  miles  an  hour,33  not  so  different  from 
the 10–11 miles an hour in central London 
today.34 This may suggest an “equilibrium 
level”  of  congestion.  The  city’s  economic 
density  consistent  with  this  equilibrium 
depends on the quality of spatially connec-
tive infrastructure. In this sense, the value 
of  additional  investment  in  such  infra-
structure  is  not  as  much  in  the  long-run 
abatement of congestion as in the continu-
ally rising economic density for any given 
level of congestion. Congestion is the result 

of the substitution of one scarce resource, 
travel time, for another even more scarce 
resource, land. It is not efﬁ cient to devote 
so much urban land to roads that conges-
tion is completely eliminated. Some urban 
congestion is likely to be optimal, if for no 
other reason than to prompt policy mak-
ers to review and update institutions and 
infrastructure. 

As cities specialize, intercity infrastruc-
ture becomes a priority in the most dynamic 
areas. There is a symbiosis between cities 
and  their  peripheries,  but  economic  rela-
tionships also join other cities in an urban 
hierarchy.  Transport  links  between  cities 
reinforce  agglomeration  economies  and 
generate  complementary  and  specialized 
functions. In the United States the mega-
lopolis  stretching  from  Boston,  through 
New York City, Philadelphia, and Baltimore 
to Washington along the northeastern coast 
is  linked  by  highways  and  rails  (the  ﬁ rst 
freight rail link was between Baltimore and 
Washington in 1827).35 Japan also invested 
in  spatially  connective  infrastructure  to 
link its two largest agglomerations Tokyo-
Yokohama and Osaka-Kobe (see box 7.5). 

In the Republic of Korea, Seoul-Incheon 
(in  the  northwest)  and  Pusan  (the  second 
largest city at the southeast tip) were linked 
as early as 1905 by the Gyeongbu Rail, and 
in  1970  by  the  400-plus-kilometer  Gyeo-
ngbu Highway. In 2004 the bullet train—the 
Korea  Train  Express—connected  the  two 
cities in two hours’ travel time. In the Pearl 
River  Delta—a  region  of  China  studded 
with factories and interwoven by freeways—
the  economies  of  several  cities  are  linked 
together so effectively that, according to the 
chief executive ofﬁ cer of a large electronics 
manufacturer, “In practice, we are a single 
vast factory scattered across the territory.”

Demand management and public trans-
port encourage development of higher den-
sity. There are many instruments to increase 
connectivity, among them—36
(cid:129)  Improving  transport  options—say, 
through better transit management that 
increases the use of, or gives preference 
to, high-occupancy vehicles

(cid:129)  Managing  land  use—through  transit-
oriented development or smart growth 
that  gives  preference  to  new  develop-

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   208
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   208

10/9/08   4:27:14 PM
10/9/08   4:27:14 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

209

BOX 7.5     Promoting concentration in Japan between 1860 and 1980: 

spatially connective policies for Tokyo-Yokohama and Osaka-Kobe

Japan’s manufacturing industries are 
spatially concentrated—a trend that can 
be traced to the Meiji era starting in the 
1860s. In Tokyo both state-owned fac-
tories and private industrial complexes 
were concentrated along the main river. 
Gradually small machinery workshops 
conglomerated, and industries expanded 
toward the south along the new Tokaido 
railway connecting Tokyo, Yokohama, and 
areas farther south. 

After World War II, when exports to the 
United States began to accelerate, indus-
trial production became concentrated 
in the Keihin industrial zone around 
Tokyo and Yokohama, and in the Hanshin 
industrial zone around Osaka and Kobe. 
This led to heavy traffi  c congestion, 
water shortages, and air and water pol-
lution. In 1962 the Japanese government 
responded by instituting Zenso—the Inte-
grated Spatial Development Plan—which 
aggressively developed the Pacifi c Ocean 
Industrial Belt by linking the core agglom-
erated areas between Tokyo and Osaka 
and establishing new industrial zones in 
between. The investments included the 
bullet train (Shinkansen) and other trunk 
railways, expressways, and ports (see the 
map to the right). 

Despite heavy infrastructure invest-

ments in new industrial clusters in more 
remote regions, they could not attract 
industries out of the Pacifi c Ocean Belt. 
During the miraculous growth era of 
the 1950s through 1970s, industries 
remained spatially concentrated, thanks 
to the mobility of workers, even though 
there has been massive relocation of 
industries from the congested core 
to surrounding new industrial areas. 
Enterprises that remained in core urban 
clusters upgraded from standardized 
products to high-tech products and 
new models by taking advantage of 
urbanization economies accruing from 
diverse economic activity and a large 
pool of skill and talent. Other enterprises 
retained their central management 
functions in the core agglomerations to 
benefi t from the convenience of face-
to-face communications with banks, 
government offi  ces, and major industrial 
organizations. 

Industries that left the traditional 

industrial cores were mostly exporters 
of machinery and electronic appliance 
plants. They continued to enjoy localiza-
tion economies from producing similar 
and related products in new clusters. 
Their locations alongside the Tomei high-
way connecting Tokyo and Nagoya gave 
easy access to markets and high-tech 
enterprises in the urban centers. 

The geographic distribution of indus-

tries over several decades of rapid growth 
refl ected the government’s eff orts to 

promote concentration while preventing 
the grime and time costs of rising density. 
These eff orts did not interfere with the 
profi t motives of enterprises, but instead 
strengthened agglomeration economies. 
Government policies and market forces 
reinforced each other spatially to sustain 
economic growth. 

Contributed by Keijiro Otsuka and Megumi 
Muto.
Sources: Fujita and Tabuchi 1997; Sonobe and 
Otsuka 2006; Whittaker 1997; Overseas Eco-
nomic Cooperation Fund 1995.

Connected cities in Japan facilitate agglomeration economies in Tokyo-Yokohama (Keihin) and 
Osaka-Kobe (Hanshin) by road and rail

Sapporo

HOKKAIDO

HONSHU

Tokyo

Main railroads

Main highways

Osaka

SHIKOKU

KYUSHU

Source: WDR 2009 team.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   209
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   209

10/9/08   4:27:15 PM
10/9/08   4:27:15 PM

210 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

ments along established public transport 
routes

(cid:129)  Launching  general  policies  and  pro-
grams—such as freight transport man-
agement and market reforms.

Pricing mechanisms can be most effec-
tive in optimizing private car use. Extreme 
but  effective  are  Singapore’s  auction  per-
mits  to  purchase  cars.  Add  the  car  taxes, 
and  the  cost  of  a  car  in  Singapore  is  four 
to ﬁ ve times the world price. Amsterdam, 
London, and Stockholm also have schemes 
that price road use according to the time of 
day and level of congestion—substantially 
reducing peak-time car trafﬁ c and car emis-
sions. The revenue streams from congestion 
charging could be earmarked for reinvest-
ment  in  public  transportation.  But  such 
schemes require substantial investment in 
technology to ensure the efﬁ cient collection 
of fees.

Easier to implement are simple regula-
tions or trafﬁ c plans that reduce the num-
ber  of  vehicles  in  speciﬁ c  parts  of  a  city 
or overall. In Tehran entry to parts of the 
city center is restricted to essential trafﬁ c. 
Budapest  and  Buenos  Aires  have  pedes-
trian-only  zones  in  the  city  center,  easily 
reached  by  public  transport.  Gothenburg 
(Sweden) and Bremen (Germany) restrict 
private  car  links  between  different  zones 
(“cells”), encouraging public transit. India’s 
Chandigarh  built  some  160  kilometers  of 
wide- cycle paths to ease trafﬁ c on arterial 
roads.37 The most popular restraint limits 
the use of vehicles on speciﬁ c days accord-
ing  to  their  registration  plate  number,  as 
in Athens, Bogotá, Lagos, Manila, Mexico 
City, Santiago, São Paulo, Seoul, and Sin-
gapore.  Such  measures  have  been  proven 
easier to enforce than expected, with wide-
spread public acceptance.38 

Demand management is the most cost-
effective means of increasing mobility. But 
trafﬁ c will increase even with the best poli-
cies,  especially  in  rapidly  growing  cities. 
Investments in public transport infrastruc-
ture  can  connect  different  parts  of  a  city 
and guide land use and urban expansion. 
Mass rapid transit includes subways, subur-
ban rail, and dedicated busways, all having 
a capacity and performance far superior to 

buses operating on unsegregrated and con-
gested roads. But suburban rail and subways 
require huge investments in ﬁ xed capital, so 
dedicated busways (plus their more sophis-
ticated relation, “bus rapid transit”) have 
been gaining in popularity. 

Busways,  most  common  in  Latin 
American cities, cost about $10 million a 
kilometer to install. Operating in Bogotá, 
Colombia; Curitiba and São Paulo, Brazil; 
and Quito, Ecuador, they are being planned 
or built in many other cities. A more expen-
sive  alternative,  ranging  in  cost  from  $10 
million to $30 million a kilometer, is light 
rail, a modern form of tram covering short 
distances. It usually feeds a larger system 
of  heavy  metro  rail.  Cities  with  light  rail 
include Hong Kong, China; Kuala Lumpur; 
Singapore; Sydney; and Tunis. 

The most costly mass rapid transit option 
is  the  metropolitan  subway  system,  which 
has the largest capacity. Building costs aver-
age  more  than  $100  million  a  kilometer, 
explaining why there are fewer than 200 sys-
tems in the world, mostly in industrialized 
countries.39  But  their  number  is  growing: 
China, India, and the República Bolivariana 
de Venezuela have built subways. When cit-
ies reach a certain size and density, a subway 
is the only transport mode capable of mov-
ing large numbers of people to concentrated 
job  centers.  The  beneﬁ ts  that  come  from 
enabling  such  density  include  efficiency 
and  productivity  gains—traditionally  in 
industry, increasingly in services (see chap-
ter 4)—but also lower energy consumption, 
less  pollution,  and  greater  compactness, 
which  increase  interaction  and  encourage 
non motorized transport for short intracity 
trips.  Compact  and  densely  packed  cities 
might also meet the imperatives of climate 
change (see box 7.6).

Public transport, successful on its own, 
has encouraged new developments at higher 
densities, which in turn permit more suc-
cessful public transport while reducing the 
economic distance between places. Manag-
ing all this takes patience and the discipline 
to  build  from  the  bottom.  The  establish-
ment and strengthening of land and prop-
erty market institutions—including secure 
property  rights,  ﬂ exible  land  use  regula-
tions, and ease of land conversion—is not 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   210
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   210

10/9/08   4:27:15 PM
10/9/08   4:27:15 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

211

BOX 7.6    Climate change calls for a different urban form, not slower urbanization 

Urbanization is associated with industrial-
ization, which increases emissions of car-
bon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse 
gases. And increasing wealth tends to be 
associated with higher energy consump-
tion, for instance through motorization. 
But to be concerned about the climate 
does not mean that urbanization should 
be slowed. If anything, economic density 
may need to be encouraged even more. 
Historical data going back to the nine-

teenth century show that today’s rich 
countries experienced rising per capita 
carbon emissions as they urbanized and 
industrialized through the twentieth 
century.a Industrialization, motorization, 
and consequently carbon emissions in 
developing countries follow the trajecto-
ries of developed countries in their earlier 
stages of development.b For instance, per 
capita carbon emissions in Germany dou-
bled from 0.8 metric tons of carbon in 1880 
to 1.6 in 1900. In the United States and the 
United Kingdom, carbon emissions were 
about 2.5 in 1900. Today’s developing 
countries have lower average emissions 
at the equivalent GDPs per capita of Ger-
many, the United Kingdom, and the United 
States in 1880 and 1900. Botswana’s car-
bon emissions were 0.36 per capita in 1987 
and 0.57 in 1996 (see fi gure at right). 

The trend in most developing countries 

suggests continuing growth in carbon 
emissions both in total and per capita. 
The policy response to the projected 
increases in urbanization and carbon 
emissions in developing countries should 
not be to try to prevent the growth of 
cities. This would not be feasible or desir-
able in light of the evidence on growth 
and poverty reduction. Instead, growth 
in cities—many of which might double in 
size over the next few decades—should 
be managed to create urban areas far 
more carbon effi  cient than many of 
today’s mature cities.

Monocentric structures and high popu-
lation densities tend to reduce the length 
and number of motorized trips.c Compact 
cities use less energy for transport, con-
sume less land for housing, and use less 
energy for heating. Several studies fi nd 
that high population density is negatively 

correlated with carbon emissions.d At the 
national level, Sweden and Japan have 
used incentives and regulation to greatly 
reduce the emissions intensity of their 
economies. At the urban level, an empha-
sis on density and smart choices that 
reduce distance can help do the same. 
This requires land use policies that favor 
compactness and transport policies that 
guide urban form and provide convenient 
and effi  cient public transit.e

Atlanta and Barcelona illustrate alter-

native urban growth scenarios. They 
had similar populations of 2.5 million 
to 2.8 million, but Atlanta had a density 
of six people per hectare in 1990, and 
Barcelona had 176.f In Atlanta the longest 
possible distance between two points 
within the built-up area is 137 kilome-
ters; in Barcelona, the distance is only 
37 kilometers. Per capita CO2 emission 
was 400 metric tons in Atlanta, 38 tons 
in Barcelona.g Atlanta’s metro network 
is 74 kilometers long. but only 4 percent 
of its population is within 800 meters 
of a metro station. Barcelona’s metro 

Countries can change their energy trajectories 

Per capita carbon emissions (tons, metric)
20

network is 99 kilometers, and 60 percent 
of its population lives within 600 meters 
of a metro station. Only 4.5 percent of 
trips are by mass transit in Atlanta, a 
fraction of the 30 percent in Barcelona. 
For Atlanta to achieve Barcelona’s metro 
accessibility would require building an 
additional 3,400 kilometers of metro 
tracks and about 2,800 new metro sta-
tions. This would allow the Atlanta metro 
to transport the same number of people 
that Barcelona does with only 99 kilome-
ters of tracks and 136 stations.
Density makes the diff erence.

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Marland, Boden, and Andres 2007. b. 
World Bank 2002, fi gure 2.1; Lanne and Liski 
2003, fi gures 1, 4, and 5; and data in devel-
oping countries from http://cdiac.esd.ornl.
gov/ftp/ndp030/nation.1751_2004.ems. 
c. Bento and others 2003. d. Scholz 2006; 
Vance and Hedel 2006; Golob and Brown-
stone 2005; Ingram 1997; International 
Union of Public Transport. e. Bento and 
others 2003; Scholz 2006; Vance and Hedel 
2006; Golob and Brownstone 2005. f. Ber-
taud 2004. g. Kenworthy 2005.

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Germany, France,
Canada, the United Kingdom,
and the United States
1880–1940

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

GDP per capita (1990 international Geary Khamis $, thousands)

Sources: Carbon emission data worldwide can be found in the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department 
of Energy at http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/ftp/ndp030/nation.1751_2004.ems; Lanne and Liski 2003.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   211
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   211

10/9/08   4:27:16 PM
10/9/08   4:27:16 PM

212 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

easy. But without the commitment to such 
institutions,  and  without  investment  in 
connective  infrastructure,  targeted  inter-
ventions to deal with slums are unlikely to 
work.

Spatially targeted interventions to 
reduce social and economic divisions
For  the  three-dimensional  problem  faced 
by advanced urbanization areas, spatially 
blind and connective instruments must be 
supplemented with spatially targeted inter-
ventions to address the social and economic 
division within a city’s boundaries—most 
visibly,  slums.  The  lesson  of  experience 
is  that  spatially  targeted  efforts  succeed 
when they are applied where land markets 
work reasonably well, basic social services 
are  widely  accessible,  and  a  connective 
infrastructure  links  the  city’s  core  to  its 
periphery. 

Institutions  and  infrastructure  are 
prerequisites for successful interventions. 
Successful  programs  to  integrate  slums 
have been built on a foundation of spatially 
blind and spatially connective policies. This 
integration  included  the  establishment  of 
institutions to effectively govern the work-
ing of the housing market, a spatially blind 
provision of social and basic services to all 
settlements,  and  transport  infrastructure 
investments  to  connect  the  newly  created 
housing areas.

Slum clearance requires a legislative basis 
to empower local authorities to take action 
and institutions to facilitate an orderly con-
version of land from agricultural to residential 
or other purposes. At the same time, subur-
ban  development  is  made  feasible  through 
the  provision  of  basic  amenities  and  social 
services alongside ongoing improvements in 
the transport connectivity of cities with their 
suburbs and surrounding counties. 

In London social outcry at the dreadful 
conditions of Victorian slums provided the 
impetus for slum clearance and improve-
ment.  But  the  efforts  were  preceded  by 
steps  to  improve  housing  markets  and 
transport  systems.  The  Housing  of  the 
Working  Classes  Act  1890  provided  local 
authorities with the power to build houses 
for the working classes and to clear areas 
of unﬁ t housing. An amendment gave local 

authorities powers to retain the houses built 
under slum-clearance schemes, paving the 
way  for  future  public  housing  schemes. 
Better transport was part of the solution, 
evidenced  by  conferences  in  1901  on  the 
subject  of  “Improved  Means  of  Locomo-
tion  as  a  First  Step  towards  the  Cure  of 
the Housing Difﬁ culties of London.” The 
conferences  passed  a  resolution  that  “a 
complete system of transportation radiat-
ing from urban centers, and which shall be 
cheap, rapid, and under municipal owner-
ship, is a primary step towards dealing with 
the  housing  problem.”40  Londoners  obvi-
ously understood that connective policies 
must precede targeted interventions. 

Indeed, the link between improvements 
in  spatially  connective  transport  infra-
structure and the solution of London’s slum 
problem  was  made  clearly  in  the  policy 
discourse  of  the  time.  In  1890  the  Cheap 
Trains for London Workers Bill proposed 
extending the provision and further regu-
lating the fares on “workmen’s trains.” The 
private railway companies already had been 
obliged by law to introduce these trains in 
1883,  to  provide  an  affordable  means  of 
commuting to working-class workers who 
lived in the suburbs but earned their living 
in central London. By lowering the cost of 
commuting,  the  suburbs  could  be  devel-
oped, decongesting London’s central areas. 
Likewise,  during  the  late-nineteenth 
and early twentieth century, governments 
across North America and Western Europe 
implemented  large-scale  slum  clearance 
and  re-housing.  Landowners  were  com-
pensated, and the cleared land was sold for 
redevelopment. These programs would not 
have succeeded without a rapid expansion 
of transport infrastructure. New transport 
systems helped “open up” the outskirts, or 
suburbs, of cities, making periurban hous-
ing attractive for both real estate develop-
ers and urban workers. The resulting ﬂ ight 
to the suburbs was also both a cause and 
a  consequence  of  the  relocation  of  many 
industries to the peripheries. And it coin-
cided  with  the  spread  of  basic  social  ser-
vices and recreational amenities. 

Policies  to  integrate  slums  into  cities 
have worked where institutions and infra-
structure  were  adequate.  After  World 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   212
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   212

10/9/08   4:27:16 PM
10/9/08   4:27:16 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

213

War  II,  Sweden  urbanized  rapidly  and 
Stockholm’s population grew swiftly, from 
741,000 in 1950 to 1.39 million in 1980.41 
Stockholm had an inadequate and dilapi-
dated housing stock, while rents were high 
relative to most other European cities. 42 In 
reaction, the Swedish government formed 
the Royal Housing Commission in 1945. A 
plan was formulated to demolish slums in 
Stockholm and other cities, and re-house 
the  displaced  slum  dwellers  in  publicly 
provided  rental  housing  in  well-designed 
high-rise buildings on the city’s periphery. 
The ﬁ rst generation of high-rise residential 
buildings  was  integrated  with  the  provi-
sion  of  schools,  health  clinics,  and  recre-
ational  and  shopping  facilities,  as  well  as 
service centers. Spatial connectivity to city 
centers was ensured through easy access to 
transport.43 

Swedish  authorities  managed  to  con-
tinually  upgrade  urban  living  conditions 
throughout the 1960s and 1970s. With the 
Million Homes Programme the government 
set itself the aim of ending innercity squalor 
and overcrowding by building 100,000 new 
dwellings a year from 1965 to 1974, adding 
one-third  to  Sweden’s  aggregate  housing 
stock of 3 million units.44 The new settle-
ments provided basic amenities, including 
schools and clinics, and were linked to urban 
employment centers through well-planned 
trafﬁ c systems.45 

Similar  lessons  come  from  the  United 
States.  By  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury, American philanthropists had raised 
awareness  of  the  hardships  facing  slum 
dwellers. They urged building regulations 
to ensure minimum standards in the con-
struction of new tenements.46 But it was not 
until the 1930s that the government became 
active in the provision of housing.47 Follow-
ing the Great Depression, the United States 
Housing Authority was established by the 
Wagner-Steagall Housing Act of 1937, which 
allowed  for  subsidized  loans  to  be  made 
to  local  housing  authorities  for  clearing 
dilapidated areas and building replacement 
homes. A sound legal framework enabled 
national and state authorities, civil society 
organizations,  and  private  developers  to 
deal concertedly with slums. Good intra-
urban public transport systems connected 

the new housing developments to the local 
city economies. As infrastructure improved 
even more, particularly after the passage of 
the Housing and Urban Development Act 
1965, the more prosperous residents left the 
city centers for the suburbs.48 

Better connective infrastructure is a pre-
condition for applying targeted policies to 
deal  with  slum  housing.  This  takes  time, 
but both Hong Kong, China, and Singapore 
show that it can be done over decades rather 
than centuries. Regardless of differences in 
the speed, the sequencing of policies appears 
to be the same: targeted policies to integrate 
slums cannot come before the application of 
geographically blind and connective policies 
(see box 7.7). 

BOX 7.7     Speeded up, but still in sequence: spatial integration 

in twentieth-century Hong Kong, China

Before World War II, Hong Kong, 
China, developed its administrative 
structure and legislative framework 
to govern land markets. In 1935, 
mounting awareness of poor living 
conditions in urban slums led to the 
formation of a Housing Commission. 
This was followed by the Town Plan-
ning Ordinance of 1939, which estab-
lished a Town Planning Board. 

Nevertheless, the proper imple-

mentation of the ordinance and town 
planning in Hong Kong, China, had 
to wait until after the passage of the 
Town Planning Regulation in 1954. It 
was only after the famous Shek Kip 
Mei slum fi re of 1953 that eff orts to 
develop public housing programs 
went into full swing. In 1965 the 
Working Party on Slum Clearance was 
formed. It took Hong Kong, China (a 
city in a hurry), more than 30 years 
before it began eff ectively address-
ing the problem through spatially 
targeted interventions. Hong Kong, 
China, fi rst had to develop and 
strengthen the spatially blind institu-
tions governing the operation of land 
and housing markets, and connective 
infrastructure to improve the use of 
land. 

The fi rst land use strategy and 

zoning plan—the “Colony Outline 
Plan and Outline Zoning Plans”—
were only drawn up in 1963. The 

spatially blind institutions had to 
be adapted over time as the city 
developed and the urbanization 
progressed. The 1939 Ordinance was 
amended in 1958, 1969, and 1974.a 
Having established the necessary 
planning framework, Hong Kong, 
China, was better placed to imple-
ment spatially connective policies in 
the 1970s. These policies were a nec-
essary response to the doubling of 
car registration within a decade and 
the concomitant increase in conges-
tion that was a product of the city’s 
rapid economic growth of around 10 
percent a year. 

Institutions and infrastructure went 

hand in hand. With eff ective plan-
ning laws in place, the government 
was able to introduce the Temporary 
Restriction of Building Development 
Ordinance of 1973 in the Pok Fu Lam 
and Mid-Levels areas of Hong Kong, 
China. This in turn paved the way for 
building the Mass Transit Railway, 
modifying building height restric-
tions in the area around the Kai Tak 
Airport, and accelerating relief for an 
overloaded transport network. 
The result: the city now ranks 

among the world’s top fi ve in infra-
structure effi  ciency, and the slums are 
gone.b 
Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Bristow 1984. b. Cullinane 2002.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   213
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   213

10/9/08   4:27:16 PM
10/9/08   4:27:16 PM

214 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Targeted interventions may have to wait 
until institutions and infrastructure have 
been improved. The experience of developed 
countries remains relevant today. Costa Rica, 
South Africa, and Singapore show why. 

During  the  1980s,  the  combination  of 
rapid in situ population growth, migration, 
and  an  inﬂ ux  of  refugees  from  war-torn 
neighboring  countries  made  Costa  Rica’s 
already acute urban housing shortage even 
worse. This led to the creation of a National 
Housing Finance System in 1986. The aim 
was  to  provide  subsidies  to  low-income 
households for house purchases or construc-
tion.  Households  were  able  to  supplement 
the funds that they received with loans from 
private  institutions,  including  commer-
cial  banks,  savings  and  loans  institutions, 
and  cooperatives.  Minimum  wage  house-
holds were entitled to a full subsidy, while 
 households  earning  more  than  four  times 
the minimum had access to smaller subsi-
dies and loans at near-market conditions.49 
Costa Rica’s housing subsidy succeeded 
because the necessary spatially blind insti-
tutions and spatially connective infrastruc-
ture were in place to facilitate its targeted 
interventions. As early as 1869 the govern-
ment decreed that primary education was 
a basic universal right. The 1949 constitu-
tion  guaranteed  free  access  to  secondary 
education as well. Costa Rica’s government 
invests more than 20 percent of its budget 
in education each year, and has a literacy 
rate  of  about  95  percent  to  show  for  it. 
Similar  investment  in  the  public  medical 
system reduced infant mortality rates, with 
an  average  life  expectancy  at  birth  of  79 
years.50 Although incomes are much higher 
in Costa Rica’s central regions, social indi-
cators are similar across the country.51 

Costa Rica has well-functioning institu-
tions governing the land market. An effec-
tive  property  registry  system  is  in  place. 
Indeed, more than 80 percent of property 
owners possess registered titles, and there is 
a high degree of legal security.52 The capital 
city, San José, is linked with the major pro-
vincial cities by an efﬁ cient and affordable 
bus system, and private bus companies con-
nect San José and its outlying suburbs. In 
many ways, Costa Rica is a model for other 
developing countries. 

South Africa’s experience is more sober-
ing.  When  the  ﬁ rst  post-apartheid  South 
African government came to power in 1994, 
it faced a housing crisis with an estimated 
deﬁ cit  of  1.5  million  housing  units  and 
an additional requirement of 170,000 new 
units a year. Some 18 percent of households, 
or 7.4 million people, lived in slums.53 The 
new  housing  policy  that  emerged  from 
multiparty negotiations was implemented 
through the Housing Act of 1997, provid-
ing  housing-related  subsidies  to  as  many 
people as possible for renting, purchasing, 
constructing, and improving homes. 

But the requisite institutions and con-
nective infrastructure were not yet in place. 
A range of reforms—including changes to 
regional government boundaries, ﬁ nancial 
support mechanisms, and housing-related 
legislation—were  introduced  simultane-
ously.  Indeed,  the  Housing  Act  repealed, 
incorporated,  or  amended  35  separate 
pieces of legislation.54 The ﬁ rst wave of low-
cost housing developments, on the periph-
eries of major cities, lacked basic amenities 
and transport links to city (and job) cen-
ters. These developments failed to amelio-
rate intraurban divisions. Recent shifts in 
policy are more encouraging. The Breaking 
New Ground national housing program has 
focused  on  integrating  low-income  com-
munities through improvements in access 
to  public  transportation  and  basic  social 
and commercial services.55

Improving institutions and infrastruc-
ture  and  intervening  at  the  same  time  is 
a  tall  order  for  any  government,  but  Sin-
gapore shows it can be done (see box 7.8). 
Perhaps the most successful example of how 
slums  can  be  eradicated,  Singapore  is  to 
some extent an anomaly. It is one of the few 
countries that have managed to implement 
all three sets of integration policies simulta-
neously. Singapore was successful because it 
had exceptionally rapid economic growth 
and a focused government in power since 
1965. The fact that it is a city-state helped 
greatly, indirectly providing a general les-
son: successful urbanization takes coordi-
nated action at all levels of government.

Most countries will not be able to rep-
licate Singapore’s efforts—aligning priori-
ties and the effort of central, state, and city 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   214
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   214

10/9/08   4:27:17 PM
10/9/08   4:27:17 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

215

governments  is  difﬁ cult  for  any  country 
that is not a city-state. More likely, they will 
have to sequence their policy efforts along 
the path followed by Costa Rica and earlier 
developers such as Great Britain, Sweden, 
and the United States. South Africa shows 
the difﬁ culties of trying to implement all 
three sets of policies simultaneously.

“An I for a D”—a policy instrument 
for each dimension of urbanization’s 
challenge
The  sequence  of  policies  corresponds  to 
different  levels  of  urbanization.  Incipient 
urbanization requires mainly the applica-
tion of spatially blind policies. Intermediate 
urbanization requires the addition of spa-
tially  connective  policies.  And  advanced 
urbanization  requires  these  and  spatially 
targeted efforts. So the success of the new 
policy is predicated on the successful imple-
mentation of the ones introduced before it. 
For a predominantly rural country whose 
urban share is less than a quarter or so, the 
portfolio of places is faced with what might 
be termed a one-dimensional challenge—to 
facilitate  density  (see  table  7.1).  It  is  not 
obvious  where  this  density  will  increase 
ﬁ rst, and governments are best advised to 
allow market forces to play themselves out. 
Neutrality between places is the rule, and its 
urbanization strategy should consist mainly 
of spatially blind institutions. They include 
the provision of basic and social services, the 
establishment of market institutions and law 
and order, the security of property rights, 
the efﬁ cient operation of the land market, 
and sound macroeconomic policies. Regu-
lations must be versatile enough to facilitate 
efﬁ cient land use conversion, and standards 
for  building  must  be  enforceable  without 
being overly restrictive. This is a tall order 
for governments in countries at the low lev-
els of income with which low urbanization 
rates are associated. They should not make 
it  harder  by  attempting  spatially  explicit 
policies.

For  a  rapidly  urbanizing  country  with 
urban shares between one fourth and three 
fourths, managing its portfolio of places is 
mainly  a  two-dimensional  challenge—to 
build density and reduce distance to den-
sity. A two-dimensional challenge requires 

BOX 7.8    Singapore: from slums to world city

At independence in 1965, 70 percent 
of Singapore’s households lived in 
badly overcrowded conditions, and 
a third of its people squatted on the 
city fringes. Unemployment aver-
aged 14 percent, GDP per capita 
was less than $2,700, and half of the 
population was illiterate. Falling 
mortality rates and migration from 
the Malay Peninsula implied rapid 
population growth, further increas-
ing the pressure on both housing 
and employment: 600,000 additional 
units of housing were needed, and 
private supply was less than 60,000. 
An account of this time comes from a 
contemporary visitor to Singapore:a 

The undercover walkways are usually 
taken over by hawker stalls and junk. 
Laundry hangs from poles thrust out of 
windows above—just like in old Shang-
hai. This is Singapore, in the early 1970s. 
We were all devastated at the time—we 
who didn’t live here. From 1871 to 1931 
the city’s Chinese population rose from 
100,000 to 500,000. By 1960 it is estimated 
that more than 500,000 Chinese were 
living in slum-like conditions—indoors. 
Equipped with only one kitchen and one 
bathroom, the shophouses were designed 
for two extended families at most. After 
extensive partitioning many of them 
housed up to 50 individuals.

Today, less than 40 years later, 

Singapore’s slums are gone. In their 
place is one of the cleanest and most 
welcoming cities in the world. The 
secret? First, institutional reforms 
made the government known for 
its accountability. Then, the gov-

ernment became a major provider 
of infrastructure and services. The 
scarcity of land made good plan-
ning an imperative. Multiyear plans 
were produced, implemented, and 
updated. Finally, the housing author-
ity (HDB) was mandated to undertake 
a massive program of slum clearance, 
housing construction, and urban 
renewal. Public housing has been 
an integral part of all development 
plans. At the height of the program, 
HDB was building a new fl at every 
eight minutes. Of Singapore’s popu-
lation, 86 percent now lives in pub-
licly built units. Most own their fl ats, 
encouraged by special housing funds 
fi nanced from the Employees Provi-
dent Fund, a mandatory retirement 
scheme. Serviced land was made 
available. Through the Land Amalga-
mation act, the government acquired 
almost one-third of city land. Slum 
dwellers were relocated to public 
housing. 

For a city-state in a poor region, it 
is not an exaggeration to assert that 
eff ective urbanization was respon-
sible for delivering growth rates that 
averaged 8 percent a year through-
out the 1970s and 1980s. It required 
a combination of market institutions 
and social service provision, strategic 
investment in infrastructure, and 
improved housing for slum dwellers. 

Sources: Yuen 2004, Yusuf and 
Nabeshima 2006.
a. Cockrem 2007.

a  two-pronged  response:  continuing  the 
task of building spatially blind institutions, 
and investing in spatially connective infra-
structure to offset the congestion that might 
otherwise  offset  the  efﬁ ciency  gains  from 
“localization economies” (see chapter 4). 

For  a  highly  urbanized  country  with 
urban  shares  above  75  percent,  urbaniza-
tion should emphasize livability, creativity, 
and urban social integration—the delivery 
of “urbanization economies.” These coun-
tries face a three-dimensional challenge—to 
build density, reduce distance, and diminish 
divisions. To be sure, these countries have 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   215
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   215

10/9/08   4:27:17 PM
10/9/08   4:27:17 PM

216 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 7.1    An instrument per dimension—a simple framework for urbanization policies

Incipient urbanization
Less than 25 percent
Kampong Speu, Cambodia; Lindi, 
Tanzania
1-D: Build density 

Area

Intermediate urbanization
About 50 percent
Chengdu, China; Hyderabad, India

2-D: Build density, reduce distance

Land rights; basic education, 
health and water and sanitation

Land use regulations; universal 
provision of basic and social services 
Transport infrastructure

Advanced urbanization
More than 75 percent
Greater Cairo, the Arab Republic of Egypt; Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil
3-D: Build density, reduce distance, eliminate 
division 

Land use regulation and land taxation; 
universal provision of basic services
Transport infrastructure; demand management
Slum area development; targeted programs to 
reduce crime and environmental degradation

Urban shares
Examples 

Dimensions of policy 
challenge
Instruments for integration
Institutions

Infrastructure
Interventions

Source: WDR 2009 team.

a  varied  economic  geography:  their  port-
folio of places consists of a handful of one-
dimensional areas, a good proportion face 
two-dimensional challenges, and some face 
three-dimensional challenges. Spatially blind 
and connective policies continue to facilitate 
agglomeration economies, but now they also 
are prerequisites for successful interventions 
to reduce within-city divisions.

The framework in action
Low-density areas should build economic 
density  through  rural-urban  transforma-
tions  and  stronger  links  between  villages 
and towns. Rapidly urbanizing areas should 
ensure that the productivity gains from eco-
nomic density are not offset by congestion 
costs. Highly urbanized areas should focus 
on livability by promoting social integra-
tion and the gains from economic concen-
tration. The priorities at the national level 
correspond with the predominance of one 
or more of these types of areas. 

Incipient urbanizers (one-dimensional 
areas): institutions for more efﬁ cient 
rural-urban transformations
The  recent  developers  show  that  success 
does not require explicitly spatial policies 
to lay the groundwork for successful urban-
ization. For areas of incipient urbanization, 
the policy priorities remain the provision of 
basic social services and the improvement 
of land markets. 

Emphasize social services. In 1960 the 
Republic  of  Korea  had  a  GDP  per  capita 

level roughly the same as Benin, Cambodia, 
or Tajikistan. Since then it has transformed 
itself  into  a  leading  industrial  country.56 
Consistent with the stylized facts of chapter 
1, the Republic of Korea’s sectoral transfor-
mation has been accompanied by an equally 
radical  spatial  transformation.  In  1960 
about 75 percent of all Korean citizens lived 
in rural areas. By 1990 the country was 75 
percent urban, and today the urban share of 
the population exceeds 80 percent.57 

Institutions  to  ensure  the  universal 
availability of basic social services helped 
the nation lay the foundations of rapid and 
successful urbanization. In 1960 the pro-
portion of the overall population age 15 and 
over with no schooling was 36 percent, and 
by 1980, when it had entered the intermedi-
ate urbanization stage, this proportion had 
fallen to less than 15 percent. By 2000, some 
years  after  it  entered  the  advanced  stage, 
the proportion was less than 5 percent. The 
years of schooling of the average member 
of the labor force had increased from ﬁ ve 
years in 1960 to nine years in 1980, rising 
to  more  than  12  years  by  2000.58  A  simi-
lar  story  unfolded  for  health-related  ser-
vices.  In  1980  only  4  percent  of  children 
were immunized against measles. By 1989, 
95 percent were. In 2006 only one child in 
every 100 was not immunized.

Matching the universal provision of educa-
tion and health services has been the nation-
wide ﬂ exibility in land use conversion.59 In 
particular, the Republic of Korea’s govern-
ment has been willing to convert agricultural 
land  for  industrial  purposes.  The  central 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   216
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   216

10/9/08   4:27:17 PM
10/9/08   4:27:17 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

217

government also encouraged local govern-
ments to promote the conversion of agricul-
tural land through the formation of smaller, 
more localized industrial complexes. 

While  some  areas  have  inevitably  been 
left behind in the Republic of Korea’s urban-
ization process, none has been left disadvan-
taged. Take Eumseong county, a largely rural 
area  in  Chungcheongbukdo  province  (see 
map 7.1). As the Republic of Korea indus-
trialized and urbanized, the county experi-
enced a continual outﬂ ow of people. In 1968 
the  population  exceeded  120,000,  but  by 
1990 it had fallen to just under 75,000. But 
even as the people of Eumseong were seeing 
their neighbors move closer to Korea’s major 
cities, they got better education and health 
services and improved streets and sanitation. 
Between  1969  and  1990,  middle  and  high 
school teachers tripled in Eumseong county 
from 1,000 to around 3,000. And the num-
ber  of  hospitals  per  million  population  in 
 Chungcheongbukdo province doubled from 
around 400 in 1980 to 800 in 1990, while the 
water  supply  coverage  increased  from  less 
than 30 percent to almost 60 percent. People 
left Eumseong, but the Korean government 
did  not  abandon  the  county—instead,  it 
continued to emphasize the universal provi-
sion of basic and social services.

The  Republic  of  Korea  is  not  the  only 
successful economy to provide evidence of 
the framework in action. Over the last two 
decades, China has been gradually putting in 
place the institutions to improve its urban-
ization processes. An urban land market has 
been created, and regulations standardizing 
the assignment of land use rights have been 
established.60 In the 1980s the urban planning 
law was aimed at controlling the size of large 
cities, but the 10th Five-Year Plan (2001–05) 
instead  chose  to  emphasize  the  synergistic 
development of China’s large, medium, and 
small cities. The household registration sys-
tem,  which  for  years  had  imposed  restric-
tions on rural migrants looking to move to 
urban areas, has been reformed, and the 11th 
Five-Year  Plan  (2006–10)  aims  to  further 
strengthen land market institutions.

Against  this  backdrop  the  urbanization 
prospects of China’s one-dimensional areas 
have improved. Take Guizhou province. In 
southwest  China,  and  home  to  almost  40 
million people, Guizhou lags far behind the 

coastal provinces (see map 7.2). Its GDP per 
capita in 2005 was only 34 percent of the Chi-
nese average,61 with almost 75 percent of its 
population classiﬁ ed as rural. The challenge 
Guizhou faces is building density to facilitate 
agglomeration economies. Its 11th Five-Year 
Plan (2006–10) aims to deliver an urban share 
of 35 percent by focusing on the area’s larg-
est  city,  Guiyang.  With  the  improvements 
in spatially blind institutions in China, this 

Map 7.1    The Republic of Korea —three areas at different stages of urbanization 

3D Area: Seoul
Metropolitan Area

KYONGGI

KANGWON

1D Area: Eumseoung
County

NORTH

CHUNGCHONG

SOUTH

CHUNGCHONG

NORTH
CHOLLA

SOUTH
CHOLLA

NORTH

KYONGSANG

2D Area: Daegu
Metropolitan Area

SOUTH KYONGSANG

PUSAN

CHEJU

Source: WDR 2009 team.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   217
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   217

10/9/08   4:27:18 PM
10/9/08   4:27:18 PM

218 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Map 7.2    China—three areas at different stages of urbanization

HEILONGJIANG

JILIN

NEI MONGOL

LIAONING

BEIJING

Beijing

TIANJIN

HEBEI

SHANXI

SHANDONG

GANSU

NINGXIA 

QINGHAI

SHAANXI

HENAN

JIANGSU

HUBEI

ANHUI

SHANGHAI

SICHUAN

1D Area: Guizhou
Province

CHONGQING

GUIZHOU

ZHEJIANG

JIANGXI

HUNAN

2D Area: Changsha–Zhuzhou–
Xiangfan Cluster

FUJIAN

YUNNAN

GUANGXI

GUANGDONG

TAIWAN

HONG KONG

MACAO

3D Area: Pearl
River Delta

HAINAN

Source: WDR 2009 team.

appears to be more realistic now than would 
have been the case two decades ago.

Deﬁ ne  and  enforce  land  rights.  Kam-
pong Speu province in Cambodia, about 100 
kilometers southwest of Phnom Penh, covers 
about 7,000 squares kilometers. It has about 
700,000 people, and is 10 percent urban. A 
few  market  towns  serve  its  farming  com-
munes of Mohasaing, Ou, Traeng Trayeung, 
and others. Many villages are beneﬁ ciaries 
of the land registration and titling begun in 
2000. The aims are to strengthen land tenure 
security and land markets, formulate policies 
for land administration and management, 
develop mechanisms for dispute resolution, 
and  establish  a  national  land  registration 

system. The results are more security of ten-
ure—leading to easier transactions, higher 
land values, and more land investments—
and greater mobility to urban areas.

Kampong  Speu  illustrates  the  critical 
issues  for  areas  of  incipient  urbanizers. 
Spatially blind policies to encourage rural-
urban integration should be the mainstay 
of  a  government’s  strategy:  improve  land 
markets and property rights, improve rural 
and  urban  social  services,  and  encourage 
inclusive  governance  in  towns  and  small 
cities (box 7.9 discusses the importance of 
land titling in Cambodia and Vietnam). 

Secure  tenure  promotes  greater  invest-
ment in land and shelter, improves the abil-
ity to transfer land, and enhances access to 
credit. China, Pakistan, and Vietnam con-
ﬁ rm its importance for investment in low-
density areas. Farmers use more labor and 
inputs on owned plots than on leased land. 
They  also  use  land  as  collateral  for  new 
activities and beneﬁ t from increases in land 
prices. In India the prices for titled land are, 
on average, 15 percent higher than those for 
untitled land. In the Philippines secure hous-
ing commands prices 58 percent higher than 
housing without title, and in Jakarta prices 
for secure housing are 73 percent higher.62 

Despite these obvious advantages, more 
than 50 percent of the periurban population 
in Africa and more than 40 percent in Asia 
lives under informal tenure. In many coun-
tries improving land tenure (and registra-
tion) is hindered by political and customary 
tenure arrangements. In Africa, where cus-
tomary institutions cover between 90 and 98 
percent of the land, policies to formalize land 
tenure must start with customary systems 
and gradually add features of modern land 
registration.  Once  community- recognized 
rights  are  obtained  in  Benin,  Ghana, 
Mozambique, and Namibia, individuals can 
apply for land certiﬁ cation and full registra-
tion, and both can be used for credit. 

Improve  land  administration.  Central 
Asia and Eastern Europe have the most sys-
tematic experience in tackling land admin-
istration, from Central European countries 
with old traditions of land markets, to Cen-
tral Asian countries where no land markets 
existed. During the transition from plan to 
market, countries tried to reestablish equity 
in  land  and  property  rights,  deepen  land 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   218
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   218

10/9/08   4:27:18 PM
10/9/08   4:27:18 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

219

BOX 7.9     Titling land for a sustainable rural-urban transformation

“Application receipts” 
in Cambodia
Cambodia is formalizing ownership of 
land through the distribution of land 
titles, with immediate benefi ts in higher 
productivity and land values.a Although 
the courts and other formal institutions 
to resolve land confl icts are slow, formal 
land rights documents carry authority 
in most rural communities. If landhold-
ers hold a formal title to a disputed plot 
of land, their position is considerably 
strengthened, even if the confl ict is 
resolved through informal means.

In 1989 individual land use in agricul-

ture was codifi ed by law.b Rural residents 
were encouraged to submit applications 
for land ownership certifi cates, and appli-
cations came in for 4 million plots. Due to 
the limited administrative capacity and 
reach of the government, only about half 
a million titles were actually distributed.c 
But people who applied got an “applica-
tion receipt,” and this document often 
worked as a formal title.d 

This view was backed by the 1992 

land law, which ruled that an application 
receipt is a valid claim on the plot. In 2004 
the government initiated a comprehensive 
land management and administration pro-
gram, and one of its central components 
includes a systematic titling scheme. By 
the end of 2005 about 457,000 plots had 
been registered under this program, and 
166,000 titles had been distributed.e

“Red books” in Vietnam
In 1981 Vietnam moved to a system simi-
lar to the Chinese “household responsibil-
ity system,” with land users entitled to 
keep surplus production above a fi xed 
quota. In 1988 some individual property 
rights to agricultural land were trans-
ferred to farmer households. In the 1993 
land law, the distribution of land use 
certifi cates—known as “red books”—
was mandated. Red books come with 
the rights to sell, rent, mortgage, and 
bequeath land. So the idea of a land mar-
ket was formally sanctioned.

Red books increase land market 

activities, and these activities increase 
agricultural productivity by transferring 
land to the most productive users, reduc-
ing ineffi  ciencies.f The liberalization of 
the land market has been followed by 
increased mobility as households sell 
land to take up new economic oppor-
tunities in the wage labor sector.g So a 
more fl uid land market has facilitated the 
ongoing shift in Vietnam from a predomi-
nantly agricultural economy to a more 
diversifi ed and urbanized economy. It is a 
big part of a strategy that has yielded per-
haps the most impressive poverty reduc-
tion in any country in recent history.h
Contributed by Thomas Markussen.
a. Markussen forthcoming; World Bank 2003b. 
b. Boreak 2000. 
c. Sophal, Saravi, and Acharya 2001. 
d. Sovannarith and others 2001. 
e. Deutsch 2006. 
f. Deininger and Jin 2003; Ravallion and van 
de Walle 2006b. 
g. Ravallion and van de Walle 2006a.
h. World Bank 2003b. 

and  capital  markets,  and  improve  public 
functions such as land taxation, planning, 
and  asset  management.  Now  they  have  to 
improve mechanisms to enable registrations, 
valuations, and transactions (see box 7.10). 
Instituting  mechanisms  to  govern  land 
use and conversion can be difﬁ cult. Some 
nations fear that land conversion would hurt 
grain production and food security (China 
and the Arab Republic of Egypt). Many oth-
ers are constrained by traditional forms of 
land tenure, such as the communal systems 
in Africa and the ejido in Mexico. In cases of 
unclear property title, land conversion tends 
to beneﬁ t the state and the developers at the 
cost of the farmers or rural households that 
traditionally held or cultivated this land. 

In Mexico the traditional communal land 
system has evolved to enable land transac-
tions. After the 1917 revolution, Mexico dis-
tributed more than 100 million hectares, or 
50 percent of its arable area, from large farms 
to ejidos, rural communities organized along 
the precolonial indigenous social structures. 
But the redistribution undermined property 
rights, and the requirement that land be used 
for self-cultivation precluded rental markets. 

BOX 7.10    Land markets in transition

In the fi rst phase, Eastern Europe and 
Central Asia restored property rights, 
privatized state-owned assets, and 
promoted equity in housing. Next, 
they rebuilt the land administration 
systems for cadastre and registration 
followed. Proper records were needed 
to stimulate real estate markets and 
take care of land allocation and con-
solidation. Information infrastructure, 
institutional capacity, and databases 
were the areas of focus. Now some are 
entering the third phase of collecting 
property taxes, managing public land, 
and issuing building permits. 

Some lessons: 

•  Reforming dysfunctional legal and 
institutional systems such as those 
in Latin America, may be more diffi  -
cult than starting anew (the Kyrgyz 
Republic, Georgia). 

•  A single agency should be respon-

sible for both registration and 

cadastres. More effi  cient, a com-
bined system is easier to make self-
fi nancing. 

•  A local champion is needed, pref-
erably not a surveyor or a lawyer. 
Enthusiastic change managers 
were instrumental in Moldova and 
the Czech Republic. Competent 
offi  cials in the Russian Federation, 
Serbia, and Turkey were needed 
to design and implement the new 
systems. Systematic registration 
was not necessary because good 
land records predated socialism, 
and there were few transactions 
during the socialist period. 

•  A solid system with Web-based 

applications to reduce user 
transaction costs and the oppor-
tunities for corruption can be 
updated on its own. 

Contributed by Cora Shaw and Gavin P. 
Adlington.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   219
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   219

10/9/08   4:27:19 PM
10/9/08   4:27:19 PM

220 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

In 1991 the system gave more freedom to eji-
dos to sell and rent land. Of 150,000 hectares 
used for urban development between 1995 
and 2000, more than two-thirds were from 
ejidos.  The  off-farm  income  of  the  farm-
ers increased 45 percent. (Box 7.11 presents 
promising examples.)

Intermediate urbanization 
(two-dimensional areas): institutions 
and infrastructure for increasing 
density and reducing congestion
Rapidly  urbanizing  areas  expect  a  con-
tinuing inﬂ ux of migrants and increasing 

congestion.  The  priorities  include  pro-
viding social services for rural and urban 
residents, ensuring ﬂ uid land markets, and 
investing in infrastructure in and around 
the growing city centers. 

Expand  administrative  jurisdictions 
to  coordinate  infrastructure  investments. 
Among the many cities that have absorbed 
rural  Koreans  are  Seoul  and  Daegu.  Both 
of these cities were initially able to urbanize 
against a backdrop of spatially blind poli-
cies, but they soon began to face congestion, 
which required spatially connective policies. 
Indeed, housing congestion in Seoul became 

BOX 7.11     Strengthening land market institutions for rural-urban integration

Land management on Douala’s 
urban fringe—Cameroon’s 
Mbanga-Japoma Project
Mbanga-Japoma, a land development proj-
ect in Douala, Cameroon, provides serviced 
land at a reasonable price and reconciles 
formal and customary development prac-
tices. The fi rst phase, covering 160 hectares 
30 kilometers from the city center, started 
as a partnership among public institutions, 
formal private investors, and customary 
owners. The partnership develops the site 
with primary and secondary infrastructure 
services (roads, water, sewerage, drainage, 
electricity), delineating blocks of land of 
between 1 and 8 hectares. The developer 
gives back 45 percent of the land to cus-
tomary landowners, keeping 55 percent. 
Blocks are then subdivided and sold, either 
by the developer or by customary owners. 
The fi nal cost of a serviced plot is much 
lower than one provided by the formal 
private sector. 

Although there are questions about eli-
gibility for purchasing the serviced plots, 
the approach provides a new perspective 
for partnerships in managing rural-urban 
land use in and near Sub-Saharan cities. 
Secondary land rights and farming 
in central Mali
Secondary land rights—including share-
cropping, tenancy, and borrowing land 
under customary tenure—are often seen 
as exploitative because they do not give 
permanent tenure to users. But in some 
circumstances they can benefi t both sec-
ondary and permanent rights holders. In 
the village of Baguinéda, in central Mali, 

secondary rights allow small-scale farm-
ers to hire migrant workers in exchange 
for temporary rights to cultivate plots. 
The system is highly structured, with 
specifi c days of the week designated for 
laborers and others who are working on 
the borrowed land. Land tenure in the vil-
lage is almost exclusively under the cus-
tomary system, controlled by the village 
council, allowing for secondary rights 
allocations. Strong demand from nearby 
urban markets for horticultural produce 
makes cultivating of even a small plot 
profi table and thus attractive to migrants. 
Inclusive administration—the 
Republic of Korea’s integrated cities
The Republic of Korea developed the rural-
urban integrated city to overcome the 
shortcomings of earlier rural development 
initiatives. The integrated city policy incor-
porates rural counties with cities in a uni-
fi ed spatial framework. It aims to improve 
local public services and local administra-
tion and reduce rural-urban disparities. 

Starting in 1994 the government 

selected 49 cities and 43 counties as can-
didates. The selection criteria included 
historical homogeneity, natural topo-
graphical conditions, and the potential 
for balanced development within the 
integrated city. The selected cities and 
counties held public hearings and citizen 
surveys. After this screening, 41 cities and 
39 counties were amalgamated into 40 
rural-urban integrated cities. 

Attitude surveys suggest that residents 
and local councils see the benefi ts. Every-
one agrees that the integrated city makes 

for better land use planning in urban 
areas. Areas for improvement include the 
equity of service provision, since rural and 
urban residents have diff erent needs, and 
the weak rural voice, since urbanites are 
believed to be more organized. 

Land consolidation in Indonesia
The Land Consolidation Program imple-
mented in Indonesia in the 1990s shows 
how to facilitate the orderly develop-
ment of fast-growing areas and to plan 
the development of vacant areas on the 
urban fringe. 

The mayor has the authority to deter-
mine the location of consolidation areas 
and to manage and supervise the pro-
cess. But the key actors are the private 
landowners and the occupiers of (state-
owned) land. 

The minimum requirement for land 
consolidation is to have at least 85 per-
cent of landowners representing at least 
85 percent of the land area give their 
agreement. All participants contribute 
by providing land for infrastructure and 
services. The amount of land a partici-
pant is required to give up is determined 
by consensus. Small landowners who 
cannot contribute land can contribute 
money or labor. The contributions fund 
infrastructure and utilities—and build 
a pool of “cost-equivalent land,” to 
be used only by small landowners to 
enlarge their parcels. 

Sources: WDR 2009 team; Groupe Recher-
che/Actions pour le Développement 2001; 
and Kim 1998.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   220
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   220

10/9/08   4:27:20 PM
10/9/08   4:27:20 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

221

a severe problem in 1960 as the area grew 
through the intermediate stage of urbaniza-
tion and absorbed a large inﬂ ux of people 
from abroad after the country gained inde-
pendence from Japan and from rural areas 
in the Republic of Korea. To help tackle this 
problem, the area of Gangnam, south of the 
Han River, was absorbed into Seoul’s terri-
tory in 1963, and the Gangnam Development 
Program initiated. This program involved a 
series of spatially connective infrastructure 
projects  spread  over  30  years,  including 
several bridges across the Han River and a 
54.2-kilometer circular subway line to link 
Gangnam with central Seoul. 

Daegu’s story is similar. Between 1950 and 
1990, Daegu’s population swelled by a factor 
of six, from 355,000 to nearly 2 million,63 as 
its thriving textile industry pulled in rural 
migrants  seeking  a  better  life.  The  policy 
response was to integrate Daegu and its hin-
terland by expanding its administrative zone 
in 1987 and again in 1995, followed by build-
ing a subway system and expanding the city 
bus system. The city also experienced con-
tinual building and upgrading of local roads. 
In 1980 just over 40 percent of Daegu’s local 
roads were paved, and by 1995, virtually all 
had been paved. 

Combining universal access to the most 
basic services and reasonable land markets 
with investments to improve spatial con-
nectivity with other areas of the country, 
Daegu  has  thrived.  Manufacturing  has 
deconcentrated from Daegu into the sur-
rounding  Gyeongsangbukdo  province, 
and  the  local  economy  has  diversiﬁ ed, 
reducing its reliance on the textile indus-
try  and  moving  into  sectors  with  higher 
value added production. Daegu now sits at 
the center of a vibrant urban system sur-
rounded by ﬁ ve cities, all with easy trans-
port  access  to  the  central  city,  and  each 
having  evolved  to  provide  localization 
economies (see map 7.3). Gumi has been 
dubbed  “Korea’s  Silicon  Valley”  for  its 
specialization in electronics, while coastal 
Pohang  and  Ulsan,  respectively,  provide 
homes for the Pohang Steel Company and 
Hyundai. Ulsan also houses one of the big-
gest shipbuilding industries in the world, 
and  both  these  cities  have  been  on  the 

Map 7.3    Decentralization and localization 
economies in Daegu

Daegu urban area
Daegu city center
Highways
KTX High-speed train
Industrial centers

90 km

60 km

DAEGU

30 km

Pohang
Machinery &
auto:
31 million
cars per year

Gumi
Electronics
80 million
mobile phones
per year,
1.4 million
LCDs per year

Ulsan
Automotive:
1.8 million
cars per year

Busan
Container terminal:
1,500 kton

Machinery & auto: 240,000 cars per year

Changwon

Source: Daegu Metropolitan City.

forefront of the Republic Korea’s export-
led industrialization. 

Other  examples  are  Chongqing  and 
Chengdu,  both  rapidly  urbanizing  areas 
in  southwestern  China.  In  line  with  an 
unabashedly urbanization-based economic 
growth strategy, China is piloting the “area 
approach” in western China. At about 43 
percent, they have similar urban shares to 
the average for China. The objective is to 
increase those shares to 70 percent in 2020, 
but in a manner that speeds the concentra-
tion of economic activities while reducing 
rural-urban disparities in living standards. 
The mainstays of the strategy are institu-
tions and infrastructure (see box 5 in the 
overview).

If markets favor the two places as much 
as the central and provincial governments 
have, the two cities will improve the lives 
of millions in the Chinese hinterland. The 
initiatives have already had a local impact. 
In Chongqing rural incomes in the ﬁ rst half 
of 2007 increased faster than those of urban 
residents. Foreign investment is about the 
same  as  it  was  in  Shanghai  a  decade  ago. 
Industries  are  attracted  to  the  low  wages 
and low cost of land. According to govern-
ment statistics, average wages, at $2 to $3 a 
day, are much lower than those in Beijing 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   221
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   221

10/9/08   4:27:20 PM
10/9/08   4:27:20 PM

222 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

or Shanghai. In Chengdu farmer concen-
trations are believed to have increased pro-
ductivity  by  80  percent.  Industrialization 
has been absorbing about 100,000 farmers 
a year, with some narrowing of rural-urban 
income differences.

Several areas at the intermediate stage of 
urbanization in China appear to conform 
to the principle of an additional instrument 
for  the  dimensional  challenge  of  conges-
tion. An example is the tri-city area in the 
northeast  of  Hunan  province,  in  central 
China (see map 7.4). The cluster of three 
cities—Changsha,  Zhuzhou,  and  Xiang-
tan—has a combined population of around 
13 million and accounts for about one-ﬁ fth 
of the province. With an income exceeding 
the national average by 17 percent and the 
Hunan average by 61 percent, this cluster is 
an intermediate urbanization area with an 
urban share of half. 

An  area  plan—the  ﬁ rst  of  its  kind  in 
inland China—was formulated in 2005.64 
The  plan  speciﬁ es  a  regulatory  land  use 
planning framework within which market 
prices will be allowed to allocate land for 
different  uses.  It  also  provides  planning 
guidelines including, for example, enforc-
ing  land  use  rights  and  promoting  land 

Map 7.4    Changsha, Zhuzhou, and Xiangtan—spatially 
connective infrastructure in a two dimensional area

CHANGSHA
Changsha

Zhuzhou

Pingxiang

JIANGXI

Loudi

Xiangtan

XIANGTAN

ZHUZHOU

HUNAN

Hengyang

Main connective artery

Secondary transport axis

Tertiary transport axis

Source: China Urban Planning and Design Institute and Hunan 
Development and Reform Commission 2005.
Note: The main artery is formed by the Beijing-Guangzhou 
railway, Beijing-Zhuhai highway, and State Highway 107.

intensiﬁ cation  in  central  city  areas.  The 
plan sets out a series of spatially connective 
policies  aiming  to  promote  connectivity 
between the three cities in the cluster. These 
include highway and rail-based expressway 
projects to connect Xiangtan with Zhuzhou 
and ring roads around each of the three cit-
ies. The plan is a good illustration of how 
the principle of “an I for a D” can be made 
operational using an area approach. 

Invest in transport connectivity while 
continuing  institutional  reform.  Devel-
oped  metropolitan  areas  rarely  leave  city 
growth  unplanned.  Land  and  housing 
markets help allocate residential and ofﬁ ce 
space.  Rapidly  expanding  systems  need 
clear property rights to provide incentives 
for land transactions and correct land valu-
ation to avoid an urban bias and too much 
migration  to  the  city.  Singapore  develops 
land and housing plans every 10 years and 
lets  the  market  function  once  public  and 
private  sectors  agree  on  which  economic 
activities to develop and which residential 
patterns are needed to accommodate ﬁ rms 
and workers. 

Urban transport, along with urban land 
management, determines the shape of the 
city  and  its  ecological  footprint.  Urban 
mobility is particularly important for the 
poor. In Buenos Aires 87 percent of the jobs 
in the metropolitan area are accessible in 
45 minutes. In Mexico City 20 percent of 
workers spend more than three hours trav-
eling to and from work each day. The urban 
poor  in  Beijing  and  Shanghai  spend  less 
than 5 percent of their income on transport 
because they walk or cycle. If they chose to 
travel by bus, the costs would be 40 percent 
of their income.65 Brazil’s vale de transporte 
is an effective way to subsidize poor workers 
in the absence of good urban transport—
ﬁ nanced by the central government and by 
the employer in equal parts. Several large 
cities have public transport networks that 
are used extensively—metro in Delhi, Kol-
kata, and Mumbai, buses and metro in São 
Paulo—but the network quickly becomes 
inadequate  and  congested  because  of  the 
rapid population growth. Regular mainte-
nance and new investments in infrastruc-
ture are needed to sustain density in urban 
areas (see box 7.12). 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   222
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   222

10/9/08   4:27:21 PM
10/9/08   4:27:21 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

223

Put infrastructure in the most promis-
ing places. Several countries have created 
new cities to move a capital city (Brasília), 
to decongest the capital (Seoul), or for eco-
nomic  reasons.  Creating  new  cities  with 
the  sole  purpose  of  diverting  population 
from  the  capital  is  often  risky,  evidenced 
by Brazil, France, República Bolivariana de 
Venezuela, the United Kingdom, and more 
recently  Egypt  and  Nigeria.66  New  cities 
become attractive to private investors only 
after they reach a threshold, but there is no 
way  to  know  that  threshold.67  And  when 
cities are created far from main transport 
networks  and  business  centers,  they  are 
unlikely to be economic successes. 

When markets identify promising cities, 
strategic investments in infrastructure and 
public goods can accelerate their potential 
for economic growth (see box 7.13). Second-
ary  cities  that  promote  access  to  markets, 
improve city management, and build human 
capital seem a better alternative. And if polit-
ical concerns dictate the creation of new cit-
ies, efﬁ ciency concerns will guide locations 
to be close to growing markets and to have 
access to infrastructure. Working with exist-
ing cities is preferable to creating new cities 
from scratch. But, if new cities are created, 
they should be constructed on an appropri-
ate scale, close to markets, and planned to 
generate demand-side links. 

Advanced urbanizers 
(three-dimensional areas): 
institutions and infrastructure for 
higher density and shorter distance, 
and targeted incentives to 
address divisions
Successful  metropolitan  areas  in  both 
developed  and  developing  countries  have 
well-functioning land markets, representa-
tive management, state-of-the art transport 
infrastructure, and social policies to inte-
grate low-income residents. 

Use  an  inclusive  mix  of  institutions, 
infrastructure,  and  incentives.  Colom-
bia’s capital, Bogotá, shows the resolve and 
resources  needed  for  inclusive  urbaniza-
tion  in  a  metropolitan  region.  Although 
the  area’s  income  places  it  in  upper-mid-
dle-income levels, 43 percent of its popula-
tion of 6.7 million is considered poor. One 

BOX 7.12    Retroﬁ tting transport infrastructure in Bangkok
Thailand, or to suburban districts of 
Bangkok, because of the enduring 
attraction of Bangkok’s agglomera-
tion economies, sociocultural ameni-
ties, and key export infrastructure, 
including its port.

In the 1990s it was estimated that the 
average car in Bangkok spent 44 days 
each year stationary in traffi  c. How 
did this situation come to pass? And 
how is it being remedied? 

A city of around 7 million people, 
Bangkok is the product of hundreds 
of years of incremental growth along 
traditional land confi gurations. The 
result is a city woven with narrow 
lanes, many of them culs-de-sac 
(called soi), but with few arterial 
roads. Indeed, the arterial roads can 
be as far as 7 kilometers or more 
apart. According to a recent estimate, 
roads account for only about 6.1 
percent of Bangkok’s land area in 
the inner city, and only 1.7 percent in 
its peripheral areas. In high-income 
countries it is usual for 20 to 30 per-
cent of urban land area to be devoted 
to roads. Even with this extreme con-
gestion, economic activity has been 
slow to decentralize to other cities in 

In recent years several fl yovers and 
elevated expressways have been built, 
along with an elevated railway system 
(Skytrain), dedicated bus lanes, and 
two peripheral ring roads. But car 
ownership has shot up, too, adding to 
the traffi  c and diminishing the impact 
of remedial investments. Looking to 
the future, congestion pricing and 
increased parking fees appear to be 
promising policy options. Reducing 
fares on the Skytrain and extending 
rapid transit to more of Bangkok, 
perhaps using bus rapid transit, pose 
greater challenges.
Contributed by Austin Kilroy.
Sources: Angel 2008, Bae and Suthira-
nart 2003, and Gakenheimer 1999.

of 12 residents lives in a slum, and about 
one-third of new citizens in recent years are 
rural migrants. The city has taken steps to 
make urbanization inclusive. It built better 
schools, renewed parks, started community 
centers, and improved main networks for 
water  and  sanitation.  Since  2000  a  pub-
lic-private  bus  rapid  transit  system,  the 
TransMilenio, has improved citywide acces-
sibility. Travel times have fallen by an aver-
age of 15 minutes, with larger reductions 
for households in poorer parts of the city 
(see  map  7.5).  Aided  by  these  infrastruc-
ture improvements, Bogotá’s internation-
ally recognized Programa de Mejoramiento 
Integral de Barrios has assisted the poorest 
neighborhoods  to  integrate  with  the  city. 
Begun in 2003 it has already helped 930,000 
people.  The  program  is  believed  to  have 
contributed increases of up to 11 percent in 
house values.68 

The  Republic  of  Korea  also  provides 
lessons.  In  the  1950s  it  had  an  estimated 
136,650 unregistered slum districts, more 
than 2,200 in the core of Seoul.69 Spatially 
targeted policies to redevelop Seoul’s slum 
areas  started  as  early  as  the  mid-1960s. 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   223
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   223

10/9/08   4:27:21 PM
10/9/08   4:27:21 PM

224 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 7.13    New cities: escapes from urban jungles, or cathedrals in the desert?

New cities were attempted in Europe with-
out much success. In the United Kingdom 
the Barlow Commission Report of 1940 
stimulated interest in new towns. Between 
1947 and 1968, Britain created 26 new 
towns to control the growth of London 
and stimulate development in Scotland 
and Wales. In 1965 France followed a simi-
lar program—nine towns, fi ve in the Paris 
area and four in lagging areas, were con-
structed. These programs soon were inter-
rupted and put aside as unsustainable. The 
new towns never reached their targeted 
population, nor did they forestall the 
growth of London or Paris. The experience 
in developing countries has been mixed. 
Failure in the Arab Republic of Egypt
Egypt’s program of new cities is the 
world’s largest. In 20 years Egypt has 
built 20 new cities and is preparing for 
45 more. The fi rst set of 24 cities was 
launched in 1974–75 as a manifestation of 
the political commitment to conquer the 
desert and ensure sustainable growth. 
Large industrial zones were created and 
generous tax incentives were given to the 
private sector. Land was virtually free. The 
“fi rst generation” of new towns included 
six towns, each with its own industrial 
base and large target populations.a Ten 
years later—by the mid-1980s—the next 
program based on satellite settlements 
was launched, and nine second-genera-
tion settlements were launched around 
Greater Cairo. A third generation included 
twin towns close to provincial capitals, 
such as New Thebes. 

The performance of the six cities cre-

ated 30 years ago suggests a mixed 

record at best. Cities closer to Cairo 
have attracted businesses and people, 
though much fewer than anticipated. 
Cities distant from Cairo (including Sadat 
City, supposedly the new capital) remain 
unattractive for skilled labor due to lack 
of amenities and transport links. The new 
cities have no more than 1 million inhabit-
ants (1 percent of Egypt’s population), 
compared with the 5 million target set 
for 2005. The program was also costly: 22 
percent of the Ministry of Infrastructure’s 
investment under the Fourth Plan (1997–
2001) was spent in these new towns. This 
will increase if the government continues 
its policy of developing the urban fringes. 
The emphasis on attracting investment 
was not balanced by the need to make 
cities attractive for skilled labor and acces-
sible from the established urban centers. 
Eventually, the creation of the new cities 
had little impact on decongesting greater 
Cairo.  
Success in China
China’s approach recognizes the need to 
create cities with access to major markets 
and transportation networks. Shenzhen 
was the fi rst special economic zone 
(SEZ) to be approved by Deng Xiaoping 
in 1980. From a small town with 30,000 
inhabitants, it grew to 800,000 in 1988 
and 7 million in 2000. The new residents 
include the best-trained professionals in 
the country, attracted by high salaries, 
better housing, and education opportu-
nities for their children. GDP per capita 
increased more than 60 times. 

Shenzhen owes its success to its near-
ness to Hong Kong, China; its connected-

ness within the area and with other cities 
in China; and its urban form:
•  Access to foreign markets. Locating the 

SEZ close to the city of Hong Kong, 
China, facilitated foreign investment, 
technical assistance, and access to for-
eign markets. 

•  Connectedness within the area. To 

spread the fruits of development, the 
boundaries of the municipality were 
expanded to extend the benefi ts of 
the city to all workers. The rural hukou 
was abolished in the municipality, and 
all urban services became accessible 
to all residents. Placing the Shenzhen 
city-area in the Pearl River Delta area 
ensured the best possible links to its 
hinterland and other urban nodes in 
the Delta regions. Complementary 
decisions to ease the mobility and 
integration include investments in 
transport infrastructure and a shift 
from a road-based to a rail-based 
system. 

•  Functional urban form. The compre-

hensive plan for Shenzhen envisions a 
polycentric metropolis that connects 
the SEZ to urban nodes through effi  -
cient transport.

Sources: WDR 2009 team; Stewart 1996; and 
World Bank 2007k.
a. For example, Sixth of October had an 
original target population of 500,000, 
which was raised in the late 1980s to 1 mil-
lion, and currently the target is 2.5 million. 
The actual population is probably less than 
200,000.

But  without  the  requisite  investments  in 
spatially  blind  institutions  and  spatially 
connective  infrastructure  in  place,  these 
policies  succeeded  only  in  relocating  the 
slums to new slum areas such as Mokdang, 
Nangok, and Shillim near the Guro Indus-
trial  Complex,  whose  textile  and  other 
industries provided low-skill employment 
opportunities for rural migrants.

The  Republic  of  Korea’s  government 
would have more luck when it tried again 
with  an  expanded  set  of  policies  in  the 
1980s. By this time, the Republic of Korea 

was  closing  in  on  the  advanced  stage  of 
urbanization, and Seoul’s population level 
had started to stabilize (see map 7.6). Fur-
thermore, enough time had elapsed for the 
earlier spatially blind and connective poli-
cies to take full effect. 

Between  1984  and  1990,  expanding 
road capacity struggled to keep up with the 
growth of vehicle ownership. More exten-
sive plans of city- periphery integration were 
required, and in 1989 the New City Devel-
opment plan was launched. Five new cities 
were encouraged around 25–30 kilometers 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   224
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   224

10/9/08   4:27:22 PM
10/9/08   4:27:22 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

225

Map 7.5    Bogotá’s TransMilenio has helped to integrate the poor

TransMilenio
routes

Feeder routes

Minutes spent during rush hour within transport system
80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Poverty:
Low

High

18

15

Average minutes saved,
weighted by number of
passengers

10

10

13

10

1

Poorest

2

3

4

5

Neighborhood stratification

Before the TransMilenio
After the TransMilenio

6

Richest

Source: Yepes 2008.

from Seoul. Central to the success of this 
integration  were  investments  in  connec-
tive infrastructure. The subway system was 
extended, and a beltway was constructed, 
easing trafﬁ c congestion.

During  this  period,  93  slum  districts 
covering an area of 427 square kilometers 
were modernized, including the Wolgoksa-
dong and Mok-dong slum areas.70 Dwellers 
in the former beneﬁ ted from successful in 
situ upgrading; those in the latter were relo-
cated  as  the  government  cleared  the  area 
and replaced it with a modern apartment 
complex. Squatters beneﬁ ted from moving 
subsidies  of  about  $2,000  per  person  and 
the right to purchase a new apartment at a 
discount.71  

Turkey has also transformed itself from a 
predominantly rural society to a primarily 
urban one over the past half-century. Since 
becoming  a  member  of  the  Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD) in 1961, Turkey’s urban share 
increased  from  around  one-third  to  two-
thirds,72 as GDP per capita more than tri-
pled to about $6,600.73 Driving this increase 
in density was the rapid growth of Turkey’s 
cities, foremost among them, Istanbul. 

In 1960 Istanbul’s population was about 
1.5 million, a modern-day Kansas City in 
the United States. With a population more 
than 10 million today, Istanbul is now one 
of  Europe’s  largest  cities,  about  the  same 

Map 7.6    Economic density in Seoul with good connections to other cities 

Seoul

Ansan

Chongju

Taejon

Chonju

Kwangju

Mokpo

Daegu

Ulsan

Pusan

Changwon

Source: WDR 2009 team and World Bank Development Research Group, based on subnational GDP estimates 
for 2005. See also Nordhaus 2006.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   225
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   225

10/9/08   4:27:23 PM
10/9/08   4:27:23 PM

226 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

size as Chicago.74 Much of this growth has 
been accommodated on the Asian side of 
the city, home to successive waves of rural 
immigrants. It is now the origin of a daily 
tidal wave of commuters who make their 
way  across  the  Bosporus  to  work  on  the 
European side of the city.

Underpinning  Turkey’s  transformation 
to an urban economy are the spatially blind 
reforms  that  accompanied  the  creation  of 
the modern republic of Turkey. The Turkish 
constitution of 1924 included the adaptation 
of  European  laws  to  the  needs  of  the  new 
republic, endorsing private property rights. 
The  reforms  introduced  under  Mustafa 
Kemal  Ataturk  uniﬁ ed  the  country’s  edu-
cation system, providing the backdrop for 
better access to education over the last half-
century. In 1960 the proportion of the adult 
population more than 15 years old with no 
schooling was 67 percent, and in 2000, 18.6 
percent.75  And  better  health  care  services 
helped increase life expectancy from 51 years 
in 1960 to 71 years in 2005.76

The  reforms  of  the  1920s  helped  to  lay 
the  foundation  for  Istanbul’s  rapid  expan-
sion, but the city has found itself grappling 
with  congestion.  In  response,  the  city  has 
improved its connective infrastructure, with 
1973 marking the opening of the eight-lane 
Bosporus Bridge connecting the European 
and Asian parts of the city. This was followed, 
in 1988, by the completion of the second Bos-
porus Bridge. In 1989 the ﬁ rst light metro rail 
line opened between the areas of Aksaray and 
Kartaltepe. Meanwhile, a second light metro 
line opened in 2007, supplementing the 2005 
construction  of  an  11-kilometer  metrobus 
line. More are in the pipeline. 

With this prosperity has come division. 
Much of Istanbul’s rapid growth over the 
last several decades has occurred through 
the  growth  of  informal  settlements,  such 
as  Sultanbeyli,  Sarigazi,  and  Pas¸aköy  on 
the  Asian  side.  These  settlements  formed 
as  rural  migrants  took  advantage  of  an 
ancient  legal  precept,  which  survived  the 
Ataturk reforms: no matter who owns the 
land, if people are able to get their houses 
built overnight and are moved in by morn-
ing, they cannot be evicted without being 
taken  to  court.  Such  settlements,  called 
gecekondu, house a large share of Istanbul’s 

population. Almost half of the city’s resi-
dents—some  5–6  million  people—live 
in  dwellings  that  are  or  were  gecekondu. 
Although  settlements  such  as  Sultanbeyli 
have  integrated  themselves  into  the  city, 
others  like  Pas¸aköy  have  not.77  Istanbul 
still needs targeted programs to deal with 
the divisions associated with the continu-
ing existence of poorly serviced and under-
integrated informal communities.78

China’s  Pearl  River  Delta  faces  similar 
challenges. The area consists of nine cities 
and has a population roughly equal to that 
of Spain, representing one of China’s most 
advanced urban agglomerations. With an 
urban share of almost 75 percent in 2006, 
it  is  a  three-dimensional  area  with  the 
triple challenge of building density, reduc-
ing  distance,  and  overcoming  divisions. 
The divisions are manifest in “urban vil-
lages,” many of which would be known as 
slums elsewhere. They lack access to basic 
sanitation services and are subject to envi-
ronmental  degradation.  The  cities  of  the 
Pearl River Delta area have been introduc-
ing spatially targeted policies to deal with 
urban villages. Guangdong province, where 
the area is located, began rebuilding urban 
villages in June 2000. The city of Zhuhai, 
for example, aims to rebuild 26 adminis-
trative villages. An incentive scheme allows 
the  village  administration,  residents,  and 
developers to share any land appreciation.

Rural-urban  integration  has  been  part 
of post-1978 liberalization in China. Under 
the  township  model,  the  urban  core  has 
responsibility  for  the  surrounding  rural 
hinterland. As the city grows and its area 
of  influence  expands,  the  administra-
tive borders of the township also expand. 
Large  cities  promote  the  active  inclusion 
of their surrounding hinterland by ﬁ nanc-
ing investment in infrastructure and social 
services in the small cities and rural areas 
under their inﬂ uence (see box 7.14).

Get regulations right. Shanghai, a metro-
politan area with special status as a province, 
has  a  population  of  13  million  registered 
and 4 million permanent residents, spread 
out  over  6,300  square  kilometers.  The 
urban  share  is  almost  80  percent,  with  18 
urban  districts  and  the  Chongming  rural 
county. Urban land markets function well 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   226
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   226

10/9/08   4:27:25 PM
10/9/08   4:27:25 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

227

in allocating the urban land available under 
the rural land conversion limits. Floor-area 
ratios  have  adapted  to  changing  market 
needs  and  increased  the  space  per  person 
from 3 to 12 square meters over the past 20 
years. Land leases are a source of revenue. 

Shanghai’s  built-up  area  has  expanded 
from  300  to  500  square  kilometers  in  the 
past decade. Passengers on the metro have 
increased tenfold, from 178,000 to 1.6 mil-
lion over the past decade, but its share of all 
trips is just 2.5 percent. Many of the 4 mil-
lion transient workers in Shanghai live in old 
urban villages, affordable because they are 
not subject to regulations for density, height, 
and  public  space.  Given  the  difﬁ culties  in 
converting rural land, these urban villages 
are attractive to developers, but developing 
them would likely make the housing condi-
tions worse for transient workers.

Less encouraging is Mumbai. Between 
the  1970s  and  1990s,  the  city  resisted  the 
inﬂ ux of migrants by instituting land use 
and  building  regulations  that  favored 
incumbents and prevented efﬁ cient use of 
land.79 The result has been an evenly spread 
development,  but  with  congested  streets 
and the proliferation of slums. 

Integrate  slums  into  cities,  using  all 
three  instruments—institutions,  infra-
structure,  and  incentives.  Cities  without 
slums is not a realistic vision for develop-
ing countries, as recognized in the midterm 
appraisal of India’s 10th Five-Year plan: 

There has, over the years, been a paradigm shift 
in  government’s  slum  policy  prescriptions. 
Originally,  a “slum  free  cities”  policy  was  pre-
scribed. However, looking at the social dimen-
sions  of  the  whole  problem  and  the  various 
economic  activities  carried  out  by  the  slum 
dwellers,  this  concept  has  given  way  to  reha-
bilitation  of  slum  dwellers.  The  rehabilitation 
involves  either  relocation  or  in-situ  develop-
ment  of  the  slum  areas.  In  the  initial  years  of 
slum development, the focus was on provision 
of infrastructure in slums through the National 
Slum Development Program (NSDP) and now 
there is renewed stress on provision of shelter 
to  urban  slum  dwellers  through  the  Valmiki 
Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY).80

Identifying  and  implementing  poli-
cies  for  managing  slum  formation  is  a 
major  concern  for  policy  makers  in  most 

BOX 7.14     Rural-urban integration in Beijing, Guangzhou, 

and Shanghai

Beijing, Guangzhou, and Shanghai—
all thriving areas—have plans to link 
rural and urban areas: to provide 
education and health services, invest 
in infrastructure and transport net-
works, and construct townships.
•  Social services. The governments 
provide vocational training and 
other services to support non-
agricultural employment and help 
farmers transition from agriculture 
to nonagriculture. They also off er 
incentives for fi rms that will train 
people and recruit the trainees after 
training. And they provide social 
services such as medical insurance 
and pensions to rural residents. 
Beijing subsidized rural coopera-
tive medical insurance. Shanghai 
increased public spending on rural 
social services, including education 
and health to cover farmers (100 
percent covered by a rural collective 
medical insurance plan). Guangzhou 
will establish a pension scheme to 
cover all the local residents.

•  Infrastructure investments. In 2005 

Beijing built 304 kilometers of 
roads and linked all administrative 
villages. In Shanghai expressways 
were extended from 200 kilo-

meters in 2003 to 550 kilometers 
in 2005, and will be extended 
again to 750 kilometers in 2010. In 
Guangzhou the provision of roads, 
electricity, and water to all rural 
settlements with more than 100 
residents was completed in 2007. 

•  Integrating surrounding areas. 

The three cities have encouraged 
traditional industries to move 
from the central business district 
(where rents are quite high) to the 
periphery (using fi scal incentives) 
and allow high value-added indus-
try to move in to the core area. A 
township construction program 
was launched to have a city system 
centered on an inner city of 10 
million inhabitants, surrounded 
by secondary cities, central towns, 
and villages. In 2003 Guangzhou 
initiated the building of 10 central 
towns fi nanced by the city govern-
ment. Shanghai has begun imple-
menting the “1966 plan,” which by 
2020 aims to have one main city, 
nine secondary cities (traditional 
historical centers), 60 new town-
ships, and 600 central villages with 
1,500–3,000 residents each.

Source: WDR 2009 team.

developing countries. But there is little con-
sensus on the choice of policies required to 
improve living conditions and livelihoods 
of slum dwellers, while not compromising 
the  economic  potential  of  metropolitan 
areas. Two questions have to be answered. 
When  should  slums  be  improved?  And 
what should be done to develop slums? This 
Report proposes that the right time to sys-
tematically address the problem of slums is 
when the institutional and infrastructure 
requirements are in place. And the correct 
approach  is  integration  of  slums  into  the 
broader urban economy.

If the problem is crime and squalor, the 
better  strategy  would  be  to  upgrade  the 
neighborhood.  But  if  the  problem  is  spa-
tial inefﬁ ciency, steps to improve land use 
efﬁ ciency  and  compensate  slum  dwellers 

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   227
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   227

10/9/08   10:40:15 PM
10/9/08   10:40:15 PM

228 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

for disruptions to their livelihoods probably 
should  take  precedence.  Interventions  to 
improve living conditions in slums include 
prevention measures, such as sites and ser-
vices programs and remedial schemes (with 
slum upgrading being the most common), 
packages of basic services, paving, shelter, and 
social integration. The Kampong Improve-
ment Program in Indonesia is probably the 
oldest,  largest,  and  best-known  urban-up-
grading initiative in the world. It combines 
low investment costs of $23 to $118 per per-
son, beneﬁ ts 15 million people, and uses a 
participatory approach. The Orangi Project 
in  Pakistan  and  the  Accra  District  Reha-
bilitation Project in Ghana are also prom-
ising (see table 7.2). But the experiences all 
show that spatially focused interventions for 

improving slums are unlikely to be enough 
for social integration, unless accompanied by 
infrastructure, institutions, and complemen-
tary reform (see box 7.15).

Land use and zoning policies have often 
excluded  the  poor  from  being  physically 
integrated  into  dynamic  labor  markets, 
while deﬁ cient transport infrastructure low-
ers the possibility of connecting distant resi-
dents to urban jobs. South African zoning 
policies  under  apartheid  segregated  white 
and  black  people  in  cities.  City  structure 
can exacerbate social divisions and hinder 
efforts  to  reduce  inequality  and  discrimi-
nation. The abolition of apartheid was not 
enough to reduce the disparities. To offset 
spatial  income  inequalities,  local  govern-
ments can subsidize transport costs of poor 

Table 7.2    Interventions to integrate the urban poor 
Focus and objectives
Country (city)
Tenure security. Regularizes tenure, provides 
Tunisia (National) Agence 
infrastructure, house improvement support, plots for 
de Rehabilitation et de 
displaced households.
Renovation Urbaine 
Brazil (Goiania) The Goiania 
Tenure security. Public land occupied and tenure secured 
by appealing to rights of citizens to occupy unused and 
Federation for Tenants and 
untitled land.
Posseiros 
Land provision. Makes serviced plots available for 
Peru (Ilo) Municipal 
Government
construction by low-income households.

Argentina (Buenos Aires, 
San Fernando, and San 
Jorge) IIED-America Latina 
Namibia (Windhoek) 
Shack Dwellers Federation 
of Namibia and City 
Government
Malawi (Lilongwe, Blantyre, 
Mzuzu) Malawi Homeless 
People’s Federation

Pakistan (Orangi) Research 
and Training Institute 

15 countries (South Asia, 
East Asia, and Africa) Slum 
Dwellers International 

Land provision. Serviced land donated to facilitate 
resettlement and density reduction; plots allocated in 
community-managed lottery.
Flexible zoning laws. Group purchases and leases of land 
with communal services; plot sizes below ofﬁ cial national 
minimum.

Land provision; ﬂ exible regulation. Lobbied government 
for land; demonstrated capacity of members to build good 
quality housing at low cost. Changing ofﬁ cial standards 
important for cost.
Amenities provision. Community development of drainage 
and sewerage systems, ﬁ nanced by local communities 
and government.
Amenities provision. National federations formed by slum 
dwellers; initiatives to build and improve homes and basic 
services. 

Thailand (National) 
Community Organizations 
Development Institute 

Amenities provision. Infrastructure subsidies and housing 
loans to community organizations formed by low-income 
slum households.

Nicaragua (National) Local 
Development Program 
(PRODEL)

Amenities provision. Coﬁ nance small infrastructure 
projects (water, sanitation, drainage); house improvement 
and microenterprise loans and support.

Key features and lessons
Triggered dynamic process of housing improvement; helped 
explain low proportion of urban population in slums.

Covers 100,000 former tenants. Local grassroots organization 
successfully supported efforts to get tenure security and 
access to infrastructure and services.
6,000 lots serviced for housing by 2005. Despite a ﬁ vefold 
increase in local population in 1960–2000, no pressure for 
land invasions.
Program is the result of a series of actions and initiatives 
over the past 20 years, supported by an Argentine NGO that 
lobbies provincial and municipal authorities.
Demonstrates how constraints in the form of urban land 
use standards and regulations can be overcome to make 
serviced sites more affordable to low-income households.

Since 2003, approximately 760 plots for housing have been 
provided and housing construction loans made available to 
savings groups; slum accommodation containment and land 
use improvement.
96,994 households in Orangi and 300 locations in Pakistan. 
All costs can be covered by eliminating contractors and 
modifying engineering standards. 
Savings groups (mostly women) and their collective 
management of money allow groups to increase capacity 
for cooperative action; negotiation of partnerships with 
governments.
495 projects in 957 communities covering 52,776 households. 
Activities identiﬁ ed by each community organization in 
partnership with local actors; funding sources include 
community contributions.
484 projects beneﬁ ting some 60,000 households. Funds 
provided to local governments, NGOs, community 
organizations, and households. 

Source: Sattherthwaite 2008, for this Report.
Note: IIED = International Institute for Environment and Development; NGO = nongovernmental organization.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   228
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   228

10/9/08   4:27:26 PM
10/9/08   4:27:26 PM

 

Concentration without Congestion 

229

children,  provide  private-school  vouchers, 
and increase public-school spending.81

A strategy for inclusive urbanization
The Tinbergen principle proposes that one 
policy instrument is needed to address each 
policy objective.82 Applying the principle to 
the policy issues addressed in this Report 
implies  that  as  many  integration  instru-
ments are needed as there are dimensions 
to a problem. As the integration challenges 
increase with the stage of urbanization, the 
number  of  policy  instruments  required 
increases as well. Fortunately for develop-
ing  nations,  the  capacity  of  markets  and 
governments grows as they urbanize. But 
these  policies  must  be  introduced  in  the 
right sequence. 

The foundations for an inclusive urban-
ization  have  to  be  instituted  early  in  the 
development process. To do this, govern-
ments must be selective. This chapter sug-
gest how they can prioritize and sequence:
(cid:129)  In  areas  of  incipient  urbanization,  the 
objective should be to facilitate a natu-
ral rural-urban transformation. The core 
policy  instruments  are  spatially  blind 
institutions that facilitate density in some 
locations.  These  instruments  include 
secure land tenure and property rights, 
basic  and  social  services,  and  macro-
economic policies that do not favor one 
productive activity (large industry) over 
another (small agriculture). Policy mak-
ers  should  aim  for  neutrality  between 
rural and urban areas. 

(cid:129)  In areas of intermediate urbanization, 
the  rapid  growth  of  some  cities  cre-
ates congestion. In addition to spatially 
blind policies to facilitate density, con-
nective  policies  to  tackle  congestion 
and  economic  distance  become  nec-
essary.  They  include  investments  in 
transport  infrastructure  (to  enhance 
connectivity both within and between 
cities)  and  encouragement  of  socially 
efﬁ cient  location  decisions  by  ﬁ rms. 

BOX 7.15    Slum upgrading and prevention: what works?

Evidence from policy experience com-
piled by UN-HABITAT and the Cities 
Alliance shows that successful initia-
tives share several attributes. Among 
them, institutional strengthening and 
coordination across government lev-
els seem to be the most important. 
Stronger institutions. Countries 

that have been successful in inte-
grating slums into their cities have 
strengthened their institutions and 
carried out complementary reforms,  
which include a broader urban pov-
erty reduction agenda (Indonesia, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, Mexico, South 
Africa, and Turkey). Some have imple-
mented policies to integrate the urban 
poor into the legal and social fabric 
of cities (Brazil, Chile, and  Colombia), 
others have carried out reforms in land 
and housing provision (India).

Coordination across govern-

ment levels and with private 
agents. Countries that performed 
well also made an effort to coordi-
nate among central, regional, and 
local authorities and the private 
sector (Chile, Egypt, Sri Lanka, Thai-
land, and Tunisia).  But cities and 
countries that were successful in 
the delivery of basic services and 
housing improvements had clear 

performance monitoring mecha-
nisms that require the involve-
ment of all levels of  government. 
Cambodia, China, and Vietnam, 
for example, have strict upward 
accountability regarding municipal 
implementation on infrastructure. 
Brazil and Indonesia, on the other 
hand,  have bottom-up perfor-
mance monitoring, which enhances 
citizen participation in planning 
and decision making.b Coordination 
across government levels and with 
the private sector is also critical 
for successful scaling up of slum 
upgrading projects. One example 
is Indonesia’s Kampong Improve-
ment Program, and there are oth-
ers (for example, Brazil, Colombia, 
Mexico, South Africa, Thailand, and 
Tunisia) whose programs began on 
a modest scale, and were success-
fully scaled up to the national level 
because of the involvement of all 
levels of the government and the 
private sector.

Based on a contribution by Eduardo 
López Moreno, chief, Global Urban 
Observatory, UN-HABITAT.
a. Garau 2008. 
b. Bazoglu 2008.

Efﬁ ciency should be the watchword of 
policy makers. 

(cid:129)  In  areas  with  advanced  urbanization, 
divisions within cities caused by formal 
settlements and slums and by grime and 
crime  add  to  the  challenges  of  density 
and  distance.  In  addition  to  spatially 
blind and spatially connective policies, 
spatially  focused  policies  for  address-
ing intracity divisions are necessary to 
target  the  difﬁ culties  of  slums,  crime, 
and the environment—and to improve 
livability.

WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   229
WDR09_15_Ch07.indd   229

10/9/08   4:27:26 PM
10/9/08   4:27:26 PM

CHAPTER 8 Unity, Not Uniformity

Effective approaches to territorial development

Globalization  and  liberalization 

may rearrange production within 
countries, leaving people concen-
trated in places no longer favored by mar-
kets. In Brazil, China, India, and the Russian 
Federation,  changes  in  both  markets  and 
policies over the last century have altered the 
fortunes of places. Geographic differences 
in economic activities encourage migration 
from lagging areas, concentrating people—
including  the  poor—in  leading  areas.  But 
geographic unevenness in living standards, 
by  creating  or  deepening  divisions  within 
countries, can also lead to conﬂ ict, slowing 
social and economic development.

Building on the ﬁ ndings and analysis in 
earlier chapters, this chapter discusses the 
policy responses to widening or persistent 
differences  in  living  standards  between 
areas of a country that markets favor with 
greater economic mass and those that they 
do not. As in the rest of this report, the term 
“area”  is  synonymous  with  a  subnational 
region or territory, so this chapter deals with 
the “regional development” (also referred 
to as the “territorial development”) debate. 
Logic and experience indicate that policy 
makers should calibrate their responses to 
the severity of the challenge.
(cid:129)  In  countries  where  labor  and  capital 
are mobile, economic distance between 
lagging  and  leading  areas  should  be 
addressed  mainly  with  spatially  blind 
or universal policies, for which the term 
“institutions”  is  used  as  shorthand.
These policies should make it easier for 
people  to  move  toward  opportunity. 

When lagging areas have few people and 
a small share of the country’s poor, mea-
sures to enhance migration should be the 
mainstay of development policy.

(cid:129)  In countries where lagging areas have 
large  numbers  of  the  poor,  but  few 
impediments  to  their  mobility,  insti-
tutions  that  promote  mobility  should 
be  augmented  by  spatially  connec-
tive  infrastructure.  Some  countries 
have  high  population  densities  in  lag-
ging  areas—and  large  numbers  of  the 
poor—but  few  cultural,  linguistic,  or 
political impediments to labor and capi-
tal ﬂ ows. Investments in infrastructure 
that increase the ﬂ ow of goods, people, 
and  information  would  aid  economic 
concentration  and  spatial  convergence 
in living standards.

(cid:129)  In  countries  fragmented  by  linguistic, 
political, religious, or ethnic divisions, 
spatially targeted interventions may be 
needed. When lagging areas face the triple 
challenge of long distances to economic 
opportunities  in  leading  areas,  large 
population densities, and large numbers 
of poor people, as well as domestic divi-
sions  that  limit  the  movement  of  labor 
and capital, institutions and infrastruc-
ture investments could be supplemented 
by targeted incentives to encourage eco-
nomic production in lagging areas. But 
these  incentives  should  not  run  coun-
ter to the integration objectives pursued 
through  institutions  that  bring  people 
together and infrastructure that connects 
lagging and leading areas of a nation.

230

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   230
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   230

10/8/08   3:14:13 PM
10/8/08   3:14:13 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

231

Institutions,  infrastructure,  and  incen-
tives—these are the three parts of a success-
ful policy approach to domestic integration. 
In deciding among the integration options, 
governments have to consider the ﬁ scal and 
opportunity costs of these instruments. This 
chapter  provides  an  organizing  frame  for 
governments to think through these options 
and ﬁ nd the best combination of policies.

A new approach. Policy discussions about 
how  to  improve  welfare  in  lagging  areas 
often begin with a focus on lagging areas—
and an emphasis on targeted interventions 
or policy “incentives” to move production 
to these places. Instead, territorial develop-
ment policies should integrate lagging with 
leading areas, and the discussion of spatially 
targeted incentives should come last—after 
considering spatially blind policies such as 
national revenue-sharing and social expen-
diture  arrangements  and  spatially  con-
necting  initiatives,  such  as  transport  and 
communication systems. The experience of 
developed and developing countries shows 
that  without  these  supporting  institutions 
and  infrastructure,  incentives  have  been 
unsuccessful and expensive. 

In many countries, the decentralization 
of  administrative  and  ﬁ scal  responsibili-
ties  has  increased  the  role  of  subnational 
governments in the design and delivery of 
policies. Resources allocated to subnational 
governments should come with agreements 
to  ensure  that  local  initiatives  improve 
national  welfare  along  with  local  welfare 
(see box 8.1).

In  addressing  these  policy  issues,  the 
chapter provides an answer to a question 
of considerable concern to policy makers: 
Should  countries  invest  in  people  or  in 
places?  The  answer  is  to  invest  in  activi-
ties that produce the highest economic and 
social returns nationally. In leading areas, 
emphasize investment in places—durable 
investments  that  increase  national  eco-
nomic growth. In lagging areas, emphasize 
investment  in  people—portable  invest-
ments that stimulate mobility and acceler-
ate poverty reduction.

People seek opportunities
Throughout  history,  people  have  moved 
from places with harsh geography to those 
offering a more pleasant climate and better 

BOX 8.1     Are the policy messages of this Report “anti-decentralization”? No.

Spatially blind institutions are the bed-
rock of economic integration policies 
seeking spatial effi  ciency and equity. 
Regardless of where people live, they 
should have aff ordable access to basic 
services such as primary health care, 
education, sanitation, and security. How 
these services are delivered depends on 
country circumstances.

Decentralization in many countries has 

made subnational governments more 
responsible for improving local welfare 
outcomes. In Vietnam subnational gov-
ernments were responsible for almost 50 
percent of public spending in 2002, up 
from about 25 percent in 1992. In China 
the ratio climbed from 67 to 72 percent 
between 1990 and 2004.a In the Philip-
pines the ratio was about 25 percent in 
2002, up from 11 percent in 1990.

Problems arise when decentralization 

gets in the way of delivering spatially 
blind policies. Rather than allocating 
resources to social services, subnational 

policy makers may be inclined to tilt 
expenditures toward politically popular 
activities. In a highly decentralized coun-
try such as Brazil, progress on national 
priorities of eliminating illiteracy and 
universalizing primary education is moni-
tored using expenditure allocations, with 
the constitution determining that 25 
percent of state and municipal revenues 
from taxes and transfers be earmarked 
to fi nance primary education. But closer 
inspection shows that around 10 percent 
of municipalities spend less than the con-
stitutionally recommended amounts.b 

Large and visible investments are politi-
cally expedient signals to voters that their 
representatives are hard at work. So how 
can decentralization be consistent with 
the spatially integrative policies discussed 
here? 

on public services) but should move as 
soon as feasible to outcomes (improve-
ments in the national Millennium 
Development Indicators).

•  Infrastructure—to maximize synergies 

from infrastructure investments and 
to regulate interstate commerce effi  -
ciently, design and planning decisions 
should be jointly made by subnational 
governments aff ected by these invest-
ments and regulations. 

•  Incentives—while subnational govern-

ments may be well suited to assess 
local economic potential, the decision 
of where to target incentives should 
lie with a national authority that can 
prioritize resources to accelerate overall 
growth. How these programs are imple-
mented can be decided locally. 

•  Institutions—resource allocations to 
subnational governments could be 
based initially on inputs (expenditures 

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. National Bureau of Statistics, China, 2005. 
b. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografi a e Estatís-
tica (IBGE) 2004.

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   231
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   231

10/8/08   3:14:15 PM
10/8/08   3:14:15 PM

232 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Map 8.1    The poverty rate is high in China’s western interior, but most poor people live closer to economic density in the East

Poverty rate:
proportion of poor (%)

< 17.5
17.6–35.9
36.0–51.6
51.7–70.3
70.4–81.1

Source: WDR 2009 team.
Note: Poverty rates and counts are estimated for a $2/day poverty line in 2002.

Poverty density

Each dot represents
50,000 poor persons

economic opportunities. The concentration 
of  people  in  areas  with  hospitable  natural 
environments attracted economic activities 
to these places, helping many to prosper even 
when the initial conditions that made these 
settlements economically attractive became 
less important. Mobility was not just for the 
well-off. Poor people also moved to econom-
ically dense areas—to seek better lives.

Consider  the  current  distribution  of 
poor  people  in  China  (see  map  8.1).  The 
percentage of people living below $2 a day is 
high in the country’s lagging western areas. 
But  in  absolute  terms,  many  more  poor 
people live in the dynamic coastal south-
eastern areas—the leaders in China’s rapid 
integration with the global economy. Even 
before  this  integration  happened,  people 
did not concentrate in places with inhospi-
table geography, such as the  Qinghai-Tibet 
Plateau with an elevation of 4,000 meters 
above sea level, or the highlands of the cen-
tral region with elevations of 2,000 meters. 
The ﬂ at lands and warmer climates along 
the  coast  provided  better  conditions  for 
farming and trade.

Maps  of  many  countries  would  also 
show that the poverty mass—the numbers 
of poor people—and economic mass coin-
cide. Java, the economically leading area in 
Indonesia,  is  also  the  island  in  the  archi-
pelago  where  most  poor  people  live.  The 
islands of Java and Bali are home to 21 mil-
lion poor people, about 58 percent of the 

country’s poor. The numbers on the other 
islands are much lower: 1.3 million in Kali-
mantan, 2.6 million in Sulawesi, 2.7 million 
in Nusa Tenggara, and 1 million in Papua. 
Chapter 2 showed that Honduras and Viet-
nam have similar (overlapping) geographic 
distributions of economic production and 
poor people.

Using a sharper geographic resolution, a 
similar distribution of the population can be 
discerned within lagging areas. The north-
east of Brazil is the country’s poorest area. 
Per  capita  incomes  in  the  southeast  were 
2.9 times that of the northeast in 1939, and 
2.8  times  in  1992.  Eight  of  the  10  poorest 
states are in the northeast, two in the north.1 
The poverty rate is clearly high in the rural 
northeast and Amazon areas (see map 8.2). 
But  even  in  the  northeast,  the  mass  and 
concentration  of  poverty—the  number  of 
poor people per square kilometer—is much 
higher in urbanized agglomerations near the 
coast, from the lagging northeast all the way 
to the dynamic regions of Rio de Janeiro and 
São Paulo in the southeast.2 

In  some  countries  the  market  forces 
prompting factor mobility are not quite as 
strong. Their economic mass and poverty 
mass do not coincide nearly as much as in 
countries  such  as  China  and  Honduras. 
Consider India, where more than 400 mil-
lion  people  live  in  “lagging  states”  in  the 
north-central  part  of  the  country,  which 
includes—using  the  country’s  poverty 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   232
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   232

10/8/08   3:14:15 PM
10/8/08   3:14:15 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

233

Map 8.2    The poverty rate is high in Brazil’s Northeast and Amazon areas, but the poor are massed in areas along the coast

Poverty rate:
proportion of poor (%)

< 12
12–25
25–35
35–45
>45

Poverty density

Each dot represents
5,000 poor persons

Source: State-level poverty rates computed by Phillippe G. Leite, based on the Brazil Household Budget Survey (Pesquisa de Orcamentos Familiares) 2002–03 (see World Bank 
2007c).

line—60 percent of the nation’s poor (see 
map 8.3).3 Labor mobility from these areas 
has been limited due to ethnolinguistic and 
class-based  divisions,  perhaps  inclining 
people to stay in their own “enclaves.”

People are in these lagging areas for a 
reason. With rich soils and good internal 
connections,  the  fertile  Indo-Gangetic 
plain  attracted  people.  These  areas  were 
historically among India’s most dynamic 
locations when the country accounted for 
a  quarter  of  the  world’s  gross  domestic 
product (GDP), between 1600 and 1700.4 
But historical “accidents,” such as making 
landlords responsible for paying land taxes 
to the British crown in these areas, eroded 
agricultural productivity and infrastruc-
ture  investments.5  India  is  now  reinte-
grating into the world economy, resulting 
in economic dynamism in its coastal and 
metropolitan areas. These areas offer good 
access to intermediate inputs and domes-
tic and international markets, provide reli-
able and high-quality local public services, 
and have a business environment condu-
cive  to  entrepreneurship.  About  half  of 
manufacturing investments in 2005 were 
concentrated  in  only  10  of  the  country’s 
more than 3,000 cities, the ones offering 

better access to domestic and international 
markets.6

Should  today’s  policy  makers  try  to 
correct  historical  accidents  by  reviving 
investments  in  lagging  areas  and  helping 
them  regain  their  past  glory?  Or  should 
they accelerate India’s integration with the 
global economy and help people in lagging 
areas take advantage of new opportunities 
in places with greater economic density?

India’s  national  policy  discussion  in 
the mid-1970s focused on promoting spa-
tially balanced growth to revive the lagging 
areas with subsidized ﬁ nance, investment 
subsidies,  industrial  infrastructure,  and 
preferential industrial licensing. India’s lat-
est ﬁ ve-year plan recognizes the failures of 
industrial  licensing  and  its  inconsistency 
with growth. The discussion today is more 
about  integration  and  the  shift  toward 
promoting better health and education in 
lagging  areas,  along  with  strategic  inter-
regional  infrastructure  investments  that 
connect the remote northeast with markets 
in the rest of the country.7 Similar regional 
development  policies  have  been  imple-
mented  in  other  countries  with  internal 
divisions  along  religious  or  ethnic  lines, 
such as Nigeria and Ethiopia.

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   233
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   233

10/8/08   3:14:18 PM
10/8/08   3:14:18 PM

234 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Map 8.3    Both the poverty rate and poverty mass are high in some of India’s lagging states

Poverty rate:
proportion of poor (%)

6.4–9.7
9.8–16.7
16.8–24.8
24.9–35.4
35.5–46.6
No data

Poverty density

Each dot represents
50,000 poor persons

Source: Based on poverty estimates for 2004–05 from the Planning Commission, Government of India.
Note: State-level poverty rates and counts are based on the sum of the number of urban poor and rural poor in 2004–05, which are calculated using different poverty lines.

Policies  aimed  at  reducing  such  divi-
sions have reinforced a natural tendency of 
people to seek places that offer better eco-
nomic opportunities. Take the well-studied 
German uniﬁ cation, a merger of two econ-
omies  with  few  exchanges  of  goods  and 
factors that propelled people from the east 
to the west. The opportunity arose in the 
summer of 1989, when people could leave 
East Germany through Hungary. And with 
the fall of the Berlin wall on November 9, 
1989,  direct  migration  from  East  to  West 
Germany became possible. With the bor-
der open, 800,000 people left the east for 
the west in 1989 and 1990, 5 percent of the 
eastern population (see box 8.2).8 Clearly, 
the German uniﬁ cation started a move to 
density. It suggests that reducing distance 
to economic density improves people’s wel-
fare,  and  labor  mobility  is  the  strongest 
natural mechanism for this.

Countries seek unity
Many countries have spatial differences in 
production  and  poverty,  mostly  because 
of economic distance between lagging and 

leading areas, and also because of divisions 
from political, ethnic, religious, and linguis-
tic differences. And all countries seek unity, 
by lowering the barriers of internal divisions. 
A review of national constitutions from 20 
developing countries shows that promoting 
unity—reducing divisions—is an important 
political objective (see box 8.2). In Nigeria 
an important article of unity is that people 
will not be discriminated by sex, religion, 
place of birth, ethnic, or linguistic associa-
tion. In India Article 16 of the constitution 
states  that  “no  citizen  shall,  on  grounds 
only  of  religion,  race,  caste,  sex,  descent, 
place of birth, residence or any of them, be 
ineligible  for,  or  discriminated  against  in 
respect of, any employment or ofﬁ ce under 
the State.” For the most part, constitutions 
do not make places paramount—they focus 
instead on the welfare and unity of people 
(see box 8.3).

Unity does not mean uniformity. India’s 
national  motto,  for  example,  is  “unity  in 
diversity.”  But  in  many  countries,  policy 
makers have viewed uniformity as the main 
vehicle for unity. The European Union (EU)

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   234
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   234

10/9/08   4:29:38 PM
10/9/08   4:29:38 PM

BOX 8.2    The German integration: convergence and concentration with mobile labor

With the fall of the Berlin wall in 1989, 
direct migration from East to West Ger-
many became possible. Opening the bor-
der led 400,000 people to leave the east to 
the west in 1989 and again in 1990, about 5 
percent of the eastern population (see the 
left fi gure). In later years, incomes started 
to converge and the process slowed. In 
2001 a recession in Germany again led 
about 100,000 people to leave the east for 
the west. By 2007 more than 1.7 million 
people had left the east (of about 17 million 
at the time of the fall of the Berlin wall).
Migration produced one predictable 
outcome: incomes became more equal 
between the two areas (see the right fi g-
ure). While the cross-country distribution 
of income in 1992 was clearly bimodal, 
with the counties in the east forming the 
lower peak, this was smoothed by 2005. 
Although the counties from the east are 
still located at the left of the distribution, 
their economic distance to western coun-
ties has shortened. 

Convergence in incomes has also pro-

duced more surprising outcomes. Almost 
all counties with more young women than 
men are in the economically dynamic 
areas of Germany, which also have better 

Migration from East to West Germany was 
possible after the fall of the Berlin wall 
Net migration from East to West Germany, 
1991–2005

Thousands of people
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

1991

1993 1995 1997

1999 2001 2003 2005

Year

Convergence of income across German 
counties was noticeable between 1992 
and 2005

Density

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
0
1.5

2005

1992

2.0

3.0

2.5
3.5
Log, € (thousands)

4.0

4.5

Source: Holzmann, Priebe, and Vollmer 2008.

Source: Federal Statistical Office Germany 2007. 

institutions of higher learning (see the map 
below). In 2004, in the 18–29 age-group, 
there were only 90 women for every 100 
men in East Germany (including Berlin).

Why did East German women move to 

the economically dynamic areas, while 
men stay in the lagging areas? There are 
two explanations. First, women are on 
average more successful in school and 
higher education, which makes it easier 

for them to study or to fi nd a job in the 
economically more dynamic parts of 
Germany. Second, it is much harder for 
women to fi nd an attractive job locally 
in the lagging areas than it is for men, 
because these areas are typically domi-
nated by traditionally male jobs in agri-
culture, manufacturing, and construction.
Sources: WDR 2009 team, based on Kroeh-
nert and Vollmer 2008.

Women moved to the west seeking economic opportunity: in 2003, there were fewer women per 100 men 
in the eastern part of the country (left), and higher taxpayer incomes in the west (right) 

Number of women,
ages 18–29, per 100 men

75–85
86–95
96–100
101–105
106–115
116–126

GERMANY

Average income
of taxpayers

Top 20%

Bottom 20%

Source: Kroehnert, Medicus, and Kinglolz 2006. 

Source: Federal Statistics Office of Germany.

 

 

235

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   235
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   235

10/8/08   3:14:22 PM
10/8/08   3:14:22 PM

236 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 8.3    Constitutions call for unity, not uniformity

National constitutions refl ect the evolu-
tion of political discourse in most coun-
tries and defi ne interactions between 
the state and its citizens. A review of 
constitutions from 20 developing coun-
triesa fi nds that all emphasize national 
unity as an important national objective. 
Uniformity in economic outcomes across 
areas is mentioned only in one—Brazil’s 
constitution. Universal access to primary 
education and basic health care are con-
stitutional mandates in most countries.
Excerpts from the constitutional arti-
cles of three African countries highlight 
the importance that societies place on 
national unity and integration:

Nigeria: “The motto of the Federal 
Republic of Nigeria shall be Unity and 
Faith, Peace and Progress.” Article 15 
(2)—“Accordingly, national integration 
shall be actively encouraged, whilst 
discrimination on the grounds of place 
of birth, sex, religion, status, ethnic or 
linguistic association or ties shall be pro-

hibited.” Article 15 (3)—“For the purpose 
of promoting national integration, it shall 
be the duty of the State to: (a) provide 
adequate facilities for and encourage free 
mobility of people, goods and services 
throughout the Federation; (b) secure 
full residence rights for every citizen in all 
parts of the Federation.”

Côte d’Ivoire: Article 30—“The Republic 
of Côte d’Ivoire shall be one and indivisible, 
secular, democratic and social. The Repub-
lic shall ensure equality before the law to all 
without distinction as to origin, race, sex or 
religion. It shall respect all beliefs.” Its prin-
ciple shall be: “Government of the people, 
by the people and for the people.”

Uganda: Article 3—“(i) All organs of the 

State and people of Uganda shall work 
towards the promotion of national unity, 
peace and stability. (ii) Every eff ort shall 
be made to integrate all the peoples of 
Uganda while at the same time recogniz-
ing the existence of their ethnic, religious, 
ideological, political and cultural diversity.”

Brazil’s constitution calls for regionally 
balanced economic development, setting 
out guidelines to promote capital fl ows 
to lagging areas. The translation of these 
guidelines into practice has not produced 
the expected economic gains. And the 
programs have been costly. The Constitu-
tion Funds—a prominent regional eco-
nomic development program—provided 
subsidized credit worth more than $10 
billion between 1990 and 2002 to help 
fi rms locate in lagging areas. The ineff ec-
tiveness of these interventions is evalu-
ated elsewhere in this chapter. 

Source: WDR 2009 team; based on a review of 
constitutions from 20 developing countries.
a. The countries are Argentina, Bolivia, 
Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico (LAC); Côte 
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria, and Uganda (AFR); 
Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and Pakistan 
(SAR); Kazakhstan, Poland, and the Russian 
Federation (ECA); China, Indonesia, and the 
Philippines (EAP); and the Arab Republic of 
Egypt (MENA).

policies to integrate new member states call 
for  “cohesion.”  But  the  objective  of  cohe-
sion—or  unity—is  pursued  through  poli-
cies  for  convergence.  Convergence  targets 
include eliminating territorial disparities in 
economic development (economic cohesion) 
and  in  access  to  labor  and  income  (social 
cohesion). This “cohesion” is matched by the 
EU regional policy, which allocates about 60 
percent of its funding to support areas of low 
development (less than 75 percent of the EU 
average GDP per capita).9

Accounting for 35 percent of total spend-
ing of the EU, the EU cohesion policy is trans-
lated into practice through structural funds 
(90  percent  of  spending)  and  the  cohesion 
fund (10 percent). The Agenda 2000 package 
comes with a price tag of  €236 billion, with 
€195 billion for structural funds; €18 billion 
for  the  cohesion  funds  for  Greece,  Ireland, 
Portugal, and Spain; and €22 billion for new 
member states, in view of their 2004 acces-
sion.10 Agenda 2000’s objectives include the 
development  and  structural  adjustment  of 
lagging  areas,  the  development  of  border 
areas and areas in industrial decline, and the 
adaptation and modernization of education 

and training systems.11 The cohesion policy 
aims to improve economic performance of 
speciﬁ c areas and help them catch up with 
the rest of the union.

Resource allocations of this scale to sup-
port integration may reﬂ ect the redistribution 
preferences of member states (particularly the 
ones whose residents are footing the bill), but 
do  these  policies  stimulate  overall  growth? 
Are  they  paying  for  the  “wrong”  type  of 
assets? Academic research shows that they are 
not well suited to maximizing aggregate eco-
nomic growth because they try to promote 
spatial evenness and not agglomeration. Nor 
are they especially well suited to promoting 
catch-up by lagging areas. Traditional cohe-
sion policies that provide “hard” infrastruc-
ture  and  assistance  to  ﬁ rms  are  unlikely 
to  increase  the  competitiveness  of  lagging 
areas.12 Moving away from these programs to 
support education programs and institutional 
development could do much more.

Trying  to  use  the  same  instrument  to 
pursue  dual  challenges  of  internal  and 
external convergence is likely to make the 
policy  lose  focus.  The  EU’s  fourth  report 
on economic and social cohesion provides 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   236
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   236

10/8/08   3:14:24 PM
10/8/08   3:14:24 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

237

a candid assessment of convergence across 
its  regions  and  within  individual  coun-
tries.13 Between 1995 and 2004, there was 
a tendency of aggregate convergence in the 
EU,  with  new  member  states  with  lower 
GDP  per  capita  growing  faster  than  the 
EU-27  average.  But  at  a  more  disaggre-
gated Nomenclature of Territorial Units for 
Statistics  (NUTS)  2  regional  level—sub-
national  areas  larger  than  administrative 
units in most countries—the results show 
little  effectiveness  of  directed  interven-
tions in improving economic performance 
of lagging areas. For the better-off EU-15, 
the  number  of  people  in  lagging  regions 
has remained almost unchanged at 32 mil-
lion, around 8 percent of the total. When 
the  new  member  states  are  considered, 
there has been international convergence in 

per capita incomes. But the concentration 
of  economic  production  within  member 
states—new  and  old—has  been  increas-
ing, led by market forces driving faster eco-
nomic growth in their leading areas. Indeed 
per capita incomes in several areas in some 
new  member  states—Bratislavský  kraj  in 
the Slovak Republic, Közép-Magyarország 
in  Hungary,  Mazoweickie  in  Poland,  and 
Zahodna Slovenija in Slovenia—have risen 
to more than 75 percent of the EU average.
Ireland  took  a  different  approach  for 
using EU funds. Rather than try to use the 
EU  funds  to  achieve  both  international 
catch-up and to disperse economic produc-
tion  domestically,  Ireland  focused  on  one 
objective—national economic growth. From 
being one of Europe’s poorest countries, it is 
now one of the richest (see box 8.4). Between 

BOX 8.4    An instrument per objective: Ireland used EU funds for international convergence

nied by a rising spatial concentration of eco-
nomic activity. Compared with the other 
cohesion countries—Greece, Portugal, and 
Spain—Ireland’s economic concentration 
rose much more (see the fi gure below). But 
its per capita income grew much faster too. 
In 1977 Greece, Ireland, and Spain had per 
capita incomes of about $9,000; Portugal’s 
was about $6,000. By 2002 Portugal had an 
income of $11,000, and Greece and Spain 
close to $15,000. Ireland’s per capita income 
had risen to $27,500.

Today, almost all regions in the new 

member nations in Eastern Europe qual-
ify for EU fi nancial support. They should 
consider the Irish example of using the 
funds for international convergence and 
not—until later stages—for spatially 
balanced economic growth within their 
borders.

Sources: Dall’Erba 2003, WDR 2009 team.
a. Ireland’s National Development Plan 
(NDP) 2000–06.

As Ireland’s income rapidly grew, economic concentration increased within the country

Natural log of variance
17.0

Ireland

Spain

Portugal

Greece

Between 1977 and 2000, Ireland’s GDP 
per capita grew from 72 percent of the EU 
average to 116 percent. What was behind 
Ireland’s success? 

Since joining the European Union in 
1973, Ireland received approximately 
€17 billion in EU Structural and Cohesion 
Funds through the end of 2003. In the fi rst 
two rounds of EU funding, the entire coun-
try was classifi ed as an Objective One area. 
Between 1993 and 2003 cohesion funds 
supported 120 infrastructure projects at 
the cost of about €2 billion.a The choice of 
projects was based on a national develop-
ment plan, which focused on investments 
in economic infrastructure that stimulated 
long-term national economic growth. 
These included investments in leading 
areas and in connecting leading and lag-
ging areas, such as the M50 (Dublin Ring 
Road), M1 (Dublin-Belfast), and improve-
ments in the N4 (Dublin-Sligo), N7 (Dublin-
 Limerick), and N11 (Dublin-Rosslare). 

The Irish also invested in education, 
training, and lifelong learning in all of 
Ireland to provide investors with a good 
business environment countrywide. With 
its skilled labor force and good logistics, 
Ireland has become a popular destination 
for American fi rms wishing to reach Euro-
pean markets. In 2004 Irish-based U.S. 
fi rms exported $55 billion worth of goods 
and services, mostly destined for Europe.
Ireland’s rapid convergence toward the 
incomes of Europe’s leaders was accompa-

16.5

16.0

15.5

15.0

14.5

14.0

13.5

13.0

12.5
12.0

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989
Year

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

Sources: Dall’Erba 2003; WDR 2009 team.

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   237
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   237

10/8/08   3:14:24 PM
10/8/08   3:14:24 PM

238 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

1991 and 1998 Ireland was just one region for 
the purposes of Objective One support from 
the EU.14 When the country grew past the 
75  percent  threshold,  in  July  1999,  Ireland 
created two regional “assemblies”—Border-
Midland-Western,  and  the  Southern  and 
Eastern.  But  spatial  concentration  of  eco-
nomic production has increased in Ireland 
relative to Greece, Portugal, and Spain, the 
other three cohesion countries.15

A policy framework for integrating 
lagging and leading areas
People  seek  opportunity,  and  countries 
seek  unity.  Policies  that  integrate  lagging 
and leading areas can help with both. This 
section  outlines  a  framework  to  guide 
policy  making.  It  proposes  a  calibrated 
combination  of  institutions,  infrastruc-
ture, and incentives to address the domes-
tic  challenges  posed  by  density,  distance, 
and division. Used well, a combination of 
these measures can help countries reap the 
economic  beneﬁ ts  from  increasing  con-
centration of economic activity, as well as 
the social, political, and economic payoffs 
associated with converging living standards 
between lagging and leading areas.

Policy makers, often viewing economic 
concentration as inconsistent with spatial 
equity in living standards, have sought to 
reduce  concentration  through  spatially 
targeted interventions. Many governments 
ﬁ ght market forces that promote the con-
centration of people in economically dense 

Figure 8.1    France has benefited from increasing concentration of economic production and 
declining spatial disparities in disposable income

GDP per capita 
0.190

Coefficients of variation

Per capita disposable income (right axis)

Income per capita
0.085

places. Indonesia’s transmigration program 
tried to relocate people from densely popu-
lated Java to less densely populated areas of 
Kalimantan, Papua, Sulawesi, and Sumatra. 
At its peak between 1979 and 1984, 535,000 
families or almost 2.5 million people were 
relocated.  The  objective  was  to  promote 
“balanced demographic development” and 
reduce poverty by providing land and new 
economic opportunities for poor landless 
settlers. But the program made almost no 
dent in the population density of Java, nor 
did  the  high  cost  of  the  program  reduce 
poverty much among the migrants.16

Relying solely on spatially targeted inter-
ventions is a common mistake. It is far bet-
ter  to  rely  on  institutions  that  work  less 
noisily. In France the concentration of eco-
nomic mass and convergence of disposable 
incomes between leading and lagging areas 
have been concurrent, producing a “scissors 
effect” in the geographies of production and 
disposable  income  (see  ﬁ gure  8.1).17  The 
effect appears to be driven not by spatially 
focused interventions but by spatially blind 
or “universal” progressive income taxation, 
social security, and unemployment beneﬁ ts. 
Although space is not explicitly considered 
in such policies, their effects and outcomes 
can  vary  considerably  across  locations. 
As the base of economic integration, such 
“institutions” capture the beneﬁ ts of spatial 
concentration  of  production  and  deliver 
convergence in living standards.

Even  in  the  EU  as  a  whole,  the  rising 
inequality of market incomes between 1985 
and 1995 was partially offset by progressive 
tax  and  transfer  policies.  Increases  in  the 
income  of  skilled  people  were  moderated 
through higher taxes, and the unskilled were 
aided  with  transfers.18  Similarly,  the  pro-
gressive tax structure in the United States 
reduced  disparities  in  disposable  incomes 
across  states,  while  production  became 
more concentrated, although the extent has 
varied greatly over time as government poli-
cies changed (see box 8.5).

The experience of the EU and the United 
States  in  addressing  spatial  equity  with 
aspatial  tax  systems  is  instructive.  Skep-
tics  might  counter  that  the  coverage  of 
the tax system is low in developing coun-
tries and that weak tax administration and 

0.080

0.075

0.070

0.065

0.060

0.055

0.050

0.185

0.180

0.175

0.170

0.165

0.160

0.155

0.150

GDP per capita (left axis)

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

1992
Years

Source: Martin 2005.

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   238
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   238

10/8/08   3:14:25 PM
10/8/08   3:14:25 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

239

BOX 8.5    Taxation against spatial inequality? The U.S. federal income tax system 

A progressive federal income tax in 
the United States has reduced income 
inequalities among people. An unin-
tended eff ect has been to reduce income 
inequalities across states, showing that a 
spatially blind policy can be a sharp instru-
ment for reducing spatial inequalities. 

Data from the Internal Revenue Service 
show how much the income tax reduced 
spatial inequality. To see this, fi rst, pretax 
incomes of the top percentile of earners 
in each state are divided by the U.S. per-
sonal income, as published by the Bureau 
of Economic Analysis. Next, the same 
income dispersion ratio is calculated with 
post-tax incomes. Then, the percentage 
decrease between the pretax and post-

tax income ratios for two groups of 10 
states are calculated: one recording the 
highest pretax incomes (Group 1), and 
the other the lowest (Group 2).a The fi g-
ure below shows the change in post-tax 
income diff erences between the richest 
and poorest states. Directly imputable 
to taxation, it shows how the U.S. taxa-
tion system has helped to reduce income 
inequalities across states. 

Never had the tax rate been higher 

than in 1918, at 77 percent to fi nance the 
war. After World War I, tax rates declined. 
Lowered to 24 percent in 1929, the tax 
rate for top incomes rose again during 
the Great Depression (–26 percent in 
1940 versus –7 percent in 1930 for Group 

1). When Congress introduced payroll 
withholding and quarterly tax payments 
during World War II, the progressive 
tax system was reinforced. But these 
inequality-reducing eff ects started fading 
away between 1950 and 1970. A brief rise 
in these eff ects during the late 1970s was 
followed by a fall in the 1980s and 1990s. 

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. Although both groups belong to the rich-
est 1 percent of their respective states, keep 
in mind the sharp diff erences from one state 
to another. In 1940, for instance, an income 
of about $47,000 made a tax fi ler part of the 
wealthiest 1 percent in Mississippi, but part 
of the wealthiest 10 percent in the District of 
Columbia.

Without an explicit spatial focus, U.S. federal income taxes reduce spatial disparities

Percentage decrease in inequality due to taxation

0

–5

–10

–15

–20

–25

–30

–35

–40

The 10 richest
states converge
to the mean 3
times faster than
the 10 poorest
ones.

Increasing tax rates
during Great
Depression

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1981

1990

2000

2003

Bridging the gap after WWII

Government increases
taxes for the bottom group

Year

10 U.S. states with highest income levels before taxes (within top percentile)
10 U.S. states with lowest income levels before taxes (within top percentile)

Source: WDR 2009 team, based on analysis by Estelle Sommelier.

widespread informality in the economy will 
reduce the potential beneﬁ ts of progressive 
taxes. But it is worth remembering that a 
century ago, when its tax system was intro-
duced,  the  United  States  exhibited  many 
of  the  attributes  of  a  developing  country 
today.  Its  population  was  mainly  rural, 
with just 28 percent living in metropolitan 
areas in 1910.19 Wages were $0.72 an hour in 

the automobile industry in 1925.20 The tax 
coverage and revenues were low, with only 
10 percent of the households ﬁ ling an indi-
vidual tax return in 1916; today the ratio is 
93 percent.

Some  evidence  from  developing  coun-
tries points to the fact that income redis-
tribution  through  a  progressive  tax 
system  is  difﬁ cult,  and  that  the  targeting 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   239
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   239

10/8/08   3:14:25 PM
10/8/08   3:14:25 PM

240 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

of  expenditures by individual or household 
income levels and the level of the average 
tax rate are more important for the post-
transfer income distribution. Thus a high-
yield proportional tax system may have a 
larger equalizing impact than a low-yield 
progressive tax system.21

Spatially blind tax and transfer policies 
will form the bedrock of public policies to 
integrate countries spatially and help them 
benefit  from  concentration  and  conver-
gence. But these policies may not be enough. 
Depending on their conditions, nations need 
a broader range of instruments for domestic 
integration. The challenge of economic inte-
gration can be seen as reducing the distance 
between people—especially the poor—and 
economic opportunity. Misplaced popula-
tion  densities,  and  barriers  to  mobility  of 
workers and entrepreneurs between leading 
and  lagging  areas  posed  by  internal  divi-
sions, complicate the challenge. 

In general, a policy framework for eco-

nomic integration includes the following:
(cid:129)  Institutions (spatially blind policies). The 
term is used here to categorize policies 
that are not explicitly designed with spa-
tial considerations, but that have effects 
and  outcomes  that  may  vary  across 
locations.  These  include  such  national 
policies as the income tax system, inter-
governmental  ﬁ scal  relations,  and  gov-
ernance  of  land  and  housing  markets, 
as  well  as  education,  health  care,  basic 
water and sanitation, and other govern-
ment initiatives.

(cid:129)  Infrastructure (spatially connective poli-
cies). The term is used here as shorthand 
to include all investments that connect 
places  and  provide  basic  business  ser-
vices, such as public transportation and 
utilities. These include developing inter-
regional highways and railroads to pro-
mote  trade  in  goods—and  improving 
information and communication tech-
nologies to increase the ﬂ ow of informa-
tion and ideas.

(cid:129)  Incentives  (spatially  focused  policies). 
The term is used here to include spatially 
targeted measures to stimulate economic 
growth in lagging areas. These include 
investment subsidies, tax rebates, loca-

tion  regulations,  local  infrastructure 
development,  and  targeted  investment 
climate reforms, such as special regula-
tions for export processing zones.

These  instruments  for  integration—
institutions,  infrastructure,  and  incen-
tives—span  the  range  between  universal 
and geographically targeted policies. Each 
of  the  three  categories  can  include  taxes, 
public spending, and regulations. 

Adverse  physical  geography  generally 
increases  economic  distance,  reducing 
trade of goods and services and the ﬂ ow 
of labor, capital, and information, making 
delivery of public services harder. In Papua 
New  Guinea,  with  the  transport  system 
fragmented by a rugged mountainous ter-
rain, the average travel time from a rural 
community to the nearest road is two and 
a  half  hours.  and  to  the  nearest  govern-
ment station is more than three hours.22 
In  the  more  rugged  parts  of  Peru,  the 
coverage of public infrastructure is low.23 
Other  such  places  include  Chile’s  Zonas 
Extremas,  western  China,  Upper  Egypt, 
the  outer  areas  of  Nepal,  and  northeast-
ern Russia. Because of adverse conditions, 
poverty rates can be high in these areas. 
But for the same reasons, unless prevented 
from  leaving  by  government  policies  or 
sociopolitical reasons, or enticed into stay-
ing by incentives, not many people live in 
these areas. 

Integration reduces the economic dis-
tance  between  lagging  areas  and  more 
dynamic places. The most successful ini-
tiatives, which balance economic efﬁ ciency 
and  political  feasibility,  are  adapted  to 
country circumstances. The circumstances 
that matter most are the population den-
sities  in  lagging  areas  and  the  extent  to 
which domestic divisions weaken market 
forces.  Where  few  people  live  in  lagging 
areas, as in northeastern Russia, integra-
tion  policies  should  be  different  from 
those in places such as northeastern Brazil, 
where lagging areas are densely populated. 
Where  lagging  and  leading  areas  share  a 
common language and customs, as in Bra-
zil and China, integration policies have to 
exert  less  effort  than  in  areas  where  dif-
ferences in language, ethnicity, or religion 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   240
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   240

10/8/08   3:14:25 PM
10/8/08   3:14:25 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

241

divide one part of a country from another, 
as in India or Nigeria.

In Brazil the distance between the lag-
ging northeast and the leading southeast 
is coupled with high population densities 
in the coastal areas of the northeast. But 
many Nordestinos have found opportuni-
ties by moving to the dynamic southeast. 
As many as 4 million residents of Greater 
São Paulo are Nordestinos.24 This indicates 
the high population density in the north-
east and the strong market forces of labor 
mobility, made possible by factors such as 
a common language and a strong national 
identity.

Recall  the  maps  of  India,  where  some 
lagging areas have a high poverty mass and 
high poverty rate (see map 8.3). Integrating 
these areas is especially challenging when 
subnational  geographic  groupings  reﬂ ect 
ethnic,  linguistic,  or  social  differences.25 
The movement of people out of these areas 
has  been  limited  because  of  local  prefer-
ences and discrimination against particu-
lar  groups  (see  chapter  5).  Market  forces 
of factor mobility have been weakened by 
internal political and social divisions—wit-
ness the hostility that Bihari workers have 
encountered in the more prosperous parts 
of  India.  In  such  nations,  the  integration 
challenge  involves  overcoming  economic 
distance, misplaced density, and domestic 
division.

Using  the  spatial  dimensions  of  dis-
tance, density, and division to characterize 
conditions in a country, a suggestive tax-
onomy can be developed to help countries 
tailor integration policies to their speciﬁ c 
economic geography. At least three types of 
countries can be distinguished:

(cid:129)  Type 1: countries with sparsely populated 

lagging areas

(cid:129)  Type 2: uniﬁ ed countries with densely 

populated lagging areas

(cid:129)  Type 3: divided countries with densely 

populated lagging areas

This taxonomy can characterize lagging 
areas in most countries, but two qualiﬁ ca-
tions are necessary. First, lagging areas in 
some countries may be sufﬁ ciently hetero-
geneous that it is difﬁ cult to neatly classify 

them into one of these types. In Thailand 
the northeast is densely populated and dis-
tant  from  the  economically  dense  capital 
area,  but  the  sparsely  populated  south  is 
home to its Muslim minority. In India the 
lagging  northeast  is  sparsely  populated, 
whereas lagging areas in central India have 
almost  two-thirds  of  India’s  poor.  Sec-
ond,  countries  classiﬁ ed  as  Type  1  (with 
sparsely  populated  lagging  areas)  can  be 
uniﬁ ed or internally divided. But the strat-
egies for integration in these two types of 
countries—uniﬁ ed countries with sparsely 
populated lagging areas such as Russia, or 
divided countries with sparsely populated 
lagging areas such as the Philippines—will 
not be different.

An instrument per dimension

Institutions  to  overcome  distance.  In 
countries with sparsely populated lagging 
areas, the integration challenge is mainly 
one  of  reducing  economic  distance.  Poli-
cies that are universal—spatially blind in 
their  design  and  national  in  their  cover-
age—can shoulder much of the task of suc-
cessful  economic  integration.  Developing 
countries  in  this  category  include  Chile, 
China, Ghana, Indonesia, Kenya, Mexico, 
Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Russia, Sri Lanka, 
Uganda, and Vietnam. The primary objec-
tive of these policies should be to encour-
age people migrate to places with economic 
opportunities.  For  example,  as  Russia 
moves further from plan to market, it will 
have to offset a legacy of policies industrial-
izing its vast territory. Even today, millions 
of  people  are  subsidized  to  live  in  “cold” 
and  isolated  places  in  the  northeast  (see 
map 8.4), where they cannot take advan-
tage of new economic opportunities in the 
dynamic areas of the west.26

Correcting  land  market  distortions, 
removing restrictions on mobility, and pro-
viding essential services such as basic edu-
cation,  health  care,  water,  and  sanitation 
should be universal policy priorities. The 
costs associated with land sales—including 
fees,  survey  costs,  and  transfer  fees—can 
make land transactions prohibitively expen-
sive. In Russia the fees for private survey-
ing are equivalent to two years’ minimum 
wages. These costs could slow migration by 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   241
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   241

10/8/08   3:14:26 PM
10/8/08   3:14:26 PM

242 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Map 8.4    In the Russian Federation, population densities are highest in the economically vibrant and warmer west, but a communist legacy has left some 
people in the cold interior

Population per km2

0–4.86
4.86–10.75
10.75–20.14
20.14–75.64
>75.64

RUSSIAN

FEDERATION

Sources: Population density: Fay, Felkner, and Lall 2008; Ice Thickness: National Snow and Ice Data Center 2007.

Degrees Celsius

0–-3
-3–-7
-7–-11
-11–-15
-15–-17
Seasonally frozen
Permafrost extent

reducing the ability of less wealthy people 
to  transact  in  land.27  China’s  household 
registration system (the hukou system) has 
been  a  barrier  to  rural-urban  migration. 
Not having an urban hukou in urban areas 
means  that  migrants  may  not  qualify  for 
public  education  or  health  beneﬁ ts.  This 
can produce large interregional wage dif-
ferences.  Recent  research  indicates  that 
removing such mobility restrictions would 
reallocate labor across areas, reduce wage 
differences, and lower income inequality.28 
But  the  beneﬁ ts  depend  on  the  response 
of the urban housing market to additional 
demand from newcomers.

Some countries can have sparsely popu-
lated lagging areas and domestic divisions. 
In Lao People’s Democratic Republic, ethnic 
heterogeneity may make labor less mobile. 
Vientiane, the leading area, has a relatively 
low poverty rate, while the provinces in the 
north and south have higher rates (see map 
8.5). But the poor are spread out quite uni-
formly  across  the  country.  In  such  cases, 
much  of  the  policy  response  still  should 
be  spatially  neutral,  with  special  efforts 
to  ensure  equal  access  to  public  services 
to people in these areas. Afghanistan and 
Tajikistan are other examples of countries 
with divisions and sparsely populated lag-
ging areas.

Other countries may have just a few lag-
ging areas that are sparsely populated and 
divided. In Indonesia, an otherwise uniﬁ ed 
country, places like Aceh are considered lag-
ging areas, with divisions that weaken labor 
and capital mobility. Policy makers may be 
tempted to provide economic incentives for 
ﬁ rms in these areas to compensate for the 
lack of factor mobility, but the accompany-
ing risk of creating enclaves of development 
and deepening existing divisions should be 
considered. Instead, initiatives that promote 
economic  integration  by  increasing  fac-
tor mobility may be better suited for both 
economic and political reasons. Examples 
include  spatially  targeted  programs  to 
improve education and equal opportunity 
legislation to ensure that workers from lag-
ging areas do not face labor market discrim-
ination in other parts of the country.

Institutions and infrastructure to over-
come distance and density. When distance is 
coupled with high population densities in lag-
ging areas, spatially connective infrastructure 
is also necessary. Countries in this category 
include  Bangladesh,  Brazil,  Colombia,  the 
Arab Republic of Egypt, Thailand, and Tur-
key. Isolation from markets in more dynamic 
parts of the country (or the world) can reduce 
consumer  welfare,  as  residents  face  higher 
prices because of market fragmentation, and 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   242
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   242

10/8/08   3:14:26 PM
10/8/08   3:14:26 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

243

workers  and  producers  have  less  access  to 
markets. In principle, infrastructure invest-
ments that connect peripheral areas to mar-
kets should improve both consumer welfare 
and productive efﬁ ciency.

With sizable concentrations of the poor 
in lagging areas, spatially blind institutions 
that promote the mobility of labor and cap-
ital and ensure the provision of basic ser-
vices must be aided by policies to improve 
the access of entrepreneurs in lagging areas 
to  markets.  Although  migration  will  aid 
spatial  efﬁ ciency  and  equity,  with  large 
numbers of the poor in lagging areas, this 
could take a long time (see chapter 5). Bet-
ter  infrastructural  links  between  lagging 
and  leading  areas,  by  improving  market 
access, may allow some activities to ﬂ our-
ish in lagging areas. But they may increase 
the  concentration  of  economic  activity 
in  leading  areas,  because  ﬁ rms  that  value 
agglomeration  beneﬁ ts  will  now  be  able 
to serve lagging area markets from farther 
away (see chapter 6). Activities that respond 
to better infrastructure in lagging areas are 
those  that  do  not  exhibit  agglomeration 
economies—agriculture,  agroprocessing, 
and labor-intensive manufacturing such as 
leather and wood products (see chapter 4).
A useful way to conceptualize how infra-
structure investments improve connectiv-
ity is to think about a measure of market 
access  that  captures  the  size  and  density 
of market centers and the quality of trans-
port networks that link different locations 
to these centers. The measure comes from 
the  gravity  model  used  to  analyze  trade 
between areas and countries, with the inter-
action between two places proportional to 
their size (population or economic density) 
and inversely proportional to the distance 
between them (see box 8.6). 

Consider  the  Arab  Republic  of  Egypt. 
The location of human settlements has been 
dictated by a dominant natural geography 
constraint—access  to  water.  Most  people, 
in leading areas around Cairo and Alexan-
dria as well as lagging areas in Upper Egypt 
around Aswan and Qena, live along the Nile 
(see map 8.6). As in the densely populated 
coastal zone in Brazil, institutions to inte-
grate Egypt need to be complemented with 
connective  infrastructure  to  ensure  both 

Map 8.5    In the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the poverty rate is high outside the capital 
region, but poor people are scattered in remote communities

LAO
P.D.R.

Poverty rate:
proportion of poor (%)

21–40
41–60
61–80
81–100

Poverty density

Each dot represents
2,000 poor persons

Source: Richter, van der Weide, and Souksavath 2005.
Note: Dots are placed randomly within each province and do not reflect population distribution.

spatial efﬁ ciency in production and spatially 
egalitarian living standards.

There is a long history of using connective 
infrastructure to integrate peripheral areas 
with national markets. When accompanied 
by institutions that integrate nations, such 
infrastructure investments can pay off. In 
the United States, the Congress passed the 
Appalachian Regional Development Act in 
1965, relying on spatially blind institutions 
and connective infrastructure to integrate 
the 22 million people in this lagging area, 
which spans 13 states, with the rest of the 
country.29  The  basic  strategy  combined 
regionally  coordinated  social  programs 
and physical infrastructure. The 1965 Act 
allocated 85 percent of the funds for high-
ways—seen  as  critical  to  meeting  other 
socioeconomic  objectives—and,  cumula-
tively,  highways  have  accounted  for  more 
than 60 percent of the appropriated funds 
through the mid-1990s. Other investments 
included hospitals and treatment centers, 
land  conservation,  mineland  restoration, 
ﬂ ood control and water resource manage-
ment,  vocational  education  facilities,  and 
sewage treatment works. Between 1965 and 
1991, total personal income and earnings 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   243
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   243

10/8/08   3:14:27 PM
10/8/08   3:14:27 PM

244 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 8.6    Low market access in Mexico’s lagging south

Quantitative information on regional 
or local market integration is scarce. 
Summary statistics—such as the road 
length in a state or province or the 
straight-line distance to ports or urban 
agglomerations—are poor proxies for the 
complexity of a national or regional trans-
portation network. To improve on them, 
a geographic representation of Mexico’s 
transport network is used to compute an 
index of accessibility for each municipio in 
the country as a simple measure of poten-
tial market integration. 

This index summarizes the size of the 

potential market that can be reached 
from a particular point given the density 
and quality of the transport network in 
that region. For any point in the country, 
it is the sum of the population of urban 
centers surrounding that point, inversely 
weighted by the travel time to reach 

that center. It is computed using an up-
to-date digital map of transportation 
infrastructure from the Mexican statistical 
agency (Instituto Nacional de Estadística 
y Geografía, INEGI).a For each road seg-
ment, the database indicates the number 
of lanes and whether those lanes are 
paved or unpaved—and for railroad lines, 
the number of tracks. For each category 
of road or rail, average travel speeds are 
estimated to calculate how long it will 
take to traverse each segment in the 
transport network.b Urban population 
data from the INEGI database indicate 
the location and population size of about 
700 cities and agglomerations in Mexico. 
These urban centers accounted for about 
68 million of Mexico’s 97 million people 
in 2000.

The map of market access (below) 

shows high values of the index around 

the federal district, thanks to concentra-
tions of people and infrastructure. A quar-
ter of Mexico’s GDP is generated within 
two hours’ travel time from the center of 
the Federal District. The southern states 
of Chiapas, Guerrero, and Oaxaca, the 
poorest areas, have low market access. 

Source: Deichmann, Fay, Koo, and Lall 2004.
a. The digital road and rail network includes 
171,000 kms of roads, of which 84,000 kms 
are paved roads; 51,000 are unpaved; and 
36,000 are paths and breaches. The rail 
network has an estimated total length of 
14,000 kms. These values are calculated by 
a geographic information system (GIS) from 
1:1 million scale digital maps and may not 
necessarily match offi  cial statistics.
b. Using travel time on a transport network 
provides a more accurate measure of acces-
sibility compared with the computationally 
much simpler straight-line distance, as 
employed, for example, by Hanson (1998).

Market access in Mexico is highest around the national capital and low in the lagging southern states

Mexico City

GUERRERO

Source: Deichmann, Fay, Koo, and Lall 2004.

OAXACA

CHIAPAS

Accessibility Index

Low

High

City population,
2000 (thousands)

50–100
100–500
500–1,000
1,000–5,000
> 5,000

MEXICO

grew 48 percentage points faster on aver-
age  in  the  Appalachian  counties  than  in 
their economic “sisters,” population grew 5 
points faster, and per capita income grew 17 
points faster.30 

Institutions, infrastructure, and incen-
tives  to  overcome  distance,  density,  and 
division.  When  countries  face  divisions 

caused by ethnolinguistic or religious het-
erogeneity, the forces of factor mobility can 
be weak even over relatively short distances. 
Examples  include  India  and  Nigeria.  In 
such  cases,  spatially  focused  incentives 
may need to complement institutions and 
infrastructure to encourage economic pro-
duction in lagging areas. Commonly used 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   244
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   244

10/8/08   3:14:28 PM
10/8/08   3:14:28 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

245

Map 8.6    In the Arab Republic of Egypt, population densities are high in lagging areas, and connective 
infrastructure is needed to help spatial integration

Primary roads
Secondary roads

Population
density

High

Low

ARAB REP.
OF EGYPT

Source: World Bank 2008b.

incentives  include  fiscal  incentives  and 
subsidies, special economic zones, industry 
location  regulations,  and  investment  cli-
mate improvements.

Only a few countries face the triple chal-
lenges  of  distance,  density,  and  division. 
Nevertheless,  incentives  to  promote  eco-
nomic development in lagging areas have 
been widespread. The experience has been 
disheartening.31 In good measure this has 
been  because  incentives  have  been  used 
instead of, rather than in addition to, inte-
grative  institutions  and  infrastructure. 
More  often  than  not,  geographically  tar-
geted incentives would not even be neces-
sary if the policy objective was to integrate 
leading and lagging areas, rather than pro-
mote industry in economically unfavorable 
places.

Table  8.1  summarizes  policy  options 
for domestic integration using a calibrated 
combination  of  institutions,  infrastruc-
ture, and incentives. Policy makers should 
keep  three  points  in  mind  in  designing 
integration strategies. First, policies should 
focus  primarily  on  improving  the  welfare 

of  people,  encouraging  them  to  seek  eco-
nomic  opportunities  wherever  they  arise. 
Second, they should help unify countries in 
the long term. Internal divisions may be a 
short-run constraint for economic integra-
tion, but the diminution of division should 
be  a  long-term  objective.  Third,  policies 
that try to offset constraints posed by divi-
sions  should  not  inadvertently  strengthen 
them. For example, making land and labor 
laws or school systems different in lagging 
areas may weaken economic and political 
integration.

The framework in action
This section uses the framework to discuss 
how countries have used speciﬁ c policies to 
integrate lagging and leading areas.

Institutions that promote portable 
investments

Investing in human capital. Universal 
primary  education  and  basic  health  are 
mandated across a broad range of develop-
ing  countries,  as  shown  by  the  review  of 
national constitutions discussed earlier. For 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   245
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   245

10/8/08   3:14:29 PM
10/8/08   3:14:29 PM

246 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 8.1    An instrument per dimension—a framework for area, territorial, or regional development policies 

Sparsely populated lagging areas
Chile, China, Ghana, Honduras, 
Pakistan, Peru, Russian Federation, 
Sri Lanka, Uganda, Vietnam 
Economic distance (1-D)

Labor and capital mobility

Country type

Densely populated lagging areas in 
united countries
Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia, Arab 
Rep. of Egypt, Mexico, Thailand, 
Turkey 
Economic distance 
High population densities in lagging 
areas (2-D)
Labor and capital mobility 
Market integration for goods and 
services

Densely populated lagging areas in divided 
countries
India, Nigeria 

Economic distance 
High population densities 
Internal divisions (3-D)
Labor and capital mobility 
Market integration for goods and services 
Selected economic activities in lagging areas

Fluid land and labor markets, security, 
education and health programs, safe 
water and sanitation

Fluid land and labor markets, security, 
education and health programs, safe 
water and sanitation
Interregional transport infrastructure 
Information and communication 
services

Fluid land and labor markets, security, 
education and health programs, safe water 
and sanitation
Interregional transport infrastructure 
Information and communication services 

Incentives to agriculture and agro-based 
industry 
Irrigation systems 
Workforce training
Local roads

Examples (countries)

Dimensions of the 
integration challenge

What policies should 
facilitate

Policy Priorities
Spatially blind 
institutions

Spatially connective 
infrastructure

Spatially targeted 
incentives

Source: WDR 2009 team.

example, constitutions state that primary 
education  should  be  free  and  universal, 
regardless of the place of residence, and sup-
plementary national laws specify how many 
years of instruction are necessary to com-
plete primary education. In conﬂ ict-driven 
or postconﬂ ict countries, basic education is 
viewed as a tool for national reconciliation 
and ensuring territorial integrity.

Despite  such  legislation,  education, 
health,  and  poverty  levels  vary  consider-
ably  among  areas  in  many  countries,  par-
ticularly in Asia and Africa. In China, the 
human development index (a combination 
of education, health, and income levels) of 
the leading area in 2003 was 0.97, close to 
the  Republic  of  Korea’s  index,  and  that  of 
the lagging area was 0.59, about the same as 
Lao PDR’s index (see ﬁ gure 8.2). Chapter 2 
pointed out that these gaps were even higher 
some years ago.

Developing  human  capital  is  essential 
whether policies aim to bring jobs to peo-
ple or encourage the movement of people 
to jobs. One of the main gains comes from 
helping people in lagging areas migrate to 
areas with better opportunities. In Russia 
the large economic and physical distances 

between  lagging  areas  and  potential  des-
tinations have deterred migration. Reduc-
ing economic distance, an additional year 
of education increases out-migration from 
remote  areas  by  40  percent.32  As  Brazil 
transformed from an agricultural to a man-
ufacturing economy, migration ﬂ ows from 
the lagging northeast to the dynamic south 
and southeast increased between 1960 and 
2000. In the northeast people who have at 
least a primary education migrate more fre-
quently than less educated people.33

One of the biggest success stories is in the 
United States, where a rise in the schooling 
of  African  Americans  is  believed  to  have 
been an important causal factor behind their 
“Great Migration” out of the South. In 1900, 
90 percent of African Americans lived in the 
South, and only 4.3 percent of those born in 
the region were living elsewhere. By 1950 the 
proportion in the South had declined to 68 
percent, and 19.6 percent of those born in 
the region had left it. Census data for 1900, 
1940,  and  1950  show  that  better-educated 
people were more likely to migrate because 
schooling increased their awareness of dis-
tant  labor  market  opportunities  and  their 
ability  to  assimilate  into  a  different  social 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   246
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   246

10/8/08   3:14:32 PM
10/8/08   3:14:32 PM

247

0.97

0.58

Figure 8.2    Living standards can vary considerably between leading and lagging areas

Human development index
1.0

0.76

0.58

0.74

0.60

0.67

0.55

0.82

0.67

0.75

0.78

0.49

0.50

Lao PDR

2000

Indonesia

2002

Mongolia

2002

Vietnam

2001

Philippines

2003

Thailand

2003

China
2003

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

and economic environment, thus lowering 
the costs.34 In another U.S. study of people 
tracked between 1968 and 1982, those with 
high education levels showed less inclination 
to change professions but were more likely 
to move geographically. A person with a col-
lege education was likely to move three times 
more often than a person with an eighth-
grade education or less.35 

Opening  options  for  migration  stimu-
lates  greater  human  capital  investments: 
people consider not only the local returns to 
education but also the returns in other loca-
tions. If schooling options are available in 
poor areas, potential migrants will invest in 
additional human capital, anticipating that 
jobs in leading areas require higher skills. 
Employers in those areas are likely to favor 
educated workers who signal themselves as 
more “able” than other workers from lag-
ging  areas.  In  the  United  States,  African 
American  school  enrollment  rates  were 
signiﬁ cantly higher in southern states that 
previously had experienced high rates of out-
migration. An increase in earlier migration 
rates explains 7.4 percent of the increase in 
African American enrollment rates between 
1910 and 1930. As more African Americans 
migrated from the South, migration became 
more  common  and  feasible,  and  school 
enrollments rose in response. 

Schooling has a strong effect on welfare, 
as  in  Brazil.  Nine  states  in  the  northeast 
have the worst education attainments, with 
gains smaller than in the rest of the coun-
try. Average illiteracy in the nine states fell 
42 percent, less than the 49 percent in other 
states, and is still twice the national aver-
age  (18  percent  versus  9  percent).  Differ-
ences in schooling explain more than half 
the income difference between the north-
east and the leading southeast. If the local 
populace had the same education proﬁ le as 
people in the southeast, average incomes in 
the northeast would increase by more than 
half, moving from 62 percent of the Brazil-
ian average to 93 percent.36

Government programs, such as that for 
the universal primary education in Uganda, 
often  reﬂ ect  national  priorities.  Uganda’s 
program  increased  enrollments  in  the 
north—the country’s poorest area (see box 
8.7). But more effort is needed to improve 

Source: Gill and Kharas 2007.

education  quality  because  of  the  higher 
costs of delivering services in the northern 
region. With poor implementation capacity 
and underspending in lagging areas, the gap 
between  “regional  needs”  and  allocations 
from higher levels of government becomes 
even  wider.  Although  this  could  be  seen 
as spatial targeting of public spending, an 
 outcome-oriented policy framework would 
regard such efforts as spatially blind. 

Transfer mechanisms for public services. 
Redistributive transfers from higher levels 
of government can reduce disparities in ﬁ s-
cal  capacity  and  public  service  provision 
across  subnational  jurisdictions.  At  least 
three criteria motivate their allocation:
(cid:129)  Need. Areas with lower incomes would 
receive  more  investment,  but  richer 
areas may also demand more resources 
to meet the needs of population growth 
and congestion. 

(cid:129)  Efﬁ ciency.  Areas  with  higher  returns 
to  investment  would  receive  more 
allocations. 

(cid:129)  Equality.  Spending  is  equalized  across 
locations, so that public investments do 
not give an advantage to any single area. 

Need-based transfers can improve pub-
lic service delivery in lagging areas, because 
local tax bases may be inadequate to gen-
erate enough revenues. Intergovernmental 
transfers can help provide similar access to 
public services for residents anywhere in 
the country. Such transfers are particularly 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   247
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   247

10/8/08   3:14:32 PM
10/8/08   3:14:32 PM

248 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 8.7     Universal primary education in Uganda increased 

access to schools in the northern areas

President Museveni’s decision to 
implement universal primary educa-
tion (UPE) in 1996 made Uganda the 
fi rst African country to institute such a 
policy. UPE abolished tuition and con-
tributions to parent-teacher associa-
tions and school building funds. The 
impact on primary school enrollment 
has been large, with those in the poor-
est quintile gaining most and, within 
the poorest quintile, the enrollment 
of girls more than tripled between 
1992–93 and 2002–03. In the lagging 
northern area, girls’ enrollment rose 
from 40 percent to 73 percent. 

UPE has had an equalizing eff ect 
in access but not in quality and per-
formance. In the northern area, high 
rates of teacher absenteeism, low 
fi nancial incentives to teachers, and 
limited education infrastructure and 
teaching materials produce low edu-
cation performance. And the per cap-
ita budget allocations to the region 
do not always refl ect the higher costs 
of delivering services there. A spa-
tially blind program of education that 
emphasizes outcomes would not be 
geographically neutral. 
Source: Bird and Higgins 2008.

important  for  subnational  governments 
that  depend  heavily  on  federal  transfers 
to cover spending. They ﬁ nance about 60 
percent of subnational spending in devel-
oping countries and transition economies, 
compared with about a third in member 
countries  of  the  Organisation  for  Eco-
nomic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD).  In  India  central  government 
transfers ﬁ nance more than 30 percent of 
state spending. In China central-provincial 
and  provincial-local transfers ﬁ nanced 67 
percent of provincial, 57 percent of prefec-
ture, and 66 percent of county and lower-
level spending in 2003.37 

The  allocation  rules  for  transfers  thus 
have a direct bearing on the potential for 
welfare improvement in different areas. But 
intergovernmental transfers that ﬁ nance a 
large share of subnational expenditures are 
rarely  made  with  spatial  equity  in  mind. 
Indeed, the large transfers go to areas where 
people already receive high-quality services 
(see box 8.8).

Fiscal equalization transfers to lagging 
areas are ﬁ nanced by a net tax on the resi-
dents of leading areas. A common concern 
in the ﬁ scal competition literature is that 
higher  effective  taxes  in  some  areas  will 
stimulate the out-migration of productive 
factors. The new economic geography pro-
vides  some  hope  that  tax-induced  migra-
tion will be limited if residents (both ﬁ rms 

and households) beneﬁ t from agglomera-
tion economies in leading areas. External 
economies induce mobile factors to cluster 
geographically and turn them into quasi-
ﬁ xed  factors.  So  if  residents  see  beneﬁ ts 
from locating near other similar residents, 
they  become  locked  into  these  locations, 
less sensitive to tax differences. Moderate 
intergovernmental  transfers  ﬁ nanced  by 
leading areas thus can ﬁ nance public ser-
vices in lagging areas. 

Although  transfers  can  bridge  short-
term  fiscal  constraints  in  lagging  areas, 
ﬁ scal  dependency  is  a  danger.  If  intergov-
ernment  transfers  ﬁ nance  a  large  share  of 
expenditures, subnational governments are 
unlikely  to  improve  local  revenue  collec-
tion or be accountable to local residents.38 
OECD  countries  have  recognized  these 
disincentives,  and  many  have  reduced  the 
 equalization  component  of  revenues  and 
grants (Italy and Spain, for example). 

In India, where federal transfers redistrib-
ute resources to poor areas, average incomes 
in low-income states are 40 percent of those in 
high-income states. With local tax revenues 
linked to local incomes, the ﬁ scal capacity of 
low-income states is worse than that of their 
high-income counterparts.39 Compensating 
for this difference is a progressive ﬁ scal redis-
tribution system. Low-income states receive 
48 percent of total central government trans-
fers, compared with a 17-percent allocation 
to high-income states. The progressiveness 
of transfers is also evident per capita—Bihar, 
the poorest state receives Rs 501 per person in 
tax transfers. Maharashtra—a high-income 
state  and  home  to  India’s  leading  urban 
center, Mumbai—receives only Rs 298 per 
person. But the translation of resources into 
services on the ground is not always visible in 
India’s lagging areas.

Many developing countries are collecting 
and disseminating credible information on 
service entitlements to increase the account-
ability  of  service  providers  and  improve 
outcomes.  Increasing  access  to  reliable 
quantitative information about service deliv-
ery outcomes makes it difﬁ cult for providers 
to ignore this information as anecdotal or 
irrelevant. Involving community members 
in  identifying  concerns  and  encouraging 
them to do their own monitoring can create 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   248
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   248

10/8/08   3:14:32 PM
10/8/08   3:14:32 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

249

BOX 8.8    Improving the spatial progressivity of Nigeria’s intergovernmental transfers

Poverty and service quality in Nigeria are 
worst in the north, particularly the north-
east, and much better in the south, particu-
larly the southwest.a, b Nigeria’s states rely 
on fi scal transfers from the center to pro-
vide most services. Nigeria’s allocation of 
statutory grants (NGN 700 billion in 2006)c
 is not targeted using a clear principle that 
supports poverty reduction: 54 percent of 
the funds are divided equally among all 
states regardless of population, land area, 
poverty, or other measures of need.d Indi-
cators of health care and education make 
up only 7 percent of the transfer. 

The indicators chosen to direct that 
small percentage are regressive in that 
they favor states with the best service 
delivery and strongest infrastructure. 
Basing education transfers purely on 
enrollments favors states that already have 
education infrastructure and teachers, 
penalizing those that do not. Basing health 
transfers purely on hospital beds similarly 
supports better-off  states that have the 
resources to build more hospitals. 

Per capita transfers to states in the 
north (about NGN 3,300 per person) 

are lower than those in the southwest 
(3,700) despite the north’s having the 
highest overall poverty and worst service 
delivery.e To determine what would hap-
pen if transfers were spatially progressive, 
an illustrative policy experiment was 
developed by the World Resources Insti-
tute to identify the implications. Popula-
tion and land area, refl ecting demand for 
services, are used to allocate 50 percent 
of the statutory grant. Equal allocations 
are reduced to 5 percent (from 54 per-
cent). Education and health care are split 
between measures to support current 
service levels and those to support pro-
gressive funding for states with the poor 
services. For education, school enroll-
ment (increased from 4 to 5 percent) is 
used for the former purpose, and lack 
of access to schooling (increased from 0 
to 5 percent) for the latter. Health care 
also received a 10 percent weight. The 
allocation for revenue eff ort is kept at 2.5 
percent. Poverty was added as a category 
by weighting the number of poor and 
the poverty rate (headcount ratio) at 2.5 
percent apiece.

The proposed changes would shift 
intergovernmental transfers toward 
states with the greatest need. The maps 
below show this shift in per capita 
terms.

a. National Bureau of Statistics 2006.
b. See numerous measures of service qual-
ity and access (National Bureau of Statistics 
2006). Core Welfare Indicator Questionnaire 
(CWIQ). Data can be obtained from the 
Nigerian Bureau of Statistics electronically 
from http://www.nigerianstat.gov.ng/
cwiq/2006/survey0/index.html.
c. The 13 percent derivation of oil proceeds 
and disbursements from the oil fund (under 
which 9 of the 36 southern states where 
oil is produced receive 13 percent of oil 
revenues) represents about NGN 330 bil-
lion, or about one-third of total transfers to 
states in 2006. While the derivation strongly 
shapes Nigeria's overall transfers, this trans-
fer is stipulated by the constitution, not by 
statute and so is not included here (Nigeria 
Federal Ministry of Finance, downloaded 
and compiled from http://www.fmf.gov.ng/
portal/detail.php?link=faac).
d. Revenue Mobilization Allocation and Fis-
cal Commission 2003.
e. National Bureau of Statistics 2004.

Nigeria’s statutory grant transfers per capita with actual transfers in 2006 (left) and with equity considerations (right) 

 

Actual 

Proposed

Naira per capita

180–435
435–752
752–1375
No data

NIGERIA

Naira per capita

255–400
400–755
755–1036
No data

Sources: World Resources Institute; www.funnelthemoney.org; Layke and Adam 2008. 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   249
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   249

10/8/08   3:14:32 PM
10/8/08   3:14:32 PM

250 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

a constituency of users willing to hold pro-
viders accountable. 

Effective service delivery thus depends 
on having enough ﬁ nancial resources and 
translating  them  into  outcomes  on  the 
ground. Investing in public goods in lag-
ging  areas  reduces  migration  possibilities 
in the short term, because it improves the 
attractiveness of lagging areas. But targeted 
social  investments  to  develop  portable 
assets  can  improve  the  welfare  of  people 
and facilitate their longer-term mobility by 
making them better prepared for work in 
leading and intermediate areas.

Portable  pension  beneﬁ ts.  Even  with 
portable assets, people may ﬁ nd it hard to 
move.  In  several  countries,  a  lack  of  pen-
sion portability is likely to slow the pace of 
migration. Facing a potential loss in pension 
beneﬁ ts because of differences in schemes 
or a lack of portability, workers may be less 
likely to move even when leading areas offer 
higher wages. The European Commission 
ﬁ nds precisely this problem.40 

Better  land  market  regulations.  Well-
functioning land markets make it possible for 
people to acquire land, exchange it with oth-
ers, and use it effectively.41 And policies that set 
up defensible and tradable property rights for 
land and housing are likely to facilitate peo-
ple’s geographic mobility. The ability to defend 
rights  legally  rather  than  physically  allows 
people to leave their land to take advantage 
of short-term opportunities. And the ability 
to use land as collateral or sell it allows them 
to ﬁ nance migration costs and beneﬁ t from 
economic and social opportunities elsewhere.
Government  involvement  in  managing 
land markets and enforcing property rights 
prevents  households  from  wasting  pri-
vate resources. But too much government 
involvement can hurt efﬁ ciency. Large-scale 
public ownership can withhold land from 
the market and artiﬁ cially increase prices, 
precluding many poor people from entering 
the market. And high direct costs and com-
plicated procedures can reduce the incentive 
for people to formally exchange land.

Policies to safeguard the poor from rising 
land and housing costs often have hindered 
market functioning. In the Czech Republic, 
where there is a large rental market, de facto 
rent  control  has  kept  prices  signiﬁ cantly 

below the market rate and further restricted 
mobility. Tenants do not want to lose their 
favorable position in existing contracts.42 In 
Chile, meanwhile, the government’s success 
in targeting housing subsidies to the poor in 
lagging areas has also created a strong incen-
tive for people in these areas not to migrate, 
impeding convergence across locations even 
in a country that has a small population and 
homogenous society.

Institutions and infrastructure to 
connect lagging and leading areas

Transport  infrastructure.  Consider 
Bangladesh,  a  two-dimensional  country, 
where  the  most  lagging  areas  are  distant 
from economic density but densely popu-
lated.  Selected  investments  in  correc-
tive  infrastructure  can  help  greatly.  The 
bridge over the Jamuna River opened mar-
ket access for producers in the northwest 
around  the  Rajshahi  division.  Built  at  a 
cost of almost $1 billion, this bridge pro-
vides  the  ﬁ rst  road  and  rail  link  between 
the  northwest,  an  intermediate  area  with 
the  more  developed  east,  which  includes 
the national capital region. Better market 
access and reduced input prices encouraged 
farmers to diversify into high-value crops, 
such as modern varieties of rice and per-
ishable  vegetables.43  The  government  has 
complemented  connective  infrastructure 
policies  with  spatially  blind  institutions 
to improve coverage of social services. The 
Expanded Program on Immunization aims 
to immunize all children less than one year 
old against the six vaccine-preventable dis-
eases. The Health, Nutrition, and Popula-
tion Strategic Investment Plan for 2003–10 
improves  coverage  in  districts  with  poor 
health indicators.44

In the Islamic Republic of Iran, another 
two-dimensional country in the terminol-
ogy of this Report, connective infrastruc-
ture improvements are necessary for spatial 
integration.  In  addition,  spatially  blind 
education policies of improving schools as 
well as conditional cash transfers for chil-
dren to attend schools can improve welfare 
in lagging areas.45 Turkey’s lagging eastern 
areas have 44 percent of the land but only 
5.7  percent  of  national  motorways,  and 
asphalt  road  coverage  is  40  percent  that 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   250
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   250

10/8/08   3:14:33 PM
10/8/08   3:14:33 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

251

of  the  leading  regions.  The  government’s 
Village  Infrastructure  Support  Project 
(KÖYDES)  and  Municipal  Infrastructure 
Support Project (BELDES) have improved 
living  standards  in  rural  areas  and  small 
towns by paving roads and providing sani-
tation and drinking water networks.46 And 
investments in human capital are likely to 
beneﬁ t potential migrants as well as those 
who stay behind.

Information and communication tech-
nologies. Mobile phones have driven down 
provision  costs,  boosting  penetration  and 
improving information ﬂ ows. In 2003 China 
had more mobile phone users (269 million) 
than ﬁ xed-line users (263 million). For 29 
areas in China between 1986 and 2002, tele-
communication infrastructure was strongly 
associated with subnational GDP growth.47 
Because  telecommunication  investments 
are subject to diminishing returns, lagging 
areas can gain the most from them. 

New technologies have lowered the costs 
of  delivering  ﬁ nancial  services,  making 
them more affordable. Many people in lag-
ging areas have limited access to ﬁ nancial 
services, relying on cash-based transactions 
outside the banking system. But with ris-
ing international and national remittances, 
better access to ﬁ nancial services can help 
people  in  these  areas  overcome  credit 
constraints.  The  proliferation  of  mobile 
services, even in remote areas, opens new 
opportunities to provide ﬁ nancial services 
over a mobile phone network (m-banking). 
Reports from the Philippines indicate that 
3.5  million  people  have  access  to  mobile 
phones that can transfer money.48 

Producers  in  lagging  areas  can  receive 
better information on prices they can get 
for their products. In Kerala, India, mobile 
phones  reduced  the  dispersion  of  market 
prices so much that prices differed only by 
the transport cost between markets.49 And 
in Peru, a ubiquitous but often undervalued 
communication system is connecting small 
producers with markets—the postal service 
(see box 8.9).

Greater beneﬁ ts in intermediate areas. 
Intermediate areas closer to centers of eco-
nomic  mass  are  likely  to  gain  more  from 
connectivity-enhancing infrastructure, and 
lagging areas are likely to gain less and at a 

slower pace. Transport connectivity improve-
ments in China’s intermediate areas can be 
economically beneﬁ cial for lagging areas. By 
reducing the transport cost from the west to 
the coast, infrastructure investments in the 
central (intermediate) transportation hubs 
in Henan, Hubei, and Hunan provinces may 
well have greater effects on the west’s devel-
opment than improvements in the western 
area itself. But if China’s overall growth is the 
main objective, infrastructure investments 
in the dynamic economic centers along the 
coast—Hebei,  Jiangsu,  and  Shandong—
could still provide the highest payoffs.50 

In  Brazil  improvements  to  the  road 
network between the 1950s and 1980s did 
reduce  transport  and  logistics  costs.  But 
most of the economic gains accrued to the 
center-west, with only small gains to the lag-
ging northeast. During this time, its share 
of the national network increased from 15 
percent to 25 percent. Even so, such invest-
ments did bring economic density closer to 
the lagging northeast. 

In Colombia, with water and land suitable 
for agriculture, the mountainous topography 
makes  freight  transport  difﬁ cult.  So  some 
intermediate  areas  are  not  well  integrated 

BOX 8.9     Exporting by mail in Peru—connecting small 

producers to markets

In many countries small enterprises 
are often excluded from export 
chains because they operate in vil-
lages or small towns or do not have 
the needed information to export. 
In Peru a trade-facilitation program 
called “Easy Export” connects small 
producers to markets. The key to this 
program is the most basic of transport 
networks—the national postal service. 

How does it work? An individual or 
fi rm takes a package to the nearest 
post offi  ce, which provides free pack-
aging. The sender fi lls out an export 
declaration form, and the post offi  ce 
weighs the package and scans the 
export declaration form. The sender 
pays the fee for the type of service 
desired. Goods with values of $2,000 
or less can be exported. The main 
benefi t is that the exporter does not 

need to use a customs agent, logistics 
agent, or freight forwarder or to con-
solidate the merchandise; even the 
packaging is provided. Firms or indi-
viduals need only to go to a post offi  ce 
with a scale and a paper scanner and 
to use the Internet to complete the 
export declaration for the tax agency.
Has it made a diff erence? Within six 
months of inception, more than 300 
fi rms shipped goods totaling more 
than $300,000. Most users are new 
exporters—microentrepreneurs 
and small fi rms, producing jewelry, 
alpaca and cotton garments, food 
supplements (natural products), 
cosmetics, wood art and crafts, shoes 
and leather, and processed food. 
And many of them are in the poorest 
areas of the country. 
Source: Guasch 2008. 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   251
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   251

10/8/08   3:14:34 PM
10/8/08   3:14:34 PM

252 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

with large domestic and international mar-
kets. Casanare, the nation’s largest rice pro-
ducing area, has good potential for biofuels 
from corn and palm oil. But it takes 18 hours 
to reach Bogotá and 50 hours to access a main 
port. Improving road quality would increase 
market access and help the area’s economy. 
La Mojana, an area with 5,000 square kilo-
meters of ﬂ atlands, close to the Atlantic ports 
and most Colombian cities, is often ﬂ ooded, 
because it lies in the buffer zone of two major 
rivers.  Improving  ecosystem  management 
along  with  transport  connectivity  would 
improve its access to cities and ports.51

Interregional  infrastructure  improve-
ments can bring higher economic concen-
tration. The potential beneﬁ ts of improving 
market access for peripheral areas may instead 
accrue to ﬁ rms in larger agglomerations.52 
And improving transport connectivity can 
further concentrate economic activity. Roads 
and rails run both ways—better  transport 
connectivity not only provides market access 
to  ﬁ rms  in  lagging  areas,  but  also  allows 
ﬁ rms  in  leading  areas  to  reach  markets.  A 
decline in transport costs helps competitive 
ﬁ rms in leading areas easily scale up produc-
tion to reach these new markets at lower cost 
relative to local producers in lagging areas. 
So  improving  market  access  may  hurt  the 
production of standardized goods in lagging 
areas. But lower prices and better access to 
new products are likely to improve consumer 
welfare.

Experience validates this conjecture. In 
Italy reducing transport costs between the 
north and south in the 1950s deprived Mez-
zogiorno ﬁ rms of their previous protection 
and accelerated their deindustrialization.53 
And in France, where transport costs within 
the country fell by 38 percent between 1978 
and 1993, the geographic concentration of 
employment increased.54

In addition to growth effects that vary 
across  areas,  it  is  also  useful  to  consider 
the distributional effects of infrastructure 
improvements.  Are  the  beneﬁ ts  of  infra-
structure improvements large enough and 
distributed progressively enough to reduce 
overall  income  inequalities,  with  more 
beneﬁ ts accruing to the poor than the non-
poor? Empirical evidence on this question is 
limited, but a study from Nepal shows that 

the  development  of  extensive  rural  road 
networks led to signiﬁ cant economic bene-
ﬁ ts, with considerable gains to the poor. But 
the poor’s share often is not large enough 
to signiﬁ cantly reduce income inequality, 
because  the  beneﬁ ts  from  road  extension 
could  be  greater  for  the  rich.55  In  Ghana 
the beneﬁ ts of improving access to infra-
structure  by  the  poor  could  be  increased 
by complementary spatially blind policies, 
such  as  education  and  health  improve-
ments, which would boost the use of that 
infrastructure.56 

Institutions, infrastructure, and 
incentives to overcome the 3-D 
challenge of distance, density, and 
division
Incentives to promote economic investments 
in lagging areas have been widely used by 
countries  to  accelerate  national  economic 
growth and balance growth outcomes across 
places. They seem to work better when they 
reinforce market signals and address coor-
dination  failures.  They  are  less  successful 
when governments pick the places to sup-
port  growth.  The  following  lesson  seems 
to emerge: let markets pick the place, while 
governments help to push the pace.

Incentives  that  exploit  geographic 
advantages are more likely to succeed. To 
stimulate  economic  growth,  many  gov-
ernments have offered tax holidays, reli-
able  infrastructure,  and  improvements 
to  the  business  environment.  Often  the 
incentives are geographically focused—in 
special  economic  zones—to  quickly  cre-
ate enclaves of growth, leaving nationwide 
infrastructure  and  governance  shortfalls 
to  the  longer  term.  There  is  an  ongoing 
debate  over  whether  focused  incentives 
slow the pace of economic reforms, but the 
interest here is in identifying where these 
incentives  are  more  likely  to  succeed.  Is 
it desirable to provide incentives in areas 
that  already  have  good  geography  and 
human capital? Or should they be reme-
dial measures to offset market forces and 
help develop lagging areas?

In  China  and  India,  spatially  targeted 
incentives are most likely to succeed when 
they reinforce geographic advantages, par-
ticularly in areas advantaged by good access 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   252
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   252

10/8/08   3:14:34 PM
10/8/08   3:14:34 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

253

to  domestic  and  international  markets 
(see box 8.10). In Uganda the returns from 
infrastructure development in highways and 
power supply are highest in areas that already 
have a skilled labor force and a diverse mix 
of industrial activities.57 These happen to be 
along the corridor linking the country’s two 
main  agglomerations,  Kampala  and  Jinja. 
Using infrastructure to spread out manufac-
turing, instead of facilitating its concentra-
tion, can slow national economic growth.

Incentives  that  enhance  market  links 
and  improve  agriculture  performance  in 
areas with good natural geography can be 
a part of development strategies for densely 
populated  lagging  areas  where  factor 
mobility is constrained. But before offering 
incentives, agriculture needs to be assessed 
as an economic driver in the local economy. 
World Development Report 2008 provides a 
useful diagnostic technique to identify sub-
national areas as agriculture based, trans-
forming, or urbanized—a country’s “three 
worlds” of agriculture—based on the share 
of aggregate growth originating in agricul-
ture and the share of aggregate poverty in 
the  rural  sector.  Applying  this  technique 
can help identify whether agriculture will 
remain a prominent feature of lagging areas 
in the short to medium term. 

Consider  Malaysia,  where  agriculture 
is important in the regional economies of 
the lagging areas, which account for more 
than  40  percent  of  the  country’s  people 
(Sabah  and  Sarawak  are  home  to  more 
than  2  million).58  To  encourage  agricul-
tural development in the eastern peninsula, 
the national government has been offering 
reinvestment allowances for capital expen-
ditures related to farming, providing cold-
chain facilities and services for perishable 
agricultural produce and exempting food 
processing from tax.59 

But in Ghana, where the lagging north is 
mostly in the arid Savannah zone and pop-
ulation  densities  are  low,  expanding  agri-
culture is less likely to facilitate territorial 
integration. Without allowing for large-scale 
migration or structural transformation, even 
a sharp acceleration in productivity growth 
in groundnuts and other northern staples is 
insufﬁ cient to bring the north up to par with 
the south in the medium term.60

Let markets pick the places. The Repub-
lic of Korea is one of the few success stories 
involving  spatially  targeted  incentives.  To 
support economic growth in speciﬁ c areas, 
the national government worked with the 
private sector to identify areas offering pro-
duction  advantages.  Consistency  between 
national industrial policy and regional pol-
icy objectives was instrumental. Although 
deconcentrating economic activity from the 
Seoul metropolitan region was an implicit 
policy  objective  in  the  government’s  tax 
sharing,  decisions  to  promote  export-
 oriented “strategic industries” were at the 
core of industrial and regional policies.61 

Spatial  equity  did  not  guide  national 
industrial policies. In fact, areas picked by 
the market in different phases of industri-
alization were encouraged. In the 1960s and 
1970s, national industrial policies created 
new industrial cities—Ansan, Changwon, 
Kumi,  Kwangyang,  Pohang,  and  Ulsan. 
The  private  sector  (chaebols)  established 
large branch plants with imported technol-
ogy and borrowed foreign capital. Market-
driven industrial and regional policy led to 
different specializations across the country, 
with chaebol headquarters concentrating in 
Seoul, and production functions decentral-
ized to areas outside the capital. Since the 
mid-1980s,  industrial  policy  to  support 
high-technology activities triggered indus-
trial reconcentration in the capital region. 
To  speed  the  growth,  incentives  were 
complemented  by  infrastructure  invest-
ments that connected the southeast to the 
capital  region.  The  Gyeongbu  expressway, 
which connects Busan, Daegu, Daejeon, and 
Seoul, enabled industries in the southeast to 
reach the capital region within ﬁ ve hours. 
Thus  industries  producing  standardized 
intermediate goods in the capital and south-
east regions beneﬁ ted from considerable cost 
reductions. In the Republic of Korea, it may 
be fair to conclude that markets picked the 
place and governments pushed the pace.62

Many countries have offered incentives to 
create economic mass in lagging areas. The 
idea  is  that  to  attract  ﬁ rms,  lagging  areas 
need to offset higher transport and logistics 
costs, weaker infrastructure, higher factor 
prices,  and  lower  levels  of  public  services. 
European countries have a long history of 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   253
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   253

10/8/08   3:14:34 PM
10/8/08   3:14:34 PM

254 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 8.10     Special economic zones bring growth if they exploit advantages in natural 

and economic geographies

Many developing countries have loca-
tions where infrastructure conditions 
and economic regulations are more hos-
pitable than those typical in the rest of 
the country. These locations, often called 
special economic zones (SEZs), enhance 
industry competitiveness, attract foreign 
direct investment, and diversify exports. 
Recent estimates suggest that there are 
2,300 such zones in developing and tran-
sition countries.a 

Look at China
The earliest developing-country SEZs 
were established in China under Deng 
Xiaoping’s leadership in the early 1980s. 
In 1978 the government decided to 
open the country’s economy to the 
outside world. SEZs and “open” coastal 
cities were integral to this process. In 
1980 SEZs were established along the 
southeastern coast in Shenzhen, Zhu-
hai, and Shantou in Guangdong Prov-

ince and Xiamen in Fujian Province (see 
the map below). In 1984 14 coastal cities 
opened their doors to overseas invest-
ment, and in 1988 the entire island of 
Hainan was assigned SEZ status. Around 
the same time, the coastal belt around 
the Yangtze River Delta, the Pearl River 
Delta, and the Xiamen- Zhangzhou-
Quanzhou Triangle in south Fujian 
opened for business with the world. In 
the early 1990s the government opened 
up 11 border cities and six ports along 
the Yangtze River. The developments 
reflected a strategy of exploiting the 
best locations to access external mar-
kets. 

And at India
A cursory glance at India’s SEZs suggests 
that they were not nearly as well located. 
In 2007 SEZs were approved in coastal 
states of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maha-
rashtra, and Tamil Nadu, as well as inte-

rior states of Haryana, Karnataka, Punjab, 
and Rajasthan. Even in the coastal states, 
many SEZs are not along the coast.b 

Closer inspection reveals consider-
able diversity across product special-
ization, which range from standardized 
manufacturing to information technol-
ogy and pharmaceuticals. Compared 
with standardized manufacturing 
products, human capital–intensive 
products depend more on reliable 
telecommunication infrastructure 
and access to airports, not harbors. 
Moreover, India’s economic zones also 
target the large domestic market. Take 
Gurgaon, a satellite town a stone’s 
throw from Delhi’s international air-
port, which 20 years ago was a cluster 
of villages (gaon is the Hindi word for 
village). Now it is one of the main ser-
vice-oriented corridors in the country, 
sitting in the middle of India’s largest 
consumer market. It houses such infor-

China’s special economic zones opened the country to external markets

4 first special economic zones (1980)
14 coastal cities (1984)
3 deltas (1985)

Province of Hainan (1988)
6 ports of Yangtze (1992)
11 border cities (1992)

Source: WDR 2009 team, based on Huang and Luo forthcoming.

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   254
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   254

10/9/08   11:23:09 PM
10/9/08   11:23:09 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

255

BOX 8.10     Special economic zones bring growth if they exploit advantages in natural 

and economic geographies—continued

mation technology service providers 
as IBM and Microsoft, along with such 
consumer goods providers as Coca-
Cola, Gillette, and Nestlé. 

Unlike China’s government-led 

SEZs, India’s are being developed by 
the private sector, by such companies 
as Infosys and HCL, promoting infor-
mation technology development,c 
reflecting broader global trends. Of 
SEZs in developing countries, 62 per-
cent are private, up from 25 percent 

in the 1980s. They are generally more 
profitable and have better social and 
environmental track records than pub-
lic zones, except in East Asia’s govern-
ment-run zones. 

Location is the key: poor location is 
the main obstacle to success. It seems 
to matter more where the zones are 
located, not who owns and operates 
them. The lesson from China and India is 
that spatially directed interventions are 
more likely to succeed when they exploit 

geographic advantages rather than try 
to off set them.

Source: WDR 2009 team.
a. SEZs take a variety of forms, which 
include free trade zones, export processing 
zones, enterprise zones, freeports, and spe-
cialized zones (Gauthier 2007). 
b. Location of SEZs is based on SEZ INDI-
AWEB at http://www.sezindiaweb.com/
SEZ_map.html. 
c. Information on SEZs in India is drawn 
from the Indiastat database.

using industrial policies to attract ﬁ rms to 
lagging  areas.  But  ﬁ scal  incentives,  while 
politically  efﬁ cient,  have  not  transformed 
the economic fortunes of lagging areas:63

(cid:129)  In Italy one of the main objectives of the 
national economic program begun in 1965 
was to eliminate development gaps between 
the south and the rest of the country. To 
support this program, ﬁ nancial incentives 
were provided to ﬁ rms in the south through 
partial exemptions of welfare contributions. 
Through  1992  public  infrastructure  and 
ﬁ nancial  incentives  promoted  industrial 
development in the region.

(cid:129)  In  France  the  Fifth  National  Plan 
(1966–70) provided assistance to agricul-
ture and began to direct industrial invest-
ment away from Paris toward low-income 
areas in the west. Light industries—with 
lower  transport  costs  and  higher  labor 
intensity—were targeted for relocation.

(cid:129)  The  United  Kingdom  has  supported 
economic  development  in  northern 
England,  Scotland,  Wales,  and  north-
ern Ireland. During World War II, war-
time building controls directed industry 
out  of  the  south  of  England  and  into 
northern and peripheral areas. During 
the postwar recession in 1958, employ-
ment in coal mining, textiles, and ship-
building declined, renewing interest in 
bringing  jobs  to  the  north.  The  1960s 
saw regionally differentiated investment 

incentives and building grants to lagging 
areas  through  the  Local  Employment 
Act,  along  with  relocation  of  250,000 
manufacturing jobs from prosperous to 
lagging areas.

A  common  theme  in  traditional 
regional  policies  focusing  on  taxes,  sub-
sidies,  and  regulations  is  that  they  were 
mainly  central  government  initiatives  to 
create employment and provide infrastruc-
ture  with  the  objective  of  dispersing  (or 
ﬁ ghting  the  concentration  of)  economic 
activity. They targeted speciﬁ c ﬁ rms in the 
hope that they would become anchors in 
the local economy and have large multi-
plier effects.64 But for the most part, these 
incentives have not stimulated sustained 
growth  in  the  lagging  areas,  imposing 
large costs on taxpayers.

Most European countries now focus more 
on “soft” interventions, such as investing in 
innovation  and  supporting  research  insti-
tutes and science and technology parks (see 
table 8.2).65 Central government programs 
have been replaced by greater cooperation 
between the public and private sectors. And 
rather than target speciﬁ c ﬁ rms, coordinated 
measures are attracting clusters of interre-
lated  ﬁ rms.  Rigorous  evaluations  of  these 
programs are hard to come by. But innova-
tion policies that bring new information and 
technologies to lagging areas should in prin-
ciple help in the long term.

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   255
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   255

10/8/08   3:14:36 PM
10/8/08   3:14:36 PM

256 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 8.2    The OECD’s experience with incentives to stimulate lagging areas has been evolving

Strategy
Objective

“Traditional” 
regional policies
Create jobs 
and provide 
large-scale 
infrastructure

Main players

Central 
government

“New” regional policies

Provide complementary 
services, subsidize the 
cost of innovation—
research institutes, 
science and technology 
parks
Public-private 
partnerships

Focus area

Incentives to 
attract individual 
ﬁ rms

Encourage development 
of clusters—both 
sectors and business 
development

The economic 
perspective
Incentives should be 
provided only to “new” 
activities—products new 
to the local economy 
and new technologies to 
produce existing products
Public sector has limited 
information on what ﬁ rms 
want
Public sector support 
must target activities, 
not sectors; subsidized 
activities must have 
strong spillovers

Source: WDR 2009 team.

The  U.S.  federal  government  is  also 
involved  in  smaller  “economic  develop-
ment”  programs.  A  recent  review  identi-
ﬁ es 180 programs of U.S. federal agencies 
addressing  issues  as  diverse  as  planning 
and  economic  development  strategies, 
industrial parks, infrastructure repair, and 
building renovation. The agency with the 
greatest visibility in this group is the Eco-
nomic Development Administration (EDA) 
of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce.66 
The EDA has spent more than $188 billion 
on economic development, but with little 
coordination among initiatives, or a com-
mon policy objective. The EDA reports that 
its investments leverage about $37 in pri-
vate sector investment for every dollar that 
it spends.67 No independent evaluation of 
these programs is available.

Area  incentives,  popular  in  developing 
countries,  have  produced  mixed  results 
at best (see table 8.3). In Brazil, where the 
goal has been to attract “dynamic” indus-
tries  to  the  lagging  north  and  northeast 
by  providing  fiscal  incentives,  expendi-
tures have reached $3 billion to $4 billion 
a  year.  A  recent  impact  evaluation  shows 
that the allocation of these “constitutional 
funds”  did  induce  the  entry  of  footloose 
manufacturing establishments into lagging 
regions—but  incentives  were  not  attrac-
tive enough for vertically integrated indus-
tries.68 Between 1970 and 1980 the Mexican 
government  used  ﬁ scal  incentives  to  pro-
mote  industrial  development  outside  the 
three largest urban agglomerations. Firms 

locating outside these three large cities were 
eligible for a 50- to 100-percent reduction in 
import duties and income, sales, and capital 
gains taxes, as well as accelerated deprecia-
tion and lower interest rates. Their impact 
on economic decentralization was insigniﬁ -
cant because import duties on raw materials 
and capital goods were low to begin with, 
so the reductions had no effect on location 
decisions and lost revenues.69

In  India  the  Industrial  Policy  Resolu-
tion of 1956 set up a strict licensing system 
to  direct  investment  into  lagging  areas. 
The  Indian  government  decided  that  no 
licenses would be issued to new industrial 
units in the vicinity of large metropolitan 
areas. And state governments and ﬁ nancial 
institutions were asked to deny support to 
new industries in metropolitan areas even 
when  they  did  not  require  an  industrial 
license. Large public sector projects (steel 
plants, for example) were located in the lag-
ging states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and 
Orissa. Industrial estates (or growth cen-
ters)  received  infrastructure  investments 
and ﬁ nancial incentives for private indus-
trial investment in designated lagging dis-
tricts. The policies effectively stiﬂ ed growth 
in areas that had good market access and 
human  capital  and  did  not  allow  exit  of 
unproductive activities from lagging areas. 
Even after more than 30 years of draconian 
regulation, few districts in backward areas 
became major industrial centers. 

The economic reforms in 1991 scrapped 
these licensing policies. The decline of pro-
duction  in  inland  areas  continued,  and 
places with good market access and good 
local  business  environments  ﬂ ourished. 
The  ten  best-performing  industrial  dis-
tricts are now located south of the Vindhya 
mountain range, which divides north from 
south.70

Similarly,  in  the  former  Soviet  Union, 
central planners decided where ﬁ rms would 
locate and tried to spread economic activity 
throughout  the  country’s  landscape.  They 
spread production facilities across the former 
Soviet Union’s millions of square kilometers. 
Far from markets and lacking specialization, 
their  productivity  suffered.  How  did  the 
transition  to  markets  change  things?  New 
ﬁ rms located closer to markets and old ones 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   256
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   256

10/8/08   3:14:36 PM
10/8/08   3:14:36 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

257

in remote areas closed down. The result was 
a 2.5 percent gain in ﬁ rm productivity annu-
ally between 1989 and 2004.71

Coordinating local and national incen-
tives. Incentives for lagging areas are best 
coordinated with national sectoral policies: 
taking stock of various national economic 
promotion initiatives and aligning spatial 
interventions with these policies can help. 
For  instance,  spatially  targeted  subsidies 
represent only 12 percent of Brazil’s export 
promotion and industrialization subsidies, 
which favor the industrial southeast. Esti-
mates suggest that these industrial subsidies 
cost $42 billion in 1999, or 4.4 percent of 
GDP.72 In Brazil initiatives to recruit ﬁ rms 
into the northeast clearly were ﬁ ghting an 
uphill  battle  against  broader  industrial 
incentives  that  were  better  aligned  with 
market forces. 

In  India,  too,  common  pricing  poli-
cies to reduce overall inequalities hurt the 
economic prospects of lagging areas. The 
Freight  Equalization  Policy  of  1956  stan-
dardized the prices for transporting “essen-
tial” items such as coal, steel, and cement 
nationwide regardless of distance. Lost in 
the process were the location-based advan-
tages  of  resource-rich  areas.  The  affected 
areas  included  southern  Bihar,  eastern 
Madhya Pradesh, and western Orissa, each 
among  the  poorest,  least  industrialized 
parts of the country. The policy weakened 
the incentives for private capital to locate 
production in lagging areas. 

Decentralization often has been accom-
panied  by  the  efforts  of  subnational  gov-
ernments to create economic mass to meet 
expenditure responsibilities. They offer ﬁ s-
cal incentives and tax expenditures to attract 
ﬁ rms to their jurisdictions. But if not coor-
dinated, these incentives can be wasteful and 
counterproductive.

Look at the competition between states 
in Brazil, where Bahia and Rio Grande do 
Sul competed to attract a Ford Motor Com-
pany plant in the 1990s. Rio Grande do Sul 
offered a package of incentives to Ford that 
included a R$210 million (around US$200 
million)  loan  from  the  state  at  extremely 
favorable conditions (6 percent interest, 15 
years  to  repay),  additional  state  expendi-
tures  of  R$234  million  on  infrastructure 

Table 8.3    A range of instruments has been used by governments to create economic mass in 
lagging areas, with modest results 
Instrument
Investment 
subsidies

Examples
Brazil: Constitutional funds (interest rate subsidies)—induced entry 
of footloose ﬁ rms, but not for ﬁ rms in vertically integrated industries 
(Carvalho, Lall, and Timmins 2005)
Thailand: Income tax exemptions; sales tax reductions for ﬁ rms locating 
in secondary cities in the 1970s—unsuccessful as deductions from 
taxable proﬁ ts did not induce ﬁ rms to locate in unproﬁ table locations 
(World Bank 1980) 
Mexico: Import duty and tax exemptions for deconcentrating 
manufacturing out of the three largest agglomerations—unsuccessful 
as tax rates were low to begin with (World Bank 1977, Scott 1982)
Chile: Free trade zones in zonas extremas with exemptions for customs, 
value added tax, corporate proﬁ t, and real estate taxes—successful 
in the high-tax, high-tariff period until the mid-1990s, performance 
declined with national import duty reduction from 35 percent in the 
1980s to 6 percent in 2000 (World Bank 2005b) 
India: Preference to backward areas in industry licensing (1956 
industrial policy), with public sector–led industrial growth in lagging 
areas and regulations to stop industrial expansion in leading areas—
few backward areas took off, and when regulations were relaxed, these 
lagging areas declined further (Chakravorty and Lall 2007) 

Tax holidays

Reductions in 
import duties

Industrial estates/ 
free trade zones

Regulation

Source: WDR 2009 team.

and public works, an assured loan from the 
national development bank of R$500 mil-
lion,  and  exemptions  from  local  taxes  for 
10 years. When the state government tried 
to  renegotiate  the  deal  fearing  that  it  was 
too generous, Ford moved to Bahia, which 
offered a package similar to the original one. 
Evaluations show that these “ﬁ scal wars” cost 
Brazilian taxpayers around $172,000 per job 
created—ﬁ ve times the cost of job creation 
in a General Motors plant in Tennessee.73

Thinking through the design of incen-
tives.  Before  using  incentives  to  promote 
economic  development  in  lagging  areas, 
national  and  subnational  governments 
should  ﬁ rst  ﬁ nd  out  why  some  areas  are 
being bypassed by the market. Is it because 
of the low social returns to economic pro-
duction in these places, the low ability to 
capture these returns, or the high cost of 
ﬁ nance?74  Have  policies  actively  or  inad-
vertently blocked local economic growth? 
The success of incentives depends on how 
well  the  problem  is  diagnosed,  perhaps 
starting with area-speciﬁ c natural, human, 
and infrastructure endowments.75 “Know 
thy economy,” a phrase used in the World 
Development Report 2000/01, should be the 
motto of subnational governments. Good 
information  can  promote  constructive 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   257
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   257

10/8/08   3:14:37 PM
10/8/08   3:14:37 PM

258 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

debate on development options and build 
consensus around a development strategy.
If the information and subsequent anal-
ysis  points  to  speciﬁ c  opportunities  for 
growth, the next step is to identify whether 
the planned incentives are to subsidize cap-
ital  formation  or  to  promote  innovation. 
If they are to attract ﬁ rms with potential 
local  multipliers,  it  is  important  to  know 
whether the product lines value agglomer-
ation economies, which would reduce the 
power of the incentives. For ﬁ rms in sectors 
in which economies of scale and agglom-
eration are important for production, it is 
less likely that spatially targeted interven-
tions  will  attract  them  to  lagging  areas. 
Industrial surveys in Brazil, China, India, 
Indonesia, and Mexico show that manufac-
turing  ﬁ rms  in  many  product  lines  value 
both  internal  scale  economies  from  mar-
ket  access  and  agglomeration  economies 
in deciding their location.76 Firms produc-
ing  standardized  products  serving  local 
markets, and those specializing in natural 
resources, are less likely to value agglom-
eration economies than are those depend-
ing on skilled labor, business services, and 
access to information.

And from a national growth perspective, 
it is important to ﬁ nd out whether relocating 
“targeted” industries produces net additional 
employment  and  output  nationally.  If  not, 
local  efforts  of  attracting  industry  may  be 
zero-sum games. If the relocated industries 
are less productive, policy makers may face a 
negative sum. If incentives are being used to 
promote innovation, it is important to ensure 
that local production processes can accom-
modate the innovations.

Avoiding Balkanization: 
the political benefits of 
economic integration
Economic  and  political  objectives  can 
clash, but more often they coincide. In the 
Western  Balkans,  the  former  republic  of 
Yugoslavia became a federation after World 
War II but disintegrated when its republics 
declared  themselves  independent  in  the 
early 1990s. Fueling the disintegration was 
rising autarky and fragmentation in Yugo-
slavia  since  the  mid-1970s,  with  barriers 
to movements of people and capital across 

republican  borders,  limited  interrepublic 
trade,  and  duplicated  economic  produc-
tion. In 1987, for example, 70 percent of all 
production in Serbia was consumed in the 
local market.77 

As discussed in chapter 5, analysis sug-
gests  that  factor  mobility  equalizes  wel-
fare  across  areas,  weakening  incentives  to 
break away from an economic and political 
union.78 By contrast, persistent inequalities 
across areas fuel disintegration movements. 
Unity, not uniformity, is the valid principle 
for both political and economic integration. 
This chapter has provided a framework 
for integrating lagging and leading areas as 
countries address economic distance, mis-
placed density, and internal divisions. Eco-
nomic forces are likely to produce spatial 
divergence in growth outcomes. Economic 
models of geography and growth show that 
increasing returns to scale and agglomera-
tion economies can start and sustain a vir-
tuous circle of growth and investment in a 
few areas. 

For valid reasons, though, policy mak-
ers are concerned with reducing geographic 
imbalances soon, sometime between now 
and the long term. And sometimes, politi-
cal  pressures  can  be  such  that  widening 
divergence  at  any  point  is  unacceptable. 
The typical territorial development policy 
response  has  emphasized  targeted  incen-
tives  and  large-scale  infrastructure  to 
encourage economic production in lagging 
areas.  However,  the  evidence  reviewed  in 
this chapter shows that many such policies 
have led to waste. In the meantime, poli-
cies that address institutional bottlenecks 
that  can  help  people  seize  opportunities 
elsewhere or improve their living standards 
locally may be ignored.  

Even  with  such  compromises,  the  big-
gest  part  of  the  policy  challenge  lies  in 
identifying the outcomes that can be real-
istically sought, that is, which depend on 
the stage of development and the ﬁ scal and 
institutional capacities of a country. Where 
incomes are low, it may be feasible only to 
reduce spatial disparities in poverty rates 
and  in  access  to  essential  shelter,  water, 
health,  nutrition,  and  education  services. 
China’s 11th Five-Year Plan passed by the 
National People’s Congress in 2006 states 

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   258
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   258

10/8/08   3:14:37 PM
10/8/08   3:14:37 PM

 

Unity, Not Uniformity 

259

that  “the  construction  of  public  ﬁ nance 
system should be accelerated . . . to gradu-
ally equalize basic public services.” In Octo-
ber 2007 the 17th Congress again pointed 
out  that,  to  narrow  regional  disparities, 
equalization of basic public service provi-
sion would be the priority. Upper-middle-
income  countries  can  be  more  ambitious 
in  equalizing  basic  consumption  indica-
tors across areas, and developed countries 
such  as  those  in  the  EU  more  ambitious 
still. Reducing spatial inequality in dispos-
able incomes may be the relevant target for 
high-income countries. 

But at all stages of development, forcing 
economic production to spread evenly across 
areas is both elusive and expensive. Growth 
generally  is  unbalanced,  but  it  always 
brings more resources for societies to bal-
ance development outcomes. Policy makers 
should identify and execute strategies that 
balance development outcomes across areas 
by means other than resisting the forces of 
unbalanced growth—because that is tanta-
mount to ﬁ ghting economic growth itself. 

The  framework  in  this  chapter  is 
intended to help policy makers identify the 
policies best suited to addressing domes-
tic  integration.  The  suggested  solutions 
consider country-speciﬁ c conditions. The 
main points? First, integration strategies 
should increase the access of the poor in 
lagging areas to opportunities, through a 
set of spatially blind institutions. Second, 
infrastructure  that  connects  lagging  to 
leading areas is needed when the problem 
of  distance  between  lagging  and  leading 
areas  is  coupled  with  misplaced  popula-
tion  density  in  the  lagging  areas.  Third, 
when  the  problem  of  economic  distance 
comes  accompanied  by  both  misplaced 

Table 8.4    Assessing the performance of area development policies 

Performance 
criteria
Institutions
Infrastructure
Incentives

Reduce inequalities 

across regions? 

(interregional equity)

Pro-poor? 

(interpersonal 

equity)

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

Avoid tradeoff with 
spatial efﬁ ciency?

Yes
Yes
No

Source: World Bank 2008b, based on country-speciﬁ c case studies.

density  and  division,  targeted  incentives 
are necessary.

This  framework  was  tested  using 
 country-specific  case  studies  of  spatial 
integration, which included Brazil, Ghana, 
India,  Mexico,  Russia,  and  Uganda.  Each 
set of integration policies is examined using 
three criteria: (1) Do they reduce economic 
distance across subnational areas? (2) Are 
these policies pro-poor? (3) Are these poli-
cies spatially efﬁ cient (that is, do these poli-
cies avoid tradeoffs with spatial efﬁ ciency)? 
Table 8.4 summarizes the ﬁ ndings. Efforts 
to strengthen institutions fare well on all 
three  criteria.  Although  infrastructure 
investments may not reduce economic dis-
tances or help the poor, they can be spatially 
efﬁ cient. Geographically speciﬁ c incentives 
do not fare well.

Perhaps  most  important,  the  chapter 
identiﬁ es  the  point  at  which  all  discus-
sions  of  territorial  development  policies 
should start—with spatially blind institu-
tions. Infrastructure that connects lagging 
areas to markets can help nations integrate. 
Sometimes, not always, these discussions 
should  include  spatially  targeted  incen-
tives. The right mix of integration instru-
ments  will  bring  the  beneﬁ ts  that  come 
from both unbalanced growth and inclu-
sive development.

WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   259
WDR09_16_Ch08.indd   259

10/8/08   3:14:37 PM
10/8/08   3:14:37 PM

CHAPTER 9 Winners without Borders

Integrating poor countries with world markets

Many leaders in Africa called for a 

political union of the continent 
at  the  time  of  independence. 
Félix Houphouët-Boigny, Côte d’Ivoire’s ﬁ rst 
president, was more pragmatic, promoting 
a gradual increase in economic cooperation 
with  neighboring  countries.  He  proposed 
one  of  the  ﬁ rst  regional  economic  agree-
ments in Africa, the “Conseil de l’Entente,” 
backed by a solidarity fund provided mainly 
by  Côte  d’Ivoire.  The  key  elements  of  the 
Entente were free trade and free movement 
of people.1 

The  preferred  destination  of  migrants 
was,  naturally,  Côte  d’Ivoire.  Its  share  of 
foreigners  increased  from  5  percent  in 
1950 to 26 percent of its 16 million people 
in  1998—making  the  country  one  of  the 
top  dozen  destinations  for  international 
migrants in the world. Côte d’Ivoire ben-
eﬁ ted  as  foreign  workers  contributed  to 
export-led growth in industry and agricul-
ture. Sending countries—especially Benin, 
Burkina Faso, Niger, and Togo—beneﬁ ted 
from remittances and increased trade. The 
political crisis triggered by a coup in 1999 
affected the entire region. But Houphouët-
Boigny had vested his country’s neighbors 
in its future, earning the nickname of “The 
Sage of Africa.”

Côte d’Ivoire reﬂ ects the main lines of 
argument in this chapter. In today’s devel-
oped  regions—Europe,  North  America, 
and Northeast Asia—most economic activ-
ities are highly concentrated, their exports 
are  specialized,  and  living  standards  are 
converging. These regions have overcome 
national borders and have integrated their 

economies within their neighborhoods and 
with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Regional  and 
global integration have been complements, 
not substitutes, in the development of these 
regions (see box 9.1).

But in most of the developing world, con-
centration and convergence have been slow, 
often because of persisting economic, politi-
cal,  and  cultural  divisions  between  coun-
tries (see chapter 3). These divisions make it 
hard for countries to take advantage of scale 
economies (see chapter 4), mobile labor and 
capital  (see  chapter  5),  and  falling  trans-
port costs (see chapter 6). Some developing 
countries  have  tried  to  globalize  through 
unilateral  liberalization;  others  have  tried 
to integrate regionally. There have been suc-
cesses and failures with both strategies. This 
chapter  deals  with  ways  to  combine  these 
strategies by increased cooperation among 
neighbors and strong connections to world 
markets, while recognizing and avoiding the 
tradeoffs that can arise between these two 
approaches.

The chapter proposes regional integra-
tion as a mechanism to increase local supply 
capacity and global integration to improve 
access  to  markets  and  suppliers.  Integra-
tion means cooperation between countries 
in trade, domestic regulations and policies, 
regional  infrastructure,  and  other  cross-
border initiatives, including public goods. 
Regional  integration  implies  cooperation 
within a neighborhood of countries. Global 
integration implies cooperation at an even 
wider international level. 

This  chapter’s  framework  for  policy 
action uses a taxonomy of neighborhoods 

260

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   260
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   260

10/8/08   3:40:24 PM
10/8/08   3:40:24 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

261

to organize thinking about how best to con-
front the development challenges of each of 
the developing world’s regions.

The main strategies are as follows:

(cid:129)  Countries close to large world markets 
should strive to beneﬁ t from proximity 
to  high  economic  density  and  become 
an extension of the large markets. Mex-
ico, the Caribbean, the European Union 
(EU) accession countries, and the Repub-
lic of Korea are linked, respectively, with 
the U.S., EU, and Japanese markets. But 
integration  must  go  beyond  a  simple 
free trade agreement to gain signiﬁ cant 
development beneﬁ ts. The biggest chal-
lenge is to make domestic markets attrac-
tive enough to investors to be seen as an 
extension of the large market nearby. 

(cid:129)  Countries  with  big  neighbors  but  far 
from  world  markets  should  develop 
their  regional  market.  This  requires 
two  instruments:  institutional  reforms 
that  facilitate  intraregional  trade  and 
factor  mobility—and  infrastructure 
investments  that  link  lagging  to  lead-
ing  countries  and  the  region  to  major 
world markets. Regional integration can 
naturally  support  regional  production 
networks.  These  networks  maximize 
production-cost  advantages  that  come 
with increasing returns to scale, and they 
allow  small  countries  to  specialize  in 
niche products in regional supplier net-
works. Greater cost efﬁ ciency on the sup-
ply side makes it easier for such regions 
to then integrate with global markets.

(cid:129)  Countries  far  from  world  markets  in 
Central Asia, the small Paciﬁ c Islands, 
and  Sub-Saharan  Africa—the  world’s 
“bottom billion”—face the stiffest chal-
lenges to economic growth and need a 
strong commitment for cooperative solu-
tions. Regional integration can occur in 
“natural” neighborhoods with three sets 
of instruments. They need close institu-
tional  cooperation  and  comprehensive 
regional  infrastructure  investments,  as 
with the others. But they also may need 
cross-country  compensation  mecha-
nisms  to  sustain  the  integration  effort 
because deep integration is likely to lead 
to  uneven  short-term  gains  and  losses 
across countries. The international com-

BOX 9.1     Are the policy messages of this Report 

anti–global integration? No. 

World Development Report 2009 
focuses on regional integration 
because that is where considerable 
scope for policy action now lies. But 
this does not imply that the message 
is against global integration. Quite 
the contrary. This chapter argues that 
regional cooperation boosts the sup-
ply capabilities of a neighborhood 
by providing regional public goods 
and taking advantage of regional 
specialization. In this way, it can 
broaden the gains for each country 
from global integration. In this sense, 
regional and global integration are 
complements, not substitutes. With-
out global integration, the benefi ts 
from regional cooperation would be 
small or negative, as was true of many 
past regional agreements. But with-
out regional integration, the benefi ts 
from globalization might simply be 
unattainable for some countries, 
because they cannot compete on a 
global scale by themselves. 

For many countries, especially in 
Africa where global export market 
shares have fallen, the benefi ts of 
global integration have been ephem-
eral. Global integration is sometimes 
seen as risky, and progress in the 
Doha Round on several issues central 
to developing countries, such as agri-
cultural trade, has been slow. In the 
same vein, past regional cooperation 
also did not yield signifi cant benefi ts, 
and many regional agreements fell 
apart. Those experiences also high-
lighted the uneven gains across large 
and small countries in a neighbor-

hood, which aff ected the long-term 
stability of the agreement and the 
willingness to respond to unexpected 
events. With many previous eff orts 
at regional integration having failed, 
the pursuit of further regional agree-
ments has drawn considerable skepti-
cism in development circles. 

This chapter argues that, given 
current conditions, this skepticism 
is misplaced. Instability stemming 
from macroeconomic policy and 
poor governance is far less common 
today than even a decade ago, so it 
is less likely that a country will import 
problems from its neighbor even if 
their economies are integrated. And 
with the decline in transport costs and 
expansion in global trade, the benefi ts 
from successful export-led growth are 
higher than ever. To compete, coun-
tries are now more willing to harmo-
nize their policies and institutions with 
others, so the prospects for regional 
cooperation have grown substantially. 
That may be one reason why, in June 
2006, 56 regional, 49 regional exten-
sion (cooperation between a regional 
agreement and an individual country), 
5 superregional (cooperation between 
two or more regional agreements), 
and fully 118 bilateral agreements 
were signed or initiated under the 
World Trade Organization (WTO). By 
acting under the global rules of the 
game, these agreements strive to rec-
ognize and avoid tradeoff s between 
regional and global integration.

Source: WDR 2009 team.

munity  can  support  these  integration 
efforts through coordinated incentives.

East, Central, and West Africa fall into 
the third category. Resource-poor coastal 
countries  in  these  neighborhoods  have 
been the poorest growth performers in the 
world relative to other world regions.2 For 
them, the Report suggests a pact involving 
regional governments and the international 
community to improve social services and 
human capital in lagging countries and to 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   261
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   261

10/8/08   3:40:26 PM
10/8/08   3:40:26 PM

262 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

improve infrastructure in leading countries 
where takeoff is most likely. This should be 
augmented by preferential access to devel-
oped country markets for regional exports. 
In return, both leading and lagging coun-
tries  in  these  “natural  neighborhoods” 
would allow freer intraregional movements 
of labor, capital, goods, and services.

Today’s  developing  countries,  as  late-
comers,  face  a  stark  choice:  stay  divided 
and lose ground, or become winners with-
out borders.

Regional integration to scale 
up supply, global integration 
to scale up demand 
Some countries, such as Chile, Mauritius, 
and the well-known East Asian tigers, have 
integrated  globally  without  much  coop-
eration  within  their  world  region.  They 
enjoyed signiﬁ cant ﬁ rst-mover advantages. 
But many other developing countries have 
found this hard to achieve, and some won-
der if the emergence of highly competitive 
exporters like India and China makes the 
likelihood of a successful export-led strat-
egy even lower today. 

The counterargument is that the range 
of goods in which a country can develop a 
comparative advantage has expanded along 
with the growth in global trade. Intermedi-
ate goods and services, more tradable and 
traded, provide developing countries with 
a  broader  range  of  diversiﬁ cation  oppor-
tunities  than  before.3  Empirical  evidence 
suggests this is true even for Sub-Saharan 
Africa.4 Across individual countries within 
each  of  nine  Sub-Saharan  African  neigh-
borhoods,  imports  in  the  previous  year 
of intermediate goods from neighbors are 
positively correlated with total exports in 
the  current  year.  As  the  level  of  interme-
diate  imports  grows  larger  and  crosses  a 
threshold,  this  effect  becomes  noticeably 
stronger. 

These ﬁ ndings show that higher exports 
occur when countries cooperate regionally 
(in terms of scale economies, greater fac-
tor  mobility,  and  lower  transport  costs) 
as  well  as  integrating  globally.  Regional 
cooperation means that ﬁ rms in neighbor-
ing countries can produce ﬁ nal goods more 
cheaply (by building international supply 

chains) than they can by relying on sup-
pliers in one country alone (see box 9.2). 
Global  integration  provides  the  demand 
and  incentive  to  develop  such  efﬁ cient 
regional supply networks. This combina-
tion of regional and global integration has 
produced successful developers in today’s 
rich neighborhoods.

Plant data add further detail to aggre-
gate econometric ﬁ ndings.5 Firms export-
ing to regional markets are hurt more by 
power outages and inefﬁ cient border pro-
cedures than are ﬁ rms exporting to global 
markets,  although  ﬁ rms  exporting  time-
sensitive products such as textiles to global 
markets are hurt by inefﬁ cient borders as 
well. The efﬁ ciency of ﬁ rms dictates where 
they sell their products: the least efﬁ cient 
sell only in domestic markets, others serve 
both regional and domestic markets, and 
the most efﬁ cient are involved in domestic, 
regional, and international markets.6 

A successful integration policy will con-
centrate economic activities in places with 
better access to markets and inputs, whether 
subnational, national, or regional. Integra-
tion could lead to income divergence in a 
regional neighborhood for a while, before 
successive waves of lagging countries catch 
up  with  the  leading  countries  as  growth 
spills over to the neighborhood. When the 
integration process is market driven, as in 
East Asia, production factors will relocate 
and  promote  convergence  in  country  per 
capita  incomes  within  the  neighborhood 
(see chapter 3). But when it is institution 
driven,  as  in  most  developing  neighbor-
hoods today, political economy challenges 
can become major concerns.7

Regional and global integration 
imply tradeoffs
Regional integration agreements, complex 
to  negotiate,  implement,  and  maintain, 
are  intensive  in  the  use  of  administrative 
resources. Efforts to align regional institu-
tions through such agreements can come at 
the expense of domestic administration and 
unilateral liberalization that can determine 
a country’s integration with the rest of the 
world.  Regional  agreements  also  prevent 
countries from pursuing more rapid global 
integration, when some members within a 
region want to move more slowly. 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   262
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   262

10/8/08   3:40:26 PM
10/8/08   3:40:26 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

263

BOX 9.2    Diversifying production through regional cooperation

Diversifying an economy is no easy task. 
Hidalgo, Barabasi, and Haussman (2007) 
show that the current export structure 
of a country determines how easy it will 
be to diversify its production base over 
higher-value products. They use the 
metaphor of a forest representing the 
product space (the same for all countries 
in the world). Each tree is a product, and 
fi rms are monkeys that can climb higher 
on a tree to improve their value added 
(intensive diversifi cation) or jump to 
another tree with higher value (extensive 
diversifi cation).

Developing country fi rms fi nd it easiest 

to grow through intensive diversifi ca-
tion, which builds on capabilities they 
already possess. The alternative, required 
at higher incomes or in response to even 
lower-cost competitors, is to jump to 
higher value trees. Even if a country is 
lucky enough to have such higher value 
trees close to its production base, the 
jump remains costly and risky. It may 
require physical infrastructure, specifi c 
know-how, knowledge of the tastes and 
standards in the targeted markets, and 
easy and cheap access to specifi c inputs. 
Haussman and Rodrik (2003) called these 
initial investment needs “cost discovery,” 
a search by the fi rst fi rms to explore these 
new opportunities. Cost discovery can 

be facilitated in several ways. Foreign 
direct investment can provide much of 
the required information and know-how. 
So can learning from one’s neighbors. 
Cooperation between neighboring coun-
tries can therefore help, providing the 
scale attractive for foreign investors and 
the access to critical intermediate goods 
that makes the leap to a new product less 
costly and risky. Cooperation can provide 
an outlet for intermediate goods produc-
ers who sell to innovating fi rms elsewhere 
in the neighborhood. 

When African exports during 1980–

2004 are mapped against a global prod-
uct space of some 800 products (four-digit 
industries), the Central African Economic 
and Monetary Community appears to 
have only a few options for diversifi cation 
(wood and its manufactures). Members 
of the East African Community have 
more options because their exports are 
more diversifi ed (fruits and vegetables, 
prepared food, fi sh, wood and its manu-
factures, cotton, textiles, low-tech manu-
factures, metallic products, chemicals, 
and minerals). Other countries with similar 
production structures have gone on to 
diversify into such clusters as cotton, tex-
tiles, and garments, which currently enjoy 
preferences under the African Growth and 
Opportunity Act in the U.S. market.

Nearly all members of the West African 
Economic and Monetary Union can ben-
efi t from cooperation in at least seven 
product clusters (fruits and vegetables 
and their products, wood and its manu-
factures, cotton, low-tech manufactures, 
chemicals, and minerals) to reduce their 
overdependence on traditional agricul-
tural exports, such as coff ee and cocoa. 
Southern Africa Customs Union mem-

bers, except for South Africa, can gain 
signifi cantly more than other unions from 
cooperation in natural-resource-based 
and manufacturing clusters, because they 
have much easier diversifi cation options 
driven by the logistics, fi nance, skills, and 
infrastructure that refl ect their middle-
income status. 

By looking at which areas of economic 
activity off er the most promise for further 
development, countries can focus coop-
eration on sector-specifi c infrastructure, 
such as common standards, compliance 
and metrology systems, and specifi c cur-
ricula to build a skilled labor force and 
adapt new technologies. That can serve 
as a complement to the general areas of 
cooperation in regional infrastructure, 
better business regulations, and a strong 
judicial systems. 
Based on contributions from Vandana Chan-
dra, Jessica Boccardo, and Israel Osorio.

The regional versus global debate is not 
new. It revolves around the welfare impli-
cations  of  potential  trade  diversion  and 
trade creation compared with the ﬁ rst-best 
welfare- improving effects of unilateral lib-
eralization or multilateralism.8 Yet a “new 
regionalism”  debate  has  been  launched 
with the recent proliferation of free trade 
agreements. One side of this debate sees in 
regional integration a competitive liberal-
ization process that will ultimately support 
global integration.9 The other side sees the 
emergence of “spaghetti bowls” impeding 
global integration.10

This  debate  will  not  be  readily  con-
cluded. But the lens of the new economic 
geography gives it a different perspective. 
Some have argued that when physical geog-
raphy is properly included in trade models, 
regional  trade  agreements  can  be  more 

welfare improving than multilateral trade 
agreements  if  intercontinental  transport 
costs are much higher than intracontinental 
trade costs.11 There are also noneconomic 
gains  to  regional  integration  initiatives, 
such as greater peace and security as well as 
increased bargaining power in international 
forums.12 These noneconomic motives are 
sometimes more important than the eco-
nomic in the decision to sign regional inte-
gration agreements. 

Regional  integration  can  take  many 
forms,  from  formal  treaties  regulating 
many  aspects  of  economic  exchange  and 
cooperation to informal, de facto integra-
tion that follows from the private sector–
led deepening of economic ties. This variety 
allows for a different dynamic. While global 
agreements  are  comprehensive  and  rare, 
regional  agreements  can  start  small  and 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   263
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   263

10/8/08   3:40:26 PM
10/8/08   3:40:26 PM

264 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

move at a pace and scope with which each 
party is comfortable. Each region needs to 
ﬁ nd the path that allows it to beneﬁ t from 
both regional and global integration.

Developed neighborhoods provide 
useful insights—think big, start small
Successful neighborhoods in Europe, North 
America, and Northeast Asia provide three 
lessons for the design and implementation 
of  regional  and  global  integration  initia-
tives:  think  global,  start  small,  and  com-
pensate the least fortunate.

Think global. For all developing neigh-
borhoods, the most important export mar-
kets are outside the region. The Republic of 
Korea, Mexico, and Romania are fortunate to 
be close to one of these large world markets, 
but most nations are not. The main goal of 
any regional integration process should thus 
be  to  promote  sound  export-led  growth. 
Indeed, the success factor of regional inte-
gration  agreements  is  “open  regionalism,” 
setting low external tariffs and suppressing 
all the internal ones.13 This is a key differ-
ence from the ﬁ rst wave of regionalism in 
the 1970s, which simply extended inward-
looking  import- substitution  policies  from 
countries to regions. 

Start  small.  Regional  integration  ini-
tiatives  do  not  need  to  address  all  issues 
immediately. Nor do they need to involve a 
whole continent at once. The Latin Ameri-
can  and  Sub-Saharan  experiences  in  the 
1970s show that comprehensive agreements 
involving a large number of countries often 
remain  “paper  agreements.”14  The  Euro-
pean Union started with a narrowly focused 
agreement—the European Coal and Steel 
Community  (see  “Geography  in  Motion, 
Overcoming Division in Western Europe”). 
The North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) started with a free trade agree-
ment for automobiles, between the United 
States and Canada.15 East Asia’s regionaliza-
tion accelerated in the 1980s, with Japanese 
multinationals  setting  up  manufacturing 
export platforms across the region. Often 
regional integration can start without a for-
mal agreement of any kind but with a state-
ment of intent for strategic cooperation that 
gives ﬁ rms comfort that any disputes will 
be resolved quickly and fairly. 

Regional  integration  implies  comple-
mentary  policy  actions  by  participating 
countries.  The  larger  the  number  of  par-
ticipants, the more complex the coordina-
tion, with a higher risk of failure. Speciﬁ c 
agreements based on country interest can 
build variable-geometry regional integra-
tion  in  which  countries  (or  areas  within 
countries as with the “growth triangle” in 
East Asia) deepen their cooperation at their 
own speed. Such cooperation on trade and 
nontrade issues can gradually build a stron-
ger neighborhood. This does not preclude 
speciﬁ c continentwide initiatives to carry 
out projects with high ﬁ xed costs, such as 
launching and maintaining a satellite.

Compensate  the 

least  fortunate. 
Regional  integration  can  produce  win-
ners  and  losers  across  countries—at  least 
in the short term.16 If two countries with 
different domestic infrastructure integrate, 
the  country  with  the  better  infrastruc-
ture will attract more industrial activities, 
which  may  deepen  differences  in  income 
and employment.17 Building a sustainable 
neighborhood  of  countries  with  different 
endowments is thus helped by a compensa-
tion mechanism to ensure equitable shar-
ing  of  the  gains  from  integration.  In  the 
EU, rich members subsidize infrastructure 
development in poorer member nations. In 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN),  richer  member  countries  have 
programs  speciﬁ cally  designed  to  assist 
poorer member countries—the Integrated 
ASEAN Initiative. Some regions also have 
bilateral  aid  programs  for  their  poorer 
neighbors.

One approach to compensation is pool-
ing customs revenues collected in customs 
unions  and  redistributing  them  accord-
ing  to  each  member’s  development  needs. 
The West African Economic and Monetary 
Union (WAEMU) adopted a common exter-
nal tariff in 2000, and introduced a 1- percent 
levy  on  all  third-party  imports  to  build  a 
compensation  fund.  By  September  2006, 
$500 million had been collected and shared. 
Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal, the richest mem-
bers of WAEMU, contributed 60 percent of 
the funds but received only 12 percent. Such 
transfers are politically feasible if the wealth-
ier countries realize that they will beneﬁ t in 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   264
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   264

10/8/08   3:40:27 PM
10/8/08   3:40:27 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

265

the long run if their neighborhood prospers. 
Revenue-sharing initiatives are strengthened 
by the involvement of a developed country as 
an external partner willing to subsidize the 
process. The Economic Partnership Agree-
ments  (EPAs)  currently  being  negotiated 
between  the  EU  and  African,  Caribbean, 
and Paciﬁ c countries are examples (see box 
9.3).

Building integrated 
neighborhoods: a framework
The “thickness” of country borders is a self-
imposed obstacle to development, with iso-
lation increasing the economic distance to 
markets (see chapter 3). On top of division, 
some  neighborhoods  have  small  countries 
whose  local  markets  are  simply  not  large 

enough to trigger or sustain industrialization, 
or that lack the capabilities to diversify and 
advance up the value chain. Different coun-
tries thus face different problems that require 
different policy responses to integrate them 
into the global economy. Integration happens 
largely through private activity in trade and 
factor mobility. But most of the institutions 
or infrastructure needed to connect a region 
to  the  global  economy  are  public  goods, 
requiring collective action to overcome coor-
dination problems and externalities. 

Three types of policy instruments can be 
used to pursue regional integration. They 
also help with global integration. 
(cid:129)  Institutional cooperation can address coor-
dination problems within neighborhoods 
and foster greater scale economies. 

BOX 9.3     Economic partnership agreements between the EU and African, Caribbean, and Paciﬁ c 

countries can be made better

Until 2007 the EU granted nonreciprocal 
trade preferences to African, Caribbean, 
and Pacifi c (ACP) countries. This policy 
did not comply with the WTO principle of 
most-favored-nation treatment, but got a 
temporary waiver that expired in Decem-
ber 2007. The economic partnership agree-
ments (EPAs) between the EU and the ACP 
countries are a new approach to promot-
ing trade and achieving more general 
development goals at the same time.

In 2003 the EU started negotiating EPAs 

with six self-defi ned ACP regions: the 
Caribbean (CARIFORUM), Central Africa 
(CEMAC), Southeast Africa (ESA), West 
Africa (ECOWAS), Southern Africa (SADC), 
and the Pacifi c. 

At the core of the EPAs are regional 

trade agreements between the EU and 
each of the six regions. The export struc-
ture from these regions to the EU is het-
erogeneous, often refl ecting dependency 
on just a few products. But the EPAs are 
broader in scope. They will extend 100 
percent duty-free and quota-free market 
access into the EU from each region (with 
simplifi ed EU rules of origin) while permit-
ting ACP countries to open their markets 
to a lesser extent (on average 80 percent 
within 15 years).

The goal is ambitious. The EPAs give 
incentives to ACP countries to increase 
regional trade and cooperation, unlike 
the previous arrangements that favored 
a hub-and-spoke structure, discourag-
ing interaction with neighbors. And 
while the previous trade preferences 
were determined unilaterally by the EU, 
the EPAs are jointly negotiated. Under-
standably, some countries are unwilling 
to cooperate on issues in which they 
might lose. But the EU can provide 
incentives—like aid—to help overcome 
such diff erences.

Experience shows, however, that 

(North-South) trade liberalization alone 
does not promote economic develop-
ment. So the EPAs try to improve the 
coherence between trade and devel-
opment. Besides trade in goods, the 
EPAs include trade in services as well as 
investment, public procurement, and 
competition law. Although the agree-
ments on trade of goods and services 
are about mutual—though asymmet-
ric—trade liberalization, the trade-
related issues follow another route. 
They aim to support regional integra-
tion by common regional regulation, 
harmonization, and implementation, 

thus improving political and economic 
stability and creating a better business 
and investment climate. 

One of the most diffi  cult issues is the 
expected loss in tariff  revenues, which 
are, on average, about 2 percent of gross 
domestic product (GDP) for Sub-Saharan 
countries. But for some, the loss can be 4 
to 6 percent of GDP, a sizable fraction of 
the public purse. A phased reduction in 
tariff s is designed to mitigate big declines 
in government revenues. Over the long 
term, the lost tariff  revenues need to be 
replaced through reforms of domestic tax 
and tax administration. A more radical 
approach would be for the EU to provide 
budget support to the most aff ected 
countries over a predetermined transition 
period.

Another issue involves complicated 

rules of origin that need to be simplifi ed 
and liberalized. Technical assistance is 
also needed to enable developing coun-
tries to fulfi ll EU standards and stimulate 
a supply response to enhanced market 
access. “Aid-for-trade” programs provide 
resources for such eff orts.

Contributed by Sebastian Vollmer.

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   265
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   265

10/8/08   3:40:27 PM
10/8/08   3:40:27 PM

266 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

(cid:129)  Regional  infrastructure,  strategically 
linking  the  neighborhood  to  the  lead-
ing world markets, can reduce transport 
costs. 

(cid:129)  Coordinated incentives involving all the 
neighborhood’s stakeholders and donors 
from the leading world markets can pro-
mote  factor  mobility  and  converging 
living  standards  between  leading  and 
lagging countries in the neighborhood. 

Institutional cooperation
Behind-the-border  reforms.  Institutional 
cooperation—such as mutual recognition 
agreements on technical and business pro-
cedures,  adoption  of  international  stan-
dards,  and  macroeconomic  convergence 
frameworks—expands the size of regional 
markets,  supporting  scale  economies. 
Indeed, domestic and foreign ﬁ rms assess 
investment opportunities and related gov-
ernment policies and the business environ-
ment—such as property rights, regulation, 
taxes, ﬁ nance, infrastructure, corruption, 
and  macroeconomic  stability—as  part 
of  a  package  that  determines  a  country’s 
attractiveness  for  investment.18  Another 
part  is  the  quality  of  the  legal  system, 
which  increases  equity  investments  and 
ﬁ rm sizes.19 These effects spill over even to 
countries with better institutional endow-
ments  in  leading  world  markets.  The  less 

Table 9.1    Few regional agreements provide for full mobility of labor
Degree of mobility 
stipulated
Full labor mobility

Agreement
European Union, Agreement on the European Economic Area, 
European Free Trade Association, Australia–New Zealand 
Closer Economic Relations, Economic Community of West 
African States
Caribbean Community, North American Free Trade Agreement, 
Europe agreements, Group of Three, and Canada-Chile, U.S.-
Singapore, U.S.-Chile, Japan-Singapore Free Trade Agreements
ASEAN Free Trade Area, Euro-Med Association Agreements, 
New Zealand–Singapore Closer Economic Partnership, 
Southern Common Market agreement, and EU-Mexico, 
EU-Chile, MERCOSUR, U.S.-Jordan Free Trade agreements 
Asia Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation Forum, South Asian 
Association for Regional Cooperation, Central European 
Free Trade Agreement, and Common Market for Eastern and 
Southern Africa

Market access for certain 
groups

Based on GATS mode 4, 
with additional provisions 
or limitations

No effective provisions for 
labor mobility

Source: World Bank 2004a, updated by the WDR 2009 team.
Note: ASEAN = Association of Southeast Asian Nations; GATS = General Agreement on Trade in Services; 
MERCOSUR = Southern Common Market.

attractive the neighborhood of a country, 
the less attractive the individual country, 
particularly when its local market is tiny.

Now that tariff preferences have fallen, 
behind-the-border barriers are more impor-
tant determinants of the pattern of trade. 
And by aligning domestic and international 
standards and institutions, a neighborhood 
can  improve  its  attractiveness  for  foreign 
direct  investment  (FDI)  and  increase  its 
opportunities for trade, particularly impor-
tant given the need to connect to regional 
and global production networks and mar-
kets. For instance, the crisis facing the ﬁ sh-
processing  sector  in  Kenya  in  the  1990s 
would have been less severe if raw and semi-
processed ﬁ sh providers in Kenya, Tanzania, 
and Uganda had all cooperated to adjust to 
EU  hygiene  standards.20  Many  countries 
in Sub-Saharan Africa are now aiming for 
such cooperation.21

At-the-border policies. Facilitating the 
ﬂ ow  of  capital,  labor,  and  intermediate 
inputs  is  a  precondition  for  cross-border 
production networks. The WTO provides 
a  framework  for  such  liberalization  that 
permits  the  scope  of  agreements  to  vary. 
Almost all new regional trade agreements 
include provisions on service liberalization, 
but some of these services are embodied in 
people  and  require  corresponding  agree-
ment on labor mobility, on which there is 
little uniformity (see table 9.1).22 Movement 
of labor raises economic and political con-
cerns that appear to be far higher than for 
traded goods or investments, so few agree-
ments provide the kind of mobility required 
for countries and people to beneﬁ t fully.

Financial  and  monetary  cooperation 
improves  capital  mobility  and  increases  a 
region’s attractiveness to FDI, especially for 
small  countries.23  Indeed,  small  ﬁ nancial 
markets tend to be less competitive and less 
efﬁ cient because they cannot exploit the sub-
stantial economies of scale in ﬁ nancial mar-
kets. Some market segments may be missing, 
and small markets are less able to diversify 
investments  and  operational  risks.  The 
regulatory structure tends to be more costly 
and of lower quality in small markets, and 
ancillary services such as credit information 
are more difﬁ cult to maintain. Regional and 
global trade in ﬁ nancial services is the best 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   266
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   266

10/8/08   3:40:27 PM
10/8/08   3:40:27 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

267

way to cope with being small—by opening 
national markets to foreign ﬁ nancial inter-
mediaries,  by  fully  or  partially  integrat-
ing  with  a  regional  ﬁ nancial  system,  and 
by  gradually  opening  national  markets  to 
international capital ﬂ ows. The beneﬁ ts of 
regional ﬁ nancial integration increase as a 
group  of  countries  moves  toward  a  single 
currency, a single central bank, and a single 
licensing and regulatory system for ﬁ nancial 
services ﬁ rms.24 But such integration also 
reduces the policy ﬂ exibility in responding 
to shocks.

Efforts  beyond  borders.  Developing 
countries,  particularly  the  landlocked, 
are  hurt  by  high  transport  costs  due  to 
expensive  and  unreliable  freight  services. 
They have overregulated transport sectors, 
inefﬁ cient  logistics  services,  oligopolistic 
freight  forwarders,  as  well  as  roadblocks 
and demands for bribes along international 
corridors.25 Each day a product is delayed 
before being shipped is estimated to trans-
late into an increase in the distance to its 
trading partners by 70 kilometers, reduc-
ing its trade volume by 1 percent.26 Land-
locked countries, in particular, would enjoy 
greater exports if their neighbors improved 
the quality of their transport logistics and 
customs procedures: it is estimated that a 
one standard deviation improvement in a 
landlocked country’s logistics together with 
one standard deviation improvement in its 
neighbors’  logistics  would  raise  the  land-
locked country’s exports by 74 percent.27

Beyond-the-border institutional reforms 
facilitating trade and transport in a neigh-
borhood can greatly increase the efﬁ ciency 
and  reliability  of  logistics  chains.  Central 
Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, whose inter-
national competitiveness is seriously affected 
by high transport costs, are now exploring 
corridor approaches that have worked well 
elsewhere, as in Southeastern Europe.28

In  1998  six  countries  asked  for  World 
Bank support in designing a regional pro-
gram of trade and transport facilitation in 
Southeast Europe. By 2004 eight countries 
were involved: Albania, Bosnia and Herze-
govina, Bulgaria, Croatia, FYR Macedonia, 
Moldova, Romania, and Serbia and Mon-
tenegro.  The  initiative  reduces  transport 
costs, ﬁ ghts corruption, and helps customs 

administrations gradually align their pro-
cedures with EU standards. The goals are to 
reduce the processing time for traders and 
transporters, reduce facilitation payments, 
reduce corruption related to international 
transport and trade, and improve the effec-
tiveness  of  controls  and  antismuggling 
efforts.  The  results  provide  an  encourag-
ing precedent for replicating and scaling up 
regional trade elsewhere.

Regional infrastructure
Regional transport infrastructure reduces 
the  economic  distance  between  trading 
partners,  both  within  the  neighborhood 
and between the neighborhood and leading 
world markets. Electricity, water, telephone 
lines, and Internet access all raise produc-
tivity but are severely inadequate in many 
developing  regions  (see  table  9.2).  Many 
countries  could  beneﬁ t  by  coordinating 
and  cooperating  in  infrastructure  provi-
sion.  Hydropower  development  launched 
in 1997 by Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal 
lowered costs and improved access, reliabil-
ity, and quality of electricity supply.29 The 
East Caribbean telecommunications proj-
ect, implemented in 1998, increased access 
to  telecom  services,  reduced  prices,  and 
increased employment opportunities.

Table 9.2    Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and the Middle East and North Africa are most 
affected by unreliable infrastructure, East Asia the least

World regions

ECA
9.3

LAC
32.9

MNA
53.7

SAR
56.3

SSA
43.8

OECD
9.7

14.0

17.8

46.1

121.5

56.4

3.1

7.5

13.4

56.7

3.6

14.5

45.1

40.9

4.2

41.7

49.9

34.2

5.6

12.0

66.3

29.2

5.7

37.2

58.4

20.4

1.5

2.3

0.3

9.0

80.2

EAP
19.4

9.3

2.5

3.5

15.8

23.7

Delay in obtaining an 
electrical connection (days)
Number of electrical 
outages (days)
Value lost due to electrical 
outages (% of sales)
Number of water supply 
failures (days)
Delay in obtaining a mainline 
telephone connection (days)
Firms using the Web in 
interaction with clients/
suppliers (%)

Source: World Bank ICA database.
Note: EAP = East Asia and the Paciﬁ c; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; 
MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia Region; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa; OECD = 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   267
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   267

10/8/08   3:40:27 PM
10/8/08   3:40:27 PM

268 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Regional infrastructure is an important 
part  of  regional  integration,  but  it  often 
requires considerable outside ﬁ nancial sup-
port because the upfront costs can be high. 
Cross-border  project  preparation  is  com-
plex, and individual countries may not have 
local capacity to conceptualize the technical 
design and to build a consensus.30 And the 
legal and regulatory framework to facilitate 
the provision of cross-border infrastructure 
is often lacking. All these constraints can 
prevent promising regional infrastructure 
projects from getting to the bankable stage.
Three types of regional infrastructure and 
related services enhance scale economies, fac-
tor mobility, and trade between countries.

Productivity-enhancing regional infra-
structure. Power, mobile phones, Internet 
connectivity, and major trunk roads can all 
generate revenue through fees. The produc-
tivity  increases  from  these  infrastructure 
services  translate  into  a  high  willingness 
to pay. Private ﬁ rms will provide regional 
infrastructure  when  it  is  proﬁ table—as 
with the South Atlantic 3 (SAT3) marine 
cable connecting West Africa to the global 
ﬁ ber optic network, or the Regional African 
Satellite  Communications  Organization 
(RASCOM)  public-private  partnership  to 
provide satellite telecommunications cov-
erage in Africa. Regional cooperation can 
provide  a  sound  regulatory  framework 
that,  for  example,  permits  free  access  of 

neighboring  countries  to  the  backbone 
infrastructure and free entry by ﬁ rms into 
national markets. But the rapid spread of 
mobile phone coverage in Africa still leaves 
out many areas (see map 9.1).

Mobility-enhancing regional infrastruc-
ture. Cooperation in higher education and 
training can not only increase the endow-
ment  of  skilled  workers  but  also  enhance 
labor  mobility  as  students  from  different 
countries establish cross-country networks.31 
French cooperation and the EU Commission 
sponsor a network of three statistical schools 
in  Abidjan  (Ecole  Nationale  Supérieure 
de  Statistique  et  d’Economie  Appliquée, 
ENSEA), Dakar (Ecole Nationale d’Economie 
Appliqué,  ENEA),  and  Yaoundé  (Institut 
Sous-regional  de  Statistique  et  d’Economie 
Appliqué, ISSEA), training highly qualiﬁ ed 
statisticians  for  French-speaking  African 
private and public enterprises.32 Recogniz-
ing the importance of mobility-enhancing 
regional infrastructures, a high-level panel 
of the African Development Bank has pro-
posed centers of excellence in research, ter-
tiary education, and vocational training in 
collaboration with the private sector.33

Trade-enhancing  regional  infrastruc-
ture. Good transport infrastructure reduces 
transport  costs,  which  in  turn  increases 
trade ﬂ ows.34 Some observers have argued 
that there is little potential for intraregional 
trade  within  developing  neighborhoods 

Map 9.1    Mobile phone coverage has spread rapidly in Africa
Global System for Mobile communications network coverage

January 1999

Source: Buys and others 2008.

March 2002

September 2006

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   268
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   268

10/8/08   3:40:27 PM
10/8/08   3:40:27 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

269

because the small size of economies will not 
create signiﬁ cant trade ﬂ ows.35 If so, improv-
ing the quality of regional roads would have 
no impact on intraregional trade. But recent 
studies suggest otherwise.

Trade models show that regional invest-
ments  to  pave  all  the  unpaved  interstate 
roads would increase the intraregional trade 
of West African countries threefold—and 
boost the region’s trade with the rest of the 
world.36 Upgrading the main highway net-
work in Sub-Saharan Africa could expand 
overland trade by about $250 billion over 15 
years, with major beneﬁ ts for the rural poor, 
while requiring about $20 billion for initial 
upgrades and $1 billion annually for main-
tenance.37  In  Central  Asia  road  upgrades 
could increase trade by half, exceeding the 
expected  gains  from  tariff  reductions  or 
trade facilitation programs of comparable 
scope. Total intraregional trade in Eastern 
Europe and Central Asia could be increased 
30 percent by upgrading roads in just Alba-
nia, Hungary, and Romania.38

Coordinated incentives
Coordinated incentives can address market 
failures and disputes between countries in a 
regional association. The Central American 
Common Market, created in 1960 by El Sal-
vador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua, 
faced periodic complaints about redistribut-
ing  beneﬁ ts  to  Honduras  and  Nicaragua. 
The agreement collapsed in 1969 following 
conﬂ ict between El Salvador and Honduras. 
Some  studies  suggest  that  the  underlying 

reason for the collapse was that El Salvador 
gained much more from regional coopera-
tion because of its better infrastructure.39 In 
1977 the East African Community of Kenya, 
Tanzania, and Uganda also collapsed after 
disagreements over the beneﬁ ts that would 
be received from common regional services 
such as airline, harbors, and telecommunica-
tions—as well as over ideological differenc-
es.40 Sound compensation mechanisms and 
better  communication  about  longer-term 
gains for all participants can reduce the risk 
of failure of such initiatives.41

Consider a taxonomy that incorporates 
the  three  essential  properties  of  public 
goods:  nonrivalry,  nonexcludability,  and 
aggregated contributions (see table 9.3).42 
(cid:129)  Nonrivalry implies that several groups or 
individuals can consume the good with-
out diminishing its value. Clean air and 
water are common examples. 

(cid:129)  Nonexcludability means that no one can 
be prevented from consuming the good. 
There is an incentive to leave the cost of 
provision to a third party. 

(cid:129)  Aggregated contributions relate to resource 
pooling  to  ﬁ nance  public  goods.  Com-
monly,  the  willingness  to  contribute 
decays over time. 

Each of these properties requires a coordi-
nated response or some mechanism for equi-
tably matching beneﬁ ts and costs, or else the 
good  will  be  underprovided.  The  quantity 
and quality of the public good both depend 
on member  contributions. In some instances, 

Table 9.3    Regional “club goods” can easily be provided because costless exclusion is possible 
Regional public goods, types, and examples

Impact of aggregated contributions 
Each contribution has the same impact on 
the quality and quantity
Countries more interested in the good can 
contribute more
Contribution of weakest member 
determines the quantity and quality 
Contributions of weaker members 
determines the quantity and quality 
Contribution of leading countries 
determines the quantity and quality 
Contribution of strongest member 
determines the quantity and quality

Pure public goods (nonrival, 
nonexcludable)
A clean lake

Impure public goods

Goods for which exclusion is easy
Transnational park

Shared public services
Preserving the rain forest

Curbing the spread of HIV/AIDS

Power grid

Implementing international ﬁ nancial 
standards
Forestalling the spread of pests

Airport hub-spoke network

Transport infrastructure

Eradication of a disease

Satellite launch facility

Discovering an effective treatment

Biohazard facility

Eliminating transnational 
terrorist threats
Preventing and mitigating 
natural disasters
Providing Internet 
connectivity
Regional peacekeeping

Agricultural research and 
bioprospecting

Sources: Sandler 2002, adapted by the WDR 2009 team.

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   269
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   269

10/8/08   3:40:29 PM
10/8/08   3:40:29 PM

270 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

each member is equally important. In oth-
ers, the public good depends on the weakest 
or strongest member, or some combination. 
This taxonomy suggests that the nature of 
regional  cooperation  varies  depending  on 
the goal. 

When the regional public good is sensi-
tive to the performance of the weaker mem-
bers, as in a hub-and-spoke airport network, 
the challenge for the other members is to 
raise the performance of the weaker links 
to an acceptable standard. This can be done 
through cross-country subsidies, as in the 
EU  structural  funds.  In  poor  neighbor-
hoods, foreign aid may be the only feasible 
way to ensure the provision of such public 
goods.  If  the  good  depends  on  the  best-
performing member of the neighborhood, 
such as targeted agricultural research, the 
weaker members may be asked to contrib-
ute to stronger members, or foreign assis-
tance can facilitate its provision.43

Trust is especially important in regional 
cooperation. For the waters of the Nile, the 
Arab  Republic  of  Egypt  and  Sudan,  two 
countries  that  were  culturally  and  politi-
cally  closer,  built  the  Aswan  High  Dam 
near their common border instead of coop-
erating with Ethiopia, where a dam might 
have been more efﬁ cient for the electricity 
and  water  needs  of  all  three  countries.44 
International organizations can help build 
trust,  as  in  the  Aral  Sea  Basin  rehabilita-
tion. Another example is the “development 
diplomacy” used to resolve the Indus River 
Basin dispute between India and Pakistan, 
with the World Bank facilitating coopera-
tion. This diplomacy was recognized by the 
then–World Bank President Eugene Black 
as “the most important thing the Bank has 
ever done, by far.”45

Specific  regional  agreements  can  get 
things  started,  but  they  can  also  lead  to 
multiple  and  at  times  overlapping  agree-
ments,  weakening  coordination.  Many 
developing regions need to rationalize their 
regional economic communities and clar-
ify relations with river basin or power pool 
organizations.46  Broader  regional  agree-
ments can foster trust, provide an institu-
tional  framework  for  compensation  that 
facilitates bargaining, and allow for more 
effective sanctions.47 The Southern African 

Development  Community  (SADC),  for 
instance,  promoted  the  Southern  Africa 
Power  Pool  to  take  advantage  of  the  dis-
tribution  of  power  sources  in  the  region. 
The Central American Electricity Connec-
tion System was initiated in 2005 under the 
umbrella  of  the  Central  American  Com-
mon  Market  (CACM).  So  an  umbrella 
agreement can spawn smaller agreements, 
or  small  agreements  can  be  consolidated 
into  umbrella  agreements.  The  path  is  a 
tactical choice.

In  the  same  vein,  there  is  a  choice 
between  starting  with  aggregate  political 
agreements, as in the EU enlargement, or 
starting with economic ties, as in East Asia, 
with  ASEAN+3.  Both  approaches  have 
seen success and failure. The United Arab 
Republic joining Egypt and Syria in 1958 
foundered  in  part  because  of  its  limited 
economic advantages. The First East Afri-
can Community started in 1967 as an eco-
nomic grouping, but collapsed 10 years later 
because of political divisions between the 
major countries. It has since been revived, 
but  the  forces  for  economic  and  political 
union remain divided.

The geography of regional integration
Looking  at  the  world’s  neighborhoods 
through the lens of market access highlights 
the role of the three major world markets: 
Europe,  North  America,  and  Northeast 
Asia,  rich  neighborhoods  where  most  of 
the world GDP is clustered (see chapter 3). 
Proximity to these markets, the thickness 
of borders, and the fragmentation of world 
regions reveal the potential market access 
of all countries (see map 9.2).48 

Adding up the country scores for poten-
tial  market  access  produces  three  broad 
types of developing regions:

(cid:129)  Type 1 countries are in regions close to large 
world markets, where the market access 
score is dominated by proximity to the 
densest areas in the world. They include 
those on the periphery of the two larg-
est markets: North America and Western 
Europe.  The  neighborhoods  are  Cen-
tral America and the Caribbean, Eastern 
Europe, and the Middle East and North 
Africa. 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   270
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   270

10/8/08   3:40:29 PM
10/8/08   3:40:29 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

271

Map 9.2    Density, distance, and division combine to determine access to markets 
Real market access, relative to the United States in 2003

Real market
access relative to the
United States, 2003

< 0.040
0.040–0.090
0.091–0.240
0.241–0.910
> 0.910
No data

Source: Mayer 2008 for this Report.
Note: To compute potential market access: Each country is assigned a score for the size of its own market (real GDP) and the size of international markets with which it can trade. 
This is computed by weighting the GDP of other countries by the inverse of a measure that combines physical distance, transport costs, and barriers to trade to show how difficult 
it is to access these markets.  The measure, which is expressed relative to the market access of the United States, essentially combines all three spatial dimensions of density, 
distance, and division into a composite of potential market access. This map is a complement to the map showing foreign market access in box 6.6.

 

    For these countries, the major prob-
lem is division between themselves and 
major  markets.  The  main  instruments 
for integration will be institutional: for-
mal  regional  trade  agreements,  more 
limited  sector-speciﬁ c  agreements  (on 
labor mobility or natural resource-shar-
ing),  and  harmonization  of  standards 
and regulations—all implemented with 
or without formal regional bodies.

(cid:129)  Type  2  countries  are  in  regions  with  big 
neighbors far from world markets. They 
include the neighborhoods of the devel-
oping  world’s  giants—Brazil,  China, 
India, and South Africa. Although these 
are potentially large markets, growth has 
not yet been sustained long enough and 
many  domestic  distortions  remain.49 
Integration  with  them  runs  a  risk—to 
different degrees in different parts of the 
world—of exposing a neighbor to vola-
tility and of importing inefﬁ ciency from 
the large neighbors’ domestic structures. 
But  because  their  market  potential  is 
attractive to enterprises in Europe and 

 

North America, they can serve as a con-
duit to accessing markets everywhere. In 
some regions, like those in South Asia, 
political  considerations  also  preclude 
economic integration of all the countries 
in the neighborhood. 
    These  countries  have  moderate 
market access potential (see map 9.3). 
Their  distance  from  major  markets 
holds down their overall score, but the 
presence  of  large  developing  country 
neighbors can offset this score to some 
degree. Brazil, China, Nigeria, the Rus-
sian Federation, and South Africa are 
examples of large emerging economies 
that  add  considerably  to  the  market 
access scores of their immediate neigh-
bors. For countries in these neighbor-
hoods,  division  is  compounded  by 
distance.  Appropriate  instruments 
include  institutional  and  infrastruc-
ture development, including regionally 
shared  utilities,  transport  corridors 
and hubs, and a range of other regional 
public goods.

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   271
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   271

10/8/08   3:40:29 PM
10/8/08   3:40:29 PM

272 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Map 9.3    Potential access to major world markets distinguishes the developing world’s regions

Regions with

High-income countries
Countries close to world markets
Large countries far from world markets
Small countries far from world markets

Source: WDR 2009 team.

(cid:129)  Type 3 countries are in regions far from 
world  markets,  without  a  big  neighbor. 
They  make  up  the  “bottom  billion” 
described  in  Collier  (2007)  and  con-
sist of Central Africa, Central Asia and 
Caucasus, East Africa, the small Paciﬁ c 
Islands, and West Africa. Many of these 
countries  are  falling  behind  because 
they are trapped in conﬂ ict, suffer from 
a natural resource curse, are landlocked 
with  bad  neighbors,  or  are  small  with 
bad governance. 
    A  range  of  countries,  mostly  small, 
have low market access potential. Hav-
ing to contend with being far from major 
markets,  these  countries  face  division, 
distance, and low economic density. In 
addition to institutional and infrastruc-
ture instruments, they need coordinated 
incentives for regional integration. The 
incentives  include  transfers  from  cus-
toms unions and other revenue sources, 
direct  aid,  and  preferential  market 
access, such as relaxed rules of origin.

 

All three types of countries have much 
lower  market  access  potential  than  rich 
countries, implying considerable potential 
for more effective economic integration. But 
their persistent divisions from major world 

markets pose barriers to the beneﬁ cial ﬂ ows 
of people, goods, capital, and ideas. 

For each of these country types, the eco-
nomic integration strategies and priorities 
will differ (see table 9.4). As the potential 
for market access becomes lower, the com-
plexity of the integration problem becomes 
greater, and a broader range of instruments 
is  required  to  manage  integration  effec-
tively. For each dimension of the integra-
tion  challenge,  this  chapter  proposes  an 
instrument for integration—“an I for a D.”
Some  countries  do  not  ﬁ t  neatly  into 
any of these three types, such as Chile and 
Russia. Chile is a relatively small country 
far from major markets. But it has grown 
by  exporting  to  world  markets  without 
signiﬁ cant  regional  integration.  Russia  is 
another special case because of its peculiar 
economic geography that spans eleven time 
zones, connected to Europe at its most pop-
ulated  and  most  developed  western  part, 
and connected with Northeast Asia through 
the  inhospitable  and  sparsely  populated 
Siberia.50 One part of Russia, and some of 
the former Soviet republics with political 
and economic ties, could be considered a 
neighborhood with a big country far from 
world markets. But given that its economic 
center is in the western part, Russia is more 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   272
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   272

10/8/08   3:40:30 PM
10/8/08   3:40:30 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

273

Table 9.4    An instrument per dimension—a simple framework for regional integration

Close to world markets
Central America and Caribbean, 
North Africa, Middle East

With big countries far from world markets
South America, Southern Africa, East Asia, 
South Asia

Region or neighborhood

International division (1-D)

Regional division, economic distance (2-D)

Integration with large nearby 
markets

Regional integration
Regional and global connectivity

Agreements on trade and factor 
mobility within region and with 
large markets nearby

Agreements on trade and factor mobility 
within region and with large markets 
nearby 
Regional provision of public goods
Transport corridors connecting to large 
regional economy
Regional power grids, telecoms, water 
management

Small countries far from world markets
Central Africa, East Africa, West Africa, 
Central Asia and Caucasus, small Paciﬁ c 
Islands
International division, economic distance, 
low density (3-D)
Regional integration
Regional and global connectivity
Regional compensation mechanisms

Agreements on trade and factor mobility 
within region 
Shared facilities (research, central banks, 
regulatory bodies)
Hub-and-spoke infrastructure
Regional power grids, telecoms, water 
management

Subsidized human development 
investments in lagging countries and areas 
Productive investments in leading 
countries and areas 
Preferential market access

World neighborhoods

Dimensions of the regional 
integration challenge
What policy instruments 
should facilitate

Priority instruments
Institutions

Infrastructure

Incentives

Source: WDR 2009 team.

appropriately  considered  close  to  world 
markets. 

Russia also highlights the point that the 
concept of market potential is not country-
wide but more spatially speciﬁ c. It is con-
venient  to  measure  it  as  a  single  number 
for all localities within a country, but many 
developing  economies  have  areas  where 
markets in other countries are potentially 
more  accessible  than  their  own  domestic 
markets because of poor local infrastruc-
ture. Northern areas of Pakistan are closer 
to Afghanistan and western China than to 
the major markets in Karachi and Lahore. 
Medan in Indonesia is closer to Penang in 
Malaysia than it is to its own capital city. 
The principles of economic integration in 
the  real  world  and  the  use  of  the  instru-
ments can be applied as readily at the sub-
national  level  as  at  the  country  level  (see 
table 9.4).

The framework in action
What  concrete  steps  can  countries  take 
toward  regional  integration  to  build  bet-
ter  neighborhoods  and  increase  global 
competitiveness? 

Integration options for countries close 
to world markets
Market  access  is  essential  for  growth, 
and proximity is an asset for just-in-time 
production.  Many  examples  in  car  man-
ufacturing  and  in  segments  of  the  gar-
ment  industry  demand  short-term  repeat 
orders. Perishable goods (fresh fruits and 
vegetables)  are  easier  to  export  to  nearby 
markets. Tradable services—such as mar-
keting, research, and complex information 
technology  tasks—beneﬁ t  from  frequent 
face-to-face interaction, easier if the client 
is nearby. Countries close to world markets 
thus  have  an  intrinsic  advantage  in  con-
necting  to  markets,  suppliers,  and  ideas. 
Conversely, for the wealthy world regions—
Europe,  North  America,  and  Northeast 
Asia—neighboring  developing  regions 
expand  their  growth  potential  as  domes-
tic  markets  mature,  while  also  delivering 
 lower-cost platforms for their ﬁ rms. There 
are  mutual  gains  to  regional  cooperation 
and  ongoing  processes  to  further  deepen 
integration.

The  Euro-Mediterranean  Forum  is  a 
long-standing  coordination  mechanism 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   273
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   273

10/8/08   3:40:30 PM
10/8/08   3:40:30 PM

274 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

between  Europe,  the  Middle  East,  and 
North  Africa.  The  Caribbean  Basin  has 
beneﬁ ted from privileged access to the U.S. 
market through various preferential trade 
schemes,  including  NAFTA,  the  Carib-
bean Basin Initiative, and the Dominican 
 Republic–Central  America  Free  Trade 
Agreement  (DR-CAFTA).  China,  Japan, 
and the Republic of Korea are intensifying 
their relations with Southeast Asian coun-
tries through the ASEAN+3 initiative. The 
long-term beneﬁ ts are clear to all sides, but 
the short-term risks and adjustment costs 
have to be managed. 

Institutional reform. The key for coun-
tries close to world markets is to undertake 
institutional reforms and improve domes-
tic governance to fully integrate with the 
large  markets  nearby.  Free  trade  alone 
does not bring the full beneﬁ ts of integra-
tion. Although Turkey has had a free trade 
agreement  with  the  EU  for  many  years, 
it  did  not  receive  signiﬁ cant  FDI  until  it 
embarked on major institutional reforms 
associated  with  membership  talks.  The 
policies  and  governance  standards  in 
countries  close  to  large  world  markets 
have to converge with those in the nearby 
high-income region. Indeed, multinational 
ﬁ rms are more likely to locate in a coun-
try if it has both institutional and physical 
connections to a larger market. The large 
market nearby also has a strong incentive 
to  foster  sound  policy  and  governance 
frameworks  in  nearby  small  markets  to 
ensure  the  stability  of  its  neighborhood. 
These two factors make the coordination 
of national policies in neighborhoods close 
to large world markets both desirable and 
feasible.  The  prospect  of  joining  the  EU 
has accelerated the pace of reform in Cen-
tral  Europe.  And  the  prospect  of  better 
access to the U.S. market triggered policy 
reforms  in  Mexico  long  before  NAFTA 
took effect.51

Institutional  reforms  include  moving 
to  a  sound  macroeconomic  environment 
that contains inﬂ ation and an efﬁ cient ﬁ s-
cal system that does not rely on distorted 
trade  policies  for  budget  revenues.  They 
also  include  establishing  a  sound  institu-
tional  framework  that  limits  corruption 
and improves governance. The Stabilization 

and  Association  Agreements  between  the 
EU and the Balkans specify the legal and 
regulatory reforms to be undertaken before 
joining  the  EU.  The  Balkans  also  have 
signed  an  intraregional  free  trade  agree-
ment,  the  Central  European  Free  Trade 
Agreement (CEFTA), to replace the patch-
work  of  32  bilateral  agreements  formerly 
governing  their  intraregional  trade.  The 
new agreement simpliﬁ es and harmonizes 
rules of origin and extends the trade and 
transport  facilitation  initiative  launched 
in 2000. The region has also established a 
common power market and signed an open 
sky agreement with the EU that could boost 
tourism.

The  Balkan  region  is  close  enough  to 
the  EU  to  permit  tight  integration  of  its 
companies  into  pan-European  produc-
tion networks. Governments can facilitate 
regional  production  chains  linking  their 
supply capacity to that of the EU by signing 
mutual  recognition  agreements,  confor-
mity assessments, and other trade-related 
coordination initiatives. Besides trade pro-
motion,  government  policies  can  attract 
direct  investment  by  multinationals  to 
help countries move from agriculture and 
basic manufacturing to higher technology 
production. In the 1990s El Salvador and 
Costa Rica diversiﬁ ed their exports from 
traditional products (coffee for El Salvador 
and bananas for Costa Rica) by develop-
ing export processing zones, tax incentives, 
and FDI promotion in high-tech activities. 
They  more  than  doubled  their  exports 
in  a  decade.  In  Costa  Rica  and  Mexico, 
human capital and FDI have jointly stimu-
lated knowledge-intensive manufacturing 
activities.52

Small  countries  usually  lack  the  eco-
nomic  and  political  weight  to  bargain 
with wealthier regions. But the Caribbean 
Regional  Negotiating  Machinery,  created 
in  1997,  has  the  goal  of  formulating  and 
implementing a joint Caribbean negotiat-
ing strategy in international trade forums.53 
The countries now have technical special-
ists to deal with each area of negotiations 
in the WTO. The machinery also facilitates 
the  transition  of  Caribbean  Community 
(CARICOM)  countries  toward  a  single 
market, with a common external tariff as 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   274
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   274

10/8/08   3:40:31 PM
10/8/08   3:40:31 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

275

the basis for a common trade policy. And it 
has been involved in the negotiations of the 
EPA between the EU and CARICOM. 

To enter the world market for tradable 
accounting  and  back-office  functions, 
countries need an efﬁ cient telecommuni-
cation system and a highly educated work-
force. The small countries of the Caribbean 
region  have  pooled  resources  to  establish 
the  Eastern  Caribbean  Telecommunica-
tions  Authority  (ECTEL)  and  the  Carib-
bean  Knowledge  and  Learning  Network 
(CKLN).

Contrast that with the lack of coordina-
tion in the Middle East and North Africa. 
The  regional  economy  is  based  mainly 
on oil revenue and cannot create enough 
jobs  for  the  4.2  million  people  added  to 
the labor force every year.54 Governments 
in  the  region  have  started  the  transition 
to  manufacturing  and  services,  but  the 
region’s  investment  climate  is  still  weak. 
The  Pan-Arab  Free  Trade  Area  (PAFTA) 
and the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) have 
had little impact on export performance. 
The declining imports from the rest of the 
world accompanying the increase in intra-
PAFTA  and  intra-AMU  exports  suggest 
that the agreements have been more trade 
diverting than trade creating.55 The region 
could take greater advantage of its prox-
imity to European markets by increasing 
exports  of  high-value  agricultural  prod-
ucts,  especially  in  the  winter.  But  agri-
cultural  expansion  will  put  pressure  on 
scarce water resources, so regional agree-
ments for water management and use are 
essential.56

Integration options for countries with big 
neighbors but distant from world markets
A  large  home  market  gives  countries  an 
advantage  in  attracting  industrial  activi-
ties. If this market is also well connected 
to  world  markets,  this  advantage  is  rein-
forced. But the second group of countries 
is far from world markets. South America 
is  farther  than  Central  America  and  the 
Caribbean from the U.S. market and even 
farther from the EU and Northeast Asian 
markets. South Asia is far from Northeast 
Asia. Southern Africa is far from all three 
large  world  markets.  Countries  in  these 

distant  regions  should  try  to  bridge  the 
gap with world markets by reducing border 
barriers,  but  they  suffer  from  late-mover 
disadvantages in major markets. They can 
complement their global integration with 
efforts to build a stronger regional market 
centered on a large neighbor. 

The competitive advantage of neighbor-
hoods with big countries is size: large local 
markets,  abundant  human  capital,  and 
substantial remittances. Economic activi-
ties  generating  scale  economies—such  as 
petroleum  and  coal  products,  reﬁ neries, 
pharmaceuticals,  electric  and  electronic 
machinery,  iron  and  steel,  instruments, 
and nonelectrical machinery—beneﬁ t from 
being  concentrated  in  leading  countries 
that have strong agglomeration economies 
and  better  market  access.57  Because  most 
investment in these sectors will go to those 
countries, usually the largest in the region, 
this creates tensions. The challenges are to 
balance  political  and  economic  concerns 
between leading and lagging countries, to 
ensure spillovers of direct and indirect ben-
eﬁ ts to lagging countries, and to compete 
with neighborhoods close to world markets 
and  such  emerging  economic  powers  as 
China and Russia. 

Meeting these challenges of division and 
distance requires institutions to ensure pol-
icies  and  governance  that  promote  trade, 
factor  mobility,  and  regional  growth—
and infrastructure to connect lagging and 
leading countries, link regional economic 
centers, and favor regional production net-
works integrated with the global economy.
Institutional reform to improve regional 
integration. The provision of public goods 
within a region depends on each member 
to a differing degree according to the good 
(see table 9.3). Although regional coopera-
tion is sometimes seen as a process to be led 
by the strongest member economy, this is 
valid only for certain types of regional pub-
lic goods, perhaps peacekeeping, research, 
and specialized shared infrastructure, such 
as  biohazard  facilities  or  satellite  launch 
sites. For other types of goods, mainly net-
work related, institutional reforms depend 
on the contributions of the weaker mem-
bers  of  the  region.  In  these  cases,  some 
assistance to build the capabilities of weaker 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   275
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   275

10/8/08   3:40:31 PM
10/8/08   3:40:31 PM

276 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

member states can promote overall regional 
integration. 

Countries grow faster when other coun-
tries in their neighborhood are also grow-
ing, as several studies conﬁ rm.58 For small 
countries far from world markets but close 
to  a  large  developing  country,  their  best 
prospects often lie in growth in the domi-
nant  economy.59  Regional  growth  cen-
ters are one reason for regional economic 
groupings  and  for  regional  peer  surveil-
lance.  What  happens  in  one’s  neighbor-
hood, good or bad, is too important to one’s 
own development prospects to ignore. 

Economic advantage may not be the sole 
determinant of regional integration pros-
pects. Conﬂ ict in South Asia after the end of 
the British colonial rule in 1947 prevented 
the  neighborhood  from  taking  advantage 
of its market size, more than a ﬁ fth of the 
world’s people. It took four decades before 
trade volumes between India and Pakistan 
passed those of the early 1950s.60 A recent 
study  estimates  that  trade  between  India 
and  Pakistan  would  increase  by  405  per-
cent if the territorial and political disputes 
were resolved.61 In 2004 the two countries 
engaged  in  the  “Composite  Dialogue”  on 
peace and security issues, including terror-
ism and drug trafﬁ cking, conﬁ dence-build-
ing, economic and commercial cooperation, 
and friendly exchanges in various ﬁ elds. On 
a broader regional basis, the South Asian 
Association for Regional Cooperation is a 
forum to discuss development challenges, 
such as cooperation in energy production 
and water basin management. The burden 
is on India, the largest country by far in the 
neighborhood, to take the lead in promot-
ing the common agenda.62

Zimbabwe’s  political  instability  since 
1998 has dimmed growth prospects in the 
Southern African neighborhood. Attempts 
to mediate by the African Union and the 
SADC have brought limited results. South 
Africa, the largest country in the Southern 
Africa  Customs  Union,  has  a  large  inter-
est in a stable neighborhood. But the large 
rents from natural resources along regional 
transport corridors are realized even dur-
ing  conﬂ ict,  though  most  of  the  beneﬁ ts 
are  not  shared  widely.  So  economic  rea-
sons  may  be  unlikely  to  provide  enough 

incentives, and the growing political crisis 
poses  risks  to  the  effectiveness  of  deeper 
regional integration.

Investments  in  cross-country  infra-
structure to connect regional markets. In 
neighborhoods with big countries distant 
from world markets, the costs and beneﬁ ts 
of cross-country infrastructure can differ 
between  large  and  small  countries  in  the 
neighborhood.  Where  the  distribution  of 
beneﬁ ts differs from the proposed sharing 
of the costs, there may be underinvestment 
in  such  infrastructure.  One  example  is  a 
landlocked country such as Bolivia or Para-
guay that needs access to the coast to export 
its  products.  International  transit  agree-
ments  guarantee  this  right  to  landlocked 
countries,  but  since  they  are  not  always 
enforced,  support  from  the  international 
community, or from regional institutions, 
may be necessary. Another example is the 
potential for better infrastructure to link 
India’s  northeastern  lagging  regions  and 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, and Nepal. The South 
Asia  Subregional  Economic  Cooperation 
(SASEC)  initiative  of  the  Asian  Develop-
ment Bank suggests that such cross-border 
cooperation can be beneﬁ cial for all these 
countries.

Several  major  cross-border  infrastruc-
ture  projects  are  being  developed.  The 
Maputo  Development  Corridor  between 
South  Africa  and  Mozambique  was  initi-
ated  in  1995  to  rehabilitate  the  primary 
infrastructure  network  along  the  corridor 
(road, rail, port, and border posts), attract 
investment in the corridor’s catchment area, 
and provide employment opportunities for 
disadvantaged  populations  (see  map  9.4). 
Its structure, led by South Africa, promotes 
fast-track  design  and  implementation  of 
bankable  private  investment  projects  and 
public-private partnerships. But it risks fail-
ing to address the social service needs of local 
communities.63 Some ongoing evaluations of 
the corridor show that border-crossing costs 
and delays are common impediments, pos-
sibly diverting freight to domestic corridors. 
This suggests that more formal institutional 
cooperation  between  the  countries  could 
generate additional beneﬁ ts.

South  America  has  been  much  more 
ambitious  in  its  plans  with  the  Initiative 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   276
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   276

10/8/08   3:40:31 PM
10/8/08   3:40:31 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

277

Map 9.4    Building regional infrastructure in Southern Africa
The Maputo Development Corridor

AREA OF
MAP

Groblersdal

Marble Hall

Brits

Coal-based Power Station
2 transmission lines to 

Matola completed 

Pilgrims Rest

Lydenburg

Sabie

Joburg-Maputo Highway
PPP- BOT completed   

Numbe
Gate

Witrivier

Nelspruit

Waterval Boven

Machadodorp

Graskop

Hazyview

Joburg to Maputo

Railway line 

MOZAMBIQUE

Ressano
Garcia

Port of Matola/Maputo

Upgrades, PPP  

Komatipoort

Malelane

Moamba

Barberton

Maputo

Piggs Peak

Tshaneni

Matola

Namaacha

Tshwane
(Pretoria)

Johannesburg

Liquid Fuels & Petro-
chemicals: Sasol 

Vereeniging 

Belfast

Carolina

Hendrina

Middleburg

Witbank
Ogies

SOUTH AFRICA

Evander

Secunda

Bethal

Chrissiesmeer

Ermelo

Mbabane
Manzini

Mpaka

Al smelter 500ktpa
BHPB completed  

Pande-Secunda Gas line
PPP Sasol completed   

Standerton

Amsterdam

Piet Retief

SWAZILAND

Big Bend

Ponta do
Ouro

Port
Main roads

Main railroads
Existing gas line

Golela

Source: MINTEK 2007.

for Integration of Regional Infrastructure, 
launched in 2000 to promote the integra-
tion  and  modernization  of  the  12  coun-
tries’ physical infrastructure in the energy, 
telecommunications,  and  transport  sec-
tors,  with  the  goal  of  improving  global 
competitiveness. The initiative focuses on 
10 hubs of economic integration across the 
continent and on harmonizing regulatory 
frameworks. It has identiﬁ ed 40 megaproj-
ects  and  hundreds  of  smaller  infrastruc-
ture  improvement  projects  for  potential 
ﬁ nancing,  with  an  aggregate  cost  in  the 
tens of billions of dollars. Implementation 
has been slow, however.

Integration options for countries 
distant from world markets and with 
small neighbors
Central  Asia  has  the  highest  proportion 
of landlocked countries (see box 9.4) with 
many  common  problems  that  could  be 
more  effectively  tackled  through  better 
regional  cooperation.  The  small  Paciﬁ c 
Islands are the most geographically frag-
mented,  making  them  “sealocked,”  with 
limited accessibility to world markets (see 
box  9.5).  And  Africa  between  the  trop-
ics has the largest number of landlocked 
countries, many small in population and 

GDP,  most  among  the  world’s  poorest, 
and far too many prone to conﬂ ict. These 
neighborhoods face divisions and barriers 
to  trade  and  factor  mobility,  are  distant 
from major markets, and lack the density 
of  economic  production  to  beneﬁ t  from 
agglomeration economies. Collier (2007) 
identiﬁ es  their  populations  as  the  “bot-
tom billion.”

The challenge for countries in isolated 
neighborhoods is to ﬁ nd ways to integrate 
regionally  and  globally.  Their  geographic 
situation implies that the degree of integra-
tion rarely will be as high as in other coun-
tries,  so  the  prospects  for  manufactured 
trade  are  more  limited.  Conversely,  their 
isolation provides them with natural pro-
tection of their home markets. 

Many of these economies have minerals 
and other natural resources, such as water, 
that  can  best  be  exploited  on  a  regional 
basis.  While  there  is  evidence  of  growth 
spillover  from  resource-rich  countries  to 
their  neighbors  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,64 
regional  integration  is  the  key  to  getting 
resource-led growth going and to spread-
ing  beneﬁ ts  more  broadly.  These  coun-
tries face the triple challenges of division, 
distance,  and  density.  Addressing  them 
will  require  institutional  reform,  scaling 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   277
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   277

10/8/08   3:40:31 PM
10/8/08   3:40:31 PM

278 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 9.4    Integration in Central Asia

Central Asia has fi ve landlocked countries: 
Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. The coun-
tries vary in population, type of govern-
ment, and willingness to cooperate with 
each other and the rest of the world. But the 
region has established national identities 
and institutions, avoided violent confl icts, 
established the foundations for market-
based economies, and sustained an eco-
nomic recovery since the end of the 1990s.

Consider many regional institutions 
and initiatives. The Central Asia Coop-
eration Organization (CACO) comprises 
Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Russia, 
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan, 
which merged with EURASEC (Eurasian 
Economic Community) in 2005. The Cen-
tral Asia Regional Economic Cooperation 
Initiative (CAREC) comprises Azerbaijan, 
China, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, 
Mongolia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. The 
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) 
comprises China, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz 

Republic, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbeki-
stan. Then there are the Commonwealth 
of Independent States (CIS), the Collec-
tive Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), 
the Economic Cooperation Organization 
(ECO), and the Special Programme for the 
Economies of Central Asia (SPECA).

The sheer number of regional agree-
ments illustrate the problems that can 
arise from a disjointed regional approach. 
Regional initiatives in Central Asia can 
foster integration but add duplication and 
complexity to reform. The ongoing WTO 
accession for many of these countries 
could help, because the WTO has clear 
rules on regional trade agreements. Also 
needed are trade and transport facilitation 
initiatives and behind-the-border reforms 
to improve the countries’ attractiveness 
to FDI and bolster their global integration. 
(Countries with the highest cost of busi-
ness entry have lower imports, exports, 
and FDI infl ows.) Regional forums for busi-
ness communities could off er suggestions 

and feedback on the design and imple-
mentation of trade and related policies. 
The region loses an estimated 3 per-
cent of GDP annually because of poor 
water management. Agreements are also 
needed for oil and gas resources to reach 
international markets. Many environ-
mental problems remain as a legacy from 
the Soviet era, such as radioactivity from 
abandoned uranium mines and danger-
ous remnants of biological and nuclear 
tests. Regional organizations could be 
rationalized around these key themes of 
trade and transport facilitation, water, 
energy, and environment management. 
They could develop long-term plans for 
these issues, bringing civil society and 
academic institutions into the fray. The 
international community could facilitate 
the strengthening of institutions with 
clear mandates and targets.

Sources: Linn and Tiomkin 2006; Broadman 
2005; United Nations 2005a.

BOX 9.5    Integrating the small and distant Paciﬁ c Islands with world markets

Small island developing states face a 
great risk of marginalization in the global 
economy because of their small size, 
remoteness from large markets, and 
vulnerability to economic and natural 
shocks. And with their fragile ecosystems, 
they are highly vulnerable to domestic 
pollution and rising seas. Their share in 
global merchandise trade fell from 0.4 
percent of world exports of goods in 1980 
to 0.2 percent in 2003, while their share 
of global services trade remained at 0.7 
percent.

One eff ort to deal with the special 
problems of small islands is the South 

Pacifi c Regional Trade and Economic 
Cooperation Agreement (SPARTECA), a 
nonreciprocal trade agreement for which 
Australia and New Zealand off er duty-
free, unrestricted, or concessional access 
for almost all products originating from 
the countries of the Pacifi c Islands Forum. 
To qualify for preferential access, goods 
exported to Australia and New Zealand 
must meet the rules of origin set out in 
SPARTECA.

The textiles, clothing, and footwear 
industry has been a major benefi ciary. 
But Australia and New Zealand are plan-
ning to adopt free trade by 2010, ending 

this preferential access to their markets. 
Without signifi cant trade preferences, 
the Pacifi c Islands need other ways to 
integrate with their large neighbors. More 
radical approaches, including consid-
eration of greater labor mobility, could 
be required. Children in island families 
receiving remittances from overseas fam-
ily members show strong improvements 
in education and health outcomes, sug-
gesting labor mobility could be a power-
ful driver for longer-term development in 
these countries. 

Sources: UNCTAD 2002; SPARTECA 1996. 

up  infrastructure  investments,  and  tar-
geted  incentives  to  encourage  regional 
integration.

Identifying natural neighborhoods for 
institutional reform. Neighborhoods with 
small countries distant from world mar-
kets need to focus on speciﬁ c institutional 
needs that drive their cooperation. There 
is no shortage of international agreements. 

But  these  agreements  are  often  poorly 
implemented, their effectiveness tends to 
be low, and they overlap in responsibilities. 
The administrative costs of participating 
in such agreements are high in relation to 
the small beneﬁ ts, given the small size of 
the participating economies. The African 
Union has spotlighted the inefﬁ ciencies of 
13  or  14  overlapping  regional  economic 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   278
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   278

10/8/08   3:40:31 PM
10/8/08   3:40:31 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

279

communities  and  has  called  for  their 
rationalization.65 

Regional  integration  can  be  rooted  in 
the traditional economic and sociocultural 
interactions within natural neighborhoods, 
as building blocks for broader integration. 
Trust  can  be  built  on  a  shared  language. 
East African countries share Swahili, which 
has  facilitated  trade  in  the  neighborhood 
for  centuries.  Free  trade  was  established 
between  Kenya  and  Uganda  during  colo-
nial times.66 West African countries share 
the  Dioula,  Haoussa,  and  Peuhl  cultures, 
which,  nurtured  by  Islam,  developed  an 
impressive trade network.67 

Interactions between neighboring areas 
or cities across countries can also provide 
the base for broader integration—a form of 
transfrontier regionalism that could follow 
European  models.68  Sub-Saharan  Africa 
has many pairs of large cities that are near 
each other but separated by a national bor-
der (see map 9.5). This carries hidden eco-
nomic costs that can be overcome through 

cross-border agreements. Cameroon shares 
twin cities with West African neighbors, but 
none in its Central African neighborhood. 
Similarly, local integration initiatives, such 
as  growth  triangles  starting  in  the  early 
1980s in East Asia, can take advantage of 
the economic complementarities in border-
ing regions. 

A succession of large coastal cities along 
the Gulf of Guinea spans from Abidjan in 
Côte d’Ivoire to Douala in Cameroon, and 
includes Accra, Cotonou, Lagos, and Lomé. 
When  discussing  “growth  champions,”  it 
may be worth keeping in mind the potential 
of such multicountry agglomerations, rather 
than thinking of some nations as regional 
growth leaders. When seen through the lens 
of economic geography, the regional integra-
tion priorities change to prioritizing regional 
infrastructure investments in leading areas 
that span several countries. 

Regional trade in agricultural products 
can  be  another  entry  point  for  broader 
regional integration. This requires a revival 

Map 9.5    Twin cities for local integration 
City pairs in bordering regions within 150 kilometers and with more than 100,000 inhabitants

Ziguinchor

Bissau

Conakry
Freetown

Sikasso
Kissidougou
Nzerekore

Sefadu

Man

Maradi

Kousseri
Mubi

Ndjamena

Maroua

Jimeta

Garoua

Bobodioulasso

Katsina

Parakou
Portonovo
Lomé

Shaki
Abeokuta
Lagos

Cotonou

Calabar

Kumba

Brazzaville

Pointe-Noire
Cabinda

Matadi Boma

Kinshasa

Goma
Bukavu
Uvira
Kalemie

Kigali
Bujumbura
Kigoma

Lubumbashi
Mufulira

Chingola

Mutare

Chimoio

Bloemfontein

Maseru

Source: WDR 2009 team.

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   279
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   279

10/8/08   3:40:32 PM
10/8/08   3:40:32 PM

280 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

of  regional  trade  agreements,  adequate 
cross-country infrastructure, institutional 
reforms, and nonmarket institutions such 
as farmer cooperatives.69 The Horn of Africa 
could build on its livestock trade, though 
security  poses  a  problem.70  West  Africa 
could  build  on  cotton,  if  leading  agricul-
tural areas across several countries can be 
integrated into a single, efﬁ cient production 
and  processing  zone:  the  Sahelian  cotton 
basin in the border region of Burkina Faso, 
Côte d’Ivoire, and Mali (see map 9.6). This 
region, dominated by Dioula ethnic groups, 
is anchored by three cities—Bobodioulasso 
in Burkina Faso, Korhogo in Côte d’Ivoire, 
and Sikasso in Mali.71 In 2000 the popula-
tion of this area was 4 million (11 percent 
of the total in the three countries), with an 
estimated gross regional product of 1,000 
billion CFA francs (10 percent of aggregate 
national GDPs). 

The  areas  in  this  region  have  comple-
mentary economic endowments. Bobodi-
oulasso has an international airport with 
storage  facilities.  Korhogo  has  a  regional 
airport, a specialized university, and train-
ing centers in agricultural science. Sikasso 

is the center of the cotton basin, with the 
most production. Rails connect Ouagadou-
gou and the port of Abidjan, and roads link 
all  three  cities.  And  many  ginneries  and 
textile industries are located in the region. 
By  upgrading  and  pooling  infrastructure 
within  a  regional  industrial  development 
program, input costs could fall and cotton-
based  industries  such  as  textile  and  gar-
ments  could  become  competitive  in  the 
global  market.  Such  an  initiative  would 
require  a  strong  commitment  from  the 
participating countries and support from 
regional associations and the international 
community. 

Institutional  development  to  increase 
scale, support labor and capital mobility, 
and improve market access. Some regions 
have taken concrete steps toward integra-
tion. ECOWAS has signed protocols for the 
free  movement  of  people,  abolishing  visa 
and  entry  permit  requirements.  In  fact, 
labor mobility has always been a hallmark 
of Sub-Saharan Africa, where tradition or 
colonial  laws  have  favored  circular  labor 
mobility. Nomads moved across countries 
in  response  to  seasonal  climatic  change, 

Map 9.6    West Africa has potential for cotton-led industrial development

MAURITANIA

SENEGAL

Dakar

MALI

NIGER

Banjul

THE
GAMBIA

Bissau

GUINEA-
BISSAU

Bamako

BURKINA

FASO
Ouagadougou

Niamey

GUINEA

Conakry

Freetown

SIERRA
LEONE

BENIN

CÔTE

D’IVOIRE

TOGO

GHANA

Abuja

NIGERIA

LIBERIA

Monrovia

Yamoussoukro

Abidjan

Tema

Accra

Cotonou
Lomé

Porto
Novo

CHAD

SUDAN

N'Djamena

CENTRAL

AFRICAN REPUBLIC

CAMEROON

Douala

Yaoundé

EQ. GUINEA

GABON

CONGO

DEM. REP.
OF CONGO

Limit of cotton-producing basin:

Means of cotton exports:

Cotton exports through the ports:

Cotton-producing basin

Heart of the cotton basin

Ginning factory

Rail

Road

National cotton

Sahelian cotton

Sources: Atlas on Regional Integration in West Africa. ECOWAS; Sahel and West Africa Club/OECD 2006.

260
200
50

Tons (thousands)

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   280
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   280

10/9/08   4:30:40 PM
10/9/08   4:30:40 PM

 

Winners without Borders 

281

while  sedentary  farmers  also  moved  sea-
sonally in search of supplementary income 
during  the  dry  season.72  But  the  skills  of 
the workforce need to improve. For higher 
education, technical training, and research, 
cooperation within the neighborhood can 
support institutions beyond the means of 
individual  countries.  And  a  better  local 
business climate and new opportunities in 
regional growth centers may induce Afri-
can migrants with technical and business 
know-how to return from abroad.

Invest  in  regional  infrastructure.  The 
New Partnership for Africa’s Development 
(NEPAD)  spatial  development  initiative 
identiﬁ ed the Bas-Congo development cor-
ridor  involving  Angola,  the  Democratic 
Republic  of  Congo,  and  the  Republic  of 
Congo as a region where deep integration 
would have large beneﬁ ts, based on enor-
mous hydroelectric power potential.73 Two 
other  development  corridors  also  have 
promise in West and East Africa:
(cid:129)  The  Gulf  of  Guinea  development  cor-
ridor—linking  Benin,  Côte  d’Ivoire, 
Ghana,  Liberia,  Nigeria,  and  Togo—
could integrate West African economies 
through  transport  and  energy.  It  could 
also connect ﬁ ve large coastal cities with 
a critical mass of economic activities and 
administrative  service  provision:  Abi-
djan, Accra, Cotonou, Lagos, and Lomé.
(cid:129)  The Mombasa development corridor—
linking  the  Democratic  Republic  of 
Congo,  Kenya,  Sudan,  and  Uganda—
could  use  established  infrastructure 
links such as the Northern Corridor to 
unlock natural resources in the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo and southern 
Sudan.

Even  with  more  regional  infrastruc-
ture,  better  human  capital,  and  greater 
factor mobility, these neighborhoods still 
face  being  latecomers  in  the  global  mar-
ket, where other developing countries with 
low-cost  advantage  dominate  the  market 
for  basic  manufactures.  African  coun-
tries need to diversify their export base to 
reduce  dependence  on  natural  resources. 
Many  of  these  neighborhoods  need  to 
design explicit export diversiﬁ cation strat-
egies to capture a larger share of the world 
market  (see  box  9.2).  Success  requires 

institutional  cooperation  as  well  as  spe-
ciﬁ c infrastructure among countries in the 
neighborhood. 

Providing a regional public good is less 
complex politically if it is based on a mutu-
ally  beneﬁ cial  and  proﬁ table  project,  as 
in much of energy, communications, and 
irrigation  infrastructure.  But  for  small 
isolated countries, regional infrastructure 
projects require considerable outside sup-
port. Trafﬁ c volumes are too small in most 
parts of Africa for toll roads to be feasible. 
And regional infrastructure may be more 
beneﬁ cial  for  one  country,  even  though 
most of the investment costs are incurred 
in  another.  In  addition  to  reinvigorating 
 public-private  partnerships  in  infrastruc-
ture,  there  is  a  need  for  scaling  up  Inter-
national  Development  Association  (IDA) 
contributions  to  regional  integration, 
systematizing  Aid-for-Trade  initiatives74 
and rationalizing the interaction between 
regional  development  banks  and  global 
ﬁ nancial institutions. Less than 3 percent 
of  all  international  development  support 
now goes for regional programs.75

Use  coordinated  incentives  to  facili-
tate  regional  integration.  African  coun-
tries  need  to  make  a  strong  commitment 
to  regional  integration,  sharing  the  costs 
and beneﬁ ts from opening borders in natu-
ral  neighborhoods.  Multilateral  agencies 
and donors need to commit to long-term 
support  of  these  initiatives  by  providing 
ﬁ nancial and technical assistance and bet-
ter  access  to  markets.  Concrete  steps  can 
be sequenced, gradually ensuring the irre-
versibility of policy reforms in leading and 
lagging countries. Preferential trade agree-
ments and aid ﬂ ows could be tied to coop-
eration among recipient countries, with the 
proposed EPAs with the EU as one model 
(see box 9.3). In cases in which incentives 
for regional cooperation are insufﬁ cient for 
some partners—such as facilitating access 
for a landlocked economy to a port in its 
neighboring  country—conditional  aid 
ﬂ ows with clear performance targets may 
be required.

A  key  incentive  for  policy  reform  in 
Africa  is  temporary  preferential  access  to 
OECD markets.76 Africa cannot wait for a 
big wage difference with Asia before start-
ing to attract greater productive investment 

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   281
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   281

10/8/08   3:40:32 PM
10/8/08   3:40:32 PM

282 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

BOX 9.6    A contract with Africa? The give and take of the world’s biggest development challenge

Better understanding of the geogra-
phy of development can lead to more 
eff ective development aid. This Report 
advocates diff erent strategies for Africa’s 
landlocked countries and its resource-
poor coastal economies. The former have 
natural disadvantages associated with 
geography and a large distance to market 
that reduces their potential growth by 
as much as half a percentage point per 
year. But what is unusual in Africa is that 
resource-poor coastal countries have 
underperformed. These are the types of 
countries that act as engines of growth in 
other world regions. Africa’s growth poles 
are still weak.

This Report argues, to exaggerate 

somewhat, that development strategies 
for leading areas should invest in places, 
and strategies for lagging areas should 
invest in people. Seen through the lens of 
economic geography, the thrust of devel-
opment assistance to Africa that focused 
on education, health, and other social 
infrastructure in the late 1990s seems cor-
rect for the lagging, landlocked countries. 
But this assistance appears to focus on 
the wrong priorities for coastal countries, 
which need physical infrastructure and 
better integration with global markets.

A better contract between donors 

and countries would be to diff erentiate 
approaches across countries depending on 
their potential market access. This Report 
proposes a tailored approach, which would 
lay out the rights and responsibilities of 
countries according to their potential 

regional role. For each of Sub- Saharan 
Africa’s regions, the contract would include 
specifi c obligations and actions that 
encourage regional development. The gov-
ernments of East, West, and Central Africa 
would commit to the following:

•  Establishing “Regional Economic Areas” 

that would tie the economic interests 
of leading and lagging countries in 
Africa’s regional neighborhoods tightly 
together and provide a framework for 
the provision of regional public goods.

•  Pursuing freer movements of labor, 
capital, goods, and services within 
these areas.

•  Maintaining and protecting access 

routes between landlocked countries 
and outlets for trade.

The strategy would combine insti-
tutional cooperation, investment in 
regional infrastructure, and coordinated 
interventions that may require giving up 
some hard-won and jealously guarded 
attributes of national sovereignty.

In exchange for these actions, bilateral 

and multilateral development partners 
would commit to the following:

•  A large increase in international fi nan-

cial assistance for improved social 
services and other life-sustaining infra-
structure aimed at raising living stan-
dards and creating portable human 
capital in lagging countries.

•  Increased fi nancial support for growth-

sustaining infrastructure—including 

ports, transport links, and information 
and communication technology—in 
the coastal countries, as well as corridor 
infrastructure to link coastal and inte-
rior markets.

•  Preferential access for Sub-Saharan 

Africa’s exports, with liberalized rules of 
origin that encourage regional supply 
chains. 

Things are already headed in this 

direction. In 2007 the Government of 
the United Kingdom, through its Depart-
ment for International Development, 
allocated $1.4 billion over the coming 
decade to eff orts by the governments of 
Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and 
Uganda and to revitalize the East African 
Economic Community. The European 
Commission is also adopting a regional 
approach with its economic partnership 
agreements. But all donors could be 
bolder in their approaches.

The experience of Europe after World 
War II illustrates how national determina-
tion to prioritize reconstruction coupled 
with international assistance can pay off . 
Regional integration in Europe did not go 
smoothly initially. But encouraged by the 
tough terms of cooperation in the Mar-
shall Plan, a process of integration that 
would have been impossible a generation 
earlier, created the largest common mar-
ket for capital, labor, and ideas today.

Source: WDR 2009 team. 

and  larger  export  shares,  especially  with 
multilateral trade negotiations at the WTO 
driving down tariffs at a fast pace. Initia-
tives  such  as  the  U.S.  Africa  Growth  and 
Opportunity  Act  and  the  EU  Everything 
But  Arms  could  be  extended  to  all  Sub-
Saharan countries, with more liberal rules 
of origin and a longer time span. This may 
allow  at  least  some  of  these  countries  to 
break into world markets and could jump-
start  export  diversification  in  African 
neighborhoods.  A  “contract  with  Africa” 
could be a framework for supporting such 
coordinated incentives (see box 9.6).

Over  the  past  centuries,  East,  Central, 
and  West  Africa  have  suffered  a  series  of 
“formative  disasters”  (see  “Geography  in 
Motion, Density, Distance, and Division in 
Sub-Saharan Africa”). Today, they pose an 
especially  difﬁ cult  development  challenge 
spanning  the  three  development  dimen-
sions—density,  distance,  and  division. 
To  reshape  their  economic  geography,  the 
policy response has to be commensurately 
calibrated.  A  three-dimensional  challenge 
demands  employing  all  three  instruments 
of integration—institutions, infrastructure, 
and incentives.

WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   282
WDR09_17_Ch09.indd   282

10/8/08   3:40:33 PM
10/8/08   3:40:33 PM

Geography in motion

Density, Distance, and Division 
in Sub-Saharan Africa

In November 1884, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck of Germany convened a meeting of 14 European colonial powers in Berlin. After 
In NNNNNovovovovovememememembebebebeber r r 18181818848484, ChChChananancecec lllloror O Otto von Bismarck of Germany convened a meeting of 14 European colonial powers in Berlin. After
four centuries of competition and hostility, the time had come to negotiate and settle territorial claims. Britain, France, Germany, 
foffff urururr c c cenenenntututut riririeseses o oof ff cooompmppetetititioion n and hostility, the time had come to negotiate and settle territorial claims. Britain, France, Germany,
and Portugal were the main players; no Africans were invited. Four months later, the borders of African countries had been charted 
anddd PoPoPorrrtugal were e e thhe mam in players; no Africans were invited. Four months later, the borders of African countries had been charted
in a pattern still recognizable today (see map G4.1). Bismarck’s disciplined solution remained until the end of World War I, when 
in a pppatatteternr  stillll rreecognizable today (see map G4.1). Bismarck’s disciplined solution remained until the end of World War I, when 
the League of Nations conﬁ scated Germany’s four colonies and gave other colonizers the mandate of governing them. At indepen-
ththe e LeLeague of Nations conﬁ scated Germany’s four colonies and gave other colonizers the mandate of governing them. At indepen-
dence in the 1950s and 1960s, Sub-Saharan Africa had almost 50 countries, many of them called “artiﬁ cial states,” with borders 
dence in the 1950s and 1960s, Sub-Saharan Africa had almost 50 countries, many of them called “artiﬁ cial states,” with borders 
cutting across physical geographic features and partitioning ethnic groups into more than one country.1
cutting across physical geographic features and partitioning ethnic groups into more than one country.1

For  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  the  Ber-

lin  conference  was  just  the  last 
in  a  long  line  of  what  geogra-
phers  have  termed  “formative  disas-
ters,”  unfavorably  altering  the  human, 
physical,  and  political  geography  of 
the  continent,  creating  continentwide 
problems of low density, long distances, 
and divided countries.

(cid:129)  Low density. Sub-Saharan Africa has 
long been a continent where people 
are scarce. Its population in the eigh-
teenth century was about 90 million. 
Eurasia, with an area about twice that 
of Africa, had more than ﬁ ve times as 
many people. But these initial condi-
tions were tragically worsened by the 
slave trade. Between 1700 and 1810, 
an  estimated  15  million  Africans—
one of every six—were taken to the 
Americas. Some areas were depopu-
lated, and many more mired in dev-
astating conﬂ ict as the price put on 
humans turned Africans against each 
another. Europe ﬁ nally put an end to 
the slave trade, and replaced it with 
colonialism in the eighteenth century. 
A  rapacious  trade  in  men  was  then 
replaced by a plundering of the conti-
nent for minerals. But even with new 
settlers,  the  continent  still  suffered 
from low density in most places.

(cid:129)  Long  distances.  Since  the  Holocene 
Age  that  began  about  18,000  years 

ago,  the  Sahara  has  been  an  inhos-
pitable  desert,  separating  northern 
Africa from what we now call “Sub-
Saharan” Africa. The global warming 
of that period had other major conse-
quences. It cut contact between most 
of Africa and the emerging civiliza-
tions in the Arab Republic of Egypt 
and the Middle East. It turned Equa-
torial Africa from a temperate savan-
nah into a hot and humid place where 
malaria  and  yellow  fever  thrived. 
Proximity  to  wild  animals  and  the 
absence of frost—a natural disinfec-
tant—increased  human  vulnerabil-
ity  to  diseases.  And  when  Africans 
settled in healthy, fertile places, they 
were again displaced by colonial set-
tlers. Since the 1950s armed conﬂ icts 
in pre- and postindependence move-
ments  have  aggravated  the  problem 
of refugees. The result: movements of 
people that have left many in remote 
areas far from the centers of economic 
activity. The long distance to density 
still affects the growth potential of a 
large part of the African population.

(cid:129)  Deep  divisions.  The  partitioning  of 
Africa in 1884 left the continent with 
the  most  countries  per  square  kilo-
meter  of  any  region  in  the  world. 
Each African country has an average 
of four neighbors; in Latin America 
the average is 2.3. There are also reli-
gious divisions, between and within 

countries. Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethio-
pia, Nigeria, Somalia, and Sudan, for 
 example, are fragmented into Islamic 
and  non-Islamic  parts.  Islam  came 
from the Middle East into North and 
West  Africa  by  land  and  into  East 
Africa by sea. Later, European colo-
nialists  brought  Christianity.  The 
superimposition of these great world 
religions on top of traditional beliefs 
reinforced the continent’s divide and 
may have added to conﬂ ict.2 

Sub-Saharan  Africa  today  suffers 
from  the  triple  disadvantages  of  low 
density,  long  distance,  and  deep  divi-
sion that put the continent at a devel-
opmental  disadvantage.  These  spatial 
dimensions reduce proximity between 
economic  agents  within  Sub-Saharan 
Africa, and between Africa and the rest 
of  the  world. “Cumulative  causation” 
between  these  forces  catches  many 
countries  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  in  a 
“proximity trap.”3 

Low density is linked to weak 
agglomeration forces
The average population density on the 
continent (77 people per square kilome-
ter) is among the lowest in the world.4
A sparsely inhabited continent can over-
come this by using its land and people 
well and by concentrating resources in 
urban agglomerations. But Sub- Saharan 

WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   283
WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   283

10/9/08   10:33:36 PM
10/9/08   10:33:36 PM

284 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Map G4.1    Africa’s borders were charted before World War I

FRENCH
MOROCCO

ALGERIA

TUNISIA

LIBYA

EGYPT

Tangier International zone
SPANISH
MOROCCO

Madeira I.
(Portugal)

Canary Is.
(Spain)

RIO DE ORO

Cape Verde Is.

(Portugal)

GAMBIA

PORTUGUESE
GUINEA

F R E N C H   W E S T

A F R I C A

TOGOLAND

NIGERIA

FRENCH

EQUATORIAL

CAMEROON

GUINEA

SUDAN

ERITREA

FRENCH
SOMALILAND

BRITISH
SOMALILAND

ETHIOPIA

ITALIAN
SOMALILAND

SIERRA LEONE

LIBERIA

IVORY
COAST

GOLD
COAST

Fernando Poo
(Spain)

RIO MUNI

São Tomé
(Portugal)

CABINDA
(United Kingdom)

WALVIS BAY
(United Kingdom)

Possession of:
Belgium
France
Germany
Italian
Portuguese
Spain
United Kingdom
Independent nations

BELGIAN

EAST AFRICA

UGANDA

KENYA

BELGIAN
CONGO

GERMAN

EAST AFRICA

Seychelles

(United Kingdom)

Zanzibar I.
(United Kingdom)

Aldabra Is.
(United Kingdom)

NYASALAND

Comoros Is.

(France)

MOZAMBIQUE

MADAGASCAR

Réunion
(France)

Mauritius
(United
Kingdom)

ANGOLA

NORTHERN
RHODESIA

SOUTHERN
RHODESIA

GERMAN

SOUTHWEST

AFRICA

BECHUANALAND

SOUTH
AFRICA

SWAZILAND

BASUTOLAND

Source: WDR 2009 team, based on Pakenham 1992.

Africa  is  the  world’s  least  urbanized 
continent,  with  only  one-third  of  the 
population living in urban areas in 2000, 
according to the UN’s World Urbaniza-
tion Prospects. Due to the lack of regular 
and recent censuses, even this may over-
state  the  urbanization  in  Africa.5  The 
agglomeration index in chapter 1 gives 
Africa a score of 30 percent, compared 
with about 50 percent for the rest of the 
world.

Divisions between countries in Africa 
can distort the pattern of urbanization. 
One simulation suggests that if Africa’s 
50 countries were 50 states in one coun-
try, like the United States, the largest cit-
ies would be even bigger than they are 
today, capable of sustaining diversiﬁ ed 
economies  and  incubating  entrepre-
neurship, skills, and innovation. Without 
such prospects Africa’s skilled labor has 
migrated to other continents. 

Long distances raise 
transport costs and 
reduce factor mobility
Distance  reinforces  the  effects  of  low 
population  density  on  productivity  in 
Africa. While much is made of Africa’s 
distance  from  world  markets,  the  pri-
mary  problem  is  domestic—long  dis-
tances  within  countries.6  Table  G4.1 
indicates that Africa has one of the lowest 
road densities in the world, second only 

WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   284
WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   284

10/9/08   10:33:50 PM
10/9/08   10:33:50 PM

 

Geography in Motion 

285

Table G4.1    The most distant and divided regions—trading and transport are expensive

Region
East Asia & Paciﬁ c
Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & Caribbean
Middle East & North Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Trading time 
across borders 

for exports 

(days)a

Average transport 

costs 

($ per container to 

Baltimore)b

24
29
22
27
34
40

3,900

–

4,600
2,100
3,900
7,600

Population in 
landlocked 
countries (%)b

Ratio of number 

countries to 
surface areab

0.42
23.00
2.77
0
3.78
40.20

1.44
1.17
1.52
1.60
1.67
2.00

Road density 
(km2 of road per 
surface area) 

(1999)c
0.72
–
0.12
0.33
0.85
0.13

Estimated 

number of civil 

conﬂ icts, 
(1940–2000)d

8
13
15
17
24
34

Sources: a. World Bank 2006b, p. 44; b. Ndulu and others 2007, p. 101; c. Ndulu and others 2007, p. 29; d. Fearon and Laitin 2003, pp. 7–10.
Note: – = not available

to Latin America. But unlike Latin Amer-
ica—where the population lives largely 
along the coast, making it unnecessary to 
build roads into the interior—Africa has 
a third of its population in landlocked 
countries and even more far from access 
to global markets. Economic distance in 
Africa—in  the  sense  of  market  access 
(see chapter 2)—is further lengthened 
by armed conﬂ icts and linguistic diver-
sity (see map G4.1). Economic distance 
has isolated a large proportion of Afri-
cans from access to domestic and global 
markets.  Physical  factors,  such  as  the 
relative absence of navigable rivers and 
natural harbors, have been serious bar-
riers  to  trade.  Low  levels  of  domestic 
and  international  trade,  in  turn,  limit 
the potential for growth.

Deep divisions raise 
transport costs 
Sub-Saharan  Africa  is  a  highly  frag-
mented continent with many borders, 
many  neighbors,  and  high  transport 
costs.  Africa  is  as  physically  close  to 
global markets as is East Asia—about 
7,500  kilometers—and  closer  than 
Latin America (9,000 kilometers).7 But 
it  still  costs  almost  twice  as  much  to 
ship a container to the east coast of the 
United States from Africa as from other 
regions  (see  table  G4.1).  Compound-
ing expensive access to global markets 
is costly access to regional markets. It 
takes an African exporter about 40 days 
to cross the border into a neighboring 
country, compared with 22 days for a 
Latin  American  counterpart.  For  the 

third of Africans who live in landlocked 
countries, the costs of division are even 
greater.  They  must  move  goods  long 
distances over land—expensive, because 
each  1  percent  increase  in  distance 
increases  transport  costs  by  approxi-
mately  0.25  percent.8 And  landlocked 
countries  must  rely  on  the  goodwill 
(and efﬁ cient investment) of neighbors 
for access to ports and markets. 

Meeting the challenge—better 
urbanization, more domestic 
specialization, and more 
regional integration
Africa can reduce the limitations of its 
poor economic geography. Better urban 
agglomerations can deliver scale efﬁ cien-
cies. Transport links can help domestic 
markets grow. And regional and global 
integration can promote trade. Regional 
integration, labor mobility, investments 
in trade, communication and transport 
infrastructure,  and  peace  and  stability 
should remain high on the agenda. They 
create good neighborhoods, and better 
neighborhoods will facilitate investment, 
trade, and factor mobility in a cycle of 
prosperity. 

(cid:129)  Urbanization.  Contrary  to  some 
thinking,  urbanization,  done  right, 
can help development more in Africa 
than elsewhere. Despite ﬁ ve decades 
of  low-quality  urbanization,  living 
standards in Africa’s cities are much 
higher  than  in  the  countryside.  If 
urbanization can be managed better, 
along the lines proposed in chapter 7, 

signiﬁ cant  gains  can  be  expected  in 
productivity and poverty reduction.
(cid:129)  Territorial  development.  The  guid-
ance  from  economic  geography  is 
unambiguous:  firms  and  workers 
seek agglomeration, and migration is 
a natural way to increase density and 
reduce distance to markets. Chapter 8 
proposes some principles and priori-
ties for countries where lagging areas 
are  sparsely  populated  and  divided 
along  ethnic,  linguistic,  or  religious 
lines. Agriculture is one priority, but 
policies to help leading areas exploit 
scale  economies  may  be  especially 
important in Africa as a latecomer to 
economic development.

(cid:129)  Regional  integration.  Given  its  his-
tory,  political  regionalism  may  have 
to  take  the  lead  in  African  regional 
integration. The experience of West-
ern Europe summarized earlier in this 
Report  spotlights  the  importance  of 
starting  small  and  keeping  expecta-
tions  realistic.  Regional  integration 
takes time and will not happen in all 
parts of Africa at once. Infrastructure 
projects are a good place to start. But 
through  regional  integration,  Africa 
can  undo  some  of  what  Bismarck 
and his guests did in 1884. Chapter 9 
showed that many African countries 
have  taken  the  ﬁ rst  steps,  outlining 
what the rest of the world can do to 
help. 

Based  on  a  contribution  by  Wim 
Naudé.

WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   285
WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   285

10/9/08   10:33:51 PM
10/9/08   10:33:51 PM

WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   286
WDR09_18_GIM04.indd   286

10/9/08   10:33:51 PM
10/9/08   10:33:51 PM

Bibliographical Note

This Report draws on a wide range of World Bank documents 
and on numerous outside sources. Background papers and 
notes were prepared by Maria Abreu, Stephen Adam, Yusuf 
Ahmad, M Alva, Alberto Behar, Sarah Boeckmann, Marius 
Brulhart, Massimiliano Cali, Yang Chen, Michael Clemens, 
Kirsten Cornelson, Souleymane Coulibaly, Nicholas Crafts, 
Edward Feser, John Felkner, Kali Glen-Haley, Geoffrey J.D. 
Hewings,  Austin  Kilroy,  Melissa  Klink,  Christian  Layke, 
Philip Manners, Robert Margo, Thomas Markussen, Thierry 
Mayer,  John  McCombie,  Topher  McDougal,  Claudio  E. 
Montenegro,  Megumi  Muto,  Andrew  Nelson,  B.  Nelson, 
Wim Naudé, Park Sam Ock, Jinhwan Oh, Keijiro Otsuka, 
Ken Poole, Lant Pritchett, Diego Puga, David Satterthwaite, 
Andrey Treyvish, Hirotsugu Uchida, Dirk Willem Te Velde, 
Cam Vidler, and Nong Zhu.

Background  papers  for  the  Report  are  available  either 
on the World Wide Web www.worldbank.org/wdr2009 or 
through the World Development Report ofﬁ ce. The views 
expressed in these papers are not necessarily those of the 
World Bank or of this Report. 

Many  people  inside  and  outside  the  World  Bank  gave 
comments to the team. Valuable comments, guidance, sup-
port,  and  contributions  were  provided  by  James  Adams, 
Uma Adusumilli, Theodore Ahlers, Alexis Albion, Junaid 
Ahmed, Halil Ibrahim Akca, Mohamad Al-Arief, Riad Al 
Khoury,  Asad  Alam,  Ritu  Anand,  Candra  Fajri  Ananda, 
Inger Andersen, Martin Andersson, Patricia Clarke Annez, 
Jorge Saba Arbache, Omar Arias, Jean Eric Aubert, Fouad 
Awada,  Jit  Bajpai,  George  Banjo,  Luca  Barbone,  Elena 
Bardasi,  Alberto  Behar,  Connie  Bernard,  Anthony  Bigio, 
S.  A.  Dan  Biller,  Kate  Bird,  Alessandro  Magnoli  Bocchi, 
Zeljko  Bogetic,  Laurent  Bossard,  Carlos  Braga,  Milan 
Brahmbhatt, Marie-H. P. Bricknell, Robert Buckley, Thomas 
Buckley,  Derek  Byerlee,  Fernando  Cabezas,  Francisco 
Carneiro, Mauricio Carrizosa, Shyam Chainani, Nadereh 
Chamlou,  Jaime  Saavedra  Chanduvi,  Robert  Chase,  Ken 
Chomitz,  Abderrahmane  Chorfi,  Luc  Christiaensen, 
Marie-Helene Collion, Hector Valdes Conroy, Jean-Marie 
Cour,  Xavier  Crépin,  Aude  de  Amorim,  Augusto  de  la 
Torre,  Christopher  Delgado,  Christian  Delvoie,  Gabriel 
Demombynes, Sebastien Dessus, Jaime de Melo, Mamadou 
Dem, Banu Demir, Michele de Nevers, Jean-Jacques Dethier, 
Shantayanan  Devarajan,  Makhtar  Diop,  Ndiame  Diop, 
Frederique Docquier, Paul Dorosh, Cuney Duzyol, William 
Easterly,  Ibrahim  Elbadawi,  Lewis  Eldridge,  Antonio 
Estache, Warren Evans, Shahrokh Fardoust, Marianne Fay, 
Wolfgang Fengler, Alexander Ferguson, Francisco Ferreira, 
Melissa Fossberg, Vivien Foster, Bernard G. Funck, Saurabh 

Garg, Kristalina Georgieva, Ejaz Ghani, Marcelo Giugale, 
Sudarshan  Gooptu  Jose  Luis  Guasch,  Sumila  Gulyani, 
Jonathan Halpern, Simon Hay, Rui Hao, Jesko S. Hentschel, 
Santiago  Herrera,  Andre  Herzog,  Kate  Higging,  Larry 
Hinkle, Mun S. Ho, Bernard Hoekman, Vivian Hon, Yukon 
Huang, David Hummels, Djibrilla Issa, Narasimham Vijay 
Jagannathan,  Zelena  Jagdeo,  Rachid  Jamali,  Emmanuel 
Jimenez, Steen Jorgensen, Abha Joshi-Ghani, Ellis J. Juan, 
Stephen George Karam, Shigeo Katsu, Phil Keefer, Christine 
Kessides,  Peyvand  Khaleghian,  Homi  Kharas,  Nadim 
Khouri, Jacob Kolster, Aart Kraay, Alexander Kremer, K. L. 
Krishna,  Kathy  Krumm,  Alice  Kuegler,  Praveen  Kumar, 
Caterina Laderchi, Amina Lahreche, Peter Lanjouw, Hedi 
Larbi,  Frannie  Leautier,  Phillippe  Leite,  Jeffrey  Lewis, 
Maureen  Lewis,  Johannes  Linn,  Laszlo  Lovei,  Xubei 
Luo,  William  Maloney,  Jean-Michel  Marchat,  Katharine 
Martingale,  Ernesto  May,  David  McKenzie,  Elisabeth 
Mealey, Shomik Raj Mehndiratta, Barjor Mehta, Mukesh 
Mehta, Abel Mejia, Taye Mengistae, Dino Merotto, Stephen 
Mink, Pradeep Mitra, Keiko Miwa, Celestin Monga, Nasser 
Munjee,  Zafer  Mustafaoglu,  Abdu  Muwonge,  Ijaz  Nabi, 
Mustapha Kamel Nabli, Gobind Nankani, Ashish Narain, 
Benno  N’dulu,  Vikram  Nehru,  Eric  Neumayer,  Cecile 
Niang, John Overholt, Caglar Ozden, Nicolas Perrin, Abhay 
Pethe, Axel Peuker, Vidyadhar Phatak, Brian Pinto, Mark 
Povey, Habib Nasser Rab, Madhu Raghunath, Robin Rajack, 
Anupam Rastogi, Dilip Ratha, S. K. Rao, Martin Ravallion, 
Jean-Louis Reiffers, Jose Guilherme Reis, Frederic Robert-
Nicoud, Klaus Rohland, Jamal Saghir, Maurice Schiff, Emily 
M. Schmidt, Annemarie Schneider. Harris Selod, Marcelo 
Selowsky,  Ethel  Sennhauser,  Claudia  Sepulveda,  Shekhar 
Shah, Zmarak Shalizi, Sudhir Shetty, Vera Songwe, Manju 
Sood, Andrew Steer, Jack Stein, Andy Tatem, Ahmet Tiktik, 
Christopher Timmins, Tim Thomas, Vinod Thomas, Peter 
Thomson, Mark Tomlinson, Yvonne Tsikata, Laura Tuck, 
Carolyn  Turk,  Sanjay  Ubale,  Sameh  Wahba,  Linda  Van 
Gelder, Juergen Voegele, Hyoung Gun Wang, David Wheeler, 
Dirk Willem te Velde, Jan von der Goltz, Jorge Wilheim, 
John Wilson, Zelai Xu, Ahmet Yaman, Evgeny Yasin, Tito 
Yepes, Yutaka Yoshino, Shahid Yusuf, Ulrich Zachau, Albert 
Zeufack, Yan Zhang, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 

We have also beneﬁ ted from suggestions and feedback 
of participants at consultation and discussion workshops 
held  during  the  drafting  stage  of  the  report.  In  particu-
lar, we would like to thank Olav Seim and Marianne Berg 
of  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  (Norway);  Per  Ronnas, 
Klas  Groth,  and  Christina  Hartler  of  SIDA  (Sweden); 
Pekka Hukka and Elina Levaniemi of Ministry of Foreign 

WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   287
WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   287

287

10/10/08   9:42:34 AM
10/10/08   9:42:34 AM

288 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Affaires  (Finland);  participants  in  the  Berlin  workshop: 
Tanja Boerzel, Mantang Cai, Angel de la Fuente Moreno, 
Nicola De Michelis, Manfred Fischer, Grzegorz Gorzelak, 
Eduardo  Haddad,  Steven  Haggblade,  Michael  Hofmann, 
Robert  Kappel,  Aehyung  Kim,  Adama  Konseiga,  Frauke 
Kraas,  Astrid  Kuehl,  Rolf  J.  Langhammer,  Ingo  Liefner, 
Roman  Mogilevsky,  Hassen  Mohamed,  Peter  Nijkamp, 
Nils-Henning Meyer, Ulrich Nitschke, Boris Pleskovic, and 
Gerhard  Ressel;  participants  in  the  Marseille  workshop: 
Mona Yaﬁ , Jean-Eric Aubert, Gilles Pipien, Rachid Aﬁ rat, 
Erfan  Ali,  Michel  Arnaud,  Jean-Dominique  Assie,  Fouad 
Awada, Mohamed Basyouny, AbdelKébir Berkia, Morched 
Chabbi,  Abderrahmane  Chorﬁ ,  Simon  Compaore,  Jean-
Pierre Elong Mbassi, Kamal Hamdan, Gamal Hamid, Rachid 
El-Jamali, Rabea Kharﬁ , Hugues Kouadio, Frannie Léautier, 
Abdellah Lehzam, Pierre Mayet, Jean-Louis Reiffers, Wafaa 
Sobhy,  Kian  Tajbakhsh,  Pierre  Veltz,  Xavier  Crépin,  Luc 
Dassonville,  Thierry  Desclos,  Olivier  Mourareau,  Joan 
Parpal,  Elizabeth  Peri,  Michele  Reynaud,  Paul-Henri 
Schipper,  Serge  Snrech,  Louis-Jacques  Vaillant,  Nathalie 
Tchoumba Bitnga, Loraine Falconetti, Fabien Marry, and 
Olivier Lavinal; participants in the Dar-es-Salaam work-
shop:  Tom  Okurut,  Samuel  Wangwe,  Elly  Manjale,  Mr. 
Raphael  Mwai,  Audance  Ndayizeye,  Professor  Semboja, 
Dennis  Rweyemamu,  Amos  Majule,  Mr  Kweyamba, 
Professor  Kishimba,  Furaha  Lugoe,  Haji  Semboja,  Dr 
Shechambo, Cosmos Sokoni, Prof Yanda, Marc Kabandama, 
H. B. Lunogelo, Vivian Kazi, Irene Alenga, Stina Peteson, 
and Monica Hangi; participants in the Abidjan workshop: 
Mohamadou  Abdoul,  Kasségné  Adjonou,  Stéphane  Aka 
Anghui, Alban Alphonse Emmanuel Ahourse, Jean-Marie 
Akpoue,  Kofﬁ   Attahi,  Djerkbary  Bambah,  Toyidi  Bello, 
Joseph Coulibaly, Konan Kouakou Noel Dahoua, Alhassane 
Coster  Diaw,  Anne  Marcelle  Douka,  Jacques  Esso,  Siaka 
Fofana,  Agnès  Gnamon-Adiko,  Joachim  Hunlede,  John 
Igue, Prosper Kedagni, Constant Koidou, Hugues Kouadio, 
Alexane Kouame, Kouassi Jean-Baptiste Kouma, Mibanan 
Hippolithe Kone, Jean Claude Koutou, Gabin Kponhassia, 
Owusu-Bonsu  Kwame,  Moussa  Ladan,  Youayou  Marital 
Laguidahi,  Konon  Jules  Lella,  Edmond  Manouan,  Isaac 
F. Mensa-Bonsou, Yao Kouadio Antoine N’Gbala, Jérôme 
Aloko  N’Guessan,  N’Da  N’Guessan  Kouadio,  Sidi  Ould 
Cheikh  Abdallahi,  Guillaume  Poirel,  Adama  Sall,  Kanon 
Seri,  Adama  Sissouma,  Soumaïla  Sogodogo,  Fidel  Yapi 
Amoncou, and François Yatta; organizers of the Mumbai 
and  Hyderabad  workshops:  Infrastructure  Development 
Finance Corporation and Bombay Chamber of Commerce 
and  Industry;  and  Administrative  Staff  College  of  India; 
participants  at  the  Mumbai  workshop:  Jairaj  Phatak, 
Sanjay  G.  Ubale,  Manu  Kumar  Srivastava,  Sanjay  Sethi, 

P.  R.  K.  Murthy,  Uma  Adusumilli,  Vidyadhar  K.  Phatak, 
G.  S.  Gill,  Satyendra  Sinha,  C.  S.  Deshpande,  Mukesh 
Mehta,  Mridula  Krishna,  Arun  Mokashi,  Siddharth  Roy, 
Veena  Mishra,  Rajan  Divekar,  Dilip  Karmarkar,  Dinkar 
Samant, Shishirkumar Rai, John Alexander, Ramakant Jha, 
Rahul  Srivastava,  Shyam  H.  Chainani,  Gerson  D’Cunha, 
Jockin  Arputham,  Abhay  Pethe,  Niranjan  Rajadhyaksha, 
Sarosh  Bana,  Darryl  D’Monte,  Ashley  D’Mello,  Dilip 
D’Souza, Neha Batura, Sadashiv Rao, M. K. Sinha, A. K. T. 
Chari, Sonia Sethi, Ashish Chandak, Anupam Rastogi, Lavi 
D’Costa, Ritu Anand, Nasser Munjee, Manju Sood, C. B. 
Juvekar,  and  R.  Ganesh;  participants  at  the  Hyderabad 
workshop: Kamal Kumar, M. Govinda Rao, K. L. Krishna, 
B. G. Verghese, Mahendra Dev, Subhashish Gangopadhyay, 
Narhari  Rao,  Sanjaya  Baru,  C.  Rammanohar  Reddy, 
Amitabh Kundu, Ravi Bhoothalingam, Amb. S. Narayanan, 
Ranjana  Kumar,  Alakh  N.  Sharma,  Rameshwar  Singh, 
A.  K.  Singh,  Sri.  B.  C.  Mohapatra,  R.  Radhakrishna,  K. 
Krishnamurthy, Mahesh Mishra, Santosh Mahrotra, D. C. 
Sah, Surjit Singh, Prabhat P. Ghosh, G. C. Paul, Jang Pangi, 
Yaduvendra Mathur, Shubas Chandra Garg, Umesh Sinha, 
Gautam Pingle, S. K. Rao, Mohammed A. Abid, Surendar 
Reddy,  Nirmalaya  Bagchi,  and  Anand  Akundy;  partici-
pants  at  the  Moscow  workshop:  Evgeny  Yasin,  Vladimir 
Mau, Vladimir Nazarov, Ilya Mazayev, Mikhail Dmitriev, 
Ksenia  Yudaeva,  Ekaterina  Zhuravskaya,  Evsei  Gurvich, 
Evgennii  Gavrlienkov,  Galina  Kurlyandskaya,  Nadezhda 
Kosareva, Lidiya Ovhcharova, Natalia Zubarevich, Vladimir 
Drebentsov, Eugenii Gontmacher, Aleksey Prazdnichnykh, 
Aleksander  Morozov,  Andrey  Treyvish,  Vitaly  Shipov, 
Dmitry Aratsky, Tatyana Popova, Irina Makeeva, Oksana 
Sergienko,  Oleg  Zasov,  Marina  Vasilieva,  and  Vladislava 
Nemova;  the  organizers  of  the  Ankara  workshop,  State 
Planning Organization, and participants: Necla Akça, Didem 
Akman, Enver Aksoy, Ayhan Atli, Yavuz Cabbar, Abdullah 
Çelik, Ayda Eraydin, Oguz Isik, Serap Kayasu, Vural Kural, 
Cenk Oguzsoy, Elvan Ongun, Mevlüt Özen, Ibrahim Hakki 
Polat, Gül Polat, Faruk Sahin, Zekeriya Sarbak, Zafer Yavan, 
and Hami Yildirim

Jeff  Lecksell,  Siobhan  Murray,  and  Brian  Blankespoor 
prepared  the  maps  for  this  Report.  Other  valuable  assis-
tance was provided by Gytis Kanchas, Polly Means, Nacer 
Mohamed Megherbi, Grace P. Sorensen, Catalina Tejada, 
and Roula I. Yazigi. Merrell J. Tuck-Primdahl, Kavita Watsa, 
and Prianka Nandy assisted the team with consultations and 
dissemination.

Despite efforts to compile a comprehensive list, some who 
contributed may have been inadvertently omitted. The team 
apologizes for any oversights and reiterates its gratitude to 
all who contributed to this Report.

WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   288
WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   288

10/10/08   9:42:34 AM
10/10/08   9:42:34 AM

 

Bibliographical note 

289

Background papers for the World Development 
Report 2009

Background notes for the World Development 
Report 2009

Behar, Alberto. 2008. “Neighborhood Growth Effects: An Annual 

Panel Data Approach.” 

Brulhart,  Marius.  2008. “An Account  of  Global  Intra-Industry 

Trade, 1962-2006.” 

Cali,  Massimiliano.  2007.  “Urbanisation,  Inequality  and  Eco-

nomic Growth: Evidence from Indian States.” 

Clemens, Michael A., Claudio E. Montenegro, and Lant Pritch-
ett.  2008. “The  Great  Discrimination:  Borders  as  a  Labor  Market 
Barrier.” 

Abreu, Maria. 2008. “Effectively Dealing with Slums.” 
Alva,  M.,  and A.  Behar.  2008. “Factors  That  Contribute  to  (or 
Detract  from)  Successful  Outcomes  in  African  Regional  Agree-
ments.” 

Andersson, Martin. 2007. “Spatial Disparities in Taiwan.”
Cali,  Massimiliano.  2008.  “Urban  Agglomeration  Policy  in 

China.” 

Chen, Yang. 2008. “China: A Case Study of 1D-2D-3D areas.” 
Cornelson, Kirsten. 2008. “Egypt and South Africa: A Case Study 

Coulibaly,  Souleymane.  2008.  “On  the  Complementarity  of 

of 1D-2D-3D areas.” 

Regional and Global Trade.” 

Crafts, Nicholas. 2007. “European Growth in the Age of Regional 

Hewings, Geoffrey, E. Feser, and K. Poole. 2007. “Spatial/Territo-

Economic Integration: Convergence Big Time?” 

rial Development Policies in the United States.” 

Crafts, Nicholas. 2007. “Spatial Disparities in 19th Century Brit-

Kilroy, Austin. 2007. “Intra-Urban Spatial Inequalities: Cities as 

ish Industrialization.” 

‘Urban Regions’.”

Hay, Simon I., Dave L. Smith, and Robert W. Snow. 2008. “Is a 

Kroehnert, Steffen, and Sebastian Vollmer. 2008. “Where Have 

Future for Human Malaria Inevitable?”

All Young Women Gone?” 

Kilroy, Austin. 2008. “The Role of Cities in Postwar Economic 

Mayer, Thierry. 2008. “Market Potential and Development.” 
Montenegro, Claudio E., and Maximilian L. Hirn. 2008. “A New 
Disaggregated Set of Labor Market Indicators using Standardized 
Household Surveys from Around the World.” 

Recovery.” 

Klink, Melissa. 2008. “Nigeria and South Africa: A Case Study of 

1D-2D-3D areas.” 

Layke, Christian, and Stephen Adam. 2008. “Spatial Allocation 

Nelson,  Andrew.  2007.  “Accessibility  Model  and  Population 

of Public Expenditures in Nigeria.” 

Estimates.” 

Manners, P., and A. Behar. 2007. “Trade in Sub-Saharan Africa 

Nelson, B., and A. Behar. 2008. “Natural Resources, Growth and 

and Opportunities for Low Income Countries.” 

Spatially-Based Development: A View of the Literature.” 

Markussen,  Thomas.  2008. “Policies  for  improved  land  use  in 

Roberts, Mark. 2008. “Congestion and spatially connective infra-

developing countries.” 

structure: the case of London in the 19th and early 20th century.” 

Naudé,  Wim.  2007. “Density,  Distance  and  Division  Spotlight 

Roberts, Mark, and Uwe Deichmann. 2008. “Regional Spillover 

on Sub-Saharan Africa.” 

Estimation.” 

Uchida, Hirotsugu, and Andrew Nelson. 2008. “Agglomeration 

Index: Towards a New Measure of Urban Concentration.” 

Oh, Jinhwan. 2008. “Korea: A Case Study of 1D-2D-3D areas.” 
Roberts, Mark. 2008. “Social and Spatial Equity.” 
Satterthwaite, David. 2007. “Expanding the Supply and Reduc-
ing  the  Cost  of  Land  for  Housing  in  Urban  Areas  in  Low-  and 
 Middle-Income Nations.” 

Te Velde, Dirk Willem. 2007. “Regional Integration, Growth and 

Concentration.” 

Treyvish, Andrey. 2008. “The Downfall of the Soviet Union: A 

Spatial Explanation.” 

Vidler,  Cam,  2008.  “Turkey  and  Russia:  A  Case  Study  of 

1D-2D-3D areas.” 

WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   289
WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   289

10/10/08   9:42:34 AM
10/10/08   9:42:34 AM

WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   290
WDR09_19_BibNote.indd   290

10/10/08   9:42:34 AM
10/10/08   9:42:34 AM

Endnotes

Overview 

1. Clemens,  Montenegro,  and  Pritchett  (2008),  background 

paper for this Report. 
2. Collier (2007). 
3. In Zambia a person in a settlement with more than 5,000 peo-
ple is considered urban; in India the threshold is 20,000. To compare 
urbanization across countries, this Report pioneers a new measure 
of population density, the “agglomeration index” (see chapter 1).

4. See World Bank 2007k. 
5. Fujita 2007. 
6. Mukherjee 2007. 
7. Koh and Chang 2005. 
8. de Blij 2005. 
9. Khanna 2008. 
10. World Bank 2008e. 
11. Throughout this Report, what is often called “regional devel-
opment” or “territorial development” is referred to as “area devel-
opment.”  These  policies  must  contend  with  even  greater  spatial 
unevenness as their scope widens to encompass a country. 

Navigating This Report

1. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/1971. 
2. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/

1971/kuznets-lecture.html.

3. Brown and others 2008. 

GIM 1

1. See Engerman and Sokoloff (2000a) and Acemoglu, Johnson, 

and Robinson (2002).

2. For a more detailed discussion of U.S. economic geography, 

see Kim and Margo (2004).

3. Fogel (1979) suggests that no single technology was respon-
sible for this reduction in cost. For example, he estimates that U.S. 
output in 1890 would have been only 4 percent lower if goods were 
transported by water rather than rail.

4. McCallum (1995).

Chapter 1

1. Farvacque-Vitkovic, Casalis, and Eghoff (2007), p. 37.
2. United Nations/Wilbur Smith Associates (1980), p. 2.
3. Siegel (1997), p. 61.
4. NUTS  provides  a  single  uniform  classiﬁ cation  of  territorial 
units for producing regional statistics for the European Union. The 
ﬁ rst  two  administrative  levels  in  most  member  states  correspond 
to  NUTS  2  and  NUTS  3.  NUTS  1,  a  larger  unit  representing  the 
major socioeconomic regions, often does not correspond to exist-
ing administrative units within member states. 

5. The ﬁ gures in this paragraph are derived from data on total 
land  area,  proportion  of  land  area  dedicated  to  agricultural  uses, 
total employment, proportion of employment in agriculture, GDP, 
and proportion of gross value added (GVA) generated in agricul-
ture  (Eurostat  2005;  Belgium’s  Ofﬁ ce  of  National  Statistics  2006). 

Employment ﬁ gures are for 2003, population ﬁ gures for 2002, and 
GDP ﬁ gures for 2005. All GDP ﬁ gures are quoted using purchasing 
power standard (PPS) exchange rates.

6. Population ﬁ gures are for year 2007 (www.citypopulation.de/

world.htm).

7. The  tendency  for  the  populations  of  the  primate  or  largest 
few cities in a country to considerably outweigh the populations of 
cities down the hierarchy of places is reﬂ ected in the tendency of 
the rank-size rule to break down at the top end of the size distribu-
tion of cities.

8. These  deﬁ nitions  of  the  rank-size  rule  and  Zipf ’s  law  are 
approximate.  For  more  precise  deﬁ nitions  see  Gabaix  and  Ioan-
nides (2004).

9. Eeckhout 2004.
10. Martin  2005.  Even  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  has  a 
highly  spatially  and  institutionally  concentrated  ﬁ nancial  sector, 
large cities such as Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, and Edinburgh 
have fairly large concentrations of venture capital ﬁ rms, although 
regional stock exchanges had been abolished by the beginning of 
the 1970s.

11. Kim and Margo 2004.
12. Ofﬁ ce of the Deputy Prime Minister 2003.
13. Thanh, Anh, and Tacoli 2005.
14. Tiffen 2003.
15. Glaeser and Kahn 2001, p. 21.
16. Baker and others 2005, p. 15.
17. Peng, Zhu, and Song 2008, p. 7.
18. Glaeser and Kahn 2001.
19. Estimated from the gross product of the world’s major cit-
ies  published  in  www.citymayors.com;  Price  Waterhouse  Cooper 
2007.

20. This is equal to the excess of GVA measured on a workplace 
basis over GVA measured on a residence basis for London. Calcula-
tion is based on data from Ofﬁ ce of National Statistics (2006).

21. Figures  on  ﬂ ows  of  earnings  associated  with  commuting 

come from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 

22. Quote  taken  from  the  glossary  of  the  World  Urbanization 
Prospects:  The  2007  Revision  Population  Database  (http://esa
.un.org/unup/.).

23. Even with time-series analysis, some care needs to be exhib-
ited  with  the  World  Urbanization  Prospects  database.  For  some 
countries the ofﬁ cial deﬁ nition of an urban area has changed over 
time.  In  China,  for  example,  the  urban  share  in  1999  could  have 
been 24 percent, 31 percent, or 73 percent depending on the ofﬁ cial 
deﬁ nition of urban population used (Satterthwaite 2007).

24. Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz 2001.
25. Statistics taken from Price Waterhouse Cooper 2007.
26. The  estimates  of  urban  consumption  shares  are  based  on 
available  household  surveys  of  different  years,  and  the  per  capita 
GDP estimates are in 2000 U.S. dollars for the respective years (the 
data set is described in detail in Montenegro and Hirn 2008). 

27. Maddison 2008b.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   291
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   291

291

10/9/08   11:44:42 PM
10/9/08   11:44:42 PM

292 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

28. Kim and Margo 2004.
29. This  is  the  so-called  home  market  effect  of  the  new  eco-
nomic  geography,  also  discussed  in  chapter  4.  The  concentra-
tion  of  economic  activity  in  urban  areas  also  entails  additional 
 productivity-enhancing effects, as discussed in chapter 4.

30. This tendency for urbanization to produce a divergence in 
basic  welfare  indicators  in  favor  of  urban  areas  distinguishes  the 
modern-day  developing  countries  from  the  industrializers  of  the 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, discussed below.

31. Based on 2003 data from Maddison (2008b).
32. European Commission 2001.
33. Miles 2007.
34. As  measured  in  constant  1990  international  dollars  using 

data from Maddison (2008b).

35. An area is deﬁ ned as predominantly urban (rural) if more 
than 50 percent of its population lives in urban (rural) areas. An 
area is also classed as predominantly urban if its urban population 
share is between 15 and 50 percent and it has an urban center of 
more than 500,000 inhabitants (1 million for Japan) representing 
in excess of 25 percent of the area’s population.

36. Some care is required in this case. The increase in the U.S. 
urban wage premium during this period might have had less to do 
with better lives in cities than with the effects of large declines in 
the relative prices of agricultural commodities (Barro and Sala-I-
Martin 2004, p. 470).

37. These estimates of urban consumption and urban shares of 
population  are  based  on  country  household  surveys  of  different 
years, depending on availability. 

38. As illustrated later for China, however, this is not the case for 
all developing countries. Although there is a negative relationship 
across Chinese provinces between the urban share and the ratio of 
urban to rural income, this relationship has shifted upward since 
the late 1990s.

39. “Access to water” is deﬁ ned here as any access to improved 
water  sources.  These  sources  vary  according  to  the  local  context, 
but include wells, communal taps, piped water, and trucks selling 
water.  Similarly,  “sanitation”  refers  to  a  range  of  qualiﬁ ed  items 
such as latrines and outhouses. 

40. The countries included in the sample are Bangladesh, Benin, 
Bolivia,  Burkina  Faso,  Cameroon,  Chad,  Colombia,  the  Domini-
can  Republic,  the  Arab  Republic  of  Egypt,  Ghana,  Guatemala, 
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Morocco, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Peru, the Phil-
ippines, Tanzania, Turkey, Uganda, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimba-
bwe.

41. Gwatkin and others 2007.
42. Satterthwaite and others 2007.
43. The Economist 2007a.
44. Satterthwaite and others 2007.
45. Satterthwaite and others 2007.
46. Data  on  Delhi’s  population  comes  from  United  Nations 

(2006). 

47. Smith 1989.
48. Crafts 2008.
49. Williamson 1982.
50. The Economist 2007a.
51. Satterthwaite and others 2007.

52. This ﬁ gure, together with all other historical urban share ﬁ g-
ures quoted in this section, is based on the deﬁ nition of an urban 
area as a city with more than 5,000 inhabitants and taken from Bai-
roch and Goertz (1986). All ﬁ gures on urban shares and populations 
for  contemporary  developing  countries  in  this  section  have  been 
taken, or calculated using data, from the United Nations (2006c). As 
previously noted, using this database to compare changes in urban 
share across countries is not as problematic as using it to compare 
levels of urban shares across countries. 

53. This sample consists of Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, 
Sweden,  Switzerland,  and  the  United  Kingdom.  Its  composition 
was determined by the availability of historical data from Bairoch 
and Goertz (1986).

54. Figure  1.13  illustrates  a  number  of  countries  that,  accord-
ing  to  the  United  Nations  (2006),  experienced  positive  change  in 
urban share between 1985 and 2005. A handful of countries with 
populations  greater  than  1  million  experienced “negative  urban-
ization” over this period (for example, Armenia, Estonia, Georgia, 
Kyrgystan, Latvia, Moldova, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan). Although 
the deﬁ nitions of an urban area have not changed for these coun-
tries, the pattern of declining urban shares may, in these cases, be 
related to the dissolution of the Soviet Union. A further two of the 
countries (the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic) were parts 
of the former Czechoslovakia, and the dissolution of this country, 
along with the transition away from a planned economy, may have 
likewise affected their urban shares. For the remaining six countries 
(Iraq,  Mauritius,  Papua  New  Guinea,  Sri  Lanka,  the  United Arab 
Emirates, and Zambia), a number have unconventional or chang-
ing deﬁ nitions of an urban area. For example, Papua New Guinea’s 
deﬁ nition of an urban area is a center with 500 inhabitants or more, 
an  unusually  small  threshold,  while  the  United  Arab  Emirates’ 
urban population is measured as the population of nine cities.

55. Satterthwaite 2007.
56. United Nations 2006c.
57. This conclusion is based on historical estimate of U.S. urban 
population growth derived by combining historical data on urban 
shares  from  Bairoch  and  Goertz  (1986)  with  historical  data  on 
country population sizes from Maddison (2008b).

58. Gwatkin and others 2007. 
59. Gwatkin and others 2007. 
60. Woods 2000.
61. Williams and Galley 1995.
62. Orwell 1937. 
63. Crafts 2008.
64. Williamson 1990.
65. Stockel 2002.
66. Kim and Margo 2004. 

Chapter 2

1. Armstrong and Taylor 2000. See, in particular, chapter 8.
2. Beaumier 1998.
3. Krugman (1991a), pp. 11–13.
4. See, for example, Barro and Sala-I-Martin (2004).
5. OECD (2007), p. 14.
6. Blanchard and Katz 1992.
7. OECD (2006), p. 13.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   292
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   292

10/9/08   11:44:42 PM
10/9/08   11:44:42 PM

 

Endnotes 

293

8. France’s National Statistics Ofﬁ ce’s Web site (www.insee.fr/fr/

default.asp). 

9. Länder  National  Accounts  Working  Group  (http://www

.statistik-portal.de).

10. This  pattern  is  familiar  to  development  specialists  as  the 
“Kuznets curve,” named for the Nobel economist Simon Kuznets. 
Although the Kuznets curve depicts a relationship between a coun-
try’s economic development and its interpersonal income inequal-
ity, the hypothesis Kuznets forwarded to explain this relationship 
corresponds  to  that  underlying  the  relationship  between  spatial 
inequality and development documented in this chapter.

11. Poncet 2006.
12. Buys, Deichmann, and Wheeler 2006.
13. Poncet 2005.
14. Poncet 2006.
15. Tobler 1970.
16. Angeriz, McCombie, and Roberts 2008.
17. Lipsey and Nakamura 2006. 
18. Henderson, Kuncoro, and Nasution 1996.
19. Deichmann and others forthcoming.
20. Henderson, Shalizi, and Venables 2001.
21. U.S. Bureau Census, various years.
22. Aghion and Williamson (1998), pp. 144–51.
23. Taylor and Williamson 2006.
24. Angeriz, McCombie, and Roberts 2008.
25. Fingleton 2003.
26. Deichmann and others 2005.
27. Hering and Poncet 2006.
28. Da Mata and others 2007.
29. Paillacar 2007. 
30. Head and Mayer 2006.
31. Collier 2007.
32. Estimates generated from Nordhaus’s Geographically Based 
Economic Database (http://gecon.yale.edu/), compiled from infor-
mation gathered in 1990. 

33. Time-series  data  on  spatial  concentration  were  assembled 
for  10  countries—some,  however,  with  only  two  observations. 
Countries  in  the  sample  are  Canada  (1890–2006),  Spain  (1850–
2000),  France  (1801–1999),  the  Netherlands  (1850–2006),  Japan 
(1900–2000), United States (1960–2000), Brazil (1960–2004), Chile 
(1975–2004),  Thailand  (1975–2004),  Indonesia  (1989–2005),  and 
the Philippines (1980–2005. Except France, Spain, and the Nether-
lands, where population is used, economic mass is measured based 
on  GDP.  Data  come  from  a  variety  of  sources.  But,  as  explained 
below,  this  combination  of  information  sources  does  not  consti-
tute  a  signiﬁ cant  problem  because  the  concentration  measure—a 
ratio—is robust to various indicators. 

34. In  what  follows,  the  concentration  measure  is  deﬁ ned 
according  to  the  following  method.  First,  we  estimate  an  area’s 
hypothetical share of national GDP under the assumption that this 
GDP  exhibits  a  uniform  spatial  distribution.  Second,  we  identify 
the area with the highest actual share of national GDP. Third, we 
divide the actual GDP share of this leading area by its hypothetical 
(uniformly spatially distributed) share to get our measure of spatial 
concentration. For example, if the leading area has an actual share 
of 10 percent and a hypothetical share of 2 percent, then the mea-
sure of concentration is equal to 5. 

35. The concentration measure in this section focuses only on 
the  level  of  concentration  (density)  in  the  leading  area  of  each 
country. It does not provide information for the spatial distribution 
of density across the remaining areas.

36. GDP per capita ﬁ gures are taken from Maddison (2008b).
37. Krugman (1991a), pp. 11–13.
38. Ingram and Whitehead 2008.
39. The source of information is a set of more than 120 house-
hold surveys in 75 countries, with some countries having two years 
of observations. For each country and year, we estimate household 
consumption  for  individual  households.  In  some  countries,  only 
household incomes are available. Then, we aggregate the household 
consumption  into  total  household  consumption  for  each  census 
region of the country. The concentration measure for a country is 
proxied by the highest regional share of total household consump-
tion.

40. The source of information is Yale University’s William Nord-
haus’s Geographically Based Economic Database (http://gecon.yale.
edu/). This database of population, gross product, and land area of 
subnational areas covers more than 90 countries.

41. In cross-country comparisons, use of a standardized grid cell 
helps  avoid  the  cross-level  fallacy,  in  which  the  number  of  parti-
tions can affect the variance of the measure. Like the procedure for 
estimating the spatial Gini coefﬁ cient, we rank the terrestrial grid 
cells in descending order according to their GDP density and plot 
the cumulative land area on the horizontal axis against cumulative 
gross product on the vertical axis. Then a polynomial function is 
ﬁ tted to the data to predict the share of GDP within the densest 5 
percent of the country’s land area. 

42. Spatial Gini coefﬁ cients consider the distribution of density 
across  a  country’s  entire  land  area.  The  coefﬁ cient  equals  zero  if 
economic density is evenly distributed across space, while it equals 
one if all production takes place within a single terrestrial grid cell. 
Spatial  Gini  coefﬁ cients  of  GDP  density  are  computed  in  three 
steps. First, grid cells are ranked in descending order according to 
density  of  economic  mass  (GDP  per  square  kilometer).  Second, 
cumulative  shares  of  land  area  are  derived,  plus  a  corresponding 
series of cumulative shares of GDP, by grid cell. Third, these two 
measures are plotted against each other to produce a Lorenz curve, 
and the spatial Gini coefﬁ cient is calculated as the ratio of the area 
between the uniform distribution line and the Lorenz curve to the 
area below the uniform distribution line.

43. Krugman 1993.
44. Based on constant 1990 international Geary-Khamis dollars 

in Maddison (2008b).

45. The  coefﬁ cient  of  variation  increased  from  0.107  to  0.148 

(Crafts 2005).

46. Comparison based on GDP per capita ﬁ gures from Maddi-

son (2008b).

47. Roberts 2004.
48. Barro and Sala-I-Martin 1992.
49. Green 1969.
50. We deﬁ ne the welfare measure as per capita gross cell prod-
uct, and spatial disparity as the ratio of the highest-to-lowest per 
capita  gross  cell  product.  Other  measures  of  spatial  inequality—
such as the difference between the 90th percentile and the 10th per-
centile and that between the mean for the top 10 grid cells and the 

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   293
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   293

10/9/08   11:44:43 PM
10/9/08   11:44:43 PM

294 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

mean  for  the  bottom  10  grid  cells—and  coefﬁ cients  of  variation 
show similar stylized patterns. 

51. For  each  country  and  year,  we  estimate  a  Mincerian-type 
regression  with  per  capita  household  consumption  as  the  depen-
dent variable, a set of location dummies as the independent vari-
ables, and standard observable household characteristics (such as 
household  size  and  household  head’s  education,  gender,  age,  and 
marital status) as control variables. The location variables are broad 
census regions. The difference between the maximal and minimal 
coefﬁ cients on the location dummy variables is our disparity mea-
sure  in  consumption  between  leading  and  lagging  areas,  purely 
because of location.

52. We  estimate  the  relationship  between  spatial  disparity 
and GDP per capita by pooling the disparity estimates from each 
household survey in a regression analysis that also controls for the 
number of census regions within each country and each country’s 
land  area.  The  inverse  relationship  between  spatial  disparities  in 
consumption and the level of development was found to be robust 
to various model speciﬁ cations (to the use of different sets of con-
trol variables). 

53. These estimates are in 2000 U.S. dollars for the years of the 

household surveys during the 2000s.

54. Yemtsov 2005.
55. Kanbur and Zhang 2005; Milanovic 2005.
56. Demurger and others 2002.
57. World Bank 2007.
58. Georgia was the only country in the region not to enjoy a 
reduction in absolute poverty over the period. Douthat, Poe, and 
Cutler (2006), p. 52, and World Bank (2005e).

59. Ferreira 2000.
60. GDP per capita ﬁ gures taken from Maddison 2008b.
61. Naudé and Krugell 2006.
62. Cárdenas and Pontón 1995.
63. Hill, Resosudarmo, and Vidyattama 2007. 
64. Wisaweisuan forthcoming.
65. Son forthcoming.
66. Based  on  United  Nations  (1997)  and  United  Nations 

(2005).

67. Garcia-Verdu 2005; Fuentes and Montes 2004. 
68. Public  Administration  Research  and  Consultation  Centre 

(PARC) 2004.

69. Government of India Planning Commission 2002b.
70. Sri Lanka National Council for Economic Development and 

UNDP (2005).

71. Government of Sri Lanka 2008.
72. Kenya Ministry of Planning and National Development and 

UNDP (2005).

73. Smith (1976), p. 122.
74. Venables 2006.
75. Chang 2005.
76. Hanson 1998b.
77. Demurger and others 2002.
78. He forthcoming. 
79. Venables 2006.
80. Crafts (2005), table 4, p. 59.
81. Calculations  are  for  2005,  based  on  data  from  the  China 
Statistical Yearbook (2006), (http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2006/
indexeh.htm). 

82. GDP per capita ﬁ gures for Shanghai and Guizho have been 
calculated  for  2005  by  multiplying  the  estimates  for  relative  pro-
vincial performance by Maddison’s estimate of national GDP per 
capita. The ﬁ gures are in 1990 international dollars. Comparisons 
with Britain are likewise based on Maddison’s data from Maddison 
(2008b).

Chapter 3

1. Figures  are  based  on  Maddison  (2006).  Between  1820  and 
1998,  GDP  increased  from  $694.4  billion  to  $33,725.9  billion  in 
1990 international dollars. Population during that time grew from 
1.04 billion to 5.3 billion, a ﬁ vefold increase at about 1 percent per 
year. 

2. These  estimates  are  based  on  the  G-Econ  project  database 
assembled  at  Yale  University  (see  Nordhaus  2006).  The  database 
provides estimates for 1990 of GDP, population, and land area of 
regular grid cells that are about 100 by 100 kilometers at the equa-
tor. These ﬁ gures likely underestimate actual concentration.

3. Ohmae 1990.
4. The  numbers  include  land  borders  between  nation-states 
only. So, borders between colonies in the nineteenth or early twen-
tieth century are not considered. 

5. Blake 2005.
6. The  measure  summarizes  four  indicators  representing 
restrictions to the flow of goods, capital, people, and ideas: (1) 
average tariffs (World Bank data), (2) capital openness (Chinn 
and Ito 2006), (3) proportion of countries that need a visa to visit 
that  country  (Neumayer  2006),  and  (4)  a  press  freedom  index 
that  includes  information  such  as  Internet  filtering  (Reporters 
without  Borders  for  Press  Freedom  2007).  These  measures  are 
discussed in more detail later in the chapter. All indicators were 
normalized  and  rescaled  from  more  open  to  more  closed  bor-
ders and summed. An index based on rank sizes provides similar 
results.  The  data  typically  refer  to  2005  or  2006,  but  in  a  few 
instances they refer to 2004. For a few countries with only three 
of  the  four  indicators  were  available,  the  missing  values  were 
replaced by the overall mean. Among the larger countries, this 
affected Afghanistan, Cuba, the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Serbia and Montenegro, Tajikistan, and the Republic of Yemen. 
The index captures many but not all barriers and divisions. For 
instance, incompatible laws and regulations can have an impact 
on country well-being. 

7. There  are  several  globalization  indexes  that  capture  similar 
aspects of international barriers. One example is the KOF Index of 
Globalization  (globalization.kof.ethz.ch).  However,  these  indexes 
typically mix country regulations such as tariff levels with outcome 
variables such as the share of exports in GDP. For the illustrative 
analysis in this chapter, we are strictly interested in how countries 
themselves manage economic interaction. 

8. See McCallum (1995) and Helliwell (2002).
9. Anderson and van Wincoop 2003; 2004.
10. Bhagwati and Srinivasan 2002; Alcalá and Ciccone 2004.
11. Rodriguez and Rodrik 2000; Slaughter 2001.
12. World Bank 2007j.
13. Kee,  Nicita,  and  Olarreaga  (2006)  develop  measures  of 
trade restrictions that include some of these aspects. Available for 
a smaller set of countries than the average tariff index, this subset 
shows a high correlation with the average tariff index.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   294
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   294

10/9/08   11:44:43 PM
10/9/08   11:44:43 PM

 

Endnotes 

295

14. See  Chinn  and  Ito  (2006).  The  Chinn-Ito  index  of  capital 
openness  is  derived  from  the  IMF’s  Annual  Report  on  Exchange 
Arrangements  and  Exchange  Restrictions  (AREAER).  It  is  the  ﬁ rst 
principle  component  of  four  binary  variables  reported:  existence 
of multiple exchange rates, restrictions on current account, capital 
account transactions, and requirement of the surrender of export 
proceeds. See Chinn and Ito (2006). The original index values were 
rescaled  between  0  (lowest  restrictions  among  all  countries)  and 
100 (highest restrictions). The regional averages are unweighted.

15. McKenzie 2001; Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei 2006; Chinn 

and Ito 2006; Henry 2007.

16. Quinn and Toyoda 2006.
17. Bekaerta, Harvey, and Lundblad 2005.
18. Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei 2006.
19. Pritchett 2006.
20. Quantifying  these  beneﬁ ts  is  difﬁ cult.  But  a  recent  study 
estimates that a 3 percent increase in the labor force of industrial 
countries could provide a $356 billion gain (World Bank 2005).

21. Pritchett 2006.
22. Neumayer 2006.
23. McKenzie 2007.
24. Linden, Kraemer, and Dedrick 2007. Another example of the 
importance  of  knowledge-intensive  activities  is  given  by  Oppen-
heimer (2008): Of each cup of Latin American–grown coffee that 
U.S. consumers buy, only 3 percent of the price goes to the region’s 
farmers. The rest funds genetic engineering, processing, branding, 
marketing, and other knowledge-based activities, which are mostly 
based outside the region.

25. Criscuolo, Haskel, and Slaughter 2004.
26. Brunettia and Weder 2003; Keefer and Khemani 2005.
27. Data available online at www.rsf.org. 
28. Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger 1999.
29. See Collier 2007.
30. Alesina and Spolaore (2003), p. 81.
31. Winters and Martins 2004.
32. Bertram 2004; World Bank 2006a.
33. Alesina,  Devleeschauwer,  Easterly,  Kurlat,  and  Wacziarg 

2003.

34. Collier 2007.
35. Spolaore and Wacziarg 2005.
36. Simmons 2006.
37. Blake 2005.
38. Collier 2003; 2007. Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) 
show that the impact can also be in the opposite direction. Based 
on data for African countries from 1981–99 and using rainfall data 
to correct for potential endogeneity, they estimate that a negative 
growth  shock  of  5  percent  increases  the  likelihood  of  conﬂ ict  by 
one-half in the following year. 

39. See endnote 2 for data source. These data by grid cells may 
still underestimate concentration, because the estimates are based 
on  data  for  1990  and  high-concentration  areas  have  likely  grown 
faster than low-concentration areas. 

40. Maddison 2006.
41. Bairoch 1982.
42. Tilly 1990.
43. Maddison 2006.
44. See box 0.2 for deﬁ nitions of WDR regions.
45. Disdier and Head 2008.

46. Leamer (2007) highlights this point.
47. Bourguignon and Morrisson 1998; World Bank 2007a.
48. Morrisson and Murtin 2005.
49. Maddison 2006.
50. Bourguignon and Morrisson 2002.
51. Collier 2007.
52. Cutler, Deaton, and Lleras-Muney (2006) discuss the drivers 

of falling mortality rates that led to these increases in longevity.

53. Morrisson and Murtin 2005.
54. The  inequality  numbers  may  underestimate  the  true  dis-
parities  in  human  capital  outcomes.  “Years  of  schooling”  relates 
only  to  primary  and  secondary  education  and  therefore  has  an 
inherent  maximum  value.  Many  developed  countries  have  essen-
tially achieved a natural maximum some time ago, but they have 
made further progress in improving the quality of education and 
in  expanding  tertiary  education.  Developing  countries  have  been 
catching  up  on  primary  and  secondary  education,  but  less  so  in 
other dimensions of human capital.

55. Cohen and Soto 2007.
56. These  numbers  may  overstate  improvements  somewhat, 
because  no  data  are  available  for  several  countries  that  are  likely 
among the worst performers.

57. Baumol 1986; De Long 1988; Barro and Sala-I-Martin 1992; 

Quah 1996.

58. Maddison 2006. Pre-1990 data for Eastern Europe are likely 

somewhat less reliable.

59. Lederman, Maloney, and Servén 2005.
60. Pallage and Robe 2003.
61. Nordhaus 2006.
62. Snow, Craig, Deichmann, and Marsh 1999.
63. Caselli 2005.
64. Easterly and Levine 2001.
65. Baldwin, Martin, and Ottaviano 2001.
66. Puga and Venables 1999; Shatz and Venables 2005.
67. Levinson 2006.
68. Economic Intelligence Unit 2007.
69. Wolf  2004.  Others,  however,  such  as  Bordo,  Eichengreen, 
and Irwin (1999), think trade and capital markets are more inte-
grated today.

70. Leamer 2007.
71. According  to  UN  Comtrade  data  for  2004  and  using  ﬁ g-
ures reported by China—for example, Japan has a trade surplus in 
manufacturing of US$21 billion with China, the Republic of Korea 
US$34 billion, Thailand US$6 billion, the Philippines US$5 billion, 
and Indonesia US$1 billion. 

72. New York Times, February 22, 1999.

GIM 2

1. Baldwin and Wyplosz 2006; Crafts and Toniolo 1996.
2. Baldwin 2008.
3. Baldwin 1995.

Chapter 4

1. Smith (1976), p. 21.
2. See Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz 2001; Sinai and Waldfogel 2004. 
3. Discussion of agglomeration economies dates as far back as 
Smith’s  consideration  of  specialization  and  the  division  of  labor 
(Smith  (1976));  Marshall’s  information  spillovers,  searching  and 

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   295
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   295

10/9/08   11:44:43 PM
10/9/08   11:44:43 PM

296 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

matching  processes,  and  input-sharing  (Marshall  (1890));  and 
more  recently,  interindustry  supply  linkages  (Chinitz  (1961)); 
learning-by-doing (Arrow (1962)); and cross-fertilization of ideas 
and innovation (Jacobs (1970)).

4. McCann (2001), p. 56.
5. See,  for  example,  Henderson  (1986);  Henderson,  Kuncoro, 
and Turner (1995); Nakamura (1985); Hammond and von Hagen 
(1994); Sveikauskas, Gowdy, and Funk (1988); Greytak and Black-
ley  (1985);  Glaeser  and  others  (1992);  and  Bernstein  and  Nadiri 
(1988). 

6. Prateen 1988.
7. Junius 1997.
8. Of 27 estimated scale coefﬁ cients, 23 show increasing returns 
to scale, most above 4 percent, robust to various speciﬁ cations of 
the production function (Griliches and Ringstad 1971, and Ring-
stad 1978). 

9. Baldwin and Gorecki 1986.
10. Owen (1983) for Europe, and Scherer (1980) and Hall (1988; 

1990) for the United States.

11. Industry-level  scale  returns  in  the  range  of  1.30  are  found 
for many U.S. manufacturing industries (see Paul and Siegel 1999), 
and Chilean plant-level data for eight industries exhibit a compara-
ble scale elasticity of between 1.20 and 1.44 (Levinsohn and Petrin 
1999). 

12. Antweiler and Treﬂ er (2002) for 71 countries over the period 

1972–92. 

13. The  average  scale  elasticity  estimate  of  1.051  is  within  the 
bounds of estimates in the United States (Basu and Fernald 1997) 
and in Canada (Fuss and Gupta 1981).

14. See Roeger (1995) for the United States, and Martins, Scar-
petta, and Pilat (1996) for the Organisation for Economic Co-oper-
ation and Development. 

15. Junius 1997.
16. Roeger 1995.
17. Hughes  and  Mester  (1998)  detect  that,  as  scale  increases, 
banks  economize  on  resources  to  manage  risks,  preserve  capital, 
and  signal  institutional  strength.  Calem  (1994)  and  Hughes  and 
others (1999) suggest that geographic expansion of bank branches 
produces scale efﬁ ciency gains from lower deposit volatility, higher 
expected returns, and more diversiﬁ ed risk. There is also evidence 
of increasing returns to scale in data processing activities (for exam-
ple, Hancock, Humphrey, and Wilcox (1999) for payment system). 
18. Bossone and Lee (2004), using a sample of 875 commercial 

banks drawn from the FitchLBCA’s Bank Scope database.

19. Named  after  three  economists:  Alfred  Marshall,  Kenneth 

Arrow, and Paul Romer (Glaeser and others 1992).

20. Hanson 1996.
21. See  www.referenceforbusiness.com/industries/Textile-Mill/

Women-s-Full-Length-Knee.html.

22. Donsky 1990.
23. U.S. Bureau of Census website.
24. Henderson  (1986),  based  on  cross-sectional  data  for  the 

United States and Brazil.

25. Jacobs 1970.
26. Henderson, Kuncoro, and Turner 1995. Henderson (1997a) 
ﬁ nds the largest effects on productivity from own-industry employ-
ment are lagged two to ﬁ ve years, because it takes time to learn from 
neighbors.  Jaffe,  Trajtenberg,  and  Henderson  (1993)  corroborate 

the  slow  diffusion  over  space  of  location-  and  industry-speciﬁ c 
information.

27. Carlton 1983; Wheeler and Mody 1992; Carlino 1979; and 
Hay (1979) ﬁ nd that concentration of industrial activity is favor-
able for inﬂ uencing U.S. ﬁ rms investment and location decisions. 

28. World Bank 2006c.
29. Burchﬁ eld and others 2006.
30. Instituto de Pesquisa Economica Aplicada (ipeadata.gov.br).
31. Data from World Bank (2007j).
32. Devereux, Grifﬁ th, and Simpson (2004) for the United King-
dom; Ellison and Glaeser (1997) for the United States; and Maurel 
and Sédillot (1999) for France. 

33. Rosenthal and Strange 2004.
34. Kim 1995.
35. Duranton and Overman 2002. 
36. Henderson, Shalizi, and Venables 2001.
37. Henderson, Shalizi, and Venables 2001. 
38. Henderson, Lee, and Lee 2001. 
39. Krugman (1991b) notes that “the most spectacular examples 
of localization in today’s world are, in fact, based on services rather 
than  manufacturing  .  .  .  and  technology  .  .  .  will  promote  more 
localization of services” (p. 66). 

40. In 2004, the rest of the nonfarm employment went to trans-
port and trade (22 percent) and forestry, utilities, and construction 
(7 percent) (Kolko 2007). 

41. Audretsch and Feldman 1996.
42. Feldman  (1994)  documents  that,  in  the  United  States,  ser-
vices,  such  as  innovative  or  knowledge-intensive  activity,  are  far 
more densely packed than manufacturing. Audretsch and Feldman 
(1996), using a count of new product introductions by the Small 
Business  Administration  in  1982,  ﬁ nd  that  knowledge-oriented 
industries  have  more  spatially  concentrated  innovative  activity. 
Dekle  and  Eaton  (1999)  provide  evidence  that  external  econo-
mies  from  clustering  are  even  stronger  for  business  services  than 
for  manufacturing  activities.  Feldman  and Audretsch  (1999)  ﬁ nd 
that sectors in which R&D, university research, and skilled labor are 
important inputs tend to be more spatially concentrated.

43. Kolko 2007.
44. Fafchamps and Desmet 2000. 
45. Desmet and Fafchamps 2006.
46. At the upper tail of the distribution, however, the opposite is 
true, with large cities losing jobs in favor of intermediate size urban 
areas (Carlino and Chatterjee 2001; Desmet and Fafchamps 2003).

47. Kolko 1998.
48. Martin, R. 2005.
49. See, for example, Holmes and Stevens (2002).
50. Head, Reis, and Swenson (1995) and Smith Jr. and Florida 
(1994)  ﬁ nd  strong  preferences  of  Japanese  automotive  assem-
blers to locate near each other to take advantage of backward and 
forward  linkages.  Hammond  and  von  Hagen  (1994)  examining 
employment in four U.S. cities and three two-digit industries, ﬁ nd 
that labor-sharing tends to be stronger in expanding markets while 
asset-sharing is more important in mature markets. Holmes (1999) 
offers the most direct and compelling evidence of input-sharing as a 
source of agglomeration economies: the pantyhose industry is con-
centrated in North Carolina with 62 percent of national employ-
ment, and purchased input intensity of 53 percent, compared with 
40 percent nationally. This pattern is found for other concentrated 

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   296
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   296

10/9/08   11:44:43 PM
10/9/08   11:44:43 PM

 

Endnotes 

297

industries  as  well.  Holmes  (1999)  examines  the  textile  industry, 
ﬁ nding evidence in support of input-sharing. In particular, he ﬁ nds 
a positive relationship between the size of the textile industry at a 
location and the presence of local specialized input suppliers to the 
industry.

51. Costa and Kahn 2000. 
52. See Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1998), and Sobel 

(2000) for surveys of the literature on social learning.

53. Marshall  (1890)  emphasizes  how  cities  favor  the  diffusion 
of innovations and ideas while Jacobs (1970) stresses how the envi-
ronment  offered  by  cities  improves  the  prospects  for  generating 
new ideas. Lucas Jr. (1988) also suggests that learning encompasses, 
not  just  of  cutting-edge  technology,  but  incremental  mundane 
knowledge  (knowing  how,  knowing  who,  etc.)  through  intended 
and unintended communications, and cities are the best place for 
knowledge transmission. 

54. Marshall 1890.
55. Jaffe,  Trajtenberg,  and  Henderson  1993.  Jaffe  (1986)  ﬁ nds 
evidence  for  local  research  and  development  (R&D)  spillovers 
among 432 U.S. ﬁ rms where the number of patents per dollar of 
R&D spending is higher for ﬁ rms located in areas with above-aver-
age R&D spending. 

56. Rauch  (1993)  shows  that  wages  are  higher  where  average 
education levels are high, because workers will be more productive 
and employers will be willing to pay high wages in competing for 
them.  Moretti  (2004a)  ﬁ nds  a  positive  effect  of  college  graduates 
on a city’s wages. Charlot and Duranton (2004) use survey data to 
show  that  workplace  communication  is  more  extensive  in  urban 
areas and that this communication increases wages. 

57. This is known as the home market effects in the literature.
58. Holmes and Stevens (2002) look at the relationship between 
ﬁ rm size and city size across county-industries in the United States, 
and interpret their ﬁ ndings as evidence of increased productivity 
associated  with  concentration  that  allows  the  plants  to  become 
larger.

59. Holmes 1999; Henderson 2005a.
60. Davis  and  Weinstein  (1999),  examining  production  across 
Japanese  prefectures,  ﬁ nd  that  an  industry‘s  production  is  con-
centrated where the demand for that industry‘s good is relatively 
high. Wheat  (1986)  and  Glaeser  and  others  (1992)  ﬁ nd  evidence 
that manufacturing employment grows faster in subnational areas 
with more rapid population growth. Justman (1994) ﬁ nds strong 
positive comovements of local supply and local demand for manu-
facturing industries in U.S. cities.

61. See, for example, Shefer (1973); Mera (1973); Segal (1976); 
Kawashima  (1975);  Sveikauskas  (1975);  Moomaw  (1981)  and 
Moomaw (1983); and Bartelsman, Caballero, and Lyons (1994). 

62. Henderson, Shalizi, and Venables 2001).
63. As  Glaeser  and  others  (1992)  observe  “intellectual  break-
throughs must cross hallways and streets more easily than oceans 
and continents” (p. 1127).

64. Feldman and Audretsch 1999. 
65. Angeriz, McCombie, and Roberts 2008.
66. On  this  point  see  Feldman  and  Audretsch  (1999),  pp. 

409–29.

67. On this point see Venables (2006), pp. 61–85.
68. There were, of course, some exceptions, most notably in the 
work of Young (1928) and Kaldor (see, for example, Kaldor 1972). 

These economists failed, however, to provide the technical solutions 
associated with the modeling of increasing returns to scale.

69. Krugman 1991b.
70. Warsh (2006) provides an entertaining and accurate account 
of intellectual progress in dealing with increasing returns to scale. 
The advances are based on the special features of ideas, highlighted 
elegantly in Romer (1994). An idea, once developed, may be used 
costlessly  by  others  as  a  starting  point  for  new  ideas,  making  it 
“nonrival,” unlike labor, capital, land, and other inputs for produc-
tion.  Though  ideas  are  nonrival,  however,  they  are  generally  nei-
ther free nor nonexcludable. Coming up with useful ideas usually 
requires effort, and through secrecy or the enforcement of intellec-
tual property rights, it is possible to exclude people from using ideas 
to improve products or production processes, even if temporarily. 
This  excludability  results  in  knowledge  that  confers  a  monopoly 
power  on  the  creators  of  the  knowledge.  By  adding  knowledge 
explicitly to formulations of economic growth, economists are able 
to recognize the centrality of ideas and the importance of increas-
ing returns, but this also requires recognizing the proliferation of 
imperfect competition. 

71. Dixit and Stiglitz 1977. 
72. Henderson 1974.
73. Black  and  Henderson  1999;  Calem  and  Carlino  1991; 
Combes  2000;  Desmet  and  Fafchamps  2006;  Duranton  and  Puga 
2005;  Duranton  and  Puga  2004;  Feldman  and  Audretsch  1999; 
Fujita and Ishii 1999; and Glaeser and others 1992.

74. Glaeser and Maré 2001; Henderson 1986; Henderson, Kun-
coro, and Turner 1995; Henderson 1997b; Henderson 1997a; Hen-
derson 2003b; Moomaw 1981; Moomaw 1983; Kolko 1999; Naka-
mura  1985;  Rosenthal  and  Strange  2001;  Rosenthal  and  Strange 
2003; Sveikauskas, Gowdy, and Funk 1988.

75. Black  and  Henderson  1999;  Dumais,  Ellison,  and  Glaeser 
2002;  Eaton  and  Eckstein  1997;  Henderson  1997a;  Henderson 
2003a; and Kim 1995.

76. This has been recognized in geography as long ago as since 

Christaller (1933) and Lösch (1940).

77. Duranton and Puga 2000.
78. Henderson  (1997b)  for  the  United  States,  Fujita  and  Ishii 
(1999) for Japan, and Kolko (1999) and Henderson, Lee, and Lee 
(2001) for the Republic of Korea. 

79. Henderson 1997b.
80. Glaeser,  Scheinkman,  and  Schleifer  1995;  Fafchamps  and 

Desmet 2000.

81. Henderson  2005b  and  Henderson,  Kuncoro,  and  Nasution 

1996.

82. Glaeser and Kahn 2001.
83. Diversity is measured by the inverse of the Herﬁ ndal Index 

of local employment shares of different sectors.

84. Feldman and Audretsch 1999. 
85. Fujita and Ishii 1999 and Duranton and Puga 2001. 
86. Duranton and Puga 2005.
87. Chandler Jr. 1977 and Kim 1999.
88. Tofﬂ er  1980;  Naisbitt  1995;  Negroponte  1995;  and  Knoke 

1996. 

89. Feldman and Audretsch 1999 and Venables 2006.
90. Kolko 2000. 
91. Glaeser and others 1992; Henderson, Kuncoro, and Turner 

1995.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   297
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   297

10/9/08   11:44:43 PM
10/9/08   11:44:43 PM

298 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

92. Black and Henderson (2003) show that cities that dramati-
cally  grew  (the  Phoenix  population  multiplied  10-fold  during 
1950–90) or shrank (the Detroit population halved during the same 
period) are the exceptions, as relative sizes of U.S. cities have been 
stable over the last century. Eaton and Eckstein (1997) and Dob-
kins and Ioannides (2001) also ﬁ nd a pattern of overall stability in 
France, Japan, and the United States. They observe that the relative 
populations of the top 40 urban areas in France (1876–1990) and 
Japan (1925–85) remained essentially unchanged.

93. Henderson (1997b). Kim (1995) shows a high (0.64) corre-
lation coefﬁ cient of regional localization for two-digit industries in 
the United States between 1860 and 1987 at the state level. Dumais, 
Ellison,  and  Glaeser  (2002)  also  ﬁ nd  that,  for  most  industries, 
agglomeration patterns were strikingly stable over 1972–92. Hen-
derson (2003a) ﬁ nds stable specialization patterns over 30 years in 
a study of nine three-digit industries. 

94. See, Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989b); Dunne, Rob-
erts,  and  Samuelson  (1989a);  Davis  and  Haltiwanger  (1992);  and 
Herzog Jr. and Schlottmann (1991). 

95. Brezis and Krugman 1997.
96. Henderson, Kuncoro, and Turner 1995.
97. Van der Linde 2003.
98. Kolko 1998.
99. United Nations (2006c), Fact Sheet 9.
100. Gribbin (2000), pp. 30–31.
101. Quote from a top UN ofﬁ cial, Lars Reutersward, Nairobi-

based director of the UN Human Settlements Program.

102. Quoting Lars Reutersward in Ward 2006.
103. United Nations 2004b.
104. Gill and Kharas 2007. 
105. Au and Henderson 2006a.
106. Rosenthal and Strange 2004 cited from Hoover and Vernon 

1959.

107. Santos and Shaffer 2004.
108. McCrae 2006.
109. World Bank 2002a.

Chapter 5

1. Bureau of Transport Statistics 2003.
2. While  returns  to  capital  vary  by  place  (between  urban  and 
rural areas, leading and lagging regions, and rich and poor coun-
tries), lower marginal returns in a given location can be explained 
by inadequate complementary factors (Caselli and Feyrer 2007).

3. In 2000 China sent only 458,000 migrants abroad, while 120 
million  people  migrated  internally.  In  the  second  half  of  1990s, 
fewer than 300,000 people emigrated from Vietnam, while 4.3 mil-
lion people migrated internally. See Anh, Tacoli, and Thanh (2003) 
in Deshingkar and Grimm (2004).

4. Migration from rural areas to cities accounts for only about 
a third for the growth of urban areas worldwide. Nam, Serow, and 
Sly (1990) and Deshingkar and Grimm (2004) show that the largest 
ﬂ ows of internal migrants in developing countries are from rural 
areas  to  other  rural  areas.  In  India,  where  permanent  migration 
seems to have stabilized, temporary “circular” migration—particu-
larly by workers in poor households—is increasing.

5. More than half the migrants to the United States come from 
Central and South America. About the same portion of migrants to 
the EU-15 come from Europe and Central Asia. And up to 70 per-

cent of migrants to Japan come from other countries in East Asia 
and the Paciﬁ c. 

6. The largest share of emigrants in Sub-Saharan Africa (more 
than  63  percent)  and  South  Asia  (34  percent)  settle  in  countries 
within the same region, typically in an adjacent country. See Ratha 
and  Shaw  (2007).  This  phenomenon  is  in  part  a  colonial  legacy, 
because  borders  were  drawn  arbitrarily  across  traditional  lands 
dividing  long-standing  trading  partners  and  even  people  of  the 
same ethnic groups.

7. Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor 2004.
8. Taylor 1996; Obstfeld and Taylor 2002.
9. See Caselli and Feyrer 2007.
10. See de Blij (2005) for a review of the geographic and climatic 

drivers of early migrations.

11. See  Massey  (2003)  for  a  review  of  the  modern  history  of 

international migration.

12. Comparable  statistics  of  emigration  from  European  coun-

tries and Japan are available in Massey (1988).

13. Massey  (1988)  calculates  a  correlation  coefﬁ cient  of  0.59 
between the onset of industrialization (proxied by the year when 
rail  track  exceeded  1,000  kilometers),  and  the  initiation  of  large-
scale international movement of labor (deﬁ ned as the period when 
emigration ﬁ rst exceeded 10,000 people).

14. See  the  International  Organization  of  Immigration  (IOM) 
Web page for updated statistics, at http://www.iom.org. An interna-
tional migrant is deﬁ ned as a person living in a country other than 
where he or she was born (Ozden and Schiff 2007).

15. Massey 2003.
16. Ratha and Shaw 2007.
17. The  notable  exceptions  are  Australia,  because  of  isolation, 
and Israel, because of the religious and political nature of the deci-
sion to immigrate.

18. Experts point out that although appealing to governments in 
high-income countries, selective immigration policies are probably 
not transferable to other popular destinations. A crucial element to 
the viability of these policies in Canada and Australia is the relative 
geographic  isolation  of  these  countries,  which  makes  movement 
across their borders easier to monitor and control.

19. Timmer and Williamson (1998), cited in Massey (2003).
20. The best data currently available are still likely to underes-
timate the internal mobility of labor. Census and survey data used 
to  track  internal  migration  are  notoriously  inadequate.  Census 
and  survey  instruments  typically  fail  to  capture  seasonal  move-
ment  to  part-time  and  temporary  jobs;  movement  of  migrants 
who ﬁ nd jobs in the informal economy or who reside in informal 
settlements; and movement between rural areas. For a detailed dis-
cussion of the limitations of data on internal migration see Nam, 
Serow, and Sly (1990), Lucas (1997), Bell (2003), and Deshingkar 
and Grimm (2004).

21. Lucas (1997) cites quantitative studies by Connell and oth-

ers (1976) and Skeldon (1986) to support this assertion.

22. Rodriguez 2004.
23. Deshingkar and Grimm (2004) give a detailed description 
of biases in data collection instruments that lead to a systematic 
underestimation of rural-to-rural migration, and particularly of 
temporary “circular”  migration,  which  leads  to  the “invisibility” 
of a large portion of internally labor movements to policy mak-
ers that is captured only in qualitative village-level studies. Lucas 

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   298
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   298

10/9/08   11:44:44 PM
10/9/08   11:44:44 PM

 

Endnotes 

299

(1997) points out that the failure of the early literature on inter-
nal migration to capture the dominant rural-to-rural movement 
can  be  explained  by  the  greater  visibility  of  urban  growth,  and 
by  the  portrayal  of  rural  sectors  in  the  early  theoretical  models 
as homogenous, within which migration did not confer any real 
beneﬁ ts.

24. Borjas 1990; Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo 1992; Dunlevy and 

Bellante 1983.

25. Deshingkar and Grimm 2004; United Nations 2006b.
26. Lucas 1997; 2003; McKenzie and Rapoport 2007.
27. Schiff and Özden 2006.
28. Docquier 2006.
29. Lucas 1997.
30. Solow 1956; Swan 1956.
31. Romer 1986; Lucas Jr. 1988.
32. A  recent  comprehensive  review  of  economic  theories  and 
empirical evidence on internal labor migration is available in Lall, 
Selod, and Shalizi (2006), on which this subsection is based.

33. Todaro 1969.
34. Harris and Todaro 1970.
35. Lucas 1997.
36. Cole and Sanders 1985; Packard 1997.
37. Romer (1986) and Lucas Jr. (1988), originally delivered as an 

address in 1985.

38. Lucas Jr. 1988.
39. Lucas Jr. (1988) with an acknowledgment of Jacobs (1970).
40. Moretti  2004b;  Rosenthal  and  Strange  2004;  Ciccone  and 

Peri 2006.

41. As discussed in other chapters of this Report, urban econom-
ics provide a range of arguments in favor of clustering that are inde-
pendent of spillovers to human capital. For example, cities provide 
the  large  markets  for  producers  to  exploit  productivity  gains  from 
scale, as shown by Faini (1996), as well as “thick” labor markets that 
lower hiring costs for employers. Clustering workers adds to growth 
by increasing backward and forward linkages, as shown by Adelman 
and Robinson (1978) in a study of the Republic of Korea.

42. Clemens, Montenegro, and Pritchett 2008.
43. Ratha and Xu 2008.
44. Pritchett 2006.
45. Andrews, Clark, and Whittaker 2007.
46. Cited in Andrews, Clark, and Whittaker (2007).
47. In the United States, rates of internal migration among the 
native born declined from 1850 to 1940 but accelerated signiﬁ cantly 
thereafter coinciding with the rapid rate of economic growth after 
World War II. See Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (2003).

48. Schmertmann 1992.
49. Fujita and Tabuchi 1997.
50. Xenos 2004.
51. Anh 2003.
52. Timmins 2005.
53. Au and Henderson 2006a; 2006b.
54. Shukla and Stark 1986.
55. For  evidence  on  nineteenth-century  labor  market  integra-

tion in the United States, see Lebergott (1964) and Margo (2000).

56. Coe and Emery 2004.
57. Hunt 1986.
58. Gallaway and Vedder 1971.
59. Rosenbloom and Sundstrom 2003.

60. McInnis 1966.
61. European Commission 2007.
62. Decressin and Fatás (1994) examine regional labor markets 
dynamics in Europe and the United States. They analyze the adjust-
ment mechanisms that a typical region’s speciﬁ c shock triggers in 
regional labor markets. In Europe they ﬁ nd that for the ﬁ rst three 
years, most of the shock is absorbed by changes in the participa-
tion rate, while in the United States, it is immediately reﬂ ected in 
migration.

63. Tabuchi 1988.
64. Barro and Sala-I-Martin 1992; Brown 1997.
65. Fujita and Tabuchi 1997. However, the authors observe that 
inequality  then  rose  in  a  third  stage,  after  1975,  as  the  impact  of 
agglomeration economies accelerated income growth in large met-
ropolitan areas, such as Tokyo.

66. De  Brauw  and  Giles  (2008)  on  China,  and  McKenzie  and 

Rapoport (2007) on Mexico.

67. Overseas Development Institute 2006.
68. Soto and Torche 2004.
69. Timmins 2005.
70. Koola and Özden 2008. 
71. Beegle, De Weerdt, and Dercon 2008.
72. Adams Jr. (2006) as cited in Özden and Schiff (2007).
73. Acosta,  Fajnzylber,  and  Lopez  (2007)  in  Özden  and  Schiff 

(2007).

74. Yang 2008.
75. World Bank 2007k.
76. Garrett 2005.
77. De Brauw and Giles 2008.
78. Zhu and Luo 2008.
79. Iliffe (1995) on the historical impact of drought on popu-
lation  distribution  in  Africa;  Bryceson  (1999)  on  the  Sahel  and 
Sudan; Hardoy and Satterthwaite (1989) on Mauritania.

80. Wandschneider and Mishra (2003), cited in Deshingkar and 
Grimm (2004), on the drought-induced migration of 60,000 peo-
ple out of Bolangir, in the Indian state of Orissa, in 2001.

81. Venables and Kanbur 2005.
82. Deshingkar and Grimm 2004; Rodriguez 2004.
83. Docquier, Beine, and Rapoport 2006.
84. Docquier 2006.
85. Easterly and Nyarko 2008.
86. Sahn and Stifel 2003.
87. Anderson and Pomfret 2005.

Chapter 6

1. Some of these trends were due to the rise in trade with Europe 
as a share of GDP. But non-European trade declined even as a share 
of GDP.

2. Krugman 1991b; see also Krugman 2007.
3. See, for example, Antweiler and Treﬂ er (2002), who ﬁ nd that 
international trade is fueled as much by scale economies as by dif-
ferences in factor endowments. 
4. Limão and Venables 2001.
5. Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger 1999.
6. World Bank 2007d. 
7. Anderson and van Wincoop 2004.
8. It has also meant a change in long-distance trade, mainly in a 
rise in manufacturing exports (based on differences in labor abun-

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   299
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   299

10/9/08   11:44:44 PM
10/9/08   11:44:44 PM

300 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

dance) and a fall in the share of agricultural goods (based on cli-
matic differences) from developing countries. 

9. Rostow 1960.
10. Williamson 1974.
11. Mitchell 1964.
12. Crafts, Mills, and Mulatu 2007.
13. Metzer 1974.
14. Hurd 1975.
15. Roy 2002.
16. Mohammed and Williamson 2004.
17. Harley 1980.
18. O’Rourke and Williamson 1994.
19. Yasuba 1978.
20. Krueger 2006.
21. Baldwin and Martin 1999.
22. Krugman 2007.
23. Combes  and  Lafourcade  2005.  Costs  are  approximated  by 
ad valorem shares of trade values between geographic regions and 
distance and take into account that the real price for transportation 
depends on the physical transportation network, technology, trafﬁ c 
conditions, and structure of the market for transport services.

24. Ivaldi and McCullough 2007.
25. Gordon 1990.
26. Hummels 2007.
27. United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development 

(various years).

28. Tolofari 1986.
29. Button 1999.
30. United Nations 1970.
31. Gilman 1984.
32. Tramp prices are set in competitive markets and quoted in 
U.S. dollars. Two deﬂ ators are used to compute the development of 
real prices: the U.S. GDP deﬂ ator and the price index for bulk com-
modities that typically are shipped by tramp.

33. Levinson 2006.
34. Hummels 2007.
35. Harrigan 2005.
36. Hummels 2001. 
37. Evans  and  Harrigan  2005.  For  a  similar  analysis  on  trade 
between East and West Europe compare Nordas, Pinali, and Grosso 
(2006).

38. Harrigan and Venables 2006.
39. Krugman 1995; Venables 2001.
40. Freund and Weinhold 2004.
41. Fink, Mattoo, and Neagu 2005.
42. Rauch 1999.
43. Antras, Garicano, and Rossi-Hansberg 2006.
44. Rajan and Wei 2004.
45. Amiti and Wei 2005.
46. Bairoch 1988.
47. Christaller 1966.
48. Feenstra and Hanson 1997.
49. Evans and Harrigan 2005.
50. Duranton and Puga 2004.
51. Leamer and Storper 2001.
52. Storper and Venables 2007.
53. Winston 1993.
54. Nikomborirak 2007.

55. Hulten,  Bennathan,  and  Srinivasan  (2003),  summarized 
in Hummels, Lugovsky, and Skiba (2007). Scale economies in the 
manufacturing  sector  derive  from  the  beneﬁ ts  of  many  indepen-
dent  producers  with  relatively  small  market  shares  moving  close 
together and interacting (monopolistic competition). Indivisibility 
and  network  effects,  by  contrast,  favor  monopolies  or  oligopolies 
in which one or a few providers generate scale economies that are 
internal to a private or public transport provider that dominates a 
port, airport, or railway.

56. Estache, Gonzalez, and Trujillo 2002.
57. Hulten 2007.
58.   Canning  and  Bennathan  (2007),  for  example,  ﬁ nd  a  large 
variation across countries but a general tendency of middle-income 
countries to have a deﬁ cit in infrastructure investment, in particular 
road infrastructure. The macroeconomic rates of return calculated 
in these studies derive from the agglomeration and specialization 
beneﬁ ts provided by the lowering of transport costs. These beneﬁ ts 
increase with an increasing level of development. See Estache and 
Fay (2007) for a review of these studies. 

59. Brushett 2005.
60. Wilson, Mann, and Otsuki 2004.
61. Wilson, Luo, and Broadman 2006. 
62. World Bank 2008.
63. Evans and Harrigan 2005; Harrigan and Venables 2006.
64. Martinez-Zarzoso and Marquez-Ramos 2007.
65. Arvis, Raballand, and Marteau 2007.
66. Arnold 2006.
67. World Bank 2008.
68. Fischer, Harrington, and Parry forthcoming.
69. Nordhaus and Boyer 2000.
70. Tol 2005.
71. World Bank 2008.

GIM 3

1. Allen and others 2007.
2. Smith (1979), p. 189.
3. Kuroda 2007.

Chapter 7

1. Ravallion 2007.
2. Soto 2000.
3. De Long and Shleifer 1993.
4. A  passage  explicitly  mentioning  the  land  law  is  found  in 

North (1971), p. 123.

5. Wordie 1983.
6. Craft 1989; Turner 1986; Wordie 1983; Wrigley 1985.
7. Craft 1989.
8. Sokoloff and Engerman 2000b.
9. Sokoloff and Engerman 2000b.
10. Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi 2004.
11. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001.
12. This discussion of Mumbai is drawn from Buckley, Bertaud, 

and Phatak 2005; Buckley and Kalarickal 2006.

13. United Nations 2001; www.mymoneyblog.comarchives/2006.
14. World  Bank  2007j;  purchasing  power  parity  adjusted  per 

capita gross national income (GNI).

15. Brueckener 2007; Henderson 2007.
16. Buckley and Kalarickal (2006), box 3.4.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   300
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   300

10/9/08   11:44:44 PM
10/9/08   11:44:44 PM

 

Endnotes 

301

17. In  2002,  a  Ministry  of  Cities  was  established  to  overhaul 
the regulatory framework allowing cities to more effectively man-
age land use and subdivision and be more responsive to changes in 
market needs.

18. World Bank 2007b. 
19. Chiquier, Hassler, and Lea 2004. 
20. World Bank 2006d. 
21. Lall and others 2004.
22. World Bank 2002a. 
23. The discussion is based on the historical collection of transport 
pamphlets  the  London  School  of  Economics  library  has  converted 
into digital format and made available for public download (www.lse
.ac.uk/library/pamphlets/Transport/transportpamphletpages/urban_
transport.htm).  These  pamphlets  cover  London  transport  history 
(eight pamphlets), transport policy in London (nine pamphlets), the 
tramways (three pamphlets), and urban transport policy more gener-
ally  (three  pamphlets).  These  pamphlets  were  issued  by  a  variety  of 
organizations,  including  private-sector  providers  of  transport,  local 
political parties, and what might now be called think-tanks. See Rob-
erts (2008), a background paper for this Report.

24. Hargan 2007. 
25. Land Enquiry Commission 1914. 
26. Offer (1981), p. 291. 
27. GDP  per  capita  ﬁ gures  have  been  taken  from  Maddison’s 
(2007) historical database (http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/). They 
are quoted in 1990 international Geary-Khamis dollars.

28. Bairoch and Goertz (1986), table 3, p. 288.
29. Staff  City  Population  Database,  Human  Settlements 
Group, International Institute for Environment and Development 
(IIED). 

30. Mumford 1963. 
31. Dunlap 1992. 
32. Lane 1860.
33. O’Gorman 1939a; 1939b.
34. Santos and Shaffer 2004.
35. Meyer 1917.
36. Victoria Transport Policy Institute 2007.
37. Pucher and others 2005.
38. World Bank 2002a. 
39. Metro Bits (http://mic-ro.com/metro).
40. Booth 1901.
41. Abreu 2008, a note prepared for this Report.
42. Nesslein 2003. 
43. Borgegård and Kemeny 2004. 
44. Hall and Vidén 2005. 
45. Swedish Council for Building Research 1990; Borgegård and 

Kemeny 2004.

46. Hoffman 1996. 
47. Hall 2002; Chandler 1992. 
48. Chandler 1992. 
48. Imparato and Ruster 2003; Abreu 2008. 
50. World Bank 2007j. 
51. Hall 1984. 
52. Trackman, Fisher, and Salas 1999. 
53. Mackay 1999; Jones and Datta 2000, based on Abreu 2008. 
54. Mackay 1999, based on Abreu 2008. 
55. Goodlad 1996; Mackay 1999; Jones and Datta 2000. 
56. These comparisons are based on data from Maddison 2006.

57. World Urbanisation Prospects: The 2007 Revision Population 

Database (http://esa.un.org/unup/). 

58. Cohen and Soto 2001.
59. The discussion that follows is largely based on Oh (2008), a 

note prepared for this Report.

60. The discussion that follows is based in part on Chen (2008), 

a note prepared for this Report. 

61. Figure derived from China Statistical Yearbook 2007.
62. World Bank 2003b; 2007k; Bertaud 2004.
63. World Urbanisation Prospects: The 2007 Revision Population 

Database (http://esa.un.org/unup/).

64. Human  Development  and  Reform  Commission  2005; 

Changsha-Zhuzhou-Xiangtan Cluster Regional Plan.

65. Kilroy 2007.
66. Lall 2005.
67. Lall 2005.
68. Yepes and Lall 2008.
69. Sohn 2003, based on Oh 2008.
70. Evans 2002, Sohn 2003, respectively.
71. World Urbanisation Prospects: The 2007 Revision Population 

Database (http://esa.un.org/unup/).

72. Maddison 2006. GDP per capita is quoted in constant 1990 

international dollars.

73. Comparisons  based  on  urban  agglomeration  population 

data from World Urbanisation Prospects.

74. Cohen and Soto 2007.
75. World Bank 2007j.
76. Neuwirth 2007, based on Vidler 2008.
77. BBC World  Service,  Thursday, April  27,  2000  (http://news.

bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/727966.stm).

78. The discussion of Turkey above is based on Vidler (2008), a 

note prepared for this Report.

79. Bertaud 2003.
80. Government of India Planning Commission 2002a.
81. Selod 2007.
82. Tinbergen 1952. 

Chapter 8

1. Azzoni,  Menezes-Filho,  Menezes,  and  Silveira-Neto  (2000), 

World Bank 1998.

2. World Bank (2007b), ﬁ gure 8.2 comes from this Report.
3. World Bank 2007a.
4. Estimate  based  on  ﬁ gures  reported  in  Maddison  (2008).  In 
1700 India’s GDP was $90,750 million compared with a world GDP 
of $371,369 million in 1990 international dollars (Maddison 2008).
5. In landlord systems, the landlord was responsible for collect-
ing revenues from villages after retaining part of the revenue he col-
lected; in individual systems, British government ofﬁ cers collected 
revenue directly from cultivators; in village systems, a village com-
munity body bore the responsibility for revenue collection (Baner-
jee and Iyer 2005).

6. Lall, Wang, and Deichmann 2008b. 
7. Government of India 2006.
8. Hunt 2000. 
9. Gorzelak 2007.
10. European Commission 2002.
11. Between 1994 and 1999 structural funds allocated resources 
to areas on the basis of ﬁ ve “objectives”: supporting development 

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   301
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   301

10/9/08   11:44:44 PM
10/9/08   11:44:44 PM

302 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

and structural adjustment of areas whose development is lagging, 
helping frontier areas or parts of areas seriously affected by indus-
trial decline, combating long-term unemployment and facilitating 
labor market integration of persons excluded from the labor mar-
ket, speeding adjustment of agricultural structures as part of com-
mon agriculture policy reform and structural adjustment of rural 
areas,  and  promoting  development  and  structural  adjustment  in 
areas with low population density.

12. Rodríguez-Pose and Fratesi 2004.
13. European Commission 2007.
14. Objective  One  is  to  help  regions  (called  “areas”  in  this 
Report) whose development is lagging to catch up. Some 50 regions, 
representing 22 percent of the EU’s population, are included.

15. Dall’Erba 2003.
16. Estimates suggest that resettlement costs were US$7,000 per 

family in the mid-1980s (Adhiati and Bobsien 2001).

17. Davezies (2001), Martin (2005). This ﬁ gure shows that the 
coefﬁ cient  of  variation  of  per  capita  GDP  (orange  line,  left  axis) 
across NUTS 2 areas in France rises between 1982 and 2002; whereas 
the  coefﬁ cient  of  variation  of  per  capita  disposable  incomes  falls 
(blue line, right axis). 

18. Morrisson and Murtin 2005. 
19. United States Census Bureau 2002.
20. About $8 an hour in 2007 U.S. dollars.
21. Engel, Galetovic, and Raddatz 1998.
22. Gibson and Rozelle 2003.
23. Escobal and Torero 2000. 
24. Baer 1995.
25. Stewart 2008.
26. Hill and Gaddy 2003.
27. Rolfes 2002.
28. Whalley and Zhang 2007.
29. Hewings, Feser, and Poole 2008; population ﬁ gure for 1996.
30. Rephann and Isserman (1994). One of the ﬁ rst ex post eval-
uations of regional development programs ever conducted in the 
United States using an experimental design.

31. Speciﬁ c examples are discussed later in this chapter.
32. Andrienko and Guriev 2003. 
33. Based on recent research using census micro data for Brazil 

between 1960 and 2000.

34 . Margo 1988. 
35. Borsch-Supan 1987.
36. Duarte, Ferreira, and Salvato Jr. 2004. The labor force in the 
northeast has 4.6 years of schooling compared with the average of 
6.4 years nationwide, and 7.3 years in the southeast. 

37. Shah and Shen 2006.
38. They will be accountable to the higher levels of government 

providing these transfers.

39. Numbers are for 2000 (Chakraborty 2003).
40. Euractiv (2008). 
41. World Bank (2003b) provides a comprehensive treatment of 
land  management  practices  and  policies  in  different  parts  of  the 
world, and how speciﬁ c policies promote development and reduce 
poverty.

42. Palacin and Shelburne 2005.
43. Bayes 2007.
44. World Bank 2008b.
45. World Bank 2008a.

46. World Bank 2008e.
47. Econometric analysis based on panel data (Lei and Haynes 

2004).

48. Kloeppinger-Todd  2007.  Overall,  there  are  more  than  20 

million mobile phone subscribers in the Philippines. 

49. Jensen 2007. 
50. Luo 2004.
51. Yepes and Lall 2008.
52. Baldwin,  Forslid,  Martin,  Ottaviano,  and  Robert-Nicoud 
2003. The predictions of new economic geography models are as 
follows:  Infrastructure  policies  that  facilitate  interregional  trade 
between leading and lagging areas will increase spatial concentra-
tions of economic activity in leading areas. These policies will also 
increase  growth  in  the  whole  economy  while  reducing  nominal 
income inequalities between areas and between workers and capital 
owners.  By  contrast,  infrastructure  policies  that  improve  connec-
tivity within lagging areas may enhance local economic growth but 
can slow the growth of the whole economy. 

53. Faini 1983.
54. Combes and Lafourcade 2001.
55. Jacoby 2000.
56. World Bank 2008b.
57. Lall, Schroeder, and Schmidt 2008.
58. Government of Malaysia 2001. 
59. Malaysia  Industrial  Development  Authority  (http://www

.mida.gov.my/). 

60. Al-Hassan and Diao 2007.
61. Park forthcoming.
62. Lee (2008).
63. The following examples are based on background research 

for this report. 

64. Donoso-Clark  and  Leninhan  (2008)  call  these  centrally 
administered policies to disperse economic activity “ﬁ rst- generation” 
approaches to territorial development.

65. Donoso-Clark and Leninhan 2008.
66. Drabenstott 2005.
67. Hewings, Feser, and Poole 2008. 
68. Carvalho,  Lall,  and  Timmins  2006.  Constitutional  funds 
were created in 1989 to ﬁ nance economic activities in the north and 
northeast regions.

69. World Bank 1977; Scott 1982.
70. Chakravorty and Lall 2005.
71. Fay, Felkner, and Lall 2008.
72. Based on research done by the Secretary of Economic Policy, 

reported in Calmon (2003) and World Bank (2005a). 

73. Details are provided in Calmon (2003).
74. Haussman, Rodrik, and Velasco 2005.
75. Donoso-Clark and Leninhan 2008 point out that a feature 
of  the  failed  “ﬁ rst-generation”  territorial  development  programs 
of the 1960s and 1970s was that they depended on external inputs 
and expertise, rather than exploiting local assets and comparative 
advantage.

76. A  recent  paper  on  ﬁ rm  location  in  developing  countries 
summarizes the ﬁ ndings from empirical work on the main factors 
inﬂ uencing  location  choices  (see  Deichmann,  Lall,  Redding,  and 
Venables forthcoming).

77. Uvalic 1993.
78. Bolton and Roland 1997.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   302
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   302

10/9/08   11:44:44 PM
10/9/08   11:44:44 PM

 

Chapter 9

1. Woronoff  (1972),  p.  141.  The  Entente  was  created  in  1959 
and designed to promote the economic development of members 
by  raising  funds,  guaranteeing  loans,  and  encouraging  trade  and 
investment.  It  operates  through  the  Mutual  Aid  and  Loan  Guar-
antee Fund headquartered in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire. The original 
member  states  were  Dahomey  (now  Benin),  Côte  d’Ivoire,  Niger, 
and Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso); Togo joined in 1966.

2. Collier 2007.
3. See  Brülhart  (2008)  for  a  detailed  analysis  on  intermediate 

goods.

4. Coulibaly 2008.
5. See  Yoshino  (2008),  using  both  the  World  Bank  enterprise 

survey database and the Doing Business database.

6. Melitz 2003.
7. See Schiff and Winters (2003) for a detailed development on 

these points.

8. Viner 1950; Meade 1956; Balassa 1967; Aitken 1973; among 

others.

9. Baier and Bergstrand 2004; Bond 2005; Evenett 2005; Berg-

strand 2006.

10. Bhagwati 1995; Bhagwati, Greenaway, and Panagariya 1998; 

Krishna 1998.

11. Krugman 1991; Frankel, Stein, and Wei 1996; Carrere 2005.
12. Martin, Mayer, and Thoenig (2008) estimate that countries 
trading a lot with their neighbors are less likely to have an armed 
conﬂ ict with them than countries trading mainly with distant part-
ners.

13. World Bank 2004a; United Nations 2007.
14. Also in the 1970s, Sub-Saharan Africa was made up of vast 
countries, mostly rural with a few isolated, densely populated areas 
(mostly  on  the  coast)  and  no  interconnecting  infrastructure—
hardly conducive to regional integration (CSAO/ECOWAS 2005).

15. The  current  WTO  rules  specify  that  regional  trade  agree-
ments should cover substantially all sectors, which excludes sector-
speciﬁ c trade deals for today’s developing countries. But the prin-
ciple of starting with focused areas of cooperation is still valid.

16. Venables  (2003)  shows  that  regional  integration  between 
low-income countries tends to lead to income divergence between 
the least developed and the relatively more advanced member coun-
tries. Goyal and Staal (2004) show that small countries are more in 
favor of integration, whereas large countries prefer integrating with 
countries of equal size.
17. Coulibaly 2006.
18. World Bank 2004b.
19. Laeven and Woodruff 2007.
20. Box 3.3 of the report on food safety and agricultural health 

standards (World Bank 2005c).

21. Gibbon  and  Ponte  2005;  Chandra  2006;  Broadman  2006; 

Czubala, Shepherd, and Wilson 2007.

22. Fink and Mattoo 2004; Hoekman 2006.
23. Chow and others 2005; World Bank 2007g.
24. World Bank 2007f.
25. Arvis, Raballand, and Marteau 2007.
26. Djankov, Freund, and Pham 2006.
27. Behar and Manners 2008.
28. World Bank 2004b.

Endnotes 

303

29. Both examples are from a World Bank Independent Evalua-

tion Group report on regional programs.

30. Leigland and Roberts 2007.
31. World Bank 2006n.
32. N’Guessan and Chitou 2006.
33. African Development Bank 2007.
34. Bougheas, Demetriades, and Morgenroth 1999; Limão and 

Venables 2001.

35. For instance, Foroutan and Pritchett (1993) make this argu-

ment for Sub-Saharan Africa.

36. Coulibaly and Fontagné 2006.
37. Buys, Deichmann, and Wheeler 2006.
38. Shepherd and Wilson 2006.
39. Vargas-Hidalgo 1979; Wionczek 1970.
40. Hazelwood 1979; Kasekende and Ng’eno 1999.
41. Brandts  and  Cooper  (2007)  show  that  effective  communi-
cation  is  a  more  powerful  coordination  mechanism  than  purely 
ﬁ nancial incentives.
42. Sandler 2002.
43. Arce 2001; 2004; Arce and Sandler 2002.
44. Schiff and Winters 2002.
45. In Kraske and others (1996), p. 95.
46. See  the  International  Development Association  and World 

Bank (2008) for a thorough discussion of these issues.

47. Schiff and Winters 2002.
48. Mayer 2008. 
49. Note that Northeast Asia is an exceptional case, because of 
its proximity to Japan. Its main markets are still North America and 
the European Union. For purposes of market access, given its trade 
links with China, Southeast Asia should be considered as part of the 
same neighborhood as China. 

50. Hill and Gaddy 2003.
51. International  Monetary  Fund  (1998)  for  the  EU  enlarge-

ment; Schiff and Wang (2003) for NAFTA.

52. World Bank 2002b.
53. Jessen 2002.
54. World Bank (2003a) report on trade and investment.
55. Assessment  made  using  the  methodology  proposed  by 
Coulibaly (2007). The trade impact of the Gulf Cooperation Coun-
cil (GCC) is not faring better from this assessment, even if its mem-
bers took the important step to launch a common market on Janu-
ary 1, 2008. 

56. World Bank 2007g.
57. Antweiler and Treﬂ er 2002.
58. See for instance Moreno and Trehan (1997).
59. Arora  and  Vamvakidis  (2005)  show  the  impact  of  South 
Africa  on  its  neighbors,  while  Behar  and  Collier  emphasize  on 
the  impact  of  resource-rich  countries  on  their  neighbors  in  Sub-
 Saharan Africa. 

60. Nabi and Nasim 2001.
61. Naqvi and Schuler 2007.
62. World Bank 2007h.
63. Söderbaum 2001.
64. Behar and Collier 2008.
65. United  Nations  (2004a)  and  United  Nations  and  African 

Union (2006) report on regional integration.

66. N’Dulu 2001.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   303
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   303

10/9/08   11:44:45 PM
10/9/08   11:44:45 PM

304 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

67. Gregoire and Labazee 1993.
68. Ladman 1979; Asiwaju 2005.
69. Dorosh, Haggblade, and Dradri 2007; Jayne and others 2005; 

Tschirley and others 2004; Negri and Porto 2007.

70. Little 2007.
71. Gregoire and Labazee 1993; Yade and others 1999.
72. Adebusoye 2006.
73. Jourdan and NEPAD 2006.
74. Hoekman and Njinkeu 2007.
75. Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) 2007. 
76. Collier and Venables 2007.

GIM 4

1. Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski 2006.
2. de Blij 2005.
3. Naudé 2007.
4. Ndulu and others (2007), p. 101.
5. Satterthwaite 2007.
6. Naudé and Matthee 2007.
7. Ramos 2007.
8. Martínez-Zarzoso,  García-Menéndez,  and  Suárez-Burguet 

2003.

WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   304
WDR09_20_Endnotes.indd   304

10/9/08   11:44:45 PM
10/9/08   11:44:45 PM

References

The word “processed” describes informally reproduced works that may not be commonly available through libraries.

Abreu, María. 2008. “Effectively Dealing with Slums.” Background 

Aghion, Philippe, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. Growth, 

note for the WDR 2009.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. 

“The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An 
Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91 (5): 
1369–401.

Inequality and Globalization: Theory, History, and Policy. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.

Aitken, Norman D. 1973. “The Effects of the EEC and the EFTA on 
European Trade: A Temporal Cross-Section Analysis.” American 
Economic Review 63 (5): 881–92.

———. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in 

Al-Hassan, Ramatu M., and Xinshen Diao. 2007. “Regional Dis-

the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1231–94.

Acosta, Pablo, Pablo Fajnzylber, and J. Humberto Lopez. 2007. 

“The Impact of Remittances on Poverty and Human Capital: 
Evidence from Latin America Household Surveys.” In Interna-
tional Migration, Economic Development, and Policy, ed. Caglar 
Özden and Maurice Schiff. Washington, DC, and New York: 
World Bank and Palgrave Macmillan.

Adams, David, and E. M. Hastings. 2001. “Urban Renewal in Hong 

Kong: Transition From Development Corporation to Renewal 
Authority.” Land Use Policy 18(3):245–58.

Adams, Richard H. Jr. 2006. “Remittances, Poverty, and Investment 

in Guatemala.” In International Migration, Remittances, and the 
Brain Drain, ed. Caglar Özden and Maurice Schiff. Washington, 
DC, and New York: World Bank and Palgrave Macmillan.

Adebusoye, Paulina Makinwa. 2006. “Geographic Labour Mobil-
ity in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Globalization, Growth, and Poverty 
Working Paper Series 1, IDRC, Ottawa.

Adelman, Irma, and Sherman Robinson. 1978. “Migration, Demo-

graphic Change, and Income Distribution in a Model of a 
Developing Country.” In Research in Population Economics, vol. 
I, ed. Julian Simon. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Adhiati, M. Adriana Sri, and Armin Bobsien. 2001. Indonesia’s 

Transmigration Programme—An Update: A Report Prepared for 
Down to Earth. London: International Campaign for Ecological 
Justice in Indonesia.

Africa Development Bank (ADB). 2007. Report of the High Level 
Panel: Investing in Africa’s Future. Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire: ADB.

Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen J. Redding, and Fabrizio 
Zilibotti. 2006. “The Unequal Effects of Liberalization: Evidence 
from Dismantling the License Raj in India.” NBER Working 
Paper 12031, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth 
Through Creative Destruction.” Econometrica 60(2):323–51.

———. 2005. “Growth With Quality-Improving Innovations: An 
Integrated Framework.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol-
ume 1A, ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf. Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: North-Holland.

parities in Ghana: Policy Options and Public Investment Impli-
cations.” IFPRI Working Paper 693, Internationhal Food Policy 
Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Alcalá, Francisco, and Antonio Ciccone. 2004. “Trade and Produc-

tivity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 613–46.

Alderman, Harold, Miriam Babita, Gabriel Demombynes, Ntha-

biseng Makhatha, and Berk Özler. 2002. “How Low Can You Go? 
Combining Census and Survey Data for Mapping Poverty in 
South Africa.” Journal of African Economies 11 (2): 169–200.

Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio 
Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg. 2003. “Fractionalization.” Journal 
of Economic Growth 8 (2): 155–94.

Alesina, Alberto, William Easterly, and Janina Matuszeski. 2006. 

“Artiﬁ cial States.” Working Paper 2115, Harvard Institute of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Alesina, Alberto, and Enrico Spolaore. 2003. The Size of Nations. 

Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press.

Allen, Robert, Jean-Pascal Bassino, Debin Ma, Christine Moll-

Murata, and Jan Luiten Van Zanden. 2007. “Wages, Prices, and 
Living Standards in China, 1738–1925: In Comparison with 
Europe, Japan, and India.” Economics Working Paper 316, Uni-
versity of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.

Alston, Lee, and T. J. Hatton. 1991. “The Earnings Gap between 

Agricultural and Manufacturing Laborers, 1925–1941.” Journal 
of Economic History 51 (1): 83–99.

Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2005. “Fear of Service Outsourc-

ing: Is It Justiﬁ ed?” Economic Policy 20 (42): 308–47.

Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with 

Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle.” American Economic 
Review 93 (1): 170–92.

———. 2004. “Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic Literature 42 (3): 

691–751.

Anderson, Kathryn H., and Richard Pomfret. 2005. “Spatial 

Inequality and Development in Central Asia.” In Spatial Dis-
parities in Human Development: Perspectives from Asia, ed. Ravi 
Kanbur, Anthony J. Venables, and Guanghua Wan. Tokyo and 
New York: United Nations University Press.

Andrews, Martyn, Kenneth Clark, and William Whittaker. 2007. 

“The Employment and Earnings of Migrants in Great Britain.” 

WDR09_21_References.indd   305
WDR09_21_References.indd   305

305

10/16/08   9:47:50 AM
10/16/08   9:47:50 AM

306 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Working Paper 3068, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, 
Germany.

Andrienko, Yuri, and Sergei M. Guriev. 2003. “Determinants of 
Interregional Mobility in Russia: Evidence from Panel Data.” 
Working Paper 3835, Centre for Economic Policy Research, 
London.

Angel, Shlomo. 2008. “Preparing for Urban Expansion: A Proposed 
Strategy for Intermediate Cities in Ecuador.” In The New Global 
Frontier: Cities, Poverty and Environment in the 21st Century, ed. 
G. Martine, G. McGranahan, M. Montgomery, and R. Castilla-
Fernandez. London: IIED/UNFPA and Earthscan.

Angeriz, Alvaro, John McCombie, and Mark Roberts. 2008. “New 

Estimates of Returns to Scale and Spatial Spillovers for EU 
Regional Manufacturing, 1986–2002.” International Regional 
Science Review 31 (1): 62–87.

Anh, Dang Nguyen. 2003. “Migration and Poverty in Asia, with 

Reference to Bangladesh, China, the Philippines, and Viet 
Nam.” Paper presented at the Ad Hoc Expert Group Meeting on 
Migration and Development, Bangkok, Thailand, August 27.

Anh, Dang Nguyen, Cecilia Tacoli, and Hoang Xuan Thanh. 2003. 

“Migration in Vietnam: A Review of Information on Current 
Trends and Patterns, and Their Policy Implications.” Paper pre-
sented at the Regional Conference on Migration, Development 
and Pro-poor Policy Choices in Asia, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Antràs, Pol, Luis Garicano, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. 
“Offshoring in a Knowledge Economy.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 121 (1): 31–77.

Antweiler, Werner, and Daniel Treﬂ er. 2002. “Increasing Returns 

and All That: A View from Trade.” American Economic Review 92 
(1): 93–119.

Arce, Daniel M. 2001. “Leadership and the Aggregation of Interna-
tional Collective Action.” Oxford Economic Papers 53 (1): 114–37.
———. 2004. “Asymmetric Leadership and International Public 

Goods.” Public Finance Review 32 (5): 528–58.

Armstrong, Harvey, and Jim Taylor. 2000. Regional Economics and 

Policy. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.

Arnold, John. 2006. “Best Practices in Management of Interna-

tional Trade Corridors.” Transport Working Paper TM-13, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Arora, Vivek, and Athanasios Vamvakidis. 2005. “The Implica-

tions of South African Economic Growth for the Rest of Africa.” 
South African Journal of Economics 73 (2): 229–42.

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962. “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of 

Resources for Invention.” In The Rate and Direction of Inven-
tive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, ed. Conference of the 
Universities and the National Bureau Committee for Economic 
Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Arvis, Jean-François, Gael Raballand, and Jean-François Marteau. 
2007. “The Cost of Being Landlocked: Logistics Cost and Supply 
Chain Reliability.” Policy Research Working Paper 4258, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Asiwaju, Anthony I. 2005. “Transfrontier Regionalism: The Euro-

pean Union Perspective on Postcolonial Africa, with Special Ref-
erence to Borgu.” In Holding the Line. Borders in a Global World, 
ed. Heather N. Nicol and Ian Townsend-Gault. Vancouver, Can-
ada: University of British Columbia Press.

Atkinson, Michael M., and Richard A. Powers. 1987. “Inside the 

Industrial Policy Garbage Can: Selective Subsidies to Business in 
Canada.” Canadian Public Policy 13 (2): 208–17.

Au, Chun-Chung, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2006a. “Are Chinese 

Cities Too Small?” Review of Economic Studies 73 (3): 549–76.

———. 2006b. “How Migration Restrictions Limit Agglomeration 

and Productivity in China.” Journal of Development Economics 
80 (2): 350–88.

Audretsch, David B., and Maryann P. Feldman. 1996. “R&D Spill-
overs and the Geography of Innovation and Production.” Ame-
rican Economic Review 86 (3): 630–40.

Azzoni, Carlos, Naercio Menezes-Filho, Tatiane A. De Menezes, 
and Raul Silveira-Neto. 2000. “Geography and Income Con-
vergence among Brazilian States.” Research Network Working 
Paper R-395, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Bae, Chang-Hee Christine, and Yaourai Suthiranart. 2003. “Policy 
Options towards a Sustainable Urban Transportation Strategy 
for Bangkok.” International Development Planning Review 25 
(1): 31–51.

Baer, Werner. 1995. The Brazilian Economy: Growth and Develop-

ment, 4th ed. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.

Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2004. “Economic Deter-

minants of Free Trade Agreements.” Journal of International Eco-
nomics 64 (1): 29–63.

Bairoch, Paul. 1982. “International Industrialization Levels from 

1750 to 1980.” Journal of European Economic History 11 (2): 
269–333.

———. 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of 

History to the Present. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bairoch, Paul, and Gary Goertz. 1986. “Factors of Urbanization in 

the Nineteenth-Century Developed Countries: A Descriptive 
and Econometric Analysis.” Urban Studies 23 (4): 285–305.

Baker, Jim. 1999. Crossroads: A Popular History of Malaysia and 

Singapore. Singapore: Times Books International.

Baker, Judy, Rakhi Basu, Maureen Cropper, Somik V. Lall, and 

Akie Takeuchi. 2005. “Urban Poverty and Transport: The Case 
of Mumbai.” Policy Research Working Paper 3693, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Baker, Kevin. 2001. “The First Slum in America.” New York Times, 

September 30.

Balassa, Bela. 1967. “Trade Creation and Trade Diversion in Euro-

pean Common Market.” Economic Journal 77 (305): 1–21.
Baldwin, John R., and Paul K. Gorecki. 1986. Role of Scale in 

Canada–U.S. Productivity Differences in the Manufacturing Sec-
tor 1970–1979. Buffalo, NY, and Toronto, Canada: University of 
Toronto Press.

Baldwin, Richard E. 1995. “A Domino Theory of Regionalism.” In 

Expanding Membership of the European Union, ed. Richard E. 
Baldwin, Pertti Haaparanta, and Jaakko Kiander. Cambridge, 
MA, and New York: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2008. “Sequencing and Depth of Regional Economic Inte-
gration: Lessons for the Americas from Europe.” World Economy 
31 (1): 5–30.

Baldwin, Richard E., Rikard Forslid, Philippe Martin, Gianmarco 

I. P. Ottaviano, and Frederic Robert-Nicoud. 2003. Economic 

WDR09_21_References.indd   306
WDR09_21_References.indd   306

10/10/08   10:08:01 AM
10/10/08   10:08:01 AM

 

References 

307

Geography and Public Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.

Baldwin, Richard E., and Philippe Martin. 1999. “Two Waves of 

Behar, Alberto, and Phil Manners. 2008. “Logistics and Exports.” 
Department of Economics and CSAE Working Paper 2008-13, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.

Globalization: Superﬁ cial Similarities, Fundamental Differ-
ences.” In Globalization and Labor, ed. Horst Siebert. Tuebingen, 
Germany: Mohr Siebeck.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. 

2005. “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?” Journal of 
Financial Economics 77 (1): 3–55.

Baldwin, Richard E., Philippe Martin, and Gianmarco I. P. Ottavi-
ano. 2001. “Global Income Divergence, Trade, and Industrializa-
tion: The Geography of Growth Take-Offs.” Journal of Economic 
Growth 6 (1): 5–37.

Baldwin, Richard E., and Charles Wyplosz. 2006. The Economics of 
European Integration, 2nd ed. London: McGraw-Hill Education.
Balisacan, Arsenio, Hal Hill, and Sharon Faye Piza. Forthcoming. 

“Spatial Disparities and Development Policy in the Philippines.” 
In Reshaping Economic Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang 
and Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World Bank, 
EAP Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

Balk, Deborah L., Uwe Deichmann, Gregory Yetman, Francesca 
Pozzi, Simon I. Hay, and Andrew Nelson. 2006. “Determining 
Global Population Distribution: Methods, Applications, and 
Data.” Advances in Parasitology 62: 119–56.

Bell, Martin. 2003. “Comparing Internal Migration between 
Countries: Measures, Data Sources, and Results.” Working 
Paper 2003/02, University of Queensland Centre for Population 
Research, Brisbane, Australia.

Bento, Antonio M., Maureen L. Cropper, Ahmed Mushﬁ q Moba-

rak, and Katja Vinha. 2003. “The Impact of Urban Spatial Struc-
ture on Travel Demand in the United States.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 3007, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. 2006. “Regional Integration as a Develop-

ment Strategy.” Paper presented at The New Regionalism: Prog-
ress, Setbacks, and Challenges, Washington, DC.

Bernstein, Jeffrey I., and M. Ishaq Nadiri. 1988. “Inter-industry 

R&D Spillovers, Rates of Return, and Production in High-Tech 
Industries.” American Economic Review 78 (2): 429–34.

Bertaud, Alain. 2003. “Order without Design.” World Bank, Wash-

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2005. “History, Institutions, 

ington, DC. Processed.

and Economic Performance: The Legacy of Colonial Land 
Tenure Systems in India.” American Economic Review 95 (4): 
1190–213.

Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1992. “Convergence.” 

Journal of Political Economy 100 (2): 223–51.

———. 2004. Economic Growth, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT 

Press.

Barro, Robert J., Xavier Sala-I-Martin, Olivier J. Blanchard, and 
Robert E. Hall. 1991. “Convergence across States and Cities.” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1991 (1): 107–82.

Bartelsman, Eric J., Ricardo J. Caballero, and Richard K. Lyons. 

1994. “Customer and Supplier-Driven Externalities.” American 
Economic Review 84 (4): 1075–84.

Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald. 1997. “Returns to Scale in U.S. 

Production: Estimates and Implications.” Journal of Political 
Economy 105 (2): 249–83.

Baumert, Kevin A., Timothy Herzog, and Jonathan Pershing. 2005. 
Navigating the Numbers: Greenhouse Gas Data and International 
Climate Policy. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.

———. 2004. “The Spatial Organization of Cities: Deliber-

ate Outcome or Unforeseen Consequence?” Working Paper 
WP-2004-01, Institute of Urban and Regional Development, 
Berkeley, CA.

Bertram, Geoffrey. 2004. “On the Convergence of Small Island 
Economies with their Metropolitan Patrons.” World Develop-
ment 32 (2): 343–64.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1995. “U.S. Trade Policy: The Infatuation with 
Free Trade Areas.” In The Dangerous Drift to Preferential Trade 
Agreements, ed. Jagdish Bhagwati and Anne O. Krueger. Wash-
ington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, David Greenaway, and Arvind Panagariya. 1998. 

“Trading Preferentially: Theory and Policy.” Economic Journal 
108 (449): 1128–48.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and T. N. Srinivasan. 2002. “Trade and Pov-

erty in the Poor Countries.” American Economic Review 92 (2): 
180–3.

Biedermann, Rob. 2007. “Sinvin Realty Handles Meatpacking Dis-

trict Deal in NYC.” crefeed.com, October 29.

Baumol, William J. 1986. “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and 

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch. 1998. 

Welfare: What the Long-Run Data Show.” American Economic 
Review 76 (5): 1072–85.

Bayes, Abdul. 2007. Impact Assessment of Jamuna Multipurpose 

Bridge Project (JMBP) on Poverty. Dhaka: Japan Bank for Inter-
national Cooperation.

Bazoglu, Neﬁ se. 2008. Cities in Transition: Demographics and the 

“Learning from the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and 
Informational Cascades.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (3): 
151–70.

Bird, Kate, and Kate Higgins. 2008. “Regional Inequality and Pri-

mary Education in Northern Uganda, Policy Brief 2.” Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2009.

Development of Cities. Philadelphia: Pennsylvania State University.

Black, Duncan, and J. Vernon Henderson. 1999. “A Theory of 

Beaumier, Guy. 1998. Regional Development in Canada. Ottawa: 

Government of Canada.

Beegle, Kathleen, Joachim De Weerdt, and Stefan Dercon. 2008. 

“Migration and Economic Mobility in Tanzania: Evidence from 
a Tracking Survey.” World Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.
Behar, Alberto, and Paul Collier. 2008. “Does Proximity Matters 

More Than Wealth?” CSAE, Oxford, U.K.

Urban Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 107 (2): 252–84.

———. 2003. “Urban Evolution in the USA.” Journal of Economic 

Geography 3 (4): 343–72.

Blake, Gerald. 2005. “Boundary Permeability in Perspective.” In 

Holding the Line: Borders in a Global World, ed. Heather N. Nicol 
and Ian Townsend-Gault. Vancouver, Canada: University of 
British Columbia Press.

WDR09_21_References.indd   307
WDR09_21_References.indd   307

10/10/08   10:08:02 AM
10/10/08   10:08:02 AM

308 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Blanchard, Olivier J., Lawrence F. Katz, Robert E. Hall, and Barry 
Eichengreen. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity 1992 (1): 1–75.

Boltho, Andrea, Wendy Carlin, and Pasquale Scaramozzino. 1997. 

“Will East Germany Become a New Mezzogiorno?” Journal of 
Comparative Economics 24 (3): 241–64.

Bolton, Patrick, and Gerard Roland. 1997. “The Breakup of 

Nations: A Political Economy Analysis.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 112 (4): 1057–90.

Bond, Eric W. 2005. “The Sequencing of Trade Liberalization 

in the Presence of Adjustment Costs.” Paper presented at the 
Sequencing of Regional Economic Integration: Issues in the 
Breadth and Depth of Economic Integration in the Americas, 
Notre Dame, IN.

Booth, Charles. 1901. Improved Means of Locomotion as a First Step 

Towards the Cure of the Housing Difﬁ culties of London. London: 
Macmillan.

Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, and Douglas A. Irwin. 1999. 

“Is Globalization Today Really Different Than Globalization 
a Hundred Years Ago?” NBER Working Paper 7195, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Boreak, Sik. 2000. “Land Ownership, Sales, and Concentration 
in Cambodia. A Preliminary Review of Secondary Data and 
Primary Data from Four Recent Surveys.” Working Paper 16, 
Development Resource Institute, Phnom Penh.

Borgegård, Lars-Erik, and Jim Kemeny. 2004. “Sweden: High-Rise 
Housing for a Low-Density Country.” In High-Rise Housing in 
Europe: Current Trends and Future Prospects, ed. R. Turkington, 
R. van Kempen, and E. Wassenberg. Delft, Netherlands: Delft 
University Press.

Borjas, George J. 1990. Friends or Strangers: The Impact of Immi-

gration on the U.S. Economy. New York: Basic Books.

Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars, and Stephen J. Trejo. 1992. 

“Self Selection and Internal Migration in the United States.” 
Journal of Urban Economics 32 (2): 159–85.

Borsch-Supan, Axel. 1987. “The Role of Education: Mobility 

Increasing or Mobility Impeding?” NBER Working Paper 2329, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Bossone, Biagio, and Jong-Kun Lee. 2004. “In Finance, Size Mat-

ters: The ‘Systemic Scale Economies’ Hypothesis.” IMF Staff 
Papers 51 (1): 19–46.

Bougheas, Spiros, Panicos O. Demetriades, and Edgar L. W. Mor-

genroth. 1999. “Infrastructure, Transport Costs, and Trade.” 
Journal of International Economics 47 (1): 169–89.

Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrisson. 1998. “Inequal-
ity and Development: The Role of Dualism.” Journal of Develop-
ment Economics 57 (2): 233–57.

———. 2002. “Inequality among World Citizens: 1820–1992.” 

American Economic Review 92 (4): 727–44.

Brahmbhatt, Milan. 2004. Strong Fundamentals to the Fore: 

Regional Overview. Washington, DC: World Bank, East and 
Paciﬁ c Region.

Brakman, Steven, Harry Garretsen, and Charles van Marrewijk. 
2001. An Introduction to Geographical Economics: Trade, Loca-
tion, and Growth. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Brandts, Jordi, and David J. Cooper. 2007. “It’s What You Say, Not 

What You Pay: An Experimental Study of Manager-Employee 
Relationships in Overcoming Coordination Failure.” Journal of 
the European Economic Association 5 (6): 1223–68.

Brezis, Elise S., and Paul R. Krugman. 1997. “Technology and the 
Life Cycle of Cities.” Journal of Economic Growth 2 (4): 369–83.
Bristow, R. 1984. Land-Use Planning in Hong Kong: History, Poli-

cies, and Procedures. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.

Broadman, Harry G. 2005. From Disintegration to Reintegration: 

Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union in International 
Trade. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2006. Africa’s Silk Road: China and India’s New Economic 

Frontier. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Brockerhoff, M., and P. Hewett. 2000. “Inequality of Child Mortal-
ity among Ethnic Groups in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization 78 (1): 30–41.

Brown, Annette N. 1997. “The Economic Determinants of the 

Internal Migration Flows in Russia During Transition.” Working 
Paper 89, William Davidson Institute, Ann Arbor, MI.

Brown, David, Marianne Fay, John Felkner, Somik V. Lall, and 

Hyoung Gun Wang. 2008. “The Death of Distance? Economic 
Implications of Infrastructure Improvement in Russia.” World 
Bank, Ofﬁ ce of the Chief Economist, Europe and Central Asia 
Region, Washington, DC.

Brueckner, Jan K. 2007. “Government Land-Use Interventions: 

An Economic Analysis.” Paper presented at the World Bank 4th 
Urban Research Symposium, Washington, DC.

 Brülhart, Marius. 2008. “An Account of Global Intra-Industry 

Trade, 1962–2006.” Working Paper 2008-08, University of Not-
tingham, Nottingham, U.K.

Brunetti, Aymo, and Beatrice Weder. 2003. “A Free Press Is Bad 
News for Corruption.” Journal of Public Economics 87 (7–8): 
1801–24.

Brushett, Stephen. 2005. “Management and Financing of Road 

Transport Infrastructure in Africa.” Sub-Saharan Africa Trans-
port Policy Working Paper 4, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Bryceson, Deborah Fahy. 1999. “Sub-Saharan Africa Betwixt and 

Between: Rural Livelihood Practices and Policies.” Working 
Paper 43, African Studies Centre, Leiden, Netherlands.

Buckley, Robert, Alain Bertaud, and V. K. Phatak. 2005. “Property 

Rights and Interlocking Policy Constraints Urban Land Mar-
kets: Reforming Mumbai’s Real Estate Raj.” Paper presented at 
the Land Policies and Administration for Accelerated Growth 
and Poverty Reduction, New Delhi.

Buckley, Robert, and Jerry Kalarickal, eds. 2006. Thirty Years of 

World Bank Shelter Lending: What Have We Learned? Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Burchﬁ eld, Marcy, Henry G. Overman, Diego Puga, and Matthew 
Turner. 2006. “Causes of Sprawl: A Portrait from Space.” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 121 (2): 587–633.

Burkey, Mark L. 2006. “Gini Coefﬁ cients for the 2000 Census.” 

North Carolina A&T State University, Department of Econom-
ics and Transportation-Logistics, Greensboro, NC.

Button, Kenneth. 1999. “Shipping Alliances: Are They at the Core 

of Solving Instability Problems in Shipping?” Paper presented at 

WDR09_21_References.indd   308
WDR09_21_References.indd   308

10/10/08   10:08:02 AM
10/10/08   10:08:02 AM

 

References 

309

the 1999 Meeting of the International Association of Maritime 
Economists, Halifax, Canada.

Buys, Piet, Susmita Dasgupta, Timothy S. Thomas, and David 

Wheeler. 2008. “Determinants of a Digital Divide in Sub-
Saharan Africa: A Spatial Econometric Analysis of Cell Phone 
Coverage.” Policy Research Working Paper 4516, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Buys, Piet, Uwe Deichmann, and David Wheeler. 2006. “Road Net-
work Upgrading and Overland Trade Expansion in Sub-Saharan 
Africa.” Policy Research Working Paper 4097, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Cabinet Council. 1972. New Integrated Spatial Development Plan 

(Japanese). Tokyo: Cabinet Council.

Calem, Paul S. 1994. “The Impact of Geographic Deregulation on 

Small Banks.” Business Review (November/December): 17–31.
Calem, Paul S., and Gerald A. Carlino. 1991. “Urban Agglomera-

tion Economies in the Presence of Technical Change.” Journal of 
Urban Economics 29 (1): 82–95.

Cali, Massimiliano. 2008. “Urbanization, Inequality, and Economic 

Growth: Evidence from Indian States.” Background paper for 
the WDR 2009.

Calmon, Paulo Carlos Du Pin. 2003. “Evaluation of Subsidies in 

Catin, Maurice, and Christophe Van Huffel. 2003. “Inégalités 
Régionales et Développement Economique: le Cas Français 
(1850–2000).” La Revue d’Economie Régionale e Urbaine Part 5: 
1–18.

Chakraborty, Pinaki. 2003. “Unequal Fiscal Capacities across 
Indian States: How Corrective Is the Fiscal Transfer Mecha-
nism?” Paper presented at the WIDER project conference on 
Spatial Inequality in Asia at United Nations University Head-
quarters, Tokyo.

Chakravorty, Sanjoy, and Somik V. Lall. 2005. “Industrial Loca-

tion and Spatial Inequality: Theory and Evidence from India.” 
Review of Development Economics 9 (1): 47–68.

———. 2007. Made in India: The Economic Geography and Politi-

cal Economy of Industrialization. New Delhi and New York: 
Oxford University Press.

Chandler, Alfred Dupont Jr. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Manage-
rial Revolution in American Business. Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press.

Chandler, Mittie Olion. 1992. “Public Housing Desegregation: 
What Are the Options?” Housing Policy Debate 3 (2): 509–34.

Chandler, Tertius. 1987. Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An 

Historical Census. Lampeter, U.K.: Edwin Mellen Press.

Brazil: An Overview.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chandler, Tertius, and Gerald Fox. 1974. Three Thousand Years of 

Canning, David, and Esra Bennathan. 2007. “The Rate of Return 
to Transportation Infrastructure.” In Transport, Infrastructure 
Investment and Economic Productivity, ed. OECD/ECMT. Paris: 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Cárdenas, Mauricio, and Adriana Pontón. 1995. “Growth and Con-
vergence in Colombia: 1950–1990.” Journal of Development Eco-
nomics 47 (1): 5–37.

Carlino, Gerald A. 1979. “Increasing Returns to Scale in Metropoli-

tan Manufacturing.” Journal of Regional Science 19 (3): 369–72.

Carlino, Gerald A., and Satyajit Chatterjee. 2001. “Employment 

Deconcentration: A New Perspective on America’s Postwar 
Urban Evolution.” Working Paper 01-4, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia.

Carlton, Dennis W. 1983. “The Location and Employment Choices 

of New Firms: An Econometric Model with Discrete and Con-
tinuous Endogenous Variables.” Review of Economics and Statis-
tics 65 (3): 440–49.

Carrère, Céline. 2007. “Regional Agreement and the Welfare in the 
South: When Scale Economies in Transport Matters.” Working 
Paper 2007-26, CERDI, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

Carvalho, Alexandre S., Somik V. Lall, and Christopher Timmins. 
2006. “Regional Subsidies and Industrial Prospects of Lagging 
Regions.” Policy Research Working Paper 3843, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Caselli, Francesco. 2005. “Accounting for Cross-Country Income 

Differences.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, vol. I, ed. Philippe 
Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Caselli, Francesco, and James Feyrer. 2007. “The Marginal Product 

of Capital.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2): 535–68.

Cashin, Paul A. 1995. “Economic Growth and Convergence across 
the Seven Colonies of Australasia: 1861–1991.” Economic Record 
71 (2): 132–44.

Urban Growth. New York and London: Academic Press.

Chandra, Vandana, ed. 2006. Technology Adaptation and Exports: 
How Some Developing Countries Got It Right. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

Chang, Ha-Joon. 2005. “Policy Space in Historical Perspective—
with Special Reference to Trade and Industrial Policies.” Paper 
presented at the Queen Elizabeth House 50th Anniversary Con-
ference: The Development of Threats and Promises, Oxford, 
U.K.

Charlot, Sylvie, and Gilles Duranton. 2004. “Communication 
Externalities in Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 56 (3): 
581–613.

Chase-Dunn, Christopher, Yukio Kawano, and Benjamin D. 

Brewer. 2000. “Trade Globalization since 1795: Waves of Inte-
gration in the World System.” American Sociological Review 65 
(1): 77–95.

Chen, Yang. 2008. “China: A Case Study of 1D-2D-3D Areas.” 

Background note for the WDR 2009.

———. 2008. “Urban Agglomeration Policy in China.” Back-

ground note for the WDR 2009.

Chinitz, Benjamin J. 1961. “Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York 

and Pittsburgh.” American Economic Review 51 (2): 279–89.

Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2006. “What Matters for Financial 
Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, and Interactions.” 
Journal of Development Economics 81 (1): 163–92.

Chiquier, Loic, Olivier Hassler, and Michael Lea. 2004. “Mortgage 

Securities in Emerging Markets.” Policy Research Working Paper 
3370, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chomitz, Kenneth M., Piet Buys, and Timothy S. Thomas. 2005. 
“Quantifying the Rural-Urban Gradient in Latin America and 
the Caribbean.” Policy Research Working Paper 3634, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

WDR09_21_References.indd   309
WDR09_21_References.indd   309

10/10/08   10:08:02 AM
10/10/08   10:08:02 AM

310 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Chow, Hwee K., Peter N. Kriz, Roberto S. Mariano, and Augustine 

H. H. Tan. 2005. Trade, Investment, and Financial Integration 
in East Asia. Tanglin, Singapore: Association of Southeasrtern 
Asian Nations + 3 Secretariat.

Christaller, Walter. 1933. Central Places in Southern Germany. 

Working Paper 2894, Centre for Economic Policy Research, 
London.

———. 2005. “Transport Costs: Measures, Determinants, and 

Regional Policy Implications for France.” Journal of Economic 
Geography 5 (3): 319–49.

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Christensen, Dan Charly. 2004. “Physiocracy: The Missing Link.” 
In Modernisation and Tradition European Local and Manorial 
Societies 1500–1900, ed. K. Sundberg, T. Germundsson, and K. 
Hansen. Lancaster, U.K.: Nordic Academic Press.

Ciccone, Antonio. 2002. “Agglomeration Effects in Europe.” Euro-

pean Economic Review 46(2):213–27.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall. 1996. “Productivity and 

the Density of Economic Activity.” American Economic Review 
86(1):54–70.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Giovanni Peri. 2006. “Identifying Human-
Capital Externalities: Theory with Applications.” Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 73 (2): 381–412.

Clark, Colin. 1957. The Conditions of Economic Progress, 3rd ed. 

London: Macmillan.

Commission for Africa (CFA). 2005. Our Common Interest: Report 

of the Commission for Africa. London: CFA.

Connell, J., B. Dasgupta, R. Laishley, and M. Lipton. 1976. Migra-
tion from Rural Areas: The Evidence from Village Studies. Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.

Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2000. “Power Couples: 
Changes in the Locational Choice of the College Educated, 
1940–1990.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (4): 1287–315.
Coulibaly, Souleymane. 2006. “Regional Integration and the Per-

sistent Uneven Spread of Economic Activities in Developing 
Areas.” Economie Internationale 106 (2): 5–23.

———. 2007. “Evaluating the Trade Impact of Developing RTAs: 
A Semi-Parametric Approach.” Policy Research Working Paper 
4220, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008. “On the Complementarity of Regional and Global 

Clemens, Michael A., Claudio E. Montenegro, and Lant Pritch-

Trade.” Background paper for the WDR 2009.

ett. 2008. “The Place Premium: Wage Differences for Identical 
Workers across the U.S. Border.” Policy Research Working Paper 
4671, World Bank, Washington, DC. Background paper for the 
WDR 2009.

Cockrem, Tom. 2007. “Singapore’s Slum Deal.” The Sun-Herald, 

April 8.

Coe, Patrick J., and J. C. Herbert Emery. 2004. “The Disintegrating 
Canadian Labour Market? The Extent of the Market Then and 
Now.” Canadian Journal of Economics 37 (4): 879–97.

Cohen, Daniel, and Marcelo Soto. 2007. “Growth and Human 

Capital: Good Data, Good Results.” Journal of Economic Growth 
12 (1): 51–76.

Cole, William E., and Richard D. Sanders. 1985. “Internal Migra-

tion and Urban Employment in the Third World.” American 
Economic Review 75 (3): 481–94.

Collier, Paul. 2003. Breaking the Conﬂ ict Trap: Civil War and Devel-
opment Policy. Washington, DC, and New York: World Bank and 
Oxford University Press.

———. 2007. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are 
Failing and What Can Be Done about It. New York and Oxford, 
U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Collier, Paul, and Stephen A. O’Connel. 2008. “Opportunities and 
Choices.” In The Political Economy of Economic Growth in Africa, 
1960–2000, vol. 1, ed. Benno J. Ndulu, Stephen A. O’Connel, 
Robert H. Bates, Paul Collier, and Charles C. Soludo. Cam-
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Collier, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 2007. “Rethinking Trade 

Preferences: How Africa Can Diversify Its Exports.” World Econ-
omy 30 (8): 1326–45.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe. 2000. “Marshall-Arrow-Romer Exter-

nalities and City Growth.” Working Paper 99-06, Centre d’Étude 
et de Recherche en Action Sociale, Paris.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Miren Lafourcade. 2001. “Transport 
Cost Decline and Regional Inequalities: Evidence from France.” 

Coulibaly, Souleymane, and Lionel Fontagné. 2006. “South-South 
Trade: Geography Matters.” Journal of African Economies 15 (2): 
313–41.

Crafts, Nicholas. 2005. “Regional GDP in Britain, 1871–1911: 

Some Estimates.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy 52 (1): 
54–64.

———. 2008. “Spatial Disparities in 19th-Century British Indus-

trialization.” Background note for the WDR 2009.

Crafts, Nicholas, Terence C. Mills, and Abay Mulatu. 2007. “Total 

Factor Productivity Growth on Britain’s Railways, 1852–1912: A 
Reappraisal of the Evidence.” Exploration in Economic History 44 
(4): 608–34.

Crafts, Nicholas, and Gianni Toniolo. 1996. Economic Growth in 

Europe since 1945. Cambridge, U.K., and New York: Cambridge 
University Press.

Crafts, Nicholas F. R. 1989. “British Industrialization in an Inter-
national Context.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 19 (3): 
415–28.

Criscuolo, Chiara, Jonathan E. Haskel, and Mattew J. Slaughter. 

2004. “Why Are Some Firms More Innovative? Knowledge 
Inputs, Knowledge Stocks, and the Role of Global Engagement.” 
Tuck School of Business, Hanover, NH.

CSAO-ECOWAS. 2005. Atlas des Transports et des Telecommunica-
tions dans la West African States. Paris and Abuja: Club Du Sahel 
et de L’Afrique de L’Ouest and Economic Community of West 
African States.

Cullinane, Sharon. 2002. “The Relationship between Car Owner-

ship and Public Transport Provision: A Case Study of Hong 
Kong.” Transport Policy 9 (1): 29–39.

Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. 
“The Determinants of Mortality.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 20 (3): 97–120.

Czubala, Witold, Ben Shepherd, and John S. Wilson. 2007. “Help 
or Hindrance? The Impact of Harmonized Standards on Afri-

WDR09_21_References.indd   310
WDR09_21_References.indd   310

10/10/08   10:08:03 AM
10/10/08   10:08:03 AM

 

References 

311

can Exports.” Policy Research Working Paper 4400, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Da Mata, Daniel, Uwe Deichmann, J. Vernon Henderson, Somik V. 
Lall, and Howard G Wang. 2007. “Determinants of City Growth 
in Brazil.” Journal of Urban Economics 62 (2): 252–72.

Dall’Erba, Sandy. 2003. “The Trade-off Efﬁ ciency-Equity as an 

Explanation of the Mitigated Success of the European Regional 
Development Policies.” Working Paper 2 (3), EUC, Urbana, IL.

Davezies, Laurent. 2001. Policies for Sound Development. Paris: 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Davis, Donald R., and David E. Weinstein. 1999. “Economic Geog-
raphy and Regional Production Structure: An Empirical Investi-
gation.” European Economic Review 43 (2): 379–407.

Davis, Steven J., and John C. Haltiwanger. 1992. “Gross Job Cre-
ation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (3): 819–63.

de Blij, Harm. 2005. Why Geography Matters: Three Challenges Fac-

ing America: Climate Change, the Rise of China, and Global Ter-
rorism. New York: Oxford University Press.

De Brauw, Alan, and John Giles. 2008. “Migrant Labor Markets 

and the Welfare of Rural Households in the Developing World: 
Evidence from China.” Policy Research Working Paper 4585, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

de la Fuente, Angel. 2000. “Convergence across Countries and 

Regions: Theory and Empirics.” Working Paper 2465, Centre for 
Economic Policy Research, London.

———. 2004. “Second-Best Redistribution through Public Invest-
ment: A Characterization, an Empirical Test and an Application 
to the Case of Spain.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 34 
(5): 489–503.

Deininger, Klaus W., and S. Jin. 2003. “Land Sales and Rental 

Markets in Transition. Evidence from Rural Vietnam.” Policy 
Research Working Paper 3013, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Dekle, Robert, and Jonathan Eaton. 1999. “Agglomeration and 
Land Rents: Evidence from the Prefectures.” Journal of Urban 
Economics 46 (2): 200–14.

Demurger, Sylvie, Jeffrey D. Sachs, Wing Thye Woo, Shuming Bao, 

Gene Chang, and Andrew Mellinger. 2002. “Geography, Eco-
nomic Policy and Regional Development in China.” Asian Eco-
nomic Papers 1 (1): 146–97.

Deshingkar, Priya, and Sven Grimm. 2004. Voluntary Internal 

Migration: An Update. London: Overseas Development Institute.

Desmet, Klaus, and Marcel Fafchamps. 2003. “What Are Falling 
Transport Costs Doing to Spatial Concentration across U.S. 
Counties?” Working Paper 3853, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research, London.

———. 2006. “Employment Concentration across U.S. Counties.” 

Regional Science and Urban Economics 36 (4): 482–509.

Deutsch, Robert. 2006. “Beneﬁ ciary Assessment of Land Titles 

Recipients under Land Management and Administrative Project 
(LMAP).”

Devereux, Michael P., Rachel Grifﬁ th, and Helen Simpson. 2004. 

“The Geographic Distribution of Production Activity in the 
U.K.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 34 (5): 533–64.

Dillinger, William. 2007. “Poverty and Regional Development in 
Eastern Europe and Central Asia.” Working Paper 118, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Disdier, Anne-Celia, and Keith Head. 2008. “The Puzzling Persis-
tence of the Distance Effect on Bilateral Trade.” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 90 (1): 37–48.

de la Fuente, Angel, Xavier Vives, Juan J. Dolado, and Riccardo Faini. 

Dixie, G. 2002. Review of Current and Future Airfreight Situa-

1995. “Infrastructure and Education as Instruments of Regional 
Policy: Evidence from Spain.” Economic Policy 10 (20): 11–51.

tion from Bangladesh. Dhaka: Accord Associates for the Hortex 
Foundation.

De Long, J. Bradford. 1988. “Productivity Growth, Convergence, 

Dixit, Avinash K., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1977. “Monopolistic 

and Welfare: Comment.” American Economic Review 78 (5): 
1138–54.

Competition and Optimum Product Diversity.” American Eco-
nomic Review 67 (3): 297–308.

De Long, J. Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer. 1993. “Princes and Mer-

Djankov, Simeon, Caroline L. Freund, and Cong S. Pham. 2006. 

chants: European City Growth before the Industrial Revolu-
tion.” Journal of Law and Economics 36 (2): 671–702.

“Trading on Time.” Policy Research Working Paper 3909, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

de Soto, Hernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism 
Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. London: Bantan 
Press.

Dobkins, Linda Harris, and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2001. “Spatial 
Interactions among U.S. Cities, 1900–1990.” Regional Science 
and Urban Economics 31 (6): 701–31.

Decressin, Jörg, and Antonio Fatás. 1994. “Regional Labour Mar-
ket Dynamics in Europe.” Working Paper DP1085, Centre for 
Economic Policy Research, London.

Docquier, Frédéric. 2006. “Brain Drain and Inequality across 

Nations.” Paper presented at the EUDN-AFD Conference on 
Migration and Development, Paris.

Deichmann, Uwe, Marianne Fay, Jun Koo, and Somik V. Lall. 2004. 

Docquier, Frédéric, Michel Beine, and Hillel Rapoport. 2006. 

“Economic Structure, Productivity, and Infrastructure Quality 
in Southern Mexico.” Annals of Regional Science 38 (3): 361–85.
Deichmann, Uwe, Kai Kaiser, Somik V. Lall, and Zmarak Shalizi. 

2005. “Agglomeration, Transport, and Regional Development in 
Indonesia.” Policy Research Working Paper 3477, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

“Brain Drain and Human Capital Formation in Developing 
Countries: Winner and Losers.” Working Paper 2006-23, Uni-
versité Catholique de Louvain, Département des Sciences Eco-
nomiques, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

Dongguan Government. 2005. Guangdong Statistical Yearbook 

2005. Beijing, China: China Statistics Press.

Deichmann, Uwe, Somik V. Lall, Stephen J. Redding, and Anthony 
J. Venables. 2008. “Industrial Location in Developing Countries.” 
World Bank Research Observer 23(2): 219–46.

Donoso Clark, M., and M. Leninhan. 2008. “A Space-Based Devel-
opment Framework: A Bottom-Up Approach to Economic Inte-
gration.” World Bank, Environmentally and Socially Sustainable 

WDR09_21_References.indd   311
WDR09_21_References.indd   311

10/10/08   10:08:03 AM
10/10/08   10:08:03 AM

312 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Development Unit, Europe and Central Asia Regional Ofﬁ ce, 
Washington, DC.

Donsky, Martin. 1990. “Putting a Spin on the Yarn Business: Mac-
ﬁ eld Tries to Get a Leg Up on Its Competition.” Business North 
Carolina, September 1.

Dorosh, Paul A., Steven Haggblade, and Simon Dradri. 2007. 

“Cotton in Zambia: Alternative Instruments for Ensuring Food 
Security and Price Stability in Zambia.” Collaborative Working 
Paper ZM-FSRP-WP-29, International Development, East Lan-
sing, MI.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. 2001. “What Have We Learned 
from a Decade of Empirical Research on Growth? It’s Not Fac-
tor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth Models.” World 
Bank Economic Review 15 (2): 177–219.

Easterly, William, and Yaw Nyarko. 2008. “Is the Brain Drain Good 
for Africa?” Working Paper 19, Brookings Global Economy and 
Development, Washington, DC.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Zvi Eckstein. 1997. “Cities and Growth: The-
ory and Evidence from France and Japan.” Regional Science and 
Urban Economics 27 (4–5): 443–74.

Douthat, Ross, Marshall Poe, and Abigail Cutler. 2006. “The Poor 

The Economist. 2007a. “A Flourishing Slum.” The Economist, 

get Richer.” Atlantic Monthly.

December 9.

Drabenstott, Mark. 2005. A Review of the Federal Role in Regional 
Economic Development. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City.

Duarte, Angelo José Mont Alverne, Pedro Cavalcanti Gomes Fer-
reira, and Marcio Antonio Salvato Jr. 2004. “Regional or Educa-
tional Disparities? A Counterfactual Exercise.” Working Paper 
532, Fundação Getulio Vargas Department of Economics, Sâo 
Paulo.

Dumais, Guy, Glenn Ellison, and Edward L. Glaeser. 2002. “Geo-
graphic Concentration as a Dynamic Process.” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 84 (2): 193–204.

Dumke, Rolf H. 1994. “Urban Inequality in Wilhemine Germany.” 

Institut für Volkswirtscaftslehre, Universitat der Bundeswehr 
Munchen, Munich, Germany.

Dunlap, David W. 1992. “Some Land-Use History Highlights.” New 

York Times, April 12.

Dunlevy, James A., and Don Bellante. 1983. “Net Migration, 
Endogenous Incomes and the Speed of Adjustment to the 
North-South Differential.” Review of Economics and Statistics 65 
(1): 66–75.

Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. 1989a. 

“Plant Turnover and Gross Employment Flows in the U.S. 
Manufacturing Sector.” Journal of Labor Economics 7 (1): 
48–71.

———. 1989b. “The Growth and Failure of U.S. Manufacturing 

Plants.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (4): 671–98.

Duranton, Gilles, and Henry G. Overman. 2002. “Testing for 

Localization Using Micro-Geographic Data.” Working Paper 
540, Centre for Economic Performance, London.

———. 2007. “Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic 

Data.” Review of Economic Studies 72(4):1077–106.

———. 2007b. “Chile and Peru. Neighbours, But Not Yet Friends.” 

The Economist, June 28.

The Economist Economic Intelligence Unit. 2007. China/India Tech-

nology: Leapfrogging or Piggybacking? London: The Economist.

Eeckhout, Jan. 2004. “Gibrat’s Law for (All) Cities.” American Eco-

nomic Review 94 (5): 1429–51.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1997. “Geographic Con-

centration in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: A Dartboard 
Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 105 (5): 889–927.

Engel, Eduardo, Alexander Galetovic, and Claudio Raddatz. 1998. 

“Taxes and Income Distribution in Chile: Some Unpleasant 
Redistributive Arithmetic.” Documentos de Trabajo 41, Centro 
de Economía Aplicada, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Engels, Friedrich. 1987. The Condition of the Working Class in Eng-
land. New York: Penguin Books (original published in German 
in 1945).

Escobal, Javier, and Maximo Torero. 2000. “Does Geography 

Explain Differences in Economic Growth in Peru?” Research 
Network Working Paper R-404, Inter-American Development 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Estache, Antonio, and Marianne Fay. 2007. “Current Debates on 

Infrastructure Policy.” Policy Research Working Paper 4410, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Estache, Antonio, Marianela González, and Lourdes Trujillo. 2002. 
“Efﬁ ciency Gains from Port Reform and the Potential for Yard-
stick Competition: Lessons from Mexico.” World Development 
30 (4): 545–60.

Ethier, Wilfred J. 1982. “National and International Returns to 

Scale in the Modern Theory of International Trade.” American 
Economic Review 72(3):389–405.

Euractiv. 2008. Commission Defends Proposal on Pension ‘Portabil-

Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2000. “Diversity and Specializa-

ity.’ Brussels: Euractiv.

tion in Cities: Why, Where, and When Does It Matter?” Urban 
Studies 37 (3): 533–55.

———. 2001. “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innova-

tion, and the Life Cycle of Products.” American Economic Review 
91 (5): 1454–77.

———. 2004. “Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration 

Economies.” In Handbook of Urban and Regional Economies, 
vol. 4, ed. J. Vernon Henderson and Jacque Thisse. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland.

———. 2005. “From Sectoral to Functional Urban Specialization.” 

Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2): 343–70.

European Commission. 2001. Unity, Solidarity, Diversity for 

Europe, its People and its Territory: Second Report on Economic 
and Social Cohesion. Brussels: European Commission.

———. 2002. European Union Public Finance. Luxembourg: Euro-
pean Commission, Ofﬁ ce for Ofﬁ cial Publications of the Euro-
pean Communities.

———. 2007. Growing Regions, Growing Europe. Brussels: Euro-

pean Communities.

Evans, Carolyn L., and James E. Harrigan. 2005. “Distance, Time, 

and Specialization: Lean Retailing in General Equilibrium.” 
American Economic Review 95 (1): 292–313.

WDR09_21_References.indd   312
WDR09_21_References.indd   312

10/10/08   10:08:03 AM
10/10/08   10:08:03 AM

 

References 

313

Evans, Peter. 2002. Livable Cities? Urban Struggles for Livelihood 

and Sustainability. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Evenett, Simon J. 2005. “Competitive Liberalization: A Tourna-
ment Theory-Based Interpretation.” Paper presented at the 
Sequencing of Regional Economic Integration: Issues in the 
Breadth and Depth of Economic Integration in the Americas, 
Notre Dame, IN.

Ezcurra, Roberto, and Pedro Pascual. 2007. “Spatial Disparities in 
Productivity in Central and Eastern Europe.” Eastern European 
Economics 45 (3): 5–32.

Fink, Carsten, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2004. “Regional Agreements 
and Trade in Services: Policy Issues.” Journal of Economic Inte-
gration 19 (4): 742–79.

Fink, Carsten, Aaditya Mattoo, and Ileana Cristina Neagu. 2005. 

“Assessing the Impact of Communication Costs on Interna-
tional Trade.” Journal of International Economics 67 (2): 428–45.
Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian W. H. Parry. 2007. 
“Should Automobile Fuel Economy Standards Be Tightened?” 
Energy Journal 28 (4): 1–30.

Fogel, Robert W. 1979. “Notes on the Social Savings Controversy.” 

Fafchamps, Marcel, and Klaus Desmet. 2000. “The Changing Spa-

Journal of Economic History 39 (1): 1–54.

tial Distribution of Economic Activity across U.S. Counties.” 
Economic Working Paper 43, Oxford, U.K.

Faini, Riccardo. 1983. “Cumulative Process of Deindustrialization 
in an Open Region: the Case of Southern Italy.” Journal of Devel-
opment Economics 12 (3): 277–301.

———. 1996. “Increasing Returns, Migration, and Convergence.” 

Journal of Development Economics 49 (1): 121–36.

Faini, Riccardo, Curzio Giannini, and Giampaolo Galli. 1993. 
“Finance and Development: The Case of Southern Italy.” In 
Finance and Development: Issues and Experience, ed. Alberto 
Giovannini. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Fan, Shenggen, Xiaobo Zhang, and Neetha Rao. 2004. “Public 

Expenditure, Growth, and Poverty Reduction in Rural Uganda.” 
IFPRI Working Paper 4, International Food Policy Research 
Institute, Washington, DC.

Farvacque-Vitkovic, Catherine, Alicia Casalis, Christian Eghoff, 
and Mahine Diop. 2007. “Development of the Cities of Mali: 
Challenges and Priorities.” Africa Region Working Paper 104, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Fay, Marianne, John Felkner, and Somik V. Lall. 2008. “Market 

Access and Firm Productivity in the Russian Federation.” World 
Bank, Washington, DC. Processed.

Fay, Marianne, and Charlotte Opal. 2000. “Urbanization without 
Growth: A Not-So-Uncommon Phenomenon.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 2412, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Fearon, James D., and David D. Laitin. 2003. “Additional Tables for 

Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War.” Stanford University, Palo 
Alto, CA.

Feder, Gershon, and Peter Lanjouw. 2001. “Rural Non-farm Activi-

ties and Rural Development: From Experience towards Strat-
egy.” Rural Development Strategy Background Paper 4, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1997. “Foreign Direct 
Investment and Relative Wages: Evidence from Mexico’s Maqui-
ladoras.” Journal of International Economics 42 (3–4): 371–93.

Fontagné, Lionel, Thierry Mayer, and Soledad Zignago. 2005. 

“Trade in the Triad: How Easy Is the Access to Large Markets?” 
Canadian Journal of Economics 38 (4): 1401–30.

Foroutan, Faezeh, and Lant Pritchett. 1993. “Intra-Sub-Saharan 
African Trade: Is It Too Little?” Journal of African Economies 2 
(1): 74–105.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., Ernesto Stein, and Shang-Jin Wei. 1996. 

“Regional Trade Arrangements: Natural or Supernatural.” Amer-
ican Economic Review 86 (2): 52–6.

Freund, Caroline L., and Diana Weinhold. 2004. “The Effect of the 

Internet on International Trade.” Journal of International Eco-
nomics 62 (1): 171–89.

Fuentes, Ricardo, and Andrés Montes. 2004. “Mexico and the Mil-
lennium Development Goals in a Subnational Level.” Journal of 
Human Development 5 (1): 97–120.

Fujita, Masahisa, ed. 2007. Regional Integration in East Asia: From 

the Viewpoint of Spatial Economics. New York: Palgrave Mac-
millan.

Fujita, Masahisa, and Ryoichi Ishii. 1999. “Global Location Behav-
ior and Organizational Dynamics of Japanese Electronics Firms 
and Their Impact on Regional Economies.” In The Dynamic 
Firm: The Role of Technology, Strategy, Organization, and 
Regions, ed. Alfred D. Chandler Jr., Peter Hagstrom, and Orjan 
Solvell. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Fujita, Masahisa, and Takatoshi Tabuchi. 1997. “Regional Growth 

in Post War Japan.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 27 
(6): 643–70.

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony J. Venables. 2001. 
The Spatial Economy. Cities, Regions, and International Trade. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Fuss, Melvyn A., and Vinod K. Gupta. 1981. “A Cost Function 

Approach to the Estimation of Minimum Efﬁ cient Scale, 
Returns to Scale, and Suboptimal Capacity: With an Application 
to Canadian Manufacturing.” European Economic Review 15 (2): 
123–35.

Feldman, Maryann P. 1994. The Geography of Innovation. Boston, 

Gabaix, Xavier, and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2004. “Evolution of City 

MA: Kluwer.

Feldman, Maryann P., and David B. Audretsch. 1999. “Innovation 
in Cities: Science-Based Diversity, Specialization, and Localized 
Competition.” European Economic Review 43 (2): 409–29.

Ferreira, Afonso. 2000. “Convergence in Brazil: Recent Trends and 

Long-Run Prospects.” Journal of Applied Economics 3 (4): 479–89.
Fingleton, Bernard. 2003. “Increasing Returns: Evidence from Local 

Wages in Great Britain.” Oxford Economic Papers 55 (4): 716–39.

Size Distributions.” In Handbook of Urban and Regional Eco-
nomics, vol. 4, ed. J. Vernon Henderson and Jacque-Francois 
Thisse. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Gakenheimer, Ralph. 1999. “Urban Mobility in the Developing 
World.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 33 
(7): 671–89.

Gallaway, Lowell E., and Richard K. Vedder. 1971. “Mobility of 

Native Americans.” Journal of Economic History 31 (3): 613–49.

WDR09_21_References.indd   313
WDR09_21_References.indd   313

10/10/08   10:08:04 AM
10/10/08   10:08:04 AM

314 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Gallup, John L., Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Andrew D. Mellinger. 1999. 

Goodlad, R. 1996. “The Housing Challenge in South Africa.” 

“Geography and Economic Development.” International 
Regional Science Review 22 (2): 179–232.

Urban Studies 33 (9): 1629–45.

Gordon, Robert J. 1990. The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. 

Garau, Pietro. 2008. Notes for the State of the World’s Cities Report 

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

2008: Policy Analysis and Recommendations. Nairobi: UN- 
HABITAT.

García-Verdú, Rodrigo. 2005. “Income, Mortality, and Literacy 
Distribution Dynamics across States in Mexico: 1940–2000.” 
Cuadernos de Economía 42 (125): 165–92.

Garrett, James. 2005. Mobility, Migration, and Rural-Urban 

Changes, Brief 2. Washington, DC: International Food Policy 
Research Institute.

Garrett, Power. 2002. “Slums of Baltimore.” In From Mobtown to 
Charm City: New Perspectives on Baltimore’s Past, ed. Jessica L. 
Elfenbein, John R. Breihan, and Thomas L. Hollowak. Balti-
more, MD: Maryland Historical Society.

Gaspar, Jess, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1998. “Information Tech-

nology and the Future of Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 
43(1):136–56.

Gastner, Michael T. and Mark E. J. Newman. 2004. “Diffusion-

based method for producing density-equalizing maps.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101, 20:7499–7504.

Gauthier, Jean-Paul. 2007. Special Economic Zones: Performance, 
Lessons Learned, and Implications for Zone Development. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank, Foreign Investment Advisory Service.

Gibbon, Peter, and Stefano Ponte. 2005. Trading Down: Africa, 
Value Chains, and the Global Economy. Philadelphia: Temple 
University Press.

Gibson, John, and Scott Rozelle. 2003. “Poverty and Access to 

Roads in Papua New Guinea.” Economic Development and Cul-
tural Change 52 (1): 159–85.

Gill, Indermit, and Homi Kharas. 2007. An East Asia Renaissance: 

Ideas for Economic Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Gilman, Sidney. 1984. The Competitive Dynamics of Container 

Shipping. Liverpool, U.K.: Gower Publishing.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2001. “Decentralized 
Employment and the Transformation of the American City.” 
Working Paper 1912, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.

Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, José A. Scheinkman, and Andrei 

Shleifer. 1992. “Growth in Cities.” Journal of Political Economy 
100 (6): 1126–52.

Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. 2001. “Consumer 

City.” Journal of Economic Geography 1 (1): 27–50.

Glaeser, Edward L., and David C. Maré. 2001. “Cities and Skills.” 

Journal of Labor Economics 19 (2): 316–42.

Gorzelak, Grzegorz. 2007. “Cohesion and Convergence: Synonyms 
or Two Different Notions?” Paper presented at the Policy Work-
shop “Spatial Disparities and Development Policy,” Berlin.

Gottman, Jean. 1977. “Megalopolis and Antipolis: The Telephone 
and the Structure of the City.” In Ithiel de Sola Pool, (eds.), The 
Social Impact of the Telephone. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.

 Government of India Planning Commission. 2002a. 10th Five Year 

Plan (2002–2007). New Delhi: Government of India, Planning 
Commission.

———. 2002b. National Human Development Report 2001. New 

Delhi: Government of India, Planning Commission.

———. 2006. Towards Faster and More Inclusive Growth: An 

approach to the Eleventh Five Year Plan 2007–2012. New Delhi: 
Government of India.

Government of Malaysia. 2001. Eight Malaysia Plan: 2001–2005. 

Kuala Lumpur: Malaysia Economic Planning Unit.

Government of Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Science and Technol-

ogy. 2003. Multi-Disciplinary Committee Report of the Techno-
Economic Survey on Wood and Wood Products Sector, 2003, 4th 
Update. Lagos: Government of Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Sci-
ence and Technology.

Government of Sri Lanka. 2008. Poverty Indicators Household Income 

and Expenditure Survey, 2006–07. Colombo: Sri Lanka Depart-
ment of Census and Statistics, Ministry of Planning and Finance.

Goyal, Sanjeev, and Klaas Staal. 2004. “The Political Economy of 

Regionalism.” European Economic Review 48 (3): 563–93.

Green, Alan G. 1969. “Regional Inequality, Structural Change, and 

Economic Growth in Canada, 1890–1956.” Economic Develop-
ment and Cultural Change 17 (4): 567–83.

Gregoire, Emmanuel, and Pascal Labazee. 1993. Grands Commer-

çants d’Afrique de l’Ouest. Paris: Karthala-Orstom.

Greytak, David, and Paul Blackley. 1985. “Labor Productivity and 
Local Industry Size: Further Issues in Assessing Agglomeration 
Economies.” Southern Economic Journal 51 (4): 1121–29.

Gribbin, August. 2000. “Overpopulated Megacities Face Frighten-

ing Future: Overpopulation in Developing Countries Impact on 
the West.” Insight on the News, August 21.

Griliches, Zvi, and Vidar Ringstad. 1971. Economies of Scale and the 

Form of the Production Function: An Econometric Study of Nor-
wegian Manufacturing Establishment Data. Amsterdam: North-
Holland.

Glaeser, Edward L., José A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Schleifer. 

Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. “Quality Lad-

1995. “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Cities.” Journal 
of Monetary Economics 36 (1): 117–43.

ders in the Theory of Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 
58(1):43–61.

Golob, Thomas F., and David Brownstone. 2005. “The Impact of 

———. 1995. “Technology and Trade.” In Gene M. Grossman and 

Residential Density on Vehicle Usage and Energy Consump-
tion.” Energy Institute Policy and Economics Working Paper 
EPE-011, University of California, Berkeley, CA.

Good, David F. 1986. “Uneven Development in the Nineteenth 

Century: A Comparison of the Habsburg Empire and the 
United States.” Journal of Economic History 46 (1): 137–51.

Kenneth Rogoff, (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, 
Volume III. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland.

Groupe Recherche—Actions pour le Développement. 2001. 

“Potentialités et Conﬂ its dans les Zones Péri-urbaines: Le Cas 
de Bamako au Mali.” Rural-Urban Interactions and Livelihood 
Strategies Working Paper 5, IIED, London.

WDR09_21_References.indd   314
WDR09_21_References.indd   314

10/10/08   10:08:04 AM
10/10/08   10:08:04 AM

 

References 

315

Guasch, Juan Luis. 2008. Exporting by Mail: An Innovative Trade 

Facilitation Tool. Washington, DC: World Bank, IFC Smart Les-
sons.

Harley, C. Knick. 1980. “Transportation, the World Wheat Trade, 
and the Kuznets Cycle, 1850–1913.” Explorations in Economic 
History 17 (3): 218–50.

Guerra, Carlos A., Priscilla W. Gikandi, Andrew J. Tatem, Abdis-

Harrigan, James E. 2005. “Airplanes and Comparative Advantage.” 

alan M. Noor, Dave L. Smith, Simon I. Hay, and Robert W. 
Snow. 2008. “The Limits and Intensity of Plasmodium Falci-
parum Transmission: Implications for Malaria Control and 
Elimination Worldwide.” Plos Medicine 5 (2): e38–e38.

Gupta, Vinod K. 1983. “Labor Productivity, Establishment Size, 

and Scale Economies.” Southern Economic Journal 49(3):853–9.
Gwatkin, Davidson R., Shea Rutstein, Kiersten Johnson, Eldaw Suli-

man, Adam Wagstaff, and Agbessi Amouzou. 2007. Socio-Economic 
Differences in Health, Nutrition, and Population within Developing 
Countries: An Overview. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hall, Carolyn. 1984. “Regional Inequalities in Well-Being in Costa 

Rica.” Geographical Review 74 (1): 48–62.

Hall, Peter. 2002. Cities of Tomorrow. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell Pub-

lishing.

NBER Working Paper 11688, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.

Harrigan, James E., and Anthony J. Venables. 2006. “Timeli-

ness and Agglomeration.” Journal of Urban Economics 59 (2): 
300–16.

Harris, John R., and Michael P. Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unem-

ployment, and Development: A Two-Sector Analysis.” American 
Economic Review 60 (1): 126–42.

Hau, Timothy. 1990. “Electronic Road Pricing: Developments in 
Hong Kong, 1983–1989.” Journal of Transport Economics and 
Policy 24 (2): 203–14.

Haussmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik. 2003. “Economic Develop-

ment as Self-Discovery.” Journal of Development Economics 72 
(2): 603–33.

Hall, Robert E. 1988. “The Relation between Price and Marginal 

Haussmann, Ricardo, Dani Rodrik, and Andrés Velasco. 2005. 

Cost in U.S. Industry.” Journal of Political Economy 96 (5): 
921–47.

“Growth Diagnostics.” Center for International Development, 
Cambridge, MA.

———. 1990. “Invariance Properties of Solow’s Productivity 
Residual.” In Growth, Productivity, Unemployment: Essays to 
Celebrate Bob Solow’s Birthday, ed. Peter Diamond. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.

Hall, Thomas, and Sonja Vidén. 2005. “The Million Homes Pro-

gramme: A Review of the Great Swedish Planning Model.” Plan-
ning Perspectives 20 (3): 301–28.

Hamaguchi, Nobuaki. Forthcoming. “Regional Integration, 
Agglomeration, and Income Distribution in East Asia.” In 
Reshaping Economic Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang 
and Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World Bank, 
EAP Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

Hammond, George William, and Jürgen von Hagen. 1994. “Indus-

trial Localization: An Empirical Test for Marshallian Localiza-
tion Economies.” Working Paper 917, Centre for Economic 
Policy Research, London.

Hancock, Diana, David B. Humphrey, and James A. Wilcox. 1999. 
“Cost Reductions in Electronic Payments: The Roles of Consoli-
dation, Economies of Scale, and Technical Change.” Journal of 
Banking and Finance 23 (2–4): 391–421.

Hansen, Eric R. 1990. “Agglomeration Economics and Industrial 

Decentralization: The Wage-Productivity Trade-Offs.” Journal of 
Urban Economics 28(2):140–59.

Hanson, Gordon H. 1996. “Agglomeration, Dispersion, and the 

Pioneer Firm.” Journal of Urban Economics 39 (3): 255–81.
———. 1998a. “North American Economic Integration and 

Industry Location.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 14 (2): 
30–44.

———. 1998b. “Regional Adjustment to Trade Liberalization.” 

Regional Science and Urban Economics 28 (4): 419–44.

Hay, Donald Andrew. 1979. “The Location of Industry in a Devel-
oping Country: The Case of Brazil.” Oxford Economic Papers 31 
(1): 93–120.

Hay, Simon I., Carlos A. Guerra, Andrew J. Tatem, Abdisalan M. 

Noor, and Robert W. Snow. 2004. “The Global Distribution and 
Population at Risk of Malaria: Past, Present, and Future.” Lancet 
Infectious Diseases 4 (6): 327–36.

Hay, Simon I., David L. Smith, and Robert W. Snow. 2008. “Mea-
suring Malaria Endemicity from Intense to Interrupted Trans-
mission.” Lancet Infectious Diseases 8 (6): 369–78.

Hayashi, Takehisa. 2003. Readings on Local Public Finance. Tokyo: 

Toyo Keizai Shinposya.

Hazlewood, Arthur. 1979. “The End of the East African Commu-
nity: What Are the Lessons for Regional Integration Schemes?” 
Journal of Common Market Studies 18 (1): 40–58.

He, Canfei. Forthcoming. “Industrial Agglomeration and Eco-
nomic Performance in the Transitional China.” In Reshaping 
Economic Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang and Ales-
sandro Magnoli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World Bank, EAP 
Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

Head, Charles Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2006. “Regional Wage and 
Employment Responses to Market Potential in the EU.” Regional 
Science and Urban Economics 36 (5): 573–94.

Head, Charles Keith, John Reis, and Deborah Swenson. 1995. 

“Agglomeration Beneﬁ ts and Location Choice: Evidence from 
Japanese Manufacturing Investment in the United States.” Jour-
nal of International Economics 38 (3–4): 223–47.

Heideloff, Christel, and Manfred Zachcial. 2006. Shipping Statisti-
cal Yearbook 2006. Bremen, Germany: Institute of Shipping Eco-
nomics and Logistics.

Hardoy, Jorge E., and David Satterthwaite. 1989. Squatter Citizen: 

Helliwell, John F. 2002. “Measuring the Width of National Bor-

Life in the Urban Third World. London: Earthscan.

ders.” Review of International Economics 10 (3): 517–24.

Hargan, Jim. 2007. “Prince Charles Poundbury.” Brittish Heritage. 

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman. 1987. Market Structure and 

May, 2007.

Foreign Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

WDR09_21_References.indd   315
WDR09_21_References.indd   315

10/10/08   10:08:04 AM
10/10/08   10:08:04 AM

316 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Henderson, J. Vernon. 1974. “The Sizes and Types of Cities.” Amer-

Hill, Hal, Budy Resosudarmo, and Yogi Vidyattama. 2007. “Indo-

ican Economic Review 64 (4): 640–56.

———. 1986. “Efﬁ ciency of Resources Usage and City Size.” Jour-

nal of Urban Economics 19 (1): 47–70.

———. 1994. “Where Does an Industry Locate?” Journal of Urban 

Economics 35(1):83–104.

———. 1997a. “Externalities and Industrial Development.” Jour-

nal of Urban Economics 42 (3): 449–70.

———. 1997b. “Medium Size Cities.” Regional Science and Urban 

Economics 27 (6): 583–612.

———. 2003a. “Marshall’s Scale Economies.” Journal of Urban 

Economics 53 (1): 1–28.

———. 2003b. “The Urbanization Process and Economic Growth: 

The So-What Question.” Journal of Economic Growth 8 (1): 
47–71.

———. 2005a. “Development and Growth.” In Handbook of Eco-
nomic Growth, vol. 1, part B, ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven N. 
Durlauf. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

———. 2005b. “Urbanization and Growth.” In Handbook of Eco-

nomic Growth, ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

———. 2007. Urbanization in China: Policy Issues and Options. 

New York: China Economic Research and Advisory Programme.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Ari Kuncoro, and Damhuri Nasution. 1996. 
“The Dynamics of Jabotabek Development.” Bulletin of Indone-
sian Economic Studies 32 (1): 71–95.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Ari Kuncoro, and Matthew Turner. 1995. 

“Industrial Development in Cities.” Journal of Political Economy 
103 (5): 1067–90.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Todd Lee, and Yung Joon Lee. 2001. “Scale 

Externalities in Korea.” Journal of Urban Economics 49 (3): 479–504.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Zmarak Shalizi, and Anthony J. Venables. 

2001. “Geography and Development.” Journal of Economic Geog-
raphy 1 (1): 81–105.

Henriksen, Ingrid. 2003. “Freehold Tenure in Late Eighteenth Cen-

tury Denmark.” In Advances in Agricultural Economic History, 
ed. Kyle D. Kaufman. New York: JAI Press.

Henry, Peter Blair. 2007. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, 

Evidence, and Speculation.” Journal of Economic Literature 45 
(4): 887–935.

Hering, Laura, and Sandra Poncet. 2006. “Market Access and Indi-

vidual Wages: Evidence from China.” Working Paper 2006-23, 
Centre d’Études Prospectives et d’Informations Internationales, 
Paris.

Herzog, Henry W. Jr., and Alan M. Schlottmann, eds. 1991. Industry 
Location and Public Policy. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee.

Hewings, G., E. Feser, and K. Poole. 2008. “Spatial/Territorial 

Development Policies in the United States.” Background paper 
for the WDR 2009.

Hidalgo, C. A., B. Klinger, A. L. Barabási, and R. Hausmann. 

2007. “The Product Space Conditions for the Development of 
Nations.” Science 317 (5837): 482–87.

Hill, Fiona, and Clifford Gaddy. 2003. The Siberia Curse: How 

Communist Planners Left Russia out in the Cold. Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution Press.

nesia’s Changing Economic Geography.” Working Papers in Eco-
nomics and Development Studies 2007-13, Bandung, Indonesia.

Hoekman, Bernard. 2006. “Liberalizing Trade in Services: A Sur-
vey.” Policy Research Working Paper 4030, World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.

Hoekman, Bernard, and Dominique Njinkeu. 2007. “Aid for Trade 

and Export Competitiveness: New Opportunities for Africa.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Holmes, Thomas J. 1999. “Localization of Industry and Verti-

cal Disintegration.” Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (2): 
314–25.

Holmes, Thomas J., and John J. Stevens. 2002. “Geographic Con-
centration and Establishment Scale.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 84 (4): 682–91.

Holzmann, Hajo, and Sebastian Vollmer. 2008. “The Distribution 
of Income across German Counties, 1992–2005.” University of 
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.

Hoover, Edgar M., and Raymond Vernon. 1959. Anatomy of a 

Metropolis: The Changing Distribution of People and Jobs within 
the New York Metropolitan Area. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

Huang, Yukon, and Xubei Luo. Forthcoming. “Reshaping Eco-

nomic Geography in China.” In Reshaping Economic Geography 
in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang and Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Huber, Peter W. 1995. “New York, Capital of the Information Age.” 

New York City Journal 5(1):12–22.

Hughes, Joseph P., William W. Lang, Loretta J. Mester, and Choon-

Geol Moon. 1999. “The Dollars and Sense of Bank Consolida-
tion.” Journal of Banking and Finance 23 (2–4): 291–324.

Hughes, Joseph P., and Loretta J. Mester. 1998. “Bank Capitaliza-
tion and Cost: Evidence of Scale Economies in Risk Manage-
ment and Signaling.” Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (2): 
314–25.

Hulten, Charles R. 2007. “Transportation Infrastructure, Produc-
tivity and Externalities.” In ECMT Round Tables No. 132: Trans-
port, Infrastructure Investment and Economic Productivity, ed. 
OECD/ECMT. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development.

Hummels, David. 2001. Time as a Trade Barrier. West Lafayette, 

IN: Purdue University Press.

———. 2007. “Transportation Costs and International Trade in 
the Second Era of Globalization.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 21 (3): 131–54.

Hummels, David, Volodymyr Lugovskyy, and Alexandre Skiba. 

2007. “The Trade Reducing Effect of Market Power in Interna-
tional Shipping.” NBER Working Paper 12914, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Hunt, Edward H. 1986. “Industrialization and Regional Inequality: 

Wages in Britain, 1760–1914.” Journal of Economic History 46 
(4): 935–66.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2000. “Why Do People Still Live in East Germany?” 

NBER Working Paper 7564, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.

WDR09_21_References.indd   316
WDR09_21_References.indd   316

10/10/08   10:08:05 AM
10/10/08   10:08:05 AM

 

References 

317

Hurd, John II. 1975. “Railways and the Expansion of Markets in 

Jensen, Robert. 2007. “The Digital Provide: Information (Tech-

India, 1861–1921.” Explorations in Economic History 12 (3): 
263–88.

Iliffe, John. 1995. Africans: The History of a Continent. Cambridge, 

U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). 2007. “The Development 
Potential of Regional Programs: An Evaluation of World Bank 
Support of Multicountry Operations.” Paper presented at the 
IEG Conference on Unlocking the Potential of Regional Devel-
opment Programs, Washington, DC.

 Ingram, Gregory. 1997. “Patterns of Metropolitan Development: 
What Have We Learned?” Policy Research Working Paper 1841, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Ingram, Gregory, and John Whitehead. 2008. “The Distribu-

tion and Concentration of Population in the U.S., 1900–2000.” 
Working Paper WP08GI1, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 
Cambridge, MA.

Instituto Brasileiro de Geograﬁ a e Estatística (IBGE). 2004. Perﬁ l 

Dos Municipios Brasileiros. Rio de Janeiro: IBGE.

Inter-American Development Bank. Forthcoming. Unclogging 

the Arteries: A Report on the Impact of Transport Costs on Latin 
American and Caribbean Trade. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

International Air Transport Association. 2007a. Aviation Economic 

Beneﬁ ts: Issues Brieﬁ ng No. 8. Montreal, Canada: International 
Air Transport Association.

———. 2007b. Economics Brieﬁ ng: Air Freight Market Outlook. 

Montreal, Canada: International Air Transport Association.

International Development Association, and World Bank. 2008. 

Regional Integration Assistance Strategy. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

International Monetary Fund. 1998. World Economic Outlook. 

Financial Crises: Causes and Indicators. Washington, DC: Inter-
national Monetary Fund.

———. 2007. Directions of Trade. Washington, DC: International 

Monetary Fund.

Ivaldi, Marc, and Gerard McCullough. 2007. “Railroad Pricing and 
Revenue-to-Cost Margins in the Post-Staggers Era.” In Research 
in Transportation Economics, ed. Scott Dennis and Wayne Talley. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Jacobs, Jane. 1970. The Economy of Cities. New York: Vintage.
Jacoby, Hanan G. 2000. “Access to Markets and the Beneﬁ ts of 

Rural Roads.” Economic Journal 110 (465): 713–37.

Jaffe, Adam B. 1986. “Technological Opportunity and Spillover of 
R&D: Evidence from Firms’ Patents, Proﬁ ts, and Market Value.” 
American Economic Review 76 (5): 984–1001.

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. 
“Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidence by 
Patent Citations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3): 577–98.
Jayne, Thomas S., B. Zulu, D. Mather, E. Mghenyi, E. Chirwa, and 
David L. Tschirley. 2005. “Maize Marketing and Trade Policy in 
a Pro-Poor Agricultural Growth Strategy: Insights from House-
hold Surveys in Eastern and Southern Africa.” Paper presented 
at Toward Improved Maize Marketing and Trade Policies in the 
Southern Africa Region, Centurion, South Africa.

nology), Market Performance, and Welfare in the South Indian 
Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 879–
924.

Jessen, Anneje. 2002. “Regional Public Goods and Small Econo-

mies: The Caribbean Regional Negotiating Machinery.” In 
Regional Public Goods: From Theory to Practice, ed. Antoni Este-
vadeordal, Brian Frantz, and Tam R. Nguyen. Washington, DC: 
Inter-American Development Bank and Asian Development 
Bank.

Jones, Gareth A., and Kavita Datta. 2000. “Enabling Markets to 

Work? Housing Policy in the ‘New’ South Africa.” International 
Planning Studies 5 (3): 393–416.

Jourdan, Paul, and NEPAD. 2006. “Regional Strategies. The Case 
for a Resource-Based Spatial Development Programme.” Paper 
presented at the U.S.–Africa Infrastructure Conference, Wash-
ington, DC.

Junius, Karsten. 1997. “Economies of Scale: A Survey of Empirical 

Literature.” Working Paper 813, Kiel Institute of World Eco-
nomics, Kiel, Germany.

Justman, Moshe. 1994. “The Effect of Local Demand on Industry 

Location.” Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (4): 742–53.

Kaldor, Nicholas. 1972. “The Irrelevance of Equilibrium Econom-

ics.” Economic Journal 82 (328): 1237–55.

Kamada, Kimiyoshi, Nobuhiro Okuno, and Ritsuko Futagami. 

1998. “Decisions on Regional Allocation of Public Investment: 
the Case of Japan.” Applied Economic Letters 5 (8): 503–6.

Kanbur, Ravi, and Anthony J. Venables. 2005. Rising Spatial Dis-
parities and Development: Why Do they Matter? Oxford, U.K.: 
Oxford University Press, UNU-WIDER Studies in Development 
Economics.

Kanbur, Ravi, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2005. “Fifty Years of Regional 

Inequality in China: A Journey through Central Planning, 
Reform, and Openness.” Review of Development Economics 9 (1): 
87–106.

Kasekende, Louis A., and Nehemiah Ng’eno. 1999. “Regional Inte-
gration and Economic Liberalization in Eastern and Southern 
Africa.” In Regional Integration and Trade Liberalization in Sub-
Saharan Africa, Volume 3: Regional Case-Studies, ed. Ademola 
Oyejide, Ibrahim Elbadawi, and Stephen Yeo. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan Press.

Kawashima, Tatsuhiko. 1975. “Urban Agglomeration Economies 

in Manufacturing Industries.” Papers in Regional Science 34 (1): 
157–72.

Kearns, Kevin C. 2006. Dublin’s Lost Heroines: Mammies and Gran-

nies in a Vanished Dublin. Park West, Dublin: Gill and Macmillan.

Kee, Hiau Looi, Alessandro Nicita, and Marcelo Olarreaga. 2006. 

“Estimating Trade Restiveness Indices.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 3840, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Keefer, Philip, and Stuti Khemani. 2005. “Democracy, Public 

Expenditures, and the Poor: Understanding Political Incentives 
for Providing Public Services.” World Bank Research Observer 
Advance Access 20 (1): 1–27.

Kenworthy, Jeff. 2005. “Transport Energy Use and Greenhouse 
Gases in Urban Passenger Transport Systems:  A Study of 84 

WDR09_21_References.indd   317
WDR09_21_References.indd   317

10/10/08   10:08:05 AM
10/10/08   10:08:05 AM

318 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Global Cities.” Institute for Sustainability and Technology Pol-
icy, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Australia.

Kenya Ministry of Planning and National Development and 

UNDP. 2005. Millennium Development Goals Country Report 
2005: Kenya. Nairobi: United Nations and Kenya Ministry of 
Planning and National Development.

Kraske, Jochen, William H. Becker, William Diamond, and Louis 
Galambos. 1996. Bankers with a Mission: The Presidents of the 
World Bank, 1946–91. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Krishna, Pravin. 1998. “Regionalism and Multilateralism: A Politi-
cal Economy Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1): 
227–50.

Khanna, Tarun. 2008. Billions of Entrepreneurs: How China and 

Kroehnert, Steffen, Franziska Medicus, and Reiner Kinglolz. 2006. 

India Are Reshaping Their Futures—and Yours. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press.

Kilkenny, Maureen. 1998. “Economies of Scale. Lecture for  Eco-

nomics 376: Rural, Urban and Regional Economics.” Iowa State 
University. Ames, IA. 

Kilroy, Austin. 2008. “Intra-Urban Spatial Inequalities: Cities as 

‘Urban Regions.’” Background paper for the WDR 2009.

Kim, Sukkoo. 1995. “Expansion of Markets and the Geographic 

Distribution of Economic Activities: The Trends in U.S. 
Regional Manufacturing Structure, 1860–1987.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 110 (4): 881–908.

Die Demograﬁ sche Lage der Nation. Wie Zukunftsfaehig sind 
Deutschlands Regionen? Daten, Fakten, Analysen. Berlin: Berlin 
Institute for Population and Development.

Kroehnert, Steffen, and Sebastian Vollmer. 2008. “Where Have All 

Young Women Gone?” Background paper for the WDR 2009.
Krueger, Anne O. 2006. “Globalization and International Loca-
tional Competition.” Paper presented at the Symposium in 
Honor of Herbert Giersch, Kiel, Germany.

Krugman, Paul R. 1980. “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, 

and the Pattern of Trade.” American Economic Review 70(5):950–9.

———. 1981. “Intraindustry Specialization and the Gains from 

———. 1999. “Regions, Resources, and Economics Geography: 

Trade.” Journal of Political Economy 89(5):959–73.

Sources of U.S. Regional Comparative Advantage, 1880–1987.” 
Regional Science and Urban Economics 29 (1): 1–32.

Kim, Sukkoo, and Robert A. Margo. 2004. “Historical Perspectives 

on U.S. Economic Geography.” In Handbook of Regional and 
Urban Economics, Volume 4: Cities and Geography, ed. J. Vernon 
Henderson and Jacque-Francois Thisse. Amsterdam: North-
Holland.

Kim, Won Bae. 1998. “Korea’s Policy of Rural-Urban Integrated 

Cities.” Paper presented at the International Workshop on Rural 
and Urban Linkages, Curitiba, Brazil.

Kloeppinger-Todd, Renate. 2007. “ICT and Rural Access to 

Finance.” Paper presented at the infoDev/ARD Workshop on 
Using ICT to Support Rural Livelihoods, Washington, DC.

Knoke, William. 1996. Bold New World: The Essential Road Map to 

the Twenty-First Century. New York: Kodansha International.

Koh, Tommy, and Li Lin Chang, eds. 2005. The Little Red Dot: 

Reﬂ ections by Singapore’s Diplomats. Singapore: World Scientiﬁ c 
Publishing.

Kolko, Jed. 1998. “New England at Your Service: The New Geogra-

phy of Service Industries.” Regional Review 1998 (Q4): 6–11.

———. 1999. “Can I Get Some Service Here? Information Tech-
nology, Service Industries, and the Future of Cities.” Ph.D. the-
sis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

———. 2000. “The Death of Cities? The Death of Distance? Evi-
dence from the Geography of Commercial Internet Usage.” In 
The Internet Upheaval, ed. Ingo Vogelsang and Benjamin Com-
paine. Cambridge, MA: MIT.

———. 2007. “Agglomeration and Co-Agglomeration of Services 
Industries.” Munich Personal RePEc Archive (MPRA) Working 
Paper 3362, Munich, Germany.

Koola, J., and Caglar Özden. 2008. “Making the Move: The Effect 
of Migration on Welfare in Uganda.” World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin 
Wei. 2006. “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal.” Working 
Paper 06/189, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

———. 1991a. Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. 1991b. “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography.” 

Journal of Political Economy 99 (3): 483–99.

———. 1991c. “Is Bilateralism Bad?” In International Trade and 

Trade Policy, ed. Elhanan Helpman and Assaf Razin. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.

———. 1993. “First Nature, Second Nature, and Metropolitan 

Location.” Journal of Regional Science 33 (2): 129–44.

———. 1995. “Innovation and Agglomeration: Two Parables Sug-
gested by City-Size Distributions.” Japan and the World Economy 
7 (4): 371–90.

———. 2007. “The ‘New’ Economic Geography: Where Are We?” 

In Regional Integration in East Asia, ed. Masahisa Fujita. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Kuncoro, Ari. Forthcoming. “Spatial Agglomeration, Site Pro-

ductivity and Local Governance: Indonesian Experience from 
1980 to 2003.” In Yukon Huang and Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi 
(eds.) Reshaping Economic Geography in East Asia. Washington, 
DC: World Bank, EAP Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

Kuroda, Haruhiko. 2007. “Toward an Integrated, Poverty-Free and 
Peaceful East Asia.” In East Asia Visions: Perspectives on Economic 
Development, ed. Indermit Gill, Yukon Huang, and Homi Kha-
ras. Washington, DC, and Singapore: World Bank.

Ladman, Jerry R. 1979. “The Economic Interdependence of Con-

tiguous Border Cities: The Twin City Multiplier.” Annals of 
Regional Science 13 (1): 23–28.

Laeven, Luc, and Christopher Woodruff. 2007. “The Quality of the 

Legal System, Firm Ownership, and Firm Size.” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 89 (4): 601–14.

Lall, Somik V. 2005. “City Performance and Policy Actions.” In 

Inputs for a Strategy of Cities in Brazil, ed. World Bank. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Lall, Somik V., Uwe Deichmann, Mattias K. A. Lundberg, and 
Nazmul Chaudhury. 2004. “Tenure, Diversity, and Commit-
ment: Community Participation for Urban Service Provision.” 
Journal of Development Studies 40 (3): 1–26.

WDR09_21_References.indd   318
WDR09_21_References.indd   318

10/10/08   10:08:05 AM
10/10/08   10:08:05 AM

 

References 

319

Lall, Somik V., Elizabeth Schroeder, and Emily Schmidt. 2008. 

“Geographically Prioritizing Infrastructure Improvements to 
Accelerate Growth in Uganda.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Lall, Somik V., Harris Selod, and Zmarak Shalizi. 2006. “Rural-

Urban Migration in Developing Countries: A Survey of Theo-
retical Predictions and Empirical Findings.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 3915, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Lall, Somik V., Hyoung Gun Wang, and Uwe Deichmann. 2008. 

“Infrastructure and City Competitiveness in India.” Policy 
Research Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Land Enquiry Commission. 1914. The Land, vol. II. London: Hod-

der and Stoughton.

Landes, David S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why 
Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor. New York: W. W. Norton.

Case of the Apple’s iPod.” Personal Computing Industry Cen-
ter, Irvine, CA.

Linn, F. Johannes, and David Tiomkin. 2006. “The New Impetus 
toward Economic Integration between Europe and Asia.” Asia 
Europe Journal 4 (1): 31–41.

Lipsey, Richard G., and Alice Nakamura, eds. 2006. Services Indus-
tries and the Knowledge-Based Economy. Calgary, Canada: Uni-
versity of Calgary Press.

Little, Peter D. 2007. “Unofﬁ cial Cross-Border Trade in Eastern 
Africa.” Paper presented at the Staple Food Trade and Market 
Policy Options for Promoting Development in Eastern and 
Southern Africa, Rome.

Lösch, Auguste. 1940. The Economics of Location. New Haven, CT: 

Yale University Press.

Lane, C. B. 1860. Railway Communication in London and the 

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Devel-

Thames Embankment. London: James Ridgway.

opment.” Journal of Monetary Economics 22 (1): 3–42.

Lanne, Markku, and Matti Liski. 2003. “Trends and Breaks in Per-
Capita Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 1870–2028.” Working Paper 
0302, Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, 
Cambridge, MA.

Layke, Christian, and Stephen Adam. 2008. “Spatial Allocation 

of Public Expenditures in Nigeria.” Background paper for the 
WDR 2009.

Leamer, Edward E. 2007. “A Flat World, a Level Playing Field, 
a Small World After All, or None of the Above? A Review of 
Thomas L. Friedman’s The World Is Flat.” Journal of Economic 
Literature 45 (1): 83–126.

Leamer, Edward E., and Michael Storper. 2001. “The Economic 

Geography of the Internet Age.” Journal of International Business 
Studies 32 (4): 641–65.

Lebergott, Stanley. 1964. Manpower in Economic Growth: The 

American Record since 1800. New York: McGraw Hill.

Lederman, Daniel, William F. Maloney, and Luis Servén. 2005. 

Lessons from NAFTA for Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Washington, DC, and Palo Alto, CA: World Bank and Stanford 
University Press.

Lee, Annabel. 2008. “A History of Korea’s Spatial Transformation 

and Economic Growth.” Washington, DC.

Lei, Ding, and Kingsley E. Haynes. 2004. “The Role of Telecom-
munications Infrastructure in Regional Economic Growth of 
China.” Paper presented at the Telecommunications Policy 
Research Conference, Washington, DC.

Leigland, James, and Andrew Roberts. 2007. “The African Project 

Preparation Gap.” Note 18.

Levinsohn, James, and Amil Petrin. 1999. “When Industries 

Become More Productive, Do Firms?” NBER Working Paper 
6893, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Levinson, Marc. 2006. The Box: How the Shipping Container Made 
the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.

Limão, Nuno, and Anthony J. Venables. 2001. “Infrastructure, 

Geographical Disadvantage, Transport Costs, and Trade.” World 
Bank Economic Review 15 (3): 451–79.

Linden, Greg, Kenneth L. Kraemer, and Jason Dedrick. 2007. 
“Who Captures Value in a Global Innovation System? The 

———. 2004. “Life Earnings and Rural-Urban Migration.” Journal 

of Political Economy 112 (S1): S29–S59.

———. 2007. “Trade and the Diffusion of the Industrial Revolu-

tion.” NBER Working Paper 13286, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Lucas, Robert E. B. 1997. “Internal Migration in Developing Coun-

tries.” In Handbook of Population and Family Economics, ed. 
Mark Rosenzweig and Oded Stark. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

———. 2003. “Migration and Lagging Regions.” Boston Univer-

sity, Boston. Processed.

———. 2006. “Migration and Economic Development in Africa: 

A Review of Evidence.” Journal of African Economies 15 (2): 
337–95.

Luo, Xubei. 2004. “The Role of Infrastructure Investment Loca-

tion in China’s Western Development.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 3345, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Lutz, Vera. 1962. Italy: A Study in Economic Development. London: 

Oxford University Press.

Lynch, Sarah N., and Eugene Mulero. 2007. “Williamsburg’s Most 
Recent Reinvention: The Makeover in Brooklyn.” The Coopera-
tor. Nov., 2007.

Lysenko, A. J., and I. N. Semashko. 1968. “Geography of Malaria: A 
Medico-Geographic Proﬁ le of an Ancient Disease [in Russian].” 
In Medicinskaja Geograﬁ ja, ed. A. W. Lebedew. Moscow: Russian 
Academy of Sciences.

Mackay, C. J. 1999. “Housing Policy in South Africa: The Challenge 

of Delivery.” Housing Studies 14 (3): 387–99.

MacMillan, Margaret. 2002. Paris 1919: Six Months That Changed 

the World. New York: Random House.

Maddison, Angus. 2006. The World Economy. Paris: Organisation 

for Economic Co-operation and Development.

———. 2008a. The World Economy: Volume 1: A Millennial Per-

spective. Paris: OECD.

———. 2008b. “World Population, GDP, and Per Capita GDP, 

1–2003 AD.” University of Gröningen Growth and Development 
Centre, Gröningen, Netherlands.

Malaysia Economic Planning Unit. 2008. Malaysia Achieving the 

MDGs. Kuala Lumpur: Malaysia Economic Planning Unit, 
Primer Minister’s Ofﬁ ce.

WDR09_21_References.indd   319
WDR09_21_References.indd   319

10/10/08   10:08:06 AM
10/10/08   10:08:06 AM

320 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Malinowski, Matthew. 2007. “Cold Snap Prompts Chile to Seek 

Mayer, Thierry. 2008. “Market Potential and Development.” Back-

Gas Deal with Old Foe Bolivia.” Christian Science Monitor, 
August 8.

Margo, Robert A. 1988. “Schooling and the Great Migration.” 
NBER Working Paper 2697, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.

ground paper for the WDR 2009.

McCallum, John. 1995. “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. 
Regional Trade Patterns.” American Economic Review 85 (3): 
615–23.

McCann, Philip. 2001. Urban and Regional Economics. Oxford, 

———. 2000. Wages and Labor Markets in the United States, 1820–

U.K.: Oxford University Press.

1860. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

McCrae, Ian. 2006. “Uncertainties in Road Transport Emissions in 

———. 2004. “The North-South Wage Gap, Before and After the 

Developing Countries.” HM Treasury, London.

Civil War.” In Slavery in the Development of the Americas, ed. 
David Eltis, Frank D. Lewis, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.

Markussen, T. Forthcoming. “Property Rights, Productivity, and 

Common Property Resources: Insights from Rural Cambodia.” 
World Development.

Marland, Gregg, Tom Boden, and Robert Andres. 2007. “National 

CO2 Emissions from Fossil-Fuel Burning, Cement Manufac-
ture, and Gas Flaring: 1751–2004.” Carbon Dioxide Information 
Analysis Center, Oakridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN.

Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: Mac-

millan.

Martin, Philippe. 2005. “The Geography of Inequalities in Europe.” 

Swedish Economic Policy Review 12: 83–108.

Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer, and Mathias Thoenig. 2008. 

“Civil Wars and International Trade.” Journal of the European 
Economic Association 6 (2–3): 541–50.

Martin, Ronald L. 2005. “Centralized Versus Decentralized Finan-
cial Systems: Is There a Case for Local Capital Markets?” Paper 
presented at the Cambridge-MIT Institute Conference on Ven-
ture Capital, Finance and Regional Development, Cambridge, 
U.K., June 17.

Martinez-Galarraga, Julio. 2007. “New Estimates on Regional GDP 
in Spain, 1860–1930.” Working Paper 177, Universitat de Barce-
lona Espai de Recerca en Economia, Barcelona.

Martínez-Zarzoso, Inmaculada, L. García-Menéndez, and C. Suá-
rez-Burguet. 2003. “Impact of Transport Costs on International 
Trade: The Case of Spanish Ceramic Exports.” Maritime Eco-
nomics and Logistics 5 (2): 179–98.

Martínez-Zarzoso, Inmaculada, and Laura Marquez-Ramos. 2007. 

“The Effect of Trade Facilitation on Sectoral Trade.” Working 
Paper 167, Ibero-America Institute for Economic Research, Göt-
tingen, Germany.

Martins, Joaquim Oliveira, Stefano Scarpetta, and Dirk Pilat. 1996. 
“Mark-up Ratios in Manufacturing Industries: Estimates for 14 
OECD Countries.” Working Paper 162, Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development, Paris.

Massey, Douglas S. 1988. “International Migration and Economic 

Development in Comparative Perspective.” Population and 
Development Review 14 (3): 383–413.

———. 2003. “Patterns and Processes of International Migration 
in the 21st Century.” Paper presented at the Conference on Afri-
can Migration in Comparative Perspective, Johannesburg.

Maurel, Françoise, and Béatrice Sédillot. 1999. “A Measure of the 

Geographic Concentration in French Manufacturing Indus-
tries.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 29 (5): 575–604.

McInnis, R. Marvin. 1966. “Regional Income Differentials in Can-

ada, 1911–1961.” Journal of Economic History 26 (4): 586–88.
McKenzie, David J. 2001. “The Impact of Capital Controls on 

Growth Convergence.” Journal of Economic Development 26 (1): 
1–25.

———. 2007. “Paper Walls Are Easier to Tear Down: Passport 

Costs and Legal Barriers to Emigrations.” World Development 35 
(11): 2026–39.

McKenzie, David J., and Hillel Rapoport. 2007. “Self-Selection 
Patterns in Mexico-U.S. Migration: The Role of Migration 
Networks.” Policy Research Working Paper 4118, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Meade, James E. 1956. “The Theory of Customs Union.” American 

Economic Review 46 (4): 724–26.

Melitz, J. Marc. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry 

Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity.” Economet-
rica 71 (6): 1695–725.

Mera, Koichi. 1973. “Regional Production Function and Social 

Overhead Capital: An Analysis of the Japanese Case.” Regional 
and Urban Economics 3 (2): 157–86.

Metzer, Jacob. 1974. “Railroad Development and Market Integra-

tion: The Case of Tsarist Russia.” Journal of Economic History 34 
(3): 529–50.

Meybeck, Michel, Pamela Green, and Charles Vorosmarty. 2001. “A 

New Typology for Mountains and Other Relief Classes.” Moun-
tain Research and Development 21 (1): 34–45.

Meyer, Balthasar H. 1917. History of Transportation in the United 

States before 1860. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution of 
Washington.

Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. 
“Economic Shocks and Civil Conﬂ ict: An Instrumental Vari-
ables Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (4): 725–53.
Milanovic, Branko. 2005. Worlds Apart. Measuring International 

and Global Inequality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Miles, Alice. 2007. “What’s That Whimpering from the Fields?” 

London Times, July 17.

Mills, Edwin S., and James MacKinnon. 1973. “Notes on the New 
Urban Economics.” Bell Journal of Economics and Management 
Science 4(2):593–601.

Minot, Nicholas, Bob Baulch, and Michael Epprecht. 2003. Pov-

erty and Inequality in Vietnam: Spatial Patterns and Geographic 
Determinants. Washington, DC: International Food Policy 
Research Institute and Inter-ministerial Poverty Mapping Task 
Force.

Mints, A. A. 1974. Prognoznaya Hypoteza Razvitiya Narodnogo 

Khozyastva Evropeyskoy Chasti SSSR [A Forecast Hypothesis of 

WDR09_21_References.indd   320
WDR09_21_References.indd   320

10/10/08   10:08:06 AM
10/10/08   10:08:06 AM

 

References 

321

the Development of the European USSR Economy]. Moscow: 
Resursy, Sreda, Rasselenie, Nauka.

Naqvi, Zareen F., and Philip Schuler. 2007. The Challenges and 

Potential of Pakistan-India Trade. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Mitchell, Brian R. 1964. “The Coming of the Railway and the 

Naudé, Wim A. 2007. “Geography and Development in Africa: 

United Kingdom Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic His-
tory 24 (3): 315–36.

Overview and Implications for Regional Cooperation.” WIDER 
Working Paper Series 2007/03, United Nations, Helsinki.

Mohammed, Saif I., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2004. “Freight 

Rates and Productivity Gains in British Tramp Shipping, 1869–
1950.” Explorations in Economic History 41 (2): 172–203.

Naudé, Wim A., and W. F. Krugell. 2006. “Sub-national Growth 
Rate Differentials in South Africa: An Econometric Analysis.” 
Papers in Regional Science 85 (3): 443–57.

Montenegro, Claudio E., and Maximilian L. Hirn. 2008. “A New 
Disaggregated Set of Labor Market Indicators Using Standard-
ized Household Surveys from Around the World.” Background 
paper for the WDR 2009.

Moomaw, Ronald L. 1981. “Productivity and City Size: A Critique 
of the Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 96 (4): 675–88.
———. 1983. “Is Population Scale a Worthless Surrogate for Busi-

ness Agglomeration Economies?” Regional Science and Urban 
Economics 13 (4): 525–45.

Moreno, Ramón, and Bharat Trehan. 1997. “Location and the 

Naudé, Wim A., and Marianne Matthee. 2007. “The Signiﬁ cance 

of Transport Costs in Africa.” United Nations University, Tokyo. 
Processed.

Ndulu, Benno J., Lopamudra Chakraborty, Lebohang Lijane, 

Vijaya Ramachandran, and Jerome Wolgin. 2007. Challenges of 
African Growth: Opportunities, Constraints and Strategic Direc-
tions. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Negri, Mariano, and Guido Porto. 2007. “Burley Tobacco Clubs 
in Malawi: Non-market Institutions for Export.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Growth of Nations.” Journal of Economic Growth 2 (4): 399–418.

Negroponte, Nicholas. 1995. Being Digital. New York: Vintage 

Moretti, Enrico. 2004a. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher 
Education: Evidence from Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-
Sectional Data.” Journal of Econometrics 121 (1–2): 175–212.

Books.

Nelson, Andrew. 2008. “Accessibility Model and Population Esti-

mates.” Background paper for the WDR 2009.

———. 2004b. “Workers’ Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: 

Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions.” American 
Economic Review 94 (3): 656–90.

Nesslein, Thomas S. 2003. “Markets versus Planning: An Assess-
ment of the Swedish Housing Model in the Post-War Period.” 
Urban Studies 40 (7): 1259–82.

Morrisson, Christian, and Fabrice Murtin. 2005. “The World Dis-

Neumayer, Eric. 2006. “Unequal Access to Foreign Spaces: How 

tribution of Human Capital, Life Expectancy and Income: A 
Multi-dimensional Approach.” London School of Economics, 
London.

States Use Visa Restrictions to Regulate Mobility in a Globalised 
World.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Interna-
tional Studies Association, San Diego, CA.

Mukherjee, Andy. 2007. “India’s Answer to Shenzhen Needs Politi-

cal Will.” Bloomberg.com, March 15.

Mumford, Lewis. 1963. The Highway and the City. New York: Har-

court Brace and World Bank.

Mutlu, Servet. 1991. “Regional Disparities, Industry and Govern-
ment Policy in Japan.” Development and Change 22 (3): 547–86.

N’Dulu, Benno J. 2001. “From Vision to Reality of African Eco-

nomic Integration: Priority Actions and the Institutional 
Framework for the Way Forward.” World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

N’Guessan, Kofﬁ , and Bassirou Chitou. 2006. “ENSEA of Abidjan: 
in the Heart of Statistical Training in Francophone Africa.” Afri-
can Statistical Journal 2: 151–56.

Nabi, Ijaz, and Anjum Nasim. 2001. “Trading with the Enemy: A 

Case for Liberalizing Pakistan-India Trade.” In Regionalism and 
Globalization: Theory and Practice, ed. Sajal Lahiri. New York: 
Routledge.

Naisbitt, John. 1995. The Global Paradox. New York: Avon Books.
Nakajima, Tomio. 1982. Public Investment: Theory and Practice. 

Tokyo: Gyosei.

Nakamura, Ryohei. 1985. “Agglomeration Economies in Urban 

Manufacturing Industries: A Case of Japanese Cities.” Journal of 
Urban Economics 17 (1): 108–24.

Nam, Charles B., William J. Serow, and David F. Sly. 1990. Interna-
tional Handbook on Internal Migration. New York: Greenwood 
Press.

Neuwirth, Robert. 2007. “Security of Tenure in Istanbul: The Tri-
umph of the ‘Self-Service’ City.” United Nations Habitat. Case 
study prepared for Enhancing Urban Safety and Security, Global 
Report on Human Settlements 2007.

Nigeria National Bureau of Statistics. 2004. National Nigeria Liv-

ing Standard Survey (NLSS). Abuja: Nigeria National Bureau of 
Statistics.

———. 2006. Poverty Proﬁ le for Nigeria. Abuja: National Bureau 

of Statistics, Federal Republic of Nigeria.

Nikomborirak, Deunden. 2007. “Liberalization of Air Transport 

and Competition Concerns in ASEAN.” In Market Access, Trade 
in Transport Services and Trade Facilitation, ed. OECD/ECMT. 
Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment.

Nordas, Hildegunn Kyvik, Enrico Pinali, and Massimo Geloso 

Grosso. 2006. “Logistics and Time as a Trade Barrier.” Trade Pol-
icy Working Paper 35, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, Paris.

Nordhaus, William D. 2006. “Geography and Macroeconomics: 

New Data and New Findings.” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Science 103 (10): 3510–17.

Nordhaus, William D., and Joseph Boyer. 2000. Warming the 

World: Economic Models of Global Warming. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.

North, Douglass C. 1971. “Institutional Change and Economic 

Growth.” Journal of Economic History 31 (1): 118–25.

WDR09_21_References.indd   321
WDR09_21_References.indd   321

10/10/08   10:08:06 AM
10/10/08   10:08:06 AM

322 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

O’Gorman, Marvin. 1939a. “Square Deals for London Trafﬁ c: A 
Study of London’s Trafﬁ c Problem with Suggested Solutions. 
Part 1.” Highways and Bridges, March 29.

———. 1939b. “Square Deals for London Trafﬁ c: A Study of Lon-

don’s Trafﬁ c Problem with Suggested Solutions. Part 2.” High-
ways and Bridges, April 5.

O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey Williamson. 1994. “Late Nine-
teenth-Century Anglo-American Factor-Price Convergence: 
Were Heckscher and Ohlin Right?” Journal of Economic History 
54 (4): 892–916.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. 
“Monetary Sovereignty, Exchange Rates, and Capital Controls: 
The Trilemma in the Interwar Period.” NBER Working Paper 
10393, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2002. “Globalization and 
Capital Markets.” NBER Working Paper 8846, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Offer, A. 1981. Property and Politics, 1870–1914. Cambridge, U.K.: 

Cambridge University Press.

Ofﬁ ce of the Deputy Prime Minister. 2003. Cities, Regions, and 

Competitiveness. London: Ofﬁ ce of the Deputy Prime Minister.

Oh, Jinhwan. 2008. “Korea: A Case Study of 1D-2D-3D Areas.” 

Background note for the WDR 2009.

———. 2008. “Spatially Blind and Connective Policies in a 1D 

Region: The Case of Eumseong County in South Korea.” Back-
ground note for the WDR 2009.

Ohmae, Kenichi. 1990. The Borderless World: Power and Strategies 

in the Interlinked Economy. New York: Harper Business.

Okuma, Ichiro, ed. 1980. Readings in Public Finance. Tokyo: Toyo 

Kenzai Shinposya.

Openshaw, Stan, and Paul Taylor. 1979. “A Million or So Correla-
tion Coefﬁ cients: Three Experiments on the Modiﬁ able Areal 
Unit Problem.” In Statistical Applications in the Spatial Sciences, 
ed. Neil Wrigley. London: Pion.

Oppenheimer, Andrés. 2008. “Latin America Is Lagging. Someone 

Tells Its Leaders.” Washington Post, January 13.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

(OECD). 2003. Place-Based Policies for Rural Development: The 
Micro-Regions Strategy, Mexico (Case Study). Background paper 
for the OECD’s Horizontal Review of Place-Based Policies for 
Development, Paris.

———. 2006. Territorial Reviews: Competitive Cities in the Global 
Economy. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development.

———. 2007. OECD: Regions at a Glance. Paris: Organisation for 

Economic Co-operation and Development.

Orwell, George. 1937. The Road to Wigan Pier. London: Victor 

Gollancz.

Overseas Development Institute. 2006. What’s Next in Interna-

tional Development? London: Overseas Development Institute.

Owen, Nicholas. 1983. Economies of Scale, Competitiveness, and 
Trade Patterns within the European Community. Oxford, U.K.: 
Clarendon Press.

Özden, Caglar, and Maurice Schiff. 2007. International Migration, 

Economic Development and Policy. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Paci, Pierella, Erwin R. Tiongson, Mateusz Walewski, Jacek Liwin-
ski, and Maria M. Stoilkova. 2007. “Internal Labor Mobility in 
Central Europe and the Baltic Region.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 105, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Packard, Truman. 1997. “Adjustment, Migration and Economic 

Informality in Latin America.” M.S. Economic for Development 
thesis, Queen Elizabeth House, University of Oxford.

Paillacar, Rodrigo. 2007. “Market Potential and Worker Heteroge-
neity as Determinants of Brazilian Wages.” Université de Paris I 
Panthéon-Sorbonne. Paris.

Pakenham, Thomas. 1992. The Scramble for Africa. New York: 

Harper Collins.

Palacin, Jose, and Robert C. Shelburne. 2005. “The Private Housing 

Market in Eastern Europe and the CIS.” Working Paper 2005-5, 
United Nations Commission for Europe, Geneva.

Pallage, Stéphane, and Michel A. Robe. 2003. “On the Welfare Cost 

of Economic Fluctuation in Developing Countries.” Interna-
tional Economic Review 44 (2): 677–98.

Park, Sam Ock. Forthcoming. “A History of Korea’s Spatial Trans-

formation and Economic Growth.” In Reshaping Economic 
Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang and Alessandro Mag-
noli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World Bank, EAP Companion 
Volume to the WDR 2009.

Parsons, Christopher R., Ronald Skeldon, Terrie L. Walmsley, and 
L. Alan Winters. 2007. “Quantifying International Migration: A 
Database of Bilateral Migrant Stocks.” In International Migra-
tion, Economic Development and Policy, ed. Caglar Özden and 
Maurice Schiff. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Paul, Catherine J. Morrison, and Donald S. Siegel. 1999. “Scale 

Economies and Industry Agglomeration Externalities: A 
Dynamic Cost Function Approach.” American Economic Review 
89 (1): 272–90.

Pedersen, P. O. 1990. “The Role of Small Rural Towns in Develop-

ment.” In Small Town Africa, Seminar Proceedings No. 23, ed. 
Jonathan Baker. Uppsalla: Scandinavian Institute of African 
Studies.

Peng, Zhong-Ren, Yi Zhu, and Shunfeng Song. 2008. “Mobility of 

the Chinese Urban Poor: A Case Study of Hefei City.” Chinese 
Economy 41 (1): 36–57.

Phillips, Truman P., Daphne S. Taylor, Lateef Sanni, and Malachy 

O. Akoroda. 2004. The Global Cassava Development Strat-
egy. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations.

Policy Research Institute for Land, Infrastructure Transport, and 

Tourism Research. 2001. Discussion on Equity and Social Capital 
Improvement. Tokyo: Policy Research Institute for Land, Infra-
structure, Transport, and Tourism.

Poncet, Sandra. 2005. “A Fragmented China: Measures and Deter-

minants of Chinese Domestic Market Integration.” Review of 
International Economics 13 (3): 409–30.

———. 2006. “Provincial Migration Dynamics in China: Borders, 
Costs, and Economic Motivations.” Regional Science and Urban 
Economics 36 (3): 385–98.

Prateen, Cliff. 1988. “Survey of the Economies of Scale.” Eco-

nomic Papers 67, Commission of the European Communities, 
Brussels.

WDR09_21_References.indd   322
WDR09_21_References.indd   322

10/10/08   10:08:07 AM
10/10/08   10:08:07 AM

 

References 

323

PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2007. Which Are the Largest City Econo-
mies in the World and How Might This Change by 2020? London 
PricewaterhouseCoopers: UK Economic Outlook.

Pritchett, Lant. 2006. Let Their People Come: Breaking the Gridlock 

on Global Labor Mobility. Washington, DC: Center for Global 
Development.

Public Administration Research and Consultation Centre. 2004. 
Egypt Millennium Development Goals: Second Country Report. 
Cairo: United Nations and Egypt Ministry of Planning.

Revenue Mobilization Allocation and Fiscal Commission. 2003. 
States and Local Governments 2003 Revenue Allocation Indices. 
Abuja, Nigeria: Revenue Mobilization Allocation and Fiscal 
Commission.

Richter, K., R. van der Weide, and Phonesaly Souksavath. 2005. 
Lao PDR Poverty Trends 1992/93–2002/03. Washington, DC: 
National Statistics Centre and World Bank.

Roberts, Leslie, and Martin Enserink. 2007. “María: Did They 

Really Say ... Eradication?” Science 318 (5856): 1544–45.

Pucher, John, Nisha Korattyswaropam, Neha Mittal, and Neenu 

Roberts, Mark. 2004. “The Growth Performances of the GB Coun-

Ittyerah. 2005. “Urban Transport Crisis in India.” Transport Pol-
icy 12 (3): 185–98.

ties: Some New Empirical Evidence for 1977–1993.” Regional 
Studies 38 (2): 149–65.

Puga, Diego. 2002. “European Regional Policies in Light of Recent 

Roberts, Mark, and Uwe Deichmann. 2008. “Regional Spillover 

Location Theories.” Journal of Economic Geography 2 (4): 373–
406.

Puga, Diego, and Anthony J. Venables. 1999. “Agglomeration and 
Economic Development: Import Substitution vs. Trade Liberal-
ization.” Economic Journal 109 (455): 292–311.

Quah, Danny T. 1996. “Twin Peaks: Growth and Convergence in 

Models of Distribution Dynamics.” Economic Journal 106 (437): 
1045–55.

Quinn, Dennis P., and A. María Toyoda. 2006. “Does Capital 

Account Liberalization Lead to Growth?” Georgetown Univer-
sity, Washington, DC.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2004. “The Non-Threat 

That Is Outsourcing.” Business Times (Singapore).

Ratha, Dilip, and William Shaw. 2007. “South-South Migration 

and Remittances.” Working Paper 102, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Ratha, Dilip, and Zhimei Xu. 2008. Migration and Remittances 

Factbook 2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Rauch, James E. 1993. “Productivity Gains from Geographic Con-
centration of Human Capital: Evidence from the Cities.” Journal 
of Urban Economics 34 (3): 380–400.

———. 1999. “Networks versus Markets in International Trade.” 

Journal of International Economics 48 (1): 7–35.

Ravallion, Martin. 2007. “Inequality Is Bad for the Poor.” In 

Inequality and Poverty Re-Examined, ed. Steven Jenkins and 
John Micklewright. New York: Oxford University Press.

Ravallion, Martin, and Dominique van de Walle. 2006a. “Does Ris-
ing Landlessness Signal Success or Failure for Vietnam’s Agricul-
tural Transition?” Policy Research Working Paper 3871, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2006b. “Land Reallocation in an Agrarian Transition.” 

Economic Journal 116 (514): 924–42.

Redding, Stephen J., and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. “Economic 
Geography and International Inequality.” Journal of Interna-
tional Economics 62 (1): 53–82.

Rephann, Terance, and Andrew Isserman. 1994. “New Highways 
as Economic Development Tools: An Evaluation Using Quasi-
Experimental Matching Methods.” Regional Science and Urban 
Economics 24 (6): 723–51.

Reporters without Borders for Press Freedom. 2007. Freedom of the 

Press Worldwide in 2007. Paris: Reporters without Borders for 
Press Freedom.

Estimation.” Background paper for the WDR 2009.

Robles, Marcos. 2003. Estimación de Indicadores de pobreza y Des-
igualdad a Nivel Municipal en Honduras. Tegucigalpa: BID-ME-
COVI and Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas de Honduras.

Rodríguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik. 2000. “Trade Policy and 

Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-National Evi-
dence.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, ed. Ben S. Ber-
nanke and Kenneth Rogoff. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau 
of Economic Research.

Rodríguez, Jorge. 2004. “Migración Interna en América Latina y el 

Caribe: Estudio Regional del Período 1980–2000.” Serie Pobla-
ción y Desarrollo 50, ECLAC, Santiago.

Rodríguez-Pose, Andrés, and Ugo Fratesi. 2004. “Between Devel-

opment and Social Policies: The Impact of European Structural 
Funds in Objective 1 Regions.” Regional Studies 38 (1): 97–113.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. 

“Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography 
and Integration in Economic Development.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Growth 9 (2): 131–65.

Roeger, Werner. 1995. “Can Imperfect Competition Explain the 
Difference between Primal and Dual Productivity Measures? 
Estimates for U.S. Manufacturing.” Journal of Political Economy 
103 (2): 316–30.

Rohwedder, Cecilie, and Keith Johnson. 2008. “Pace-Setting Zara 
Seeks More Speed to Fight Its Rising Cheap-Chic Rivals.” Wall 
Street Journal, February 20.

Rolfes, L. Jr. 2002. “Making the Legal Basis for Private Land Rights 
Operational and Effective.” Paper presented at the World Bank 
Regional Land Policy Workshop, Budapest, April 6.

Romer, Paul M. 1986. “Increasing Returns in Long-Run Growth.” 

Journal of Political Economy 94 (5): 1002–37.

———. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of 

Political Economy 98(5):71–102.

———. 1994. “The Origins of Endogenous Growth.” Journal of 

Economic Perspectives 8 (1): 3–22.

Rose, Andrew K. 2005. “Cities and Countries.” Discussion Paper 

5235, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.

Rosenbloom, Joshua L., and William A. Sundstrom. 2003. “The 
Decline and Rise of Interstate Migration in the United States: 
Evidence from the IPUMS, 1850–1990.” NBER Working 
Paper 9857, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam-
bridge, MA.

WDR09_21_References.indd   323
WDR09_21_References.indd   323

10/10/08   10:08:07 AM
10/10/08   10:08:07 AM

324 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange. 2001. “The Deter-

minants of Agglomeration.” Journal of Urban Economics 50 (2): 
191–229.

———. 2003. “Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglom-

eration.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2): 377–93.

———. 2004. “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomera-
tion Economies.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, 
vol. IV, ed. J. Vernon Henderson and Jacque Thisse. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, and Mark L. J. Wright. 2007. “Urban 

Structure and Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 74(2):597–
624.

Rostow, Walt Whitman. 1960. The Stages of Economic Growth. 

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Middle Income Nations. London: International Institute for 
Environment and Development.

Schacter, Jason P. 2004. “Geographical Mobility: 2002 to 2003.” 

Current Population Report, U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, 
DC. March.

Scherer, Frederic M. 1980. Industrial Market Structure and Eco-

nomic Performance. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ in.

Schiff, Maurice, and Caglar Özden. 2006. International Migration, 
Remittances and the Brain Drain. Washington, DC: World Bank 
and Palgrave Macmillan.

Schiff, Maurice, and Yanling Wang. 2003. “Regional Integration 
and Technology Diffusion: The Case of North American Free 
Trade Agreement.” Policy Research Working Paper 3132, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Roy, Tirthankar. 2002. “Economic History and Modern India: 

Schiff, Maurice, and L. Alain Winters. 2002. “Regional Coopera-

Redeﬁ ning the Link.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16 (3): 
109–30.

Ruster, Jeff, and Ivo Imperato. 2003. Slum Upgrading and Participa-
tion: Lessons from Latin America. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Pia Malaney. 2002. “The Economic and 

Social Burden of Malaria.” Nature 415 (6872): 680–5.

Sahn, David E., and David C. Stifel. 2003. “Urban-Rural Inequality 

in Living Standards in Africa.” Journal of African Economies 12 
(4): 564–97.

Sakamaki, Tetsuro. 2006. “Regional Disparities and National Land 
Development Policy in East Asian Countries.” Journal of Japan 
Bank for International Cooperation Institute 29: 84–122.

Sánchez, Ricardo J., Jan Hoffmann, Alejandro Micco, Georgina V. 

Pizzolitto, Martín Sgut, and Gordon Wilmsmeier. 2003. “Port 
Efﬁ ciency and International Trade: Port Efﬁ ciency as a Deter-
minant of Maritime Transport Costs.” Maritime Economics and 
Logistics 5 (2): 199–218.

tion and the Role of International Organizations and Regional 
Integration.” Policy Research Working Paper 2872, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

———. 2003. Regional Integration and Development. New York: 

Oxford University Press.

Schmertmann, Carl P. 1992. “Estimation of Historical Migration 
Rates from a Single Census: Interregional Migration in Brazil, 
1900–1980.” Population Studies 46 (1): 103–20.

Schneider, A., M. A. Friedl, and D. Potere. Forthcoming. “A New 
Map of Global Urban Extent from MODIS Data.” Geophysical 
Research Letters.

Scholz, Stephan. 2006. “The POETICS of Industrial Carbon Diox-
ide Emissions in Japan: An Urban and Institutional Extension 
of the IPAT Identity.” Carbon Balance and Management 1 (11): 
1–10.

Schwenning, Gustav. 1927. “An Attack on Shanghai Slums.” Social 

Forces 6 (1): 125–31.

Sandler, Todd. 2002. “Demand and Institutions for Regional Pub-

Scott, Ian. 1982. Urban and Spatial Development in Mexico. Balti-

lic Goods.” In Regional Public Goods: From Theory to Practice, 
ed. Antoni Estevadeordal, Brian Frantz, and Tam R. Nguyen. 
Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank and Asian 
Development Bank.

Sandler, Todd, and Daniel M. Arce. 2002. “A Conceptual Frame-

work for Understanding Global and Transnational Public Goods 
for Health.” Fiscal Studies 23 (2): 195–222.

Santos, Georgina, and Blake Shaffer. 2004. “Preliminary Results of 

the London Congestion Charging Scheme.” Public Work Man-
agement and Policy 9 (2): 164–81.

Sassen, Saskia. 1991. The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo. 

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Satterthwaite, David. 2007. “The Transition to a Predominantly 
Urban World and Its Underpinnings.” Paper presented at the 
UNU-WIDER International Workshop on Beyond the Tipping 
Point: Development in an Urban World, London, October 19.
———. 2008. “Expanding the Supply and Reducing the Cost of 
Land for Housing in Urban Areas in Low and Middle Income 
Nations.” Background note for the WDR 2009.

Satterthwaite, David, Saleemul Hug, Mark Pelling, Hannah Reid, 

and Patricia Romero-Lankao. 2007. Adapting to Climate Change 
in Urban Areas: The Possibilities and Constraints in Low and 

more, MD: Johns Hopkins University.

Seeman, Helene Zuckerman, and Alanna Siegfried. 1978. “The 

Evolution of SoHo.” In Helene Zuckerman Seeman and Alanna 
Siegfried, (eds.), SoHo: A Guide. New York, NY: Neal-Schuman 
Publishers, Inc.

Segal, David. 1976. “Are There Returns to Scale in City Size?” 

Review of Economics and Statistics 58 (3): 339–50.

Selod, Harris. 2007. “Land Policies and Urban Segregation.” World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

Shah, Anwar, and Chunli Shen. 2006. “The Reform of the Intergov-
ernmental Transfer System to Achieve a Harmonious Society and 
a Level Playing Field for Regional Development in China.” Policy 
Research Working Paper 4100, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Shatz, Howard J., and Anthony J. Venables. 2005. “The Geography 
of International Investment.” In Oxford Handbook of Economic 
Geography, ed. Gordon L. Clark, Meric S. Gertler, and Maryann 
P. Feldman. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Shaw, Dan. 2007. “Meatpacking District: What a Difference 38 

Years Make.” The New York Times, October 14.

Shefer, Daniel. 1973. “Localization Economies in SMSA’s: A Pro-
duction Function Analysis.” Journal of Regional Science 13 (1): 
55–64.

WDR09_21_References.indd   324
WDR09_21_References.indd   324

10/10/08   10:08:07 AM
10/10/08   10:08:07 AM

 

References 

325

Shepherd, Ben, and John S. Wilson. 2006. “Road Infrastructure in 
Europe and Central Asia: Does Network Quality Affects Trade?” 
Policy Research Working Paper 4104, World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Showers, Victor. 1979. World Facts and Figures. Chichester, U.K.: 

John Wiley and Sons.

Shukla, Vibhooti, and Oded Stark. 1986. “Urban External Econo-

mies and Optimal Migration.” In Migration, Human Capital, 
and Development, ed. Oded Stark. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Sicsic, Pierre. 1992. “City-Farm Wage Gaps in Late Nineteenth-
Century France.” Journal of Economic History 52 (3): 675–95.
Siegel, Fred. 1997. The Future Once Happened Here: New York, 
D.C., L.A., and the Fate of America’s Big Cities. Florence, MA: 
Free Press.

Simmons, Beth A. 2005. “Rules over Real Estate: Trade, Territorial 
Conﬂ ict, and International Borders as Institutions.” Journal of 
Conﬂ ict Resolution 49 (6): 823–48.

Sinai, Todd, and Joel Waldfogel. 2004. “Geography and the Inter-

net: Is the Internet a Substitute or Complement for Cities?” 
Journal of Urban Economics 56 (1): 1–24.

Sinn, Hans-Werner, and Frank Westermann. 2001. “Two Mezzo-
giornos.” NBER Working Paper 8125, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Skeldon, Ronald. 1986. “On Migration Patterns in India during the 

1970s.” Population and Development Review 12 (4): 759–79.

Slaughter, Mattew J. 2001. “Trade Liberalization and Per Capita 
Income Convergence: A Difference-in-Differences Analysis.” 
Journal of International Economics 55 (1): 203–28.

Smith, Adam. 1976 [1776]. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes 
of the Wealth of Nations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 
(Cannan’s edition of the Wealth of Nations was originally pub-
lished in 1904 by Methuen & Co. Ltd. First Edition in 1776).

 Smith, Donald F. Jr., and Richard Florida. 1994. “Agglomeration 
and Industrial Location: An Econometric Analysis of Japanese-
Afﬁ liated Manufacturing Establishments in Automotive-Related 
Industries.” Journal of Urban Economics 36 (1): 23–41.

Smith, P. J. 1989. “The Rehousing/Relocation Issue in an Early 

Slum Clearance Scheme: Edinburgh 1865–1885.” Urban Studies 
26 (1): 100–14.

Snow, Robert W., Marlies Craig, Uwe Deichmann, and Karen 

Marsh. 1999. “Estimating Mortality, Morbidity, and Disability 
Due to Malaria among Africa’s Non-Pregnant Population.” Bul-
letin of the World Health Organization 77 (8): 624–40.

Sobel, Robert. 2000. How a Generation of Americans Created the 
World’s Most Prosperous Society. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Söderbaum, Fredrik. 2001. “Institutional Aspects of the Maputo 

Development Corridor.” Development Policy Research Unit 
Working Paper 9675, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, 
South Africa.

Sohn, Jeongmok. 2003. Seoul Dosi Hoek Iyagi [Seoul: The Story of 

Urban Planning]. Seoul: Hanul.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Stanley L. Engerman. 2000a. “History 
Lessons: Institutions, Factor Endowments, and Paths of Devel-
opment in the New World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 
(3): 217–32.

———. 2000b. “Institutions, Factor Endowments, and Paths of 
Development in the New World.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 14 (3): 217–32.

Solow, Robert M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Eco-

nomic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70 (1): 65–94.
Soltow, Lee. 1989. “The Rich and the Destitute in Sweden, 1805–
1855: A Test of Tocqueville’s Inequality Hypotheses.” Economic 
History Review 42 (1): 43–63.

Son, Dang Kim. Forthcoming. “Rural Development and Issues in 
Vietnam: Spatial Disparities and Some Recommendations.” In 
Reshaping Economic Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang 
and Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World Bank, 
EAP Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

Sonobe, Tetsushi, and Keijiro Otsuka. 2006. Cluster-Based Indus-
trial Development: An East Asian Model. Hampshire, U.K.: Pal-
grave Macmillan.

Sophal, Chan, Tep Saravi, and Sarthi Acharya. 2001. “Land Tenure 
in Cambodia: A Data Update.” Working Paper 19, Development 
Resource Institute, Phnom Penh.

Soto, Raimundo, and Arístides Torche. 2004. “Spatial Inequal-

ity, Migration, and Economic Growth in Chile.” Cuadernos de 
Economía 41 (124): 401–24.

Sovannarith, So, Real Sopheap, Uch Utey, Sy Rathmony, Brett Bal-

lard, and Sarthi Acharya. 2001. “Social Assessment of Land in 
Cambodia: A Field Study.” Prepared for the Ministry of Land 
Management, Urban Planning, and Construction, Royal Gov-
ernment of Cambodia, Cambodia Development Resource Insti-
tute, Phnom Penh.

SPARTECA. 1996. Rules of Origin Requirements of the South Paciﬁ c 
Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement. Suva: South Paciﬁ c 
Regional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement, Forum 
Secretariat.

Spence, A. Michael. 1976. “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and 

Monopolistic Competition.” Review of Economic Studies 
43(2):217–35.

Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2005. “Borders and 

Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 10 (4): 331–86.

Squire, Lyn. 1981. Employment Policy in Developing Countries. 

Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Sri Lanka National Council for Economic Development, and 

UNDP. 2005. Millennium Development Goals Country Report 
2005: Sri Lanka. Colombo: Sri Lanka National Council for Eco-
nomic Development.

Stewart, Dona J. 1996. “Cities in the Desert: The Egyptian New 

Town-Program.” Annals of the Association of American Geogra-
phers 86 (3): 459–80.

Stewart, Frances. 2008. “Horizontal Inequalities: A Neglected 

Dimension of Development.” Queen Elizabeth House Working 
Paper 81, Oxford University, Oxford, U.K.

Stinnett, Douglas M., Jaroslav Tir, Philip Schafer, Paul F. Diehl, and 

Charles Gochman. 2002. “The Correlates of War Project Direct 
Contiguity Data, Version 3.” Conﬂ ict Management and Peace Sci-
ence 19 (2): 58–66.

Stockel, Sigrid. 2002. “Infant Mortality and Concepts of Hygiene: 
Strategies and Consequences in the Kaiserreich and the Weimar 

WDR09_21_References.indd   325
WDR09_21_References.indd   325

10/10/08   10:08:08 AM
10/10/08   10:08:08 AM

326 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Republic—The Example of Berlin.” History of the Family 7 (4): 
601–16.

Storper, Michael, and Anthony J. Venables. 2007. “Buzz: Face-
to-Face Contact and the Urban Economy.” In Clusters, Net-
works and Innovation, ed. Stefano Breschi and Franco Malerba. 
Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Sveikauskas, Leo A. 1975. “The Productivity of Cities.” Quarterly 

Journal of Economics 89 (3): 393–413.

Sveikauskas, Leo A., John Gowdy, and Michael Funk. 1988. “Urban 
Productivity: City Size or Industry Size.” Journal of Regional Sci-
ence 28 (2): 185–202.

Sveikauskas, Leo A., Peter M. Townroe, and Eric R. Hansen. 1985. 
“Intraregional Productivity Difference in Sao Paulo State Manu-
facturing Plants.” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 121(4):722–40.

Swan, Trevor W. 1956. “Economic Growth and Capital Accumula-

tion.” Economic Record 32 (2): 334–61.

Swedish Council for Building Research. 1990. Housing Research 

and Design in Sweden. Stockholm: Swedish Council for Building 
Research.

Tabuchi, Takatoshi. 1988. “Interregional Income Differentials and 

Migration: Their Interrelationships.” Regional Studies 22 (1): 1–10.
Taira, Koji. 1969. “Urban Poverty, Ragpickers, and the ‘Ants’ Villa’ in 

Tokyo.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 17 (2): 155–77.

Taylor, Alan M. 1996. “International Capital Mobility in History: 

Purchasing-Power Parity in the Long Run.” NBER Working Paper 
5742, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Taylor, Alan M., and Jeffrey Williamson. 2006. “Convergence in the 
Age of Mass Migration.” European Review of Economic History 1 
(1): 27–63.

Thanh, Hoang Xuan, Dang Nguyen Anh, and Cecilia Tacoli. 2005. 
“Livelihood Diversiﬁ cation and Rural-Urban Linkages in Viet-
nam’s Red River Delta.” IFPRI Working Paper 193, International 
Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Tiffen, Mary. 2003. “Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa: Agricul-

ture, Urbanization, and Income Growth.” World Development 31 
(8): 1343–66.

Tol, Richard S. J. 2005. “The Marginal Damage Costs of Carbon 

Dioxide Emissions: An Assessment of the Uncertainties.” Energy 
Policy 33 (16): 2064–74.

Tolofari, Sonny R. 1986. Open Registry Shipping: A Comparative 

Study of Costs Freight Rates. New York: Routledge.

Trackman, B., W. Fisher, and L. Salas. 1999. The Reform of Property 
Registration Systems in Costa Rica: A Status Report. Cambridge, 
MA: Law School Harvard University.

Tschirley, David L., Jan J. Nijhoff, Pedro Arlindo, Billy Mwinga, 

Michael T. Weber, and Thomas S. Jayne. 2006. “Anticipating and 
Responding to Drought Emergencies in Southern Africa: Les-
sons from the 2002–2003 Experience.” International Develop-
ment Working Paper 89, East Lansing, MI.

Turner, Michael. 1986. “English Open Fields and Enclosures: 

Retardation or Productivity Improvements.” Journal of Economic 
History 46 (3): 669–92.

Uchida, Hirotsugu, and Andrew Nelson. 2008. “”Agglomeration 

Index: Towards a New Measure of Urban Concentration.” Back-
ground paper for the WDR 2009.

United Nations. 1949. Demographic Yearbook 1948. New York: 

United Nations.

———. 1952. Demographic Yearbook 1952. New York: United 

Nations.

———. 1969. Growth of the World’s Urban and Rural Population, 

1920–2000. New York: United Nations, Population Division.

———. 1970. “Unitization of Cargo.” Paper presented at the 

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 
Geneva.

———. 1997. China Human Development Report 1997: Human 

Development and Poverty Reduction. New York: United Nations 
Development Program.

———. 2001. “Istanbul+5: Reviewing and Appraising Progress Five 

Years after Habitat II in June 2001.” United Nations, New York.

———. 2004a. Assessing Regional Integration in Africa. Addis 
Ababa: United Nations Economic Commission for Africa.

———. 2004b. State of the World’s Cities Report 2004/2005. Nai-

Tilly, Richard H. 1990. Vom Zollverein zum Industriestaat: Die 

robi: United Nations.

wirtschaftlich-soziale Entwicklung Deutschlands 1834 bis 1914. 
Munich, Germany: Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag.

Timmer, Ashley S., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. “Immigra-
tion Policy prior to the 1930s: Labor Markets, Policy Interac-
tions, and Globalization Backlash.” Population and Development 
Review 24 (4): 739–71.

Timmins, Christopher. 2005. “Estimable Equilibrium Models of 

Locational Sorting and Their Role in Development Economics.” 
Journal of Economic Geography 5 (1): 83–100.

Tinbergen, J. 1952. On the Theory of Economic Policy. Amsterdam: 

North-Holland.

Tobler, W. R. 1970. “A Computer Movie Simulating Urban Growth 

in the Detroit Region.” Economic Geography 46 (Supplement): 
234–40.

Todaro, Michael P. 1969. “A Model of Labor Migration and Urban 

Unemployment in Less Developed Countries.” American Eco-
nomic Review 59 (1): 138–48.

Tofﬂ er, Alvin. 1980. The Third Wave. New York: Bantam Books.

———. 2005a. Bringing Down Barriers: Regional Cooperation for 
Human Development and Human Security. Bratislava: United 
Nations Development Programme.

———. 2005b. China Human Development Report 2005: Devel-
opment with Equity. New York: United Nations Development 
Program.

———. 2006a. State of the Worlds Cities 2006/7: The Millennium 

Development Goals and Urban Sustainability: 30 Years of Shaping 
the Habitat Agenda (UN Habitat). Nairobi: UN-Habitat.

———. 2006b. The 2004 Vietnam Migration Survey: The Quality of 

Life of Migrants in Vietnam. Hanoi: United Nations Population 
Fund.

———. 2006c. “World Urbanization Prospects: The 2005 Revi-
sion.” United Nations, Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, Population Division, New York.

———. 2007. “Trade and Development Report 2007: Regional 

Cooperation for Development.” Paper presented at the United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, New York.

WDR09_21_References.indd   326
WDR09_21_References.indd   326

10/10/08   10:08:08 AM
10/10/08   10:08:08 AM

 

References 

327

United Nations and African Union. 2006. Assessing Regional Inte-
gration in Africa II: Rationalizing Regional Economic Communi-
ties. Addis Ababa: United Nations Commission for Africa and 
African Union.

U.S. Bureau of Transport Statistics. 2003. America on the Go: U.S. 
Holiday Travel. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transpor-
tation, Research, and Innovative Technology Administration.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2002. Demographic Trends in the 20th Century. 

Census 2000 Special Reports. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Uvalic, Milica. 1993. “The Disintegration of Yugoslavia: Its Costs 

and Beneﬁ ts.” Post-Communist Economies 5 (3): 273–93.

Van der Linde, Claas. 2003. “The Demography of Clusters: Find-
ings from the Cluster Meta-Study.” In Innovation Clusters and 
Interregional Competition, ed. Johannes Brocker, Dirk Dohse, 
and Rudiger Soltwedel. Berlin: Springer.

Vance, Colin, and Ralf Hedel. 2006. “On the Link between Urban 

Form and Automobile Use: Evidence from German Survey 
Data.” Working Paper 0048, Rheinisch-Westfälisches Institut für 
Wirtschaftsforschung, Essen, Germany.

Vargas-Hidalgo, Rafael. 1979. “The Crisis for the Andean Pact: Les-

sons for Integration among Developing Countries.” Journal of 
Common Market Studies 17 (3): 213–26.

Venables, Anthony J. 2001. “Geography and International Inequali-
ties: the Impact of New Technologies.” Journal of Industry, Com-
petition and Trade 1 (2): 135–59.

———. 2003. “Winners and Losers from Regional Integration 

Agreements.” Economic Journal 113 (490): 747–61.

———. 2006. “Shifts in Economic Geography and Their Causes.” 

Economic Review 2006 (Q IV): 61–85.

Venables, Anthony J., and Ravi Kanbur. 2005. Spatial Inequality 
and Development, Overview of the UNU-WIDER Project. New 
York: Oxford University Press.

Victoria Transport Policy Institute. 2007. Online TDM Encyclope-

dia. Victoria, Canada: Victoria Transport Policy Institute.

Vidler, Cam. 2008. “Turkey: A Case Study of 1D-2D-3D Areas.” 

Background note for the WDR 2009.

Vigdor, Jacob L. 2006. “The New Promised Land: Black-White 

Convergence in the American South, 1960–2000.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 12143, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam-
bridge, MA.

Villarreal, Roberto. 2005. “Regional Development Policies in 

Mexico.” Paper presented at the Sustainable Regional Policy and 
Planning Roundtable, Beijing, December 14.

Viner, Jacob. 1950. The Customs Union Issue. New York: Carnegie 

Endowment of International Peace.

von Hoffman, A. 1996. “High Ambitions: The Past and Future of 
American Low-Income Housing Policy.” Housing Policy Debate 
7 (3): 423–46.

Wandschneider, Tiago, and Pravas Mishra. 2003. Rural Non-

Farm Economy and Livelihood Enhancement. Washington, DC: 
National Resources Institute.

Ward, Doug. 2006. “Urbanization Is a World Concern.” Vancouver 

Sun, June 14.

Warsh, David. 2006. Knowledge and the Wealth of Nations: A Story 
of Economic Discovery. New York: W.W. Norton and Company.

Weber, Adna. 1899. The Growth of Cities in the Nineteenth Century: 

A Study in Statistics. New York: Macmillan.

Whalley, John, and Shunming Zhang. 2007. “A Numerical Simu-

lation Analysis of (Hukou) Labour Mobility Restrictions in 
China.” Journal of Development Economics 83 (2): 392–410.

Wheat, Leonard F. 1986. “The Determinants of 1963–77 Regional 

Manufacturing Growth: Why the South and West Grow.” Journal 
of Regional Science 26 (4): 635–59.

Wheeler, David, and Ashoka Mody. 1992. “International Invest-
ment Location Decisions: The Case for U.S. Firms.” Journal of 
International Economics 33 (1–2): 57–76.

Whittaker, D. Hugh. 1997. Small Firms in the Japanese Economy. 

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Wilbur Smith Associates and United Nations. 1980. Master Plan for 

Metropolitan Lagos. New York: United Nations.

Williams, Naomi, and Chris Galley. 1995. “Urban-Rural Differen-
tials in Infant Mortality in Victorian England.” Population Stud-
ies 49 (3): 401–20.

Williamson, Jeffrey. 1965. “Regional Inequality and the Process of 

National Development: A Description of the Patterns.” Economic 
Development and Cultural Change 13 (4): 1–84.

———. 1974. Late Nineteenth Century American Development: A 
General Equilibrium History. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.

———. 1982. “Was the Industrial Revolution Worth It? Disameni-

ties and Death in 19th-Century British Towns.” Exploration in 
Economic History 19 (3): 221–45.

———. 1987. “Did English Factor Markets Fail during the Indus-

trial Revolution?” Oxford Economic Papers 39 (4): 641–78.

———. 1990. Coping with City Growth during the British Indus-

trial Revolution. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University 
Press.

Wilson, John S., Xubei Luo, and Harry J. Broadman. 2006. “Trade 

and Transport Facilitation: European Accession and Capacity 
Building Priorities.” Paper presented at the Transport and Inter-
national Trade, Report of the 130th Round Table on Transport 
Economics, Paris.

 Wilson, John S., Catherine L. Mann, and Tsunehiro Otsuki. 2004. 
“Assessing the Potential Beneﬁ t of Trade Facilitation: A Global 
Perspective.” Policy Research Working Paper 3224, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Winston, Clifford. 1993. “Economic Deregulation: Days of Reck-
oning for the Microeconomists.” Journal of Economic Literature 
31 (3): 1263–89.

Winters, L. Alain, and Pedro Martins. 2004. “When Compara-

tive Advantage Is Not Enough: Business Costs in Small Remote 
Economies.” World Trade Review 3 (3): 347–83.

Wionczek, Miguel S. 1970. “The Rise and Decline of Latin Ameri-
can Economic Integration.” Journal of Common Market Studies 
9 (1): 49–66.

Wisaweisuan, Nitinant. Forthcoming. “Spatial Disparities in Thai-
land: Does Government Policy Aggravate or Alleviate the Prob-
lem?” In Reshaping Economic Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon 
Huang and Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World 
Bank, EAP Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

WDR09_21_References.indd   327
WDR09_21_References.indd   327

10/10/08   10:08:08 AM
10/10/08   10:08:08 AM

328 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Wolf, Martin. 2004. Why Globalization Works. New Haven, CT: Yale 

———. 2006f. Trends in Average Applied Tariff Rates in Developing 

University Press.

Woods, Robert. 2000. The Demography of Victorian England and 

and Industrial Countries, 1981–2005. Washington, DC: World 
Bank, Development Research Group (digital ﬁ le).

Wales. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2006g. World Development Indicators 2006. Washington, 

Wordie, J. R. 1983. “The Chronology of English Enclosure, 1500–

DC: World Bank.

1914.” Economic History Review 36 (4): 483–505.

———. 2006h. World Development Report 2007: Development and 

World Bank. 1977. Spatial Development in Mexico. Report No. 

1081-ME. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 1980. The Development of Regional Cities in Thailand. 

Report No. 2900-TH. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 1998. Public Expenditure for Poverty Alleviation in North-
east Brazil: Promoting Growth and Improving Services. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

———. 2002a. Cities on the Move: A World Bank Urban Transport 

Strategy Review. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2002b. From Natural Resources to the Knowledge Economy: 

Trade and Job Quality. Washington, DC: World Bank, Latin 
American and Caribbean Region.

———. 2003a. Trade, Investment, and Development in the Middle 

East and North Africa: Engaging with the World. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

———. 2003b. World Bank Policy Research Report 2003: Land Poli-

cies for Growth and Poverty Reduction. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

———. 2004a. Global Economic Prospects 2005: Trade, Regional-

ism, and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2004b. World Development Report 2005: A Better Invest-
ment Climate for Everyone. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2005a. Brazil: Regional Economic Development—(Some) 

Lessons from Experience. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2005b. Chile: Zonas Extremas Policies and Beyond—An 
Assessment of Costs and Impact with Recommendations of Ave-
nues for Policy Reform. Report No. 27357-CH. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.

———. 2005c. Food Safety and Agricultural Health Standards: 

Challenges and Opportunities for Developing Country Exports. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, PREM, and ARD.

———. 2005d. Global Economic Prospects 2006. Economic Impli-
cations of Remittances and Migration. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

———. 2005e. Growth, Poverty and Inequality: Eastern Europe and 

the Former Soviet Union. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2006a. At Home and Away: Expanding Job Opportunities 
for Paciﬁ c Islanders through Labour Mobility. Washington, DC: 
World Bank, East Asia and Paciﬁ c Region.

———. 2006b. Doing Business in 2007: How to Reform. Washing-

ton, DC: World Bank.

———. 2006c. Governance, Investment Climate, and Harmonious 
Society: Competitiveness Enhancements for 120 Cities in China. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2006d. Housing Finance in Emerging Economies. Washing-

ton, DC: World Bank.

the Next Generation. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007a. Accelerating Growth and Development in the Lag-

ging Regions of India. Washington, DC: World Bank, ESW 
Report.

———. 2007b. Brazil: Inputs for a Strategy for Cities in Brazil. 

Report No. 35749-BR. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007c. Brazil: Measuring Poverty using Household Con-

sumption. Report No. 36358-BR. Washington, DC: World Bank, 
Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Sector Unit, 
Latin America, and the Caribbean Region.

———. 2007d. Doing Business in 2008: Making a Difference. Wash-

ington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007e. East Asia and Paciﬁ c Update: Will Resilience Over-

come Risk? Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2007f. Making Finance Work for Africa. Washington, DC: 

World Bank, Africa Region.

———. 2007g. Making the Most of Scarcity: Accountability for 

Better Water Management in the Middle East and North Africa. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, Middle East and North Africa 
Region.

———. 2007h. South Asia: Growth and Regional Integration. New 

Delhi: World Bank.

———. 2007i. World Bank Policy Research Report 2007: At Log-

gerheads? Agricultural Expansion, Poverty Reduction, and 
Environment in the Tropical Forests. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

———. 2007j. World Development Indicators 2007. Washington, 

DC: World Bank.

———. 2007k. World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for 

Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008a. “Iran: Spatial Patterns of Poverty and Economic 

Activity.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008b. “Shrinking Distance: Identifying Priorities and 

Assessing Trade-offs for Territorial Development Policies—SDN 
Flagship Report, Spatial and Local.” World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

———. 2008c. Transport for Development: The World Bank’s Trans-

port Business Strategy for 2008–2012. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

———. 2008d. Transport Prices and Costs in Africa: A Review of the 

Main International Corridors. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2008e. Turkey: Country Economic Memorandum, Sustain-
ing High Growth—Selected Issues. Report No. 39194. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank.

Woronoff, Jon. 1972. West African Wager. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow 

Press.

———. 2006e. Labor Migration in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region, 
Synthesis Report Phase I. Washington, DC: World Bank, Regional 
Ofﬁ ce for East Asia and the Paciﬁ c.

Wrigley, E. Anthony. 1985. “Urban Growth and Agricultural 
Change: England and the Continent in the Early Modern 
Period.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 15 (4): 683–728.

WDR09_21_References.indd   328
WDR09_21_References.indd   328

10/10/08   10:08:09 AM
10/10/08   10:08:09 AM

 

References 

329

Xenos, Peter. 2004. “Demographic Forces Shaping Youth Popula-

Yemtsov, Ruslan. 2005. “Quo Vadis? Inequality and Poverty 

tions in Asian Cities.” In Youth Poverty, and Conﬂ ict in Southeast 
Asian Cities, ed. Lisa Hanley, Blair Ruble, and Joseph Tulchin. 
Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson International Center for 
Scholars.

Yade, Mbaye, Anne Chohin-Kuper, Valerie Kelly, John Staatz, and 
James Tefft. 1999. “The Role of Regional Trade in Agricultural 
Transformation.” Paper presented at the Workshops on Struc-
tural Transformation in Africa, Nairobi.

 Yamauchi, Futoshi, Megumi Muto, Reno Dewina, and Sony 

Sumaryanto. Forthcoming. “Spatial Networks, Incentives, and 
the Dynamics of Village Economy: Evidence from Indonesia.” 
In Reshaping Economic Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang 
and Alessandro Magnoli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World Bank, 
EAP Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

Yang, Dean. 2008. “International Migration, Remittances and 
Household Investment: Evidence from Philippine Migrants’ 
Exchange Rate Shocks.” Economic Journal 118 (528): 591–630.
Yao, Yang. Forthcoming. “The Political Economy of Government 

Policies Toward Regional Inequality in China.” In Reshaping 
Economic Geography in East Asia, ed. Yukon Huang and Ales-
sandro Magnoli Bocchi. Washington, DC: World Bank, EAP 
Companion Volume to the WDR 2009.

Yasuba, Yasukichi. 1978. “Freight Rates and Productivity in Ocean 
Transportation for Japan, 1875–1943.” Explorations in Economic 
History 15 (1): 11–39.

Dynamics across Russian Regions.” In Spatial Inequality and 
Development, ed. Ravi Kanbur and Anthony J. Venables. Oxford, 
U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Yepes, Tito. 2008. “Inclusive Growth for Latin America.” World 

Bank, Washington, DC.

Yepes, Tito, and Somik V. Lall. 2008. “Evaluating the Impact of 
Upgrading Informal Settlements on Land Markets: Evidence 
from Bogota.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Yoshino, Yutaka. 2008. “Domestic Constraints, Firm Characteris-
tics, and Geographical Diversiﬁ cation of Firm-Level Manufac-
turing Exports in Africa.” Policy Research Working Paper 4575, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Young, Allyn. 1928. “Increasing Returns and Economic Progress.” 

Economic Journal 38 (152): 527–42.

Yuen, Belinda. 2004. “Planning Singapore Growth for Better Liv-

ing.” In Enhancing Urban Management in East Asia, ed. Belinda 
Yuen and Mila Freire. Hampshire, U.K.: Ashgate Publishing.

Yusuf, Shahid, and Kaoru Nabeshima. 2006. Post-industrial East 

Asian Cities, Innovation for Growth. Palo Alto, CA, and Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank and Stanford University Press.

Zhu, Nong, and Xubei Luo. 2008. “Impact of Remittances on Rural 

Poverty and Inequality in China.” World Bank, East Asia and 
Paciﬁ c Regional Ofﬁ ce, Washington, DC.

WDR09_21_References.indd   329
WDR09_21_References.indd   329

10/10/08   10:08:09 AM
10/10/08   10:08:09 AM

WDR09_21_References.indd   330
WDR09_21_References.indd   330

10/10/08   10:08:09 AM
10/10/08   10:08:09 AM

Selected Indicators

Table A1  Geography and access
Table A2  Urbanization
Table A3  Territorial development
Table A4 
International integration
Table A5  Other indicators
Sources and deﬁ nitions

Selected world development indicators

Introduction
Classiﬁ cation of economies by region and income, FY2009
Table 1  Key indicators of development
Table 2  Millennium Development Goals: eradicating poverty 

and improving lives

Table 3  Economic activity
Table 4  Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance
Table 5  Key indicators for other economies
Technical notes

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   331
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   331

10/10/08   10:39:28 AM
10/10/08   10:39:28 AM

331

332 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A1    Geography and access

Surface 
area (km2)

Arable land 
(% of land 

area)

Forest land 
(% of land 

area)

Coastline 

(kms)

Location

boundaries 

Land 

(kms)

Economy
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Channel Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Faeroe Islands
Fiji
Finland
France
French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guam
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana

 

2007

9 30 N, 2 15 E

2007
652,090
33 00 N, 65 00 E
28,750
41 00 N, 20 00 E
2,381,740
28 00 N, 3 00 E
200
14 20 S, 170 00 W
470
42 30 N, 1 30 E
1,246,700
12 30 S, 18 30 E
17 03 N, 61 48 W
440
34 00 S, 64 00 W 2,780,400
29,800
40 00 N, 45 00 E
12 30 N, 69 58 W
180
7,741,220
27 00 S, 133 00 E
83,870
47 20 N, 13 20 E
40 30 N, 47 30 E
86,600
13,880
24 15 N, 76 00 W
26 00 N, 50 33 E
710
144,000
24 00 N, 90 00 E
13 10 N, 59 32 W
430
207,600
53 00 N, 28 00 E
30,530
50 50 N, 4 00 E
17 15 N, 88 45 W
22,970
112,620
50
32 20 N, 64 45 W
27 30 N, 90 30 E
47,000
17 00 S, 65 00 W 1,098,580
44 00 N, 18 00 E
51,210
22 00 S, 24 00 E
581,730
10 00 S, 55 00 W 8,514,880
4 30 N, 114 40 E
5,770
111,000
43 00 N, 25 00 E
274,000
13 00 N, 2 00 W
3 30 S, 30 00 E
27,830
181,040
13 00 N, 105 00 E
6 00 N, 12 00 E
475,440
60 00 N, 95 00 W 9,984,670
4,030
16 00 N, 24 00 W
19 30 N, 80 30 W
260
623,000
7 00 N, 21 00 E
1,284,000
15 00 N, 19 00 E
190
756,630
30 00 S, 71 00 W
9,598,088
35 00 N, 105 00 E
4 00 N, 72 00 W 1,141,750
12 10 S, 44 15 E
1,861
2,344,860
0 00 N, 25 00 E
342,000
1 00 S, 15 00 E
10 00 N, 84 00 W
51,100
322,460
8 00 N, 5 00 W
45 10 N, 15 30 E
56,540
110,860
21 30 N, 80 00 W
9,250
35 00 N, 33 00 E
78,870
49 45 N, 15 30 E
43,090
56 00 N, 10 00 E
23,200
11 30 N, 43 00 E
750
15 25 N, 61 20 W
19 00 N, 70 40 W
48,730
283,560
2 00 S, 77 30 W
1,001,450
27 00 N, 30 00 E
21,040
13 50 N, 88 55 W
2 00 N, 10 00 E
28,050
117,600
15 00 N, 39 00 E
59 00 N, 26 00 E
45,230
1,104,300
8 00 N, 38 00 E
1,400
62 00 N, 7 00 W
18 00 S, 175 00 E
18,270
338,150
64 00 N, 26 00 E
551,500
46 00 N, 2 00 E
15 00 S, 140 00 W
4,000
267,670
11,300
69,700
357,050
238,540
131,960
410,450
340
540
108,890
245,860
36,120
214,970

1 00 S, 11 45 E
13 28 N, 16 34 W
42 00 N, 43 30 E
51 00 N, 9 00 E
8 00 N, 2 00 W
39 00 N, 22 00 E
72 00 N, 40 00 W
12 07 N, 61 40 W
13 28 N, 144 47 E
15 30 N, 90 15 W
11 00 N, 10 00 W
12 00 N, 15 00 W
5 00 N, 59 00 W

2007
12.1
21.1
3.2
10.0
2.1
2.6
18.2
10.2
17.6
10.5
6.4
16.8
22.3
0.8
2.8
61.1
37.2
26.3
27.9
3.1
24.0
20.0
3.4
2.8
19.5
0.7
7.0
2.7
29.2
17.7
38.6
21.0
12.8
5.0
11.4
3.8
3.1
2.9
0.0
2.6
11.1
1.8
35.9
3.0
1.4
4.4
10.4
19.8
27.9
10.8
39.4
52.7
0.0
6.7
22.7
4.9
3.0
31.9
4.6
5.6
13.9
11.1
2.1
10.9
7.3
33.6
0.8
1.3
31.5
11.5
34.1
18.4
20.4
0.0
5.9
3.6
13.3
4.5
10.7
2.4

2007
1.3
29.0
1.0
90.0
34.2
47.4
20.5
12.1
10.0
..
21.3
46.8
11.3
51.4
0.0
6.7
4.7
38.0
22.1
72.5
21.3
20.0
68.0
54.2
42.7
21.1
56.5
52.8
33.4
24.8
5.9
59.2
45.6
34.1
20.8
46.2
36.5
9.5
..
21.5
21.2
54.7
2.2
58.9
65.8
46.8
32.7
38.2
24.7
18.8
34.3
11.8
0.3
61.3
28.4
39.2
0.1
14.4
58.2
15.4
53.9
13.0
..
54.7
73.9
28.3
28.7
84.5
47.1
39.7
31.8
24.2
29.1
..
11.8
47.3
36.3
27.4
73.7
76.7

2007
0
362
998
116
0
1,600
153
4,989
0
69
25,760
0
0
3,542
161
580
97
0
67
386
121
103
0
0
20
0
7,491
161
354
0
0
443
402
202,080
965
160
0
0

..
6,435
14,500
3,208
340
37
169
1,290
515
1,777
3,735
648
0
7,314
314
148
1,288
2,237
2,450
307
296
1,151
3,794
0
1,117
1,129
1,250
3,427
2,525
885
80
310
2,389
539
13,676
44,087
121
126
400
320
350
459

2007
5,529
720
6,343
0
120
5,198
0
9,861
1,254
0
0
2,562
2,013
0
0
4,246
0
2,900
1,385
516
1,989
0
1,075
6,940
1,459
4,013
16,885
381
1,808
3,193
974
2,752
4,591
8,893
0
0
5,203
5,968

..

6,339
22,117
6,309
0
10,730
5,504
639
3,110
2,197
29
0
2,290
68
516
0
360
2,010
2,665
545
539
1,626
633
5,328
0
0
2,681
2,889
0
2,551
740
1,461
3,621
2,094
1,228
0
0
0
1,687
3,399
724
2,949

Airports with 
paved runway 

(number)

Ports and 
terminals 
(number)

Rail density 
(rail km per 
100 km2)

Road density 
(road km per 

100 km2)

National average 

distance to 

capital city (kms)

2007
11
3
52
2
0
31
2
154
11
1
311
25
27
29
3
15
1
41
25
5
1
1
16
16
8
10
714
1
132
2
1
6
11
509
7
2
3
7

..
73
403
101
4
25
4
32
7
23
78
13
46
28
3
2
14
98
72
4
3
4
12
14
1
3
76
292
39
11
1
19
332
7
66
9
3
4
11
5
3
9

2007
0
4
9
1
0
3
1
8
0
3
11
0
0
3
2
2
1
0
6
2
1
2
0
0
1
0
9
3
2
0
0
2
2
8
3
2
0
0
..
8
7
7
2
11
6
2
4
5
3
3
0
12
1
2
4
5
3
2
1
2
5
0
1
3
10
10
1
5
1
2
10
2
6
1
1
1
2
1
4
1

2000–06 a

2000–06 a

..
1.6
0.2
..
..
0.2
..
1.2
3.0
..
0.5
7.7
2.6
..
..
2.1
..
2.7
11.7
..
0.7
..
..
0.3
1.2
0.2
0.3
..
4.0
0.2
..
0.3
0.2
0.5
..
..
..
..
..
0.9
0.8
0.3
..
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.2
4.9
3.8
..
12.4
6.2
0.4
..
1.1
0.3
0.5
2.7
..
0.3
2.3
0.1
..
3.3
1.9
5.3
..
0.3

2.3
13.8
0.4
2.0
..
..
..
0.8
0.3
..
..

5.3
65.7
4.5
 ..
.. 
4.1
264.8
14.6
27.1
.. 
10.5
162.4
71.5
.. 
492.7
183.8
372.1
45.0
498.1
.. 
17.2
.. 
17.1
5.8
.. 
4.3
20.7
.. 
40.5
5.6
48.0
21.7
10.7
15.5
33.5
..
 ..
.. 
.. 
10.6
20.7
..
..
6.8
5.1
69.2
25.2
50.9
.. 
130.5
165.2
169.3
.. 
.. 
 
15.6
9.3
..
.. 
.. 
134.1
3.6
.. 
.. 
25.7
172.9
.. 
3.6
37.4
29.1
.. 
21.0
89.2
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
18.0
12.3
.. 

2000
418
84
1,108
7
10
711
30
971
87
8
1,946
204
219
230
25
165
14
185
78
74
398
7
99
521
103
441
1,378
61
190
220
84
206
363
2,449
156
15
450
671
.. 
1,149
1,668
456
59
1,006
479
105
236
144
398
48
134
195
85
20
119
266
558
68
301
184
128
425
25
113
417
365
472
317
123
156
334
344
249
1,031
11
14
175
348
97
314

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   332
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   332

10/10/08   10:39:29 AM
10/10/08   10:39:29 AM

 

Selected indicators 

333

Economy
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Isle of Man
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao, China
Macedonia, FYR
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Northern Mariana Islands
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Samoa

Surface 
area (km2)

Arable land 
(% of land 

area)

Forest land 
(% of land 

area)

Coastline 

(kms)

Location

2007

2007
27,750
19 00 N, 72 25 W
112,090
15 00 N, 86 30 W
1,092
22 15 N, 114 10 E
93,030
47 00 N, 20 00 E
103,000
65 00 N, 18 00 W
3,287,260
20 00 N, 77 00 E
1,904,570
5 00 S, 120 00 E
1,745,150
32 00 N, 53 00 E
438,320
33 00 N, 44 00 E
70,270
53 00 N, 8 00 W
570
54 15 N, 4 30 W
22,070
31 30 N, 34 45 E
301,340
42 50 N, 12 50 E
10,990
18 15 N, 77 30 W
377,910
36 00 N, 138 00 E
88,780
31 00 N, 36 00 E
2,724,900
48 00 N, 68 00 E
580,370
1 00 N, 38 00 E
810
1 25 N, 173 00 E
120,540
40 00 N, 127 00 E
99,260
37 00 N, 127 30 E
17,820
29 30 N, 45 45 E
199,900
41 00 N, 75 00 E
236,800
18 00 N, 105 00 E
64,590
57 00 N, 25 00 E
10,400
33 50 N, 35 50 E
30,350
29 30 S, 28 30 E
111,370
6 30 N, 9 30 W
1,759,540
25 00 N, 17 00 E
160
47 16 N, 9 32 E
65,300
56 00 N, 24 00 E
2,590
49 45 N, 6 10 E
28
22 10 N, 113 33 E
25,710
41 50 N, 22 00 E
587,040
20 00 S, 47 00 E
118,480
13 30 S, 34 00 E
329,740
2 30 N, 112 30 E
3 15 N, 73 00 E
300
17 00 N, 4 00 W 1,240,190
320
35 50 N, 14 35 E
9 00 N, 168 00 E
180
20 00 N, 12 00 W 1,030,700
2,040
20 17 S, 57 33 E
12 50 S, 45 10 E
374
23 00 N, 102 00 W 1,964,380
700
6 55 N, 158 15 E
33,840
47 00 N, 29 00 E
43 44 N, 7 24 E
2
1,566,500
46 00 N, 105 00 E
14,026
42 30 N, 19 18 E
446,550
32 00 N, 5 00 W
799,380
18 15 S, 35 00 E
676,580
22 00 N, 98 00 E
824,290
22 00 S, 17 00 E
28 00 N, 84 00 E
147,180
41,530
52 30 N, 5 45 E
800
12 15 N, 68 45 W
18,580
21 30 S, 165 30 E
267,710
41 00 S, 174 00 E
13 00 N, 85 00 W
130,000
1,267,000
16 00 N, 8 00 E
10 00 N, 8 00 E
923,770
460
323,800
62 00 N, 10 00 E
309,500
21 00 N, 57 00 E
796,100
30 00 N, 70 00 E
460
7 30 N, 134 30 E
75,520
9 00 N, 80 00 W
462,840
6 00 S, 147 00 E
23 00 S, 58 00 W
406,750
10 00 S, 76 00 W 1,285,220
300,000
13 00 N, 122 00 E
312,690
52 00 N, 20 00 E
92,120
39 30 N, 8 00 W
8,950
18 15 N, 66 30 W
25 30 N, 51 15 E
11,000
238,390
46 00 N, 25 00 E
60 00 N, 100 00 E 17,098,240
26,340
2 00 S, 30 00 E
2,840

13 35 S, 172 20 W

 

2007
28.3
9.5
0.0
51.3
0.1
53.7
12.7
9.8
13.1
17.6
0.0
14.6
26.3
16.1
12.0
2.1
8.3
8.2
2.7
23.3
16.6
0.8
6.7
4.3
17.5
16.6
10.9
4.0
1.0
25.0
30.4
23.2
0.0
22.3
5.1
26.0
5.5
13.3
3.9
28.1
11.1
0.5
49.3
0.0
13.0
5.7
56.2
0.0
0.8
0.0
19.0
5.5
15.3
1.0
16.5
26.8
10.0
0.3
5.6
15.9
11.4
33.5
0.0
2.8
0.1
27.6
8.7
7.4
0.5
7.7
2.9
19.1
39.6
16.8
8.0
1.6
40.4
7.4
48.6
21.2

2007
3.8
41.5
..
22.1
0.5
22.8
48.8
6.8
1.9
9.7
5.2
7.9
33.9
31.3
68.2
0.9
1.2
6.2
2.7
51.4
63.5
0.3
4.5
69.9
47.2
13.3
0.3
32.7
0.1
43.8
33.5
33.6
..
35.6
22.1
36.2
63.6
3.3
10.3
..
..
0.3
18.2
13.4
33.7
90.0
10.0
0.0
6.5
..
9.8
24.6
49.0
9.3
25.4
10.8
1.3
39.2
31.0
42.7
1.0
12.2
69.2
30.8
0.0
2.5
87.0
57.7
65.0
46.5
53.7
24.0
30.0
41.3
46.0
..
27.7
49.4
19.5
60.4

2007
1,771
820
733
0
4,970
7,000
54,716
2,440
58
1,448
160
273
7,600
1,022
29,751
26
0
536
1,143
2,495
2,416
499
0
0
531
225
0
579
1,770
0
90
0
41
0
4,828
0
4,675
644
0
197
370
754
177
185
9,330
6,112
0
4
0
294
1,835
2,470
1,930
1,572
0
451
364
2,254
15,134
910
0
853
..
2,650
2,092
1,046
1,519
2,490
5,152
0
2,414
36,289
491
1,793
501
563
225
37,653
0
403

boundaries 

Land 

(kms)

2007
360
1,520
30
2,271
0
14,103
2,830
5,440
3,650
360
0
1,017
1,932
0
0
1,635
12,012
3,477
0
238
462
462
3,878
5,083
1,368
454
909
1,585
4,348
76
1,613
359
0
766
0
2,881
2,669
0
7,243
0
0
5,074
0
0
4,353
0
1,389
4
8,220
625
2,018
4,571
5,876
3,936
2,926
1,027
15
0
0
1,231
5,697
4,047

..

2,542
1,374
6,774
0
555
820
3,995
7,461
0
3,056
1,214
0
60
2,508
20,097
893
0

Airports with 
paved runway 

(number)

Ports and 
terminals 
(number)

Rail density 
(rail km per 
100 km2)

Road density 
(road km per 

100 km2)

National average 

distance to 

capital city (kms)

2007
4
11
3
20
5
243
159
129
77
15
1
30
98
11
145
15
67
15
3
36
69
4
18
9
24
5
3
2
60
0
34
1
1
10
29
6
37
2
9
1
4
8
2
1
228
6
6
0
12
3
26
22
21
21
10
20
5
11
45
11
9
36
..
67
6
91
1
53
21
12
54
83
83
43
17
3
25
616
4
3

2007
1
4
1
0
5
8
9
2
3
5
3
4
8
5
10
1
0
1
1
12
5
6
0
0
2
4
0
2
6
0
1
0
1
0
4
0
9
1
0
1
1
2
1
1
7
1
0
1
0
1
6
3
3
2
0
7
4
1
5
3
0
3
..
8
2
2
1
3
3
0
2
6
4
4
3
1
4
10
0
1

2000–06 a

2000–06 a

..
0.6
..
9.0
..
2.1
0.4
0.5
0.5
4.7
11.4
3.9
6.6
..
6.4
0.6
0.5
0.5
..
4.3
3.5
..
0.2
..
3.7
3.9
..
0.5
..
5.6
2.8
10.6
..
2.7
0.1
0.8
0.6
..
0.1
..
..
0.1
..
..
0.9
..
3.5
..
0.1
1.8
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.3
0.0
8.3
..
..
1.5
0.0
..
0.4
..
1.4
..
1.1
..
0.5
..
0.0
0.2
0.3
7.5
3.0
1.1
..
5.0
0.5
..
..

.. 
.. 
186.5
178.0
12.9
113.8
20.3
11.0
.. 
140.2
.. 
80.6
164.8
193.9
323.0
8.5
3.3
11.1
.. 
.. 
101.6
32.3
9.8
13.5
111.6
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
126.6
201.8
1284.0
.. 
.. 
16.4
30.0
.. 
1.5
704.4
.. 
.. 
99.3
 ..
17.7
.. 
38.7
.. 
3.1
.. 
12.9
 ..
 ..
5.1
12.2
372.2
 ..
 ..
34.7
15.4
1.1
21.2
 ..
30.2
11.3
33.5
 ..
15.6
.. 
 
6.2
67.1
138.5
85.8
289.1
.. 
86.4
3.3
56.8
82.6

2000
99
167
.. 
137
235
992
1,519
654
281
165
13
110
353
67
531
171
823
372
25
211
187
67
255
311
140
60
98
196
910
6
143
25
 ..
76
385
230
873
276
804
9

.. 
686
51
13
886
134
87
.. 
617
.. 
369
1,112
619
407
236
95
36
157
418
192
896
380
16
507
462
661
11
179
536
363
690
555
237
237
60
55
246
4,322
65
51

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   333
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   333

10/10/08   10:39:30 AM
10/10/08   10:39:30 AM

334 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A1    Geography and access—continued

Surface 
area (km2)

Arable land 
(% of land 

area)

Forest land 
(% of land 

area)

Coastline 

(kms)

boundaries 

Land 

(kms)

Airports with 
paved runway 

(number)

Ports and 
terminals 
(number)

Rail density 
(rail km per 
100 km2)

Road density 
(road km per 

100 km2)

National average 

distance to 

capital city (kms)

Location

2007

2007

Economy
San Marino
Sao Tome and Princip
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan, China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
Virgin Islands (U.S.)
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe

 

43 46 N, 12 25 E
1 00 N, 7 00 E
25 00 N, 45 00 E
14 00 N, 14 00 W

4 35 S, 55 40 E
8 30 N, 11 30 W
1 22 N, 103 48 E
48 40 N, 19 30 E
46 07 N, 14 49 E
8 00 S, 159 00 E
10 00 N, 49 00 E
29 00 S, 24 00 E
40 00 N, 4 00 W
7 00 N, 81 00 E
17 20 N, 62 45 W
13 53 N, 60 58 W
13 15 N, 61 12 W
15 00 N, 30 00 E
4 00 N, 56 00 W
26 30 S, 31 30 E
62 00 N, 15 00 E
47 00 N, 8 00 E
35 00 N, 38 00 E
23 30 N, 121 00 E
39 00 N, 71 00 E
6 00 S, 35 00 E
15 00 N, 100 00 E
8 50 S, 125 55 E
8 00 N, 1 10 E

60
960
2,000,000
196,720
88,361
460
71,740
699
49,030
20,270
28,900
637,660
1,219,090
505,370
65,610
260
620
390
2,505,810
163,270
17,360
450,290
41,280
185,180
35,980
142,550
947,300
513,120
14,870
56,790
750
20 00 S, 175 00 W
5,130
11 00 N, 61 00 W
163,610
34 00 N, 9 00 E
783,560
39 00 N, 35 00 E
488,100
40 00 N, 60 00 E
241,040
1 00 N, 32 00 E
603,550
49 00 N, 32 00 E
83,600
24 00 N, 54 00 E
54 00 N, 2 00 W
243,610
38 00 N, 97 00 W 9,632,030
33 00 S, 56 00 W
176,220
447,400
41 00 N, 64 00 E
16 00 S, 167 00 E
12,190
912,050
8 00 N, 66 00 W
329,310
16 00 N, 106 00 E
350
18 20 N, 64 50 W
32 00 N, 35 15 E
6,020
527,970
15 00 N, 48 00 E
752,610
15 00 S, 30 00 E
20 00 S, 30 00 E
390,760

2007
16.7
8.3
1.8
12.8
0.0
2.2
8.0
0.9
28.9
8.7
0.6
1.7
12.1
27.4
14.2
19.4
6.6
17.9
7.2
0.4
10.3
6.6
10.3
26.5
0.0
6.6
4.5
27.7
8.2
46.1
20.8
14.6
18.0
31.0
4.7
26.4
56.0
0.8
23.7
19.0
7.8
11.0
1.6
2.9
21.3
5.7
17.8
2.9
7.1
8.3

2007
..
28.1
1.4
45.0
..
87.0
38.5
2.9
40.1
62.8
77.6
11.4
7.6
35.9
29.9
13.9
27.9
28.2
28.4
94.7
31.5
67.1
30.5
2.5
..
2.9
39.9
28.4
53.7
7.1
5.6
44.1
6.8
13.2
8.8
18.4
16.5
3.7
11.8
33.1
8.6
7.7
36.1
54.1
41.7
28.6
1.5
1.0
57.1
45.3

2007
0
209
2,640
531
..
491
402
193
0
47
5,313
3,025
2,798
4,964
1,340
135
158
84
853
386
0
3,218
0
193
1,566
0
1,424
3,219
706
56
419
362
1,148
7,200
0
0
2,782
1,318
12,429
19,924
660
0
2,528
2,800
3,444
188
0
1,906
0
0

2007
39
0
4,431
2,640

..

0
958
0
1,524
1,382
0
2,340
4,862
1,918
0
0
0
0
7,687
1,703
535
2,233
1,852
2,253
0
3,651
3,861
4,863
228
1,647
0
0
1,424
2,648
3,736
2,698
4,663
867
360
12,034
1,648
6,221
0
4,993
4,639
0
404
1,746
5,664
3,066

2007
0
2
73
9

..

8
1
9
18
6
2
7
146
96
14
2
2
5
15
5
1
155
42
26
38
17
11
66
3
2
1
3
14
89
22
5
193
23
334
5119
8
34
3
129
26
2
3
16
10
17

2007
0
1
4
1
..
1
3
1
0
1
5
5
6
8
2
2
3
1
1
1
0
9
0
2
5
0
3
4
1
2
1
3
4
8
0
0
8
7
8
12
5
0
3
5
2
2
0
2
0
0

2000–06 a

2000–06 a

..
..
0.1
0.5
4.3
..
..
..
7.6
6.1
..
..
1.7
3.0
2.2
13.9
..
..
0.3
..
1.8
2.8
12.1
1.5
7.8
0.3
0.4
0.8
..
1.0
..
..
1.4
1.1
0.5
0.6
3.9
..
6.8
2.5
1.2
0.9
..
0.1
0.8
..
..
..
0.3
0.8

 ..
.. 
7.6
7.1
.. 
99.6
15.8
462.7
89.4
190.9
0.0
.. 
30.0
133.5
150.5
.. 
.. 
212.6
0.0
2.8
20.9
103.6
178.0
51.6
115.6
19.8
8.9
11.2
.. 
.. 
 ..
.. 
12.4
55.5
.. 
35.9
29.2
.. 
160.2
70.2
34.3
.. 
.. 
.. 
71.7
 ..
83.0
.. 
12.3
25.1

2000
3
45
593
328
.. 
413
170
11
199
65
214
623
608
306
157
8
15
11
699
248
64
439
99
289
168
240
395
428
.. 
300
108
48
335
442
344
223
373
141
361
2,595
275
564
250
549
646
10
.. 
406
436
285

a. Data are for the latest year available in the period shown.

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   334
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   334

10/10/08   10:39:31 AM
10/10/08   10:39:31 AM

 

Table A2    Urbanization

Agglomeration 
index, 0 (low) 
to 100 (high)

Economy
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Channel Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Faeroe Islands
Fiji
Finland
France
French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Greenland
Grenada

2000
25.0
52.7
58.7
    ..
    ..
26.8
    ..
72.1
69.6
    ..
75.9
67.9
48.7
57.8
94.9
48.0
91.3
60.6
89.8
1.8
37.5
    ..
3.8
55.7
37.7
27.9
63.6
63.8
64.9
12.8
31.7
23.8
40.2
70.5
44.4
    ..
19.7
12.1
    ..
74.8
37.2
62.1
    ..
25.6
54.2
54.0
35.1
37.3
64.2
62.1
73.8
48.8
40.6
    ..
71.7
49.2
90.4
73.7
21.4
21.4
45.3
11.9
    ..
17.7
52.4
72.5
45.8
35.9
44.0
50.2
79.6
34.1
57.5
    ..
    ..

2000
21.3
41.8
59.8
88.8
92.4
50.0
37.3
89.2
65.1
46.7
87.2
65.8
50.9
88.8
94.6
23.2
49.9
70.0
97.1
47.7
38.4
100.0
9.6
61.8
43.2
53.3
81.2
71.2
68.9
16.6
8.6
16.9
50.0
79.4
53.4
100.0
37.6
23.4
30.5
86.0
35.8
71.2
33.8
29.8
58.3
59.0
43.1
55.6
75.6
68.7
74.0
85.1
83.4
71.1
62.4
60.3
42.5
58.4
38.8
17.8
69.4
14.9
36.3
48.3
61.1
75.8
52.4
80.2
49.1
52.7
75.1
44.0
58.8
81.6
31.0

2005
22.9
45.4
63.3
91.3
90.6
53.3
39.1
90.1
64.1
46.6
88.2
66.0
51.5
90.4
96.5
25.1
52.7
72.3
97.2
48.3
40.1
100.0
11.1
64.2
45.8
57.4
84.2
73.5
70.0
18.3
10.0
19.7
54.6
80.1
57.3
100.0
38.1
25.3
30.5
87.6
40.4
72.7
37.0
32.1
60.2
61.7
45.0
56.5
75.5
69.3
73.5
85.6
86.1
72.9
66.8
62.8
42.8
59.8
38.9
19.4
69.1
16.0
38.8
50.8
61.1
76.7
51.7
83.6
53.9
52.2
75.2
47.8
59.0
82.9
30.6

2015
27.1
52.8
69.3
94.1
87.8
59.7
44.7
91.6
64.1
47.6
89.9
67.7
52.8
92.2
98.2
29.9
58.8
76.7
97.5
51.2
44.6
100.0
14.8
68.8
51.8
64.6
88.2
77.6
72.8
22.8
13.5
26.1
62.7
81.4
64.3
100.0
40.4
30.5
31.5
90.1
49.2
75.7
44.0
38.6
64.2
66.9
49.8
59.5
74.7
71.5
74.1
86.9
89.6
76.4
73.6
67.6
45.4
63.2
41.1
24.4
70.1
19.1
41.5
56.1
62.7
79.0
52.3
87.7
61.8
53.8
76.3
55.1
61.0
85.5
32.2

2006
    .. 
115
14
292
141
13
189
14
107
557
3
100
102
32
1021
1178
679
47
347
13
77
1271
14
8
76
3
22
71
71
51
306
79
38
4
126
173
7
8
782
22
140
41
323
26
11
85
58
79
103
82
132
128
35
96
196
47
73
322
17
45
32
75
35
45
17
111
70
5
162
64
236
99
86
0
313

Selected indicators 

335

Urbanization

Population density

Rural-urban disparities

Urban 

population 
(% of total 

pop.)

Urban 

population (% 
of total pop.)

Urban 

population 
(% of total 

pop.)

Population 

density 

(number of 

people 
per km2)

Pop. in 
cities > 
1 million 
(% of total 

pop.)

2005
    ..
    ..
9.7
    ..
    ..
17.2
    ..
39.1
36.5
    ..
60.4
27.4
22.1
    ..
    ..
11.8
    ..
18.2
9.7
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
31.0
    ..
    ..
36.9
    ..
14.1
    ..
    ..
9.8
18.2
44.5
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
34.9
17.7
36.0
    ..
16.2
32.5
28.1
19.2
    ..
19.4
    ..
11.4
20.1
    ..
    ..
21.4
29.9
20.5
22.7
    ..
    ..
    ..
3.8
    ..
    ..
20.8
22.4
    ..
    ..
    ..
23.4
7.7
15.5
29.1
    ..
    ..

Pop. in 
largest 

city 
(% of 

urban pop.)

% of urban 
population 
with water 

access

% of rural 
population 
with water 

access

% of urban 
population 

with sanitation 

services

% of rural 
population 

with 

sanitation 
services

2005
    ..
    ..
15.4
    ..
    ..
32.2
    ..
35.9
57.0
    ..
24.1
41.6
42.9
    ..
    ..
32.3
    ..
25.2
9.9
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
25.9
    ..
    ..
11.7
    ..
20.2
36.3
    ..
49.6
18.1
20.5
    ..
    ..
    ..
34.6
    ..
39.8
2.8
23.7
    ..
32.1
54.0
45.6
42.8
    ..
25.7
    ..
15.6
23.5
    ..
    ..
32.0
29.1
35.7
38.0
    ..
    ..
    ..
24.1
    ..
    ..
34.0
21.0
    ..
    ..
    ..
44.8
5.5
18.4
49.3
    ..
    ..

2004
63
99
88
    ..
100
75
95
98
99
100
100
100
95
98
100
82
100
100
100
100
78
    ..
86
95
99
100
96
    ..
100
94
92
64
86
100
86
    ..
93
41
    ..
100
93
99
92
82
84
100
97
100
95
100
100
100
76
100
97
97
99
94
45
74
100
81
    ..
43
100
100
100
95
95
96
100
88
    ..
    ..
97

2004
31
94
80
    ..
100
40
89
80
80
100
100
100
59
86
    ..
72
100
100
    ..
82
57
    ..
60
68
96
90
57
    ..
97
54
77
35
44
99
73
    ..
61
43
    ..
58
67
71
82
29
27
92
74
100
78
100
100
100
59
90
91
89
97
70
42
57
99
11
    ..
51
100
100
100
47
77
67
100
64
    ..
    ..
93

2004
49
99
99
    ..
100
56
98
92
96
    ..
100
100
73
100
100
51
99
93
    ..
71
59
    ..
65
60
99
57
83
    ..
100
42
47
53
58
100
61
    ..
47
24
    ..
95
69
96
41
42
28
89
46
100
99
100
99
    ..
88
86
81
94
86
77
60
32
97
44
    ..
87
100
    ..
99
37
72
96
100
27
    ..
    ..
96

2004
29
84
82
    ..
100
16
94
83
61
    ..
100
100
36
100
    ..
35
100
61
    ..
25
11
    ..
70
22
92
25
37
    ..
96
6
35
8
43
99
19
    ..
12
4
    ..
62
28
54
29
25
25
97
29
100
95
100
97
    ..
50
75
73
82
58
39
46
3
96
7
    ..
55
100
    ..
97
30
46
91
100
11
    ..
    ..
97

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   335
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   335

10/10/08   10:39:31 AM
10/10/08   10:39:31 AM

336 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A2    Urbanization—continued

Agglomeration 
index, 0 (low) 
to 100 (high)

Urban 

population 
(% of total 

pop.)

Urban 

population (% 
of total pop.)

Urban 

population 
(% of total 

pop.)

Population 

density 

(number of 

people 
per km2)

Urbanization

Population density

Rural-urban disparities

Economy
Guam
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Isle of Man
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao, China
Macedonia, FYR
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Northern Mariana Islands
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay

2000
2.4
36.6
15.0
20.9
36.1
33.9
41.6
99.8
71.9
57.1
52.4
55.2
60.9
69.9
45.8
    ..
81.3
78.0
69.4
90.9
77.9
50.6
25.4
    ..
46.2
86.4
85.2
34.0
13.5
52.6
79.0
23.1
17.8
80.4
    ..
56.1
75.1
58.8
63.5
19.5
23.8
68.0
    ..
18.4
91.5
    ..
26.3
92.1
0.0
68.4
    ..
49.4
    ..
34.4
37.4
53.0
24.1
33.1
13.3
26.0
88.2
81.5
50.6
64.7
48.0
14.3
40.8
    ..
46.8
68.5
53.6
    ..
52.6
3.5
45.7

2000
93.2
45.1
31.0
29.7
28.6
35.6
44.4
100.0
64.6
92.3
27.7
42.0
64.2
67.8
59.2
51.8
91.4
67.2
51.8
65.2
80.4
56.3
19.7
43.0
60.2
79.6
98.2
35.4
18.9
68.1
86.0
17.9
54.3
83.1
15.1
67.0
83.8
100.0
64.9
26.0
15.1
61.8
27.5
27.9
93.4
65.8
40.0
42.7
    .. 
74.7
22.3
46.1
100.0
56.6
    .. 
55.1
30.7
28.0
32.4
13.4
76.8
69.3
61.9
85.7
57.2
16.2
43.9
93.3
76.1
71.6
33.2
69.6
65.8
13.2
55.3

2005
94.1
47.2
33.0
29.6
28.2
38.8
46.5
100.0
66.3
92.8
28.7
48.1
66.9
66.9
60.5
51.8
91.6
67.6
53.1
65.8
82.3
57.3
20.7
47.4
61.6
80.8
98.3
35.8
20.6
67.8
86.6
18.7
58.1
84.8
14.6
66.6
82.8
100.0
68.9
26.8
17.2
67.3
29.6
30.5
95.3
66.7
40.4
42.4
    ..
76.0
22.3
46.7
100.0
56.7
    ..
58.7
34.5
30.7
35.1
15.8
80.2
70.4
63.7
86.2
59.0
16.8
48.2
94.5
77.4
71.5
34.9
69.7
70.8
13.4
58.5

2015
95.3
52.0
38.1
31.1
29.4
45.5
51.4
100.0
70.3
93.6
32.0
58.5
71.9
66.9
63.8
52.8
91.9
69.5
56.7
68.2
85.3
60.3
24.1
55.4
65.5
83.1
98.5
38.1
24.9
68.9
87.9
22.0
64.8
87.4
14.7
66.8
82.1
100.0
75.2
30.1
22.1
75.4
34.8
36.5
97.2
69.3
43.1
44.1
    ..
78.7
23.6
50.0
100.0
58.8
    ..
65.0
42.4
37.4
41.1
20.9
84.9
73.4
67.4
87.4
63.0
19.3
55.9
95.9
78.6
72.3
39.6
70.9
77.9
15.0
64.4

2006
312
117
37
57
4
337
61
6539
113
3
368
122
42
     ..
60
133
320
199
245
351
61
6
63
122
196
489
142
27
25
37
392
65
36
3
217
54
176
16776
80
32
141
78
984
10
1261
351
3
612
481
53
157
118
16667
2
44
68
26
73
2
189
482
233
13
15
45
10
155
175
15
8
202
44
43
13
15

Pop. in 
cities > 
1 million 
(% of total 

pop.)

2005
    ..
    ..
15.8
    ..
    ..
22.9
    ..
103.3
16.8
    ..
11.6
11.6
22.9
    ..
24.9
    ..
43.5
17.4
    ..
47.8
23.9
7.6
7.8
    ..
18.9
50.6
71.4
    ..
    ..
    ..
44.3
    ..
    ..
54.3
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
8.5
    ..
5.5
    ..
11.8
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
35.0
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
15.9
6.4
8.6
    ..
    ..
13.8
    ..
    ..
27.8
21.3
    ..
13.3
    ..
    ..
    ..
17.8
    ..
37.6
    ..
31.5

Pop. in 
largest 

city 
(% of 

urban pop.)

% of urban 
population 
with water 

access

% of rural 
population 
with water 

access

% of urban 
population 

with sanitation 

services

% of rural 
population 

with 

sanitation 
services

2005
    ..
16.4
48.0
    ..
    ..
59.0
29.2
103.3
25.3
    ..
5.8
12.5
15.8
    ..
41.2
    ..
47.5
8.5
    ..
41.9
29.0
13.3
37.6
    ..
23.0
24.7
72.6
43.3
    ..
    ..
51.2
    ..
46.8
41.8
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
31.7
    ..
8.1
    ..
38.6
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
24.8
    ..
    ..
    ..
59.6
    ..
17.7
18.6
28.0
    ..
19.0
8.8
    ..
    ..
32.2
36.2
38.1
16.0
    ..
22.4
    ..
21.4
    ..
53.1
    ..
53.8

2004
100
99
78
79
83
52
95
    ..
100
100
95
87
99
97
100
    ..
100
100
98
100
99
97
83
77
100
97
    ..
98
79
100
100
92
72
    ..
    ..
    ..
100
    ..
    ..
77
98
100
98
78
100
82
59
100
    ..
100
95
97
100
87
    ..
99
72
80
98
96
100
    ..
    ..
100
90
80
67
98
100
    ..
96
79
99
88
99

2004
100
92
35
49
83
56
81
    ..
98
100
83
69
84
50
    ..
    ..
100
    ..
88
100
91
73
46
53
100
71
    ..
66
43
96
100
76
52
    ..
    ..
    ..
100
    ..
    ..
35
68
96
76
36
100
96
44
100
    ..
87
94
88
    ..
30
    ..
56
26
77
81
89
100
    ..
    ..
    ..
63
36
31
97
100
    ..
89
94
79
32
68

2004
99
90
31
57
86
57
87
    ..
100
100
59
73
    ..
95
    ..
    ..
100
    ..
91
100
94
87
46
59
58
    ..
    ..
75
67
82
100
61
49
97
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
48
62
95
100
59
100
93
49
95
    ..
91
61
86
100
75
    ..
88
53
88
50
62
100
    ..
    ..
    ..
56
43
53
94
    ..
97
92
96
89
67
94

2004
98
82
11
23
60
14
54
    ..
85
100
22
40
    ..
48
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
69
100
87
52
41
22
60
    ..
    ..
51
20
71
87
32
7
96
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
26
61
93
42
39
    ..
58
8
94
    ..
41
14
52
    ..
37
    ..
52
19
72
13
30
100
    ..
    ..
    ..
34
4
36
96
    ..
    ..
41
52
51
41
61

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   336
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   336

10/10/08   10:39:33 AM
10/10/08   10:39:33 AM

 

Selected indicators 

337

Urbanization

Population density

Rural-urban disparities

Agglomeration 
index, 0 (low) 
to 100 (high)

Economy
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
Sao Tome and Princip
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan, China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
Virgin Islands (U.S.)
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe

2000
52.1
56.1
67.2
62.6
90.3
87.1
65.2
64.8
14.3
    ..
60.0
46.2
75.7
43.0
60.5
    ..
29.3
96.2
59.3
48.1
6.9
21.4
50.2
76.7
38.2
    ..
75.4
    ..
31.9
70.4
20.2
54.4
75.8
57.2
84.1
36.2
28.2
35.6
0.0
35.7
    ..
81.6
48.7
60.1
42.6
28.0
63.9
61.0
84.4
71.9
64.1
54.2
    ..
80.5
47.1
    ..
57.9
23.0
30.8
33.4

Urban 

population 
(% of total 

pop.)

Urban 

population (% 
of total pop.)

Urban 

population 
(% of total 

pop.)

Population 

density 

(number of 

people 
per km2)

2000
71.6
58.6
61.7
54.4
94.7
95.0
54.6
73.4
13.8
21.9
93.5
53.4
79.9
40.6
     ..
51.1
37.0
100.0
56.3
50.8
15.7
33.3
56.9
76.3
15.7
32.8
28.0
44.4
36.1
72.1
23.3
84.0
73.1
50.1
    ..
25.9
22.3
31.1
24.5
36.6
23.2
10.8
63.4
64.7
45.1
12.1
67.2
77.4
89.4
79.1
91.4
37.3
21.7
91.1
24.3
92.6
71.5
25.4
34.8
33.8

2005
72.6
62.7
62.1
57.6
97.6
95.4
53.7
73.0
19.3
22.4
97.2
58.0
81.0
41.6
    ..
52.9
40.7
100.0
56.2
51.0
17.0
35.2
59.3
76.7
15.1
32.2
27.6
45.9
40.8
73.9
24.1
84.2
75.2
50.6
    ..
24.7
24.2
32.3
26.5
40.1
24.0
12.2
65.3
67.3
46.3
12.6
67.8
76.7
89.7
80.8
92.0
36.7
23.5
93.4
26.4
94.2
71.6
27.3
35.0
35.9

2015
74.9
69.6
64.0
63.6
99.3
96.2
56.1
72.6
28.7
24.9
99.3
65.8
83.2
44.7
    ..
58.2
48.2
100.0
58.0
53.3
20.5
40.1
64.1
78.3
15.7
33.5
29.0
50.0
49.4
77.4
27.5
85.1
78.8
53.4
    ..
24.6
28.9
36.2
31.2
47.4
27.4
15.8
69.1
71.9
50.8
14.5
70.2
77.4
90.6
83.7
93.1
38.0
28.1
95.9
31.6
96.0
72.9
31.9
37.0
40.9

2006
21
284
125
115
441
72
94
9
374
65
470
159
12
61
84
180
78
6302
112
99
17
13
39
87
304
185
270
305
16
3
66
22
186
103
705
47
43
123
66
115
138
258
65
94
10
147
81
49
249
32
19
62
18
30
268
311
602
40
15
34

Pop. in 
cities > 
1 million 
(% of total 

pop.)

2005
26.3
14.2
4.4
38.6
66.6
    ..
8.9
19.2
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
36.2
18.3
    ..
    ..
    ..
99.6
    ..
    ..
    ..
16.1
30.0
24.0
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
12.2
    ..
    ..
18.9
15.4
25.4
    ..
    ..
7.0
10.5
    ..
21.4
    ..
    ..
    ..
25.6
    ..
4.6
13.1
32.4
26.1
43.3
38.2
8.3
    ..
36.9
13.4
    ..
    ..
8.5
11.0
11.5

Pop. in 
largest 

city 
(% of 

urban pop.)

% of urban 
population 
with water 

access

% of rural 
population 
with water 

access

% of urban 
population 

with sanitation 

services

% of rural 
population 

with 

sanitation 
services

2005
36.3
20.2
7.1
45.4
68.2
    ..
16.6
10.2
43.7
    ..
    ..
    ..
22.4
44.1
    ..
    ..
35.2
99.6
    ..
    ..
    ..
45.7
11.7
16.8
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
30.0
    ..
    ..
22.5
20.5
26.4
    ..
    ..
28.7
32.4
    ..
53.4
    ..
    ..
    ..
20.0
    ..
36.2
8.4
42.2
15.7
7.8
41.6
22.7
    ..
11.7
23.1
    ..
    ..
31.3
31.4
32.2

2004
89
87
100
    ..
    ..
100
91
100
92
90
    ..
89
97
92
    ..
100
75
100
100
    ..
94
32
99
100
98
99
98
    ..
78
98
87
100
100
98
    ..
92
85
98
77
80
100
92
99
98
93
87
99
100
100
100
100
95
86
85
99
    ..
94
71
90
98

2004
65
82
    ..
    ..
    ..
100
16
88
69
87
    ..
73
    ..
60
    ..
75
46
    ..
99
    ..
65
27
73
100
74
99
98
93
64
73
54
100
100
87
    ..
48
49
100
56
36
100
88
82
93
54
56
91
100
100
100
100
75
52
70
80
    ..
88
65
40
72

2004
74
80
    ..
    ..
    ..
100
89
93
56
100
    ..
32
100
79
    ..
    ..
53
100
100
    ..
98
48
79
100
98
96
89
    ..
50
99
59
100
100
99
    ..
70
53
98
66
71
98
100
96
96
77
54
98
98
    ..
100
100
78
78
71
92
    ..
78
86
59
63

2004
32
59
    ..
    ..
    ..
100
    ..
70
38
100
    ..
20
    ..
34
    ..
100
30
    ..
98
    ..
18
14
46
100
89
96
89
96
24
76
44
100
100
81
    ..
45
43
99
33
15
96
100
65
72
50
41
93
95
    ..
100
99
61
42
48
50
    ..
61
28
52
47

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   337
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   337

10/10/08   10:39:34 AM
10/10/08   10:39:34 AM

338 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A3    Territorial development

Leading area: deﬁ ned as the area with the highest measure of welfare 

(income or consumption or gdp) per capita

Lagging area: deﬁ ned as the area with the lowest measure of welfare 

(income or consumption or gdp) per capita

Area’s 

number of poor 
as percentage 
of total country 

poor

Poverty 
Incidence

Area’s 
welfare 
measure 
as a % of 
country’s 
average 
welfare 
measure

Area name

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

Population 

density 

(number of 
people per 

km2)

Poverty 
Incidence

Area’s 

number of poor 
as percentage 
of total country 

poor

Area’s 
welfare 
measure 
as a % of 
country’s 
average 
welfare 
measure

Area 
(km2)

Population 

density 

(number of 
people per 

km2)

latest census

Area name

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

2007

latest census

439
13,676

5,196
129

944
1,257
38
16
6,795
5
149
858
413
363
2,547
        ..

5
        ..
384

47
230
1,216

6
9,897

259
1,668
120
4,574

29
4,060
1,121
810
3,523
543
120
819
12,516
1,282

236
3,133
38
79
146
3,952
498
5,896
.. 
1,870

1,631
7
155
314
1,065
182
359
140
4,244
254
15,766

142

Bulqize
Santiago del 
Estero
Armavir
Tasmania

Nakhchivan AR
Rajshahi
Gomel
Toledo
Mono
Potosi
Piaui
Kardzhali
Centre Sud
Ruyigi
Siemreap
Extreme-Nord

Newfoundland
Mayo-Dala
Maule

Huetar Atlantic
Marahoue
Viroviticko-
Podravska 
zupanija
Djibouti
Elias Pina

Pastaza
Cabanas
Hiiumaa
Benishangul 
Gumuz
Ogooue-Ivindo
Upper River
Upper East
San Marcos
Labe
Nord-Est
Lempira
Bihar
Jawa Central
Saint Ann

Al-Mafraq
Eastern Province
Naryn
Fianarantsoa
Northern Region
Sikasso
Guidimakha
Oaxaca
West
Gharb-Chrarda-
Beni Hssen
Inhambane
Ohangwena
Far Western
Esteli
Maradi
Jigawa
Azad Kashmir
Ngöbe Buglé
San Pedro
Huancavelica
Region V (Bicol 
region)
Lubelskie

56.2
31.4

52.0
31.1

45.0
56.7
17.3
57.6
58.6
76.6
57.1
19.3
66.1
55.4
53.7
56.3

18.7
79.0
23.1

23.6
56.4
19.8

36.2
74.0

34.7
32.6
11.4
71.0

59.9
80.0
79.6
86.7
66.3
94.0
94.7
41.4
28.4
33.8

29.2
57.6
98.1
81.1
62.5
76.4
71.6
68.0
49.0
23.3

82.6
85.8
41.0
23.4
80.4
89.5
15.6
98.7
51.1
88.7
49.0

21.2

2.8
2.6

9.3
2.8

4.1
28.2
18.5
17.5
8.5
11.8
3.1
3.7
6.1
6.2
11.8
24.9

1.9
4.9
7.4

10.8
5.4
3.6

58.3
1.5

1.6
5.5
1.0
1.1

7.4
15.7
14.9
12.5
15.1
4.2
5.2
12.2
18.3
10.3

13.5
18.5
9.0
24.4
11.9
21.7
10.8
4.8
23.8
9.2

8.6
16.9
12.4
4.5
26.2
5.4
1.0
10.3
8.1
3.5
10.5

7.9

66
38

68
89

90
22
93
74
64
56
31
81
61
62
63
67

77
68
70

38
62
68

92
39

49
45
2
72

55
52
35
39
75
41
43
76
16
61

72
65
65
65
81
78
60
49
79
47

70
38
76
21
64
36
85
15
72
39
63

67

718
136,351

1,241
68,127

5,500
13,218
40,400
4,649
1,396
118,218
251,312
3,209
11,313
2,339
10,299
34,246

405,212
          ..
30,518

9,189
8,500
2,024

600
1,397

29,774
1,104
1,023
49,289

46,075
2,070
8,842
3,791
24,144
1,698
4,290
99,200
32,549
1,213

26,435
159,891
45,200
102,373
26,931
71,741
10,300
93,952

..
8,805

68,615
10,582
19,539
2,230
38,581
23,415
11,639
6,673
20,002
22,131
14,544

25,115

60
6

20
7

65
2,269
38
5
201
6
11
50
43
130
67
80

1
      ..
30

12
59
46

528
46

2
123
10
11

1
88
104
166
33
147
57
837
930
136

9
29
6
33
46
24
14
37
..
182

17
22
112
78
58
186
241
16
16
21
321

89

Area 
(km2)

2007
1,193
203

210
2,432

2,130
30,772
40,800
4,204
79
370,621
248,177
1,349
2,805
696
375
        ..

661,848
        ..
15,782

10,669
14,200
641

2,600
91

9,110
886
4,333
530

20,740
88
2,593
2,126
308
4,595
261
38,863
664
431

8,231
684
20,200
58,283
31,754
267
1,000
1,479
..
1,615

602
36,805
29,398
3,465
670
9,363
205,344
9,633
117
32,137
630

35,728

21.8
18.7

44.7
14.8

49.0
46.7
13.3
24.5
8.9
40.6
17.8
3.2
22.3
37.6
11.9
10.9

13.3
21.0
13.5

17.1
17.9
2.7

92.4
21.5

5.1
6.8
7.9
57.0

23.0
50.0
2.4
11.7
24.4
57.0
57.6
15.0
4.3
16.4

7.8
44.0
33.1
61.7
68.1
28.2
29.0
31.8
26.0
4.0

47.8
23.5
27.1
3.6
26.2
26.2
32.4
22.7
24.8
24.5
5.7

10.8

13.0
5.4

34.2
0.9

25.1
30.0
14.4
21.8
2.5
17.8
12.6
4.4
4.9
3.5
3.6
2.6

8.6
0.01
28.9

34.8
6.1
4.1

7.0
6.2

7.9
12.6
33.7
4.0

35.8
19.2
1.4
4.6
7.6
25.7
0.4
1.7
0.8
16.8

28.6
6.5
9.4
25.3
48.7
5.2
15.3
5.6
22.5
3.0

4.2
5.1
17.1
4.3
2.7
0.6
54.1
29.0
6.2
16.8
2.6

9.1

111
256

124
139

109
157
107
123
185
131
154
111
197
141
249
183

111
295
130

117
160
133

192
159

144
151
228
197

121
183
182
212
140
162
154
140
289
138

124
244
136
158
119
174
130
182
116
159

192
274
119
161
180
162
104
127
135
137
216

163

Economy
Albania
Argentina

Armenia
Australia

Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon

Canada
Chad
Chile

Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia

Djibouti
Dominican 
Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Estonia
Ethiopia

Gabon
Gambia, The
Ghana
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Jamaica

Tirane
Ciudad Autonoma 
de Buenos Aires
Yerevan
Australian Capital 
Territory
Baku
Dhaka
Minsk
Belize
Littoral
Santa Cruz
Sao Paulo
Soﬁ a-city
Centre
Muramvya
Phnom Penh
Douala (capital of 
Littoral)
Alberta
Ennedi
Region 
Metropolitana
Central
Lagunes
Grad Zagreb

Ali Sabieh
Distrito Nacional

Pichincha
San Salvador
Harjumaa
Addis Ababa City

Estuaire
Banjul
Greater Accra
Guatemala
Conakry
Ouest
Islas de la Bahia
Kerala
Jakarta
Saint Andrew and 
Kingston
Amman
Nairobi Province

Jordan
Kenya
Kyrgyz Republic Chuy Oblast
Antananarivo
Madagascar
Southern Region
Malawi
Bamako
Mali
Mauritania
Nouakchott
Distrito Federal
Mexico
Ulaanbaatar
Mongolia
Morocco
Grand Casablanca

Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines

Poland

Maputo (city)
Khomas
Western
Managua
Niamey
Bayelsa
Punjab
Panamá
Asuncion
Lima
National Capital 
region (NCR)
Mazowieckie

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   338
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   338

10/10/08   10:39:35 AM
10/10/08   10:39:35 AM

 

Selected indicators 

339

Leading area: deﬁ ned as the area with the highest measure of welfare 

(income or consumption or gdp) per capita

Lagging area: deﬁ ned as the area with the lowest measure of welfare 

(income or consumption or gdp) per capita

Area’s 

number of poor 
as percentage 
of total country 

poor

Poverty 
Incidence

Area’s 
welfare 
measure 
as a % of 
country’s 
average 
welfare 
measure

Area name

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

Economy
Romania
Russian 
Federation
Rwanda

Bucharest
Saint Petersburg

Prefecture de la 
Ville de Kigali
Western Area

3.0
7.8

12.3

80.8
9.4
19.0

6.0
43.5

19.1
0.5

28.5
22.3
8.7
15.0
5.3
16.6
52.0

2.2
1.1

0.6

19.0
10.3
6.6

3.7
6.9

4.3
1.2

17.4
17.1
1.9
13.6
1.0
4.2
10.0

216
117

379

200
172
186

179
144

188
174

116
146
129
126
241
184
170

Sierra Leone
Slovak Republic Bratislava
South Africa

Gauteng

Sri Lanka
Tajikistan

Tanzania
Thailand

Turkmenistan
Uganda
United States
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia

Colombo
Dushanbe (City)

Dar Es Salaam
Krung Thep Maha 
Nakhon (Bangkok)
Lebap
Central
New Jersey
Capital
Ho Chi Minh city
Sana’a
Lusaka

Population 

density 

(number of 
people per 

km2)

Poverty 
Incidence

Area’s 

number of poor 
as percentage 
of total country 

poor

Area’s 
welfare 
measure 
as a % of 
country’s 
average 
welfare 
measure

latest census

Area name

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

1995–2006a

1,186
197

753

1,707
292
520

3,480
1,873

1,793
13,016

11
.. 
429
518
2,409
4,827
64

North-East
Republic Tyva

Gikongoro

Eastern
Presov
Northern Province 
(Limpopo)
Monaragala
Khatlon 
(Qurghonteppa)
Rukwa
Nong Bua Lam 
Phu
Ahal
Northern
Mississippi
Zuliana
Lai Chau
Al Jawf
Western

25.0
66.5

77.2

80.0
9.7
77.0

37.0
73.3

36.4
35.2

34.8
63.3
21.0
25.2
79.8
40.8
89.0

31.4
0.6

8.0

23.5
14.0
18.0

4.0
44.8

3.8
2.1

12.4
29.9
1.5
15.7
1.7
2.7
9.4

69
56

70

65
73
46

51
79

68
39

79
54
73
83
46
71
59

Area 
(km2)

2007
1,821
23,900

313

557
2,052
17,010

642
300

1,393
1,569

93,800

..

20,168
9,880
2,090
380
21,898

Population 

density 

(number of 
people per 

km2)

latest census

100
8

237

76
88
40

56
87

17
125

6
      ..
23
56
65
12
6

Area 
(km2)

2007
36,850
37,300

1,974

15,553
8,981
123,910

7,133
24,600

68,635
3,859

95,400
          ..
123,515
63,100
9,065
39,500
126,386

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   339
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   339

10/10/08   10:39:36 AM
10/10/08   10:39:36 AM

340 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A4    International integration

People

Ideas

Trade

Countries 
that need a 
visa to visit 
this country 
(number)

2004
192
142
183
192
132
191
105
124
162
  ..
161
132
181
119
140
19
72
179
132
120
167
  ..
191
140
154
139
140
157
147
175
191
191
184
149
174
121
173
181
  ..
114
191
64
192
190
169
125
169
131
169
137
136
132
192
0
130
27
60
120
191
190
132
190
  ..
94
132
132
  ..
174
41
131

Economy
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Channel Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Cote d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Faeroe Islands
Fiji
Finland
France
French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Georgia

Countries 
for which 

this 

country’s 
residents 
need a visa 
(number)

2004
168
159
157
156
89
162
121
88
144
  ..
59
57
143
119
139
155
113
141
54
127
144
  ..
153
110
154
138
85
89
103
147
163
159
157
57
145
156
153
154
  ..
84
161
150
158
162
151
100
145
105
153
80
95
53
159
130
152
139
156
108
159
163
98
163
  ..
131
55
54
  ..
156
135
143

Cost of 
obtaining 
a passport 
relative to 
GDP per 
capita (%)

2005
      ..
2.2
      ..
      ..
      ..
4.9
0.2
0.7
0.0
      ..
0.4
0.3
2.5
0.2
0.3
5.2
0.7
      ..
0.3
0.4
8.6
      ..
      ..
6.7
7.0
0.1
1.3

0.7
12.7
50.9
      ..
11.4
0.3
      ..
      ..
17.7
60.2
      ..
1.5
2.9
1.5
      ..
125.0
8.5
0.4
      ..
2.0
      ..
0.3
0.1
0.4
      ..
1.0
      ..
3.6
1.9
0.4
      ..
      ..
0.2
31.1
      ..
1.6
0.2
0.2
      ..
      ..
6.0
      ..

International 
migration stock 

(% of 

foreigners)

(%)

International 
voice trafﬁ c 
(incoming 

and outgoing, 
minutes per 

person)
(minutes)

International 

Internet 
bandwith 
(bits per 
person)
(bits)

Telephone 
average cost 
of call to the 
US (US$ per 
three minutes) 

(US$)

Total trade 
as share of 

GDP
(%)

Index of 
shipping 
difﬁ culties

(Index)

Average 
tariffs and 
custom 
duties (% 
of import 
value)
(%)

2005
0.1
2.6
0.7
35.0
79.1
0.4
22.0
3.9
7.8
24.4
20.2
15.0
2.2
9.8
40.7
0.7
9.7
12.2
6.9
13.9
2.1
29.6
1.5
1.3
1.0
4.5
0.3
33.2
1.3
5.8
1.3
2.2
0.8
18.9
2.2
35.8
1.9
4.5
45.8
1.4
0.0
0.3
11.2
0.9
7.2
10.2
13.1
14.9
0.7
15.3
4.4
7.2
2.6
6.3
1.7
0.9
0.2
0.3
1.2
0.3
15.0
0.8
11.1
2.0
3.0
10.6
13.1
17.7
15.3
4.3

2000–06a
0.6
160.0
16.9
        ..
        ..
6.7
596.4
32.5
127.8
        ..
213.8
264.7
32.6
585.0
587.1
6.4
565.2
64.0
316.3
178.2
6.4

        ..

40.9
48.7
207.6
74.1
11.7
142.7
71.7
10.8
1.6
9.5
8.8
438.7
139.5
1630.2
2.3
2.0
        ..
48.3
7.3
68.2
33.1
5.3
        ..
126.8
16.9
231.2
30.6
693.2
94.8
318.0
26.7
..
218.5
215.6
30.1
409.9
        ..
8.7
109.0
3.5
        ..
112.1
178.3
182.8
        ..
74.0
        ..
57.5

2000–06a
0.2
3.8
4.8
..
6344.4
11.5
16588.0
689.9
22.5
1794.6
11593.4
6633.5
35.7
278.4
564.3
8.0
2055.3
191.7
11278.5
604.8
5.4
8699.1
33.9
43.3
39.6
16.1
149.9
1453.1
1756.1
15.0
0.5
1.3
8.7
6731.9
46.3
..
0.4
0.5
..
779.6
195.7
560.2
3.3
0.1
0.3
176.2
3.0
1073.7
13.8
593.8
2169.8
34796.1
56.0
419.8
6.1
227.2
126.4
22.9
34.7
1.7
11174.9
0.1
3312.6
87.0
4311.2
3285.5
887.2
152.6
5.6
7.2

2000–06a

2005–06a

0.39
1.34
2.08
    ..
    ..
3.23
    ..
    ..
2.42
    ..
0.68
0.71
4.18
    ..
1.74
2.02
1.95
1.90
0.75
2.59
4.80
    ..
0.66
1.89
3.62
2.88
0.71
    ..
0.57
1.14
2.45
2.94
    ..
    ..
6.08
    ..
1.99
9.11
2.90
2.18
2.90
    ..
    ..
    ..
5.39
1.93
2.25
    ..
7.49
0.33
1.06
0.89
4.73
    ..
0.22
1.75
1.45
2.40
    ..
3.59
0.90
4.01
    ..
2.84
1.80
0.84
3.67
2.77
1.81
0.68

68.1
74.2
71.4
..
..
111.7
130.8
43.9
58.5
..
42.1
109.7
111.3
..
127.0
44.2
117.8
124.1
172.8
125.4
39.6
..
76.8
75.1
72.3
83.8
26.4
96.2
147.0
35.8
58.7
144.6
52.7
72.0
74.6
..
35.5
97.3
..
76.3
72.4
47.3
47.3
70.4
137.0
105.5
92.3
104.6
..
..
148.3
100.8
97.2
107.2
73.5
67.5
61.5
74.0
144.7
58.1
169.3
57.5
..
127.6
82.3
55.1
29.1
89.1
110.2
89.9

2008
174
70
114
    ..
    ..
164
55
107
118
    ..
34
12
173
    ..
    ..
112

137
48
116
124
    ..
149
115
53
145
93
36
89
170
167
139
132
39
51
    ..
172
157
    ..
43
42
105
119
154
171
54
147
96
    ..
    ..
30
2
66
80
35
131
26
68
133
159
7
150
    ..
111
5
25
    ..
106
73
64

2005
11.2
7.6
3.0
..
..
..
..
15.8
3.3
..
1.8
0.0
,,
55.0
3.7
32.6
8.0
7.2

24.5
..
1.5
2.1
0.0
..
..
..
2.4
12.7
..
21.6
..
1.3
..
..
19.4
..
..
1.6
–16.2
8.8
..
27.4
6.6
5.0
43.6
1.6
..
0.7
0.0
..
..
..
13.9

6.4
6.0
..
..
0.0
26.6
..
15.9
0.0
0.0
..
..
..
4.0

Share of 
trade with 
neighboring 
countries (% 
of total trade)

(%)

Average 
2000–2005

..
71.9
10.5
0.0
0.0
..
17.4
35.9
10.4
5.4
0.0
81.3
26.7
0.0
23.7
8.9
22.6
68.9
73.8
14.1
20.4
0.0
..
50.8
57.9
50.2
13.2
7.3
25.5
40.7
14.8
10.2
12.4
73.0
1.1
0.0
16.1

0.0
12.4
15.4
19.2
0.0
..
..
7.6
20.2
50.0
0.4
8.5
61.8
74.9
..
30.5
..
15.4
5.4
29.1
..
4.5
54.6
6.6
3.1
1.3
65.4
62.4
0.0
2.4
4.1
39.4

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   340
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   340

10/10/08   10:39:36 AM
10/10/08   10:39:36 AM

 

Selected indicators 

341

People

Ideas

Trade

Countries 
that need a 
visa to visit 
this country 
(number)

2004
132
171
132
  ..
11
  ..
118
171
176
158
4
128
42
132
132
189
162
188
  ..
107
  ..
123
132
80
137
61
175
21
168
192
89
154
144
192
132
100
127
176
177
117
132
132
0
148
0
123
23
3
172
132
162
169
88
  ..
139
0
149
132
174
  ..
134
0
192
141
0
132
  ..
  ..
146
38

Economy
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guam
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Isle of Man
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao, China
Macedonia, FYR
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua

Countries 
for which 

this 

country’s 
residents 
need a visa 
(number)

2004
54
142
56
  ..
127
  ..
110
146
150
127
157
110
89
85
59
160
148
166
  ..
57
  ..
88
55
126
56
159
141
140
133
163
78
135
143
158
98
169
135
151
163
74
100
55
122
141
156
139
63
134
148
73
144
141
131
  ..
92
146
141
88
155
  ..
147
158
161
145
158
56
  ..
  ..
59
116

Cost of 
obtaining 
a passport 
relative to 
GDP per 
capita (%)

2005
0.3
1.4
0.4
1.0
..
..
1.8
..
..
0.6
..
3.4
0.2
0.3
0.2
3.6
1.9
..
..
0.3
..
0.3
0.2
1.4
0.2
..
..
1.2
..
..
0.3
..
..
11.8
..
4.0
1.5
..
..
..
0.4
0.0
..
..
..
..
1.7
..
..
0.3
..
8.7
0.5
..
1.2
2.5
..
..
..
..
2.1
..
2.3
1.0
26.3
0.2
..
..
0.2
3.0

International 
migration stock 

(% of 

foreigners)

(%)

International 
voice trafﬁ c 
(incoming 

and outgoing, 
minutes per 

person)
(minutes)

International 

Internet 
bandwith 
(bits per 
person)
(bits)

Telephone 
average cost 
of call to the 
US (US$ per 
three minutes) 

(US$)

Total trade 
as share of 

GDP
(%)

Index of 
shipping 
difﬁ culties

(Index)

2005
12.3
7.5
8.8
21.4
10.2
66.9
0.4
4.5
1.2
0.1
0.4
0.4
43.2
3.1
7.8
0.5
0.1
2.9
0.1
14.1
48.6
38.4
4.3
0.7
1.6
41.1
16.5
1.0
2.6
0.2
1.1
65.8
5.6
0.4
19.5
16.4
0.3
1.5
10.5
33.7
4.8
38.0
55.9
6.0
0.3
2.2
6.5
1.0
0.3
2.6
2.6
2.1
1.7
..
0.6
3.2
11.4
75.8
0.4
6.4
0.4
2.1
0.2
7.1
3.0
10.0
26.5
18.4
15.7
0.5

2000–06a
190.8
20.1
181.8
..
624.5
..
194.7
6.8
8.9
118.3
..
96.4
1178.7
105.1
240.0
3.0
5.3
8.8
..
709.5
..
364.2
236.0
233.2
43.4
138.8
26.4
5.6
24.2
..
91.6
..
29.5
6.6
66.7
279.1
18.1
..
65.6
..
49.0
1399.1
497.2
63.3
1.3
4.8
87.9
91.2
7.4
222.4
76.5
20.3
149.8
..
174.0
80.8
109.9
..
4.8
..
65.1
12.7
2.8
58.0
5.6
310.8
..
215.0
361.1
61.7

2000–06a
6863.8
9.3
586.5
106.8
3976.0
..
55.5
0.2
1.2
48.7
16.7
6.0
13438.6
993.3
7289.6
24.3
6.8
53.2
..
5911.6
..
2455.4
2044.0
15822.2
1037.8
57.3
62.5
20.8
5.4
..
1027.8
347.9
38.9
3.5
3229.7
111.0
2.2
0.1
20.6
4298.0
2714.4
20459.0
6491.7
16.7
1.8
1.5
124.5
179.5
25.9
4729.1
26.2
29.6
153.2
..
109.0
54.5
147.4
..
13.3
..
377.1
0.9
1.9
17.8
4.6
20501.3
..
562.9
1106.7
1.1

2000–06a

2005–06a

0.43
0.39
1.09
2.41
    ..
    ..
1.21
4.61
    ..
    ..
2.15
2.52
0.77
1.01
0.84
1.19
2.79
0.55
    ..
0.71
    ..
0.59
0.79
0.87
1.63
1.44
    ..
3.00
8.82
    ..
0.76
1.51
5.40
1.11
1.63
2.19
3.28
    ..
    ..
    ..
1.55
15.96
1.12
    ..
0.59
3.56
0.71
5.86
12.28
0.77
    ..
    ..
1.59
    ..
0.83
6.00
1.46
    ..
4.92
    ..
1.69
1.17
0.17
4.28
2.04
0.32
    ..
3.13
1.30
3.15

84.7
103.0
45.6
..
109.0
..
46.2
67.4
95.4
211.8
57.3
107.3
399.4
155.1
83.1
48.8
56.9
75.2
..
149.9
..
88.4
56.5
108.8
27.3
146.6
91.6
62.2
133.3
..
85.3
98.0
115.7
78.2
108.6
63.6
149.0
99.6
84.1
..
129.8
326.6
150.5
118.3
70.7
46.4
217.0
178.1
72.3
179.6
..
113.7
127.1
..
65.1
..
139.2
..
125.0
128.9
71.4
88.9
..
110.0
45.3
140.6
..
..
58.2
92.1

2008
10
61
65
  ..
52
  ..
116
102
109
101
153
103
3
45
11
79
41
135
175
20
  ..
8
62
92
18
59
178
148
97
  ..
13
99
177
158
19
83
129
98
  ..
  ..
23
32
  ..
72
126
161
21
110
162
  ..
46
152
17
  ..
76
85
122
  ..
168
113
67
140
  ..
144
151
14
  ..
  ..
16
87

Average 
tariffs and 
custom 
duties (% 
of import 
value)
(%)

2005

Share of 
trade with 
neighboring 
countries (% 
of total trade)

(%)

Average 
2000–2005

28.5
0.0
..
..
..
8.9
..
..
..
..
6.3
..
0.0
1.1
14.6
3.0
5.5
..
0.1
..
0.7
..
7.7
..
10.4
6.0
10.2
..
..
3.4
1.3
13.2
..
0.6
7.6
49.5
..
..
..
0.5
..
..
..
24.8
..
5.6
23.6
3.8
0.1
..
..
16.8
..
4.1
..
4.1
..
5.7
..
9.4
..
2.3
31.8
18.2
0.8
..
..
1.7
4.6

63.6
10.7
56.4
0.0
25.9
0.0
21.4
10.1
..
25.2
..
20.6
49.1
26.5
0.7
9.9
4.1
4.8
..
60.6
0.0
0.9
59.4
0.8
0.0
31.8
34.4
13.8
0.0
..
0.0
..
35.8
..
55.0
9.9
66.4
..
8.6
..
48.0
89.1
39.9
45.8
0.0
16.4
22.0
10.7
25.1
19.5
0.0
2.1
0.0
0.0
72.3
0.0
39.7
..
64.7
..
16.6
43.7
..
63.1
60.5
56.4
0.0
0.4
0.0
28.4

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   341
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   341

10/10/08   10:39:38 AM
10/10/08   10:39:38 AM

342 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A4    International integration—continued

People

Ideas

Trade

Countries 
for which 

this 

country’s 
residents 
need a visa 
(number)

Cost of 
obtaining 
a passport 
relative to 
GDP per 
capita (%)

Countries 
that need a 
visa to visit 
this country 
(number)

5.3

2005
19.8
10.0
..
0.3
0.2
4.2
0.7

Economy
Niger
Nigeria
Northern Mariana Islands
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
Sao Tome and Princip
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan, China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
Virgin Islands (U.S.)
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe
a. Data are for the latest year available in the period shown.

2004
167
174
157
132
128
184
0
130
114
163
97
44
132
132
  ..
156
145
183
180
0
132
0
187
151
  ..
0
124
32
131
132
123
192
120
132
114
92
130
122
190
171
137
132
119
160
  ..
  ..
35
136
  ..
0
142
47
126
118
174
0
181
155
104
158
134
184
106
131
185
  ..
  ..
145
18
117

2004
144
149
153
56
141
165
148
107
138
103
135
144
86
57
  ..
136
107
134
156
129
82
155
142
146
  ..
131
139
66
95
92
130
165
118
55
156
120
121
124
166
137
138
54
57
163
  ..
  ..
142
146
  ..
148
135
119
142
126
148
145
139
136
55
52
98
148
137
95
160
  ..
  ..
161
142
141

2.6
0.8
0.5
0.4
..
..
1.1
0.4
41.5
2.1
..
..
0.8
4.1
..
1.1
..
0.2
0.5
0.3
..
..
0.7
0.1
2.4
0.2
0.5
0.6
..
..
0.3
0.2
0.2
..
..
13.4
13.4
1.0
..
..
2.4
0.3
1.1
8.9
..
..
2.7
..
0.2
0.2
..
..
3.4
0.5
2.3
..
..
..
3.7
..

International 
migration stock 

(% of 

foreigners)

(%)

International 
voice trafﬁ c 
(incoming 

and outgoing, 
minutes per 

person)
(minutes)

International 

Internet 
bandwith 
(bits per 
person)
(bits)

Telephone 
average cost 
of call to the 
US (US$ per 
three minutes) 

(US$)

Total trade 
as share of 

GDP
(%)

Index of 
shipping 
difﬁ culties

(Index)

Average 
tariffs and 
custom 
duties (% 
of import 
value)
(%)

2005
0.9
0.7
6.5
7.4
24.4
2.1
15.1
3.2
0.4
2.9
0.1
0.5
1.8
7.2
10.7
78.3
0.6
8.4
1.3
5.0
33.4
4.8
27.5
2.8
6.4
5.8
2.2
42.4
2.3
8.4
0.7
3.4
2.4
11.0
1.9
9.3
5.3
8.7
1.8
1.2
4.0
12.4
22.3
5.2
..
4.7
2.1
1.6
0.6
3.0
1.1
2.9
0.4
1.8
4.6
1.8
14.5
70.9
9.0
12.9
2.5
4.8
0.5
3.8
0.0
33.7
46.3
1.3
2.4
3.9

2000–06a
2.0
2.3
..
192.9
189.1
10.5
..
54.9
8.0
31.3
99.1
28.3
60.6
178.1
..
842.9
49.1
15.3
..
149.7
6448.4
51.3
215.8
39.4
..
..
..
1045.4
90.0

23.2
..
27.6
173.3
27.9
571.6
217.9
288.5
12.2
276.7
47.5

664.8
44.0
292.3
10.4
1.4
14.1
..
21.5
..
375.7
72.6
27.1
6.0
3.1
56.6
..
262.2
279.5
120.7
12.4
..
23.1
8.4
..
65.7
12.0
6.9
24.9

2000–06a
2.3
1.1
..
9304.8
173.6
4.6
..
286.6
1.0
83.1
366.6
38.0
560.2
829.0
511.2
943.6
1503.2
100.3
7.4
49.0
5419.6
25.8
126.1
102.7
94.6
307.3
0.1
7052.4
2912.6
1254.7
17.1
0.4
18.8
2775.7
25.1
42.5
94.9
25.0
5.4
439.3
0.9
17468.5
9609.1
8.0
6569.5
0.3
0.4
156.2
..
15.6
20.1
370.2
126.4
630.7
15.7
4.4
17.3
2371.4
13062.0
3306.6
484.0
8.7
23.2
50.3
84.1
414.0
198.7
0.3
10.9
4.2

2000–06a

2005–06a

8.77
1.49
    ..
0.31
1.87
1.03
    ..
3.64
4.32
0.90
1.80
1.20
1.35
1.04
    ..
1.95
0.82
2.03
2.43
1.36
    ..
5.11
2.40
1.02
    ..
3.78
    ..
0.69
1.06
0.65
    ..
    ..
0.79
0.60
2.11
    ..
    ..
3.97
39.18
1.33
2.97
0.41
0.32
4.81
0.51
7.84
3.17
0.67
    ..
3.98
1.09
2.19
2.28
2.40
    ..
3.21
1.65
1.73
0.77
    ..
0.52
13.95
7.45
0.84
1.95
    ..
1.17
2.39
1.41
4.36

38.9
91.1
..
75.0
99.2
38.6
153.5
144.5
134.8
115.2
48.5
94.0
82.0
70.0
181.2
101.7
78.5
55.1
43.2
78.1
..
..
92.9
69.8
73.4
244.5
59.4
473.5
176.0
139.1
102.2
..
63.1
58.4
74.8
113.5
117.6
125.0
42.8
76.3
167.5
94.5
89.0
75.0
134.0
80.7
55.1
143.5
..
83.9
54.3
108.0
108.7
64.1
126.2
44.4
97.3
170.6
61.6
26.8
60.2
63.4
100.3
57.6
150.3
..
85.4
79.4
67.8
129.8

2008
163
138
  ..
4
104
94
121
9
82
123
71
57
40
31
95
  ..
38
155
166
108
  ..
91
33
136
58
84
130
1
90
69
74
  ..
134
47
60
22
88
75
143
86
146
6
37
127
29
176
100
50
78
81
44
49
28
56
  ..
141
120
24
27
15
125
165
142
156
63
  ..
77
128
160
169

2005
..
..
..
0.2
2.8
13.0
..
8.6
26.4
8.2
5.7
20.4
0.4
0.0
..
3.2
3.0
29.2
..
..
1.7
..
..
33.1
..
10.7
27.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
..
..
4.2
0.0
14.6
31.3
..
..
..
..
47.7
..
1.1
..
..
11.1
..
6.2
..
..
..
4.8
6.2
1.1
..
20.5
4.3
..
..
1.1
5.1
..
..
4.9
..
..
..
..
9.0
..

Share of 
trade with 
neighboring 
countries (% 
of total trade)

(%)

Average 
2000–2005

20.7
4.4
0.0
18.8
32.1
11.1
0.0
9.7
1.7
41.4
21.5
0.0
52.7
28.2
0.0
9.2
18.7
33.1
43.2
6.5
..
3.1
3.2
9.1
..
0.0
2.3
14.7
66.8
67.1
0.0
..
2.9
64.7
0.6
15.5
22.8
33.8
5.2
4.4
80.0
25.9
61.4
16.0
10.8
..
8.5
7.5
..
28.1
0.0
10.3
26.3
9.3
..
26.1
40.6
..
55.2
30.7
36.2
..
0.0
14.6
11.7
0.0

7.6
14.1
53.9

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   342
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   342

10/10/08   10:39:39 AM
10/10/08   10:39:39 AM

 

Table A5    Other indicators

Selected indicators 

343

Terrain characteristics

Geography and people

Economy
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Channel Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Cote d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Faeroe Islands
Fiji
Finland
France
French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Georgia

plains

(% of total 
land area)

lowlands
(% of total 
land area)

plateaus
(% of total 
land area)

hills

(% of total 
land area)

mountains
(% of total 
land area)

2007
0.9
0.0
12.4
0.0
0.0
16.9
0.0
33.0
0.0
35.4
29.7
0.0
0.7
100.0
57.3
67.1
0.0
37.8
19.2
1.4
13.3
100.0
0.0
26.3
0.0
49.4
21.1
0.3
0.0
34.4
0.0
6.5
2.2
6.7
0.7
100.0
17.6
35.9
0.0
0.0
3.9
24.0
0.0
17.1
29.1
0.0
0.0
6.8
0.0
5.8
0.0
30.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
7.4
5.7
0.0
0.0
0.1
39.8
0.7
0.0
0.0
2.0
3.9
0.0
5.2
100.0
0.0

2007
0.0
0.4
4.2
100.0
0.0
3.0
100.0
9.4
0.0
64.6
23.3
0.2
31.2
0.0
42.7
20.3
100.0
58.7
45.5
51.5
15.5
0.0
0.4
8.4
6.0
0.0
20.8
75.7
21.9
0.1
0.0
74.3
2.0
20.8
40.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
100.0
9.0
10.2
23.1
0.0
0.3
1.2
1.9
0.1
25.3
41.3
80.1
44.1
69.9
18.6
0.0
31.2
6.1
27.8
1.1
20.6
11.6
60.2
0.3
100.0
43.2
71.7
41.0
9.2
21.3
0.0
0.0

2007
8.7
0.0
51.7
0.0
0.0
47.0
0.0
8.7
0.0
0.0
33.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.5
0.0
7.7
65.2
0.0
0.0
14.8
0.0
48.5
37.6
0.0
0.0
65.6
15.9
0.0
44.7
27.9
0.0
0.0
78.5
42.4
0.0
0.0
8.9
9.7
12.4
61.1
58.6
0.0
0.1
60.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
9.7
41.4
0.0
18.6
0.0
0.0
14.1
0.0
0.0
6.3
3.0
6.2
52.0
0.0
0.0

2007
0.3
33.6
5.1
0.0
0.0
6.0
0.0
11.0
0.0
0.0
8.8
26.7
5.6
0.0
0.0
10.8
0.0
0.0
35.3
39.5
6.0
0.0
16.2
13.1
23.0
0.0
8.0
0.0
45.4
0.0
0.0
17.9
20.7
21.3
31.7
0.0
0.0
3.7
0.0
26.9
12.7
12.5
26.2
1.0
8.2
62.0
72.9
6.4
25.7
14.2
55.9
0.0
30.0
100.0
33.2
28.1
16.4
52.5
7.7
14.6
0.0
4.8
0.0
56.8
19.2
30.1
84.5
15.7
0.0
6.9

2007
90.1
66.0
26.6
0.0
100.0
27.1
0.0
37.9
100.0
0.0
4.8
73.1
62.5
0.0
0.0
1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
83.4
37.3
71.0
2.1
12.5
23.9
32.7
0.0
84.1
1.4
30.4
23.2
26.8
0.0
3.9
18.0
0.0
64.1
64.2
30.7
61.4
20.5
2.8
36.1
27.0
0.6
32.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
51.4
0.0
35.5
48.7
8.7
46.4
53.1
73.8
0.0
80.1
0.0
0.0
0.8
21.9
0.0
5.7
0.0
93.0

Population living 
at less than 25 kms 
from an international 

border

(%)

Population living 

at less than 

75 kms from an 

international border

(%)

Population 

living at less than 

25 kms from a 

coastline

(%)

Population 

living at less than 

75 kms from a 

coastline

(%)

2000
11.2
29.2
3.3
0.0
100.0
5.2
0.0
5.0
70.5
0.0
0.0
38.7
26.9
0.0
0.0
28.2
0.0
18.3
53.4
37.9
42.7
0.0
54.8
5.0
40.5
34.2
1.0
98.9
19.1
14.4
60.9
18.1
17.5
17.6
0.0
0.0
31.4
23.6
0.0
3.3
1.1
4.7
0.0
24.9
50.5
8.2
11.3
68.1
1.3
0.0
38.3
2.0
86.3
0.0
3.7
5.2
0.2
25.4
35.6
16.7
13.7
3.0
0.0
0.0
4.7
12.0
0.0
13.2
92.2
21.8

2000
37.1
83.2
13.0
0.0
100.0
11.5
0.0
10.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
97.4
61.9
0.0
0.0
78.8
0.0
53.5
100.0
94.2
96.0
0.0
99.9
22.5
90.1
66.2
2.4
100.0
80.5
42.2
100.0
57.0
40.2
61.8
0.0
0.0
58.5
51.5
0.0
48.9
3.7
11.1
0.0
46.5
91.8
29.4
30.0
98.1
11.4
0.0
88.0
9.1
100.0
0.0
17.3
15.8
0.5
96.7
77.9
56.2
48.1
9.1
0.0
0.0
14.2
23.2
0.0
32.7
100.0
91.7

2000
0.0
41.9
35.8
100.0
0.0
23.0
100.0
33.3
0.0
100.0
69.1
0.0
0.0
100.0
100.0
25.3
100.0
0.0
18.1
57.9
27.7
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.8
0.0
25.4
80.8
9.4
0.0
0.0
4.9
15.8
20.6
100.0
100.0
0.0
0.0
100.0
26.2
11.6
11.5
100.0
0.6
19.8
22.1
26.0
31.2
63.5
90.1
0.0
94.8
79.8
100.0
61.2
33.7
16.4
26.7
41.3
11.1
64.4
0.0
100.0
88.3
48.1
20.8
100.0
44.9
74.2
15.2

2000
0.0
87.2
63.4
100.0
0.0
26.9
100.0
42.8
0.0
100.0
87.5
0.0
0.0
100.0
100.0
48.1
100.0
0.0
69.9
94.4
46.0
100.0
0.0
0.0
12.4
0.0
46.5
99.3
15.8
0.0
0.0
12.1
20.8
23.1
100.0
100.0
0.0
0.0
100.0
53.1
21.8
24.9
100.0
1.8
21.5
97.7
33.7
36.3
100.0
100.0
0.0
100.0
99.1
100.0
96.7
49.0
36.9
94.7
59.5
51.8
78.5
0.0
100.0
100.0
67.4
36.2
100.0
53.0
85.7
28.1

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   343
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   343

10/10/08   10:39:39 AM
10/10/08   10:39:39 AM

344 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A5    Other indicators—continued

Terrain characteristics

Geography and people

Economy
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guam
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Iraq
Ireland
Isle of Man
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao, China
Macedonia, FYR
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua

plains

(% of total 
land area)

lowlands
(% of total 
land area)

plateaus
(% of total 
land area)

hills

(% of total 
land area)

mountains
(% of total 
land area)

2007
3.1
15.2
0.0
0.3
0.2
0.0
0.3
5.9
71.9
9.7
0.0
2.1
0.0
15.8
0.0
13.2
13.3
1.1
19.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
22.7
9.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
7.9
0.0
0.0
8.5
0.0
0.0
2.1
23.5
0.0
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
2.9
99.0
59.3
0.0
96.2
56.0
0.0
0.0
5.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
6.5
2.8
22.4
0.0
40.0
74.1
10.9
0.0
7.9

2007
45.2
41.8
7.4
3.0
99.8
100.0
19.1
11.9
24.6
49.6
0.8
12.4
100.0
66.6
9.6
17.8
30.5
4.3
27.2
100.0
100.0
31.1
14.5
23.3
17.3
0.0
22.4
10.3
0.0
19.4
35.2
70.9
0.0
11.0
91.5
0.0
0.0
45.9
11.4
0.0
96.5
0.0
100.0
0.0
20.2
0.3
48.2
0.0
2.4
100.0
0.0
13.4
5.3
100.0
12.9
100.0
85.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.8
30.2
18.8
0.9
5.5
58.3
25.9
4.7
19.1
53.2

2007
4.6
24.0
0.0
33.6
0.0
0.0
7.6
23.7
0.0
16.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.4
0.1
0.3
35.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
53.3
27.4
10.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.2
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
31.8
52.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
36.6
0.0
0.0
29.6
0.0
0.0
5.4
0.0
14.6
0.0
14.3
0.0
6.7
6.6
0.0
26.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2007
34.3
19.0
50.6
8.1
0.0
0.0
22.8
20.9
3.5
18.7
67.1
40.0
0.0
16.4
43.2
22.8
32.3
4.9
12.0
0.0
0.0
49.1
49.8
76.7
64.6
9.8
7.9
3.3
0.0
34.5
52.5
0.0
0.0
25.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
17.1
2.6
0.0
0.0
100.0
0.0
0.0
31.0
6.0
29.5
0.0
1.8
0.0
0.0
1.1
94.2
0.0
14.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
17.8
28.4
31.7
3.0
19.5
1.8
0.0
84.5
28.3
23.5

2007
12.8
0.0
41.9
54.9
0.0
0.0
50.2
37.6
0.0
5.1
32.2
45.4
0.0
1.2
47.2
18.7
23.8
89.4
6.4
0.0
0.0
19.8
35.7
0.0
18.0
36.9
19.6
66.4
0.0
46.1
12.3
0.0
99.8
63.7
0.0
100.0
100.0
3.2
9.7
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
100.0
44.7
93.7
19.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
62.0
0.0
0.0
100.0
85.7
98.7
69.5
28.3
46.6
47.4
75.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
52.6
15.4

Population living 
at less than 25 kms 
from an international 

border

(%)

Population living 

at less than 

75 kms from an 

international border

(%)

Population 

living at less than 

25 kms from a 

coastline

(%)

Population 

living at less than 

75 kms from a 

coastline

(%)

2000
15.2
14.7
7.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
25.0
26.0
10.2
16.3
19.8
49.4
30.5
0.0
5.6
0.1
6.0
9.2
7.5
0.0
90.6
6.8
0.0
0.0
33.6
14.2
8.5
0.0
12.8
1.3
13.7
55.3
49.0
19.4
35.0
60.5
28.2
1.2
100.0
28.7
100.0
100.0
67.5
0.0
34.3
8.2
0.0
12.6
0.0
0.0
22.4
0.0
0.0
5.8
0.0
52.7
100.0
5.8

4.6
8.9
3.5
26.8
44.1
33.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.6

2000
52.0
33.3
27.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
57.2
63.3
96.5
23.3
63.3
77.6
100.0
91.4
0.0
16.1
0.7
21.3
28.7
31.4
0.0
100.0
28.4
0.0
0.0
100.0
45.8
32.0
0.0
28.9
37.3
100.0
94.9
91.3
94.3
100.0
100.0
55.2
4.8
100.0
87.1
100.0
100.0
100.0
0.0
98.8
25.1
0.0
38.1
0.0
0.0
46.8
0.0
0.0
8.0
0.0
100.0
100.0
18.1

13.2
34.6
15.2
54.1
95.2
85.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
39.1

2000
7.3
25.9
81.4
100.0
100.0
100.0
5.6
19.0
60.9
56.9
80.9
22.0
100.0
0.0
99.2
10.3
52.2
2.2
0.7
73.4
100.0
66.4
45.2
91.3
69.3
1.5
0.0
6.1
100.0
43.9
62.3
88.5
0.0
0.0
50.0
84.3
0.0
39.7
73.6
0.0
9.1
0.0
100.0
0.0
23.2
0.0
59.0
100.0
0.0
100.0
100.0
27.0
100.0
100.0
11.2
100.0
0.0
100.0
0.0

39.5
32.7
26.0
6.0
0.0
53.8
100.0
100.0
87.0
17.3

2000
12.6
39.9
96.4
100.0
100.0
100.0
28.5
26.4
86.5
81.5
99.8
46.1
100.0
0.0
100.0
19.7
90.4
5.5
5.1
98.0
100.0
95.2
68.3
100.0
95.3
1.8
0.0
7.5
100.0
89.2
70.7
97.7
0.0
0.0
73.5
100.0
0.0
54.7
86.5
0.0
14.8
0.0
100.0
0.0
45.0
0.0
95.6
100.0
0.0
100.0
100.0
32.6
100.0
100.0
23.5
100.0
0.0
100.0
0.0

59.7
52.1
42.7
6.7
0.0
88.6
100.0
100.0
98.3
63.2

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   344
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   344

10/10/08   10:39:41 AM
10/10/08   10:39:41 AM

 

Selected indicators 

345

Terrain characteristics

Geography and people

plains

(% of total 
land area)

lowlands
(% of total 
land area)

plateaus
(% of total 
land area)

hills

(% of total 
land area)

mountains
(% of total 
land area)

Economy
Niger
Nigeria
Northern Mariana Islands
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
Sao Tome and Princip
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan, China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, RB
Vietnam
Virgin Islands (U.S.)
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe

2007
50.2
16.1
0.0
0.0
31.3
21.9
0.0
0.2
13.1
51.3
24.5
0.1
10.8
0.0
0.0
79.2
0.9
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.7
84.2
1.4
35.4
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
13.1
1.8
0.0
20.3
0.0
0.0

0.0
29.7
9.5
0.0
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.5
5.0
..
0.0
89.3
0.0
1.2
0.0
36.5
10.2
23.0
29.8
2.3
12.6
17.4
23.5
0.3
11.0
8.4
0.0
0.0
2.5
20.3
2.2

2007
0.0
21.8
100.0
9.8
17.9
10.2
100.0
30.8
17.1
22.3
4.2
26.4
63.5
37.4
38.9
20.8
37.9
36.0
0.0
8.0
0.0
0.6
16.4
5.2
10.0
18.8
64.6
53.3
100.0
5.2
0.0
51.4
19.2
3.7
2.8
43.6
100.0
71.5

0.0
0.3
65.2
5.3
37.8
0.0
5.1
0.0
5.1
41.1
..
58.2
10.7
100.0
40.5
4.3
34.6
0.0
51.1
50.7
67.4
13.1
82.5
27.2
7.9
31.9
25.3
100.0
10.1
1.8
0.0
0.0

2007
41.8
35.4
0.0
0.0
14.4
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
23.6
8.5
0.0
12.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.6
6.4
15.5
0.0
0.0
31.2
0.0
48.0
2.2
0.0
0.0
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
36.1
29.1
3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
51.1
16.8
0.0
4.4
0.0
0.0
0.3
29.2
2.3
..
14.8
0.0
0.0
17.4
0.6
11.1
40.8
18.1
0.0
0.0
24.6
0.0
12.4
1.4
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.5
46.4
35.9

2007
0.0
17.5
0.0
42.7
20.0
15.6
0.0
53.6
25.9
2.8
11.0
56.4
10.4
36.4
61.1
0.0
21.5
22.1
0.0
92.0
100.0
35.9
83.6
3.4
3.6
39.3
0.0
43.7
0.0
67.5
49.4
48.4
11.6
7.4
31.6
36.0
0.0
28.5

100.0
3.1
8.5
8.0
34.4
0.5
12.6
0.7
7.2
38.4
..
27.0
0.0
0.0
36.4
9.1
8.1
0.0
4.3
19.5
30.3
12.8
0.0
17.6
90.4
27.2
30.5
0.0
89.9
3.7
0.0
0.0

2007
7.9
9.2
0.0
47.5
16.3
51.4
0.0
15.4
43.9
0.0
51.9
17.0
3.2
26.2
0.0
0.0
39.1
25.5
84.5
0.0
0.0
32.3
0.0
23.6
0.0
40.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
27.2
50.6
0.0
20.1
58.0
61.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
15.9
0.0
86.7
21.1
99.5
82.3
99.0
57.1
13.2
..
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.4
86.0
9.7
49.1
3.5
0.0
0.0
36.9
0.0
19.4
0.0
25.9
35.9
0.0
0.0
70.4
33.3
61.9

Population living 
at less than 25 kms 
from an international 

border

(%)

Population living 

at less than 

75 kms from an 

international border

(%)

Population 

living at less than 

25 kms from a 

coastline

(%)

Population 

living at less than 

75 kms from a 

coastline

(%)

2000
21.5
5.3
0.0
5.2
4.7
13.8
0.0
8.6
1.0
53.0
2.5
0.0
12.8
6.4
0.0
0.4
20.1
3.5
57.8
0.0
100.0
0.0
2.8
20.2
..
0.0
15.0
 ..
57.0
68.4
0.0
8.0
5.0
4.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

5.9
3.4
60.5
1.0
63.8
25.3
0.0
49.9
10.9
10.5
..
72.5
0.0
0.0
6.6
4.2
27.4
21.3
10.1
23.3
0.7
3.1
10.7
55.8
0.0
3.7
9.9
0.0
100.0
2.0
22.7
11.7

2000
55.5
24.4
0.0
48.7
15.1
42.2
0.0
17.2
3.4
73.1
11.8
0.0
44.0
32.4
0.0
18.6
61.5
13.0
100.0
0.0
100.0
0.0
9.0
39.9
..
0.0
68.1
..
100.0
100.0
0.0
25.2
14.8
15.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

14.2
14.1
100.0
7.1
100.0
85.8
0.0
96.2
32.3
34.4
..
100.0
0.0
0.0
22.4
12.7
54.9
53.1
41.1
83.7
2.1
6.9
17.5
86.6
0.0
9.8
44.7
0.0
100.0
7.9
52.6
28.8

2000
0.0
12.3
100.0
82.3
66.5
7.1
100.0
78.8
35.8
0.0
39.0
78.3
5.9
65.1
94.1
94.0
3.4
8.0
0.0

0.0
100.0
27.0
48.6
..
100.0
35.0
100.0
0.0
4.3
100.0
30.5
23.4
48.1
47.3
100.0
100.0
100.0

1.8
86.8
0.0
63.9
0.0
11.3
71.4
0.0
13.6
18.2
..
26.8
100.0
100.0
55.8
37.8
0.0
0.0
11.2
54.8
45.5
28.9
65.7
0.0
100.0
35.4
42.0
100.0
34.8
13.3
0.0
0.0

2000
0.0
20.9
100.0
92.4
81.5
8.3
100.0
100.0
53.3
0.0
50.4
98.9
11.2
89.8
100.0
100.0
5.1
10.7
0.0
 
0.0
100.0
38.3
74.4
..
100.0
55.3
100.0
0.0
14.0
100.0
52.7
35.9
63.5
88.0
100.0
100.0
100.0

2.6
97.3
0.0
82.9
0.0
28.5
100.0
0.0
17.3
37.6
..
38.6
100.0
100.0
79.4
52.7
0.0
0.0
16.4
84.4
87.6
41.4
77.4
0.0
100.0
64.8
73.2
100.0
66.3
43.7
0.0
0.0

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   345
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   345

10/10/08   10:39:42 AM
10/10/08   10:39:42 AM

346 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Sources and Definitions
Table A1    Geography and access

Column
1

Location

Source
CIA Factbook

2

3

4
5
6

7

8
9

10

Surface area (sq. km)

World Bank

Arable land (% of land area)

World Bank

Forest land (% of land area)
Coastline (kms)
Land boundaries (kms)

World Bank
CIA Factbook
CIA Factbook

Airports with paved runway 
(number)

CIA Factbook

Ports and terminals (number)
Rail density (rail km per 100 km2)

CIA Factbook
CIA Factbook

Road density (road km per 100 km2) WB and CIA 

Notes
This entry includes rounded latitude and longitude ﬁ gures for the purpose of ﬁ nding the 
approximate geographic center of an entity and is based on the Gazetteer of Conventional Names, 
Third Edition, August 1988, US Board on Geographic Names and on other sources.
Surface area is a country’s total area, including areas under inland bodies of water and some 
coastal waterways. Food and Agriculture Organization, Production Yearbook and data ﬁ les.
Arable land includes land deﬁ ned by the FAO as land under temporary crops (double-cropped 
areas are counted once), temporary meadows for mowing or for pasture, land under market or 
kitchen gardens, and land temporarily fallow.
Forest area is land under natural or planted stands of trees, whether productive or not.
Total length of the boundary between the land area (including islands) and the sea.
Total length of all land boundaries and the individual lengths for each of the contiguous border 
countries. When available, ofﬁ cial lengths published by national statistical agencies are used. 
Because surveying methods may differ, country border lengths reported by contiguous countries 
may differ.
Total number of airports with paved runways (concrete or asphalt surfaces) by length. For airports 
with more than one runway, only the longest runway is included according to the following ﬁ ve 
groups - (1) over 3,047 m, (2) 2,438 to 3,047 m, (3) 1,524 to 2,437 m, (4) 914 to 1,523 m, and (5) under 
914 m. Only airports with usable runways are included in this listing. Not all airports have facilities 
for refueling, maintenance, or air trafﬁ c control.
Number of ports
Total route length of the railway network and of its component parts by gauge (broad, standard, 
narrow, and dual) divided by the country size (in % terms).
Total length of the road network and includes the length of the paved and unpaved portions divided 
by the country size (in % terms).
Population weighted average distance to the capital city

Factbook
WDR 2009 Team

11 National average distance to capital 

city (kms)

Table A2    Urbanization

Column
12 Agglomeration index

13 % of urban population to total 

population (2000)

14 % of urban population to total 

population (2005)

15 % of urban population to total 

population (2015)

16

17

Population density (number of 
people per km2)
Pop. in cities > 1 million (% of total 
pop.)

18 % of Population in largest city (% of 

urban pop.)

Source
WDR 2009 Team

Notes
See chapter 1

UN

UN

UN

Urban population as a % of total population in 2000

Urban population as a % of total population in 2005

Urban population as a % of total population in 2015

World Bank

Number of people per km2

World Bank

Proportion of the population living in cities bigger than 1 million people

World Bank

Proportion of the population living in the largest city (as % of the urban population)

19 % of urban population with water 

access

World Bank

20 % of rural population with water 

access

World Bank

21 % of urban population with 

sanitation services

World Bank

22 % of rural population with sanitation 

services

World Bank

Percentage of the urban population with reasonable access to an adequate amount of water from 
an improved source, such as a household connection, public standpipe, borehole, protected well 
or spring, and rainwater collection. Reasonable access is deﬁ ned as the availability of at least 20 
liters a person a day from a source within one kilometer of the dwelling.

Percentage of the urban population with reasonable access to an adequate amount of water from 
an improved source, such as a household connection, public standpipe, borehole, protected well 
or spring, and rainwater collection. Reasonable access is deﬁ ned as the availability of at least 20 
liters a person a day from a source within one kilometer of the dwelling.

Percentage of the urban population with at least adequate access to excreta disposal facilities that 
can effectively prevent human, animal, and insect contact with excreta. Improved facilities range 
from simple but protected pit latrines to ﬂ ush toilets with a sewerage connection. To be effective, 
facilities must be correctly constructed and properly maintained.

Percentage of the rural population with at least adequate access to excreta disposal facilities that 
can effectively prevent human, animal, and insect contact with excreta. Improved facilities range 
from simple but protected pit latrines to ﬂ ush toilets with a sewerage connection. To be effective, 
facilities must be correctly constructed and properly maintained.

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   346
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   346

10/10/08   10:39:43 AM
10/10/08   10:39:43 AM

 

Selected indicators 

347

Table A3    Territorial development

Column
23

Leading area: Area name

Source
WDR 2009 Team

Notes
Name of the leading area. Leading area is deﬁ ned as the area with the highest measure of welfare 
(income or consumption or gdp) per capita

24

25

26

27

28

Leading area: Poverty Incidence

WDR 2009 Team

The poverty incidence is the proportion of the population living below the poverty line

Leading area: Poor in area as % of 
total country poor

Leading area: Welfare measure in 
area (as a % of country’s average 
welfare measure )

Leading area: Area (km2)

Leading area: Population density 
(number of people per km2)

WDR 2009 Team

Proportion of the country’s poor residing in the leading area

WDR 2009 Team

Leading measure of welfare (income, consumption or gdp) per capita, relative to the national 
measure of welfare (income, consumption or gdp) per capita

Statoids

Statoids

Surface area of the leading area

People per km2 in the leading area

29

Lagging area: Area name

WDR 2009 Team

Name of the lagging area. Lagging area is deﬁ ned as the area with the lowest measure of welfare 
(income or consumption or gdp) per capita

30

31

32

33

34

Lagging area: Poverty Incidence

WDR 2009 Team

The poverty incidence is the proportion of the population living below the poverty line

Lagging area: Poor in area as % of 
total country poor

Lagging area: Welfare measure in 
area (as a % of country’s average 
welfare measure )

Lagging area: Area (km2)

Lagging area: Population density 
(number of people per km2)

WDR 2009 Team

Proportion of the country’s poor residing in the lagging area

WDR 2009 Team

Lagging measure of welfare (income, consumption or gdp) per capita, relative to the national 
measure of welfare (income, consumption or gdp) per capita

Statoids

Statoids

Surface area of the lagging area

People per km2 in the leading area

Table A4    International integration

Column
35

Countries that need a visa to visit 
this country

Source
Neumayer (2005) Number of countries for which their nationals need a visa to visit this country.

Notes

36

37

38

39

40

41

Countries for which this country’s 
residents need a visa

Cost of obtaining a passport relative 
to GDP per capita

Neumayer (2005) Number of countries for which the nationals of this country need a visa.

McKenzie (2005)

The price of a standard passport standardized using the GNI per capita

International migration stock (% of 
foreigners)

World Bank

Migration stock is the number of people born in a country other than that in which they live. It also 
includes refugees

International voice trafﬁ c (incoming 
and outgoing, minutes per person)

World Bank

International voice trafﬁ c is the sum of international incoming and outgoing telephone trafﬁ c (in 
minutes).

International internet bandwith (bits 
per person)

World Bank

International Internet bandwidth is the contracted capacity of international connections between 
countries for transmitting Internet trafﬁ c.

Telephone average cost of call to 
the US (US$ per three minutes)

World Bank

Cost of international call to U.S. is the cost of a three-minute, peak rate, ﬁ xed line call from the 
country to the United States.

42

Total trade as share of GDP

World Bank

43

Index of shipping difﬁ culties

44 Average tariffs and custom duties 

(% of import value)

WB Doing 
Business

World Bank

Trade is the sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of gross 
domestic product.

Indicator of shipping difﬁ culties (border delays, read carpet, fees, red tape, etc)

Average tariffs 

45

Share of trade with neighboring 
countries (% of total trade)

WDR 2009 Team

The proportion of trade with neighboring countries as a proportion of the total trade of the country. 
Calculation using COMTRADE data.

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   347
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   347

10/10/08   10:39:43 AM
10/10/08   10:39:43 AM

348 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table A5    Other indicators

Column
46 % of terrain: plains

47 % of terrain: lowlands

48 % of terrain: plateaus

49 % of terrain: hills

Source
Nelson (2007)

Notes
% of terrain: plains

Nelson (2007)

% of terrain: lowlands

Nelson (2007)

% of terrain: plateaus

Nelson (2007)

% of terrain: hills

50 % of terrain: mountains

Nelson (2007)

% of terrain: mountains

51

52

53

54

Population living less than 25 kms 
from an international border

Population living less than 75 kms 
from an international border

Population living less than 25 kms 
from a coastline

Population living less than 75 kms 
from a coastline

WDR 2009 Team

Proportion of the total population living in less than 25 kms from an international border

WDR 2009 Team

Proportion of the total population living in less than 75 kms from an international border

WDR 2009 Team

Proportion of the total population living in less than 25 kms from a coastline

WDR 2009 Team

Proportion of the total population living in less than 75 kms from a coastline

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   348
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   348

10/10/08   10:39:43 AM
10/10/08   10:39:43 AM

Selected World Development 
Indicators

In this year’s edition, development data 

are presented in ﬁ ve tables showing the 
comparative  socioeconomic  data  for 
more  than  130  economies  for  the  most 
recent year for which data are available and, 
for some indicators, for an earlier year. An 
additional  table  presents  basic  indicators 
for 77 economies with sparse data or with 
populations of less than 3 million. 

The indicators presented here are a selec-
tion from more than 800 included in World 
Development  Indicators  2008.  Published 
annually,  World  Development  Indicators 
(WDI) reﬂ ects a comprehensive view of the 
development  process.  The  WDI’s  six  sec-
tions recognize the contribution of a wide 
range of factors: progress on the Millennium 
Development  Goals  and  human  capital 
development, environmental sustainability, 
macroeconomic  performance,  private  sec-
tor development and the investment climate, 
and the global links that inﬂ uence the exter-
nal environment for development. 

World Development Indicators is comple-
mented by a separately published database 
that gives access to more than 1,000 data 
tables  and  800  time-series  indicators  for 
222 economies and regions. This database 
is available through an electronic subscrip-
tion (WDI Online) or as a CD-ROM. 

Data sources and methodology
Socioeconomic  and  environmental  data 
presented  here  are  drawn  from  several 
sources:  primary  data  collected  by  the 
World  Bank,  member  country  statistical 
publications, research institutes, and inter-
national organizations such as the United 
Nations  and  its  specialized  agencies,  the 

International Monetary Fund (IMF), and 
the Organisation for Economic Co-opera-
tion  and  Development  (OECD)  (see  the 
Data Sources following the Technical notes 
for a complete listing). Although interna-
tional  standards  of  coverage,  deﬁ nition, 
and  classiﬁ cation  apply  to  most  statistics 
reported  by  countries  and  international 
agencies, there are inevitably differences in 
timeliness and reliability arising from dif-
ferences  in  the  capabilities  and  resources 
devoted to basic data collection and compi-
lation. For some topics, competing sources 
of data require review by World Bank staff 
to ensure that the most reliable data avail-
able are presented. In some instances, where 
available data are deemed too weak to pro-
vide reliable measures of levels and trends 
or do not adequately adhere to international 
standards, the data are not shown.

The  data  presented  are  generally  con-
sistent  with  those  in  World  Development 
Indicators  2008.  However,  data  have  been 
revised  and  updated  wherever  new  infor-
mation has become available. Differences 
may also reﬂ ect revisions to historical series 
and  changes  in  methodology.  Thus  data 
of different vintages may be published in 
different editions of World Bank publica-
tions. Readers are advised not to compile 
data  series  from  different  publications  or 
different editions of the same publication. 
Consistent  time-series  data  are  available 
on World Development Indicators 2008 CD-
ROM and through WDI Online. 

All dollar ﬁ gures are in current U.S. dollars 
unless otherwise stated. The various methods 
used to convert from national currency ﬁ gures 
are described in the Technical notes.

349

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   349
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   349

10/10/08   10:39:44 AM
10/10/08   10:39:44 AM

350 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Because the World Bank’s primary busi-
ness is providing lending and policy advice 
to its low- and middle-income members, the 
issues covered in these tables focus mainly 
on these economies. Where available, infor-
mation  on  the  high-income  economies  is 
also provided for comparison. Readers may 
wish to refer to national statistical publica-
tions and publications of the OECD and the 
European  Union  for  more  information  on 
the high-income economies

Classification of economies 
and summary measures
The  summary  measures  at  the  bottom  of 
most tables include economies classiﬁ ed by 
income  per  capita  and  by  region.  Gross 
national income (GNI) per capita is used to 
determine the following income classiﬁ ca-
tions:  low-income,  $935  or  less  in  2007; 
 middle-income, $936 to $11,455; and high-
income, $11,456 and above. A further divi-
sion at GNI per capita $3,705 is made between 
lower-middle-income  and  upper-middle- 
income  economies.  The  classification  of 
economies based on per capita income occurs 
annually, so the country composition of the 
income groups may change annually. When 
these changes in classiﬁ cation are made based 
on  the  most  recent  estimates,  aggregates 
based on the new income classiﬁ cations are 
recalculated for all past periods to ensure that 
a consistent time series is maintained. See the 
table on classiﬁ cation of economies at the end 
of this volume for a list of economies in each 
group (including those with populations of 
less than 3 million).

Summary  measures  are  either  totals 
(indicated by t if the aggregates include esti-
mates  for  missing  data  and  nonreporting 
countries, or by an s for simple sums of the 
data  available),  weighted  averages  (w),  or 
median values (m) calculated for groups of 
economies. Data for the countries excluded 
from  the  main  tables  (those  presented  in 
table  5)  have  been  included  in  the  sum-
mary  measures,  where  data  are  available, 
or by assuming that they follow the trend of 
reporting countries. This gives a more con-
sistent aggregated measure by standardizing 
country  coverage  for  each  period  shown. 
Where missing information accounts for a 

third or more of the overall estimate, how-
ever, the group measure is reported as not 
available. The section on Statistical methods 
in the Technical notes provides further infor-
mation  on  aggregation  methods.  Weights 
used to construct the aggregates are listed 
in the technical notes for each table.

Terminology and country coverage
The  term  country  does  not  imply  political 
independence but may refer to any territory 
for which authorities report separate social or 
economic statistics. Data are shown for econ-
omies as they were constituted in 2007, and 
historical data are revised to reﬂ ect current 
political  arrangements.  Throughout  the 
tables,  exceptions  are  noted.  Unless  other-
wise  noted,  data  for  China  do  not  include 
data for Hong Kong, China; Macao, China; 
or Taiwan, China. Data for Indonesia include 
Timor-Leste through 1999 unless otherwise 
noted. Montenegro declared independence 
from Serbia and Montenegro on June 3, 2006. 
When  available,  data  for  each  country  are 
shown separately. However, some indicators 
for Serbia continue to include data for Monte-
negro through 2005; these data are footnoted in 
the tables. Moreover, data for most indicators 
from 1999 onward for Serbia exclude data for 
Kosovo, a territory within Serbia that is cur-
rently  under  international  administration 
pursuant to UN Security Council Resolution 
1244 (1999); any exceptions are noted. 

Technical notes
Because data quality and intercountry com-
parisons are often problematic, readers are 
encouraged to consult the Technical notes, 
the table on Classiﬁ cation of Economies by 
Region and Income, and the footnotes to the 
tables. For more extensive documentation, 
see World Development Indicators 2008.

Readers may ﬁ nd more information on 
the  WDI  2008,  and  orders  can  be  made 
online, by phone, or fax as follows:

For  more  information  and  to  order 
online:  http://www.worldbank.org/data/
wdi2006/index.htm. 

To  order  by  phone  or  fax:  1-800-645-

7247 or 703-661-1580; Fax 703-661-1501.

To order by mail: The World Bank, P.O. 

Box 960, Herndon, VA 20172-0960, U.S.A.

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   350
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   350

10/10/08   10:39:44 AM
10/10/08   10:39:44 AM

 

Selected world development indicators 

351

Classiﬁ cation of economies by region and income, FY2009

East Asia and the Paciﬁ c 
American Samoa
Cambodia
China
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. People’s Rep. of
Lao PDR
Malaysia
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Fed. States of
Mongolia
Myanmar
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Vanuatu
Vietnam
 
Europe and Central Asia 
Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia, FYR
Moldova
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Russian Federation
Serbia
Tajikistan
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
 

UMC
LIC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC 

 
LMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
LIC
UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
 

Latin America and the Caribbean
Argentina
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela, R.B.

Middle East and North Africa
Algeria
Djibouti
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Libya
Morocco
Syrian Arab Republic
Tunisia
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep. of

UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC
UMC

LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
UMC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
 

South Asia
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa 
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
 

LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LMC
 
 
LMC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
UMC
UMC
LIC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LIC
LIC
UMC
LMC
LMC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
LIC
 

High income OECD
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
 

Other high income
Andorra
Antigua and Barbuda
Aruba
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Barbados
Bermuda
Brunei Darussalam
Cayman Islands
Channel Islands
Cyprus
Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Faeroe Islands
French Polynesia
Greenland
Guam
Hong Kong, China
Isle of Man
Israel
Kuwait
Liechtenstein
Macao, China
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
Northern Mariana Islands
Oman
Puerto Rico
Qatar
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Slovenia
Taiwan, China
Trinidad and Tobago
United Arab Emirates
Virgin Islands (U.S.)

This table classiﬁ es all World Bank member economies and all other economies with populations of more than 30,000. Economies are divided among income groups according to 
2007 GNI per capita, calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. The groups are low income (LIC), $935 or less; lower middle income (LMC), $936–3,705; upper middle income 
(UMC), $3,706–11,455; and high income, $11,456 or more.
Source: World Bank data.

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   351
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   351

10/10/08   10:39:44 AM
10/10/08   10:39:44 AM

352 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 1    Key indicators of development

Population 

composition 

age 

% 

ages 0–14 

Population

Average 
annual % 
growth 
2000–07

Density 

people per 
sq. km 2007

    ..
0.5
1.5
2.9
1.0
–0.4
1.3
0.5
0.9
1.8
–0.4
0.5
3.2
1.9
0.3
1.4
–0.8
3.1
3.5
1.8
2.2
1.0
1.7
3.4
1.1
0.6
0.5
1.4
3.0
2.3
1.8
1.7
–0.2
0.1
0.3
1.6
1.2
1.8
1.4
3.9
2.6
0.3
0.7
–1.0
0.0f
2.2
0.4
2.5
1.9
1.6
1.9
–0.2
1.4
1.3
1.5
    ..
2.0
1.9
0.6
0.1
2.5
0.6
2.6
0.5
0.9
1.6
1.2
2.9
2.0
–0.5
2.8
2.6
1.9
3.0
2.8
1.0
–1.3
1.2
2.3
0.9

    ..
116
14
14
14
106
3
101
104
1,218
47
352
82
9
74
23
70
54
331
82
40
4
7
9
22
142
6,647
42
28
11
87
61
79
134
129
202
48
76
331
48
79
17
112
63
236
103
87
123
38
349
63
112
378
125
44
      ..
63
331
202
351
65
6
66
492
27
25
401
39
4
54
34
148
81
10
3
54
115
69
27
74

Millions 

2007
      ..
3
34
17
40
3
21
8
9
159
10
11
9
10
4
192
8
15
8
14
19
33
4
11
17
1,320
7
46
62
4
4
19
4
10
5
10
13
75
7
5
79
5
62
4
82
23
11
13
9
10
7
10
1,123
226
71
      ..
4
7
59
128
6
15
38
49
5
6
4
4
6
3
20
14
27
12
3
105
4
31
21
49

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
    Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar

2007
  ..
25
28
46
26
19
19
15
23
34
15
17
44
37
17
27
13
46
44
36
41
17
42
46
24
21
14
29
47
42
27
41
15
14
19
33
32
33
33
43
44
17
18
18
14
38
14
43
43
37
39
15
32
28
27
..
21
28
14
14
36
24
43
18
30
38
28
47
30
16
43
47
30
48
40
30
19
29
44
26

GNIa

PPP GNIb

$ billions 

2007
10.1
10.5
122.5
43.6
238.9
7.9
755.8
355.1
21.9
75.1
40.9
432.5
5.1
12.0
14.3
1,133.0
35.1
6.4
0.9
7.9
19.5
1,300.0
1.7
5.8
138.6
3,120.9
218.9
149.9
8.6
5.8
24.8
17.5
46.4
149.4
299.8
34.6
41.2
119.4
19.5
1.1
17.6
234.8
2,447.1
9.3
3,197.0
13.9
331.7
32.6
3.7
5.4
11.3
116.3
1,069.4
373.1
246.5
        ..
210.2
157.1
1,991.3
4,813.3
16.3
78.3
25.6
955.8
3.1
3.4
23.7
0.6
55.5
33.5
6.3
3.5
173.7
6.1
2.6
878.0
4.3
69.4
6.8
        ..

$ per 
capita 
2007
        ..c
3,290
3,620
2,560
6,050
2,640
35,960
42,700
2,550
470
4,220
40,710
570
1,260
3,790
5,910
4,590
430
110
540
1,050
39,420
380
540
8,350
2,360
31,610
3,250
140
1,540
5,560
910
10,460
14,450
54,910
3,550
3,080
1,580
2,850
230
220
44,400
38,500e
2,120
38,860
590
29,630
2,440
400
560
1,600
11,570
950
1,650
3,470
        ..g
48,140
21,900
33,540
37,670
2,850
5,060
680
19,690
590
580
5,770
150
9,010
9,920
320
250
6,540
500
840
8,340
1,260h
2,250
320
        ..c

$ billions 

2007
27.2d
20.9
258.8d
74.9
513.0
17.7
700.6
316.8
54.6
212.7
104.2
373.1
11.9
39.4
28.6
1,795.7
85.4
16.5
2.8
24.5
39.2
1,164.2
3.2
13.8
209.0
7,083.5
305.1
306.2
17.9
10.4
47.7d
30.7
66.8
225.5
200.6
61.8d
93.9
407.6
38.6d
2.5d
61.7
186.5
2,065.4
21.0
2,782.7
31.2
364.1
60.4d
10.5
11.1d
25.7d
175.2
3,078.7
807.9
766.9
        ..
161.7
186.0
1,775.3
4,420.6
29.5
150.1
57.8
1,201.1
10.2
11.4
41.2
1.1
90.6d
58.0
18.2
10.5
360.2
12.8
6.3
1,324.6
11.1
123.3
14.8
        ..

$ per 
capita 
2007
        ..d
6,580
7,640d
4,400
12,990
5,900
33,340
38,090
6,370
1,340
10,740
35,110
1,310
4,140
7,280
9,370
11,180
1,120
330
1,690
2,120
35,310
740
1,280
12,590
5,370
44,050
6,640
290
2,750
10,700d
1,590
15,050
21,820
36,740
6,340d
7,040
5,400
5,640d
520d
780
35,270
33,470
4,770
33,820
1,330
32,520
4,520d
1,120
1,150d
3,620d
17,430
2,740
3,580
10,800
      ..
37,040
25,930
29,900
34,600
5,160
9,700
1,540
24,750
1,950
1,940
10,050
290
14,710d
17,180
920
750
13,570
1,040
2,010
12,580
2,930
3,990
690
      ..

Gross 

domestic 
product 
per capita 
% growth 
2006–07

    ..
5.7
1.6
20.1
7.6
14.0
2.9
3.0
18.0
4.8
8.5
2.1
1.5
2.8
6.8
4.2
6.9
1.0
–0.3
8.4
1.3
1.7
2.3
–2.1
4.1
11.2
5.3
6.2
3.5
–3.6
4.8
–0.1
5.6
5.0
1.4
7.0
0.9
5.2
2.8
–2.3
8.4
4.0
1.6
13.4
2.6
4.3
3.6
3.2
–0.6
1.4
4.5
1.5
7.7
5.1
6.2
    ..
2.8
3.4
0.8
2.1
2.6
7.3
4.1
4.7
6.4
5.3
1.0
4.3
4.8
9.4
3.7
4.7
4.0
–0.3
–0.6
2.3
4.1
1.1
5.0
4.1

Life expectancy at 

birth

Male 
years 
2006
  ..
73
71
41
71
68
79
77
70
63
63
77
55
63
72
69
69
50
48
57
50
78
43
49
75
70
79
69
45
54
76
47
73
73
76
69
72
69
69
55
51
76
77
67
76
59
77
66
54
59
66
69
63
66
69
  ..
77
78
78
79
71
61
52
75
64
63
70
44
71
65
57
47
72
52
62
72
65
69
42
59

Female 
years 
2006
  ..
80
73
44
79
75
83
83
75
65
74
82
57
67
77
76
76
53
50
61
51
83
46
52
81
74
85
76
47
56
81
49
79
80
80
75
78
73
75
60
54
83
84
75
82
60
82
74
57
62
73
77
66
70
72
  ..
82
82
84
86
74
72
55
82
72
65
74
46
77
77
61
48
76
56
66
77
72
73
43
65

Adult 
literacy 
rate % 
ages 15 
and older 

2005
    ..
99
70
67
97
99
    ..
    ..
    ..
47
    ..
    ..
35
87
97
89
98
24
59
74
68
    ..
49
26
96
91
    ..
93
67
85
95
49
98
    ..
    ..
87
91
71
81
    ..
36
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
58
96
69
29
    ..
80
    ..
61
90
82
    ..
    ..
    ..
98
    ..
91
    ..
74
    ..
    ..
69
    ..
52
84
100
71
    ..
89
24
51
92
99
52
    ..
90

Carbon 
dioxide 
emissions 
per capita 
metric tons 

2004
0.0
1.2
6.0
0.5
3.7
1.2
16.2
8.5
3.8
0.3
6.6
9.7
0.3
0.8
4.0
1.8
5.5
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
20.0
0.1
0.0
3.9
3.9
5.5
1.2
0.0
1.0
1.5
0.3
5.3
11.5
9.8
2.1
2.3
2.2
0.9
0.2
0.1
12.6
6.2
0.9
9.8
0.3
8.7
1.0
0.2
0.2
1.1
5.7
1.2
1.7
6.4
3.0
10.4
10.5
7.7
9.8
3.1
13.3
0.3
9.7
1.1
0.2
4.1
0.1
10.3
3.9
0.2
0.1
7.0
0.1
0.9
4.3
2.0
1.4
0.1
0.2

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   352
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   352

10/22/08   4:45:04 PM
10/22/08   4:45:04 PM

 

Selected world development indicators 

353

Population

Average 
annual % 
growth 
2000–07

Density 

people per 
sq. km 2007

2.0
0.4
1.3
1.3
3.5
2.4
0.7
2.3
1.8
2.3
1.9
1.2
2.0
–0.1
0.5
–0.6
–0.5
2.5
2.3
2.6
–0.3i
3.7
1.9
0.0f
3.0
1.1
1.6
0.4
2.1
0.4
0.7
2.7
1.3
2.5
0.7
2.8
1.0
1.3
1.4
3.2
–0.8
4.2
0.5
0.9
0.1
1.2
1.7
1.3
3.8
3.0
1.9
0.8
1.2w
2.2
1.0
1.1
0.7
1.3
0.8
0.0f
1.3

197
484
16
46
11
162
15
211
45
14
15
22
295
124
116
94
9
395
12
64
95i
82
6,660
112
14
39
90
309
16
22
189
108
48
46
125
121
66
96
11
157
80
52
252
33
19
63
31
275
643
42
16
35
51w
61
57
100
20
58
121
19
28

Millions 

2007
28
16
4
6
14
148
5
162
3
6
6
28
88
38
11
22
142
10
24
12
7i
6
5
5
9
48
45
20
39
9
8
20
7
40
64
7
10
74
5
31
46
4
61
302
3
27
27
85
4
22
12
13
6,612s
1,296
4,260
3,437
823
5,556
1,914
445
563

Population 

composition 

ages 0–14 

age 

% 

2007
38
18
21
37
48
44
19
36
30
40
35
31
35
15
16
15
15
43
34
42
18
43
18
16
44
32
15
23
40
17
16
36
38
44
21
43
25
27
30
49
14
20
18
20
23
32
31
28
45
45
46
38
28w
39
27
27
24
29
23
19
29

GNIa

PPP GNIb

$ billions 

2007
9.7
750.5
121.7
5.5
4.0
137.1
360.0
141.0
18.4
5.4
10.2
96.2
142.6
374.6
201.1
132.5
1,071.0
3.1
373.5
10.2
35.0
1.5
149.0
63.3
        ..
274.0
1,321.8
30.8
37.0
421.3
452.1
35.0
3.1
16.3
217.4
2.4
32.8
592.9
        ..
10.5
118.4
        ..
2,608.5
13,886.5
21.2
19.7
201.2
67.2
4.5
19.4
9.5
4.5
52,621.4t
748.8
12,234.7
6,485.0
5,749.6
12,985.9
4,173.5
2,693.7
3,118.0

$ billions 

$ per 
capita 
2007
340
45,820
28,780
980
280
930
76,450
870
5,510
850
1,670
3,450
1,620
9,840
18,950
6,150
7,560
320
15,440
820
4,730i
260
32,470
11,730
        ..c
5,760
29,450
1,540
960
46,060
59,880
1,760
460
400j
3,400
360
3,200
8,020
        ..g
340
2,550
        ..k
42,740
46,040
6,380
730
7,320
790
1,230
870
800
340

2007
29.2
647.1
111.4
14.1d
9.0
262.5
252.8
417.5
35.4d
11.8d
26.8
201.9
327.8
593.3
219.0
236.6
2,039.1
8.4
554.3
20.3
75.5
3.9
222.7
104.3
        ..
454.8
1,351.1
84.0
72.6
327.9
325.3
87.0
11.5
48.7
503.1
5.2
73.0
893.1
21.0d
28.5
315.9
        ..
2,097.9
13,829.0
36.6
65.3d
327.5
216.9
        ..
49.3
14.6
        ..
7,958w 65,144.4t
1,935.2
25,353.6
15,613.9
9,765.9
27,283.9
9,449.8
4,947.7
5,245.9

578
2,872
1,887
6,987
2,337
2,180
6,051
5,540

$ per 
capita 
2007
1,040
39,500
26,340
2,520d
630
1,770
53,690
2,570
10,610d
1,870d
4,380
7,240
3,730
15,590
20,640
10,980
14,400
860
22,910
1,640
10,220
660
48,520
19,330
      ..
9,560
30,110
4,210
1,880
35,840
43,080
4,370
1,710
1,200
7,880
800
7,130
12,090
4,350d
920
6,810
    ..
34,370
45,850
11,040
2,430d
11,920
2,550
      ..
2,200
1,220
    ..
9,852w
1,494
5,952
4,543
11,868
4,911
4,937
11,115
9,321

Gross 

domestic 
product 
per capita 
% growth 
2006–07

0.8
3.3
2.3
2.9
–0.1
4.0
2.4
4.2
9.4
4.2
4.6
7.8
5.3
6.7
1.7
6.4
8.8
3.0
1.2
1.9
6.9
4.6
3.3
10.3
    ..
4.4
2.0
6.5
7.8
1.8
2.2
4.0
6.2
4.5
4.1
–0.5
5.1
3.2
    ..
2.9
8.2
4.4
2.3
1.5
7.3
7.9
6.6
7.2
–4.9
0.6
4.0
–6.0
2.6w
4.3
6.9
8.6
5.1
6.5
9.6
6.7
4.5

Life expectancy at 

birth

Male 
years 
2006
63
78
78
70
57
46
78
65
73
55
69
69
69
71
75
69
59
44
71
61
70i
41
78
70
47
49
78
72
57
79
79
72
64
51
66
56
72
69
59
50
62
77
77
75
72
64
72
68
71
61
41
43
66w
56
67
67
67
64
69
64
70

Female 
years 
2006
64
82
82
76
56
47
83
66
78
60
74
74
74
80
82
76
73
47
75
65
76i
44
82
78
49
53
84
78
60
83
84
76
69
53
75
60
76
74
67
51
74
82
81
81
80
71
77
73
74
64
42
42
70w
58
71
70
74
68
73
74
76

Adult 
literacy 
rate % 
ages 15 
and older 

2005
49
    ..
    ..
77
29
69
    ..
50
92
57
93
88
93
    ..
94
97
99
65
83
39
    ..
35
93
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
91
61
    ..
    ..
81
99
69
93
53
74
87
    ..
67
99
89
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
93
    ..
92
54
    ..
89
82w
61
90
89
93
79
91
97
90

Carbon 
dioxide 
emissions 
per capita 
metric tons 

2004
0.1
8.7
7.7
0.7
0.1
0.8
19.1
0.8
1.8
0.4
0.7
1.2
1.0
8.0
5.6
4.2
10.6
0.1
13.7
0.4
    ..
0.2
12.5
6.7
    ..
9.4
7.7
0.6
0.3
5.9
5.5
3.7
0.8
0.1
4.3
0.4
2.3
3.2
8.8
0.1
7.0
37.8
9.8
20.6
1.7
5.3
6.6
1.2
    ..
1.0
0.2
0.8
4.3w
0.6
3.2
2.6
5.5
2.6
3.3
7.1
2.6

Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R.B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
    Lower middle income
    Upper middle income
Low and middle income
    East Asia & Paciﬁ c
    Europe & Central Asia
     Latin America & the 

  Caribbean

313
1,520
800
1,056

    Middle East & North Africa
    South Asia
    Sub-Saharan Africa
High income
a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. b. PPP is purchasing power parity; see Technical notes. c. Estimated to be low income ($935 or less). d.The estimate is based on 
regression; others are extrapolated from the latest International Comparison Program benchmark estimates. e. The GNI and GNI per capita estimates include the French overseas 
departments of  French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Réunion. f. Less than 0.05. g. Estimated to be lower middle income ($936 to $3,705). h. Excludes data for Transnistria. i. 
Excludes data for Kosovo and Metohija. j. Data refer to mainland Tanzania only. k. Estimated to be high income ($11.456 or more). 

875.6
1,338.6
761.6
39,682.1

2,314.7
3,856.7
1,496.1
38,133.5

7,385
2,537
1,870
36,100

2,794
880
952
37,566

3.8
1.1
0.9
13.1

36
318
34
32

4.0
7.0
3.7
2.0

1.8
1.6
2.5
0.7

32
33
43
18

68
63
49
76

72
66
52
82

73
58
59
99

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   353
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   353

10/22/08   5:30:50 PM
10/22/08   5:30:50 PM

354 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 2    Millennium Development Goals: eradicating poverty and improving lives

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Share of poorest 
quintile in national 

consumption or 

income 

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
    Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar

% b

1992–2005

  ..
8.2c
7.0c
..
3.1d,e
8.5c
5.9e
8.6e
7.4c
8.8c
8.8c
8.5e
7.4c
1.5e
7.0c
2.9e
8.7c
6.9c
5.1c
6.8c
5.6c
7.2e
2.0c
..
3.8e
4.3e
5.3e
2.9e
..
..
4.1e
5.2c
8.8c
10.3e
8.3e
4.1e
3.3c
8.9c
2.7e
..
9.1c
9.6e
7.2e
5.4c
8.5e
5.6c
6.7e
3.9e
7.0c
2.4e
3.4e
8.6c
8.1c
7.1c
6.5c
..
7.4e
5.7e
6.5e
10.6e
6.7c
7.4c
6.0c
7.9e
8.9c
8.1c
..
..
..
6.8c
4.9c
7.0c
4.4e
6.1c
6.2c
4.3c
7.8c
6.5c
5.4c
..

Prevalence of 

child malnutrition 

% of children 

under 5

1990
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
8.9
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
8.4
    ..
    ..
11.1
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
24.1
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
2.3
    ..
31.0
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
4.8
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
35.5
24.4
    ..
    ..
    ..
13.9
    ..
8.1
    ..
    ..

2000–07b

    ..
17.0
10.2
27.5
2.3
4.2
    ..
    ..
14.0
39.2
1.3
    ..
21.5
5.9
1.6
3.7
1.6
35.2
38.9
28.4
15.1
    ..
21.8
33.9
    ..
6.8
    ..
5.1
33.6
11.8
    ..
20.2
    ..
2.1
    ..
4.2
6.2
5.4
6.1
34.5
34.6
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
18.8
    ..
17.7
22.5
18.9
8.6
    ..
43.5
24.4
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
3.6
    ..
16.5
    ..
    ..
36.4
3.4
22.8
    ..
    ..
36.8
18.4
    ..
30.1
30.4
3.4
3.2
9.9
21.2
29.6

Achieve 
universal 
primary 
education 
Primary 

completion ratea 

%

Promote gender 

equality 

Ratio of girls to 
boys enrolllments 

in primary and 

secondary schoola 

%

Reduce child 

mortality 
Under-ﬁ ve 

mortality rate 

per 1,000

Contraceptive 
Prevalence rate 

Combat 
HIV/AIDS 
and other 
diseases 

Improve maternal health

Births attended 

by skilled health staff

% of total

% of married 
women ages 

15–49 

HIV prevalence 
% of population 

ages 15–49

1991
    ..
    ..
80
35
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
49
94
79
21
    ..
    ..
93
84
20
46
    ..
53
    ..
27
18
    ..
105
102
70
46
54
79
43
    ..
    ..
98
    ..
    ..
    ..
41
    ..
26
97
104
    ..
100
61
99
    ..
17
27
64
93
64
91
91
58
    ..
    ..
104
101
72
    ..
    ..
98
    ..
46
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
33
29
91
13
34
88
    ..
48
26
    ..

2006
  ..
96
85
  ..
97
91
  ..
103
92
72
95
87
64
101
  ..
106
98
31
36
87
52
  ..
24
31
95
  ..
100
105
  ..
73
89
43
92
94
101
83
106
98k
88
49
46k
97
  ..
85
97
71
103
77
64
  ..
89
96
86
99
101
  ..
96
101
100
  ..
99
101k
93
101k
99
75
80
63
  ..
93
57
55
98
49
47
104
98
84
42
95

1991
  ..
96
83
  ..
  ..
  ..
101
95
100
  ..
  ..
101
49
  ..
  ..
  ..
99
62
82
73
83
99
60
42
100
87
103
108
  ..
85
101
65
102
98
101
  ..
  ..
81
102
  ..
68
109
102
98
99
79
99
  ..
45
94
106
100
70
93
85
78
104
105
100
101
101
102
94
99
  ..
76
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
98
81
101
57
71
97
106
70
71
97

2006
  ..
97
99
  ..
104
104
97
97
96
103
101
98
73
98
  ..
103
97
80
89
89
83
98
  ..
61
99
100
98
104
  ..
90
102
  ..
102
101
101
104
100
95
99
72
83k
102
100
103
98
95k
98
92
74
  ..
109
99
91
98
105
  ..
103
101
99
100
102
99k
96
96k
100
85
103
  ..
105
100
96
100
104
74
102
99
103
87
85
101

1990
  ..
45
69
260
29
56
10
10
105
149
24
10
185
125
22
57
19
206
190
116
139
8
173
201
21
45
  ..
35
205
103
18
153
12
13
9
65
57
91
60
147
204
7
9
46
9
120
11
82
235
152
58
17
115
91
72
53
9
12
9
6
40
60
97
9
75
163
37
235
41
13
168
221
22
250
133
53
37
89
235
130

2006
    ..
17
38
260
16
24
6
5
88
69
13
4
148
61
15
20
14
204
181
82
149
6
175
209
9
24
    ..
21
205
126
12
127
6
4
5
29
24
35
25
74
123
4
4
32
4
120
4
41
161
80
27
7
76
34
34
    ..
5
5
4
4
25
29
121
5
41
75
30
235
18
8
115
120
12
217
125
35
19
37
138
104

1990
    ..
    ..
77
    ..
96
    ..
100
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
43
97
72
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
58
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
50
    ..
82
    ..
    ..
98
    ..
100
    ..
    ..
93
    ..
37
52
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
40
    ..
    ..
31
23
45
    ..
    ..
32
    ..
54
    ..
    ..
    ..
100
87
    ..
50
98
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
57
55
    ..
    ..
40
    ..
    ..
31
    ..
    ..

2000–07b

1990

2000–07b

..
100
95
45
99
98
100
..
100
20
100
..
79
67
100
97
99
54
34
44
63
100
53
14
100
98
100
96
74k
86
99
57
100
100
..
96
75
74
92
28
6
100
..
92
100
50
..
41
38
26
67
100
47
72
90
..
100
..
99
100
100
100
42
100
98
19
98
51
..
100
51
54
98
41
57
83
100
63
48
68

..
..
47
..
..
..
..
..
..
31
..
78
..
30
..
59
..
..
..
..
16
..
..
..
56
71
86
66
8
..
..
..
..
78
78
56
53
38
47
..
4
77
81
..
75
13
..
..
..
10
47
..
43
50
49
14
60
68
..
58
40
..
27
77
..
..
..
..
..
..
17
13
50
..
3
..
..
42
..
17

..
60
61
6
..
53
..
..
55
58
73
..
17
58
36
..
..
17
9
40
29
..
19
3
..
87
..
78
21k
44
96
13
69
..
..
61
73
59
67
8
15
..
..
47
..
17
..
43
9
32
65
..
56
57
74
..
..
..
..
56
56
51
39
..
48
32
58
10
..
..
27
42
..
8
8
71
68
63
17
34

2005
    ..
0.2
0.1
3.7
0.6
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
<0.1
0.3
0.3
1.8
0.1
<0.1
0.5
<0.1
2.0
3.3
1.6
5.5g
0.3
10.7
3.5
0.3
0.1h
    ..
0.6
3.2
5.3
0.3
7.1
<0.1
0.1
0.2
1.1
0.3
<0.1
0.9
2.4
1.4i
0.1
0.4
0.2
0.1
2.3
0.2
0.9
1.5
2.2j
1.5
0.1
0.9
0.1
0.2
    ..
0.2
0.2
0.5
<0.1
0.2
0.1
6.1
<0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
    ..
0.2
0.2
0.5
14.1
0.5
1.7
0.7
0.3
1.1
0.1
16.1
1.3

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   354
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   354

10/10/08   10:39:48 AM
10/10/08   10:39:48 AM

 

Selected world development indicators 

355

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Share of poorest 
quintile in national 

consumption or 

income 

% b

1992–2005

6.0c
7.6e
6.4e
5.6c
2.6c
5.0c
9.6e
9.1c
2.5e
4.5c
2.4e
3.7e
5.4c
7.4c
5.8e
8.2c
6.1c
5.3c
..
6.6c
8.3c,f
6.5c
5.0e
8.8e
..
3.5c
7.0e
7.0c
..
9.1e
7.6e
..
7.8c
7.3c
6.3c
..
6.0c
5.3c
6.1c
5.7c
9.0c
..
6.1e
5.4e
4.5d,e
7.2c
3.3e
7.1c
..
7.2c
3.6c
4.6c

Prevalence of 

child malnutrition 

% of children 

under 5

1990
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
41.0
35.1
    ..
39.0
    ..
    ..
2.8
8.8
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
24.3
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
25.1
    ..
21.2
8.5
    ..
    ..
19.7
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
21.2
8.0

      ..w
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..

    ..

2000–07b

38.8
    ..
    ..
7.8
39.9
27.2
    ..
31.3
    ..
    ..
    ..
5.2
20.7
    ..
    ..
3.5
    ..
18.0
    ..
14.5
1.8
24.7
3.3
    ..
32.8
    ..
    ..
22.8
38.4
    ..
    ..
8.5
    ..
16.7
7.0
    ..
    ..
3.5
    ..
19.0
4.1
    ..
    ..
1.1
6.0
4.4
    ..
20.2
    ..
41.3
23.3
14.0
23.9w
28.9
22.9
25.2
    ..
24.9
13.3
    ..
5.1

    ..

Achieve 
universal 
primary 
education 
Primary 

completion ratea 

%

Promote gender 

equality 

Ratio of girls to 
boys enrolllments 

in primary and 

secondary schoola 

%

Reduce child 

mortality 
Under-ﬁ ve 

mortality rate 

per 1,000

Contraceptive 
Prevalence rate 

Combat 
HIV/AIDS 
and other 
diseases 

Improve maternal health

Births attended 

by skilled health staff

% of total

% of married 
women ages 

15–49 

HIV prevalence 
% of population 

ages 15–49

1991
51
  ..
100
42
18
  ..
100
  ..
86
46
68
  ..
86
98
95
96
  ..
35
55
42
  ..
  ..
  ..
96
  ..
76
  ..
102
42
96
53
89
  ..
62
  ..
35
74
90
  ..
  ..
94
103
  ..
  ..
94
  ..
43
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
97
79w
49
82
83
88
77
101
90
82

1991
59
97
100
109
53
77
102
    ..
    ..
80
98
96
100
101
103
99
104
92
84
69
    ..
67
95
    ..
    ..
104
104
102
77
102
97
85
    ..
97
97
59
86
81
    ..
82
    ..
104
102
100
    ..
94
105
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
92

2006
76
    ..
    ..
73
33
76
96
62
94
    ..
95
101
94
97
104
101
94
35
    ..
49
    ..
81k
    ..
93
    ..
100
103
108
47
    ..
88
115
106
85k
    ..
67
120
96
    ..
54
105
100
    ..
95
99
100
96
    ..
95
60
84
    ..
86w         ..w
65
93
91
101
85
98
98
100

76
86
83
99
84
90
98
99

77

90

79

2006
93
98
103
102
70
83
100
78
101
..
99
101
102
99
101
100
99
102
..
92
..
86k
..
100
..
100
103
..
89
100
97
95
88
..
104
73
104
90
..
98
99
101
102
100
106
98k
103
..
104
66
93
97
95w
88
97
96
100
94
100
97
101

93

1990
142
9
11
68
320
230
9
130
34
94
41
78
62
18
14
31
27
176
44
149
..
290
8
14
203
60
9
32
120
7
9
38
115
161
31
149
52
82
99
160
25
15
10
11
23
74
33
53
40
139
180
76
92w
164
75
81
46
101
56
49
55

2006
59
5
6
36
253
191
4
97
23
73
22
25
32
7
5
18
16
160
25
116
8
270
3
8
145
69
4
13
89
3
5
14
68
118
8
108
23
26
51
134
24
8
6
8
12
43
21
17
22
100
182
105
72w
135
49
54
26
79
29
26
26

1990
7
    ..
    ..
    ..
15
33
100
19
    ..
    ..
66
80
    ..
    ..
98
    ..
    ..
26
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
69
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
53
    ..
31
69
    ..
    ..
38
    ..
    ..
    ..
99
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
    ..
16
51
70
49w
33
48
44
79
45
47
81
75

2000–07b
19
100
97
67
18
36
..
31
91
42
77
87
60
100
100
98
99
39
96
52
99
43
100
100
33
92
..
96
49
..
100
93
83
43
97
62
90
83
100
42
100
100
..
99
99
100
95
88
99
27
43
80
65w
41
73
69
94
62
87
95
88

78

42

48

77

1990
23
76
..
..
4
6
74
15
..
..
48
59
36
49
..
..
34
21
..
..
..
..
65
74
1
57
..
..
9
..
..
..
..
10
..
34
50
63
..
5
..
..
..
71
..
..
..
53
..
10
15
43
57w
22
61
63
50
54
75
44
57

42

2000–07b

48
..
..
69
11
13
..
28
..
..
73
46
49
..
..
70
..
17
..
12
41
5
..
..
15
60
..
70
8
..
..
58
38
26
77
17
63
71
48
24
66
..
84
..
..
65
..
76
50
23
34
60
60w
33
69
69
67
60
79
63
67

60

2005
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.2
1.1
3.9
0.1
0.1
0.9
1.8
0.4
0.6
<0.1
0.1
0.4
<0.1
1.1
3.0i
0.2
0.7i
0.2f
1.6
0.3
<0.1
0.9
18.8
0.6
<0.1
1.6
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.1
6.5
1.4
3.2
0.1
0.2
<0.1
6.4l
1.4
0.2
0.2
0.6
0.5
0.2
0.7
0.5i
..
0.2
17.0
18.1j
1.0w
2.5
0.7
0.5
1.6
1.1
0.2
0.6
0.6

0.1

Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R.B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep.
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
    Lower middle income
    Upper middle income
Low and middle income
    East Asia & Paciﬁ c
    Europe & Central Asia
     Latin America & the 

  Caribbean

     Middle East & North

 

 Africa

    South Asia
0.7
    Sub-Saharan Africa
5.8
0.4
High income
a. Because of the change from International Standard Classification of Education 1976 (ISCED76) to ISCED97, data before 1998 are not fully comparable with data from 1999 
onward. b. Data are for the most recent year available. c. Refers to expenditure shares by percentiles of population, ranked by per capita expenditure. d. Urban data. e. Refers to 
income shares by percentiles of population, ranked by per capita income. f. Includes Montenegro. g. Survey data, 2004. h. Includes Hong Kong, China. i. Survey data 2005. j. Survey 
data 2005–2006. k. Data are for 2007. l. Survey data, 2004–2005. 

41.3
26.8
    ..

30
44
    ..

    ..
    ..
    ..

83
157
7

70
82
100

123
184
12

62
51
  ..

41
45
99

40
15
71

90
87
99

53
22
..

80
60
97

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   355
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   355

10/10/08   10:39:49 AM
10/10/08   10:39:49 AM

356 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 3    Economic activity

Gross domestic product

Millions of 

dollars

Avg. annual 
% growth

Agricultural tchr

productivity 

Agricultural value 
added per worker 

2000 $

Value added as % of GDP

Agriculture Industry

Services

Household 
ﬁ nal cons. 
expenditure 
% of GDP

General gov’t. 

ﬁ nal cons. 
expenditure 
% of GDP

Gross 
capital 
formation
% of GDP

External 
balance of 
goods and 
services 
% of GDP

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
    Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar

2007
11,627
10,569
135,285
58,547
262,331
9,177
821,716
377,028
31,248
67,694
44,771
448,560
5,428
13,120
14,661
1,314,170
39,549
6,767
974
8,628
20,644
1,326,376
1,712
7,085
163,915
3,280,053
206,706
171,979
8,955
7,646
25,225
19,570
51,277
168,142
308,093
36,686
44,184
128,095
20,215
1,201
19,395
246,020
2,562,288
10,176
3,297,233
15,246
360,031
33,432
4,564
6,137
12,279
138,182
1,170,968
432,817
270,937
            ..
254,970
161,822
2,107,481
4,376,705
15,832
103,840
29,509
969,795
3,505
4,008
24,001
725
58,333
38,328
7,326
3,552
180,714
6,863
2,644
893,364
4,396
73,275
7,752
            ..

2000–07

11.5
5.3
4.5
13.1
4.7
12.7
3.3
1.9
17.2
5.8
8.3
1.9
3.8
3.6
5.3
3.3
5.7
5.8
2.7
9.8
3.5
2.7
0.1
12.2
4.5
10.2
5.2
4.5
5.0
4.1
5.2
0.2
4.8
4.5
1.8
4.8
5.0
4.5
2.7
2.3
7.5
3.1
1.7
8.3
1.1
5.5
4.3
3.6
2.8
0.2
5.3
4.0
7.8
5.1
5.9
–11.4
5.2
3.3
0.8
1.7
6.3
10.0
4.4
4.7
4.0
6.6
3.3
–2.7
3.7
8.0
3.3
3.2
5.1
5.4
5.1
2.6
6.5
4.9
8.0
9.2

1990–92
        ..
778
1,911
165
6,767
1,476b
20,838
12,048
1,084b
254
1,977b
21,479
326
670
        ..
1,506
2,500
110
108
        ..
389
28,243
287
173
3,600
254
        ..
3,405
184
        ..
3,143
598
4,921b
        ..
15,190
2,268
1,686
1,528
1,633
        ..
146
18,822
22,234
2,443b
13,724
293
7,668
2,119
142
        ..
1,193
4,105
324
484
1,954
        ..
        ..
        ..
11,542
20,445
1,892
1,795b
333
5,679
675b
360
        ..
        ..
        ..
        ..
186
72
3,803
208
574
2,256
1,286b
1,430
109
        ..

2003–05
        ..
1,449
2,225
174
10,072
3,692
29,924
22,203
1,143
338
3,153
41,631
519
773
8,270
3,126
7,159
173
70
306
646
43,055
381
215
5,308
401
        ..
2,847
149
        ..
4,499
795
9,987
5,423
40,780
4,586
1,676
2,072
1,638
61
158
31,214
44,017
1,790
26,549
320
9,011
2,350
190
        ..
1,483
6,987
392
583
2,542
1,756
17,879
        ..
23,967
35,517
1,360
1,557
332
11,286
979
458
30,099
        ..
        ..
4,703
174
116
5,126
241
356
2,792
816
1,775
153
        ..

2007
36
23
8
10
8
18
3
2
6
19
9
1
32
14
10
5
8
33
35
30
19
  ..
56
23
4
12
0
11
42
5
9
23
7
3
2
12
7
13
11
18
46
3
2
11
1
36
3
12
17
  ..
13
4
18
14
9
  ..
2
  ..
2
2
3
7
23
3
33
42
6
66
  ..
5
27
34
9
37
13
4
17
12
28
  ..

2007
24
22
61
68
36
44
28
31
62
29
40
24
13
32
26
31
33
22
20
26
29
  ..
16
44
48
48
9
29
28
60
31
26
32
39
26
28
35
36
29
24
13
32
21
24
30
25
21
27
45
  ..
28
29
29
47
42
  ..
36
  ..
27
30
32
44
19
39
20
32
23
16
  ..
33
15
20
51
24
47
25
15
29
27
  ..

2007
39
56
30
22
56
38
69
67
32
53
51
75
54
54
64
64
59
44
45
44
52
  ..
28
32
48
40
91
60
29
35
60
51
61
58
72
60
58
51
60
58
40
65
77
65
69
38
76
60
38
  ..
58
66
53
39
49
  ..
62
  ..
71
69
65
49
58
58
47
26
71
18
  ..
61
58
45
41
39
41
71
67
59
45
  ..

2007
111
90
34
59
59
74
57
56
32
77
62
53
78
68
76
48
75
75
91
82
73
55
88
60
55
34
60
63
82
29
75
73
56
48
49
80
67
75
93
81
84
51
57
75
58
78
68
87
84
91
79
66
55
63
47
    ..
44
56
59
57
89
48
75
55
101
65
89
86
  ..
66
81
71
50
76
61
71
97
58
72
  ..

2007
10
9
12
    ..a
12
9
18
18
13
6
20
23
15
13
24
28
12
22
29
3
9
19
10
6
10
14
8
13
9
14
5
8
20
21
26
7
13
11
11
42
11
21
24
22
18
13
14
9
6
9
15
10
10
8
14
  ..
16
26
20
18
20
11
16
15
19
9
15
11
  ..
17
10
12
13
11
20
9
18
16
12
  ..

2007
28
27
30
14
24
32
27
21
27
24
28
22
20
13
18
22
35
18
17
21
17
22
9
19
21
44
21
24
18
27
27
10
33
27
23
20
21
22
16
19
25
21
21
29
18
33
26
20
13
29
28
22
38
25
37
  ..
27
20
21
23
26
31
20
29
17
33
12
16
  ..
30
29
28
23
23
26
23
30
32
24
  ..

2007
–49
–26
24
26
6
–15
–1
6
27
–7
–9
3
–13
5
–18
2
–22
–15
–37
–7
1
4
–7
15
14
8
11
–1
–9
30
–7
8
–8
3
3
–6
–1
–8
–21
–42
–19
7
–1
–26
5
–23
–8
–16
–2
–29
–23
2
–3
4
3
  ..
13
–1
–1
1
–35
9
–10
1
–37
–6
–16
–14
  ..
–12
–19
–11
14
–10
–7
–2
–44
–6
–8
    ..

GDP implicit 

deﬂ ator 

Avg. annual 
% growth

2000–07

5.9
3.5
8.8
55.3
12.3
4.2
3.7
1.8
9.3
4.3
27.6
2.0
2.9
6.8
3.8
8.5
5.0
2.2
8.4
3.8
2.2
2.0
1.9
8.2
7.0
3.7
–2.3
6.3
31.0
5.7
9.8
3.1
3.7
2.1
2.2
17.4
9.6
6.9
3.4
14.8
6.6
0.9
2.0
6.9
1.0
19.5
3.4
4.7
18.1
16.5
6.2
5.1
4.4
10.1
16.9
    ..
3.1
1.2
2.7
–1.2
3.0
14.3
6.0
1.7
5.8
9.4
2.0
10.0
21.0
2.9
11.6
21.3
4.8
3.6
11.3
6.3
11.5
1.1
7.8
21.2

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   356
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   356

10/10/08   10:39:50 AM
10/10/08   10:39:50 AM

 

Selected world development indicators 

357

Gross domestic product

Millions of 

dollars

Avg. annual 
% growth

Agricultural tchr

productivity 

Agricultural value 
added per worker 

2000 $

Value added as % of GDP

Agriculture Industry

Services

Household 
ﬁ nal cons. 
expenditure 
% of GDP

General gov’t. 

ﬁ nal cons. 
expenditure 
% of GDP

Gross 
capital 
formation
% of GDP

External 
balance of 
goods and 
services 
% of GDP

GDP implicit 

deﬂ ator 

Avg. annual 
% growth

2000–07

2000–07

3.2
1.6
3.2
3.5
3.9
6.7
2.5
5.8
6.0
2.4
3.3
5.4
5.1
4.1
0.8
6.1
6.6
5.8
4.1
4.5
5.5
11.2
5.8
6.0
    ..
4.3
3.4
5.3
7.1
2.8
1.6
4.5
8.8
6.7
5.4
2.6
4.8
5.9
    ..
5.7
7.6
8.2
2.6
2.7
3.3
6.2
4.7
7.8
0.4
4.0
–5.7
–4.4
3.2w
5.6
6.2
8.0
4.3
6.2
8.9
6.1
3.6

2003–05
207
42,198
25,109
2,071
157b
        ..
37,776
695
3,914
595
2,052
1,498
1,075
2,182
5,980
4,646
2,519
182
15,780
215
        ..
        ..
40,419
5,026
        ..
2,484
19,030
702
666
33,023
23,418
3,261
465
295
621
347
2,719
1,846
        ..
229
1,702
25,841
26,933
41,797
7,973
1,800
6,292
305
        ..
328b
204
222
911w
321
654
509
2,954
583
446
2,109
3,053

1990–92
191
24,914
19,204
        ..
152
        ..
19,500
593
2,363
500
1,596
930
905
1,502b
4,612
2,196
1,825b
168
7,875
225
        ..
        ..
22,695
        ..
        ..
1,786
9,511
679
418
21,463
22,344
2,344
397b
238
497
312
2,422
        ..
1,222b
184
1,195b
10,454
22,659
20,793
5,714
1,272b
4,483
214
        ..
271
159
240
730w
259
454
370
2,134
417
303
1,588
2,155

2007
10,207
754,203
129,372
5,676
4,170
165,690
381,951
143,597
19,740
6,261
12,004
109,088
144,129
420,321
220,241
165,980
1,291,011
3,320
381,683
11,151
41,581
1,672
161,347
74,932
            ..
277,581
1,429,226
32,354
47,632
444,443
415,516
38,081
3,712
16,181
245,818
2,493
35,020
657,091
12,933
11,214
140,484
129,702
2,727,806
13,811,200
23,087
22,308
228,071
71,216
4,007
22,523
11,363
3,418
54,347,038t
810,300
13,342,194
6,888,343
6,450,429
14,155,882
4,438,135
3,155,221
3,444,374

Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzaniac
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R.B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep. of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
    Lower middle income
    Upper middle income
Low and middle income
    East Asia & Paciﬁ c
    Europe & Central Asia
    Latin America & the 
 
    Middle East & North 
 
    South Asia
    Sub-Saharan Africa
High income
a. Data on general government final consumption expenditure are not available separately; they are included in household final consumption expenditure. b. Data for all three 
years are not available. c. Data refer to mainland Tanzania only. 

2007
16
25
  ..
30
  ..
39
45
27
16
45
20
35
31
30
25
26
39
14
65
22
26
24
31
37
  ..
31
30
30
28
29
28
32
28
17
44
23
27
28
  ..
18
32
56
24
23
32
27
  ..
42
  ..
  ..
38
24
28w
28
32
41
31
32
47
33
29

2007
82
47
60
92
75
  ..
41
75
71
47
74
63
80
63
65
77
50
85
28
76
73
84
38
55
  ..
64
58
68
68
47
60
71
113
73
57
85
64
71
46
80
66
46
64
71
73
54
48
67
96
  ..
59
72
61w
74
60
49
59
61
41
61
60

2007
35
2
  ..
20
  ..
33
2
20
7
36
26
6
14
4
3
8
5
36
3
15
13
44
0
3
  ..
3
3
12
32
1
1
20
21
45
11
43
11
9
  ..
29
7
2
1
1
9
24
  ..
20
  ..
  ..
22
19
3w
25
8
13
5
10
12
7
5

2007
9
25
18
9
12
  ..
19
10
7
12
9
9
10
17
21
14
17
11
23
10
22
13
10
18
  ..
20
18
15
14
27
11
12
9
16
10
10
13
12
13
14
15
11
22
16
11
16
11
6
33
  ..
10
27
17w
9
15
13
17
15
13
16
17

2007
25
20
25
29
23
  ..
22
23
23
20
21
20
15
22
22
22
25
22
22
32
25
17
23
27
  ..
20
31
27
24
18
22
16
23
17
30
18
23
22
23
24
22
24
18
19
18
20
24
35
23
  ..
24
17
22w
24
25
35
23
25
38
24
22

2007
49
73
  ..
51
  ..
28
54
54
77
19
54
59
55
66
72
65
57
50
32
63
62
32
69
60
  ..
66
67
58
41
70
70
48
51
37
45
34
62
63
  ..
53
61
42
75
76
59
49
  ..
38
  ..
  ..
40
57
69w
48
59
46
64
59
41
60
66

5.6
2.1
2.4
7.6
2.1
17.8
4.0
6.5
1.8
7.2
10.6
3.8
5.1
2.4
3.0
18.0
16.7
9.7
8.1
2.2
19.5
8.9
1.0
3.9
      ..
6.6
4.0
10.0
9.6
1.5
0.9
6.2
20.5
9.0
2.9
0.8
2.7
18.8
      ..
6.2
14.0
4.9
2.6
2.6
9.4
26.5
26.8
6.7
3.0
13.5
18.3
232.0

2007
–16
8
–3
–30
–9
9
18
–8
–1
21
–4
8
–5
–1
–8
–13
8
–18
27
–18
–20
–14
29
0
  ..
–4
–6
–10
–6
8
7
2
–45
–6
4
–13
0
–5
17
–19
–4
18
–4
–6
–2
10
17
–8
–52
  ..
6
–16

828,691

1,438,594
842,914
40,197,253

0w 
–6 
0 
3 
1 
–1 
7 
–1 
1 

–1 

–4 
–3 
–1

  Caribbean

  Africa

62

59
67
62

4.5

7.3
5.0
2.4

1,583

335
246
14,586

2,205

406
281
25,456

14

10
16
18

11

18
15
2

35

29
32
26

53

53
54
72

26

35
21
21

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   357
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   357

10/10/08   10:39:51 AM
10/10/08   10:39:51 AM

358 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Table 4    Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance

Merchandise trade

Exports

Imports

$ millions

$ millions

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
    Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Rep. of
Congo, Rep. of
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep. of
El Salvador
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Rep. of
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar

2007

480
1,072
59,518
38,100
55,933
1,219
141,079
162,204
9,300
12,360
24,339
432,327
590
4,485
4,155
160,649
18,450
660
55
4,400
3,750
418,493
195
3,450
68,296
1,217,939e
349,663
29,360
2,600
6,100
9,367
8,400
12,360
122,414
103,307
6,700
13,751
16,201
3,980
15
1,290
89,656
552,193
1,240
1,326,521
4,320
23,574
6,926
1,100
550
2,160
94,160
145,228
118,163
83,000
36,400
121,068
54,065
491,532
712,839
5,760
46,540
4,140
371,554
1,105
980
3,574
157
45,000
17,173
1,190
670
176,211
1,620
1,360
272,044
1,370
14,646
2,650
5,350

2007

2,950
4,196
27,439
11,400
44,780
3,282
165,331
161,800
6,050
18,470
28,674
415,752
1,110
3,446
9,726
126,581
30,034
1,700
350
5,300
3,760
389,670
230
1,500
46,108
955,845
370,733
32,897
2,950
2,900
12,955
6,100
25,830
117,980
99,375
13,100
13,565
27,064
8,677
515
5,320
81,145
613,224
5,217
1,059,439
7,980
75,553
13,578
1,190
1,550
6,760
94,792
216,682
91,715
45,000
29,020
81,678
58,950
504,591
620,967
13,310
32,940
9,210
356,648
2,475
1,400
12,251
490
8,600
24,116
2,590
1,380
146,982
2,000
1,510
296,578
3,720
31,468
3,210
3,250

Manufactured 

exports
% of total 

High technology 

exports 

% of 

merchandise 

manufactured 

exports 

exports

Current 
account 
balance 
$ millions

Foreign direct 

investment 
net inﬂ ows 
$ millions

Ofﬁ cial 

development 
assistancea 
$ per capita

External debt

Total $ 
millions

Present 
value % of 

GNI

Domestic 

credit provided by 

banking 
sector 
% of GDP

2006
  ..
27
1
  ..
32
56
23
80
8
92
50
77
9
7
62
51
53
8
6
97
3
56
36
  ..
11
92e
91
37
  ..
  ..
65
15
66
89
65
  ..
10
21
55
  ..
  ..
81
79
48
83
31
52
35
  ..
  ..
21
84
70
45
10
  ..
85
82
85
91
71
13
26
89
46
  ..
70
  ..
  ..
58
41
13
74
10
0
76
31
68
5
  ..

2006
  ..
13
2
  ..
7
1
12
13
2
0
3
8c
0
4
3
12
6
10
4
0
3
15
0
  ..
7
30
11
4
  ..
  ..
45
42
10
14
20
  ..
8
1
3
  ..
  ..
22
21
16
17
0
11
3
  ..
  ..
1
24
5
13
6
  ..
34
14
7
22
1
21
3
32
3
  ..
2
  ..
  ..
8
1
11
54
4
  ..
19
5
10
2
  ..

2007
          ..
–671
          ..
10,690
7,210
–571
–56,783
12,031
9,019
1,196
–2,944
8,254
–226
1,319
–1,939
1,460
–8,592
          ..
–135
–506
          ..
12,815
          ..
          ..
7,200
249,866
27,405
–5,851
          ..
903
–1,499
–146
–4,412
–4,586
4,279
–2,231
1,503
2,635
–855
          ..
–1,786
11,402
–30,567
–1,931
150,746
–1,040
–29,565
–1,592
          ..
1
–195
–7,421
–9,415
11,009
          ..
          ..
–12,695
4,994
–51,032
210,490
–1,909
–7,184
–526
5,954
–234
          ..
–2,046
–138
22,170
–3,218
–554
          ..
28,931
–231
          ..
–1,993
–695
1,851
–634
802

2006
        ..
325
1,795
–38
4,840
343
26,599
157
–584
697
354
61,990
63
240
423
18,782
5,172
26
0
483
309
69,068
24
700
7,952
78,095
42,891
6,463
180
344
1,469
315
3,376
6,021
3,343
1,183
271
10,043
204
4
364
5,311
81,045
1,060
43,410
435
5,401
354
108
160
385
6,098
17,453
5,580
901
        ..
–882
14,302
38,884
–6,784
3,219
6,143
51
3,645
182
187
2,794
–82
        ..
1,812
230
30
6,064
185
–3
19,222
242
2,699
154
279

2006
  ..
101
6
10
3
71
  ..
  ..
24
8
7
  ..
43
62
126
0
  ..
61
51
37
93
  ..
31
27
5
1
  ..
22
34
69
5
13
45
  ..
  ..
6
14
12
23
28
25
  ..
  ..
81
  ..
51
  ..
37
18
62
84
  ..
1
6
2
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
105
11
26
  ..
60
63
174
75
6
  ..
39
49
9
69
62
2
60
34
77
3

2006
1,771
2,340
5,583
9,563
122,190
2,073
          ..
          ..
1,900
20,521
6,124
          ..
824
5,292
5,669
194,150
20,925
1,142
1,411
3,527
3,171
          ..
1,020
1,772
47,977
322,845
          ..
39,698
11,201
6,130
6,832
13,840
37,480
          ..
          ..
8,905
16,536
29,339
9,136
800
2,326
          ..
          ..
1,964
          ..
3,192
          ..
5,496
3,281
1,189
4,076
107,677
153,075
130,956
20,113
          ..
          ..
          ..
          ..
          ..
8,000
74,148
6,534
          ..
2,382
2,985
23,963
2,674
          ..
18,955
1,453
850
52,526
1,436
1,630
160,700
2,416
18,493
3,265
6,828

2006
18d
21
5
33
68
29
  ..
  ..
12
22
17
  ..
12d
20d
43
26
74
11d
105
48
4d
  ..
53d
23d
42
14
  ..
32
119d
108d
35
72d
93
  ..
  ..
35
52
28
55
49d
8d
  ..
  ..
22
  ..
21d
  ..
18
58d
22d
25d
100
15
45
10
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
58
132
26
  ..
52d
87
116
1,128d
  ..
79
13d
6d
39
15d
93d
21
65
30
12d
47

2007
0
64
–3
2
29
12
142
124
18
59
27
114
9
54
56
96
59
12
38
13
6
166
18
0
90
136
126
50
5
–10
48
21
83
55
207
54
19
91
46
139
47
85
123
32
126
33
95
42
16
25
51
75
63
41
48
    ..
199
76
129
294
124
41
34
110
15
8
190
92
–70
61
9
16
117
15
    ..
43
40
92
10
28

Net migration 

thousands

2000–05b 

1,112
–110
–140
175
–100
–100
593
180
–100
–500
        ..
180
99
–100
115
–229
–43
100
192
10
6
1,041
–45
219
30
–1,900
300
–120
–237
–10
84
–339
100
67
46
–148
–400
–525
–143
229
–140
33
722
–248
1,000
12
154
–300
–425
–140
–150
65
–1,350
–1,000
–1,250
–375
188
115
1,125
270
130
–200
25
–80
–75
–115
        ..
–119
10
–30
–5
–30
150
–134
30
–3,983
–250
–550
–20
–99

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   358
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   358

10/10/08   10:39:54 AM
10/10/08   10:39:54 AM

 

Selected world development indicators 

359

Merchandise trade

Exports

Imports

$ millions

$ millions

2007

2007

888
550,636
26,950
1,210
650
66,500
139,424
17,457
1,200
4,610
3,374
27,956
50,276
137,609
50,994
40,257
355,177
165
228,550
1,650
8,780
260
299,271e
58,082
          ..
69,788
241,962
7,750
8,160
168,223
171,621
11,330
1,468
2,005
152,469
690
15,029
107,154
8,920
1,530
49,100
154,000
435,615
1,163,183
4,480
8,040
69,165
48,387
          ..
7,160
4,876
2,050
13,899,267t
230,215
3,919,104
2,179,289
1,738,728
4,149,329
1,783,695
874,122
750,092

2,904
490,582
30,890
3,510
970
27,500
80,347
32,598
7,010
2,950
7,280
20,185
57,160
160,804
77,050
69,712
223,059
600
94,235
4,250
18,295
420
263,150
60,103
            ..
90,990
373,585
10,840
8,450
150,039
160,798
14,820
2,455
5,337
141,347
1,450
18,980
169,987
4,460
3,350
60,440
121,100
617,178
2,016,978
5,480
4,470
48,591
60,830
            ..
5,890
4,014
2,420
14,107,100t
251,819
3,641,914
1,947,080
1,690,142
3,893,700
1,475,731
935,854
732,907

297,678

234,252

Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, R.B. de
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen, Rep. of
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World
Low income
Middle income
    Lower middle income
    Upper middle income
Low and middle income
    East Asia & Paciﬁ c
    Europe & Central Asia
     Latin America & the 

  Caribbean

     Middle East & North

  Africa

Manufactured 

exports
% of total 

High technology 

exports 

% of 

merchandise 

manufactured 

exports 

exports

Current 
account 
balance 
$ millions

Foreign direct 

investment 
net inﬂ ows 
$ millions

Ofﬁ cial 

development 
assistancea 
$ per capita

External debt

Total $ 
millions

Present 
value % of 

GNI

Domestic 

credit provided by 

banking 
sector 
% of GDP

2006
  ..
66
27
9
15
  ..
16
81
10
  ..
16
14
87
79
74
79
17
  ..
8
44
  ..
  ..
80e
85
  ..
53f
76
70
0
78
91
32
  ..
18
76
58
75
42
  ..
21
73
  ..
77
79
32
  ..
5
50
  ..
1
6
38
74w
  ..
60
69
52
60
80
39
53

19

2006
  ..
28
11
7
11
  ..
19
1
0
  ..
8
2
68
4
9
4
9
  ..
1
6
4
  ..
58
6
  ..
6
6
2
1
16
22
1
  ..
0
27
0
4
  ..
  ..
34
3
  ..
34
30
3
  ..
2
5
  ..
5
2
2
20w
  ..
20
25
16
20
33
8
12

5

2007

6
50,706
–10,233
–855
–312
24,202
64,070
–8,253
–1,577
640
–217
2,589
5,897
–15,794
–18,281
–23,136
78,310
–147
99,066
          ..
          ..
–101
36,326
          ..
          ..
–20,631
–145,275
–1,334
–4,722
28,413
72,354
920
–21
–1,442
14,921
–461
–634
–32,774
          ..
–745
–5,927
          ..
–115,243
–738,641
–186
          ..
20,001
–6,992
          ..
206
–505
          ..

2006
–7
7,197
7,941
282
20
5,445
4,653
4,273
2,574
32
189
3,467
2,345
19,198
7,366
11,394
30,827
11
660
58
5,128
59
24,191
4,165
96
–120
20,167
480
3,534
27,299
27,185
600
339
474
9,010
57
3,270
20,070
731
392
5,604
          ..
139,745
180,580
1,346
164
–543
2,315
          ..
1,121
575
40
1,352,442s
20,380
334,242
162,047
172,195
354,621
104,972
114,318
70,457

26,551

2006
19
  ..
  ..
132
29
79
  ..
14
9
45
9
17
7
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
62
1
68
214
63
  ..
  ..
46
15
  ..
40
55
  ..
  ..
1
36
46
–3
12
43
8
5
52
10
  ..
  ..
  ..
6
6
2
22
384
13
122
21
16w
35
9
9
7
19
4
14
12

54

2006
3,409
          ..
          ..
4,391
805
7,693
          ..
35,909
9,989
1,675
3,426
28,174
60,324
125,831
          ..
55,114
251,067
419
          ..
1,984
13,831
1,428
          ..
27,085
2,836
35,549
          ..
11,446
19,158
          ..
          ..
6,502
1,154
4,240
55,233
1,806
18,480
207,854
881
1,264
49,887
          ..
          ..
          ..
9,804
3,892
44,635
20,202
          ..
5,563
2,325
4,677
  ..s

201,382
2,642,418
1,080,416
1,562,002
2,843,800
659,985
912,265
734,499

2006
27d
  ..
  ..
30d
8d
9
  ..
26
77
35
43
42
57
41
  ..
58
34
8d
  ..
14d
52
10d
  ..
58
  ..
15
  ..
40
77d
  ..
  ..
23
36
16d,g
30
68d
66
61
11
6d
58
  ..
  ..
  ..
66
26
34
33
  ..
25
9d
110
167w
30
77
102
55
75
119
38
63

2007
49
208
152
74
7
4
    ..
46
88
23
20
16
41
47
174
36
25
9
18
25
30
10
81
52
    ..
89
194
47
0
135
194
33
15
13
96
22
72
49
    ..
9
62
59
194
240
25
  ..
23
96
9
10
17
93

        ..wh
–2,858
–15,770
–11,295
–4,475
–18,629
–3,847
–1,798
–6,811

136,499

49

–2,618

Net migration 

thousands

2000–05b 

–100
110
102
–210
–29
–170
84
–1,239
8
        ..
–45
–510
–900
–200
276
–270
917
43
285
–100
–339
472
200
3
100
75
2,846
–442
–532
152
100
200
–345
–345
231
–4
–29
–30
–10
–5
–173
577
948
6,493
–104
–300
40
–200
11
–100
–82
–75

184,991
261,373
9,752,088

286,021
237,971
10,219,990

    South Asia
    Sub-Saharan Africa
High income
a. The distinction between official aid, for countries on the Part II list of the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC), and official development assistance was dropped in 
2005. Regional aggregates include data for economies not listed in the table. World and income group totals include aid not allocated by country or region. b. Total for the 5-year 
period. c. Includes Luxembourg. d. Data are from debt sustainability analysis undertaken as part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. e. Includes re-exports. f. 
Data on total exports and imports refer to South Africa only. Data on export commodity shares refer to the South African Customs Union (Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and South 
Africa). g. GNI refers to mainland Tanzania only. h. World total computed by the UN sums to zero, but because the aggregates shown here refer to World Bank definitions, regional 
and income group totals do not equal zero.

22,916
15,408
997,821

–2,484
–1,070
18,522

227,303
173,248

6
52
0.1

60
48
196

4
  ..
21

72
  ..
77

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   359
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   359

10/10/08   10:39:54 AM
10/10/08   10:39:54 AM

Table 5    Key indicators for other economies

Thousands

American Samoa
Andorra
Antigua and Barbuda
Aruba
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
Bhutan
Botswana
Brunei Darussalam
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Channel Islands
Comoros
Cuba
Cyprus
Djibouti
Dominica
Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Faeroe Islands
Fiji
French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia, The
Greenland
Grenada
Guam
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Iceland
Isle of Man
Jamaica
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. People’s 
Rep. of
Kuwait
Latvia
Lesotho
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Macao, China
Macedonia, FYR
Maldives
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Mayotte
Micronesia, Fed. States
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Namibia
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
Northern Mariana 
Islands
Oman
Palau
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and Príncipe
Seychelles
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Suriname
Swaziland
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Vanuatu
Virgin Islands (U.S.)

2007
60
67
85
101
331
753
294
304
64
657
1,881
389
530
47
149
626
11,257
787
833
73
508
1,342
48
838
263
1,330
1,707
57
108
173
1,695
739
311
77
2,677
102
23,783

2,663
2,276
2,006
35
480
480
2,037
305
409
67
1,263
194
111
33
2,612
600
2,074
191
242
84

2,600
20
3,943
836
187
29
158
85
2,018
495
49
168
120

458
1,145
1,066
101
1,333
226
108

Population

Avg. annual 
% growth

2000–2007

1.4c
0.5c
1.4
0.5c
1.3
2.1
0.4
2.8
0.4
2.3
1.2
2.2
2.3
2.1c
0.2
2.1
0.1
1.8
1.9
0.3
2.3
–0.3
0.2c
0.6
1.5
1.7
3.0
0.1
0.9
1.6
3.0
0.1
1.4
0.9
0.5
1.7
0.5

2.8
–0.6
0.9
0.8c
1.3
1.2
0.2
1.6
0.7
3.3
0.9
3.8c
0.5
0.3c
1.2
–1.6
1.4
0.8
1.8
2.4c

1.1
0.8c
0.5
4.3
0.7
1.1j
1.7
0.7
0.2
2.5
1.4
1.1
0.5

0.7
1.3
4.4
0.4
0.4
2.5
0.0k

Density 

people per 

sq. km

Population 

age 

composition 
% ages 0–14

2007
301
143
193
561
33
1,060
684
13
1,280
14
3
74
132
180
785
336
103
85
36
97
18
32
35
46
72
5
171
0h
318
321
60
4
3
136
247
126
198

149
37
66
220
185
17,026
80
1,018
1,279
369
622
518
159
16,769
2
43
3
239
13
182

8
44
445
76
66
482
165
185
100
18
188
275
309

3
67
72
140
260
19
310

2007
  ..
  ..
  ..
22
27
25
18
37
  ..
31
35
29
38
  ..
16
42g
18
19
37
  ..
42
15
  ..
32
27
35
41
  ..
33
29
48
31
22
  ..
31
  ..
23

23
14
40
  ..
18
14
19
32
17
  ..
24
  ..
38
  ..
27
19
37
21
26
  ..

32
  ..
21
21
40
  ..
41
  ..
14
40
  ..
27
28

29
39
45
37
21
39
23

Gross national income 

(GNI)a

PPP gross national 

income (GNI)b

Millions of 

dollars

per capita 

dollars

Millions of 

dollars

per capita 

dollars

2007
        ..
        ..
977
        ..
        ..
14,022
        ..
1,157
        ..
1,166
10,991
10,287
1,287
        ..
        ..
425
        ..
19,617
908
310
6,527
17,706
        ..
3,189
        ..
8,876
544
        ..
505
        ..
331
959
16,826
3,088
9,923
120
        ..

80,221
22,595
2,007
        ..
36,420
        ..
7,052
977
6,216
204
6,878
        ..
274
        ..
3,362
3,109
6,970
        ..
        ..
        ..

27,887
167
        ..
        ..
454
1,291
138
762
42,306
363
470
929
507

2,166
2,951
1,604
233
18,795
417
        ..

2007
        ..d
        ..e
11,520
        ..e
        ..e
19,350
        ..e
3,800
        ..e
1,770
5,840
26,930
2,430
        ..e
        ..e
680
        ..d
24,940
1,090
4,250
12,860
13,200
        ..e
3,800
        ..e
6,670
320
        ..e
4,670
        ..e
200
1,300
54,100
40,600
3,710
1,170
        ..i

31,640
9,930
1,000
        ..e
75,880
        ..e
3,460
3,200
15,310
3,070
5,450
        ..d
2,470
        ..e
1,290
5,180
3,360
        ..e
        ..e
        ..e

11,120
8,210
        ..e
        ..e
2,430
45,130
870
8,960
20,960
730
9,630
5,530
4,210

4,730
2,580
1,510
2,320
14,100
1,840
        ..e

2007
        ..
        ..
1,494
        ..
        ..
24,869
4,711f
1,886f
        ..
3,276
23,369
19,059
1,558
        ..
        ..
721
        ..
20,741
1,886
540f
10,773
26,399
        ..
3,666
        ..
17,395
1,951
        ..
747f
        ..
790
2,129f
10,592
2,568f
16,612
228f
        ..

126,703
38,452
3,783
        ..
30,909
        ..
17,344
1,540
8,523
        ..
14,381
        ..
363f
        ..
8,246
6,175
10,608
        ..
        ..
        ..

49,487
        ..
        ..
        ..
735f
1,046f
258
1,313f
53,756
831f
650f
1,584f
863f

3,499f
5,649
3,281f
367f
29,981
771f
        ..

2007
        ..
        ..
17,620f
        ..
        ..
34,310
16,140f
6,200f
        ..
4,980
12,420
49,900
2,940
        ..
        ..
1,150
        ..
26,370
2,260
7,410f
21,230
19,680
        ..
4,370
        ..
13,080
1,140
        ..
6,910f
        ..
470
2,880f
34,060
33,750f
6,210
2,240f
        ..

49,970
16,890
1,890
        ..
64,400
        ..
8,510
5,040
20,990
        ..
11,390
        ..
3,270f
        ..
3,160
10,290
5,120
        ..
        ..
        ..

19,740
        ..
        ..
        ..
3,930f
37,080f
1,630
15,450f
26,640
1,680f
13,320f
9,430f
7,170f

7,640f
4,930
3,080f
3,650f
22,490
3,410f
        ..

Gross 

domestic 
product per 
capita % 
growth

2006–2007

    ..
    ..
2.9
    ..
    ..
5.6
    ..
0.1
    ..
17.5
2.5
2.9
4.6
    ..
    ..
–2.9
    ..
2.5
2.2
0.4
9.9
7.3
    ..
–5.0
    ..
4.0
4.3
    ..
3.0
    ..
–0.3
5.5
1.4
4.9
1.7
0.8
    ..

6.7
10.9
4.3
    ..
1.9
26.6
5.1
3.8
2.7
1.8
3.9
    ..
1.5
    ..
8.7
7.6
4.6
    ..
    ..
    ..

4.6
2.0
    ..
1.8
2.2
3.5
4.1
5.8
5.5
3.2
2.5
2.0
6.2

4.7
1.7
4.1
–4.3
5.6
2.6
    ..

Life expectancy 

at birth

Male 
years

Female 
years

Adult 

literacy rate 
% ages 15 
and older

Carbon 
dioxide 
emissions 
per capita 
metric tons

2006
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
70
74
74
70
76
64
50
75
68
  ..
76
62g
76
77
53
  ..
50
67
77
66
71
56
58
  ..
  ..
73
45
63
79
  ..
70
  ..
65

76
65
43
  ..
76
78
72
67
77
  ..
70
  ..
68
  ..
66
72
52
71
73
  ..

74
  ..
74
75
68
79
63
69
74
63
  ..
73
69

67
42
56
72
68
68
77

2006
  ..
  ..
  ..
  ..
76
77
80
74
81
67
50
80
74
  ..
81
64g
80
82
56
  ..
52
78
81
71
77
57
60
  ..
  ..
78
48
69
83
  ..
73
  ..
69

80
77
43
  ..
82
83
76
69
81
  ..
77
  ..
69
  ..
69
77
53
79
78
  ..

77
  ..
83
76
75
85
67
76
81
64
  ..
76
74

73
40
58
74
72
72
80

2005

..
..
..
97
..
87
..
..
..
60
81
93
81
..
..
..
100
97
..
..
87
100
..
..
..
84
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

93
100
82
..
..
91
96
96
..
..
84
..
..
..
98
..
85
96
..
..

81
..
90
89
99
..
85
92
100
..
..
..
..

90
80
..
..
98
..
..

2004
5.1
..
5.1
21.8
6.3
23.8
4.4
2.8
8.7
0.7
2.4
24.1
0.6
7.1
..
0.2
2.3
9.1
0.5
1.5
11.5
14.0
13.7
1.3
2.7
1.1
0.2
10.0
2.0
25.0
0.2
2.0
7.6
..
4.0
0.3
3.4

40.4
3.1
..
..
24.9
4.7
5.1
2.5
6.1
..
2.6
..
..
..
3.4
..
1.2
22.2
11.2
..

12.5
11.9
0.5
69.2
0.8
..
0.6
6.6
8.1
0.4
2.7
2.3
1.7

5.1
0.9
0.2
1.2
24.7
0.4
124.3

a. Calculated using the World Bank Atlas method. b. PPP is purchasing power parity; see Definitions. c. Data are for 2003–2007. d. Estimated to be upper middle ($3,706  to $11,455). e. 
Estimated to be high income ($11,456 or more). f. The estimate is based on regression; others are extrapolated from the latest International Comparison Program benchmark estimates. 
g. Includes the island of Mayotte. h. Less than 0.5. i. Estimated to be low income ($935 or less). j. Data are for 2004–2007.  k. More than –0.05.
360 

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   360
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   360

10/22/08   5:32:03 PM
10/22/08   5:32:03 PM

 

Selected world development indicators 

361

Technical notes
These technical notes discuss the sources 
and methods used to compile the indicators 
included in this edition of Selected World 
Development Indicators. The notes follow 
the order in which the indicators appear in 
the tables. 

Sources
The data published in the Selected World 
Development  Indicators  are  taken  from 
World Development Indicators 2008. Where 
possible, however, revisions reported since 
the closing date of that edition have been 
incorporated.  In  addition,  newly  released 
estimates of population and gross national 
income  (GNI)  per  capita  for  2007  are 
included in table 1 and table 5.

The World Bank draws on a variety of 
sources  for  the  statistics  published  in  the 
World  Development  Indicators.  Data  on 
external debt for developing countries are 
reported  directly  to  the  World  Bank  by 
developing member countries through the 
Debtor Reporting System. Other data are 
drawn mainly from the United Nations and 
its specialized agencies, from the Interna-
tional  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  and  from 
country reports to the World Bank. Bank 
staff estimates are also used to improve cur-
rentness or consistency. For most countries, 
national  accounts  estimates  are  obtained 
from member governments through World 
Bank economic missions. In some instances 
these are adjusted by staff to ensure con-
formity with international deﬁ nitions and 
concepts.  Most  social  data  from  national 
sources  are  drawn  from  regular  admin-
istrative ﬁ les, special surveys, or periodic 
censuses. 

For more detailed notes about the data, 
please  refer  to  the  World  Bank’s  World 
Development Indicators 2008.

Data consistency and reliability 
Considerable effort has been made to stan-
dardize  the  data,  but  full  comparability 
cannot be assured, and care must be taken 
in interpreting the indicators. Many factors 
affect data availability, comparability, and 
reliability:  statistical  systems  in  many 
developing economies are still weak; statis-
tical methods, coverage, practices, and deﬁ -

nitions  differ  widely;  and  cross-country 
and  intertemporal  comparisons  involve 
complex  technical  and  conceptual  prob-
lems that cannot be unequivocally resolved. 
Data coverage may not be complete because 
of special circumstances or for economies 
experiencing problems (such as those stem-
ming from conﬂ icts) affecting the collec-
tion  and  reporting  of  data.  For  these 
reasons, although the data are drawn from 
the sources thought to be most authorita-
tive, they should be construed only as indi-
cating  trends  and  characterizing  major 
differences among economies rather than 
offering  precise  quantitative  measures  of 
those  differences.  Discrepancies  in  data 
presented  in  different  editions  ref lect 
updates by countries as well as revisions to 
historical series and changes in methodol-
ogy. Thus readers are advised not to com-
pare data series between editions or between 
different editions of World Bank publica-
tions. Consistent time series are available 
from  the  World  Development  Indicators 
2008 CD-ROM and in WDI Online.

Ratios and growth rates 
For ease of reference, the tables usually show 
ratios and rates of growth rather than the 
simple  underlying  values.  Values  in  their 
original form are available from the World 
Development  Indicators  2008  CD-ROM. 
Unless  otherwise  noted,  growth  rates  are 
computed using the least-squares regression 
method  (see  Statistical  methods  below). 
Because this method takes into account all 
available observations during a period, the 
resulting growth rates reﬂ ect general trends 
that  are  not  unduly  inﬂ uenced  by  excep-
tional values. To exclude the effects of inﬂ a-
tion, constant price economic indicators are 
used  in  calculating  growth  rates.  Data  in 
italics  are  for  a  year  or  period  other  than 
that speciﬁ ed in the column heading—up to 
two years before or after for economic indi-
cators and up to three years for social indi-
cators, because the latter tend to be collected 
less regularly and change less dramatically 
over short periods. 

Constant price series 
An economy’s growth is measured by the 
increase  in  value  added  produced  by  the 

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   361
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   361

10/10/08   10:39:57 AM
10/10/08   10:39:57 AM

362 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

individuals  and  enterprises  operating  in 
that economy. Thus, measuring real growth 
requires estimates of GDP and its compo-
nents valued in constant prices. The World 
Bank  collects  constant  price  national 
accounts series in national currencies and 
recorded in the country’s original base year. 
To  obtain  comparable  series  of  constant 
price data, it rescales GDP and value added 
by industrial origin to a common reference 
year,  2000  in  the  current  version  of  the 
World Development Indicators. This process 
gives rise to a discrepancy between the res-
caled  GDP  and  the  sum  of  the  rescaled 
components.  Because  allocating  the  dis-
crepancy would give rise to distortions in 
the growth rate, it is left unallocated.

Summary measures 
The  summary  measures  for  regions  and 
income groups, presented at the end of most 
tables,  are  calculated  by  simple  addition 
when they are expressed in levels. Aggregate 
growth rates and ratios are usually computed 
as  weighted  averages.  The  summary  mea-
sures for social indicators are weighted by 
population  or  subgroups  of  population, 
except for infant mortality, which is weighted 
by the number of births. See the notes on 
speciﬁ c indicators for more information. 

For summary measures that cover many 
years, calculations are based on a uniform 
group of economies so that the composition 
of the aggregate does not change over time. 
Group  measures  are  compiled  only  if  the 
data available for a given year account for at 
least two-thirds of the full group, as deﬁ ned 
for  the  2000  benchmark  year.  As  long  as 
this criterion is met, economies for which 
data  are  missing  are  assumed  to  behave 
like those that provide estimates. Readers 
should  keep  in  mind  that  the  summary 
measures  are  estimates  of  representative 
aggregates for each topic and that nothing 
meaningful can be deduced about behavior 
at the country level by working back from 
group indicators. In addition, the estima-
tion  process  may  result  in  discrepancies 
between subgroup and overall totals. 

Table 1. Key indicators of development
Population is based on the de facto deﬁ ni-
tion, which counts all residents, regardless 

of legal status or citizenship, except for ref-
ugees not permanently settled in the coun-
try of asylum, who are generally considered 
part  of  the  population  of  the  country  of 
origin. 

Average annual population growth rate 
is  the  exponential  rate  of  change  for  the 
period (see the section on Statistical meth-
ods below). 

Population density is midyear popula-
tion  divided  by  land  area.  Land  area  is  a 
country’s total area excluding areas under 
inland bodies of water and coastal water-
ways. Density is calculated using the most 
recently available data on land area.

Population age composition, ages 0–14 
refers to the percentage of the total popula-
tion that is ages 0–14.

Gross  national  income  (GNI)  is  the 
broadest  measure  of  national  income;  it 
measures total value added from domestic 
and foreign sources claimed by residents. 
GNI  comprises  gross  domestic  product 
(GDP) plus net receipts of primary income 
from  foreign  sources.  Data  are  converted 
from national currency to current U.S. dol-
lars  using  the  World  Bank  Atlas  method. 
This  involves  using  a  three-year  average 
of exchange rates to smooth the effects of 
transitory exchange rate ﬂ uctuations. (See 
the section on Statistical methods below for 
further discussion of the Atlas method.)

GNI per capita is GNI divided by mid-
year population. It is converted into current 
U.S. dollars by the Atlas method. The World 
Bank uses GNI per capita in U.S. dollars to 
classify economies for analytical purposes 
and to determine borrowing eligibility. 

PPP  gross  national  income,  which  is 
GNI  converted  into  international  dollars 
using purchasing power parity (PPP) con-
version factors, is included because nominal 
exchange rates do not always reﬂ ect interna-
tional differences in relative prices. At the 
PPP rate, one international dollar has the 
same purchasing power over domestic GNI 
that the U.S. dollar has over U.S. GNI. PPP 
rates allow a standard comparison of real 
price levels between countries, just as con-
ventional price indexes allow comparison of 
real values over time. The PPP conversion 
factors  used  here  are  derived  from  price 
surveys covering 146 countries conducted 

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   362
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   362

10/10/08   10:39:58 AM
10/10/08   10:39:58 AM

 

Selected world development indicators 

363

in 2005 by the International Comparison 
Program. For OECD countries, data come 
from  the  most  recent  round  of  surveys, 
completed in 1999; the rest are either from 
the 1996 survey, or data from the 1993 or 
earlier round and extrapolated to the 1996 
benchmark.  Estimates  for  countries  not 
included  in  the  surveys  are  derived  from 
statistical models using available data. 

PPP GNI per capita is PPP GNI divided 

by midyear population.

Gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  per 
capita growth is based on GDP measured 
in constant prices. Growth in GDP is con-
sidered a broad measure of the growth of 
an economy. GDP in constant prices can be 
estimated by measuring the total quantity 
of goods and services produced in a period, 
valuing them at an agreed set of base year 
prices, and subtracting the cost of interme-
diate inputs, also in constant prices. See the 
section on Statistical methods for details of 
the least-squares growth rate.

Life expectancy at birth is the number 
of years a newborn infant would live if pat-
terns  of  mortality  prevailing  at  its  birth 
were to stay the same throughout its life. 
Data are presented for males and females 
separately.

Adult literacy rate is the percentage of 
persons aged 15 and above who can, with 
understanding,  read  and  write  a  short, 
simple statement about their everyday life. 
In practice, literacy is difﬁ cult to measure. 
To  estimate  literacy  using  such  a  deﬁ ni-
tion  requires  census  or  survey  measure-
ments under controlled conditions. Many 
countries  estimate  the  number  of  literate 
people from self-reported data. Some use 
educational attainment data as a proxy but 
apply different lengths of school attendance 
or level of completion. Because deﬁ nition 
and methodologies of data collection differ 
across countries, data need to be used with 
caution.

Carbon dioxide emissions (CO2) mea-
sures those emissions stemming from the 
burning of fossil fuels and the manufacture 
of  cement.  These  include  carbon  dioxide 
produced  during  consumption  of  solid, 
liquid, and gas fuels and from gas ﬂ aring. 
Carbon dioxide per capita is CO2 divided 
by the mid-year population. 

The Carbon Dioxide Information Anal-
ysis Center (CDIAC), sponsored by the U.S. 
Department  of  Energy,  calculates  annual 
anthropogenic  emissions  of  CO2.  These 
calculations are derived from data on fos-
sil fuel consumption, based on the World 
Energy Data Set maintained by the UNSD, 
and from data on world cement manufac-
turing, based on the Cement Manufactur-
ing Data Set maintained by the U.S. Bureau 
of Mines. Each year the CDIAC recalculates 
the entire time series from 1950 to the pres-
ent, incorporating its most recent ﬁ ndings 
and  the  latest  corrections  to  its  database. 
Estimates  exclude  fuels  supplied  to  ships 
and  aircraft  engaged  in  international 
transportation because of the difﬁ culty of 
apportioning these fuels among the coun-
tries beneﬁ ting from that transport. 

Table  2.  Millennium  Development  Goals: 
eradicating poverty and improving lives
Share of poorest quintile in national con-
sumption  or  income  is  the  share  of  the 
poorest  20  percent  of  the  population  in 
consumption or, in some cases, income. It 
is a distributional measure. Countries with 
more  unequal  distributions  of  consump-
tion (or income) have a higher rate of pov-
erty for a given average income. Data are 
from  nationally  representative  household 
surveys. Because the underlying household 
surveys differ in method and type of data 
collected,  the  distribution  data  are  not 
strictly  comparable  across  countries.  The 
World  Bank  staff  have  made  an  effort  to 
ensure that the data are as comparable as 
possible. Wherever possible, consumption 
has been used rather than income. 

Prevalence of child malnutrition is the 
percentage  of  children  under  ﬁ ve  whose 
weight for age is less than minus two stan-
dard  deviations  from  the  median  for  the 
international  reference  population  ages 
0–59  months.  The  table  presents  data  for 
the new child growth standards released by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) in 
2006. Estimates of child malnutrition are 
from national survey data. The proportion 
of children who are underweight is the most 
common indicator of malnutrition. Being 
underweight, even mildly, increases the risk 
of death and inhibits cognitive development 

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   363
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   363

10/10/08   10:39:58 AM
10/10/08   10:39:58 AM

364 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

in  children.  Moreover,  it  perpetuates  the 
problem from one generation to the next, 
as malnourished women are more likely to 
have low-birth-weight babies.

Primary  completion  rate  is  the  per-
centage  of  students  completing  the  last 
year of primary school. It is calculated by 
taking the total number of students in the 
last  grade  of  primary  school,  minus  the 
number of repeaters in that grade, divided 
by the total number of children of ofﬁ cial 
graduation  age.  The  primary  completion 
rate reﬂ ects the primary cycle as deﬁ ned by 
the International Standard Classiﬁ cation of 
Education (ISCED), ranging from three or 
four years of primary education (in a very 
small  number  of  countries)  to  ﬁ ve  or  six 
years (in most countries) and seven (in a 
small number of countries). Because cur-
ricula and standards for school completion 
vary across countries, a high rate of primary 
completion does not necessarily mean high 
levels of student learning.

Ratio  of  girls  to  boys  enrollments  in 
primary and secondary school is the ratio 
of the female gross enrollment rate in pri-
mary  and  secondary  school  to  the  male 
gross enrollment rate.

Eliminating gender disparities in educa-
tion would help to increase the status and 
capabilities of women. This indicator is an 
imperfect measure of the relative accessibil-
ity of schooling for girls. With a target date 
of 2005, this is the ﬁ rst of the targets to fall 
due. School enrollment data are reported 
to the UN Educational, Scientiﬁ c, and Cul-
tural Organization (UNESCO) Institute for 
Statistics by national education authorities. 
Primary education provides children with 
basic  reading,  writing,  and  mathematics 
skills  along  with  an  elementary  under-
standing of such subjects as history, geogra-
phy, natural science, social science, art, and 
music. Secondary education completes the 
provision of basic education that began at 
the primary level and aims at laying foun-
dations  for  lifelong  learning  and  human 
development  by  offering  more  subject-or 
skill-oriented instruction using more spe-
cialized teachers. 

Under-ﬁ ve mortality rate  is  the  prob-
ability that a newborn baby will die before 
reaching age ﬁ ve, if subject to current age-

speciﬁ c  mortality  rates.  The  probability 
is expressed as a rate per 1,000. The main 
sources of mortality date are vital registra-
tion  systems  and  direct  or  indirect  esti-
mates based on sample surveys or censuses. 
To produce harmonized estimates of under-
ﬁ ve  mortality  rates  that  make  use  of  all 
available information in a transparent way, 
a methodology that ﬁ ts a regression line to 
the  relationship  between  mortality  rates 
and  their  reference  dates  using  weighted 
least squares was developed and adopted by 
both UNICEF and the World Bank.

Births attended by skilled health staff 
are  the  percentage  of  deliveries  attended 
by personnel trained to give the necessary 
supervision,  care,  and  advice  to  women 
during pregnancy, labor, and the postpar-
tum period; to conduct deliveries on their 
own; and to care for newborns. The share 
of  births  attended  by  skilled  health  staff 
is  an  indicator  of  a  health  system’s  abil-
ity  to  provide  adequate  care  for  pregnant 
women. Data are from UNICEF and house-
hold surveys. Good prenatal and postnatal 
care improves maternal health and reduces 
maternal  and  infant  mortality.  But  data 
may not reﬂ ect such improvements because 
health information systems are often weak, 
maternal  deaths  are  underreported,  and 
rates of maternal mortality are difﬁ cult to 
measure.

Contraceptive  prevalence  rate  is  the 
percentage of women married or in-union 
ages  15–49  who  are  practicing,  or  whose 
sexual partners are practicing, any form of 
contraception.  Safe  and  effective  contra-
ception is one of the indispensable means 
to  achieve  reproductive  health,  helping 
women  avoid  unintended  pregnancies 
while preventing sexually transmitted dis-
eases. Contraceptive prevalence reﬂ ects all 
methods—ineffective traditional methods 
as well as highly effective modern methods. 
Contraceptive prevalence rates are obtained 
mainly from household surveys. 

Prevalence of HIV is the percentage of 
people  ages  15–49  who  are  infected  with 
HIV. Adult HIV prevalence rates reﬂ ect the 
rate of HIV infection in each country’s pop-
ulation. Low national prevalence rates can 
be  very  misleading,  however.  They  often 
disguise serious epidemics that are initially 

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   364
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   364

10/10/08   10:39:58 AM
10/10/08   10:39:58 AM

 

Selected world development indicators 

365

concentrated in certain localities or among 
speciﬁ c  population  groups  and  threaten 
to spill over into the wider population. In 
many parts of the developing world, most 
new infections occur in young adults, with 
young  women  especially  vulnerable.  The 
estimates of HIV prevalence are based on 
extrapolations from data collected through 
surveys  and  from  surveillance  of  small, 
nonrepresentative groups.

Table 3. Economic activity
Gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  is  gross 
value  added,  at  purchasers’  prices,  by  all 
resident producers in the economy plus any 
taxes and minus any subsidies not included 
in the value of the products. It is calculated 
without deducting for depreciation of fab-
ricated assets or for depletion or degrada-
tion of natural resources. Value added is the 
net output of an industry after adding up 
all  outputs  and  subtracting  intermediate 
inputs. The industrial origin of value added 
is  determined  by  the  International  Stan-
dard Industrial Classiﬁ cation (ISIC) revi-
sion 3. The World Bank conventionally uses 
the U.S. dollar and applies the average ofﬁ -
cial exchange rate reported by the IMF for 
the year shown. An alternative conversion 
factor is applied if the ofﬁ cial exchange rate 
is  judged  to  diverge  by  an  exceptionally 
large  margin  from  the  rate  effectively 
applied to transactions in foreign curren-
cies and traded products. 

Gross domestic product average annual 
growth  rate  is  calculated  from  constant 
price GDP data in local currency.

Agricultural productivity refers to the 
ratio of agricultural value added, measured 
in constant 1995 U.S. dollars, to the num-
ber of workers in agriculture.

Value  added  is  the  net  output  of  an 
industry  after  adding  up  all  outputs  and 
subtracting intermediate inputs. The indus-
trial origin of value added is determined by 
the International Standard Industrial Clas-
siﬁ cation (ISIC) revision 3.

Agriculture  value  added  corresponds 
to ISIC divisions 1–5 and includes forestry 
and ﬁ shing.

Industry  value  added  comprises  min-
ing, manufacturing, construction, electric-
ity, water, and gas (ISIC divisions 10–45).

Services value added correspond to ISIC 

divisions 50–99.

Household  ﬁ nal  consumption  expen-
diture  is  the  market  value  of  all  goods 
and  services,  including  durable  products 
(such as cars, washing machines, and home 
computers),  purchased  by  households.  It 
excludes purchases of dwellings but includes 
imputed rent for owner-occupied dwellings. 
It also includes payments and fees to gov-
ernments  to  obtain  permits  and  licenses. 
Here,  household  consumption  expendi-
ture includes the expenditures of nonproﬁ t 
institutions serving households, even when 
reported separately by the country. In prac-
tice, household consumption expenditure 
may include any statistical discrepancy in 
the use of resources relative to the supply 
of resources. 

General government ﬁ nal consumption 
expenditure includes all government cur-
rent  expenditures  for  purchases  of  goods 
and  services  (including  compensation  of 
employees).  It  also  includes  most  expen-
ditures  on  national  defense  and  security, 
but  excludes  government  military  expen-
ditures that are part of government capital 
formation.

Gross  capital  formation  consists  of 
outlays on additions to the ﬁ xed assets of 
the economy plus net changes in the level 
of  inventories  and  valuables.  Fixed  assets 
include land improvements (fences, ditches, 
drains, and so on); plant, machinery, and 
equipment purchases; and the construction 
of buildings, roads, railways, and the like, 
including commercial and industrial build-
ings, ofﬁ ces, schools, hospitals, and private 
dwellings. Inventories are stocks of goods 
held by ﬁ rms to meet temporary or unex-
pected ﬂ uctuations in production or sales, 
and “work in progress.” According to the 
1993 System of National Accounts (SNA), 
net acquisitions of valuables are also con-
sidered capital formation.

External balance of goods and services is 
exports of goods and services less imports of 
goods and services. Trade in goods and ser-
vices comprise all transactions between resi-
dents of a country and the rest of the world 
involving a change in ownership of general 
merchandise, goods sent for processing and 
repairs, nonmonetary gold, and services.

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   365
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   365

10/10/08   10:39:58 AM
10/10/08   10:39:58 AM

366 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

The  GDP  implicit  deflator  ref lects 
changes  in  prices  for  all  final  demand 
categories, such as government consump-
tion, capital formation, and international 
trade, as well as the main component, pri-
vate ﬁ nal consumption. It is derived as the 
ratio of current to constant price GDP. The 
GDP deﬂ ator may also be calculated explic-
itly as a Paasche price index in which the 
weights are the current period quantities of 
output.

National  accounts  indicators  for  most 
developing  countries  are  collected  from 
national statistical organizations and cen-
tral banks by visiting and resident World 
Bank missions. Data for high-income econ-
omies come from the OECD. 

Table 4. Trade, aid, and ﬁ nance
Merchandise  exports  show  the  free  on 
board (f.o.b.) value of goods provided to the 
rest of the world valued in U.S. dollars. 

Merchandise  imports  show  the  c.i.f. 
value of goods (the cost of the goods includ-
ing insurance and freight) purchased from 
the rest of the world valued in U.S. dollars. 
Data on merchandise trade come from the 
World  Trade  Organization  (WTO)  in  its 
annual report.

Manufactured  exports  comprise  the 
commodities in Standard Industrial Trade 
Classiﬁ cation  (SITC)  sections  5  (chemi-
cals), 6 (basic manufactures), 7 (machinery 
and transport equipment), and 8 (miscel-
laneous  manufactured  goods),  excluding 
division 68.

High-technology exports are products 
with high research and development (R&D) 
intensity.  They  include  high-technology 
products such as in aerospace, computers, 
pharmaceuticals,  scientiﬁ c  instruments, 
and electrical machinery.

Current  account  balance  is  the  sum 
of  net  exports  of  goods  and  services,  net 
income, and net current transfers. Data are 
drawn from the IMF’s Balance of Payments 
Statistics Yearbook.

Foreign direct investment is net inﬂ ows 
of investment to acquire a lasting manage-
ment  interest  (10  percent  or  more  of  vot-
ing stock) in an enterprise operating in an 
economy other than that of the investor. It 
is the sum of equity capital, re-investment 

of  earnings,  other  long-term  capital,  and 
short-term capital, as shown in the balance 
of  payments.  Data  on  FDI  are  based  on 
balance-of-payments data reported by the 
IMF,  supplemented  by  World  Bank  staff 
estimates using data reported by the United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Develop-
ment, and ofﬁ cial national sources.

Ofﬁ cial development assistance or ofﬁ -
cial aid from the high-income members of 
the OECD are the main source of ofﬁ cial 
external ﬁ nance for developing countries, 
but ofﬁ cial development assistance (ODA) 
is also disbursed by some important donor 
countries that are not members of OECD’s 
Development  Assistance  Committee 
(DAC). DAC has three criteria for ODA: it 
is undertaken by the ofﬁ cial sector; it pro-
motes  economic  development  or  welfare 
as a main objective; and it is provided on 
concessional  terms,  with  a  grant  element 
of at least 25 percent on loans (calculated 
at  a  10-percent  discount  rate).  Official 
development  assistance  comprises  grants 
and  loans,  net  of  repayments,  that  meet 
the DAC deﬁ nition of ODA and are made 
to countries and territories on of the DAC 
list of aid recipients. The new DAC list of 
recipients  is  organized  on  more  objective 
needs-based criteria than its predecessors, 
and  includes  all  low-  and  middle-income 
countries, except those that are members of 
the G8 or the EU (including countries with 
a ﬁ rm date for EU admission). 

Total  external  debt  is  debt  owed  to 
nonresidents  repayable  in  foreign  cur-
rency, goods, or services. It is the sum of 
public,  publicly  guaranteed,  and  private 
non-guaranteed long-term debt, use of IMF 
credit,  and  short-term  debt.  Short-term 
debt  includes  all  debt  having  an  original 
maturity of one year or less and interest in 
arrears on long-term debt. 

Present  value  of  debt  is  the  sum  of 
short-term  external  debt  plus  the  dis-
counted  sum  of  total  debt  service  pay-
ments due on public, publicly guaranteed, 
and  private  nonguaranteed  long-term 
external  debt  over  the  life  of  existing 
loans. Data on external debt come mainly 
from reports to the World Bank through 
its Debtor Reporting System via member 
countries  that  have  received  IBRD  loans 

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   366
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   366

10/10/08   10:39:59 AM
10/10/08   10:39:59 AM

 

Selected world development indicators 

367

or IDA credits, with additional informa-
tion from the ﬁ les of the World Bank, the 
IMF, the African Development Bank and 
African  Development  Fund,  the  Asian 
Development  Bank  and  Asian  Devel-
opment  Fund,  and  the  Inter  American 
Development Bank. Summary tables of the 
external debt of developing countries are 
published  annually  in  the  World  Bank’s 
Global Development Finance.

Net migration is the total net number 
of migrants during the period, that is, the 
number of immigrants less the number of 
emigrants, including both citizens and non-
citizens. Data shown in the table are ﬁ ve-
year  estimates.  Data  are  from  the  United 
Nations Population Division’s World Popu-
lation Prospects: The 2006 Revision.

Domestic credit provided by banking 
sector  includes  all  credit  to  various  sec-
tors on a gross basis, with the exception of 
credit to the central government, which is 
net. The banking sector includes monetary 
authorities,  deposit  money  banks,  and 
other banking institutions for which data 
are  available  (including  institutions  that 
do not accept transferable deposits but do 
incur  such  liabilities  as  time  and  savings 
deposits). Examples of other banking insti-
tutions include savings and mortgage loan 
institutions and building and loan associa-
tions. Data are from the IMF’s International 
Finance Statistics.

Table 5. Key indicators for other 
economies
See  Technical  notes  for  table  1,  key 
indicators. 

Statistical methods
This section describes the calculation of the 
least-squares growth rate, the exponential 
(endpoint)  growth  rate,  and  the  World 
Bank’s Atlas methodology for calculating 
the conversion factor used to estimate GNI 
and GNI per capita in U.S. dollars.

Least-squares growth rate
Least-squares growth rates are used wher-
ever there is a sufﬁ ciently long time series to 
permit  a  reliable  calculation.  No  growth 
rate  is  calculated  if  more  than  half  the 
observations in a period are missing. 

The least-squares growth rate, r, is esti-
mated by ﬁ tting a linear regression trend-
line to the logarithmic annual values of the 
variable in the relevant period. The regres-
sion equation takes the form 

ln Xt = a + bt

which  is  equivalent  to  the  logarithmic 
transformation  of  the  compound  growth 
equation,

Xt = Xo (1 + r)t

In  this  equation,  X  is  the  variable,  t 
is time, and a = log Xo and b = ln (1 + r) 
are  the  parameters  to  be  estimated.  If  b* 
is the least-squares estimate of b, the aver-
age  annual  growth  rate,  r,  is  obtained  as 
[exp(b*)  –  1]  and  is  multiplied  by  100  to 
express it as a percentage. 

The calculated growth rate is an average 
rate that is representative of the available 
observations over the entire period. It does 
not  necessarily  match  the  actual  growth 
rate between any two periods. 

Exponential growth rate 
The growth rate between two points in time 
for certain demographic data, notably labor 
force and population, is calculated from the 
equation 

r = ln (pn /p1)/n

where pn and p1 are the last and ﬁ rst obser-
vations in the period, n is the number of 
years in the period, and ln is the natural 
logarithm  operator.  This  growth  rate  is 
based on a model of continuous, exponen-
tial growth between two points in time. It 
does not take into account the intermedi-
ate values of the series. Note also that the 
exponential  growth  rate  does  not  corre-
spond to the annual rate of change mea-
sured at a one-year interval which is given 
by

(pn – pn – 1)/pn – 1

World Bank Atlas method
In calculating GNI and GNI per capita in 
U.S.  dollars  for  certain  operational  pur-
poses, the World Bank uses the Atlas con-
version  factor.  The  purpose  of  the  Atlas 

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   367
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   367

10/10/08   10:39:59 AM
10/10/08   10:39:59 AM

368 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

conversion  factor  is  to  reduce  the  impact 
of exchange rate ﬂ uctuations in the cross-
country comparison of national incomes. 
The Atlas conversion factor for any year is 
the average of a country’s exchange rate (or 
alternative conversion factor) for that year 
and its exchange rates for the two preceding 
years, adjusted for the difference between 
the rate of inﬂ ation in the country and that 
in Japan, the United Kingdom, the United 
States,  and  the  Euro  Zone.  A  country’s 
inﬂ ation  rate  is  measured  by  the  change 
in its GDP deﬂ ator. The inﬂ ation rate for 
Japan,  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United 
States,  and  the  Euro  Zone,  representing 
international inﬂ ation, is measured by the 
change in the SDR deﬂ ator. (Special draw-
ing rights, or SDRs, are the IMF’s unit of 
account.)  The  SDR  deﬂ ator  is  calculated 
as  a  weighted  average  of  these  countries’ 
GDP  deﬂ ators  in  SDR  terms,  the  weights 
being  the  amount  of  each  country’s  cur-
rency in one SDR unit. Weights vary over 
time because both the composition of the 
SDR and the relative exchange rates for each 
currency change. The SDR deﬂ ator is calcu-
lated in SDR terms ﬁ rst and then converted 
to U.S. dollars using the SDR to dollar Atlas 
conversion factor. The Atlas conversion fac-
tor is then applied to a country’s GNI. The 
resulting GNI in U.S. dollars is divided by 
the midyear population to derive GNI per 
capita.

When  official  exchange  rates  are 
deemed to be unreliable or unrepresenta-
tive of the effective exchange rate during 
a  period,  an  alternative  estimate  of  the 
exchange rate is used in the Atlas formula 
(see below). 

The following formulas describe the cal-
culation of the Atlas conversion factor for 
year t :

and  the  calculation  of  GNI  per  capita  in 
U.S. dollars for year t:

Yt

$ = (Yt/Nt)/et*

where  et*  is  the  Atlas  conversion  factor 
(national  currency  to  the  U.S.  dollar)  for 
year t, et is the average annual exchange rate 
(national  currency  to  the  U.S.  dollar)  for 
S$ is 
year t, pt is the GDP deﬂ ator for year t, pt
the  SDR  deﬂ ator  in  U.S.  dollar  terms  for 
$ is the Atlas GNI per capita in U.S. 
year t, Yt
dollars  in  year  t,  Yt  is  current  GNI  (local 
currency) for year t, and Nt is the midyear 
population for year t.

Alternative conversion factors
The World Bank systematically assesses the 
appropriateness of ofﬁ cial exchange rates as 
conversion  factors.  An  alternative  conver-
sion factor is used when the ofﬁ cial exchange 
rate is judged to diverge by an exceptionally 
large margin from the rate effectively applied 
to domestic transactions of foreign curren-
cies  and  traded  products.  This  applies  to 
only a small number of countries, as shown 
in the primary data documentation table in 
World Development Indicators 2007. Alterna-
tive conversion factors are used in the Atlas 
methodology and elsewhere in the Selected 
World Development Indicators as single-year 
conversion factors.

WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   368
WDR09_22_SWDI.indd   368

10/10/08   10:44:53 AM
10/10/08   10:44:53 AM

Index

accessibility index, Mexico, 244b8.6
accidents, 191–92
ACP. See African, Caribbean, and Paciﬁ c (ACP) countries
administrative areas, economic activity link to development stages 

in, 83–84, 85t2.1

ad valorem transport charges, 179
advanced urbanization, 25map6c, 26–27, 201, 202, 223–29
Africa, 265b9.3

disparities in lagging areas of, 80b2.3
language diversity in, 104–5
life expectancy in, 111f3.12
tariffs in, 99, 99f3.3
transport sector, 186, 187t6.1

African, Caribbean, and Paciﬁ c (ACP) countries, EPAs with EU, 

265b9.3

agglomeration economies, 13–15, 26, 29, 34b0.1, 126

agriculture disperses and manufacturing clusters in, 132–33
ampliﬁ ed by density and attenuated by distance, 134–35
changes in to adapt to market forces, 142–44
China, 127b4.1
cities facilitation of, 134
clustering of services vs. clustering of manufacturing in, 

133–34

computing index for, 55b1.3
essentials of, 129
examples of, 128t4.1
Indonesia, 131–32
and knowledge production, 184
and mobility factors, 85
multicountry, 279–80
principles for managing, 200–202
Sub-Saharan Africa, 284–86
theoretical advances recognized, 136–37
and theories of labor mobility, 158–59
variations in by city size and proﬁ le, 137–38

economic activity link to development stages in, 83–84, 85t2.1
as geographic scale, 3b1
local 1-square kilometer areas, 60
as units for government action, 201–2

Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), 195, 196
autarky, and labor mobility, 149

backyard capitalism, 135
balanced industrial growth, 90–91b2.5
Balkan region, 274
Bamako, Mali, 48–49
Bangkok, transport infrastructure, 223b7.12
barriers to trade, 99
Belgium, 50
Bogotá, Colombia, 21, 22, 223, 225map7.5
Bolivia, border divisions in, 102b3.2
Bombay, India, slums in, 204, 205b7.3
borders

Africa, 187
artiﬁ cial borders, 105b3.4
Bolivia, 102b3.2
calculation of, 55b1.3
contrasted with divisions, 97–98
costs of border-crossing procedures, 189–90
cross-border migration, 152–53
cross-border production networks, 266
and economic impact of conﬂ icts on, 105
fragmentation of, 12, 13f3c
and growth spillovers, 102b3.1
increase in, 96, 97f3.1
and institutional cooperation, 266–67
integration of pairs of large cities separated by national borders, 

279–80

link of border restrictions to economic development, 97–98, 

agglomeration indexes, 54–56, 57f1.3, 60
agriculture sector, 253

Belgium, 50
dispersing of as producers seek scale economies, 132–33
link to towns, 53–54
trade of agriculture products as entry point for regional 

integration, 280

air pollution, 185b6.5, 190–91
air transport costs, 176
antidecentralization, 231b8.1
Arab Maghreb Union, 275
areas

concept of, 230
deﬁ nition of subnational areas, 78b2.1
description of, 35
development policies of to integrate nations, 27–29

99f3.2

negative inﬂ uence on trade, 46
openness of, 119–20
and patterns of labor mobility, 149–53
thickness of as obstacle to development, 265
and transport costs in Africa, 187

brain drains, 18, 147, 168, 168b5.9
brain gains, 168
Brazil

constitution and national unity in, 236b8.3
economic integration in, 241
internal migration in, 167b5.8
land use in, 204–5
local and national incentives in, 257
migration in, 15, 17
poor people in, 232–33

 

 

WDR09_23_index.indd   369
WDR09_23_index.indd   369

369

10/9/08   11:15:02 PM
10/9/08   11:15:02 PM

370 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Brazil (continued)

poverty rates in, 28map7b, 232–33
road networks, 251
Superintendency for the Development of the Northeast, 

38

Breaking New Ground, 214
Brussels, Belgium, 50
business services, imports in, 180–81
busways, 210, 223, 225map7.5
buyer-supplier networks, 177b6.2

Cambodia, rural-urban transformation in, 218, 219b79
Cameroon, rural-urban integration in, 220b7.11
Canada, 46, 79b2.2, 86
capital, 99–100

divisions as barrier to movement of, 171
and economic development, 84–85

capitalism, backyard capitalism, 135
capital mobility, 146–49, 171
capital restriction index, 100f3.4
the Caribbean, 274–75

education in, 156f5.4
transport costs, 192b6.7

Caribbean Community (CARICOM), 274–75
Caribbean Knowledge and Learning Network, 275
Caribbean Regional Negotiating Machinery, 274–75
CARICOM. See Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Cassa per il Mezzogiorno, 184b6.4
Central American Common Market, 270
Central American Electricity Connection System, 270
Central Asia, integration in, 277, 278b9.4
Central European Free Trade Agreement, 274
checkpoints, Africa, 187
Chile, border divisions in, 102b3.2
China

and exporting industries, 94, 94map2.6
inequalities in per capita provincial gross product of, 89, 

89f2.10

intermediate urbanization in, 221–22
investments in infrastructure, 227b7.14
migration of workers in, 13, 16map3, 17, 18
mobility with density in Hong Kong, China, 185b6.5
patterns of labor mobility in, 154–55b5.3
poverty rates, 28map7a
spatial integration in, 213
special economic zones in, 224b7.13, 254–55b8.10
trade policies, 76
and urbanization, 26b5, 217–18, 226
and urban renewal and redevelopment in, 142b4.6

circular causation, 171–72
cities

changes in to adapt to market forces, 142–44
China, 141–42
city-based growth, 137
empirical regularities of city-size distributions, 52b1.1
facilitation of scale economies in, 134
and importance of diversity and specialization in, 139b4.4

increase in population of, 12, 13b31
integration of pairs of large cities separated by national borders, 

279–80

integration of slums into, 227–29
new city initiatives, 144–45
patterns of specialization and diversity among, 137–40
population of, 49–50
size of related to plant size, 21b4
and telecommunication costs, 140b4.5
urban density of, 45–46
world cities, 137

Cities Alliance, 229b7.15
civil wars, economic costs of, 105
climate change, and urbanization, 211b7.6
coastal areas, 93–94, 94map2.6
cohesion policies, 236–37
Colombia, freight transport, 251–52
commodities, export of, 118–19
communal systems

land, 219
property rights, 203–4

communication costs, 13, 18–20, 180, 184
commuter rail systems, 208b7.4
competition

and the invisible hand, 135–36
and network economies, 186
within same industry, 130–31

compulsory purchases, 207
computer and electronics sector, 127b4.1
concentration

conﬂ icts and, 106
and economic geography, 41b0.4
of economic mass, 97, 238–40
of economic production, 8–10
geographic, 129b4.2
measures of, 60–62
pace and pattern of, 57–60
principles for managing, 200–202
promotion of in Japan, 208, 209b7.5
and transport costs, 183–84, 185b6.5
See also economic concentration

conﬂ icts, 105, 106
congestion, 190

in intermediate urbanization, 220–23
reduction of, 207–8, 209b7.5
See also concentration

constitutions, emphasis on national unity in, 236b8.3
consumption, 166

convergence of, 10–12
in developing countries, 141–42
and economic development, 2
increase in for urban residents, 8–9
in leading areas, 9
rural-urban disparities in, 64–65

containerization, 177–79
corruption, 186, 274
Costa Rica, urban housing shortage, 214
cost discovery, 263b9.2

WDR09_23_index.indd   370
WDR09_23_index.indd   370

10/9/08   11:15:02 PM
10/9/08   11:15:02 PM

 

costs

distance-related, 75, 77
of doing business, 6b2
economic costs of conﬂ ict and territorial disputes, 105
shipping, 176–79
See also communication costs; transport costs

Côte d’Ivoire, 236b8.3
cotton, 280, 280map9.6
countries

with bigger and denser places, 61
description of, 35
and distance challenges for integration, 275–77
as geographic scale, 3b.1
impact of divisions on, 98–101
impact of transport costs on concentration within, 183–84, 

185b6.5

integration options for market access, 273–75
resource-poor, 102b3.1
sea-locked, 103–4
size of, 101–3, 103b3.3
taxonomy to assist integration policies in, 241
See also landlocked countries

cropland per farmer, 132
cross-border migration, 152–53
cross-border production networks, 266
cultural divisions, 104–5
cultural facilities, 51, 52
cumulative causation, 2, 284
customs regimes, 188

Daegu, Korea, 220–23
decentralization, 221–22, 231, 257
vs. antidecentralization, 231b8.1

demand. See supply and demand
demographic development, 238
Deng Xiaoping, 73
Denmark, land reform to facilitate urbanization in, 203b7.2
density

agglomeration economies ampliﬁ ed by, 134–35
concentration link to development, 60–62
deﬁ nition, 49–56
as dimension of development, 6b2, 7
hierarchy of, 49–50
institutions and infrastructure to overcome, 242–45, 246t8.1
in leading areas compared to distance in lagging areas, 78–80
link of demand management and public transportation to, 208, 

210–12

measures of, 54–56
mobility with density in Hong Kong, China, 185b6.5
movement toward, 15
overview, 48–49
of population in United States, 44
reduction of during intermediate urbanization, 220–23
as spatial dimension, 36–37
spatially connective infrastructure to reduce distance to, 206–12
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 284–86
See also economic density

Index 

371

developed countries

impact of migration on, 161–68
and regional and global integration, 264–65

developing economies, 128

clustering of services vs. clustering of manufacturing in, 133–34
consumption in, 141-42
differences in, 93–95
dynamics of economic geography on, 120–21
economic growth in, 159–60
impact of migration on, 161–68
labor mobility patterns in, 155, 156t5.3
new cities in, 224b7.13
patterns of urbanization in, 71–72
regional and global integration in, 262–65
scale economies in, 132–33
slums in, 4map1, 5
spatial disparities in living standards in, 87–89
and transport and trade costs, 173
transport policies in, 184–92

development

assessing performance of policies for, 259t8.4
attributes of, 2–3
challenges of, 3–5
and concentration of economic wealth, 115–20
and density concentration, 60–62
dimensions of, 6–8
and distance, 6b2, 17, 36-37
and divergence and convergence of slums within cities, 66–70
and economic concentration, 57–60
ﬁ ndings concerning, 49
framework for policies that promote, 246t8.1
and international comparisons of economic concentration, 

83–84

rural-urban disparities in, 62–66
spatially balanced, 73
stages of related to spatial concentration of economic activity, 

82–83

strategies for Africa, 282–83

diseconomies, 144
distance

advantage of locations close to markets, 76–77
agglomeration economies attenuated by, 134–35
challenges of for integration options for countries, 275–77
countries distant from world markets with small neighbors, 

277–83

as dimension of development, 6b2, 7, 36–37
in East Asia, 194–96
as an economic concept, 75, 76map22
ﬁ ndings concerning, 74
impact on trade, 108–9
institutions and infrastructure to overcome, 241–45, 246t8.1
migration as way to reduce, 77–78
openness matters for, 94
as spatial dimension, 36–37
spatially connective infrastructure to reduce distance to density, 

206–12

in Sub-Saharan Africa, 284–86
as trade deterrent, 182

WDR09_23_index.indd   371
WDR09_23_index.indd   371

10/9/08   11:15:03 PM
10/9/08   11:15:03 PM

372 

diversity

industrial diversity and urbanization, 131–32
and specialization in cities, 137–40

divisions

and aspects of regional concentration on wealth, 115–20
as barriers to movements of capital and labor, 171
beyond control of countries, 101–5
and capital ﬂ ows, 99–100
contrasted with borders, 97–98
deﬁ nition of, 97–105
as dimension of development, 6b2, 7
in East Asia, 194–96
and economic concentration, 105–9
and economic costs of conﬂ ict and territorial disputes, 

105

and economic geography, 120–21
ethnic and cultural, 104–5
and ﬂ ow of goods and services, 98–99
impacts on countries, 98–101
institutions to overcome, 244–45
main ﬁ ndings concerning, 96–97
as spatial dimension, 36–37
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 284–86
as trade deterrent, 182

Doha Round, 187–88
domestic disparities, 5
domestic transport, 173–74
Dongguan, China, scale economies in, 126, 127b4.1

EAC. See East African Community (EAC)
earnings. See income; wages
East African Community (EAC), 152b5.1
East Asia

average annual growth rate of GDP, 110f3.11, 112–13
disparities in lagging areas of, 80b2.3
distance and division in, 194–96
economic growth in, 89, 89f2.8
and income divergence then convergence, 112–13

Eastern Caribbean Telecommunications Authority, 275
Eastern Europe

average annual GDP growth, 113–14
economic growth in, 89, 89f2.8
impact of labor and social policies on migration, 160b5.4
income convergence in, 113–14
income disparities, 91f2.11

economic analysis, insights from, 21b4
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), 21–22, 

32, 152b5.1

economic concentration
and divisions, 105–9
historical perspective, 106–8
international comparisons of, 83–84
pace and pattern of, 57–60
See also concentration
economic density, 195–96

and population density, 29
problems of in large cities, 142–44

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

spatially blind institutions to facilitate, 202–6
in three geographic scales, 8–10
See also density

economic development, 97

impact of geography, globalization, and development on, 

115–20

importance of location in, 1–2
link to malaria, 116, 117b3.7
spatial disparities in, 39b0.3
See also development

Economic Development Administration, U.S. Commerce 

Department, 256

economic forecasting, 198–99
economic geography, 115, 173, 200b7.1

and assistance for Africa, 282–83
and concentration, 41b0.4
and convergence, 41b0.4
impact on economic development, 120–21
incentives to exploit, 252–53
integration, 41b0.4
and trade, 263–64
and transport costs, 181–82
United States, 44–45
See also geography
economic growth, 128

impact of migration on, 159–61, 161b5.5
and labor mobility, 162, 163b5.6, 164f5.8
at national geographic scale, 3b1, 5
reformulation of models of, 159, 160
spatial balancing of, 5–6

economic integration, 1

and area development policies, 27–29
Bogota, 21, 22
impact of openness on, 119–20
political beneﬁ ts of, 258–59
promotion of, 2, 22–24
strategies and priorities for, 272, 273t9.4
Turkey, 21, 22
West Africa, 21–22
See also integration

economic mass, 97, 238-40
Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs), 265, 265b9.3
economic production, concentration of, 8–10
economies of scale. See scale economies
ECOWAS. See Economic Community of West African States 

(ECOWAS)

education

convergence of as incomes diverge, 92–93
impact on welfare, 247
improvements in, 110–11
inequalities in access to, 111–12
and internal migration, 156f5.4, 157f5.5
and mobility-enhancing regional infrastructure, 268
and patterns of labor mobility, 155–57, 158t5.6
Uganda, 247, 248b8.7

Egypt, Arab Republic of, 224b7.13, 243, 245map8.6
eminent domain, 44, 207
emissions, 190, 191f6.6, 211b7.6

WDR09_23_index.indd   372
WDR09_23_index.indd   372

10/9/08   11:15:03 PM
10/9/08   11:15:03 PM

 

employment

density of, 54
rates of, 164–65

enclosure movement, 203
endogenous growth model, 159
EPAs. See Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs)
ethnic divisions, 104–5
ethnic heterogeneity, 242
ethnic minorities, disparities among, 80, 80b2.3
EU. See European Union (EU)
Euclidean distances, 75
Euro-Mediterranean Forum, 273–74
Europe, compared to Asia, 194
European Union (EU), 236–38, 2324

criteria used to deﬁ ne lagging areas in, 79b2.2
EPAs with African, Caribbean, and Paciﬁ c countries, 265b9.3
GDP per capita, 62
inequalities of market incomes in, 238
Ireland’s use of EU funds for international convergence, 237–38
and regional integration, 274
territorial policy, 39b0.3

Everything But Arms initiative, 38
exports, 99

of commodities, 118–19
connecting to markets, 251–52
and distance to markets, 6b2
perishable goods, 177b6.2
regional and global integration of, 262–65

expropriation risks, 204
external scale economies, 127b4.1, 128t4.1

factor mobility, 241, 258, 285–86
ﬁ nal goods, 20b3
ﬁ nancial sector, 52, 133, 251, 266
First Law of Geography, 76
ﬁ rst-nature geography, 116, 117b3.7
Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, Japan, 87b2.4
Floor Space Index (FSI), 205b7.3
foreign aid, 5
foreign born population, 150
foreign direct investments (FDIs), 148f5.2, 149, 161, 266, 274
foreign spaces, unequal access to, 100
France

divergence then convergence of income and welfare in, 86
increasing spatial concentration and decreasing spatial 

disparities in, 238, 238f8.1

size of cities in, 51

free trade, 260
freight costs, 175–76, 192b6.7, 251–52
FSI. See Floor Space Index (FSI)

GDP. See gross domestic product (GDP)
geographic concentration, reasons ﬁ rms locate closer to each 

other, 129b4.2

geographic information systems, 54–56, 57f1.3
geographic scales, 3–6

Index 

373

geography

and access to global markets, 29–32
and concentration of economic wealth, 115–20
and disparities in income and welfare in developed countries, 

85–87

ﬁ rst-nature geography, 116, 117b3.7
natural geography, 84
physical geography, 115, 173, 240, 263–64
second-nature geography, 116, 118
unevenness of, 2
See also economic geography

Germany, 78b2.1, 235b8.2
Ghana, 253
Gibrat’s law, 51, 52b1.1
globalization, 96, 97f3.1, 128t4.1

and concentration of economic wealth, 115–20
ﬁ nancial, 100
increase in capital mobility during, 147–49
and patterns of labor mobility, 153
and transport costs, 170, 175

global markets. See world markets
Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP), 55b1.3
goods and services delivery, link to border permeability, 98–99
goods-producing industries, 130
governance, 274
Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS), cross-border migration in, 

153b5.2

gross domestic product (GDP), 49, 62, 194

and density of economic activity, 78b2.1, 83, 83f2.2
and economic concentration, 57–60, 105–6
generated by commuters, 56
and geographic disparities, 95
Germany, 78b2.1
global trade as share of, 12, 13f3b
growth of, 30f7, 96, 97map3.1, 110f3.11, 112–13, 236–37
increase in from 1500-1998, 109t3.2, 110
and landlocked countries, 102b3.1
and relationship between economic activity and stages of 

development, 83–84

and residential mortgage markets, 206
shares of world GDP, 107f3.8
Southeast Asia, 89, 89f2.9
spatial distribution of, 39b0.3
Sub-Saharan countries, 265b9.3
trade as share of, 93f2.13, 94

gross national income (GNI), link to migration, 100
gross regional product (GRP), 90–91b2.5
GRUMP. See Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP)

health

convergence of as incomes diverge, 92–93
improvements in, 110–11
as indicator of well-being of urbanites, 72
and road fatalities, 191–92
in slums, 67

heavy industries, and internal scale economies, 129–30
high-income countries, and density concentration, 61

WDR09_23_index.indd   373
WDR09_23_index.indd   373

10/9/08   11:15:03 PM
10/9/08   11:15:03 PM

374 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

high-technology industries, 133
historical accidents, 233
home places, 159
Honduras, poverty rate in leading and lagging areas, 82map2.5
Hong Kong, China

mobility with density in, 185b6.5
spatial integration in, 213
and urban renewal and redevelopment in, 142b4.6

hosiery industry, 131
household consumption, 2, 10–12, 166
household registration, 76, 154–55b5.3
household surveys, 88–89
housing

costs of, 205b7.3
and land use, 204
occupant-owned, 206
regulations for ﬁ nance of, 206
shortage of, 214
Sweden, 215b7.8
See also slums

hukou household registration system, 154–55b5.3
human capital, 146, 157

external effects from clustering of, 160
investments in, 245–50
movement of skilled workers, 21b4
See also labor mobility

human development index, 92, 246, 247f8.2
hydropower, 267

ICT. See information and communication technology (ICT)
ideas

idea-driven economies, 137
link to division changes in countries, 100–101

immigration policies, 157
imports, business services, 180–81
Improved Road Transport Governance Initiative, West Africa, 187
incentives, 22–24, 25, 231b8.1, 256

for advanced urbanization, 223–26
area incentives, 256–57
coordination of, 257, 266, 269–73
design of, 257–58
to facilitate regional integration, 281–83
ﬁ nancial, 253–55
for integrating slums into cities, 227–29
for migration, 77
to overcome distance, density, and divisions, 244–45
and policy framework for economic integration, 240
spatially focused, 37–39, 253-57
that exploit geographic advantages, 252–57

incipient urbanization, 25–26, 201, 202, 204, 216–20
inclusive urbanization, 229
income, 2, 6, 8, 45, 46

convergence of, 10–12, 235b8.2

divergence then convergence of in developed countries, 

85–87

in faster-growing regions, 112–15
in middle-income countries, 92

disparities in Eastern Europe, 91f2.11
disposable income, 62
divergence of, 10–12, 112f3.14

as health and education converge, 92–93
between richest and poorest countries, 110–11
then convergence of in developed countries, 85–87

East Asia, 195
European Union, 238
Germany, 235b8.2
improvements in, 110
as indicators of well-being of urbanites, 72
Latin America, 112, 115b3.8
predictors of, 1
spatial inequalities of in fast-growing countries, 89–92
and Todaro class of migration models, 159–60
United States, 165b5.7
upper-middle class, 8

income tax systems, United States, 238–39
India

barriers to labor mobility in, 162, 163b5.6
criteria used to deﬁ ne lagging areas in, 79b2.2
economic integration in, 241
federal transfers in, 248
Indian Railways, 175b6.1
labor mobility in, 29
lagging areas in, 233–34
licensing systems, 256
migration in, 15, 17
poverty rates, 28map7c
slums in, 204, 205b7.3, 227
spatially balanced growth in, 233
special economic zones in, 254–55b8.10

Indonesia

agglomeration economies in, 131–32
and distance to economic centers, 76
rural-urban integration in, 220b7.11

industrialization

and acceleration of urbanization, 61
in China, 154–55b5.3
link to labor mobility, 149
policies for, 24, 27
Soviet Union, 90–91b2.5

industries

industrial diversity, 138
industrial zones, 224b7.13
location patterns of, 138–40
market-oriented, 94map2.6
spatial concentration of, 133
vertically integrated industries, 256
information, freedom of access to, 101
information and communication technology (ICT), 77, 138, 251

export of, 101
New York City, 143b4.7

information technology (IT), 119, 188, 189
infrastructure, 22–24, 25, 173, 231b8.1
for advanced urbanization, 223–26
China, 26b5
to connect lagging and leading areas, 250–52

WDR09_23_index.indd   374
WDR09_23_index.indd   374

10/9/08   11:15:03 PM
10/9/08   11:15:03 PM

 

Index 

375

cross-border, 267–68
evolvement of, 207
for increasing density and reducing congestion, 220–23
as instrument for integration, 37–39
for integrating slums into cities, 227–29
intercity, 208
interregional, 252
investments in, 176–77
Italy, 184b6.5
natural infrastructure, 126
to overcome distance and density, 242–45, 246t8.1
policies in Bombay, 205b7.3
and policy framework for economic integration, 240
as prerequisite for spatially-targeted interventions, 212
regional, 266, 267–69
and spatial integration in Hong Kong, China, 213
and targeted interventions, 214–15
and transport providers, 186–87
See also spatially connective infrastructure; transport 

infrastructure

innovations, 131–32, 135
input-sharing, 130–31
institutions, 22–23, 25, 231b8.1

for advanced urbanization, 223–26
China, 26b5
for connective infrastructure, 206–7
to connect lagging and leading areas, 250–52
evolvement of, 207
for increasing density and reducing congestion, 220–23
institutional mechanisms used to overcome physical distances 

in United States, 44–45
institutional reforms, 274–75
as instrument for integration, 37–39
for integrating slums into cities, 227–29
for integration in Central Asia, 277, 278b9.4
land market institutions for rural-urban integration, 220b7.11
for more efﬁ cient rural-urban transformations, 216–20
to overcome density, distance, and divisions, 241–45, 246t8.1
and policy framework for economic integration, 240
as prerequisite for spatially targeted interventions, 212
to promote portable investments, 245–50
reforms to improve regional integration, 275–76
for slum upgrading and prevention, 229b7.15
and spatial integration in Hong Kong, China, 213
and targeted interventions, 214–15
See also spatially blind institutions

instruments, for integration, 37–39, 271, 273b9.4
integrated ﬁ rms, 138
integration

antiglobal integration, 261b9.1
in Central Asia, 277, 278b9.4
challenges of distance and division in, 195–96
in China, 227b7.14
and economic geography, 41b0.4
framework for, 202–16, 265–73
in Germany, 235b8.2
institutional mechanisms for, 271
instruments for, 37–39

of neighboring markets, 105
options for countries distant from world markets with small 

neighbors, 277–83

of Paciﬁ c islands with world markets, 277, 278b9.5
policy framework for integrating lagging and leading areas, 

238–45, 246t8.1

political beneﬁ ts of economic integration, 258–59
principles for managing, 200–202
regional and global integration, 262–65
strategies to integrate poor countries with world markets, 

260–62

urbanization framework in action, 216–29
See also economic integration; regional integration; rural-urban 

transformations

intergovernmental transfers, 248, 249b8.8
intermediate goods, 20, 22, 182
intermediate inputs, 19–20
intermediate urbanization, 25map6b, 26, 201, 202, 220–23
internal economies, 128t4.1, 129
internal labor mobility, 153–55, 156t5.3

comparison of internal migrants and native workers, 162, 

164f5.8

and economic growth, 162
India, 162, 163b5.6
relationship of skills and education to, 155–57, 158f5.6
See also labor mobility

internal migration, Brazil, 167b5.8
internal scale economies, 127b4.1, 128t4.1

in heavier industries, 129–30
in light industries, 130, 132b4.3

International Development Association, 281
international geographic scale, 3–5, 6b2, 7, 8, 10
international labor mobility, relationship of skills and education 

to, 155–57, 158f5.6

Internet, 138
interregional infrastructure, 252
interregional trade, East Asia, 194–95
interstate highway system, 46
interventions, 25, 26

as instrument for integration, 37–39
to integrate the urban poor, 228t7.2
link to institutions and infrastructure, 214–15
soft interventions, 255–56
spatially targeted, 23–24, 37–39, 42, 238, 242

intervento straordinario, 184b6.4
intraindustry trade, 19–20, 22, 136–37
and communication costs, 180–81
historical perspective, 171, 171f6.1, 182, 183f6.5
and increase in transport intensity, 175–79

investments, 25

FDIs, 148f5.2, 149, 161
in industrial sector, 255
in infrastructure, 184b6.4

in China, 227b7.14
cross-country, 276–77

institutions that promote, 245–50
in research and development, 101
in social services, 87b2.4

WDR09_23_index.indd   375
WDR09_23_index.indd   375

10/9/08   11:15:03 PM
10/9/08   11:15:03 PM

376 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Iran, Islamic Republic of, 63b1.5, 250–51
Ireland, international convergence using EU funds, 237–38
isolationism, 194
Istanbul, Turkey, 225–26
Italy, and transport costs, 184b6.4

Jacobs, Jane, 49
Japan

divergence then convergence of income and welfare in, 86–87
Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, 87b2.4
spatially connective policies to promote concentration, 208, 

209b7.5

jet engines, 176, 177b6.2
juice tankers, 176–77

Kazakhstan, 52b1.1
Kenya, disparities in lagging areas of, 80b2.3
knowledge

access to, 95
production of, 184
sharing of, 183–84
spillovers of, 134, 158

Korea, Republic of, 53b1.2, 246

infrastructure development project in, 220–22
ranking of industries in, 133
rural-urban integration in, 220b7.11
spatially targeted incentives in, 253
urbanization in, 216–17, 224–25

Kuznets, Simon, 33

labor markets, 22
labor mobility, 18, 147, 171

barriers to in India, 162, 163b5.6
conclusions from analysis of, 158–68
and economic growth, 84–85, 162, 163b5.6, 164f5.8
impact of policies on migration, 169b5.4
India, 29
international, 155–57, 158f5.6
and migration theory, 159–61, 161b5.5
and mobility-enhancing regional infrastructure, 268
overview, 146–47
patterns of, 149–53, 155, 156t5.3
and RTAs, 266
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 151–52, 281
voluntary migration, 169
See also capital mobility; internal labor mobility

lagging areas, 22, 24, 29

criteria used to deﬁ ne, 79b2.2
development policies for, 230–31
and differences in modern developing countries, 93–95
distance in compared to density in leading areas, 78–80
and distribution of poor people, 232–33
divergence then convergence of economic activity in, 84–85
Egypt, 245map8.6
impact of internal labor migration on, 162–65

income disparities in, 89, 89f2.9
India, 233–34
institutions and infrastructure to connect to leading areas, 

250–52

integration of, 27–29
living standards in, 247f8.2
Mexico, 244b8.6
and mobile phones, 251
policy framework for integrating lagging and leading areas, 

238–45, 246t8.1

poverty rates in, 81, 82map2.5
seeking unity with leading areas, 234–38
and welfare indicators, 73

Lagos, Nigeria, 48
land and land use, 15, 26

and building regulations, 204-6, 226–27
costs of in Russia, 241–42
deﬁ nition and enforcement of land rights, 218
and diseconomies, 144
and economic activity link to development stages of, 83–84, 

85t2.1

and exclusion of poor, 228
Hong Kong, China, 213
as immobile factor to production, 142
improving administration of, 218–20
institutions for land markets, 202, 203–4, 220b7.11
management of, 202–3
markets for, 22
policies for, 25

Land Consolidation Program, Indonesia, 220b7.11
landlocked countries, 101, 102b3.1, 102b3.2, 103map3.3

and beyond the border trade, 267
development strategies for, 282–83
impact of openness and integration on, 119–20
integration options for, 277–83
and time costs of border crossings, 190

LandScan, 55b1.3
language diversity, 104–5
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 242, 243map8.5, 246, 247f8.2
large cities, patterns of specialization and diversity among, 138–40
Latin America

education in, 156f5.4
per capita incomes, 112, 115b3.8
and transport costs, 192b6.7

leading areas, 22, 74

consumption in, 9
density in compared to distance for lagging areas, 78–80
and differences in modern developing countries, 93–95
divergence then convergence of economic activity in, 84–85
economic concentration in, 81–84, 85t2.1
impact of internal labor migration on, 162–65
income disparities in, 89, 89f2.9
institutions and infrastructure to connect to lagging areas, 

250–52

integration of, 27–29
living standards in, 247f8.2
policy framework for integrating lagging and leading areas, 

238–45, 246t8.1

WDR09_23_index.indd   376
WDR09_23_index.indd   376

10/9/08   11:15:04 PM
10/9/08   11:15:04 PM

 

Index 

377

poor people in, 81, 82map2.5
production in, 9
seeking unity with lagging areas, 234–38

Lewis, Arthur, 161b5.5
licensing systems, 256
life expectancy index, 92
life expectancy, 110, 111, 111f3.12
light industries, 130, 132b4.3, 133
liner shipping, 176
literacy rates, 92, 93
living standards, 1

convergence of, 10–12, 45–46, 73
disparities within cities, 66–70
divergence in, 3–5, 10–12
ﬁ ndings linking to development, 49
impact of migration on, 165
Malaysia, 27
spatial disparities in, 39b0.3, 87–89
spatial equities in, 238
United States, 73
variations in leading and lagging areas, 247f8.2

living standard surveys, and household consumption, 2
local geographic scale, 3–5

and concentration of economic production, 8–9
and density, 6b2, 7

localization economies, 14, 21b4, 128t4.1, 129, 221–22

Indonesia, 132b4.3
and industry patterns, 137–40
from input-sharing and competition within the industry, 

130–31

locations

advantages of distance to markets, 76–77
and prosperity, 1–8
See also distance

logistics, and time factors in international trade, 179–80
low-income countries, and density concentration, 61
Lucas, Robert E, Jr., 161b5.5

Maddison, Angus, 194
Le Mâitre, Alexandre, 51
malaria, 116, 117b3.7
Malaysia

agriculture sector, 253
geographic convergence in welfare, 92, 92f2.12
improvement of living standards in, 27

Mali, 48–49, 220b7.11
manmade barriers, to distance, 75
manufacturing sector

China, 127b4.1
clustering of as producers seek scale economies, 132–33
importance of, 119
and internal scale economies, 129–30
link to economic distance, 76–77
spatial concentration of, 209b7.5

marginalization index, 79b2.2
maritime transport, 176–79, 188, 189, 192b6.7
markets and marketing

advantage of distance to, 76–77
changes in cities to adapt to forces of, 142–44
connecting producers to markets by mail, 251–52
country scores for access to, 270–73
as drivers of density and migration, 45
forces of, 13–20
global nature of, 12, 13f3b
impact of policy makers on, 128
importance of market access, 108–9
institution cooperation for, 265, 266–67
integration options for countries close to world markets, 

273–75

market forces, 128, 130–41
market-oriented industries, 94map2.6
Mexico, 244b8.6
preferential access to, 282-83
size of, 41b0.4
and spatial dimensions, 36–37
and spatially targeted incentives, 253–57
See also world markets

Marshall, Alfred, 134
mass rapid transit, 210
McLean, Malcom, 178b6.3
MDGs. See Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
mega-cities, 140–41
mercantile period

capital mobility during, 147–49
labor mobility during, 149–53

mercantile trade industry, 142
metropolitan economy, 49
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, New York City, 208b7.4
Mexico, 46

criteria used to deﬁ ne lagging areas in, 79b2.2
industrial development in, 256
market access in lagging areas of, 244b8.6

Mezzogiorno, 184b6.4
middle-income countries, 61, 92
mid-size cities, 137–40
migration, 34b0.1, 100

and beneﬁ ts of economic growth, 159–61, 161b5.5
China, 13, 16map3, 17, 18
and division changes in countries, 100
economic perspective on, 161b5.5
to exploit proﬁ t from proximity, 13, 15–18
Germany, 235b8.2
impact of labor and social policies on, 160b5.4
international, 17, 150–52
link to physical distance, 75
policies for managing, 168–69
rates of, 247
reasons for migrating, 166–67, 166t5.4
restrictions on, 100
rural-to-rural, 153
as way to reduce distance, 77–78

military confrontations, costs of, 105
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 27
Millennium Development Indicators, 92–93
minimum wages, 160b5.4

WDR09_23_index.indd   377
WDR09_23_index.indd   377

10/9/08   11:15:04 PM
10/9/08   11:15:04 PM

378 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

Mints, Alexei, 90–91b2.5
mobile phones, 251, 268
mobility

with density, 185b6.5
and economic development, 84–85
factor mobility, 241, 258, 285–86
free movement of people, 260
and opportunity seeking, 231–34
See also capital mobility; labor mobility

Morocco, 52b1.1
mortality rates

as indicators of well-being of urbanites, 72
in slums, 68b1.6
Thailand, 92–93

multilocation ﬁ rms, 138
Mumbai, India, slums in, 204, 205b7.3

NAFTA. See North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
national geographic scale, 3–5, 7

and concentration of economic production, 8, 9
and distance, 6b2, 7

National Slum Development Program, India, 227
national unity, 234–38
native workers, compared to internal migrants, 162, 164f5.8
natural gas, 102b3.2
natural resources, 101–3, 103b3.3
navigation, 174
neighborhoods

close to world markets, 275
effects of, 2
identiﬁ cation of for institutional reform, 278–81
importance of, 2
natural neighborhoods, 35, 278–81
regional, 150–53

New Partnership for Africa’s Development, 281
New York City

adapting to market forces, 143b4.7
transport system and urbanization, 207, 208b7.4

Nigeria, 48, 236b8.3

and dimensions of development in, 6b2
intergovernmental transfers, 249b8.8

Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), 50, 

78b2.1, 135, 237

nontariff barriers, 99
North, Douglas, 203
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), 46, 113, 264
NUTS1. See Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS)

OECD. See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-

opment (OECD)

offshoring tasks, 180
Ohmae, Kenichi, 96
oil revenues, 275
open registry shipping, 176

opportunities

in Russian Federation, 241–42
sought by people, 231–34
for women in Germany, 235b8.2

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

(OECD), 225

density threshold used by, 55b1.3, 56
and federal transfers, 248
GDP per capita in countries of, 63
and incentives to stimulate lagging areas, 256t8.2
patterns of migration to countries of, 150–52
preferential access for Africa to OECD markets, 282–83

Osaka-Kobe, Japan, 109b7.5
outcome-oriented policy framework, 247
outcomes

in education, 110, 110f3.10
identiﬁ cation of, 259

output density, 116
outsourcing, 134–35, 181

Paciﬁ c Islands

EPAs with EU, 265b9.3
integration into world markets, 277, 278b9.5

Pan-Arab Free Trade Area, 275
passport costs, 100
pension beneﬁ ts, 250
per capita gross national income, 2
per capita incomes, 8

growth in, 46
link to income growth, 45
and market access, 108b3.5
See also gross domestic product (GDP)

performance monitoring mechanisms, 229b7.15
perishable goods, 177b6.2, 179, 273
Peru, postal service in, 251, 251b8.9
physical geography, 115, 240

and trade, 263–64
and transport costs, 173
physical infrastructure, 185
places

evolving portfolio of, 51–54
link to income, 46

plants, and size of cities, 21b4
policies and policy makers

for area development to integrate nations, 27–29
and attributes of development, 2–3
cohesion policies, 236–37
concerning infrastructure to reduce distance to density, 206–12
consideration of area as unit of government action, 201–2
framework for economic growth, 40–43
immigration policies, 157
integration framework in action, 216–29, 245–58
and lagging and leading areas

for countries seeking unity between lagging and leading 

areas, 234–38

WDR09_23_index.indd   378
WDR09_23_index.indd   378

10/9/08   11:15:04 PM
10/9/08   11:15:04 PM

 

Index 

379

criteria used to deﬁ ne lagging areas, 79b2.2
development policies for lagging areas, 230–31
framework for integrating lagging and leading areas, 238–45, 

producers, connecting to markets, 251–52
product cycles, 179–80
production

246t8.1

for managing migration, 168–69
and market forces, 128
national industrial policies, 253
and political beneﬁ ts of economic integration, 258–59
preferential trade agreements, 282
pricing policies, 257
protectionist trade policies, 175
to reduce economic disparities, 22–24
for regional integration, 261b9.1, 265–73, 273–83
spatially blind policies, 200b7.1
spatially targeted interventions for slums, 212–15
transport polices in developing world, 184–92
and urbanization

framework for, 199–200
policies for stages of, 24–27
policy instrument for dimensions of, 215–16
spatially blind institutions to facilitate, 202–3
strategies for inclusive urbanization, 229

political centers, 51, 52, 53b1.2
poor people

in Brazil, 232–33
China, 232
distribution of, 232–33
India, 233–34
interventions to integrate urban poor, 118t7.2
in leading areas, 81, 82map2.5

population

city comparisons, 49–50
density in United States, 44
density of link to economic mass, 54
foreign born population, 150
geographic centers of in United States, 44mapG1.1
increase in cities, 12, 13b31
in lagging areas, 24, 27–29, 29
prediction of, 198–99
spatial distribution of, 39b0.3
Sub-Saharan Africa, 284–86
in urban areas, 3, 5

port efﬁ ciency, 188, 189, 192b6.7
postal service, 251, 251b8.9
poverty

and landlocked countries, 101, 102b3.1, 102b3.2, 

103map3.3

link to malaria, 116, 117b3.7
poverty rates in lagging areas, 81, 82map2.5

poverty maps, 27
poverty rates

Brazil, 232–33
India, 233–34

pricing, policies for, 257
primary cities, 49, 51–52
private sector, and slum upgrading and prevention, 229b7.15

and communication costs, 180–81
concentration of, 8–10
diversiﬁ cation through regional cooperation, 263b9.2
facilities for, 257
fragmentation of, 120
importance of location in, 2
intermediate inputs of, 19–20
land as immobile factor in, 142
in leading areas, 9
and location of ﬁ rms and facilities, 41b0.3, 179–80
spatial disparities in, 6
spatially efﬁ cient distribution of, 46
specialization of, 34b0.1

production networks, 180, 194–95, 266
productivity, 84

gains from scale economies, 135
increase in, 183
rural-urban disparities in, 62–66

proﬁ t, migration to proﬁ t from proximity, 13, 15–18
progressive tax systems, 239–40
property registry systems, 214
property rights, 203
prosperity, and location, 1–8
provincial growth product, inequalities in, 89, 89f2.10
proximity, migrating to for proﬁ t, 13, 15–18
proximity trap, 284
psychic costs, 75
public goods and services

access to, 10–12
delivery of link to border permeability, 98–99
as indicators of well-being of urbanites, 72
provision of, 275–76, 281
as reason for migration, 166t5.4, 167–68
taxonomy of properties of, 269–70
transfer mechanisms for, 247–50

public health, in slums, 68b1.6
public housing, Sweden, 215b7.8
public transportation

New York City, 207, 208b7.4
as promoter of higher density, 208, 210–12

rail freight costs, 175–76
rail systems, 174, 208b7.4

Indian Railways, 175b6.1

rank-size rule of cities, 51, 52b1.1
rapid transit systems, 223, 225map7.5
redistributive transfers, 247–50
reforms, institutional, 266–67, 274–76, 278–81
Regional African Communications Organization, 268
regional infrastructure, 266, 267–69

investment in, 281
trade enhancing, 268–69

WDR09_23_index.indd   379
WDR09_23_index.indd   379

10/9/08   11:15:04 PM
10/9/08   11:15:04 PM

380 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

regional integration

diversifying production through, 263b9.2
ﬁ ndings concerning, 113–14
framework in action, 273–83
geography of, 270–73
and growth spillovers, 102b3.1
and income convergence, 112
to increase access to world markets, 29–32
institutional reform to improve, 275–76
instrument per dimension of, 271, 273t9.4
investments in cross-country infrastructure for, 276–77
policy framework for, 265–73
Sub-Saharan Africa, 286
trade of agricultural products as entry point to, 280
See also integration

regional trade agreements (RTAs), 102b3.1, 266, 280
regions

cooperation in, 19
description of, 35–36, 36b0.2
development of markets in, 261
as geographic scale, 3b1
income convergence within faster growing, 112–15
patterns of migration in regional neighborhoods, 150–53
policies to integrate nations, 27–29
regional cities, 52–54

regulations

for housing ﬁ nance, 206
land market regulations, 250
for land use and building, 204–6, 226–27
of transport for beneﬁ ts of scale economies, 186–87

remittance ﬂ ows, 161–62, 165–66, 168
rent-seeking, 186
research and development, 101
resource allocations, 236
response rule, 40–42
Ricardo, David, 106
roads

road networks, 251
road space, 144
road transport costs, 175

RTAs. See regional trade agreements (RTAs)
rural areas

link to towns, 53–54
rural households and macroeconomic policies, 200b7.1
rural-to-rural migration, 153
rural-urban disparities in, 62–66

rural-urban transformations, 216–20

in Cambodia and Vietnam, 218, 219b7.9
China, 226, 227b7.14
and land market institutions, 220b7.11

Russian Federation, population and economic opportunities in, 

241–42

sanitation, in slums, 67
scale economies

agriculture disperses and manufacturing clusters in, 132–33
ampliﬁ ed by density and attenuated by distance, 134–35

in China, 126, 127b4.1
cities facilitation of, 134
clustering of services vs. clustering of manufacturing in, 133–34
and enhancement of productivity-enhancing regional 

infrastructure, 268
guide to, 128t4.1, 129–32
list, 128t4.1
overview, 126
theoretical advances recognized, 136–37
and transport costs, 171–72, 181–84
transport sector, 19, 186–87
in United States, 46

sea-locked countries, 103–4
search costs, 180
secondary cities, 49–50, 52
second-nature geography, 116, 118
security, in slums, 67
Seoul, Korea, 220–23, 224–25
services

clustering of in scale economies, 133–34
and developing economies, 132–33
fragmentation of, 20b3
and internal scale economies, 129–30
rural-urban disparities in, 65

SEZs. See special economic zones, (SEZs)
shipping

costs for, 176–79
rates of, 174
routes, 172

sigma-convergence, 46
Singapore, slums in, 214, 215b7.8
size

and economic prosperity, 101–3, 103b3.3
inﬂ uence of, 118
as volume of demand, 183

skills

and patterns of internal and international migration, 155–57, 

158f5.6

skilled emigrants, 168

slums

as challenge for economic integration, 24
in developing countries, 4map1, 5
divergence and convergence within cities, 66–70
India, 204, 205b7.3, 227
integration into cities, 227–29
Singapore, 214, 215b7.8
slum improvement programs, 26, 229b7.15
spatially targeted interventions for, 212–15
Sweden, 213
in world class cities, 69b1.7

smaller cities, 52–53, 137–38
Smith, Adam, 14–15, 93, 126, 135, 194
social inequalities, 39b0.3, 46
social policies, impact on migration, 150b5.4
social services, 26, 216–28

China, 227b7.14
and policies to manage migration, 168–69
rising investments in, 87b2.4

WDR09_23_index.indd   380
WDR09_23_index.indd   380

10/9/08   11:15:04 PM
10/9/08   11:15:04 PM

 

Index 

381

South Africa, housing shortage, 214
South America, 115b3.6
South Asia

average annual growth rate of GDP, 110f3.11
disparities in lagging areas of, 80b2.3
tariffs in, 99, 99f3.3

Southeast Asia, per capita GDP in, 89, 89f2.9
Southern African Development Community, 270
Southern Cone of South America, 115b3.8
Southern Europe, 115b3.8
South Paciﬁ c Regional Trade and Economic Cooperation 

Agreement (SPARTECA), 278b9.5

Soviet Union, spatial inefﬁ ciency and fall of, 90–91b2.5
SPARTECA. See South Paciﬁ c Regional Trade and Economic 

Cooperation Agreement (SPARTECA)

spatial dimensions, elements of, 36–37
spatial disparities, 80b2.3

in developed countries, 85–87
France, 238, 238f8.1
in incomes in fast-growing countries, 89–92
in living standards in developing countries, 87–89
and U.S. tax system, 238–39

spatial integration, 22–24
spatially balanced development, 73
spatially blind institutions, 22–24, 29, 38, 202–3

and economic integration policies, 231b8.1
to overcome density and distance, 242–44
See also institutions

spatially connective infrastructure, 23–24, 29, 38

China, 221–22
Egypt, 243–44
Iran, 250–51
Japan, 208, 209b7.5
Korea, 221
to reduce distance to density, 206–12
See also infrastructure

spatially targeted incentives, 37-39, 253–57
spatially targeted interventions, 23–24, 37–39, 42, 238, 242
spatial scales, 35–36
spatial transformations, 33, 198–99
special economic zones, (SEZs), 224b7.13, 254–55b8.10
specialization

and diversity in cities, 137–40
of production, 34b0.1
and transport costs, 13, 18–20

spillovers

of growth from across borders, 102b3.1
of knowledge, 134, 158
from proximity to density, 76–77
regional, 116

Stabilization and Association Agreements, 274
standard of living. See living standards
statistical areas, and economic activity link to development stages, 

83–84, 85t2.1

subnational areas

deﬁ nition of, 78b2.1
rural-urban convergence in, 66
spatial disparities of living standards in, 87–89

subnational governments, and decentralization, 231
Sub-Saharan Africa

brain drain in, 168b5.9
density, distance, and division in, 284–86
GDP for, 265b9.3
and labor mobility, 151–52, 281
urbanization in, 59b1.4

subway systems, 208b7.4, 210
Superintendency for the Development of the Northeast 

(SUDENE), Brazil, 38

supply and demand

demand management relationship to public transportation, 

208, 210–12

regional global integration for, 262–65

Sweden, slums in, 213
symbiosis, and large cities, 52, 53

tanneries, 6b2
tariffs, 99, 192b6.7
taxonomy, to assist countries integration policies, 241
tax systems, 238–40
technical information, 101
technologies, for transport sector, 173, 177b6.2
telecommunications, 138, 267, 275

costs of, 140b4.5
impact of costs on, 94–95
and labor mobility, 157

territorial development, 27–29, 286
territorial disputes, economic costs of, 105
territorial policies, of European Union, 39b0.3
territorial units, classiﬁ cation of, 78b2.1
textile producers, 131
TFP. See total factor productivity (TFP)
Thailand, 153b5.2
time

costs of, 189
as factor in international trade, 179–80

Tinbergen principle, 229
Tobler, Waldo, 76
Todaro class of migration models, 159–60
Tokyo-Yokohama, Japan, 109b7.5
total factor productivity (TFP), 77, 116, 135
tourism, 177b6.2
town planning, Hong Kong, China, 213
towns, 53–54
trade, 182

in agricultural products for regional integration, 280
and institutional cooperation, 266–67
in intermediate goods, 20, 22
international, 179–80, 182
interregional, 193–95, 194–95
link to border permeability, 98–99
logistics and time factors in, 75, 179–80
national efforts and regional coordination to facilitate, 187–90
between neighbors, 182–83
preferential trade agreements, 282–83
protectionist policies for, 175

WDR09_23_index.indd   381
WDR09_23_index.indd   381

10/9/08   11:15:05 PM
10/9/08   11:15:05 PM

382 

WO R L D   D E V E LO P M E N T   R E P O RT   2 0 0 9

trade (continued)

regional and global integration of, 262–65
restraints, 45
as share of global GDP, 93f2.13, 94
shipping routes, 172
trade-enhancing regional infrastructure, 268–69
trade friction, 179–81
trade volume, 171–72
See also intraindustry trade; markets and marketing; transport 

costs; world markets

trade agreements, 46, 271, 273t9.4
training, and mobility-enhancing regional infrastructure, 268
tramp shipping, 176–79
transfers, 247–50
transfrontier regionalism, 279
transmigration programs, 238
transport costs, 94–95, 134, 170

across United States, 45
air transport costs, 176
China, 251
concentration within countries, 183–84, 185b6.5
domestic transport, 173–74
and economic concentration, 252
and economic geography, 181–82
and growth strategies, 21b4
historical perspective, 170–71, 173–81
impact of distance on, 285–86
and increase in transport intensity, 175–79
and infrastructure, 186–87, 212
international transport, 174
and intraindustry trade, 20b3
Italy, 184b6.4
maritime transport costs, 176–79
rail freight costs, 175–76
reduction in, 45
road transport costs, 175
and scale economies, 171–72, 181–84
in sea-locked countries, 103
specialization and trading as costs fall, 13, 18–20
Sub-Saharan Africa, 286
and trade between neighbors, 182–83
and trade-enhancing regional infrastructure, 268–69
and trade friction, 179–81
trade volume impact on, 171–72
transport infrastructure, 46, 75, 175

in advanced urbanization, 223–29
to connect lagging and leading areas, 250–52

transport sector

Africa, 186, 187t6.1
and air pollution, 190–91
in developing countries, 267
domestic transport, 173–74
and economic concentration, 252
and expansion of cities, 144
importance of sector, 192–93
and institutional cooperation, 266–67
international transport, 174–75
investments in, 222

Mexico, 244b8.6
negative externalities of, 190–92
policies in developing world, 184–92
scale economies in, 19
technology inventions for, 177b6.2
urban transport systems, 183, 185b6.5
weight-value ratio in, 179

travel speed, link to market access, 77f2.1
trust, as component of regional cooperation, 270
Turkey, 21, 22, 225–26

Uganda, 236b8.3, 247, 248b8.7
unemployment, 184b6.4, 215b7.8
unemployment insurance, 160b5.4
UN-HABITAT, 229b7.15
United Kingdom

criteria used to deﬁ ne lagging areas in, 79b2.2
divergence then convergence of income and welfare in, 85–86
economic development in, 255
infrastructure in, 206–7

United Nations, region classiﬁ cation, 36b0.2
United States

borders of, 46
convergence of living standards, 73
divergence then convergence of income and welfare in, 85–86
economic development programs in, 256
economic geography of, 44–45
evolvement of institutions and infrastructure in, 207
federal income tax system, 238–39
historical perspective of wages in United States South, 165b5.7
investing in human capital, 246–47
rank-size rule of, 52b1.1
slums in, 213

urban areas, 55b1.3

and density, 49
and external economies, 141
rural-urban disparities in, 62–66
transport sector in, 222
See also slums

urban hierarchy, 51, 53b1.2
urbanization, 3, 9, 128t4.1, 129

and access to public services, 10–12
Africa, 59b1.4, 285
China, 26b5, 154–55b5.3
and climate change, 211b7.6
and divergence and convergence of slums within cities, 66–70
economic activities in, 141–42
framework in action, 216–29
and housing ﬁ nance regulations, 206
indicators of well-being in, 72
from industrial diversity that fosters innovation, 131–32
infrastructure policies to reduce distance to density, 206–12
Korea, 216–27
land reform to facilitate in Denmark, 203b7.2
and land use and building regulations, 204–6
measures of, 54–56, 57f1.3
pace and pattern of, 57–59, 70–71

WDR09_23_index.indd   382
WDR09_23_index.indd   382

10/9/08   11:15:05 PM
10/9/08   11:15:05 PM

 

Index 

383

policy considerations for, 24–27, 199–200
policy instruments for dimensions of, 215–16
principles for managing, 200–202
promotion of, 23–24
rate of, 8
and reduction of congestion, 207–8, 209b7.5
rural-urban disparities in, 62–66
spatially targeted interventions for, 212–15
strategy for inclusive urbanization, 229
Sub-Saharan Africa, 285, 286
Turkey, 225–26
United Kingdom, 206–7
volume of in developing countries, 71–72
See also slums

urbanization economies, 15, 215–16
urban residents, deﬁ nition of, 8

Vajpayee, Behari, 120
value added, 49, 181
value-to-weight ratios, 179, 182
variable trade costs, 180
vehicles

and congestion, 210
and enlargement of cities, 45–46
growth in numbers of, 144

vertically integrated industries, 256
Vietnam

poverty in lagging and leading areas, 81map2.4
rural-urban transformation of, 218, 219b7.9

visa requirements, 100, 101f3.5

WAEMU. See West African Economic and Monetary Union 

(WAEMU)

wages

Asia vs. Europe, 194
converging of, 10–12
historical perspective in United States South, 165b5.7
and labor mobility, 164–65
rural-urban disparities in, 62–66

water management, 275
wealth

concentration of, 9f1c, 10, 115–20
rural-urban disparities in, 64

The Wealth of Nations, 14–15, 93, 126, 135

welfare

divergence then convergence of in developed countries, 85–87
and factor mobility, 258
impact of education on, 247
improvements in, 110
indicators of, 73
Malaysia, 92, 92f2.12
rural-urban disparities in, 62–66
spatial disparities in developing countries, 87–89

West Africa, 187

cotton-led industrial development in, 280, 280map9.6
and economic integration, 21–22

West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), 263b9.2, 

264–65

Western Asia

average annual GDP growth, 113–14
income convergence in, 113–14
tariffs in, 99, 99f3.3

World Bank, region classiﬁ cation, 36b0.2
World Development Report 2009

elements not covered in, 34b0.1
scope of, 34
structure of, 39–43
terms used in, 34–39

world markets

countries distant from world markets with small neighbors, 

277–83

and geography of regional integration, 270–73
importance of, 93–94
and institutional reforms, 274–75
integration options

for countries close to world markets, 273–75
for distance obstacles, 275–77
integrating Paciﬁ c Islands into, 277, 278b9.5
regional integration to increase access to, 29–32
strategies to integrate poor countries into, 260-62

and telecommunications, 275

World Trade Organization (WTO), 187–88, 265b9.3, 266, 278b9.4
World Urbanization Prospects, 55b1.3, 56, 58, 285
WTO. See World Trade Organization (WTO)

Zheng He, 194
Zipf ’s law, 51, 139
zoning policies, 207, 228

WDR09_23_index.indd   383
WDR09_23_index.indd   383

10/9/08   11:15:05 PM
10/9/08   11:15:05 PM

E C O - A U D I T

Environmental Beneﬁ ts Statement

The  World  Bank  is  committed  to 
preserving endangered forests and 
natural resources. The Ofﬁ ce of the 
Publisher  has  chosen  to  print  the 
World  Development  Report  2009 
on  recycled  paper  with  10  percent 
postconsumer  ﬁ ber  in  accordance 
with  the  recommended  standards 
for  paper  usage  set  by  the  Green 
Press Initiative, a nonproﬁ t program 
supporting publishers in using ﬁ ber 
that is not sourced from endangered 
forests.  For  more  information,  visit 
www.greenpressinitiative.org.

Saved:
• 92 trees
•  64 million BTUs of 
total energy
•  211,008 pounds of 
CO2 equivalent 
greenhouse gases
•  700,880 gallons of 
waste water
•  83,411 pounds of 
solid waste

WDR09_23_index.indd   384
WDR09_23_index.indd   384

10/29/08   9:53:00 AM
10/29/08   9:53:00 AM

reshaping 
economic 
geography

Places do well when they promote transformations along the dimensions 
of economic geography: higher densities as cities grow; shorter 
distances as workers and businesses migrate closer to density; and 
fewer divisions as nations lower their economic borders and enter 
world markets to take advantage of scale and trade in specialized 
products. World Development Report 2009 concludes that the 
transformations along these three dimensions—density, distance, and 
division—are essential for development and should be encouraged. 

The conclusion is controversial. Slum-dwellers now number a billion, 
but the rush to cities continues. A billion people live in lagging areas of 
developing nations, remote from globalization’s many benefits. And poverty 
and high mortality persist among the world’s “bottom billion,” trapped 
without access to global markets, even as others grow more prosperous 
and live ever longer lives. Concern for these three intersecting billions often 
comes with the prescription that growth must be spatially balanced. 

This report has a different message: economic growth will be unbalanced. 
To try to spread it out is to discourage it—to fight prosperity, not 
poverty. But development can still be inclusive, even for people who 
start their lives distant from dense economic activity. For growth to be 
rapid and shared, governments must promote economic integration, 
the pivotal concept, as this report argues, in the policy debates on 
urbanization, territorial development, and regional integration. Instead, 
all three debates overemphasize place-based interventions. 

Reshaping Economic Geography reframes these debates to include 
all the instruments of integration—spatially blind institutions, spatially 
connective infrastructure, and spatially targeted interventions. By 
calibrating the blend of these instruments, today’s developers can 
reshape their economic geography. If they do this well, their growth 
will still be unbalanced, but their development will be inclusive.

