HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT
REPORT  2004

Cultural Liberty in Today’s Diverse World

Accommodating people’s growing demands for their inclusion in society,

for respect of their ethnicity, religion, and language, takes more than democracy

and equitable growth. Also needed are multicultural policies that 

recognize differences, champion diversity and promote cultural freedoms,

so that all people can choose to speak their language, practice 

their religion, and participate in shaping their culture—

so that all people can choose to be who they are.

Key to countries

HDI 
RANK
65 Albania
108 Algeria
166 Angola
55 Antigua and Barbuda
34 Argentina
82 Armenia
3 Australia
14 Austria
91 Azerbaijan
51 Bahamas
40 Bahrain
138 Bangladesh
29 Barbados
62 Belarus
6 Belgium
99 Belize
161 Benin
134 Bhutan
114 Bolivia
66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
128 Botswana
72 Brazil
33 Brunei Darussalam
56 Bulgaria
175 Burkina Faso
173 Burundi
130 Cambodia
141 Cameroon

4 Canada

105 Cape Verde
169 Central African Republic
167 Chad
43 Chile
94 China
73 Colombia
136 Comoros
144 Congo
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
45 Costa Rica
163 Côte d'Ivoire
48 Croatia
52 Cuba
30 Cyprus
32 Czech Republic

17 Denmark
154 Djibouti
95 Dominica
98 Dominican Republic
100 Ecuador
120 Egypt
103 El Salvador
109 Equatorial Guinea
156 Eritrea
36 Estonia
170 Ethiopia
81 Fiji
13 Finland
16 France
122 Gabon
155 Gambia
97 Georgia
19 Germany
131 Ghana
24 Greece
93 Grenada
121 Guatemala
160 Guinea
172 Guinea-Bissau
104 Guyana
153 Haiti
115 Honduras
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
38 Hungary
7 Iceland

127 India
111 Indonesia
101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
10 Ireland
22 Israel
21 Italy
79 Jamaica
9 Japan
90 Jordan
78 Kazakhstan
148 Kenya
28 Korea, Rep. of
44 Kuwait
110 Kyrgyzstan
135 Lao People's Dem.  Rep.
50 Latvia
80 Lebanon

145 Lesotho
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
41 Lithuania
15 Luxembourg
60 Macedonia, TFYR
150 Madagascar
165 Malawi
59 Malaysia
84 Maldives
174 Mali
31 Malta
152 Mauritania
64 Mauritius
53 Mexico
113 Moldova, Rep. of
117 Mongolia
125 Morocco
171 Mozambique
132 Myanmar
126 Namibia
140 Nepal

5 Netherlands
18 New Zealand
118 Nicaragua
176 Niger
151 Nigeria
1 Norway

102 Occupied Palestinian 

Territories

74 Oman
142 Pakistan
61 Panama
133 Papua New Guinea
89 Paraguay
85 Peru
83 Philippines
37 Poland
26 Portugal
47 Qatar
69 Romania
57 Russian Federation
159 Rwanda
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
71 Saint Lucia
87 Saint Vincent and the 

Grenadines

75 Samoa (Western)

123 São Tomé and Principe
77 Saudi Arabia
157 Senegal
35 Seychelles
177 Sierra Leone
25 Singapore
42 Slovakia
27 Slovenia
124 Solomon Islands
119 South Africa
20 Spain
96 Sri Lanka
139 Sudan
67 Suriname
137 Swaziland

2 Sweden
11 Switzerland
106 Syrian Arab Republic
116 Tajikistan
162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
76 Thailand
158 Timor-Leste
143 Togo
63 Tonga
54 Trinidad and Tobago
92 Tunisia
88 Turkey
86 Turkmenistan
146 Uganda
70 Ukraine
49 United Arab Emirates
12 United Kingdom
8 United States
46 Uruguay
107 Uzbekistan
129 Vanuatu
68 Venezuela
112 Viet Nam
149 Yemen
164 Zambia
147 Zimbabwe

™xHSKBTFy221466zv*:+:!:+:!

I S B N   0 - 1 9 - 5 2 2 1 4 6 - X

In our diverse world more than two-thirds of countries have minority groups that make up more
than 10% of their population, and nearly a billion people belong to groups subject to some form
of exclusion. Human Development Report 2004: Cultural Liberty in Today’s Diverse World argues
that  states  must  actively  devise  multicultural  policies  to  prevent  discrimination  on  cultural
grounds—religious, ethnic and linguistic. The expansion of cultural freedoms, not suppression, is
the only sustainable option to promote stability, democracy and human development within and
across societies.

Such policies are not always simple, but many countries are making headway. The Report debunks
the myths that have been used to deny expansions of cultural freedoms, showing that diversity is
not a threat to state unity, not the source of inevitable “clashes”, not an obstacle to development.
Instead, it is at the core of human development—the ability of people to choose who they are.
The Report presents a path-breaking framework to examine issues that leap from the headlines
to the forefront of the international policy agenda: migration, predatory extremism, customary law
and cultural diversity. 

In its 15th year, the annual Human Development Report continues to frame debates on the most
pressing challenges—new and old—for enabling people to live full and creative lives. 

Human Development Report 2004…

• Features an analysis of the vital links between human development and cultural 

liberty by Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen.

• Identifies living mode exclusions as well as political, economic and social 

exclusions (participation exclusion) faced by culturally identified groups.

• Presents cutting-edge multicultural approaches covering power-sharing, religious 

and secular states, language policy, legal pluralism and affirmative action.

• Analyzes the rise of coercive movements for cultural domination and their 

challenges to democracies.

• Examines key areas of policy for cultural diversity and globalization, including 

traditional knowledge, trade in cultural goods and migration. 

• Includes special contributions from Shirin Ebadi, John Hume, Hamid Karzai, 

Nelson Mandela and Ole Henrik Magga. 

HDR Website: http://hdr.undp.org

 

H
D
R
2
0
0
4

 
 

•

C
u

l
t
u
r
a

l
 

L
i

b
e
r
t
y

 
i

 

n
T
o
d
a
y

 

’
s
D

i
v
e
r
s
e
W
o
r
l

 

d

 

O
X
F
O
R
D

NEW MATERIALS FROM THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT OFFICE

HDR Background Papers and National Human Development Reports

Available on the HDR website at: http://hdr.undp.org

Journal of Human Development: Alternative Economics in Action
Launched in January 2000, this journal provides a new perspective on human potential, growth, and markets.
The editors believe that development cuts across economic, social and political issues and that this multi-
dimensional nature is often overlooked. This peer-reviewed journal publishes original work that expands
concepts and measurement tools for human development and that challenges traditional views of economics.
It provides a forum for an open exchange of ideas among a broad spectrum of policy makers, economists,
and academics. It addresses issues at the global, national and local levels. Human development is becoming
a “school of thought” for alternative economic approaches, and the journal acts as a conduit for members
and critics of this school.

Available through:
Carfax Publishing, Taylor and Francis Ltd. 
Customer Services Department,
Rankine Road, Basingstoke, Hants RG24 8PR, UK  
Tel: +44(0)1256 813002, Fax: +44(0)1256  330245
Email: journals.orders@tandf.co.uk
Website: www.tandf.co.uk/journals

Carfax Publishing, Taylor and Francis Inc.
Customer Services Department 
325 Chestnut Street, 8th Floor 
Philadelphia, PA 19106, USA  
Tel:+1 215-625-8900, Fax: +1215 625 8914

Carfax Publishing, Taylor and Francis Ltd.
PO Box 352, Cammeray
NSW 2062, Australia
Tel: +61 (0)2 99585329, Fax: +61 (0)2 9958 2376

Themes of the Human Development Reports

Millennium Development Goals: A Compact Among Nations to End Human Poverty
Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented World
Making New Technologies Work for Human Development
Human Rights and Human Development
Globalization with a Human Face
Consumption for Human Development 

2003
2002
2001
2000
1999 
1998 
1997  Human Development to Eradicate Poverty
1996 
1995 
1994 
1993 
1992 
1991 
1990 

Economic Growth and Human Development
Gender and Human Development
New Dimensions of Human Security
People’s Participation
Global Dimensions of Human Development
Financing Human Development
Concept and Measurement of Human Development

For more information visit:

http://hdr.undp.org

Handprints. Across time, cultures and continents they carry the message, “I am”. 

I am an artist of the Pleistocene. I left my handprint in caves from Gibraltar to Tasmania.
I am a ﬁve-year-old child. I hope to start school in 2005 and learn in my own language.

I am a worker in the city, but I am also an elder of my people, a caretaker and teacher of our beliefs and customs.

Culture is the most enduring artifact of humanity, and humans have ﬂourished on the Earth 

mainly through culture. Family, tribe, chiefdom, nation-state.

I am my language, my symbols, my beliefs.

I am. We are.

HUMAN 
DEVELOPMENT 
REPORT 2004

Cultural liberty
in today’s
diverse world

Published
for the United Nations
Development Programme
(UNDP)

Copyright ©2004
by the United Nations Development Programme
1 UN Plaza, New York, New York, 10017, USA

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without prior permission.

ISBN 0-19-522146-X

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed by Hoechstetter Printing Co. on chlorine-free paper with vegetable inks and 
produced by means of environmentally compatible technology.

Cover and design: Gerald Quinn, Quinn Information Design, Cabin John, Maryland
Information design: Grundy & Northedge, London
Editing, desktop composition and production management: Communications Development Incorporated, 
Washington, DC

For a listing of any errors or omissions in HDR2004 found subsequent to printing, please visit our website at 
http://hdr.undp.org

TEAM FOR THE PREPARATION OF
Human Development Report 2004

Director and Lead Author

Sakiko Fukuda-Parr

Core team
Carla De Gregorio, Haishan Fu (Chief of Statistics), Ricardo
Fuentes, Arunabha Ghosh, Claes Johansson, Christopher
Kuonqui, Santosh Mehrotra, Tanni Mukhopadhyay, Stefano
Pettinato, David Stewart and Emily White

Statistical adviser: Tom Griffin 

Editors: Cait Murphy and Bruce Ross-Larson 

Cover and layout design: Gerald Quinn
Information design: Grundy & Northedge

Principal consultants
Amartya Sen (Chapter 1), Lourdes Arizpe, Robert Bach, Rajeev
Bhargava, Elie Cohen, Emmanuel de Kadt, Nicholas Dirks,
K.S.  Jomo,  Will  Kymlicka,  Valentine  Moghadam,  Joy
Moncrieffe, Sam Moyo, Brendan O’Leary, Kwesi Kwaa Prah,
Barnett R. Rubin, Daniel Sabbagh, D.L. Sheth, Rodolfo
Stavenhagen, Alfred Stepan, Deborah Yashar and Aristide
Zolberg

HDRO colleagues
The team expresses its sincere gratitude for the invaluable support and contributions from their colleagues in the Human Development
Report Office (HDRO). Administrative support for the Report’s preparation was provided by Oscar Bernal, Renuka Corea-Lloyd and
Mamaye Gebretsadik. Outreach and promotional work for the Report were provided by Nena Terrell with Maria Kristina Dominguez
and Anne-Louise Winsløv. HDRO operations were managed by Yves Sassenrath with Marie Suzanne Ndaw. And the team collaborated
with members of the National Human Development Report (NHDR) Unit including: Sarah Burd-Sharps (Deputy Director HDRO and
Chief NHDR Unit), Marcia de Castro, Sharmila Kurukulasuriya, Juan Pablo Mejia and Mary Ann Mwangi. 

Foreword 

At a time when the notion of a global “clash of
cultures”  is  resonating  so  powerfully—and
worryingly—around the world, finding answers
to the old questions of how best to manage and
mitigate conflict over language, religion, culture
and ethnicity has taken on renewed importance.
For development practitioners this is not an ab-
stract question. If the world is to reach the Mil-
lennium Development Goals and ultimately
eradicate poverty, it must first successfully con-
front the challenge of how to build inclusive,
culturally diverse societies. Not just because doing
so successfully is a precondition for countries to
focus properly on other priorities of economic
growth, health and education for all citizens. But
because allowing people full cultural expression
is an important development end in itself. 

Human development is first and foremost
about allowing people to lead the kind of life they
choose—and providing them with the tools and
opportunities to make those choices. In recent
years Human Development Report has argued
strongly that this is as much a question of poli-
tics as economics—from protecting human rights
to deepening democracy. Unless people who
are poor and marginalized—who more often
than not are members of religious or ethnic mi-
norities or migrants—can influence political ac-
tion at local and national levels, they are unlikely
to get equitable access to jobs, schools, hospi-
tals, justice, security and other basic services. 
This year’s Report builds on that analysis,
by carefully examining—and rejecting—claims
that cultural differences necessarily lead to so-
cial, economic and political conflict or that in-
herent cultural rights should supersede political
and economic ones. Instead, it provides a pow-
erful argument for finding ways to “delight in
our differences”, as Archbishop Desmond Tutu
has put it. It also offers some concrete ideas on
what it means in practice to build and manage

the politics of identity and culture in a manner
consistent with the bedrock principles of human
development.

Sometimes, that is relatively easy—for ex-
ample, a girl’s right to an education will always
trump her father’s claim to a cultural right to
forbid her schooling for religious or other rea-
sons. But the question can get much more com-
plicated. Take education in the mother tongue.
There is persuasive evidence that young children
are more successful learning in their own lan-
guage. However, what is an advantage at one
point in life—and indeed may remain an in-
dispensable bedrock of identity throughout
life—can turn into a disadvantage in other ways
when lack of proficiency in more widely used
national or international languages can severely
handicap employment opportunities. As this
Report makes clear, from affirmative action to
the role of the media, there are no easy—or
one size fits all—rules for how best to build
working multicultural societies. 

Even so, one overarching lesson is clear:
succeeding is not simply a question of legisla-
tive and policy changes, necessary though they
be. Constitutions and legislation that provide
protections and guarantees for minorities, in-
digenous people and other groups are a criti-
cal foundation for broader freedoms. But unless
the political culture also changes—unless citi-
zens come to think, feel and act in ways that gen-
uinely accommodate the needs and aspirations
of others—real change will not happen. 

When the political culture does not change,
the consequences are disturbingly clear. From dis-
affected indigenous groups across Latin America,
to unhappy minorities in Africa and Asia, to new
immigrants across the developed world, failing to
address the grievances of marginalized groups
does not just create injustice. It builds real prob-
lems for the future: unemployed, disaffected

v

youth, angry with the status quo and demanding
change, often violently.

That is the challenge. But there are also real
opportunities.  The  overarching  message  of
this Report is to highlight the vast potential of
building a more peaceful, prosperous world by
bringing issues of culture to the mainstream of
development  thinking  and  practice.  Not  to
substitute for more traditional priorities that
will remain our bread and butter—but to com-
plement and strengthen them. The flip side of
the  development  divide  is  that  developing
countries  are  often  able  to  draw  on  richer,
more diverse cultural traditions—whether cap-
tured in language, art, music or other forms—
than their wealthier counterparts in the North.
The globalization of mass culture—from books
to films to television—clearly poses some sig-
nificant threats to these traditional cultures. But
it also opens up opportunities, from the nar-
row sense of disadvantaged groups like Aus-
tralian  Aborigines  or  Arctic  Inuit  tapping

global art markets, to the broader one of cre-
ating more vibrant, creative, exciting societies.
Like all Human Development Reports,
this is an independent study intended to stim-
ulate  debate  and  discussion  around  an  im-
portant  issue,  not  a  statement  of  United
Nations or UNDP policy. However, by taking
up an issue often neglected by development
economists  and  putting  it  firmly  within  the
spectrum of priorities in building better, more
fulfilled lives, it presents important arguments
for UNDP and its partners to consider and act
on in their broader work. This year, I would
also  like  to  pay  particular  tribute  to  Sakiko
Fukuda-Parr, who is stepping down after 10
successful  years  leading  our  Human  Devel-
opment  Report  Office.  I  would  also  like  to
extend special thanks to Amartya Sen, one of
the godfathers of human development, who has
not only contributed the first chapter but been
an enormous influence in shaping our think-
ing on this important issue.

Mark Malloch Brown
Administrator, UNDP

The analysis and policy recommendations of this Report do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, its Executive Board or its Member States. The Report is an independent publication commissioned by UNDP. It is the fruit of
a collaborative effort by a team of eminent consultants and advisers and the Human Development Report team. Sakiko Fukuda-Parr,
Director of the Human Development Report Office, led the effort.

vi

Acknowledgements

This Report could not have been prepared with-
out the generous contributions of many indi-
viduals and organizations.

The team expresses its sincere gratitude to
Professor Amartya Sen, who provided the con-
ceptual framework for the Report.

CONTRIBUTORS

The team is particularly grateful for its collab-
oration with the Director-General of UNESCO,
Koïchiro Matsuura, and his staff, especially
Ann-Belinda Preis, Katarina Stenou and Rene
Zapata.

Many background studies, papers and notes
were prepared on thematic issues related to
identity, cultural diversity and cultural liberty.
These were contributed by Lourdes Arizpe,
Robert Bach, Rajeev Bhargava, Elie Cohen,
Emanuel De Kadt, Carolyn Deere, Nicholas
Dirks, K.S. Jomo, Will Kymlicka, Valentine
Moghadam, Joy Moncrieffe, Sam Moyo, Bren-
dan O’Leary, Kwesi Kwaa Prah, Barnett R.
Rubin, Daniel Sabbagh, Amartya Sen, D.L.
Sheth, Rodolfo Stavenhagen, Alfred Stepan,
Deborah Yashar and Aristide Zolberg. Chap-
ter 2 benefited from the country maps and as-
sociated information on conflict provided by the
Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery, es-
pecially from the work of Meegan Murray,
Praveen Pardeshi and Pablo Ruiz.

Several  organizations  generously  shared
their data and other research materials: Car-
bon Dioxide Information and Analysis Cen-
ter; Caribbean Community Secretariat; Center
for International Comparisons at the Univer-
sity  of  Pennsylvania;  Economic  and  Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific; Food
and Agriculture Organization; International

Institute for Strategic Studies; International
Labour  Organization;  International  Mone-
tary  Fund;  International  Organizations  for
Migration; International Telecommunication
Union;  Inter-Parliamentary  Union;  Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS;
Luxembourg Income Study; Organisation for
Economic  Co-operation  and  Development;
Stockholm International Peace Research In-
stitute;  United  Nations  Children's  Fund;
United Nations Conference on Trade and De-
velopment; United Nations Economic Com-
mission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and
Cultural Organization Institute for Statistics;
United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for
Refugees;  United  Nations  Office  on  Drugs
and Crime; United Nations Office of Legal Af-
fairs;  United  Nations  Population  Division;
United  Nations  Statistics  Division;  World
Bank; World Health Organization and World
Intellectual Property Organization.

The team also expresses its appreciation for
the support received from the Rockefeller Foun-
dation, especially Ram Manikkalingam, Janet
Maughan, Joan Shigekawa, Lynn Szwaja, Tomas
Ybarro-Frausto as well as Gianna Celli and
Nadia Giladroni at the Bellagio Rockefeller
Foundation Conference and Study Center.

ADVISORY PANEL

The  Report  benefited  greatly  from  intellec-
tual advice and guidance provided by an ex-
ternal advisory panel of eminent experts. The
panel included Arjun Appadurai, Robert Bach,
Seyla Benhabib, Nancy Birdsall, Jody Naran-
dran  Kollapen,  Mahmood  Mamdani,  Sonia
Picado,  Surin  Pitsuwan,  Jorge  F.  Quiroga,

vii

Paul Streeten, Victoria Tauli-Corpus, Ngaire
Woods, Rene Zapata and Antonina Zhelyaz-
kova. An advisory panel on statistics included
Sudhir Anand, Paul Cheung, Willem DeVries,
Lamine  Diop,  Carmen  Feijo,  Andrew  Flatt,
Paolo Garonna, Robert Johnston, Irena Kriz-
man,  Nora  Lustig,  Ian  Macredie,  Marion
McEwin,  Wolf  Scott,  Tim  Smeeding  and
Michael Ward.

CONSULTATIONS

Many individuals consulted during the prepa-
ration of the Report provided invaluable ad-
vice, information and material. The Report team
thanks Carla Abouzahr, Yasmin Ahmad, Patri-
cia Alexander, Serge Allegrezza, Anna Alvazzi
del Frate, Shaida Badiee, Yusuf Bangura, Nefise
Bazoglu, Grace Bediako, Matt Benjamin, Yonas
Biru, Ties Boerma, Eduard Bos, Thomas Buet-
tner, Tony Burton, Rosario Garcia Calderon, Joe
Chamie, Shaohua Chen, Paul Cheung, Martin
Chungong, David Cieslikowski, Lee Cokori-
nos, Patrick R. Cornu, Kim Cragin, Trevor
Croft, Gaurav Datt, Ian Dennis, Yuri Dikhanov,
Dennis Drescher, Asghar Ali Engineer, Hubert
Escaith, Kareen Fabre, Yousef Falah, Richard
Fix, Karl Franklin, Nancy Fraser, Rodolfo Roque
Fuentes, Enrique Ganuza, Peter Ghys, Erlinda
Go,  Rui  Gomes,  Ray  Gordon,  Marilyn
Gregerson, Ted Robert Gurr, Brian Hammond,
Philomen Harrison, Sabinne Henning, Alan
Heston, Misako Hiraga, Frederick W.H. Ho,
Joop van Holsteyn, Béla Hovy, Piero Ignazi,
Chandika  Indikadahena,  Jens  Johansen,
Lawrence Jeff Johnson, Robert Johnston, Vas-
antha Kandiah, Alison Kennedy, Sio Suat Kheng,
Elizabeth Kielman, Taro Komatsu, Karoly Ko-
vacs,  Olivier  Labe,  Frank  Laczko,  Henrik
Larsen, Georges Lemaitre, Denise Lievesley,
Rolf Luyendijk, Nyein Nyein Lwin, Doug Lynd,
Esperanza C. Magpantay, Mary Mahy, Heikki
S.  Mattila,  Clare  Menozzi,  Jorge  Mernies,
Michael Minges, Anjali Mody, Catherine Mona-
gle, Bruno Moro, Ron Morren, Philip Mukungu,
Angela Ferriol Muruaga, Jack Nagel, Keiko
Osaki, Jude Padyachy, Sonia Palmieri, Rosario
Pardo, Amy Pate, Sulekha Patel, François Pel-
letier, Bob Pember, Indira Persaud, Francesca

Perucci, Rudolphe Petras, Spyridon Pilos, Li-
onel Pintopontes, William Prince, Lakshmi
Puri, Agnès Puymoyen, Hantamalala Rafali-
manana, Markandey Rai, Vijayendra Rao, Luca
Renda, Clinton Robinson, David Roodman, Ri-
cardo Sibrián, Shaguni Singh, Armin Sirco,
Carl  Skau,  Petter  Stalenheim,  Elsa  Stam-
atopoulou, Mark Stoker, Diane Stukel, Ilpo
Survo, Eric Swanson, Tony Taubman, Benedicte
Terryn, Michel Thieren, Anne Thomas, Barbara
Trudell, Elisa Tsakiri, Rafael Tuts, Erica Usher,
Said Voffal, Rick Wacek, Neff Walker, Steve
Walter,  Tessa  Wardlaw,  Jayashree  Watal,
Glenys Waters, Catherine Watt, Wendy Wend-
land, Patrick Werquin, Siemon Wezeman, An-
ders  Widfeldt,  Boris  Wijkström,  Jonathan
Wilkenfeld, Diane Wroge, A. Sylvester Young,
Elizabeth Zaniewski and Hania Zlotnik.

An informal consultation with UN agencies
provided the team with helpful comments and
suggestions. The team thanks Food and Agri-
culture Organization; International Fund for
Agricultural Development; International Labour
Organization; International Monetary Fund;
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS;
United Nations Children’s Fund; United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development; United
Nations Department of Economic and Social Af-
fairs; United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization; United Nations En-
vironment Programme; United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; United Na-
tions High Commissioner for Refugees; United
Nations Human Settlements Programme; United
Nations Institute for Training and Research;
United Nations Population Fund; World Health
Organization; World Intellectual Property Or-
ganization and World Bank.

The team would like to thank members of
the UNDP human development reports net-
work (HDR-Net) and civil society network who
provided many insightful comments and sug-
gestions during the network discussions.

UNDP READERS

A Readers Group, made up of colleagues in
UNDP, provided extremely useful comments,
suggestions and inputs during the writing of the

viii

Report. The Report team is especially grateful
to Randa Aboul-Hosn, Fernando Calderon,
Moez Doraid, Gilbert Fossoun Houngbo, An-
drey Ivanov, Selim Jahan, Bruce Jenks, Freddy
Justiniano, Inge Kaul, Douglas Keh, Thierry
Lemaresquier,  Lamin  Manneh,  Saraswathi
Menon, Kalman Mizsei, Balasubramaniam Mu-
rali, Shoji Nishimoto, Omar Noman, William
Orme, Eugenio Ortega, Hilda Paqui, Ravi Rajan,
Ramaswamy Sudarshan, Mark Suzman, Julia
V. Taft, Gulden Turkoz-Cosslett, Louisa Vin-
ton, Mourad Wahba and Gita Welch.

EDITING, PRODUCTION AND TRANSLATION

As in previous years, the Report benefited from
the editors at Communications Development In-
corporated: Meta de Coquereaumont, Eliza-
beth  McCrocklin,  Thomas  Roncoli,  Bruce
Ross-Larson and Christopher Trott. The Report
(including cover) was designed by Gerald Quinn
and laid out by Elaine Wilson. Statistical in-
formation appearing in the Report was designed
by Grundy & Northedge.

The production, translation, distribution and
promotion of the Report benefited from the help
and support of the Communications Office of the
Administrator: Djibril Diallo, Maureen Lynch,
Trygve Olfarnes, Bill Orme, Hilda Paqui as well
as Elizabeth Scott Andrews. Translations were re-
viewed by Helene Castel, Cielo Morales, Vladimir
Scherbov, Andrey Ivanov, and Ali Al-Kasimi.

The Report also benefited from the dedi-
cated work of interns: Valentina Azzarello,
Alexandra Lopoukhine, Rachel Sorrentino and
Rati Tripathi. Emmanuel Boudard and Jessica
Lopatka made valuable contributions to the
statistical team.

Liliana Izquierdo and Gerardo Nunez of
the  UN  Office  of  Project  Services  provided
critical  administrative  support  and  manage-
ment services.

*

*

*

The team expresses sincere appreciation to the
Report’s peer reviewer, Will Kymlicka, who
carefully reviewed drafts and shared his ex-
pertise and insights. The team is also grateful to
Ian  Macredie,  Lene  Mikkelsen  and  David
Pearce, the statistical peer reviewers who scru-
tinized the data in the Report and lent their sta-
tistical expertise.

Finally, the authors are especially grateful
to Mark Malloch Brown, UNDP’s Adminis-
trator, for his leadership and vision. And al-
though thankful for all the support they have
received, the authors assume full responsibility
for the opinions expressed in the Report.

Sakiko Fukuda-Parr

Director

Human Development Report 2004

ix

Contents

OVERVIEW Cultural liberty in today’s diverse world

1

14

CHAPTER 1 Cultural liberty and human development 
Participation and recognition
Freedoms, human rights and the role of diversity
Identity, community and freedom 16
Globalization, asymmetry and democracy
Conclusions

19

22

15

13

CHAPTER 2 Challenges for cultural liberty
Cultural liberty—an uncharted dimension of human development
Promoting cultural liberty requires recognizing differences in identity
Three myths surrounding cultural liberty and development
Today’s challenges for cultural liberty

27

38

44

28

36

CHAPTER 3 Building multicultural democracies
47
Resolving state dilemmas in recognizing cultural difference
Policies for ensuring the political participation of diverse cultural groups
Policies on religion and religious practice
Policies on customary law and legal pluralism 57
Policies on the use of multiple languages
Policies for redressing socio-economic exclusion

60

54

47

65

50

CHAPTER 4 Confronting movements for cultural domination
Movements for cultural domination—today’s challenges
Dilemmas for democracies—restrictive or accommodative measures?

74

73

77

CHAPTER 5 Globalization and cultural choice
Globalization and multiculturalism 88
Flows of investment and knowledge—including indigenous people in a globally integrated world
Flows of cultural goods—widening choices through creativity and diversity
Flows of people—multiple identities for global citizens

85

96

99

91

107

Notes
Bibliographic note
Bibliography
112

110

x

28

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTIONS
Human rights embody the fundamental values of human civilizations Shirin Ebadi
Diversity—from divisive to inclusive Nelson Mandela
Recognition of linguistic diversity in Afghanistan’s Constitution Hamid Karzai
Difference is not a threat but a source of strength John Hume
Indigenous peoples and development Ole Henrik Magga
91

43

82

23

64

27

31

36

38

52

55

57

41

42

Two aspects of cultural exclusion
Defining cultural rights lags behind defining civil, political, economic and social rights—why?

The human development index: capturing inequalities across groups
Cultural policies—protecting cultural heritage and promoting cultural liberty
Inequalities between groups can fuel conflict and tension
Solomon Islands’ ethnic difference not the cause of conflict
A rough guide to federalism 50
The challenge of federalism: Nigeria’s troubled political trajectory and prospects
Proportional representation or winner takes all? New Zealand makes a switch
The many forms of secular and non-secular states and their effects on religious freedom 56
Hindu and Muslim personal law: the ongoing debate over a uniform civil code
Access to justice and cultural recognition in Guatemala

BOXES
2.1
2.2
2.3 Measuring cultural liberty
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7 Multilingual education in Papua New Guinea
3.8
3.9
3.10 Experiences with affirmative action in Malaysia and South Africa
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9

Leadership, ideological manipulation and recruiting supporters
77
Central Asia—the danger in restricting political and cultural liberties
Egypt—distinguishing between moderates and extremists
Algeria—discontent, democraticization and violence
81
United States—targeting intolerance and hatred
Culture—paradigm shift in anthropology
89
Sources of global ethics
Private companies and indigenous people can work together for development
Using intellectual property rights to protect traditional knowledge
The debate on cultural goods and the Multilateral Agreement on Investments fiasco
France’s successful support of domestic cultural industries
The headscarf dilemma in France
Temporary contracts—welcoming workers but not people does not work
How Berlin promotes respect for cultural difference

How many languages are there in Africa? 85% of Africans speak 15 core languages
Land rights in the Philippines

68

63

96

70

78

59

61

94

95

80

99

103

104

83

90

101

TABLES
2.1
2.2

Political representation of ethnic minorities in selected OECD parliaments
Integrating multicultural policies into human development strategies
37

35

xi

3.1
4.1
5.1
5.2
5.3

Indicators of internal output and costs of conventional and bilingual schools in Burkina Faso
Casualties resulting from sectarian violence in Pakistan, 1989–2003
Indigenous population in Latin America 
Policy choices for the promotion of the domestic film and audiovisual industry—market and industry size matter
Top 10 cities by share of foreign born population, 2000/01

99

75

62

92

FIGURES
2.1 Most countries are culturally diverse
2.2
2.3

28
Indigenous people can expect a shorter life
Europe’s non-European migrant population has increased significantly . . . and migrants are 
coming from more places

30

29

34

35

National holidays are important ways to recognize—or ignore—cultural identities
Indigenous people are more likely than non-indigenous people to be poor in Latin America
Non-whites benefit less than whites from public health spending in South Africa
Group inequalities have declined in Malaysia, but personal inequalities have not
The record of affirmative action in the United States is mixed

2.4 Many lack access to primary education in their mother tongue
2.5
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
4.1 Movements for cultural domination—not the same as all fundamentalist or all violent movements
4.2
4.3
5.1
5.2

Some European extreme right parties have won steadily increasing vote shares
Democratic participation can expose the fringe appeal of extreme right parties
Top-grossing films of all time at the international (non-US) box office were US films, April 2004
Unprecedented growth in international migration to Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand, but
refugees remain a small proportion, 1990–2000

67
71

74
82

100

71

73

97

67

5.3 More and more governments (rich and poor) want to control immigration, 1976–2001

100

MAPS
2.1
5.1 Much extractive and infrastructural activity in developing countries is in areas where indigenous people live

Guatemala exhibits substantial overlap between linguistic communities and social exclusion

37

98

92

FEATURES
2.1

The Minorities at Risk data set—quantifying cultural exclusion
Figure 1 Discrimination and disadvantage of culturally identified groups can be cultural, political and economic—

32

with considerable overlap

32

3.1

Figure 2 Political and economic exclusion have different causes
State unity or ethnocultural identity? Not an inevitable choice
Figure 1 Multiple and complementary identities
Figure 2 Trust, support and identification: poor and diverse countries can do well with multicultural policies

32

48

48

49

5.1 What’s new about globalization’s implications for identity politics?

86

Table 1 Top 10 countries by share of migrant population, 2000
Figure 1 Rapid increases in investments in extractive industries in developing countries, 1988–97
Figure 2 Fewer domestic films, more US films: evolving film attendance, 1984–2001

87

87

86

Statistical feature 1 The state of human development

127

Table 1 HDI, HPI-1, HPI-2, GDI—same components, different measurements
Table 2 Eliminating poverty: massive deprivation remains, 2000

129

127

xii

132

132

132

Table 3 Progress and setbacks: child mortality
Table 4 Progress and setbacks: primary education
Table 5 Progress and setbacks: income poverty
Table 6 Countries experiencing a drop in the human development index, 1980s and 1990s
Figure 1 Same HDI, different income
Figure 2 Same income, different HDI
Figure 3 Not enough progress towards the Millennium Development Goals
Figure 4 Timeline: when will the Millennium Development Goals be achieved if progress does not accelerate?
Figure 5 Global disparities in HDI
134
Figure 6 Top and high priority countries
Index to Millennium Development Goal indicators in the indicator tables
Statistical feature 2 Note to table 1: About this year’s human development index

135
137

128
128

130

132

134

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS
MONITORING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: ENLARGING PEOPLE’S CHOICES. . . 
1
2
3
4

Human development index
139
Human development index trends
Human and income poverty: developing countries
Human and income poverty: OECD, Central & Eastern Europe & CIS

143

147

150

152

. . . TO LEAD A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE. . .
5
6
7
8
9

Demographic trends
Commitment to health: resources, access and services
Water, sanitation and nutritional status
Leading global health crises and risks
168
Survival: progress and setbacks

164

160

156

. . . TO ACQUIRE KNOWLEDGE . . .
10
11
12

Commitment to education: public spending
Literacy and enrolment
Technology: diffusion and creation

176

180

172

184

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING. . .
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Economic performance
Inequality in income or consumption
Structure of trade
Rich country responsibilities: aid
Rich country responsibilities: debt relief and trade
Flows of aid, private capital and debt
Priorities in public spending
202
Unemployment in OECD countries

192

198

188

196

197

206

. . . WHILE PRESERVING IT FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS . . .
21

Energy and the environment

207

133

xiii

. . . PROTECTING PERSONAL SECURITY . . .
22
211
23

Refugees and armaments
215
Victims of crime

. . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN
24
25
26
27
28
29 Women’s political participation

Gender-related development index
221
Gender empowerment measure
225
Gender inequality in education
Gender inequality in economic activity
Gender, work burden and time allocation

217

234

229

233

HUMAN AND LABOUR RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS
30
31

Status of major international human rights instruments
Status of fundamental labour rights conventions
242

238

32
33

Human development indices: a regional perspective
Basic indicators for other UN member countries

246

250

Note on statistics in the Human Development Report

251

Technical notes
1
2

Calculating the human development indices
Identifying top priority and high priority countries for the Millennium Development Goals

258

265

Definitions of statistical terms
Statistical references
Classification of countries
Index to indicators
283

277

279

268

xiv

OVERVIEW

Cultural liberty in today’s diverse world

Cultural liberty is a vital
part of human
development 

How will the new constitution of Iraq satisfy de-
mands for fair representation for Shiites and
Kurds? Which—and how many—of the lan-
guages spoken in Afghanistan should the new
constitution recognize as the official language of
the state? How will the Nigerian federal court
deal with a Sharia law ruling to punish adultery
by death? Will the French legislature approve
the proposal to ban headscarves and other re-
ligious symbols in public schools? Do Hispan-
ics in the United States resist assimilation into
the mainstream American culture? Will there be
a peace accord to end fighting in Côte d’Ivoire?
Will the President of Bolivia resign after mount-
ing protests by indigenous people? Will the
peace talks to end the Tamil-Sinhala conflict in
Sri Lanka ever conclude? These are just some
headlines from the past few months. Managing
cultural diversity is one of the central challenges
of our time. 

Long thought to be divisive threats to social
harmony, choices like these—about recognizing
and accommodating diverse ethnicities, reli-
gions, languages and values—are an inescapable
feature of the landscape of politics in the 21st
century. Political leaders and political theorists
of all persuasions have argued against explicit
recognition of cultural identities—ethnic, reli-
gious, linguistic, racial. The result, more often
than not, has been that cultural identities have
been suppressed, sometimes brutally, as state
policy—through religious persecutions and eth-
nic cleansings, but also through everyday ex-
clusion  and  economic,  social  and  political
discrimination.

New today is the rise of identity politics. In
vastly different contexts and in different ways—
from indigenous people in Latin America to
religious minorities in South Asia to ethnic mi-
norities in the Balkans and Africa to immigrants
in Western Europe—people are mobilizing
anew  around  old  grievances  along  ethnic,

religious, racial and cultural lines, demanding
that their identities be acknowledged, appreci-
ated and accommodated by wider society. Suf-
fering discrimination and marginalization from
social, economic and political opportunities,
they are also demanding social justice. Also new
today is the rise of coercive movements that
threaten cultural liberty. And, in this era of
globalization, a new class of political claims and
demands has emerged from individuals, com-
munities and countries feeling that their local cul-
tures are being swept away. They want to keep
their diversity in a globalized world.

Why these movements today? They are not
isolated. They are part of a historic process of
social change, of struggles for cultural freedom,
of new frontiers in the advance of human free-
doms and democracy. They are propelled and
shaped by the spread of democracy, which is giv-
ing movements more political space for protest,
and the advance of globalization, which is cre-
ating new networks of alliances and presenting
new challenges.

Cultural liberty is a vital part of human de-
velopment because being able to choose one’s
identity—who one is—without losing the re-
spect of others or being excluded from other
choices is important in leading a full life. People
want the freedom to practice their religion openly,
to speak their language, to celebrate their ethnic
or religious heritage without fear of ridicule or
punishment or diminished opportunity. People
want the freedom to participate in society with-
out having to slip off their chosen cultural moor-
ings. It is a simple idea, but profoundly unsettling.
States face an urgent challenge in respond-
ing to these demands. If handled well, greater
recognition of identities will bring greater cul-
tural diversity in society, enriching people’s
lives. But there is also a great risk.

These struggles over cultural identity, if left
unmanaged or managed poorly, can quickly

OVERVIEW

1

This Report makes a case
for respecting diversity
and building more
inclusive societies by
adopting policies that
explicitly recognize
cultural differences—
multicultural policies

become one of the greatest sources of instability
within states and between them—and in so doing
trigger conflict that takes development back-
wards. Identity politics that polarize people and
groups are creating fault lines between “us” and
“them”. Growing distrust and hatred threaten
peace, development and human freedoms. Just
in the last year ethnic violence destroyed hundreds
of homes and mosques in Kosovo and Serbia. Ter-
rorist train bombings in Spain killed nearly 200.
Sectarian violence killed thousands of Muslims
and drove thousands more from their homes in
Gujarat and elsewhere in India, a champion of cul-
tural accommodation. A spate of hate crimes
against immigrants shattered Norwegians’ belief
in their unshakable commitment to tolerance.

Struggles over identity can also lead to re-
gressive and xenophobic policies that retard
human development. They can encourage a re-
treat to conservatism and a rejection of change,
closing off the infusion of ideas and of people
who bring cosmopolitan values and the know-
ledge and skills that advance development.

Managing diversity and respecting cultural
identities are not just challenges for a few “multi-
ethnic states”. Almost no country is entirely
homogeneous. The world’s nearly 200 coun-
tries contain some 5,000 ethnic groups. Two-
thirds have at least one substantial minority—an
ethnic or religious group that makes up at least
10% of the population.

At the same time the pace of international
migration has quickened, with startling effects
on some countries and cities. Nearly half the
population of Toronto was born outside of
Canada. And many more foreign-born people
maintain close ties with their countries of ori-
gin than did immigrants of the last century.
One way or another every country is a multi-
cultural society today, containing ethnic, reli-
gious or linguistic groups that have common
bonds to their own heritage, culture, values
and way of life.

Cultural diversity is here to stay—and to
grow. States need to find ways of forging national
unity amid this diversity. The world, ever more
interdependent economically, cannot function
unless people respect diversity and build unity
through common bonds of humanity. In this
age of globalization the demands for cultural

recognition can no longer be ignored by any
state or by the international community. And con-
frontations over culture and identity are likely to
grow—the ease of communications and travel
have shrunk the world and changed the landscape
of cultural diversity, and the spread of democ-
racy, human rights and new global networks
have given people greater means to mobilize
around a cause, insist on a response and get it.

Five myths debunked. Policies recognizing
cultural identities and encouraging diversity
to flourish do not result in fragmentation,
conflict, weak development or authoritarian
rule. Such policies are both viable, and nec-
essary, for it is often the suppression of cul-
turally identified groups that leads to tensions.

This Report makes a case for respecting diver-
sity and building more inclusive societies by
adopting policies that explicitly recognize cul-
tural differences—multicultural policies. But
why have many cultural identities been sup-
pressed or ignored for so long? One reason is
that many people believe that allowing diversity
to flourish may be desirable in the abstract but
in practice can weaken the state, lead to conflict
and retard development. The best approach to
diversity, in this view, is assimilation around a
single national standard, which can lead to the
suppression of cultural identities. However, this
Report argues that these are not premises—
they are myths. Indeed, it argues that a multi-
cultural policy approach is not just desirable but
also viable and necessary. Without such an ap-
proach the imagined problems of diversity can
become self-fulfilling prophecies.

Myth  1.  People’s  ethnic  identities  com-
pete with their attachment to the state, so
there is a trade-off between recognizing di-
versity and unifying the state.

Not so. Individuals can and do have multiple
identities that are complementary—ethnicity,
language, religion and race as well as citizenship.
Nor is identity a zero sum game. There is no in-
evitable need to choose between state unity and
recognition of cultural differences.

2

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

A sense of identity and
belonging to a group with
shared values and other
bonds of culture is
important for all
individuals. But each
individual can identify
with many different
groups

A sense of identity and belonging to a group
with shared values and other bonds of culture
is important for individuals. But each individ-
ual can identify with many different groups. In-
dividuals  have  identity  of  citizenship  (for
example,  being  French),  gender  (being  a
woman), race (being of West African origin), lan-
guage (being fluent in Thai, Chinese and Eng-
lish),  politics  (having  left-wing  views)  and
religion (being Buddhist).

Identity also has an element of choice: within
these memberships individuals can choose what
priority to give to one membership over an-
other in different contexts. Mexican Americans
may cheer for the Mexican soccer team but
serve  in  the  US  Army.  Many  white  South
Africans  chose  to  fight  apartheid  as  South
Africans. Sociologists tell us that people have
boundaries of identity that separate “us” from
“them”, but these boundaries shift and blur to
incorporate broader groups of people.

“Nation building” has been a dominant ob-
jective of the 20th century, and most states have
aimed to build culturally homogeneous states
with singular identities. Sometimes they suc-
ceeded but at the cost of repression and perse-
cution. If the history of the 20th century showed
anything, it is that the attempt either to exter-
minate cultural groups or to wish them away elic-
its a stubborn resilience. By contrast, recognizing
cultural identities has resolved never-ending
tensions. For both practical and moral reasons,
then, it is far better to accommodate cultural
groups than to try to eliminate them or to pre-
tend that they do not exist.

Countries do not have to choose between na-
tional unity and cultural diversity. Surveys show
that the two can and often do coexist. In Bel-
gium citizens overwhelmingly replied when
asked that they felt both Belgian and Flemish or
Walloon and in Spain, that they felt Spanish as
well as Catalan or Basque.

These countries and others have worked
hard to accommodate diverse cultures. They
have also worked hard to build unity by fostering
respect for identities and trust in state institu-
tions. The states have held together. Immigrants
need not deny their commitment to their fam-
ilies in their countries of origin when they de-
velop loyalties to their new countries. Fears that

if immigrants do not “assimilate”, they will frag-
ment the country are unfounded. Assimilation
without  choice  is  no  longer  a  viable—or  a
necessary—model of integration.

There is no trade-off between diversity and
state unity. Multicultural policies are a way to
build diverse and unified states.

Myth 2. Ethnic groups are prone to violent
conflict with each other in clashes of val-
ues,  so  there  is  a  trade-off  between  re-
specting diversity and sustaining peace.

No. There is little empirical evidence that cul-
tural differences and clashes over values are in
themselves a cause of violent conflict.

It is true, particularly since the end of the
cold war, that violent conflicts have arisen not
so much between states but within them be-
tween ethnic groups. But on their causes, there
is wide agreement in recent research by schol-
ars that cultural differences by themselves are
not the relevant factor. Some even argue that cul-
tural diversity reduces the risk of conflict by mak-
ing group mobilization more difficult.

Studies offer several explanations for these
wars: economic inequalities between the groups
as well as struggles over political power, land and
other economic assets. In Fiji indigenous Fijians
initiated a coup against the Indian-dominated
government because they feared that land might
be confiscated. In Sri Lanka the Sinhalese ma-
jority gained political power, but the Tamil mi-
nority had access to more economic resources,
triggering decades of civil conflict. In Burundi and
Rwanda, at different points in time, Tutsis and
Hutus were each excluded from economic op-
portunities and political participation.

Cultural identity does have a role in these
conflicts—not as a cause but as a driver for po-
litical mobilization. Leaders invoke a single
identity, its symbols and its history of griev-
ances, to “rally the troops”. And a lack of cul-
tural recognition can trigger violent mobilization.
Underlying inequalities in South Africa were
at the root of the Soweto riots in 1976, but they
were triggered by attempts to impose Afrikaans
on black schools.

While the coexistence of culturally distinct
groups is not, in itself, a cause of violent conflict,

OVERVIEW

3

Cultural liberty is the
capability of people to live
and be what they choose 

it is dangerous to allow economic and political
inequality to deepen between these groups or to
suppress cultural differences, because cultural
groups are easily mobilized to contest these dis-
parities as injustice.

There is no trade-off between peace and
respect for diversity, but identity politics need
to be managed so that they do not turn violent.

who enjoy autonomy in a parliament that has de-
mocratic structures and follows democratic pro-
cedures but is part of the Finnish state.

There does not need to be any trade-off be-
tween respect for cultural difference and human
rights and development. But the process of de-
velopment involves active participation of people
in fighting for human rights and shifts in values.

Myth 3. Cultural liberty requires defend-
ing  traditional  practices,  so  there  could
be a trade-off between recognizing cultural
diversity and other human development
priorities such as progress in development,
democracy and human rights.

No. Cultural liberty is about expanding indi-
vidual choices, not about preserving values and
practices as an end in itself with blind allegiance
to tradition.

Culture is not a frozen set of values and prac-
tices. It is constantly recreated as people ques-
tion, adapt and redefine their values and practices
to changing realities and exchanges of ideas.

Some argue that multiculturalism is a policy
of conserving cultures, even practices that vio-
late human rights, and that movements for cul-
tural recognition are not governed democratically.
But neither cultural freedom nor respect for di-
versity should be confused with the defence of
tradition. Cultural liberty is the capability of
people to live and be what they choose, with
adequate opportunity to consider other options.
“Culture”, “tradition” and “authenticity”
are not the same as “cultural liberty”. They are
not acceptable reasons for allowing practices that
deny individuals equality of opportunity and vi-
olate  their  human  rights—such  as  denying
women equal rights to education.

Interest groups led by self-appointed lead-
ers may not reflect the views of the membership
at large. It is not rare for groups to be dominated
by people who have an interest in maintaining
the status quo under the justification of “tradi-
tion” and who act as gatekeepers of tradition-
alism to freeze their cultures. Those making
demands for cultural accommodation should
also abide by democratic principles and the ob-
jectives of human freedom and human rights.
One good model is the Sami people in Finland,

Myth 4. Ethnically diverse countries are
less able to develop, so there is a trade-off
between respecting diversity and promot-
ing development.

No. There is no evidence of a clear relation-
ship, good or bad, between cultural diversity and
development.

Some argue, however, that diversity has
been an obstacle to development. But while it
is undeniably true that many diverse societies
have low levels of income and human develop-
ment, there is no evidence that this is related to
cultural diversity. One study argues that diver-
sity has been a source of poor economic per-
formance  in  Africa—but  this  is  related  to
political decision-making that follows ethnic
rather than national interests, not to diversity it-
self. Just as there are multi-ethnic countries that
have stagnated, there are others that were spec-
tacularly successful. Malaysia, with 62% of its
people Malays and other indigenous groups,
30% Chinese and 8% Indian, was the world’s
10th fastest growing economy during 1970–90,
years when it also implemented affirmative ac-
tion policies. Mauritius ranks 64 in the human
development index, the highest in Sub-Saharan
Africa. It has a diverse population of African,
Indian, Chinese and European origin—with
50% Hindu, 30% Christian and 17% Muslim.

Myth 5. Some cultures are more likely to
make  developmental  progress  than  oth-
ers, and some cultures have inherent de-
mocratic  values  while  others  do  not,  so
there is a trade-off between accommodat-
ing certain cultures and promoting devel-
opment and democracy.

Again,  no.  There  is  no  evidence  from  sta-
tistical analysis or historical studies of a causal

4

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

A new wave of cultural
determinism is starting to
hold sway 

relationship between culture and economic
progress or democracy.

Cultural  determinism—the  idea  that  a
group’s culture explains economic performance
and the advance of democracy—as an obstacle
or a facilitator, has enormous intuitive appeal.
But these theories are not supported by econo-
metric analysis or history.

Many theories of cultural determinism have
been advanced, starting with Max Weber’s ex-
planation of the Protestant ethic as a key factor
behind successful growth in capitalist economies.
Persuasive in explaining the past, these theories
have been repeatedly proven wrong in predict-
ing the future. When Weber’s theory of the
Protestant ethic was being touted, Catholic coun-
tries (France and Italy) were growing faster than
Protestant Britain and Germany, so the theory
was expanded to mean Christian or Western.
When Japan, the Republic of Korea, Thailand
and other East Asian countries achieved record
growth rates, the notion that Confucian values
retard growth had to be jettisoned.

Understanding cultural traditions can offer
insights to human behaviour and social dy-
namics that influence development outcomes.
But these insights do not offer a grand theory
of culture and development. In explaining eco-
nomic growth rates, for example, economic pol-
icy, geography and the burden of disease are
found to be highly relevant factors. But cul-
ture, such as whether a society is Hindu or Mus-
lim, is found to be insignificant.

The same is true with reference to democracy.
A new wave of cultural determinism is starting
to hold sway in some policy debates, attributing
the failures of democratization in the non-West-
ern world to inherent cultural traits of intolerance
and “authoritarian values”. At the global level
some theorists have argued that the 21st century
will see a “clash of civilizations”, that the future
of democratic and tolerant Western states is
threatened by non-Western states with more au-
thoritarian values. There are reasons to be scep-
tical. For one thing, the theory exaggerates the
differences between “civilization” groups and
ignores the similarities among them.

Moreover, the West has no monopoly on
democracy or tolerance, and there is no unique
line of historical division between a tolerant

and democratic West and a despotic East. Plato
and Augustine were no less authoritarian in
their thinking than were Confucius and Kautilya.
There were champions of democracy not just in
Europe but elsewhere as well. Take Akbar, who
preached religious tolerance in 16th century
India, or Prince Shotoku who in 7th century
Japan introduced the constitution (kempo) that
insisted that “decisions on important matters
should not be made by one person alone. They
should be discussed by many”. Notions of par-
ticipatory decision-making on important pub-
lic issues have been a central part of many
traditions in Africa and elsewhere. And more re-
cent findings of the World Values survey show
that people in Muslim countries have as much
support for democratic values as do people in
non-Muslim countries.

A basic problem with these theories is the
underlying assumption that culture is largely
fixed and unchanging, allowing the world to be
neatly divided into “civilizations” or “cultures”.
This ignores the fact that while there can be great
continuity in values and traditions in societies,
cultures also change and are rarely homoge-
neous. Nearly all societies have undergone shifts
in values—for example, shifts in values about
the role of women and gender equality over
the last century. And radical changes in social
practices  have  occurred  everywhere,  from
Catholics in Chile to Muslims in Bangladesh to
Buddhists in Thailand. Such changes and ten-
sions within societies drive politics and histor-
ical change, so that the way power relationships
affect those dynamics now dominates research
in anthropology. Paradoxically, just as anthro-
pologists have discarded the concept of cul-
ture as a bounded and fixed social phenomenon,
mainstream political interest in finding core
values and traits of “a people and their cul-
ture” is growing.

Theories of cultural determinism deserve
critical assessment since they have dangerous
policy implications. They can fuel support for
nationalistic policies that denigrate or oppress
“inferior” cultures argued to stand in the way
of national unity, democracy and development.
Such attacks on cultural values would then fuel
violent reactions that could feed tensions both
within and between nations.

OVERVIEW

5

Cultural liberty is a
human right and an
important aspect of
human development—
and thus worthy of state
action and attention 

Human development requires more than
health, education, a decent standard of living
and political freedom. People’s cultural iden-
tities must be recognized and accommodated
by the state, and people must be free to ex-
press  these  identities  without  being  dis-
criminated against in other aspects of their
lives. In short: cultural liberty is a human
right and an important aspect of human
development—and thus worthy of state ac-
tion and attention.

Human development is the process of widen-
ing choices for people to do and be what they
value in life. Previous Human Development
Reports have focused on expanding social, po-
litical and economic opportunities to expand
these choices. They have explored ways that
policies of equitable growth, expansion of so-
cial opportunities and deepening of democracy
can enhance those choices for all people.

A further dimension of human develop-
ment, difficult to measure and even to define,
is vitally important: cultural liberty is central to
the capability of people to live as they would like.
The advance of cultural liberty must be a cen-
tral aspect of human development, and this re-
quires  going  beyond  social,  political  and
economic opportunities since they do not guar-
antee cultural liberty.

Cultural liberty is about allowing people
the freedom to choose their identities—and to
lead the lives they value—without being ex-
cluded from other choices important to them
(such as those for education, health or job op-
portunities). In practice there are two forms of
cultural exclusion. First is living mode exclusion,
which denies recognition and accommodation
of a lifestyle that a group would choose to have
and that insists that individuals must live exactly
like all others in society. Examples include re-
ligious oppression or the insistence that immi-
grants drop their cultural practices and language.
Second is participation exclusion, when people
are discriminated against or suffer disadvan-
tage in social, political and economic opportu-
nities because of their cultural identity.

Both types of exclusion exist on an exten-
sive scale, across every continent, at every level

of development, in democracies and authori-
tarian states. The Minorities at Risk data set,
a research project including issues relating to cul-
tural exclusion that has reviewed the situation
of minority groups worldwide, estimates that
about 900 million people belong to groups that
are subject to some form of either living mode
or participation exclusion not faced by other
groups in the state—around one in every seven
people around the world.

Of course, suppressions of cultural liberty
fill the spectrum. At one extreme is ethnic
cleansing. Then there are formal restrictions on
the practice of religion, language and citizenship.
But more frequently cultural exclusion comes
from a simple lack of recognition or respect for
the culture and heritage of people—or from
some cultures being considered inferior, prim-
itive or uncivilized. This can be reflected in
state policies, as in national calendars that do not
observe a minority’s religious holiday, school-
books that leave out or belittle the achieve-
ments  of  minority  leaders  and  support  to
literature  and  other  arts  that  celebrate  the
achievements of the dominant culture.

Living mode exclusion often overlaps with
social, economic and political exclusion through
discrimination and disadvantage in employment,
housing, schooling and political representation.
The occupational castes in Nepal have under-five
mortality rates of more than 17%, compared
with around 7% for the Newar and Brahmin. In
Serbia and Montenegro 30% of Roma children
have never attended primary school. Latin Amer-
icans of European descent often express pride
that they are colour blind and insist that their
states are too. But across the continent indige-
nous groups are poorer and less represented
politically than the non-indigenous. In Mexico,
for example, 81% of indigenous people are reck-
oned to have incomes below the poverty line,
compared with 18% for the general population.
Living mode and participation exclusion,
however, do not always overlap. People of Chi-
nese ancestry in South-East Asia, for example, are
economically dominant yet have been culturally
excluded, for example, with Chinese language
schools restricted, publishing in Chinese pro-
hibited and people of Chinese descent socially
pressured to adopt local names. But more often

6

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Several emerging models
of multicultural democracy
provide effective
mechanisms for power
sharing between culturally
diverse groups

living mode exclusion reinforces exclusion from
other opportunities. This is particularly so for
language. Many groups, especially large minori-
ties such as the Kurds in Turkey and the in-
digenous people of Guatemala, are excluded
from political participation and economic op-
portunities because the state does not recognize
their language in schools, law courts and other
official arenas. This is why groups fight so hard
for their languages to be recognized and used in
instruction and in political and legal processes.

None  of  this  is  utopian.  Incorporating
multicultural policies is not always easy.
Democracy, equitable development and state
cohesion are essential, and many countries are
successfully developing multicultural poli-
cies to address cultural exclusion.

Cultural liberty will not just happen, any more
than health, education and gender equity just
happen. Fostering it should be a core concern
of governments, even where there are no explicit
policies of persecution or discrimination.

Some argue that guaranteeing individuals
civil and political rights—such as freedom of
worship, speech and association—is enough to
give them the ability to practice their religion,
speak their language and be free of discrimi-
nation in employment, schooling and many
other types of exclusion. They argue that cul-
tural exclusion is a by-product of economic
and political exclusions and that once these are
resolved, the cultural exclusion will disappear
of its own accord.

This has not happened. Many rich and de-
mocratic countries, for example, profess to treat
all citizens equally, but are nonetheless home to
minorities who lack proper representation in pol-
itics, and for whom harassment and difficulty in
accessing public services are their daily fare.

To expand cultural freedoms requires explicit
policies to address denials of cultural liberty—
multicultural policies. To do this, states need to
recognize cultural differences in their constitu-
tions, their laws and their institutions. They also
need to formulate policies to ensure that the in-
terests of particular groups—whether minorities
or historically marginalized majorities—are not

ignored or overridden by the majority or by
dominant groups. And they need to do so in
ways that do not contradict other goals and
strategies of human development, such as con-
solidating democracy, building a capable state
and ensuring equal opportunities to all citizens.
This is not easy, but there are many examples
of countries around the world adopting innov-
ative approaches for managing cultural diversity.
This Report focuses particularly on five central
policy areas: political participation, religion, ac-
cess to justice, language and access to socio-
economic opportunities.

Policies for ensuring political participation

Many historically marginalized groups are still
excluded from real political power, and so they
often feel alienated from the state. In some cases
the exclusion is due to a lack of democracy or
the denial of political rights. If so, democrati-
zation would be an essential first step. However,
something more is required, because even when
members of minorities have equal political rights
in a democracy, they may be consistently un-
derrepresented or outvoted, and so view the
central government as alien and oppressive.
Not surprisingly, many minorities resist alien or
oppressive rule and seek more political power.
That is why a “multicultural” conception of
democracy is often required.

Several emerging models of multicultural
democracy provide effective mechanisms for
power sharing between culturally diverse groups.
These kinds of power-sharing arrangements are
crucial for securing the rights of diverse cul-
tural groups and minorities and for preventing
violations—either by majoritarian imposition
or by the dominance of the ruling political elite.
Electoral reforms addressed the chronic
underrepresentation of Maoris in New Zealand.
With the introduction of proportional repre-
sentation in place of the winner-takes-all for-
mula, Maori representation rose from 3% in
1993 to 16% in the 2002 elections, in line with
their share of the population. Reserved seats
and quotas have been critical to ensuring that
the scheduled tribes and castes had a voice in
India and that ethnic minorities were repre-
sented in Croatia.

OVERVIEW

7

Power sharing
arrangements have
broadly proven to be
critical in resolving
tensions 

Federal arrangements are an important ap-
proach to power sharing. Almost every one of
the dozen ethnically diverse countries that are
longstanding democracies has asymmetrical fed-
eral arrangements in which subunits of the fed-
eral state do not all have the same powers. This
arrangement responds more flexibly to the needs
of different groups. For example, Sabah and
Sarawak have a special status in Malaysia, as do
the Basques and 14 other comunidades auto-
nomas in Spain, with autonomy in areas such
as education, language and culture.

Some indigenous people, such as the Inuits
in Canada, have also negotiated self-governing ter-
ritories. The lesson is that such power sharing
arrangements have broadly proven to be critical
in resolving tensions in countries historically
confronted with secessionist movements, as in
Spain. Introduced early enough, when tensions
are mounting, they can forestall violent conflict.

Policies for ensuring religious freedom

Many religious minorities suffer various forms
of exclusion, sometimes due to explicit sup-
pression of religious freedom or discrimination
against that group—a problem particularly com-
mon in non-secular countries where the state up-
holds an established religion.

But in other cases the exclusion may be less
direct and often unintended, as when the pub-
lic calendar does not recognize a minority’s re-
ligious holidays. India officially celebrates 5
Hindu holidays but also 4 Muslim, 2 Christian,
1 Buddhist, 1 Jain and 1 Sikh in recognition of
a diverse population. France celebrates 11 na-
tional holidays, 5 are non-denominational and
of the 6 religious holidays all celebrate events in
the Christian calendar, though 7% of the pop-
ulation is Muslim and 1% Jewish. Similarly, the
dress codes in public institutions may conflict
with a minority’s religious dress. Or state rules
about marriage and inheritance may differ from
those of religious codes. Or zoning regulations
may be at odds with a minority’s burial practices.
These sorts of conflicts can arise even in
secular states with strong democratic institutions
that protect civil and political rights. Given the
profound importance of religion to people’s
identities, it is not surprising that religious

minorities often mobilize to contest these ex-
clusions. Some religious practices are not diffi-
cult to accommodate, but often they present
difficult choices and trade-offs. France is grap-
pling with whether headscarves in state schools
violate state principles of secularism and demo-
cratic values of gender equality that state edu-
cation aims to impart. Nigeria is struggling with
whether to uphold the ruling of a Sharia court
in a case of adultery.

What is important from the human devel-
opment perspective is to expand human free-
doms and human rights—and to recognize
equality. Secular and democratic states are most
likely to achieve these goals where the state pro-
vides reasonable accommodation of religious
practices, where all religions have the same re-
lation to the state and where the state protects
human rights.

Policies for legal pluralism

In many multicultural societies indigenous peo-
ple and people from other cultural groups have
pressed for recognition of their traditional legal
systems to gain access to justice. For example,
the Maya in Guatemala suffered centuries of op-
pression, and the state legal system became part
of their oppression. The communities lost faith
in the state system of rule of law, because it did
not secure justice and because it was not em-
bedded in the society and its values.

Several countries such as Guatemala, India
and South Africa are developing approaches to
legal pluralism, recognizing the role of the judicial
norms and institutions of the communities in dif-
ferent ways. Demands for legal pluralism meet
opposition from those who fear that it under-
mines the principle of a unified legal system or
that it would promote traditional practices con-
trary to democracy and human rights. For sure,
conflicts do arise—South Africa, for example,
is grappling with the conflict between the rights
of women to inheritance under state constitution
and the rights denied under customary law.
There are real trade-offs societies must face,
but legal pluralism does not require wholesale
adoption of all traditional practices. Culture
does evolve, and cultural liberty is not a knee-
jerk defence of tradition.

8

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Multicultural policies that
recognize differences
between groups are
needed to address
injustices historically
rooted and socially
entrenched 

Language policies

Language is often the most contested issue in
multicultural states. Some countries have tried
to suppress people’s languages, labelling their
use subversive. But the more frequent source of
widespread exclusion in even well-established
democracies is monolingual policy. The choice
of official language—the language of instruction
in schools, the language of legislative debates and
civic participation, the language of commerce—
shapes the barriers and advantages individuals
face in life—political, social, economic and cul-
tural. In Malawi the Constitution requires all
parliamentarians to speak and read English.
English and Afrikaans are still the de facto lan-
guages used in the courts of South Africa, even
though nine other languages are now officially
recognized. Recognizing a language means more
than just the use of that language. It symbolizes
respect for the people who speak it, their cul-
ture and their full inclusion in society.

The state can be blind to religion, but it
cannot be mute to language. Citizens need to
communicate to feel a sense of belonging, and
the choice of official language symbolizes the na-
tional identity. That is why many states resist rec-
ognizing multiple languages even when they
champion civil and political freedoms.

Many countries are finding ways to accom-
modate the twin objectives of unity and diversity
by adopting two or three languages, recognizing
a unifying national language as well as local lan-
guages. In many colonized countries this has
meant recognizing the language of administration
(such as English or French), the most widely
used local language and a mother tongue at local
levels. Tanzania has promoted the use of Kiswahili
along with English in schools and government.
India has practised a three-language formula for
decades; children are taught in the official lan-
guage of their state (Bengali in West Bengal, for
example) and are also taught the two official
languages of the country, Hindi and English.

Socio-economic policies

Socio-economic injustices and inequalities in in-
come, education and health outcomes have been
the defining feature of many multi-ethnic societies

with marginal groups—blacks in South Africa and
indigenous people in Guatemala and Canada.
These exclusions reflect long historical roots of
conquest and colonization—as well as entrenched
structures of hierarchy, such as caste systems.

Economic and social policies that promote
equity are critical in addressing these inequali-
ties. Redressing biases in public spending as well
as targeting basic services to people with lower
health and education outcomes would help—but
would not be enough. Multicultural policies that
recognize differences between groups are needed
to address the injustices that are historically
rooted and socially entrenched. For example,
simply spending more on education for children
of indigenous groups would not be enough, for
they are disadvantaged if school instruction is in
the official language only. Bilingual education
would help. Claims over land—such as the claims
of indigenous people over land with mineral re-
sources or the land settled by white colonizers in
Southern Africa—cannot be resolved with poli-
cies that expand socio-economic opportunities.
Experience in India, Malaysia, South Africa
and the United States shows that affirmative
action can reduce inequalities between groups.
In Malaysia the ratio of average income be-
tween Chinese and Malay populations declined
from 2.3 in 1970 to 1.7 in 1990. In the United
States the proportion of black lawyers rose from
1.2% to 5.1% of the total and the proportion of
black physicians from 2% to 5.6%. In India the
allocation of government jobs, admission to
higher education and legislative seats to sched-
uled castes and tribes has helped members of
these groups climb out of poverty and join the
middle class.

None of these policies is without its com-
plexities, but the experience of many countries
shows that solutions are possible. Bilingual ed-
ucation may be contested as ineffective, but that
is because it receives too little support to ensure
quality. Affirmative action programmes may be
contested as creating permanent sources of in-
equality or becoming a source of patronage—but
they can be better managed. These are ways of
responding to demands for cultural inclusion. But
we must also recognize that in the world today
there are also more movements for cultural dom-
ination that seek to suppress diversity.

OVERVIEW

9

The maintenance of a
liberal society depends on
respecting the rule of law,
listening to political claims
and protecting
fundamental human
rights—even those of 
vile people

Movements for cultural domination threaten
cultural liberty. Fighting them with illegal and
undemocratic measures violates human rights
and does not make the problem go away. De-
mocratic accommodation is more effective in
exposing the intolerant agendas of such move-
ments and undermining their appeal.

People leading movements for cultural domina-
tion believe in their own cultural superiority and
try to impose their ideologies on others, both
within and outside their community. Not all such
movements are violent. Some coerce others using
political campaigns, threats and harassment. In
the extreme they use violent means as well—
hate attacks, expulsions, ethnic cleansing and
genocide. As a political force intolerance is threat-
ening to overwhelm political processes in countries
around the world. Movements for cultural domi-
nation take different forms: political parties, mili-
tias, violent groups, international networks and
even the state. It is naïve to assume that democratic
societies are immune to intolerance and hatred.
The underlying causes for the rise of move-
ments for cultural domination often include ma-
nipulative leadership, poverty and inequality,
weak or ineffectual states, outside political in-
terventions and linkages with the diaspora. These
factors can also inspire nationalist movements—
say, for autonomy or secession. But movements
for national autonomy are not the same as move-
ments for cultural domination. For one thing,
movements for cultural domination can often
arise within the majority group that already dom-
inates the state—such as extreme right parties in
many European countries. Conversely, many
movements for national autonomy can be quite
liberal, recognizing the importance of accom-
modating diversity within an autonomous terri-
tory and seeking only the same respect and
recognition as other nations. What distinguishes
movements for cultural domination is their as-
sertion of cultural superiority and their intoler-
ance. Their targets are freedom and diversity.

The question is how to deal with them? States
have often tried to confront these movements
with repressive and undemocratic methods—
bans on parties, extrajudicial detentions and trials,
legislation that violates fundamental rights and

even indiscriminate force and torture. These mea-
sures often suppress legitimate political demands
and processes, resulting in much more extreme
reactions. When the Islamist Salvation Front
(FIS) won the first round of elections in 1991 in
Algeria, the military intervened and banned the
party. The result: a civil war that cost more than
100,000 lives and spurred the growth of intoler-
ant and violent groups.

Instead, democratic accommodation works.
Allowing extreme right parties to contest in elec-
tions can force them to moderate their positions
as well, for example, with the Freedom Party
(FPÖ) in Austria or the Justice and Development
Party in Morocco. Electoral competition ex-
poses the fringe appeal of other groups (the
Progress Party in Denmark). Democratic ac-
commodation also gives states the legitimacy to
prosecute hate crimes, reform the curriculum
of religious schools (in Indonesia and Malaysia)
and experiment with community initiatives to im-
prove relations (Mozambique and Rwanda).

The maintenance of a liberal society depends
on respecting the rule of law, listening to polit-
ical claims and protecting fundamental human
rights—even those of vile people. Intolerance is
a real challenge for cultural liberty—that is why
the means to deal with it must be legitimate.

Globalization can threaten national and local
identities. The solution is not to retreat to con-
servatism and isolationist nationalism—it is
to design multicultural policies to promote di-
versity and pluralism.

So far the focus has been on how states should
manage diversity within their borders. But in an
era of globalization states also face challenges
from outside their borders, in the form of in-
ternational movements of ideas, capital, goods
and people.

Expanding cultural freedom in this age of
globalization presents new challenges and dilem-
mas. Contacts between people, their values,
ideas and ways of life have been growing and
deepening in unprecedented ways. For many,
this new diversity is exciting, even empowering.
For others, it is disquieting and disempowering.
Many fear that globalization means a loss of

10

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

This Report advocates an
approach that respects
and promotes diversity
while keeping countries
open to global flows of
capital, goods and people

their values and ways of life—a threat to local
and national identity. An extreme reaction is to
shut out foreign influences, an approach that is
not only xenophobic and conservative but also
regressive, shrinking rather than expanding
freedoms and choice.

This Report advocates an alternative ap-
proach that respects and promotes diversity
while keeping countries open to global flows of
capital, goods and people. That requires poli-
cies reflecting the goal of cultural liberty. Poli-
cies need to explicitly recognize and respect
cultural difference. They also need to address
imbalances in economic and political power
that lead to loss of cultures and identities.

Such alternatives are being developed and

debated in three hotly contested areas:
• Indigenous people are protesting invest-
ments in extractive sectors and misappro-
priations  of  traditional  knowledge  that
threaten their livelihoods.

• Countries are demanding that cultural goods
(mainly cinema and audiovisual products) not
be treated as any other goods in interna-
tional trade since imports of cultural goods
can weaken national cultural industries.

• Migrants are demanding accommodation of
their way of life and respect for the multiple
identities they have in both the local com-
munity and their country of origin. But local
communities are demanding that immigrants
assimilate, or be turned away, for they fear that
their societies are becoming divided and that
national values and identity are being eroded.
How can these demands be accommodated?
How should diversity be respected, and the
asymmetries addressed?

Indigenous  people,  extractive  industries
and traditional knowledge

Investments that disregard indigenous people’s
rights to land and its cultural significance as
well as its value as an economic resource will in-
evitably invite opposition. So will patenting tra-
ditional knowledge under the same conditions.
Three principles are critical: recognizing in-
digenous people’s rights over knowledge and
land, ensuring that indigenous groups have
voice (seeking their prior informed consent)

and developing strategies for sharing benefits.
Some initiatives, though still limited, are being
taken by corporations and national governments
to work with indigenous communities in devel-
oping new investments. In Peru government and
corporations have learned the lessons of previous
confrontations and have been involving indige-
nous communities in decision-making in the An-
tamina zinc and copper mine since 2001. In
Papua New Guinea investments in community de-
velopment projects accompany extraction activ-
ities. Collaborative ventures between mining
companies and indigenous people in North Amer-
ica and Australia have brought monetary bene-
fits while preserving traditional lifestyles.

Many national governments are taking steps
to recognize traditional knowledge. Bangladesh
recognizes community-based rights to biological
resources and associated traditional knowledge.
Lao PDR documents knowledge in its Tradi-
tional Medicines Resource Centre. South Africa
has promised to share with the San Bushmen the
proceeds from drugs developed based on their
knowledge. Countries have already found ways
of using existing intellectual property rights sys-
tems to protect traditional knowledge. Industrial
designs are used to protect carpets and head-
dresses in Kazakhstan. Geographical indications
protect liquors and teas in Venezuela and Viet
Nam. Copyrights and trademarks are used for tra-
ditional art in Australia and Canada.

Recognizing diversity means that different
notions of property rights and the cultural sig-
nificance of knowledge and art forms be ac-
commodated within global regimes. This requires
international action. If current intellectual prop-
erty standards cannot accommodate commonly
known traditional knowledge or its attributes of
group ownership, the rules will need to be revised.
Loans to countries and companies for projects
that wrongly acquire property or do not com-
pensate communities should be withdrawn.

Cultural goods

Should cultural goods be protected in interna-
tional trade to help protect cultural diversity in
the world? Are films and audiovisual products
cultural goods? Two principles are critical: rec-
ognize the role of cultural goods in nurturing

OVERVIEW

11

Individuals have to shed
rigid identities if they are
to become part of diverse
societies and uphold
cosmopolitan values of
tolerance and respect for
universal human rights 

creativity and diversity, and recognize the dis-
advantage of small film and audiovisual indus-
tries in global markets.

Diversity in cultural goods has its own value
because it increases consumer choice and en-
riches people’s cultural experience. But cul-
tural goods also enjoy economies of scale. So the
products of large producers tend to crowd out
the products of smaller producers, particularly
in poorer countries.

How can diversity be promoted? Mounting
barriers to trade is not the answer, since that re-
duces choice. Support to cultural industries
rather than tariffs would do more for diversity.
Argentina, Brazil and France have successfully
experimented with production subsidies and
tax breaks for cultural industries, without stop-
ping the flows of cultural products from over-
seas to local markets. Hungary diverts 6% of
television receipts to promote domestic films.
Egypt uses public-private partnerships to fi-
nance the infrastructure for film making.

Immigration

Should immigrants have to assimilate or should
their cultures be recognized? Three principles
are critical: respect diversity, recognize multiple
identities and build common bonds of belong-
ing to the local community. No country has ad-
vanced by closing its borders. International
migration brings skills, labour and ideas, en-
riching people’s lives. Just as traditionalism and
religious practices that violate human rights
cannot be defended, forced assimilation cannot
be a viable solution.

Identities are not a zero sum game. Consider
this, from a Malaysian in Norway: “I am often
asked how long I have lived here; ‘20 years’, I
say. The next remark often is ‘Oh, you are al-
most Norwegian!’ The assumption here is that
I have become less Malaysian because it is com-
mon to think about identity as a zero sum game;
if you have more of one identity, you have less
of another. Identity is somehow imagined like
a square box with a fixed size.”

Two approaches to immigration dominate
most countries’ policies: differentialism (mi-
grants keeping their identities but not integrat-
ing into the rest of society) and assimilation

(without the choice of keeping the old identity).
But new approaches of multiculturalism are
being introduced that recognize multiple iden-
tities. This involves promoting tolerance and
cultural understanding, but also specifically ac-
commodating religious practice, dress and other
aspects of everyday life. It also involves ac-
knowledging that immigrants are voiceless and
insecure in the face of exploitation and pro-
viding support for integration such as language
training and job search services.

Countries are expanding the rights of civic
participation to non-citizenship—“denizenship”
(Belgium, Sweden). And more than 30 countries
now accept dual citizenship. To reduce mis-
conceptions and prejudices the Commissioner’s
Office of the Berlin Senate for Integration and
Migration funds immigrant organizations, uses
public information campaigns and offers legal
consultations in 12 languages to help with jobs
and tackle discrimination.

But these policies are contested. Bilingual ed-
ucation in the United States and the wearing of
headscarf in France are divisive issues. Some fear
that they challenge some of the most funda-
mental values of society—such as commitment
to adopt the American culture, or the French
principles of secularism and gender equality.

*

*

*

Expanding cultural freedoms is an important
goal in human development—one that needs ur-
gent attention in the 21st century. All people
want to be free to be who they are. All people want
to be free to express their identity as members of
a group with shared commitments and values—
whether it is nationality, ethnicity, language or re-
ligion, whether it is family, profession or avocation.
Globalization is driving ever-increasing in-
teractions among the world’s people. This world
needs both greater respect for diversity and
stronger commitment to unity. Individuals have
to shed rigid identities if they are to become part
of diverse societies and uphold cosmopolitan val-
ues of tolerance and respect for universal human
rights. This Report provides a basis for dis-
cussing how countries can make that happen.
If the short history of the 21st century has taught
us nothing else, it is that ducking these questions
is not an option.

12

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

CHAPTER 1

Cultural liberty and human development

The underlying motivation
continues to be to search
for ways of enhancing
people’s lives and the
freedoms they can enjoy 

Human deprivation can occur in many ways,
some more remediable than others. The human
development approach has been extensively
used in the development literature (including
earlier Human Development Reports) to an-
alyze several prominent sources of affliction,
ranging from illiteracy and a lack of health care
to unemployment and indigence. In this year’s
Report there is a substantial expansion of cov-
erage and reach focusing in particular on the im-
portance of cultural liberty and on the personal
and social loss that can result from its dearth.
This refocusing does not abandon the basic
commitments of the human development ap-
proach. The underlying motivation continues to
be to search for ways of enhancing people’s
lives and the freedoms they can enjoy. Denial of
cultural liberty can generate significant depri-
vations, impoverishing human lives and ex-
cluding people from the cultural connections
they have reason to seek. So the human devel-
opment perspective can be extended to ac-
commodate the importance of cultural liberty.
The cultural dimensions of human develop-
ment require careful attention for three reasons.
First, cultural liberty is an important aspect of
human freedom, central to the capability of peo-
ple to live as they would like and to have the op-
portunity  to  choose  from  the  options  they
have—or can have. The advance of cultural lib-
erty must be a central aspect of human devel-
opment, and it requires us to go beyond social,
political and economic opportunities, since by
themselves they do not guarantee cultural liberty.
Second, even though there has been much
discussion in recent years about culture and
civilization, the focus has been less on cultural
liberty  and  more  on  recognizing—even
celebrating—cultural conservatism. The human
development approach has something to offer in
clarifying the importance of human freedom in
cultural spheres. Rather than glorify unreasoned

endorsement of inherited traditions, or warn the
world about the alleged inevitability of clashes
of civilizations, the human development per-
spective demands that attention go to the im-
portance of freedom in cultural spheres (as in
others), and to the ways of defending and ex-
panding the cultural freedoms that people can
enjoy. The critical issue is not just the significance
of traditional culture—it is the far-reaching im-
portance of cultural choices and freedoms.

Third, cultural liberty is important not only
in the cultural sphere, but in the successes and
failures in social, political and economic spheres.
The different dimensions of human life have
strong interrelations. Even poverty, a central
economic idea, cannot be adequately under-
stood without bringing in cultural considera-
tions. Indeed, the close link between cultural
deprivation and economic poverty was noted by
no less an economist than Adam Smith, whose
works have, as it happens, illuminated the rel-
evance of human development.

Smith argued not only that poverty takes the
gross shape of hunger and physical deprivation,
but that it can also arise in the difficulties that some
groups experience in taking part in the social
and cultural life of the community. In particular,
the analysis of poverty and the diagnosis of what
commodities count as “necessaries” cannot be in-
dependent (Smith argued) of the demands of
local culture. As he wrote: “By necessaries I un-
derstand not only the commodities which are in-
dispensably necessary for the support of life, but
whatever the custom of the country renders it in-
decent for creditable people, even the lowest
order, to be without....Custom has rendered
leather shoes a necessary of life in England. The
poorest creditable person of either sex would be
ashamed to appear in public without them.”1

Indeed, culture establishes an important re-
lation between relative incomes and absolute
human capabilities. Relative deprivation in

CULTURAL LIBERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

13

Even though cultural
correlates are very often
bogus, they clear the road
to discrimination and
exclusion 

incomes in the local community can lead to ab-
solute social deprivation. For example, being rel-
atively poor in income in a rich society can
generate absolute poverty because of one’s in-
ability to afford the commodities that the es-
tablished lifestyle in that society requires—even
though the person may have a higher income
than most people in poorer countries elsewhere.
So, the very notion of economic poverty de-
mands cultural investigation. In giving adequate
recognition to cultural freedom and cultural
influences in human development, we have to
take note of the leverage of established cultures
on our lives, and the significance of the inter-
connections between the cultural aspects of
human life and the other aspects.

PARTICIPATION AND RECOGNITION

Deprivation of freedom, including cultural free-
dom, takes many forms. So does discrimina-
tion that can lead to a loss of freedom. As
discussed in this Report, parts of the population
can be subjected to discrimination in different
spheres: political, socio-economic and cultural.
The many dimensions of deprivation—and of
discrimination—demand understanding the
distinctions between different, if interrelated,
processes through which people’s freedoms are
curtailed.

Deprivation often works through processes
of exclusion. Cultural exclusion has recently
received much attention. But two forms of cul-
tural exclusion must be clearly distinguished.

PARTICIPATION EXCLUSION

First, the cultural exclusion of a person or group
may sometimes take the form of not allowing this
person or group to participate in society in the
way that others are allowed and encouraged to
do. This can be called “participation exclusion”.
Excluding people from participation can be
linked to various characteristics of the persons
involved, such as gender, ethnicity or religion.
The primary basis of discrimination in many
cases of participation exclusion is the cultural
affiliation of the people involved, resulting in
their exclusion from participation in education
or employment or political decision-making.

Arguments used to justify such exclusion tend
to invoke alleged cultural correlates of the groups
involved. Particular ethnic groups are said to be
lazy or rowdy or irresponsible, members of mi-
nority religions are suspected of having con-
flicting loyalties to religious authorities and to
the state and so on. Even though these cultural
correlates are very often bogus, they clear the
road to discrimination and exclusion. In some
cases the identifying characteristics used in
discriminatory policy directly invoke cultural at-
tributes. This is particularly so with discrimi-
nation against religious communities, but it can
also apply to groups defined by language, social
origin or other identifying characteristic.

LIVING MODE EXCLUSION

A second kind of cultural exclusion denies
recognition of a lifestyle that a group would
choose to have. And this intolerance can go
with the insistence that members of the group
must live exactly like others in the society. This
“living mode exclusion” figures prominently in
religious intolerance—an important challenge
addressed by John Stuart Mill in his famous
essay, “On Liberty” (1859).

Living mode exclusions continue to be strong
in many contexts today, with various manifesta-
tions. Religious intolerance, obviously, is still an
important kind of exclusion. Intolerance of some
behaviour patterns in purely personal lives is an-
other example: discriminatory treatment of gays
and lesbians is a common form of living mode ex-
clusion. These exclusions involve direct viola-
tion of cultural liberty, and here the violation of
liberty goes with a denial of diversity as well.

This type of exclusion can also be a mo-
mentous issue in multicultural societies with
ethnic diversity, particularly with recently arrived
immigrant populations. The insistence that im-
migrants give up their traditional lifestyles and
adopt the dominant lifestyle in the society to
which they have immigrated illustrates a com-
mon type of lifestyle intolerance in the con-
temporary world.

The demand can extend even to minute be-
havioural issues about the conduct of immi-
grants, made famous in Great Britain by Lord
Tebbit’s far-reaching “cricket test” (a legitimate

14

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Intolerance can go with
the insistence that
members of the group
must live exactly like
others in the society 

immigrant  must  cheer  for  England  in  test
matches against the country of the person’s ori-
gin). Tebbit’s test has the merit of definiteness,
which can otherwise be a problem in a multi-
cultural society in identifying what the dominant
lifestyle actually happens to be. For example,
now that curry has been described as “authen-
tic British fare” by the British Tourist Board (in
line with the prevailing consumption patterns
of the natives of that island), a South Asian im-
migrant to Britain may have some difficulty,
without Tebbit’s algorithmic help, in deter-
mining what is the behaviour pattern to which
he or she is being asked to conform!

Living mode exclusion can be a serious area
of injustice.2 This has been the subject of much
recent work, including what is called the “pol-
itics of recognition”, which includes “claims
for the recognition of the distinctive perspectives
of ethnic, ‘racial,’ and sexual minorities, as well
as of gender difference”.3 These considerations
are indeed important for an adequately broad
view of justice, but in the context of human de-
velopment they are most immediately seen as rel-
evant  to  the  exercise  of  cultural  liberty,
which—like other freedoms—must figure in
the assessment of human development and in
the appraisal of its lapses.

FREEDOMS, HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE ROLE
OF DIVERSITY

The importance of human freedoms can be the
basis of linking them with the idea of human
rights. The recognition of human rights need not
await their legalization in the form of justicia-
ble entitlements. Often enough, they provide the
motivation behind such legislation. Indeed,
even the naming of some laws as “human rights
laws” indicates this connection. As Herbert
Hart, the distinguished legal theorist, put it in
a justly famous essay, people “speak of their
moral rights mainly when advocating their in-
corporation in a legal system”.4

Indeed, going further, the ethical acknowl-
edgement of human rights, sustained by public
discussions and reasoning, can—and does—go
beyond serving only as the basis for possible leg-
islation.5 Through the activism of individuals
and groups (including dedicated human rights

organizations), the freedoms reflected in the ac-
knowledgement of human rights can provide
the grounds for public demands, even wide-
spread collective action and agitation (for ex-
ample, for the right of minorities to have the
freedom to choose their own lifestyles). The
United Nations itself has been strongly engaged
(particularly through the UN High Commis-
sioners for Human Rights and for Refugees) in
the pursuit of human rights even where national
legislation has lagged behind ethical norms.

As pronouncements in social ethics, sus-
tained by open public reasoning, human rights
call for diverse forms of implementation. The un-
derlying freedoms can be advanced through a
variety of public actions, including recognition,
monitoring and agitation, in addition to legis-
lation and the moral commitments of concerned
people. Affirmation of human rights, founded
on the importance of human freedom in di-
verse forms, goes with the need to appreciate the
reasons for acknowledging corresponding du-
ties. Sometimes the duties are exactly specifiable,
and sometimes they are only broadly charac-
terized (they include both “perfect obligations”
and “imperfect obligations”, to make use of an
old Kantian distinction). The nature and de-
mands of human rights were extensively ex-
plored in Human Development Report 2000.
To be emphasized here is the basic recogni-
tion that the idea of human rights links directly
to the safeguarding and advance of human free-
doms. This gives reason enough, depending on
circumstances, to defend and promote particu-
lar institutions and social arrangements. But such
programmes have only derivative and contin-
gent value, which has to be assessed in terms of
what they actually do to human freedoms. The
ethical force of human rights ultimately depends
on the importance of human freedoms and can-
not be detached from that connection. This el-
ementary recognition has an extensive reach.6
One of the subjects that has received con-
siderable attention in the contemporary cul-
tural literature is cultural diversity. Sometimes
it is even seen as a human right that groups of
people, taken together, have. Group rights have
many ambiguities, but it is not hard to argue that
if they are to be taken seriously, their role in en-
hancing the freedoms of human beings must be

CULTURAL LIBERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

15

To argue for cultural
diversity on the ground
that this is what the
different groups of people
have inherited is clearly
not reasoning based on
cultural liberty 

demonstrated. Even without entering deeply
into the complex debates surrounding the idea
of groups rights, the basic need to link rights to
freedoms can be readily recognized.

This immediately raises questions about the
value of cultural diversity, since it is not itself a
characteristic of human freedoms. It is, how-
ever, easy to show that diversity can be impor-
tant in the cultural sphere. If diversity is not
allowed, many choices become unviable. Nev-
ertheless, if our focus is on freedom (including
cultural liberty), the significance of cultural di-
versity must vary along with its causal connections
to human freedom.

Quite often these connections are positive
and strong. Indeed, diversity may be both a
consequence of the exercise of human freedom
(particularly cultural liberty) and a source of so-
cietal enrichment (particularly cultural enrich-
ment). Cultural diversity may well result if
individuals are allowed and encouraged to live
as they would value living. This would tend to
follow from the earlier discussion on living
mode inclusion. For example, the persistence of
ethnically diverse lifestyles and the recognition
of, and respect for, sexual minorities can make
a society more culturally diverse precisely as a
result of the exercise of cultural liberty. In these
cases the importance of cultural diversity will fol-
low directly from the value of cultural liberty,
since the first is a consequence of the second.
Cultural diversity can also play a positive
role of its own. For example, a culturally diverse
society can bring benefits to others through the
variety of experiences that they are, as a conse-
quence, in a position to enjoy. To illustrate, it can
be plausibly argued that the rich tradition of
African American music—with its African lineage
and American evolution—has not only helped to
enhance the cultural freedom and self-respect of
African Americans, but has also expanded the
cultural options of all people (African American
or not) and enriched the cultural landscape of
America, and indeed the world.

However, the relation between cultural lib-
erty  and  cultural  diversity  requires  further
examination. The simplest way of having cultural
diversity may well be a conservative continuation
of the variety of cultures that happen to be pre-
sent at this time. A similar point can be made for

cultural diversity within an individual country,
if it happens to have a variety of cultures within
its borders. Does the championing of cultural di-
versity then demand support for cultural con-
servatism, asking that people stick to their own
cultural background and not try to move to other
lifestyles? That would immediately deliver us to
an anti-freedom position, which would look for
ways of blocking the choice of a changed living
mode that many people may wish to have. In-
deed, we could then also be in the territory of a
different kind of exclusion: participation exclu-
sion as opposed to living mode exclusion, since
people from minority cultures would be ex-
cluded from participating in the mainstream.

The insistence on cultural conservatism can
discourage—or prevent—people from adopting
a different lifestyle, indeed even from joining the
lifestyle that others, from a different cultural
background, standardly follow in the society
in question. Diversity will then be achieved at
the cost of cultural liberty. If what is ultimately
important is cultural liberty, then the valuing of
cultural diversity must take a contingent and
conditional form. Much will depend on how that
diversity is brought about and sustained.

Indeed, to argue for cultural diversity on the
ground that this is what the different groups of
people have inherited is clearly not reasoning
based on cultural liberty (even though the ar-
gument is sometimes presented as if it were
pro-freedom reasoning). Nothing can be justi-
fied in the name of freedom without actually giv-
ing an opportunity for the exercise of that
freedom, or at least without assessing how an op-
portunity of choice would be exercised if it
were available. Diversity may well be sought
for reasons other than cultural liberty. But to jus-
tify the maintenance of pre-existing diversities
on the supposed ground of cultural liberty must,
in the absence of some further argument, be a
straightforward non sequitur.

IDENTITY, COMMUNITY AND FREEDOM

The reasons for being sceptical of giving automatic
priority to inherited culture can be seen in terms
of who makes what choices. Being born in a par-
ticular  cultural  milieu  is  not  an  exercise  of
freedom—quite the contrary. It becomes aligned

16

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Within the range of the
memberships that you
actually have, you can
choose what priority to
give to one membership
or another, in a particular
context 

to cultural liberty only if the person chooses to
continue to live within the terms of that culture,
and does so having had the opportunity of con-
sidering other alternatives. The central issue in cul-
tural liberty is the capability of people to live as
they would choose, with adequate opportunity to
consider other options. The normative weight
of freedom can hardly be invoked when no
choice—real or potential—is actually considered.
As it happens, some communitarian theories
have glorified the absence of choice involved in
the “discovery” of one’s real identity. Michael
Sandel has helpfully explained this claim, which
is part of the “constitutive conception” of com-
munity: “community describes not just what
they have as fellow citizens but also what they
are, not a relationship they choose (as in a vol-
untary association) but an attachment they dis-
cover, not merely an attribute but a constituent
of their identity.”7 “The self came by its ends”,
as Sandel further explains, “not by choice but
by reflection, as knowing (or inquiring) subject
to object of (self-) understanding.”8 In this per-
spective, social organization can be seen (as an-
other communitarian author, Crowley, puts it)
as attempts to “create opportunities for men to
give voice to what they have discovered about
themselves and the world and to persuade oth-
ers of its worth”.9

The claim that identity is not a matter of
choice but ultimately one of discovery needs fur-
ther examination, and that larger issue will be
taken up below. For the present argument it is
relevant to note that the special importance and
exceptional gravity that are connected, in this
communitarian perspective, to inherited affili-
ations and attachments relate to its discovery-
based foundation, in contradistinction to things
that are “merely chosen”. Whatever may be the
persuasive power of that claim (it certainly needs
some justification), it is in real tension with at-
taching importance to choice and the freedom
to choose.

The communitarians are right, however, in
emphasizing the importance of a sense of iden-
tity in leading one’s life. Less clear is how iden-
tity can be a matter of just discovering something
about oneself, rather than, explicitly or by im-
plication, exercising a choice. These choices are
constantly being made—quite often implicitly

but sometimes explicitly, with clear awareness.
For example, when Mohandas Gandhi decided,
after considerable reflection, to give priority to
his identification with Indians seeking inde-
pendence from British rule over his identity as
a trained barrister pursuing English legal justice,
there can be no question that he was consciously
and firmly making a choice. In other cases the
choice may be implicit or obscure, and also far
less grandly defended than Gandhi’s decision,
but the choice may be no less authentic for that
reason.

Typically, each individual can identify with
many different groups. A person may have an
identity  of  citizenship  (for  example,  being
French), gender (being a woman), race (being of
Chinese origin), regional ancestry (having come
from Thailand), language (being fluent in Thai,
Chinese and English, in addition to French),
politics (having left-wing views), religion (being
a Buddhist), profession (being a lawyer), location
(being a resident of Paris), sports affiliation
(being a badminton player and a golf fanatic), mu-
sical taste (loving jazz and hip-hop), literary pref-
erence (enjoying detective stories), food habit
(being a vegetarian) and so on.

The choices are not unlimited (you cannot
choose the identity, for example, of an Inuit or
a Sumo wrestler, if you are not one). But within
the range of the memberships that you actually
have, you can choose what priority to give to one
membership or another, in a particular con-
text. The fact that you have all these—and many
other—memberships may be a matter of “dis-
covery”, but you still have to think and decide
on what relative priorities to give to your vari-
ous affiliations. The fact that discoveries occur
does not exempt you from the need to choose,
even if the choice is made implicitly.10

The possibility of choice is important in
preventing what Anthony Appiah has called
“new tyrannies” in the form of newly asserted
identities, which can tyrannize by eliminating the
claims of other identities that we may also have
reason to accept and respect. Appiah illustrates
this with the identity of being an African Amer-
ican. That identity has certainly helped in the
past—and continues to do so today—in seek-
ing racial justice in America. But it can also be
oppressive if it is taken to be the only identity

CULTURAL LIBERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

17

Cultural critiques of the
victims can be used by the
rulers to justify hugely
inefficient—as well as
deeply iniquitous—
tyrannies 

a black person has, with no other claims being
given a hearing. Appiah puts the issue thus:

In policing this imperialism of identity—an im-
perialism as visible in racial identities as anywhere
else—it is crucial to remember always that we are
not simply black or white or yellow or brown, gay
or straight or bisexual, Jewish, Christian, Moslem,
Buddhist or Confucian, but we are also brothers
and sisters; parents and children; liberals, con-
servatives and leftists; teachers and lawyers and
auto-makers and gardeners; fans of the Padres
and the Bruins; amateurs of grunge rock and
lovers of Wagner; movie buffs; MTV-holics, mys-
tery-readers; surfers and singers; poets and pet-
lovers; students and teachers; friends and lovers.
Racial identity can be the basis of resistance to
racism—and though we have made great progress,
we have further still to go—let us not let our racial
identities subject us to new tyrannies.11

Consider a different—and more ominous—
example. When Hutu instigators a decade ago
tried (and to some extent succeeded) in per-
suading other members of the Hutu community
in Rwanda that they could plainly see that they
were indubitably Hutus (not to be confused
with “those awful Tutsis”), the unreasoned
killings that followed could have been resisted
by invoking broader identities of Hutus, for
example, as Rwandans, or as Africans, or more
broadly still as human beings. To see identity
merely as a matter of discovery can not only be
a conceptual confusion. It can also lead to a dere-
liction of duty by thinking human beings—a
moral duty to consider how they would like to
see themselves and with whom they would like
to identify (whether only with the community
of Hutus or also with the nation of Rwandans,
the category of Africans or the collectivity of
human beings). Freedom to choose is important
not only for the individuals who would make the
choice, but it can also be important for others,
when the responsibility that goes with choice is
adequately seized.

BIGOTRY AND ALIENATION

Complicated theory can sometimes bolster un-
complicated bigotry and make the world a more

combustible place than it would otherwise be.12
Rapid-fire cultural generalizations can displace
a deeper understanding of culture and serve as
a tool of sectarian prejudice, social discrimina-
tion and even political tyranny. Simple cultural
generalizations, with great power in shaping
ways of thinking, abound in popular beliefs and
informal communication. A subject of many eth-
nic jokes and slurs, these underexamined be-
liefs can also surface as pernicious grand theories.
An accidental correlation between cultural prej-
udice and social observation (no matter how ca-
sual) leads to the birth of a theory that may live
on even after the chance correlation vanishes.
For example, jokes about the Irish (such as
“How many Irishmen do you need to change a
light bulb?”) have had some currency in Eng-
land for a long time. They appeared to fit well
with the depressing predicament of the Irish
economy, when it was in a long-term slump. But
when the economy started growing with aston-
ishing speed, the cultural stereotyping and its al-
legedly profound economic and social relevance
were not discarded. Theories have lives of their
own, often in defiance of the world that can ac-
tually be observed.

The connections between cultural bigotry
and political tyranny can also be very close. The
asymmetry of power between ruler and ruled,
when combined with cultural prejudices, can re-
sult in injurious failures of governance, as was
devastatingly observed in the Irish famines of the
1840s. As Richard Lebow has argued, poverty
in Ireland was widely viewed in England as
caused by laziness, indifference and ineptitude,
so that “Britain’s mission” was not seen to be
to “alleviate Irish distress but to civilize her
people and lead them to feel and act like human
beings”.13 Similar uses of cultural prejudice for
political purposes can be seen in the history of
European empires in Africa and Asia. Winston
Churchill’s famous remark that the Bengal
famines of 1943 were caused by the tendency of
people there to “breed like rabbits” belongs to
this general tradition of blaming the colonial vic-
tim. And it had a profound effect on relief ef-
forts during that disastrous famine. Cultural
critiques of the victims can be used by the rulers
to justify hugely inefficient—as well as deeply
iniquitous—tyrannies.

18

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Theories of cultural
determinism have often
been one step behind the
real world 

CULTURAL DETERMINISM

While the marriage of cultural prejudice and po-
litical asymmetry can be lethal, the need to be
cautious about jumping to cultural conclusions
is more pervasive.14 Unexamined cultural as-
sumptions can even influence the way experts
view economic development. Theories are often
derived from scanty evidence. Half-truths or
quarter-truths can grossly mislead—sometimes
even more than straightforward falsity, which is
easier to expose.

Consider this argument from the influential
book jointly edited by Lawrence Harrison and
Samuel Huntington, Culture Matters. In the in-
troductory essay, “Cultures count,” Huntington
writes:

In the early 1990s, I happened to come across eco-
nomic data on Ghana and South Korea in the early
1960s, and I was astonished to see how similar
their economies were then. ....Thirty years later,
South Korea had become an industrial giant with
the fourteenth largest economy in the world,
multinational corporations, major exports of au-
tomobiles, electronic equipment, and other so-
phisticated manufactures, and per capita income
approximately that of Greece. Moreover it was
on its way to the consolidation of democratic in-
stitutions. No such changes had occurred in
Ghana, whose per capita income was now about
one-fifteenth that of South Korea’s. How could
this extraordinary difference in development be
explained? Undoubtedly, many factors played a
role, but it seemed to me that culture had to be
a large part of the explanation. South Koreans val-
ued thrift, investment, hard work, education, or-
ganization, and discipline. Ghanians had different
values. In short, cultures count.15

There may well be something of interest in
this  engaging  comparison  (perhaps  even  a
quarter-truth torn out of context), and the con-
trast does call for probing examination. But
the causal story is extremely deceptive. There
were many important differences—other than
cultural predispositions—between Ghana and
the Republic of Korea in the 1960s, when the
countries appeared to Huntington to be much
the same, except for culture. The class structures

in the two countries were quite different, with
a much larger role of business classes in Korea.
The politics were very different too, with the
government in Korea eager to play a prime-
moving role in initiating business-centred eco-
nomic development in a way that did not apply
to Ghana. The close relationship between the
Korean economy and the Japanese and US
economies also made a big difference, at least
in the early stages of Korean development. Per-
haps most important, by the 1960s Korea had
a much higher literacy rate and a more exten-
sive school system than Ghana had. The Korean
changes had been brought about largely through
resolute public policy since the Second World
War, and were not simply a reflection of age-
old Korean culture.

There have, of course, been earlier attempts
to use cultural determinism to explain economic
development. A century ago Max Weber (1930)
presented a major thesis on the decisive role of
the Protestant ethic (in particular, Calvinism) in
the successful development of a capitalist in-
dustrial economy. Weber’s analysis of the role
of culture in the emergence of capitalism drew
on the world as he observed it in the late 19th
century. His analysis is of particular interest in
the contemporary world, especially in the light
of the recent success of market economies in
non-Protestant societies.

There may be much to learn from these
theories, and the empirical connections they
expose may be insightful. And yet it is also re-
markable how often specific aspects of cultural
explanations, based on observing the past, have
been undermined by later experiences. Indeed,
theories of cultural determinism have often
been one step behind the real world.

GLOBALIZATION, ASYMMETRY AND
DEMOCRACY

There is more to be said on the choice of iden-
tity, in particular about problems of equity—
and  of  distributive  justice—that  have  to  be
faced in examining the implications of cultural
inclusion as well as cultural diversity. But be-
fore  doing  that,  it  is  useful  to  examine  two
special phenomena—or alleged phenomena—
of the contemporary world that have exerted

CULTURAL LIBERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

19

An overarching value
must be the need for
participatory decision-
making on the kind of
society people want to
live in 

considerable influence on recent discussions of
cultural identity. They can be jointly called—for
want of a better expression—the future of cul-
tural diversity in the globalized world. They
deal with the impact of globalization and the
asymmetric power that goes with it and with the
thesis that there is a persistent tendency for civ-
ilizations to clash, which can make the world a
very violent and disruptive place.

GLOBALIZATION’S ASYMMETRIC POWER?

One of the worries that many people have in
contemplating the safeguarding of cultural lib-
erty today concerns the overwhelming influ-
ence  of  Western  culture,  especially  its
“consumerism”, in the globalized world in which
we live. The point is often made, plausibly, that
being free to choose one’s lifestyle is not, in the
present world, just a matter of being allowed to
choose freely. It is also an issue of whether peo-
ple in more marginalized civilizations are able
to resist the Western influence. This concern cer-
tainly deserves attention, given the evident pre-
cariousness  of  local  cultures  in  a  world  so
dominated by thunderous exposure to Western
influences.

At least two issues are of particular interest
here. First, there is the power and force of mar-
ket culture in general, which is part and parcel
of the form that economic globalization has in-
creasingly taken. Those who find the values and
priorities of market-related cultures to be vul-
gar and impoverishing (even many in the West
have this view) tend to find economic global-
ization itself to be quite objectionable. And yet
often enough, they also see market-based glob-
alization as hard to resist, given the reach and
strength of the market economy and the sheer
volume of resources it can bring to bear on re-
shaping the world.

The second problem concerns the asymme-
try of power between the West and other coun-
tries and the likelihood that this asymmetry will
translate into destruction of local cultures (po-
etry, drama, music, dancing, food habits and so
on). Such a loss, it is plausibly argued, would cul-
turally impoverish non-Western societies. Given
the constant cultural bombardment that tends to
come from the Western metropolis (from fast

food to blast music), there are genuine fears that
native traditions may be overwhelmed by the
fusillade.

These threats are undoubtedly real, and to
a considerable extent they may also be difficult
to escape. The solution can hardly lie in stop-
ping the globalization of trade and exchange,
both because international commerce can bring
economic benefits that many countries value
greatly and because the forces of economic ex-
change and division of labour are hard to resist
in an interacting world.

A plausible line of response to the problem
of asymmetry can, however, take the form of
strengthening the constructive opportunities that
local cultures have—and can be helped to have—
to protect their own and to resist being out-
gunned by the forces of cultural invasion. If
foreign imports dominate because of greater
control over the radio waves, television channels
and so on, surely a counteracting policy must in-
volve expanding the facilities available to local
culture to present its own creations, both locally
and beyond. The costs involved in following
that constructive route may not be as forbid-
ding as people might think, since communication
has become so much cheaper in the contempo-
rary world. This would also be a positive re-
sponse, unlike the temptation, which rears its
head with some frequency, to ban foreign influ-
ence through legislation or executive decree.

The constructive possibility of providing
much more support for local cultural activities
would not only help to strengthen them—it
would also allow them to face a more equal
competition. In the pro-freedom perspective
there is much merit in taking that route, rather
than  making  local  cultures  prevail  simply
through proscribing the competition. It is im-
portant to make sure that the baby of cultural
liberty is not thrown away with the bath water
of unequal competition.

The deciding issue, ultimately, has to be
one of democracy. An overarching value must
be the need for participatory decision-making
on the kind of society people want to live in,
based on open discussion, with adequate op-
portunity for the expression of minority posi-
tions. The issue of political inclusion (giving
people the freedom to participate in political

20

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

The specific claim that
tolerance is a special
feature of Western
civilization, extending way
back into history, is
particularly hard to sustain

choices, rather than being ignored by authori-
tarian potentates) is particularly relevant here in
the safeguarding of cultural liberty (in the free-
dom of people to choose their own lifestyles). We
cannot both want democracy and yet rule out
certain choices, on traditionalist grounds, be-
cause of their “foreignness” (irrespective of what
people would choose, in an informed and re-
flective way). The value of democracy has to
resist the banishing of citizens’ freedom of choice
through the fiat of political authorities (or orders
of religious establishments or pronouncements
of grand guardians of “national taste”), no mat-
ter how unbecoming those authorities (or es-
tablishments  or  guardians)  find  the  new
predilections to be. This is one field, among
others, in which cultural liberty and political
freedom can be fruitfully viewed together.16

CIVILIZATIONS AND GLOBAL HISTORY

If fear of globalization is one general concern that
many people express in dealing with cultural lib-
erty, the dread of a “clash of civilizations” (as
Huntington calls it) is another that has received
considerable articulation in recent years. The the-
sis has many components, but a general concern
seems to be that pluralist and tolerant Western
civilization is now under constant threat from
less lenient and more authoritarian cultures. 
Indeed, if we were to assume that people in
non-Western civilizations are constantly tempted
by authoritarian values (and perhaps even by the
lure of violence), then the dread that the world’s
cultural diversity must have grave consequences
would not be hard to understand. But how
sound is the cultural analysis that underlies that
fear? And how reliable is the reading of history
that sustains that cultural analysis? There are rea-
sons to be sceptical of both. Civilizational cat-
egories are far from clear-cut, and the simulated
history that goes with the thesis of clashing civ-
ilizations exaggerates these contrasts, partly by
neglecting the heterogeneities within each cul-
ture, but also by ignoring historical interactions
between the different cultures.

The specific claim that tolerance is a special—
and very nearly unique—feature of Western civ-
ilization, extending way back into history, is
particularly hard to sustain. This is not to deny

that tolerance and liberty are among the impor-
tant achievements of modern Europe (despite
some aberrations, such as brutal imperialist rules
over two centuries and the Nazi atrocities six
decades ago). The world indeed has much to
learn from the recent history of Europe and the
Western world, particularly since the period of
European Enlightenment. But to see a unique line
of historical division there—going back through
history—is remarkably fanciful. The history of the
world does not suggest anything like a division
between a long-run history of Western toleration
and that of non-Western despotism.

Political liberty and tolerance in their full
contemporary form are not an old historical
feature in any country or civilization. Plato and
Augustine were no less authoritarian in think-
ing than were Confucius and Kautilya. There
were, of course, champions of tolerance in clas-
sical European thought, but there are plenty of
similar examples in other cultures as well. For
example, Emperor Ashoka’s dedicated cham-
pioning of religious and other kinds of tolerance
in India in the third century BCE (arguing that
“the sects of other people all deserve reverence
for one reason or another”) is certainly among
the earliest political defences of tolerance any-
where. Similarly, when a later Indian emperor,
Akbar, the Great Moghal, was making compa-
rable pronouncements on religious tolerance
at the end of the 16th century (such as: “no
one should be interfered with on account of re-
ligion, and anyone is to be allowed to go over
to a religion that pleases him”), the Inquisition
was in full swing in Europe. To take another il-
lustration, when the Jewish philosopher Mai-
monides  was  forced  to  emigrate  from  an
intolerant Europe in the 12th century, he found
a tolerant refuge in the Arab world and was
given an honoured and influential position in the
court of Emperor Saladin in Cairo. His tolerant
host was the same Saladin who fought hard for
Islam in the Crusades.

Indeed, the very idea of democracy, in the
form of participatory public reasoning, has ap-
peared in different civilizations at different pe-
riods in world history.17 In early seventh century
Japan, the Buddhist Prince Shotoku, regent to
his mother Empress Suiko, introduced a rela-
tively liberal constitution or kempo (known as

CULTURAL LIBERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

21

The building of humane
and just societies
demands adequate
recognition of the
importance of freedoms in
general, which include
cultural liberty

“the constitution of 17 articles”) in 604 CE. In
the spirit of the Magna Carta (signed six cen-
turies later, in 1215 CE), the kempo insisted:
“Decisions on important matters should not be
made by one person alone. They should be dis-
cussed with many.” On the subject of toler-
ance, it says: “Nor let us be resentful when
others differ from us. For all men have hearts,
and each heart has its own leanings. Their right
is our wrong, and our right is their wrong.”18
Examples of championing public discus-
sion and seeking different—and conflicting—
points of view have figured in the history of
other countries in the world, both in the West
and outside it. They continue to be of contem-
porary relevance in thinking about the feasibil-
ity of a tolerant democracy in today’s world.
When India became independent in 1947, the
committee that drafted its constitution, led by
B.R. Ambedkar, had to consider India’s own tra-
ditions (including those of political tolerance and
local democracy), in addition to learning from
the gradual emergence of Western democra-
cies over the previous two centuries.

Similarly, Nelson Mandela, in his autobi-
ography, Long Walk to Freedom, describes
how influenced he was, as a young boy, by the
democratic nature of the local meetings that
were held in the regent’s house in Mqhekezweni:

Everyone who wanted to speak did so. It was
democracy in its purest form. There may have been
a hierarchy of importance among the speakers, but
everyone was heard, chief and subject, warrior and
medicine man, shopkeeper and farmer, landowner
and laborer.... The foundation of self-government
was that all men were free to voice their opinions
and equal in their value as citizens.19

The hard lines that have recently been drawn
to give shape to the fear of a clash of civilizations
are  especially  blind  to  world  history.  The
classifications are often based in an extraordi-
narily crude and extreme historical innocence.
The diversity of traditions within distinct civi-
lizations is effectively ignored, and major global
interventions in science, technology, mathe-
matics and literature over millennia are made to
disappear so as to give credence to a parochial
view of the uniqueness of Western civilization.

There is a fundamental methodological
problem in assuming that a partitioning civi-
lization is the uniquely relevant distinction and
must swamp other ways of identifying people.
Other divisions (say, between rich and poor, be-
tween members of different classes and occu-
pations, between people of different politics,
between distinct nationalities and places of res-
idence, between language groups and so on) are
all submerged by this allegedly preeminent way
of seeing the differences between people. It is
not enough that those who would foment global
confrontation or local sectarian violence try to
impose a pre-chosen unitary and divisive iden-
tity on the people who are recruited as the foot-
soldiers of political brutality. They are indirectly
aided in that task by the implicit support that
the warriors get from theories of singular cate-
gorization of the people of the world.

There is a remarkable neglect of the role of
choice and reasoning in decisions about what
importance to attach to membership in any par-
ticular group or any particular identity. By
adopting a unique and allegedly predominant
way of categorizing people, partitioning civi-
lization can materially contribute to conflict in
the world. To deny choice when it does exist is
not only a misunderstanding of what the world
is like. It is also ethical delinquency and a po-
litical dereliction of responsibility.

CONCLUSIONS

The building of humane and just societies de-
mands adequate recognition of the importance
of freedoms in general, which include cultural
liberty. This calls for securing and construc-
tively expanding the opportunities that people
have to choose how they would live and to con-
sider alternative lifestyles. Cultural considera-
tions can figure prominently in these choices.
Emphasizing cultural liberty is not exactly the
same as going all out for cultural diversity. It is
certainly true that allowing diversity in cultural
practices can be extremely important, since the
exercise of cultural liberty depends on it. This,
however, is not the same as championing cultural
diversity for its own sake. Much would depend
on how cultural diversity comes about and the
extent to which the people involved can exercise

22

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION

Human rights embody the fundamental values of human civilizations

People are different, and so are their cultures.
People live in different ways, and civilizations
also differ.
People speak in a variety of languages.
People are guided by different religions.
People are born different colours, and many
traditions influence their lives with varying
colours and shades.
People dress differently and adapt to their en-
vironment in different ways.
People express themselves differently. Music,
literature and art reflect different styles as well.
But despite these differences, all people have one
single  common  attribute:  they  are  all  human
beings—nothing more, nothing less.

And however different they may be, all cultures
embrace certain common principles:
No culture tolerates the exploitation of human
beings.
No religion allows the killing of the innocent.
No civilization accepts violence or terror.
Torture is abhorrent to the human conscience.
Brutality  and  cruelty  are  appalling  in  every
tradition.

In short, these common principles, which are
shared by all civilizations, reflect our funda-
mental human rights. These rights are treasured
and cherished by everyone, everywhere.

So cultural relativity should never be used as
a pretext to violate human rights, since these

rights embody the most fundamental values of
human civilizations. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights is needed universally, applicable
to both East and West. It is compatible with
every faith and religion. Failing to respect our
human rights only undermines our humanity.

Let us not destroy this fundamental truth;

if we do, the weak will have nowhere to turn.

Shirin Ebadi
2003 Nobel Peace Prize winner 

their freedom. It would be a serious mistake to
regard cultural diversity as valuable no matter
how it is brought about. Indeed, cultural diver-
sity, particularly in the perspective of human de-
velopment, cannot be evaluated without taking
note of the processes involved and the role of
human freedom in the way things get decided.
The analysis in this chapter leads to some
clear conclusions, pursued in the chapters that fol-
low. First, a greater extent of cultural diversity can
be a consequence of the exercise of cultural lib-
erty by all (including ethnic or sexual or social mi-
norities). When that is the case, there is a strong
argument for celebrating cultural diversity and for
doing what can be done to safeguard it. The ap-
plause for diversity, in this reasoning, comes from
the value of cultural liberty—a value that fits
fully with the importance of freedoms in general.
Second, cultural diversity in a society can also
give all the people in that society—irrespective
of their background—the opportunity to enjoy
a wider range of cultural choice. This, too, links
ultimately with cultural liberty, in this case as a
facilitator, rather than (as in the last case) as a
consequence of the exercise of cultural liberty.
Here too cultural diversity should get cheers, in
expanding the cultural range of social life and
thereby enhancing the options that people ac-
tually enjoy to choose their ways of living. This
is also a part of a freedom-based defence of
cultural diversity.

Third, the exercise of cultural liberty may
sometimes lead to a reduction of—rather than
an increase in—cultural diversity, when people
adapt to the lifestyles of others and choose, in
a reasoned way, to go in that direction (unhin-
dered by living mode exclusion). When that
occurs, to oppose cultural liberty on the ground
that it reduces cultural diversity would be a
blunder, since liberty has constitutive—and
intrinsic—importance of its own in a way that
diversity does not.

Related to that issue is the prizing of cul-
tural conservatism, often championed on the
ground that retaining one’s “own” culture is a
move in favour of freedom. But to assume that
a compulsion to retain one’s ancestral and in-
herited culture must somehow be an exercise
of  freedom  is  a  conceptual  confusion.  That
subject relates also to the role of choice in the
determination of identity. Since all individuals
belong to many groups, have many different
ways of identifying themselves and have to de-
cide  how  to  deal  with  the  correspondingly
different—possibly  conflicting—priorities,
there is no way of avoiding choice (even if it is
done  implicitly  and  perhaps  imperceptibly).
This does not deny that “discoveries” are fre-
quently made about whether one belongs to one
group or another (and these could be impor-
tant discoveries), but that does not eliminate the
need for choice.

CULTURAL LIBERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

23

It is particularly important
not to fall into the
confusion of taking
unexamined
traditionalism to be part
of the exercise of
cultural liberty 

To deny choice when a choice exists is not
only a factual mistake, it can also have grave
moral consequences in a world where identity-
based conflicts—and brutalities—are common.
The inclusiveness of a society will depend greatly
on bringing clarity to the role of choice in iden-
tity and to the need to “reason before identity”.
Indeed, understanding the responsibility of
choice can help greatly in making sure that the
relevant moral issues related to one’s social ex-
istence are adequately addressed.

The importance of freedom links well with
the need for equity in the pursuit of freedom. The
freedoms of different people are involved, and
focusing on freedom requires that attention be
paid to the freedoms of all—and this connects
with considerations of equity. It is important to
keep the issue of equity constantly in view, be-
cause of its extensive reach. There is no basic
tension—as is sometimes alleged—between free-
dom and equity. Indeed, equity can be seen in
terms of equitable advancement of the free-
doms of all people (rather than merely in terms
of the distribution of income, or in terms of the
even more limited perspective of “redistribution”
from an ultimately arbitrary starting point). Seen
in this way, it is possible to make consistent use
of both the basic concepts of liberty and equity
in assessing the demands of social inclusion and
the contingent merits of cultural diversity.

A difficult—or allegedly difficult—case may
be considered briefly to illustrate the arguments
that may be invoked. The question has been
asked, with considerable perspicacity: “Is multi-
culturalism bad for women?”20 That issue relates
to the well discussed fact that continuation of
many of the practices in a traditional male-
dominated society may go against the interests
and opportunities of women. To argue for re-
taining them on the ground of the importance of
multiculturalism does not well serve the interests
of women. Extreme cases of this kind of conflict
can involve particular practices (such as bodily
mutilations) that are sanctioned by the rules of
some prevailing cultures but that may be espe-
cially harmful to women’s ability to lead their own
lives and to exercise their own freedoms.

In pursuing this question, it is important to
see cultural liberty in a broad enough per-
spective. In defence of ongoing practices it is

sometimes pointed out that women themselves
typically accept these cultural rules without
protest. But many iniquities in the world con-
tinue to survive and prosper by making allies of
the victims, by denying them the opportunity to
consider alternatives and obstructing knowl-
edge of other feasible arrangements in other
communities. So it is particularly important not
to fall into the confusion of taking unexamined
traditionalism to be part of the exercise of cul-
tural liberty. It is necessary to ask whether the
underdogs in society—in this case the women
whose lives may be badly affected by these
practices—have had the opportunity to con-
sider alternatives and have the freedom to know
how people in the rest of the world live. The need
for reasoning and for freedom is central to the
perspective that is being used here.

Putative defences of conservative tradi-
tionalism could be—and have been—proposed
on other grounds. Can such practices be de-
fended on the ground of the value of multicul-
turalism? Can they be championed in the cause
of cultural diversity? The second question is
fairly easy to answer. Cultural diversity is not,
as has already been discussed, a value in itself,
at least not in the human development approach
(with its focus on human freedoms and their eq-
uitable advancement). The value of cultural di-
versity rests on its positive connection—as is
often the case—with cultural liberty. Invoking
the contingent value of cultural diversity in
defence of practices that deny women their
basic freedom to choose would be manifestly
perverse, since the freedom of the women in-
volved is violated, not promoted, through these
arrangements. Nor can equity, in the sense of eq-
uity of freedoms, be promoted in this way.

If, however, the expansion of cultural di-
versity, or any increase of “multiculturalism”, is
taken to be an object of value in itself—no mat-
ter  what  it  does  to  the  lives  of  the  people
involved—then we are in a territory whose lim-
itations have already been much discussed in the
human development literature. Even economic
opulence—important as it is—could not be
taken to be valuable in itself and had to be seen
as important only to the extent that it conforms
to what people would value having. In the human
development perspective multiculturalism must

24

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

be assessed for what it does to the lives and
freedoms of the people involved.

Indeed, seeing the expansion of multicul-
turalism as an end in itself can easily yield a sit-
uation  in  which  the  freedoms  of  individual
members of a community—in this case female
members—are severely violated. This goes deeply
against the importance of human freedom, which
applies to women as well as men, and to the un-
derdogs of a traditional society as well as to its
leading figures and thunderous spokesmen. The
need for equity points to the fundamental diffi-
culties involved in taking the enlargement of
multiculturalism as an end in itself.

As this chapter shows, deprivation of human
freedom can arise from many causes and reflect

diverse forms of discrimination, involving cul-
tural as well as political and socio-economic in-
fluences on human lives. In the chapters that
follow the different forms of exclusion, and
their implications for human deprivation, are ex-
tensively investigated and assessed. Attention is
paid to institutional features as well as values that
profoundly influence human lives.

The practical importance of multicultural-
ism and cultural diversity figures in these analy-
ses. Their merit, which can of course be very
great, depends on their connections with the
freedoms of the people involved, including eq-
uity and evenhandedness in the distribution of
their freedoms. That basic principle is a central
feature of the human development approach.

CULTURAL LIBERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

25

CHAPTER 2

Challenges for cultural liberty

Some of the most socially divisive debates today
are on cultural identity and diversity—in vastly
different contexts, in many different ways. The
debates can be about the choice of official lan-
guage (Afghanistan’s new Constitution), polit-
ical representation of ethnic or religious groups
(Sunnis and Shiites in Iraq), relations between
the state and religion (Muslims in France), claims
of indigenous people against mining by multi-
national corporations (Amazon region of Brazil),
immigration policies (United Kingdom) or nat-
uralization procedures (Germany). Such ten-
sions can also be at the heart of violent conflicts
(Rwanda, Yugoslavia). Globalization adds yet an-
other dimension, as ethnic groups, indigenous
people and nation-states challenge international
agreements on trade and investment on the
grounds that they diminish cultural diversity.
Around the world people are more assertive
in demanding respect for their cultural identi-
ties. Often, their demands are for social justice,
for greater political voice. But that is not all. Their
demands are also for recognition and respect
(box 2.1). People care about jobs and schools.
But they also care about whether their history
is acknowledged, their heroes are respected and
their religious celebrations are recognized as
official holidays. And they care about whether
they and their children will live in a society that
is diverse or one in which everyone is expected
to conform to a single dominant culture.

Many states face an urgent challenge in re-
sponding to these demands. But responding
can threaten ruling elites who impose their lan-
guage, religion and ways of life to consolidate
power and control of the state. And many states
fear that recognizing diverse identities gets in the
way of other important objectives: state unity,
economic growth, development, democracy,
peace and stability.

People have been persecuted for their iden-
tities for millennia. But suppressing identities is

Around the world people
are more assertive in
demanding respect for
their cultural identities 

becoming more difficult in today’s world. Po-
litical movements for cultural recognition are dif-
ficult to suppress without resorting to extreme
repression or violence, strategies that are less fea-
sible in today’s world of instant communication
and strong international human rights networks.
All countries, and the world as a whole, face
the challenges of promoting diversity and ex-
panding  the  cultural  choices  of  all  people.
These are not just challenges for a few “multi-
ethnic states”, for almost no country is homo-
geneous.  The  world’s  nearly  200  countries
include some 5,000 ethnic groups.1 Two-thirds
of countries have more than one ethnic or re-
ligious group making up at least 10% of the
population.2 Many  countries  have  large  in-
digenous populations that were marginalized
by colonization and settlers.

BOX 2.1

Two aspects of cultural exclusion

Cultural liberty is the freedom people have
to choose their identity—to be who they are
and who they want to be—and to live with-
out being excluded from other choices that
are important to them. Cultural liberty is
violated by the failure to respect or recog-
nize  the  values,  institutions  and  ways  of
life of cultural groups and by discrimina-
tion  and  disadvantage  based  on  cultural
identity.

Living mode exclusion
Living mode exclusion occurs when the
state or social custom denigrates or sup-
presses a group’s culture, including its lan-
guage, religion or traditional customs or
lifestyles. Needed are policies that give some
form of public recognition, accommoda-
tion  and  support  to  a  group’s  culture.
Through such policies of cultural inclusion
members of the group see their cultures in
the symbols and institutions of the state and
in the respect of society.

Source: Chapter 1 and Kymlicka 2004.

Participation exclusion
Participation exclusion—social, economic
and political exclusion along ethnic, linguis-
tic or religious lines—refers to discrimina-
tion or disadvantage based on cultural identity.
Such exclusions operate through discrimina-
tory policies from the state (such as the denial
of citizenship or of the right to vote or run for
office), past discrimination that has not been
remedied (lower performance in education)
or social practice (such as less access in the
media to a cultural group’s point of view, or
discrimination in job interviews). Needed are
approaches that integrate multicultural poli-
cies with human development strategies.

Specific remedies required
There is much reinforcement between liv-
ing mode exclusion and social, economic and
political exclusion, and some of their causes
(viewing some cultures as “backward”).
Each type of exclusion requires its own
analysis and remedies.

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

27

The pace of international migration has
quickened, with startling effects on some cities.
In Toronto 44% of the population was born out-
side of Canada.3 One way or another every
country is a multicultural society—containing
ethnic, religious, linguistic and racial groups
that have common bonds to a heritage, culture,
values and way of life.

In the agenda for human development in the
21st century, expanding cultural liberty is an im-
portant, and often neglected, challenge (box
2.2). This chapter explores the nature of that
challenge.

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Figure
2.1

Most countries are 
culturally diverse

Number of countries by share of 
ethnic or religious groups, 2003

110

42

30

Less than

10%

10–25% More than

25%

CULTURAL LIBERTY—AN UNCHARTED
DIMENSION OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

Share of world population, 2003

Less than 10% of population
10–25% of  population
More than 25% of population 

52%

30%

17%

Note:

Source:

Percentages refer to all ethnic or religious 
groups except the largest.
CIA 2003.

Human development is about people. It is about
enlarging the choices people have to do and be
what they value in life. Much work on human
development—including the human develop-
ment index and previous Human  Develop-
ment Reports—has focused on greater access
to health and education, on pro-poor economic
growth and on democratization as the main
challenges. But as chapter 1 explains, people
must also be free to be who they are and to

choose their cultural identity accordingly—as a
Thai,  a  Quaker,  a  Wolof  speaker,  a  South
African of Indian descent—and to enjoy the
respect of others and live in dignity. They must
also be free to make cultural choices without
penalty, without being excluded from other
choices—for jobs, schooling, housing, health-
care, political voice and many other opportu-
nities critical to human well-being. They must
be allowed to choose multiple identities—as
Thai and Muslim, for example, or as Wolof
and Senegalese.

The core argument of this Report is that so-
cieties should embrace, not suppress, such mul-
tiple  and  complementary  identities.  The
challenge for policy-makers in the 21st century
is to broaden choices—so that people need not
renounce their identities to have access to the
full range of social and economic opportunities.

DIVERSE FORMS AND ORIGINS OF CLAIMS
FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

Throughout history, in all regions of the world,
cultural identities have been suppressed. Con-
querors, colonizers, despots and democratically
elected governments alike have tried to impose

BOX 2.2

Defining cultural rights lags behind defining civil, political, economic and social rights—why?

Of the five categories of human rights—civil, cul-
tural, economic, social and political—cultural
rights have received the least attention. The first-
ever resolution on cultural rights adopted by
the Commission on Human Rights was in 2002,
on “Promotion of the enjoyment of the cultural
rights of everyone and respect for different cul-
tural identities”.

This neglect has its roots in the heated de-
bates that arose during the drafting of the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights. At issue
was  whether  cultural  rights  should  explicitly
recognize minority rights. Canada, most Latin
American countries and the United States ar-
gued against minority rights, while the Eastern
bloc countries and India argued for them. In the
end, minority rights were not recognized in the
final  wording.  It  was  not  until  1966  that  the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights recognized that people belonging to eth-
nic, linguistic or religious minorities “shall not
be denied the right, in community with other
Sources: Stamatopoulou 2002; Kymlicka 2004; and Arizpe 2004.

members of their group, to enjoy their culture,
to profess and practice their religion, or to use
their own language”.

These reservations reflect the unease that

surrounds the notion of cultural rights:
• Cultural rights can provoke arguments about
cultural relativism, arguments that use cul-
ture to defend violations of human rights.
• Cultural rights are difficult to operationalize
because they are tied up with the concept of
culture, which is a moving target.

• Cultural rights, according to some, are a “lux-
ury”, to be addressed once the other rights
have been achieved.

• Cultural rights cannot be addressed without
confronting the cultural “wrongs” that exist
in societies. These are traditions and practices
that violate human rights. States are cautious
about recognizing such wrongs.

• Cultural rights evoke the scary spectrum of
group identities and group rights that some
people fear threaten the nation-state.

Some human rights and political philosophy
theorists argue that ensuring the civil and polit-
ical rights of individuals—such as freedom of
worship, speech and association—is sufficient to
allow individuals to freely pursue their cultural
beliefs and practices.

Though slow to start, the work of human
rights  bodies  has  made  important  strides  in
clarifying the elements of human rights to par-
ticipate in cultural life, including equality and
non-discrimination, freedom from interference
in the enjoyment of cultural life and the free-
dom to create and contribute to it, freedom to
choose in which culture and which cultural life
to  participate,  freedom  to  disseminate,  free-
dom to cooperate internationally and freedom
to participate in the definition and implemen-
tation  of  policies  on  culture.  Overriding  all
these  elements  is  the  fundamental  principle
that cultural rights are an indivisible part of
human  rights,  although  not  every  custom  or
practice is a right.

28

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Indigenous people can
expect a shorter life

Figure
2.2
Gap in life expectancy in selected 
developing countries, 1997–2000

Indigenous population
Non-indigenous population
Gap in life expectancy 

10

6

13

s
r
a
e
Y

80

60

40

20

0

Guatemala

Panama

Mexico

Source:

During 1993 (share of indigenous peoples); 
WHO 2001 (Guatemala); UNDP 2002b 
(Panama); Mexico, Ministry of Health 2004 
(Mexico).

Gap in life expectancy in selected 
industrial countries, 1997–2000

Indigenous population (males)
National average (males)
Gap in life expectancy 

20

17

11

Australia

Canada

New

Zealand
Data refer to the most recent year available 
during the period specified.
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2004 
(Australia); Justiniano and Litchﬁeld 2003 
(Canada); WHO 2001 (New Zealand).

s
r
a
e
Y

80

60

40

20

0

Note:

Source:

a particular language, religion or way of life on
the people under their rule. In some places non-
favoured cultures have been labelled “inferior”
or “backward”. In others, such as apartheid
South Africa, rulers sought to keep people sep-
arated, in part by denying some groups the
same rights of citizenship and participation as
others enjoyed. Worst of all are the places that
have tried to obliterate groups through genocide,
such as in Nazi Germany and Rwanda.

The result is a legacy of widespread cul-
tural exclusion, both living mode exclusion and
exclusion in political, social and economic par-
ticipation along ethnic, linguistic or religious
lines (participation exclusion). This Report ex-
plores such exclusions in three categories: mi-
norities in multi-ethnic states, indigenous people
and migrants.

Minorities  in  multi-ethnic  states.  More
than 150 countries have significant minority
ethnic or religious groups, and only 30 countries
do not have a religious or ethnic minority that
constitutes at least 10% of the population (fig-
ure 2.1). An example is the ethnic groups in for-
mer colonial states, especially in Africa, where
boundaries did not coincide with ethnic iden-
tities, creating highly diverse states. In most of
these groups members share a common history
or at least perceive a shared experience.

Not  all  these  groups  are  discriminated
against or disadvantaged, and the situations
they face vary widely. African Americans have
twice the unemployment rate of their white
counterparts and nearly three times the infant
mortality rate (see figure 3.4 in chapter 3). They
are also underrepresented politically in upper
and lower houses of legislatures. But civil rights
struggles have led to greater respect for African
American culture and affirmation of the African
American identity as a source of pride. Other
minorities may be economically privileged but
culturally or politically sidelined. In Indonesia
the ethnic Chinese constitute 3% of the popu-
lation but control about 70% of the private
economy.4 Despite their economic power they
face restrictions on Chinese-language educa-
tion and publishing. In many countries in South-
East  Asia  residents  of  Chinese  descent  are
considered “foreigners” even when they have
lived there for generations.

For some groups discrimination is wider
spread. The Roma of Eastern Europe have un-
employment rates averaging 45% and rising above
60% in some areas. They also suffer from sub-
standard health and living conditions.5 Only one
in three Roma children in Serbia and Monte-
negro has ever attended primary school, and no
more than 0.4% of Serbian Roma have a univer-
sity education.6 Often perceived as lazy, unclean,
uneducated and petty thieves, Roma dispropor-
tionately suffer violent attacks in countries such
as Bulgaria, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.7
Indigenous  people. Around 300 million
people belong to the world’s indigenous groups,8
representing some 4,000 languages in more than
70 countries.9 Latin America’s 50 million in-
digenous people make up 11% of the region’s
population. Indigenous people are not always in
the minority.10 In Bolivia and Guatemala in-
digenous people make up more than half the
population.11

These groups are heirs to unique cultures and
unique ways of relating to other people and the
environment. They maintain political, cultural
and economic characteristics distinct from main-
stream society. In Australasia, the Americas and
elsewhere the sound of foreign feet on indigenous
soil was too often a death knell. Military conquest,
ecological destruction, forced labour and lethal
diseases reduced indigenous populations in the
Americas and Australia by as much as 95%.12 In
Australia alone some 500 languages have been lost
since the arrival of Europeans.13

For those who remain, the struggle contin-
ues. The world’s indigenous people share many
challenges, such as poverty and poor health (fig-
ure 2.2) and education. While many culturally
identifiable groups face inequalities in these
areas, indigenous people share some distinct
problems. Often the lands they use for produc-
tive purposes and to maintain historical and
spiritual links are not secure and so are being
taken over for logging, mining, tourism and
infrastructure. From occupying most of the
earth’s ecosystems two centuries ago indigenous
people today have the legal right to use about 6%
of the earth’s territory. And in many cases the
rights are partial or qualified.14 In most South-
East Asian countries, for example, there are no
laws granting indigenous people the right to

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

29

Figure
2.3

Europe’s non-European 
migrant population has 
increased signiﬁcantly...

Foreign-born population from 
outside Europe

1500

s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T

1200

900

600

300

0

1981

Germany

Italy

Netherlands

Sweden

2000

... and migrants are coming 
from more places 
Migrant groups in Sweden with 
populations greater than 1,000

33

15

s
p
u
o
r
g
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

40

30

20

10

0

1980

2002

Source:

Wanner 2002; Statistics Sweden 2004.

their land. And not only their land is being cov-
eted and taken—so is their knowledge. Multi-
national  corporations  have  discovered  its
commercial potential, and the race is on to patent,
privatize and appropriate.

Migrants.  The  number  of  international
migrants—defined as people living outside their
country of birth—more than doubled since the
mid-1970s—to about 175 million.15 The numbers
have increased most dramatically in the richest
countries. The number of migrants to the Euro-
pean Union from outside Europe is up 75%
since 1980.16 Migrants are coming from a wider
range of countries, too, so that more people of
different cultures are living together. In London
children in state schools speak some 300 differ-
ent languages.17 And in Sweden migrants come
from twice as many countries as they did in 1980
(see figure 2.3 and feature 5.1 in chapter 5).18

While the inflow is fastest in the richest
countries, migration is an issue in all regions.
People have moved from poorer to more pros-
perous developing countries (such as the mi-
gration into the oil-rich countries in the 1970s
and 1980s) and from countries experiencing
political  upheaval  or  persecution  to  neigh-
bouring countries (see figure 5.2 in chapter 5).
As a result developing countries make up 10 of
the 15 countries with the highest proportion of
foreign-born residents, including the top three
(United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and Jordan).19
Saudi Arabia has the fifth largest foreign-born
population, at more than 5 million.20

In both richer and poorer countries one of the
greatest challenges for migrants is their legal sta-
tus in the receiving country. For immigrants there
is a sea of gray between full citizenship and ille-
gal status. This uncertainty affects their civic par-
ticipation, such as receiving health and education
services, being able to drive legally and being
able to enter the workforce without being sub-
jected to discrimination. Often immigrants’ un-
certain legal status culminates in their having no
political voice and being vulnerable to human
rights abuses. Their uncertain status also puts
recognition of their cultural identity in jeopardy.
Immigrants, particularly those deemed illegiti-
mate, can face severe restrictions on building
houses of worship, celebrating holidays and
wearing their traditional or religious clothing or

symbols. In the United Kingdom, for example,
69% of Muslims surveyed felt that the rest of so-
ciety did not regard them as an integral part of it.21

CULTURAL EXCLUSION IS WIDESPREAD

In many areas of human development much
work has been done to document performance
and the nature and the size of the problems to
be overcome. Measurement techniques, devel-
oped through decades of research and estab-
lished traditions in data collection, provide
numerical evidence: 1.2 billion people survive
on less than $1 a day,22 828 million go to bed
hungry,23 114 million children of primary school
age are not in school,24 11 million children die
each year of preventable causes,25 and 1.8 bil-
lion people live in countries lacking the key el-
ements of formal democracy.26

Capturing living mode exclusion is intrinsi-
cally more difficult than capturing social, eco-
nomic and political exclusion. Living mode
exclusion happens when the culture of a group—
whether ethnic, linguistic or religious—is denied
recognition and respect. It is often reflected in
a culture being considered “inferior” or in its
practices not being recognized. The most ex-
treme forms of exclusion result from state poli-
cies to suppress or prohibit the use of languages
or religious or other important practices such as
dress that are visible markers of identity—for ex-
ample, turbans worn by Sikhs or the headscarf
worn by some Muslim women.

State policies of living mode exclusion in-
clude official language laws—where a national
language must be used in the bureaucracy,
courts, public services and education—and re-
strictions on religious freedoms. Policies of ex-
clusion also include elevating state symbols
celebrating the history and culture of dominant
groups through national holidays and the nam-
ing of streets and buildings while ignoring the
history and culture of other groups.27

Charting living mode exclusion is difficult
(box 2.3). Few national or international statisti-
cal agencies track such exclusion. As with data on
gender and the environment—also once novel to
statistical offices—this must change. But the chal-
lenges are enormous, and not just the technical
aspects. Language, religion, history, clothing,

30

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

customs, ceremonies and cuisine are just some of
the areas that define cultural identity. Just as
there are myriad ways to understand “culture”,
there are myriad ways to curtail cultural liberty
and to fail to recognize cultural identities. A com-
prehensive understanding of culture and cultural
liberty will always be out of statistical reach.

But attempts can be made to gain a rough
idea of the scope of the problem based on some
key cultural markers such as religion, language
and ceremonial practices. The Minorities  at
Risk data set attempts to capture the exclusion
of people and groups on the basis of cultural
identity (see feature 2.1). It estimates that almost
900 million people—around one of seven—
belong to groups that are discriminated against
or disadvantaged as a result of their identity, fac-
ing cultural, economic or political exclusion.

Of course, these categories often overlap, and
many people in these groups face some combi-
nation of these exclusions. About 518 million of
them belong to groups that are estimated to
face living mode exclusion, including restric-
tions on religion, language, ceremonies and ap-
pearance (see figure 1 in feature 2.1).

Recognition of religion. History is full of
examples of religious persecution. In the 14th
century BCE Egyptian Pharaoh Akhenaten pro-
claimed that there was no god but Ra and
ordered references to all other gods to be ex-
punged, forbidding even the use of the plural
form of the word god.28 The infamous Spanish
Inquisition of the 15th century sought to discover
and punish Jews and Moors who had publicly
converted to Christianity under duress but con-
tinued practicing their true beliefs. In mid-19th

BOX 2.3

To date, cultural statistics have dealt mainly with
the production and consumption of “cultural
goods”—film, books and theatre. But can cultural
liberty—and its opposites, living mode exclusion
and social, economic and political exclusion
along ethnic, linguistic or religious lines—be
measured?

Measuring living mode exclusion
Language, religion, history, clothing, customs,
ceremonies, cuisine and values, among others,
interact to define cultural identity. All of these ways
to understand culture provide ways to exclude cul-
tural identities such as language policies, treatment
of different religions, school curricula and attitudes
within society. Information can be collected on
these issues, but rarely is. Beyond the simple data
availability problems are the analytical challenges
of converting information into statistically useful
numbers. One possible approach is qualitative
assessments—expert assessments of the severity
of the situation—on issues that are important to
many cultural identities, such as language and
religion. This Report, for example, includes in-
formation from the Minorities at Risk data set
of the University of Maryland (see feature 2.1),
which does not capture the whole detail or scope
of cultural exclusions but can provide useful ev-
idence for understanding the problem.

Measuring participation exclusion
Measurement of social, economic and to a lesser
extent political exclusions along ethnic, linguistic
Sources: Goldstone 1998; Fukuda-Parr 2001; Kymlicka 2004; and Valdés 2002.

Measuring cultural liberty

and religious lines is more advanced. Often lack-
ing, however, is a breakdown by culturally iden-
tified groups. Some data collection does include
questions on religious, ethnic and linguistic iden-
tity and some post-censal surveys focus specifically
on these cultural groups, but they could be much
more comprehensive and comparable. An im-
portant issue is allowing people to register mul-
tiple identities. Political exclusion is more difficult
to capture. There are some hard data, such as rep-
resentation in parliament and voter participation
(although they could be more disaggregated),
but other issues, such as freedom of expression,
movement and organization, are more difficult to
capture and require qualitative approaches.

Next steps
More work can be done at the country level,
where understanding of the issues may be greater.
This could involve improved data monitoring and
collection—such as including questions on iden-
tities in survey questionnaires and post-censal sur-
veys targeted at specific cultural groups—as well
as qualitative assessments.

At the international level leadership by an in-
ternational statistical body could bring sharper
focus to what is a formidable and urgent task. For
example, the UNESCO Institute of Statistics has
already done much work in measuring culture.
The coordinating institution could advocate for
the collection of information, such as the inclu-
sion in national surveys of questions on cultural
identity, and could be the lead depository for

these data. In more qualitative areas of cultural and
political exclusions enormous benefits could ac-
crue from having an international institution take
the lead on comprehensive approaches to these
complex issues at the country level.

No index of cultural liberty
There are demands not only to produce statis-
tics on issues of culture but to go farther and pro-
duce a cultural liberty index. A lesson of the
human development index and other compos-
ite indicators is that such measures need to be
grounded in a conceptual framework and must
be policy relevant as well as measurable and
comparable.

As this Report acknowledges, data on is-
sues of cultural liberty are extremely limited.
And the conceptual and methodological chal-
lenges are enormous for capturing such issues as
discriminatory policy and social practice and
the extent of historical neglect that cultural
groups face.

And the problem is more than empirical.
Unlike some other aspects of human develop-
ment, such as health and education, where many
countries  face  common  challenges,  the  chal-
lenges  in  dealing  with  cultural  exclusion  are
more diverse. It will never be fully possible to
compare homogeneous Japan with diverse India,
or how Europe is dealing with issues posed by
immigration with how Latin America is meet-
ing the demands of indigenous people for land
and self-rule.

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

31

Feature 2.1   The Minorities at Risk data set—quantifying cultural exclusion
The Minorities at Risk data set, created by re-
searchers at the University of Maryland’s Center
for International Development and Conflict Man-
agement, collects data on groups that suffer dis-
crimination and disadvantage and that organize
politically on the basis of their group identity. Dis-
crimination and disadvantage include exclusion
through public policy and through social prac-
tice, both current and the lingering effects of
historical patterns of discrimination.

Discrimination and disadvantage of culturally identified groups can be 
cultural, political and economic—with considerable overlap

Living mode
exclusion

Figure
1

l

e
p
o
e
p
 
f
o
 
s
n
o

832

l

e
p
o
e
p
 
f
o
 
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

518

891

800

600

750

1000

1000

800

600

400

M

i
l
l
i

M

400

Participation
exclusion

These data track a group’s status relative to
that of the majority. If the minority groups are not
worse off than others in the country, their situa-
tion is not reflected in the data. While this may miss
many people living in countries where cultural free-
dom is restricted for all, focusing on discrimina-
tion is at the heart of this Report—capturing the
different treatment of cultural groups in society
and the suppression of cultural identities.

What is a minority at risk?
The project deals with “communal groups” whose
members share a “distinctive and enduring col-
lective identity” based on shared history, religion,
language, ethnicity or other factors. Group identity
is not seen as rigid, unchanging or inextricably
linked to a particular feature of the group, but as
a perception shared by the group or society.

While the project tracks many variables for
each group, of particular interest for this Report
are the variables on cultural (living mode), po-
litical and socio-economic discrimination and dis-
advantage. Data used for this report are current
through 2000 and are derived from the project’s
most recent global survey, completed in 2002.
• Cultural (living mode) discrimination and
disadvantage were assessed according to
discriminatory policy and practice in several
fields:  restrictions  on  religion  (affecting
groups with some 359 million members); on
the use of language, including for instruction
(334 million); on ceremonies (305 million),
appearance and family life (144 million); and
on cultural organizations. For each category
the project assessed restrictions giving a value
from zero (no restrictions) to three (activities
sharply restricted). The scores were summed
to give a broad overview of cultural restric-
tions. The project found that 129 groups
with around 518 million people face at least
some of these restrictions (figure 1).

• Political discrimination and disadvantage
were graded on a five-point scale. Zero means
no discrimination, and one signifies a situation
in which public policies are actively trying to
remedy historical patterns of discrimination.
Two refers to situations where there are his-
torical  patterns  of  discrimination,  but  no

200

0

200

0

Living mode

exclusion

Economic
exclusion

Political
exclusion

There is considerable overlap 
in types of cultural exclusion

Participation exclusion

remedial public policy. Three refers to exclu-
sion based on prevailing social practice with-
out remedial public policy. And four refers to
cases in which public policy actively discrim-
inates against a group. There were also de-
tailed assessments of discrimination in key
political rights: freedom of expression, freedom
of movement, rights in judicial proceedings,
freedom to organize, right to vote and access
to the police and military, civil service and
higher office. For the last case, the absence of
minorities in these fields is not enough to sig-
nal discrimination. There needs to be evidence
of discriminatory policy or governmental prac-
tice. According to the project 191 groups, with
around 832 million people, were considered to
be discriminated against politically (figure 2).
• Economic discrimination and disadvantage
were also graded on a four-point scale. For the
189 groups with about 750 million people
that faced economic discrimination, zero refers
to the case where public policy aims to reduce

Figure
2

Political and economic exclusion 
have different causes

e 1000

l

p
o
e
p
 
f
o
 
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

800

600

400

200

0

832 million

750 million

406

308

118

Political
exclusion

Historic
neglect

Discriminating
social practice

379

303

Discriminating
public policy

68
Economic
exclusion

disadvantages, for example, through affirma-
tive action. Four refers to the case where both
policies and prevailing social practice actively
discriminate against the group.
The data from the Minorities at Risk data set
can be used to reveal a good deal about the living
mode and participation exclusions faced by mem-
bers of culturally identified groups, showing not
only how extensive these exclusions are but also
how frequently they overlap (see figure 1). The data
set can also reveal some specific aspects of the liv-
ing mode exclusion that some minorities face, as
well as the varying causes—from discrimination by
the state to historic neglect of cultural groups that
has not been remedied (see figure 2).

Caveats
The data set is a pioneering effort to measure the
conditions that minority groups experience and the
policies affecting them. Subjective data capture as-
pects of the traits and challenges of groups not
available through other means. The Minorities at
Risk Project consults multiple sources—including
journalistic accounts, international organization re-
ports, human rights reports, government accounts
and expert opinion—when scoring groups on
their various characteristics. Every effort is made
to ensure consistent coding across cases and to
minimize the dangers of ideological bias. Addi-
tional information on the project is available 
online at www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/mar. 
Data updated through 2003 will be available by
the end of 2004.

This Report uses the data carefully, to give
a broad overview of the immense challenges of
cultural discrimination, not as an attempt to
rank or evaluate specific countries for their poli-
cies. Used in that way, the data set is a useful tool
and a great step forward in measurement.

Sources: Gurr 1993, 2000; MAR 2003; Kymlicka 2004.

32

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

There is no more powerful
means of “encouraging”
individuals to assimilate
to a dominant culture
than having the economic,
social and political returns
stacked against their
mother tongue 

century Korea several hundred Christians were
killed for their beliefs. And non-Catholic Chris-
tian denominations were not recognized in Italy
until 1984 and in Spain until 1992.29

In some countries religious restrictions can
affect everyone; in others they focus on people
with certain beliefs. The Minorities at Risk data
set found that some 359 million people (of the
518 million who belong to groups that face some
form of cultural exclusion) are disadvantaged
or discriminated against relative to others in the
state in following their beliefs (see feature 2.1).
In many cases the religious activities of groups
discriminated against are closely controlled. For
example, religious activities and organizations of
the 80% Muslim population of Uzbekistan are
banned unless the group is registered, allowing
the state to exert close control over religion. In
other instances discrimination against religion is
more active.30 Since 1997 Turkmenistan has
officially allowed religious activities for only two
religious denominations—Sunni Islam and Or-
thodox Christianity. All other religions have been
severely persecuted, including Jehovah’s Wit-
nesses, Pentecostals, Baptists, Adventists and
Hare Krishnas, and the Shiite community has
been denied registration. However, registration
requirements were formally lifted by the president
in early 2004.31 In Iran the Baha’i community—
the  largest  religious  minority,  with  300,000
members—is not recognized in the Constitution,
which essentially considers them “non-persons”.32
These are just three examples. Not only is
the issue widespread and a direct concern to cul-
tural liberty and human development. It is con-
tentious and emotive. Of the many unmet claims
of current political movements, the claim for re-
ligious freedom is often central.

Language recognition. Language is often a
key element of an individual’s cultural identity.
Limitations on people’s ability to use their
mother tongue—and limited facility in speaking
the dominant or official national language—
can exclude people from education, political
life and access to justice. There is no more pow-
erful means of “encouraging” individuals to as-
similate to a dominant culture than having the
economic, social and political returns stacked
against their mother tongue. Such assimilation
is not freely chosen if the choice is between

one’s mother tongue and one’s future. In 19th
century Belgium, for example, the Flemish who
strived for upward mobility had little choice
but to learn French—the sole official language—
and in time many abandoned their ancestral
language altogether.33 These pressures have not
gone away in other countries: the indigenous
people of Guatemala are much more likely to
prosper speaking Spanish.

An indication of the resulting assimilation
is the death of the world’s languages. Of the es-
timated 10,000 languages that have existed over
time, only about 6,000 are spoken today.34 And
the number is projected to drop by 50–90%
over the next 100 years.35

The challenges are greatest where linguistic
diversity is greatest. Sub-Saharan Africa has
more than 2,500 languages (although, as chapter
3 shows, many of these languages share com-
monalities), but the ability of many people to use
their language in education and in dealings with
the state is particularly limited. In more than 30
countries in the region—with 518 million peo-
ple, 80% of the region’s total—the official lan-
guage is different from the one most commonly
used.36 Only 13% of the children who receive
primary education do so in their mother tongue
(figure 2.4).

Does a lack of education in one’s mother
tongue stall development? Research suggests
that the answer might be yes. In the United
States children educated in their mother tongue
for the first six years of school perform much bet-
ter than those immediately immersed in English.
And there is every reason to believe that the
process of learning would follow a similar pat-
tern in developing countries (chapter 3).37

While the ability to use one’s mother tongue
in public as well as private life is important, this
does not make the use of multiple languages in
government, the courts and education easy or
practical. Chapter 3 looks in detail at the costs
and benefits states face in their language policy.
Other aspects of living mode exclusion.
Language and religion are often important parts
of an individual’s cultural identity, but there
are many ways different cultures can be re-
spected  and  recognized.  According  to  the
Minorities at Risk data set, 60% of people who
face cultural discrimination are restricted in

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

33

Many lack access to primary education in their mother tongue

Figure
2.4    

Region or group
Sub-Saharan Africa

Number of 
spoken languages
2,632

East Asia and the Pacific

2,815

South Asia

Central and Eastern Europe
  and the CIS
High-income OECD

Latin America and the 
  Caribbean

Source:

SIL International 2004b.

811

625

1,299

1,086

Population with access to education 
in mother tongue in 2000

Total population
(millions)

13%

62%

66%

74%

87%

91%

641

1,918

1,480

409

912

530

performing ceremonies. A further 25% face re-
strictions in the clothes they wear and how they
can appear in public, including many indigenous
people in Latin America and the Roma in parts
of Eastern Europe.38

Also important is the way the state recog-
nizes and respects the history of different cul-
tural groups within its borders. This is not an
easy matter on which to collect data, particularly
by region or city. One way of assessing how di-
verse groups are recognized and accepted is by
the way national holidays celebrate key mo-
ments in the history or religion of cultural groups
in a country or the way streets are named.

In the United States most national holidays
are non-denominational. In India central gov-
ernment employees have 17 holidays, 14 of
which celebrate the diversity of its religions (fig-
ure 2.5). But in France 6 of 11 national holidays
are of religious origin, all Christian, and 5 are
non-denominational although almost 1 in 13
French citizens is Muslim.

POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
EXCLUSION BASED ON CULTURAL IDENTITY

Facing restrictions in expressing one’s identity
(living  mode  exclusion)  is  only  part  of  the
challenge for cultural liberty. Many groups, be-
cause of their cultural identities, face discrimi-
nation or disadvantage in other aspects of human
development. More than 750 million people
are estimated to belong to groups that are dis-
advantaged or discriminated against in eco-
nomic or political life (see feature 2.1).

Political participation. The limits of polit-
ical participation are obvious in dictatorships or
one-party states. But inequalities in political
participation can be widespread even in estab-
lished democracies. Political processes can be
rigged or restricted in many ways to create ob-
stacles to members of certain ethnic, linguistic
and religious groups. The Minorities at Risk
data set estimates that more than 300 million
people belong to groups that face restrictions on
access to higher office relative to others in the
state as a result of their identity. Just under 300
million belong to groups that have restricted ac-
cess to the civil service. Some 250 million belong
to groups that do not have equal rights to or-
ganize. About 280 million belong to groups that
do not enjoy equal freedom of expression. And
83 million belong to groups that do not have
equal voting rights.39

Denial of citizenship is one of the most di-
rect ways of excluding groups of people from the
political process. More than 300,000 people of
the “hill tribe” minority in Thailand have been
denied nationality and the rights and privileges
afforded to full citizens, and Myanmar has denied
citizenship to more than 250,000 Rohingya Mus-
lims who had previously fled the country be-
cause  of  persecution.  Despite  a  growing
parliamentary lobby Kuwait continues to deny
citizenship to more than 100,000 Bidun, many of
whom have lived in the country for generations.40
Ensuring equality at all stages of the politi-
cal process is vital for preventing discrimination
against culturally identified groups, but it is dif-
ficult to assess. Looking at outcomes, which are
easier to define and measure, can be more re-
vealing. Of high-income OECD countries with
data, only in the Netherlands is the proportion
of ethnic minorities in parliament similar to
their share in the population. The United States
comes in second and Belgium third (table 2.1).
The problem is more widespread, of course.
In Brazil only 2 of the 33 cabinet members are
Afro-Brazilian, even though they make up al-
most half the population.41 In Kenya the num-
ber of Kikuyu cabinet members dropped from
31% in 1979 to 3% in 1998, even though their
share of the population remained steady at around
20%.42 The situation changed again in the 2003
elections. In Fiji ethnic Fijians occupied 19 of 21

34

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

National holidays are important ways to recognize—or ignore—cultural identities

Figure
2.5

Religions reflected in national holidays, 2003 

France

Number
of
holidays

Population
share

Religious
groups

India

Number
of
holidays

Population
share

Religious
groups

Christian

6

Christian

Non-denom

5

Rest

Religious
groups

Christian

Non-denom

United States

Number
of
holidays

Population
share

1

9

Christian

Rest

Hindu

Muslim

Non-denom
Buddhist
Jain
Sikh
Christian

5

4

3
3
2

Hindu

Rest

Source:

National holidays: France 2004; India, Ministry of Personnel 2004; Ofﬁce of Personnel Management 2003; religious populations: India, Office of the Registrar General 2004; France and United States, CIA 2003.

cabinet seats in 2001 although they make up
just half the population.43 In Trinidad and To-
bago citizens of Indian descent (especially Hin-
dus) were essentially excluded from cabinet
positions from 1961 to 1986 (the situation has im-
proved since then).44

The Minorities at Risk data set estimates
that more than 800 million people are part of
more than 200 culturally identified groups that
face political disadvantage or discrimination
based on ethnic, linguistic or religious identi-
ties,45 with around 130 million of them facing
directly discriminatory public policy. The rest
are discriminated against because of social cus-
toms in the country or the lingering effects of
historic discrimination (see feature 2.1).

Remedying this is vital. Politics is power. Too
often inequalities in political participation are
at the heart of the unresolved claims of cultural
groups, which are discussed in the rest of this
Report.

Health, education and income. Rarely are
levels of human development—or its progress—
spread evenly in a country. Certain religious,
ethnic and linguistic groups are too often left be-
hind (box 2.4). These pockets of poverty matter
in their own right. But inequalities along cultural
lines can be a key source of tension in society.
Few states collect information on life ex-
pectancy, infant mortality, literacy and school en-
rolment by ethnic, linguistic and religious group,
even though population censuses can be an ef-
fective means for collecting such information.
Available data show consistent patterns of
inequality. According to the Minorities at Risk

TABLE 2.1
Political representation of ethnic minorities in selected OECD parliaments

Ethnic minorities in parliaments a

Country
(year of last election with data)

Number in
lower house/

total

Share in

lower house

(%)

Share in
population

(%)

Ratio in house

to ratio in
population

Netherlands (2003)
United States (2002)
Belgium (1999)
Canada (2000)
United Kingdom (2001)
New Zealand (1999)
Denmark (2001)
Australia (2001)
Germany (2002)
France (2002)
Switzerland (1999)

13/150
69/440
6/150
12/301
12/659
2/120
2/179
1/150
5/603
0/577
0/200

8.7
15.7
4.0
4.3
1.8
1.7
1.1
0.7
0.8
0.0
0.0

9.0
28.1
10.0
13.4
8.7
10.9
5.8
6.0
8.5
8.0
6.0

1.0
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0

a. Refers to visible ethnic minorities based on census or academic reports. Non-visible immigrants (of European descent) are
not included. The share of ethnic minorities is likely to be lower than the reported figure because reports include citizens and
non-citizens and ethnic minority groups tend to be disproportionately young compared to the majority population. Does not
include aboriginals or members of dominant linguistic or national minority groups.
Source: Bird 2003.

data set, around 750 million people in the world
belong to groups that face socio-economic dis-
crimination or disadvantage because of their cul-
tural identities. Many groups face both kinds of
discrimination  (see  feature  2.1).  For  some
68 million of them this is a result of direct gov-
ernment policies of discrimination. But the
more common causes are discriminatory social
practices or unremedied neglect.

Around  the  globe  people  with  different
cultural identities live side by side, but often in
different  worlds.  Black  South  Africans  still
earn about a fifth of the incomes of whites.46
Romas in the Czech Republic, Hungary and
Slovakia believe that their ethnicity is the main
reason they cannot find a job.47 Black men and
women  in  São  Paolo,  Brazil,  have  half  the
salaries  of  whites.48 In  Guatemala  there  are

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

35

clear overlaps between indigenous groups and
social exclusion (map 2.1).

The same patterns are found in health and
education. Life expectancies are consistently
lower  for  indigenous  people  than  for  non-
indigenous people (see figure 2.2). The Dalit

BOX 2.4
The human development index: capturing inequalities across groups

Large disparities exist 
between cultural groups 
within countries 2000

Life expectancy at birth (years)
Adult literacy rate
Income per capita
Country average 

Nepal  Dalit population

Years

0

20

40

60

80

%

0

US$

0

100

250

Romania  Roma 

Years

0

20

40

60

80

%

0

PPP US$

6000

2000

4000

0
HDI
Romanian average 
Roma 

Namibia

Years

30

40

50

60

%

0

N$

2000 3000

1000

0
HDI
German 
English 
Afrikaans 
Oshiwambo 
Namibian average 
Rukavango 
San 

100

8000

.778
.570

German
Afrikaans
English
Oshiwambo
Rukavango
San

70

German
English
Afrikaans
Oshiwambo
Rukavango
San

100

German
English
Afrikaans
Oshiwambo
Rukavango
San

4000

.960
.895
.885
.641
.607
.585
.326

The  human  development  index  has  be-
come  an  invaluable  tool  for  capturing
human development and a country’s de-
velopment performance—roughly—in one
number.

One of the index’s most effective uses
is in comparing the performance of neigh-
bouring or similar countries, creating a
healthy sense of competition. While creat-
ing a similar index for cultural liberty (see
box 2.3) or including cultural liberty in the
human development index is not possible,
disaggregating  the  human  development
index by ethnic, linguistic or religious groups
can shed some light on exclusion in health,
education and income. This is rarely done,
however.

In the rare cases when the human de-
velopment index is calculated by cultural
group, a revealing picture often emerges.
The Roma in Romania, for example, have
a  human  development  index  well  below
the Romanian average (see figure). Roma-
nia  is  ranked  72  in  the  human  develop-
ment index, but its Roma population would
rank 128.

Namibia is the only country to have
calculated a human development index by
linguistic group. Again, the differences are
staggering. The German-speaking popula-
tion would finish comfortably ahead of Nor-
way at the top of the rankings, with the
English and Afrikaans speakers not far be-
hind. San speakers would come 174 places
below, with speakers of Tswana, Otjiherero,
Oshiwambo, Rukavango, Caprivi-Lozi and
Nama-Damara falling in between.

These examples show the huge chal-
lenges. Spotlighting these challenges is the
first  step  in  solving  them.  Governments
are often reluctant to collect and dissemi-
nate this sort of information. Where data
are  available,  they  should  be  considered
an  important  first  step,  not  a  damning
revelation.

Source: Sen 2004b; UNDP 2000b.

population of Nepal has a life expectancy almost
20 years less than the national average.49 Of
Roma children in Serbia and Montenegro 30%
have never attended primary school, and one in
five of those who do attend will drop out.50 In
South Africa almost a quarter of the black pop-
ulation has had no schooling.51

PROMOTING CULTURAL LIBERTY REQUIRES
RECOGNIZING DIFFERENCES IN IDENTITY

Living mode exclusion and participation exclu-
sion require different policy solutions. Tradi-
tional policy approaches alone cannot address
participation exclusion in social, economic and po-
litical life, and removing barriers to social, eco-
nomic and political participation will not eliminate
issues of living mode exclusion. New approaches
are needed that integrate multicultural policies into
human development strategies (table 2.2).

CULTURAL EXCLUSIONS REQUIRE THEIR
OWN POLICY APPROACHES

There is no evidence that eliminating economic
and political inequalities would erase living
mode inequalities. Some groups are economically
privileged but culturally (and politically) mar-
ginalized, such as the Chinese in South-East
Asia.52 Nationalist minorities like the Catalans
in Spain or the Québécois in Canada enjoy the
same standard of living as the majority, and in
some cases a higher than average income, and
their right to participate in the political process
is well protected. Yet they have suffered living
mode exclusion as their language and traditions
were marginalized by the central government.53
So while it is common for living mode ex-
clusion and political or economic exclusion to go
together, they are distinct (see chapter 1). Living
mode exclusion requires its own analysis and
remedies. Too often cultural policy-making has
been more concerned with the promotion of
arts and the protection of cultural heritage than
with the promotion of cultural liberty. Even
today, key debates on cultural policies focus
largely on protecting cultural heritage. But while
these issues are important, the fundamental ques-
tion of promoting cultural liberty has largely
been forgotten (box 2.5).54 To promote cultural

36

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

liberty, policies of cultural inclusion need to give
public recognition, accommodation and sup-
port to suppressed cultural identities. When this
happens, disadvantaged cultural groups can see
their identities reflected in the symbols and in-
stitutions of the state, removing many of the
sources of their discontent.

INCORPORATING MULTICULTURALISM INTO
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES

Many  traditional  approaches  to  social,  eco-
nomic and political equality have been based
on assimilation. Groups are expected to take
on  the  language  of  the  dominant  culture  at
the expense of their own and must sometimes
deny  their  religious  and  other  traditions  to
succeed. There is nothing wrong with identi-
fying  with  a  dominant  culture,  but  people
should not be forced to make a stark choice be-
tween their identities and economic or polit-
ical  progress.  Cultural  liberty  and  human
development  require  that  individuals  be  as
free to maintain their identities as they are to
change them. For that, multicultural policies

need  to  be  integrated  into  human  develop-
ment strategies (see table 2.2).

For example, while democracy is the only
form of government consistent with all freedoms
(including cultural freedoms), majoritarian rule
does not always protect claims for cultural recog-
nition and respect. As chapter 3 argues, asym-
metric  federalism  (different  rights—such  as
language rights—for different regions based on
cultural need) and power sharing through pro-
portionality and representative electoral arrange-
ments are options to consider when majoritarian
democracy falls short. Nor can socio-economic ex-
clusion be addressed simply through policies of
pro-poor growth and redistribution. Special pro-
grammes may be appropriate, even essential, to
overcome discrimination and redress past wrongs.
Bilingual  education  can  give  non-dominant
language groups equal opportunities. In essence,
multicultural policies require looking at equity in
a new way. Where groups have specific cultural
needs or are disadvantaged as a result of past
wrongs, identical policy approaches will not
produce equal opportunities—differentiated pol-
icy approaches are required (see table 2.2).

TABLE 2.2
Integrating multicultural policies into human development strategies

Map
2.1

Guatemala exhibits 
substantial overlap 
between linguistic 
communities and 
social exclusion

1998

Indigenous linguistic communities

Non-indigenous linguistic communities

High social exclusion

BELIZE

MEXICO

GUATEMALA

HONDURAS

PACIFIC
OCEAN

Source:

UNDP 2004.

Three pillars of the human
development strategy
Democracy

Necessary for cultural liberty
Democracy is the only form of
government consistent with
all human freedoms and
human rights, including
cultural freedoms and rights.

But not sufficient
for cultural liberty
Democracy does little to
accommodate minority
interests. Well developed
democracies have neglected
claims for cultural recognition
from ethnic, linguistic and
religious groups, including
indigenous groups and
immigrants. Democracy also
permits the rise of violent
extremist groups.

Pro-poor growth

Pro-poor growth is necessary
to redress socio-economic
exclusion (participation
exclusion) of cultural groups.

Pro-poor growth is not
enough to overcome
discrimination and redress
past wrongs.

Equitable expansion of
social opportunities

Equitable expansion of social
opportunities is necessary to
redress socio-economic
exclusion of cultural groups.

Equitable expansion of social
opportunities is not enough
to overcome discrimination
and redress past wrongs.
Also, does not address
demand for different
opportunities, such as
different kinds of education.

Source: Human Development Report Office.

Additional
multicultural policies
Incorporate accommodation
of minority identities and
adopt policies of
multiculturalism.
Consider asymmetric
federalism and executive
power sharing.
Recognize multiple identities
and multiple citizenship.

Develop special support
programmes for jobs, training
and credit.
Institute affirmative action
programmes.

Develop special support
programmes for excluded
groups.
Institute affirmative action
programmes.
Offer separate publicly funded
provisions, such as schools.

Potential contradictions
between aims of
multiculturalism and
three pillars

Claims for cultural
recognition often made by
non-democratic groups.
Demands can be antithetical
to building democracy,
freezing traditional practices
that are oppressive in the
name of “authenticity”, and
may not be supported by
many members of the
relevant group.

Affirmative action is contrary
to principles of equality. Are
special programmes an
alternative to affirmative
action?

Affirmative action is contrary
to principles of equality. Are
special programmes an
alternative to affirmative
action?
May involve “unfair inclusion”
and exclusion from many
choices and opportunities
open to all other citizens.

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

37

BOX 2.5
Cultural policies—protecting cultural heritage and promoting cultural liberty

In 1969 the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) introduced the notion of “cul-
tural policies”, calling on governments to ex-
plicitly  recognize  cultural  actions  as  an
important end of public policy. The world
community has step by step heeded this
call: the 1982 World Conference on Cultural
Policies in Mexico, the UN declaration of
1988 through 1997 as the Decade for Cul-
ture and Development, the 1998 Stockholm
Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural
Policies for Development and the increas-
ing number of states establishing cultural
ministries are all evidence of the realization
that culture is development and vice versa.

Source: Arizpe 2004.

In the beginning, the notion of cultural
policy-making was concerned with the pro-
motion of arts and the protection of cultural
heritage. It is now increasingly related to cul-
tural liberty, as the World Commission on
Culture and Development proposed in its
1995 report, Our Creative Diversity. Cultural
liberty is inseparable from respect and recog-
nition  of  cultural  diversity  and  the  safe-
guarding of cultural heritage, both physical
and intangible.

The cycle of cultural policy must end
where it began a quarter of a century ago,
with  people,  and  their  cultural  freedom
and fulfilment, the central end of cultural
policy-making.

THREE MYTHS SURROUNDING CULTURAL
LIBERTY AND DEVELOPMENT

Few countries have attempted formal multi-
cultural polices. Most countries have resisted
them. Political scientists and philosophers have
debated whether multiculturalism is consistent
with democracy and human rights. Part of the
reason lies in the realities of majority politics.
The vulnerable are easy to ignore. Policy-makers
have serious concerns about the effect of such
policies on the country as a whole. Perceptions
persist that ensuring cultural liberty is a luxury:
it would be nice, but the costs are just too high.
Many of these perceptions are based on
misconceptions about the role that cultural lib-
erty,  cultural  diversity  and  even  cultures
themselves play in a society’s development.
Here, three such myths are examined in detail:
• Some cultures are more likely to make de-

velopment progress than others.

• Cultural diversity inevitably leads to clashes

over values.

• Cultural  diversity  is  an  obstacle  to

development.

MYTH 1: SOME CULTURES ARE MORE LIKELY TO
MAKE DEVELOPMENT PROGRESS THAN OTHERS

There is no clear relationship between culture and
development.55 The idea that a group’s culture
matters for its development has enormous intuitive

appeal, allowing cultural stereotypes to be turned
into explanations for the state of the world. This
idea is not new. It goes back at least as far as de
Tocqueville’s view of American democracy in
the early 19th century and Weber’s idealization
of the Protestant work ethic. But a new wave of
cultural determinism is emerging—attributing
the failures of growth and democratization to in-
herent flaws in cultural traits.

These are dangerous ideas—that can lead to
extreme policy conclusions. If some cultures in
a society are believed not to be attuned to eco-
nomic growth or democracy, it is not a long
step to argue that they must be suppressed or
assimilated. To overgeneralize, if Africa’s failure
to progress can be blamed on culture, why
bother with political and economic policies or
with foreign aid?

Proponents of cultural determinism often
label large parts of the world as simply “African”
or “Islamic”.56 But culture is not a homogeneous
attribute. There are huge variations in language,
religion, literature, art and living styles within the
same cultural “group”.57 Moreover, culture is not
uniquely pivotal in determining our lives and
identities. Class, gender, profession and politics
also matter hugely. Without being able to iden-
tify these clear and common cultural traits, a
meaningful theory of cultural determinism strug-
gles to get off the ground.58

There can be great continuity in a culture, but
even in cultures with very long traditions rapid
changes can occur over one or two generations.59
For example, it is difficult to ascribe Japan’s de-
velopment to “Japanese culture” when interaction
with the industrializing West in the mid-19th cen-
tury led to the Meiji restoration and the determi-
nation to change the face of Japanese education.
Even aspects of culture than seem entrenched
can be altered. Bangladesh, for example, has taken
great strides in reducing practices of gender in-
equality. Because cultures evolve, a society’s cul-
ture today may determine very little of its future
development. And these changes happen not as
a result of targeted policies of cultural change, as
cultural determinists might propose. They happen
through economic and political interactions with
other cultures and through better education—a
policy conclusion that differs little from those in
other areas of development theory.60

38

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

By the time Weber’s
glowing assessment of the
Protestant ethic was being
recognized, many Catholic
countries (France, Italy)
were growing faster than
Protestant Britain or
Germany 

Even what is perceived as valuable for de-
velopment in a culture is apt to change, and
Western economies can no longer be assumed
to be the model for the world.61 Consider Japan
again, which drew from a different class of cul-
tural values than did the West for economic
operations, emphasizing company loyalty, re-
sponsibility, interpersonal trust and implicit
contracts  to  drive  tremendous  economic
progress in the 20th century—values now es-
poused in every management training course in
the West. But it was not always this way. So, pre-
dicting the value—and future—of cultural traits
is far from straightforward.

It is not that culture offers no insights into
the development process—cultural influences
can make a difference. Some analysis has found,
for example, that work ethic, thrift, honesty
and openness to strangers can play a role in
economic growth.62 And when those influences
are understood to be varied and changeable
and one source of influence among many, cul-
ture can offer constructive insights into human
behaviour and development. But there is no
grand cultural theory of development here. The
econometric evidence underlines this. In ex-
plaining growth rates, for example, economic
policy, geography and the burden of disease
were all found to be highly relevant. Cultural
factors—such as whether a society is Hindu or
Muslim—were found to be insignificant.63

So, while statistical analysis can help in as-
sessing the validity of a theory, history is perhaps
its greatest judge: and so far the history of cul-
tural determinism exposes a theory one step be-
hind the real world. By the time Weber’s glowing
assessment of the Protestant ethic was being rec-
ognized, many Catholic countries (France, Italy)
were growing faster than Protestant Britain or
Germany. The theory was then expanded to be
more generally Christian and Western. But then
Japan had to be included. And soon, East Asia
was growing fastest, and old views that Confu-
cian values do not promote conditions for growth
had to be quickly jettisoned. Then Thailand, es-
sentially a Buddhist country, became the fastest
growing, so the theory had to be altered again.64
So far, then, cultural determinism has not been
able to catch up. Are today’s views better founded
and better able to predict a culture’s influence

on development—say, in Africa—or the com-
patibility of some religions with democracy—say,
Islam?

Growth and development in Africa. Some
propose that culture is determining development
in Sub-Saharan Africa. A problematic “African
culture” the argument goes, is unsuited to eco-
nomic, political and social development.65

It is a convenient tautology for the cultural
determinist to combine the idea of an “African
culture” with the fact that Africa is failing. But
African countries have much more in common
than their cultures, and many of these factors may
be more relevant in their struggles to develop.
Human Development Report 2003 iden-
tified 38 “priority” countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa that have both low levels of develop-
ment and weak progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals (see Statistical feature 1,
The state of human development). Of these,
21 are landlocked or have a large proportion of
their populations living far from the coast. And
most are small—only 4 have more than 40 mil-
lion people. These countries are also highly de-
pendent on primary commodities, which make
up more than two-thirds of exports for 16 of the
23 countries with data. The disease burden in
these countries is also extreme: in 22 of them
more than 5% of the population has HIV/AIDS,
and malaria remains prevalent.

In the examples showcased to argue the de-
cisive role of culture in development, realities such
as these often lie just below the surface. An often
cited example, discussed in detail in chapter 1,
is that of the Republic of Korea and Ghana in the
1960s, whose rapid divergence in the following
decades has frequently been attributed to cultural
differences. But analysis, as chapter 1 points out,
has shown more important differences, such as
levels of investment in education.66 The exam-
ple demonstrates that economic and social pol-
icy can have an enormous influence. Focusing
internal and external resources on health and ed-
ucation is the first step out of the poverty trap.
Even handicaps of geography—such as small
internal markets and limited access to world
trading routes—can be addressed through re-
gional integration and cooperation.

African success stories are emerging. In Cape
Verde, Mauritius, Mozambique and Uganda

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

39

All religions contain some
ideas that can be helpful
to development and some
that can be harmful

GDP per capita grew at more than 3% in the
1990s.67 Benin, Mali and Senegal increased pri-
mary enrolment rates by more than 15 percent-
age points.68 Despite the growing HIV/AIDS
epidemic in Africa, Guinea and Niger reduced
child mortality rates by more than 5 percentage
points.69

The world has the knowledge and the re-
sources to overcome such policy challenges, of-
fering the possibility that Africa can take its
place as a full partner in the global economy. It
would not be the first time the cultural deter-
minist thesis had to adjust—this time bringing
“African culture” into the fold.

Islam and democracy. All religions contain
some ideas that can be helpful to development
and some that can be harmful.70 Islam is some-
times alleged to be incompatible with democracy,
another way that culture is said to determine
development (see also chapter 1). Yet there are
basic Islamic principles that lay a foundation
for democracy including the shura (consulta-
tion), ijithad (independent reasoning), ijma
(consensus) and the Qur’anic injunction that
there be no compulsion in matters of religion.71
The idea that Islam is incompatible with
democracy is counter not only to the word of
Islam, but also to the practice of states with Mus-
lim majorities. Driving this misunderstanding,
perhaps, is the coincidence that many Arab coun-
tries are both Islamic and have non-democratic
regimes. But the difference between Arab coun-
tries  with  Muslim  majorities  and  non-Arab
countries with Muslim majorities is stark. None
of the Arab countries that is predominantly Mus-
lim has had five consecutive years of moderate
or strong political and electoral rights in the past
quarter of a century. In the non-Arab Islamic
world 8 of 29 countries have enjoyed such rights.
With one set of Islamic countries perform-
ing poorly on democracy and another perform-
ing strongly, their common trait, Islam, cannot
be the lone reason for a failure of democracy. The
evidence shows that Islamic countries can per-
form as strongly as non-Islamic countries on
measures of democracy. Among the world’s
poorest countries (to control for income because
richer countries are more likely to be democra-
tic) non-Arab Islamic countries are as likely to be
democracies as non-Islamic countries.72

The Arab Human Development Report
2003 identified a freedom deficit in the Arab re-
gion relative to other world regions. The reason
for this deficit does not appear to lie with the
people  of  the  Arab  states  or  with  an  anti-
democratic culture: surveys have shown that as
many if not more people in the Arab countries
believe that democracy is the best form of gov-
ernment as in any other part of the world in-
cluding the United States and Europe.73 Perhaps
the answer lies in the history of power politics.
And in a lack of openness to ideas and culture
from outside the region—only 330 books were
translated into Arabic in the whole Arab world
in 1995. Greek, a language with one-twelfth
the number of speakers, had five times the num-
ber of books translated.74

MYTH 2: CULTURAL DIVERSITY INEVITABLY
LEADS TO CLASHES OVER VALUES

There is little evidence to justify this claim.
Since the 1950s, 70 territorially concentrated eth-
nic groups have engaged in violent conflict.75
These types of conflict rose sharply with the end
of the cold war, doubling between the 1970s and
1980s and reaching a peak of 48 in 1991. At the
start of 2003, 22 such conflicts continued, and
another 76 groups sought greater autonomy
but used tactics short of full-fledged war (such
as protests or isolated acts of violence).76

A popular explanation of such violence
points to cultural or ethnic differences as fun-
damentally  responsible—arguing  for  some
innate propensity among people from different
cultures to fight one another for domination
and autonomy over differences in values that are
incompatible. This view is captured by Samuel
Huntington’s well known prediction of a “clash
of civilizations”.77 These ideas have also been
used to explain interethnic conflicts within na-
tions, as in Liberia and the former Yugoslavia.
It certainly is true that many conflicts have
a cultural dimension. The opposing groups each
see themselves as belonging to a common cul-
ture (ethnicity or religion) and fighting (at least
partly) for cultural autonomy. For this reason
conflicts have been attributed to primordial
ethnic passions, making conflict appear un-
avoidable and intractable.78

40

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Chapter 1 points out the serious flaws in this
approach, based as it is on an incorrect view of
the formation, role and malleability of identities.
This argument also diverts attention from im-
portant economic and political factors. Exten-
sive evidence on how identities form and change
and why their salience varies over time indi-
cates that while a culture is inherited, it is also
constructed and chosen. Many people have
multiple identities.79 Cultural differences are
not the primary cause of conflict. And in some
cases diversity might even reduce the risk of
conflict by making group mobilization more
difficult.80 So, what causes these tensions?

Ethnic conflicts—or greed and inequality?
Many conflicts do fall along cultural lines, be-
cause people engaged on each side of these
wars see themselves as belonging to a common
culture. But the root causes are rarely the cul-
tures themselves or an incompatibility of values.
Recent research offers two other explanations:
greed and horizontal inequalities. The struggle

to control valuable natural resources, such as oil
or diamonds, may be at the heart of ethnic war-
fare, as in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Sudan.
What often appears to be ethnic conflict may
simply be a resource grab by elite groups that
have manipulated ethnic loyalties.

Declining economic performance and high
poverty levels are other important incitements
to war, as in Sierra Leone and Somalia. Behind
many  other  conflicts  are  inequalities  among
ethnic, religious or linguistic groups (horizontal
inequalities).  When  the  cultural,  political  or
socio-economic claims of different groups re-
main unmet, tension builds and can boil over
into violence.

Recent research shows that many conflicts
have erupted when groups have had unequal
access to economic assets, income or employment
opportunities, social services or political oppor-
tunities (box 2.6). Work by the UNDP Bureau
of Conflict Prevention and Recovery shows that
the likelihood of conflict increases with rising

BOX 2.6

Inequalities between groups can fuel conflict and tension

The root causes of violent conflict are rarely sim-
ple. But as the examples below show, a com-
mon theme is emerging from recent research
into conflict: the role that socio-economic and
political inequalities between groups can play
in causing tensions and violence. Less research
has been done on the role that cultural exclu-
sions of groups may play (such as lack of recog-
nition of languages or religious practices), but
as this Report argues, these are also issues that
can lead to mobilization and protests and so may
also  be  important  root  causes  or  triggers  of
conflict.
• Severe  rioting  against  the  Chinese  in
Malaysia in the late 1960s has been attrib-
uted largely to the animosity felt by the po-
litically dominant but economically sidelined
Bumiputera majority towards the economi-
cally dominant Chinese minority.

• Civil war in Sri Lanka since the early 1980s
has been linked to tensions resulting from
inequalities  between  the  Tamil  minority
and Sinhalese majority. Colonial adminis-
trators  had  favoured  the  Tamil  minority
economically,  but  this  advantage  was
sharply reversed once the Sinhalese gained
power and increasingly sidelined the Tamil
minority  in  such  areas  as  educational

Source: Stewart 2002; UNDP 2004; Fraenkel 2003.

opportunities, civil service recruitment and
language policy.

• In Uganda the Bantu-speaking people (largely
in the centre and south) have been econom-
ically dominant but politically sidelined com-
pared with the non-Bantu-speaking people
(largely in the north). These economic and po-
litical inequities have played a role in major
conflicts, including the violence initiated by
Idi Amin (1970s) and by the second Obote
regime (1983–85).

• Indigenous people in the state of Chiapas,
Mexico, have long suffered political and
socio-economic deprivations. They have de-
manded  greater  political  autonomy,  im-
proved  socio-economic  conditions  and
protection of their cultural heritage, culmi-
nating in uprisings against the Mexican state
in four municipalities.

• In South Africa before 1994 the black ma-
jority was severely disadvantaged politically
and socio-economically. That led to many up-
risings between 1976 and the transfer of
power in 1993.

• Catholics in Northern Ireland have suffered
economic and political deprivations since
the  16th  century.  The  establishment  of
Northern  Ireland  as  part  of  the  United

Kingdom in the 1920s ensured that Protes-
tants would enjoy permanent political and
economic dominance—fuelling demands by
northern Catholics to become part of the
predominantly Catholic Republic of Ireland.
Violent conflict started in the late 1960s and
began to ease in the 1990s following sys-
tematic efforts to reduce these inequalities.
• Constitutional crises and coups have oc-
curred in Fiji, notably in 1987 and 1999, as
economically sidelined indigenous Fijians
have feared losing political control to the
economically dominant Indian-origin Fijians.
• Increasing tensions between Muslims and
Christians  in  Poso,  Central  Sulawesi,
Indonesia, began surfacing in the mid-1990s
as the Muslim community increasingly gained
more than indigenous Christians from new
economic policies.

• Since colonial times the indigenous people
of Guatemala have suffered political and
economic discrimination, contributing to
the country’s ongoing conflicts.

• The Maoist insurgency launched in Nepal in
1996 may be attributed to deep grievances
stemming from the systematic marginaliza-
tion and exclusion of certain ethnic groups,
castes and women.

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

41

group inequality, as in Indonesia and Nepal.
The root of conflict in the Solomon Islands was
the struggle for scarce and poorly managed re-
sources (box 2.7). In Bolivia the government of
Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada was forced to resign
in October 2003 in large part because of the ac-
tivism and uprisings of the indigenous majority
and their supporters, aroused by their poverty and
political marginalization. In Ecuador, too, in-
digenous groups mobilized around issues of
poverty and inequality and joined other groups
in  protest  against  the  government  of  Jamil
Mahuad, who was forced to resign in January
2000.81 In some cases groups have been both eco-
nomically and politically deprived (as in Mexico
and South Africa), while in others a group may
be politically dominant yet economically de-
prived (as in Malaysia, Sri Lanka and Uganda).
The industrialized world is not immune to
this sort of violence. Race riots in US cities have
been linked to severe racial disparities in in-
come and public spending.82 In Northern Ire-
land  the  Catholic  minority  suffered  both
economic and political discrimination. Statistical
evidence supports this in-depth research. A
study of 233 groups in 93 countries strongly sup-
ports the hypothesis that such inequalities be-
tween groups are liable to lead to violence.83

Creating an environment
in which multiple
identities flourish begins
with encouraging cultural
liberty and equality
between groups in
cultural, political and
socio-economic
opportunities 

BOX 2.7

Solomon Islands’ ethnic difference not the cause of conflict

In the conflict in the Solomon Islands, eth-
nicity issues diverted attention from the core
issues of land tenure, economic development
and more accountable governance that un-
derpinned the protests. The peace agreement,
for example, refers to the victims of “ethnic
unrest” and the need to restore “ethnic har-
mony” in the Solomon Islands. But it is naïve
and potentially dangerous for would-be peace-
makers to view the conflict solely through
the lens of interethnic hostility. Situated in a
culturally diverse region with more than 1,000
languages, the Solomon Islands (where at
least 70 distinct languages are spoken) is a
weak and impoverished modern state, inca-
pable of collecting taxes or delivering basic ser-
vices. With hundreds of tribal groups and
small clans known as wantoks, the concept
of larger ethnic loyalties is almost as foreign
and artificial as the notion of the state.

Although an ethnic feud on the sur-
face,  the  recent  intense  social  unrest  in
the Solomon Islands stems more from the
struggle  for  scarce  and  poorly  managed
resources,  whose  ownership  was  previ-
ously vested in the clan, tribe or line. With
the arrival of increasing numbers of mi-
grant workers in the 1990s on the resource-
rich  island  of  Guadalcanal,  resentment
grew  among  the  island’s  native  settlers.
Starting in 1998 armed groups of Guadal-
canal youth (known as the Isatabu Free-
dom  Movement,  or  IFM)  engaged  in
belligerent actions that resulted in the in-
ternal displacement of more than 35,000
Solomon Islanders. Clashes ensued, pre-
dominantly  with  inhabitants  from  the
neighbouring island of Malaita, and con-
tinued until late 2000 and the signing of an
Australian-brokered peace agreement.

Source: Ponzio 2004 citing Reilly 2002; Schoorl and Friesen 2000.

Most research on these conflicts has focused
on economic and political inequalities, but a
lack of cultural recognition can also be impor-
tant. The introduction of the “Sinhala only” lan-
guage policy was a strong impetus to the dramatic
escalation of conflict in Sri Lanka. Language
policy also played a role in the civil war in
Moldova. And the Soweto riots in South Africa
were triggered not by new economic or political
deprivations but by attempts to impose Afrikaans
on black schools. The peace agreement that
ended  more  than  30  years  of  fighting  in
Guatemala included the Agreement on the Iden-
tity and Rights of Indigenous People (as part of
the general peace accords), which gave official
recognition to the country’s multi-ethnicity.

The state’s typical response to cultural dif-
ferences is suppression and assimilation—to
build a homogeneous nation. But suppression
of cultural liberty is an attack on human devel-
opment. And attempts to suppress and assimi-
late can heighten the tensions in society—so
much so that they spill over into violent conflict.
Multiple identities can reduce conflict.
Identities based on common cultural character-
istics, such as religion, language or ethnicity,
appear to promote stronger loyalty among group
members than identities based on other charac-
teristics. From that, leaders have learned that
uniting groups based on a single cultural bond
may be the best way to “rally the troops”. The idea
that individuals have a single rigid identity is di-
visive and confrontational. There is no question
that this has been important in many conflicts.
Creating an environment in which multiple
identities flourish is no easy task. It begins with
encouraging cultural liberty and equality be-
tween groups in cultural, political and socio-
economic opportunities. People must be free to
choose how to define themselves and must be
afforded the same rights and opportunities that
their neighbours enjoy. This Report asserts that
a main hope for harmony lies in promoting our
multiple identities.

MYTH 3: CULTURAL DIVERSITY IS AN
OBSTACLE TO DEVELOPMENT

There is no clear relationship, good or bad, be-
tween diversity and development. An argument

42

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

On 27 April 1994 the people of South Africa
founded a nation on the pledge that we would
undo the legacy of our divided past in order to
build a better life for all.

It was not a pledge that we made lightly.
For generations, millions had been delib-
erately reduced to poverty. And to perpetuate it-
self, the apartheid system that claimed to be
ordained from on high was sustained only by
brute force, robbing us all of our humanity—
oppressed and oppressor alike.

For decades we had fought for a non-racial,
non-sexist society, and even before we came
into power in the historic elections of 1994, our
vision of democracy was defined by the princi-
ple, among others, that no person or groups of
persons shall be subjected to oppression, dom-
ination or discrimination by virtue of race, gen-
der, ethnic origin, colour or creed.

Once we won power, we chose to regard the
diversity of colours and languages that had once
been used to divide us as a source of strength.

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION

Diversity—from divisive to inclusive

We ensured that the basic law of our land, our
Constitution and Bill of Rights, promoted unity
and gave unique attention to social and eco-
nomic rights. Our path of inclusiveness was not
new, nor had it been chosen in haste. For decades
the African National Congress had promoted na-
tional unity, and even at the height of oppression,
when racial interaction led to prison and death,
we never gave up on our aim to build a society
grounded on friendship and common humanity.
Now, although laws no longer enforce the
old divisions, they are still visible in social and
economic life, in our residential areas, in our
workplaces and in the growing inequality be-
tween rich and poor.

When we took on the project to transform
our society, one of our rallying cries was “free-
dom from want”. Our goal was to banish hunger,
illiteracy and homelessness and ensure that every-
one had access to food, education and housing.
We saw freedom as inseparable from human
dignity and equality. Now the foundation for a

better life has been laid, and construction has
begun. We are fully aware that our freedom and
our rights will only gain their full meaning as we
succeed together in overcoming the divisions
and inequalities of our past and in improving the
lives of all, especially the poor. Today, we are
starting to reap some of the harvest we sowed at
the end of a South African famine.

Many in the international community, ob-
serving from a distance how our society defied
the prophets of doom and their predictions of
endless conflict, have spoken of a miracle. Yet
those who have been closely involved in the
transition will know that it has been the prod-
uct of human decision.

Nelson Mandela
1993 Nobel Peace Prize Winner

for suppressing cultural groups and encourag-
ing assimilation is that cultural diversity hampers
development. Historically, one of the ideolog-
ical backbones of the nation-state is that it func-
tions much more effectively if it has a single
cultural identity.

Much fuel for that argument today comes
from Sub-Saharan Africa. A region rich in di-
versity but struggling with economic growth
and development leads to speculation that di-
versity itself might be the cause of the problem.
But  the  literature  reveals  an  important  dis-
tinction: problems arise not simply when di-
verse  groups  live  together  but  also  when
tensions between these groups lead to ineffi-
cient  political  decision-making  and  dispro-
portionate access for one or more groups to
material resources and patronage.84

In Kenya, for example, President Daniel
arap Moi took over from Jomo Kenyatta in
1978. By 1988 the share of road building in the
“home regions” of the Kenyatta coalition was
a third of what it had been at the end of the
Kenyatta years, while road building in the Moi
home regions almost doubled. The picture was
similar for health spending in 1988, which was

18% in the regions of the Kenyatta coalition
and 49% in the regions of the Moi coalition.85
The way to overall economic growth, and to
high  levels  of  health  and  education,  is  to
formulate policies for the country, not for in-
terest groups. Interest group politics are a prob-
lem  in  all  countries,  not  just  the  culturally
diverse. Indeed, the purpose of democracies is
to manage conflicting interests through a trans-
parent political system and open dialogue. Many
established and prosperous democracies are
constantly balancing the interests of powerful
groups and those of the country.

In culturally diverse countries that are per-
forming poorly, how much can diversity be
blamed? Many of the poorest countries face
enormous hurdles: high levels of HIV/AIDS
and malaria, low levels of education, a location
far from world markets. Resolving the tensions
between groups is clearly not going to solve these
problems. Consider Botswana, a homogeneous
country with a stable political situation—and
the highest HIV/AIDS prevalence in the world.
Again, the idea that diversity is bad for de-
velopment is demolished by the many success
stories of societies that recognize diversity.

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

43

Attempts to suppress and
assimilate diverse cultural
groups are not only
morally wrong—they are
often ineffective,
heightening tensions 

Malaysia, with 62% of its people Malays and
other indigenous groups, 30% ethnic Chinese
and 8% Indian, was the world’s 10th fastest
growing economy during 1970–90, years when
it implemented a broad range of affirmative ac-
tion policies.86 India has managed its diverse cul-
tures with pluralist policies and 15 official
languages—and made remarkable progress in
economic growth and in health and education.
These success stories of culturally diverse
countries point to the importance of pluralist
policies. To the extent that cultural diversity
can lead to tensions between groups and to in-
efficient political decision-making, the solution
lies in reducing these tensions. As this Report
argues from beginning to end, attempts to sup-
press and assimilate diverse cultural groups are
not only morally wrong—they are often inef-
fective, heightening tensions. Needed instead are
accommodating pluralist policies for incorpo-
rating individuals with diverse cultural identi-
ties into society.

Economic benefits of migration. A special
case in the relationship between diversity and
development is migration to the more developed
countries. Unlike managing existing diversity, ac-
cepting economic migrants—or turning a blind
eye to illegal immigrants looking for work—is
a clear policy decision to increase diversity for
economic gain.

The positive impact of migration on the
ageing demographic profile of the West lies be-
hind softer approaches to economic migration.
Large inflows of migrants are needed for coun-
tries to maintain the ratio of working to non-
working citizens—the European Union needs
about 3 million immigrants a year, roughly twice
the current number.87 Immigrants also bring
entrepreneurial  skills—30%  of  the  new
companies in Silicon Valley in California in
1995–98 were started by Chinese and Indian
immigrants (these ideas are further developed
in chapter 5).88

And while debate continues on the brain
drain from developing countries, the economic
benefits of migration are not just one way. Re-
mittances have soared, adding up to $80 billion
in 2002, outstripping foreign aid and providing
one of the biggest sources of revenue for some
poor countries.89

But  there  are  losers  as  well  as  winners.
People  already  residing  in  the  country  feel
threatened  by  the  new  immigrants  and  un-
fairly treated, through perceptions about a de-
pressing impact on wages and employment.
Key issues arise for the immigrants too. Needed
for their labour and not their culture, their cul-
tural freedoms are often not protected. Chap-
ter 5 looks at the delicate policy balances of
ensuring the benefits of migration while avoid-
ing growing tensions between groups within a
country and the negative consequences that can
follow.

Diversity and dynamism through an ex-
change of ideas. Diverse societies can reap real
benefits through the dynamism and creativity
arising from the interactions of different cultural
groups. Such effects are not easy to capture.
They are most visible at the international level,
where benefits can accrue from interactions
between countries through trade and a sharing
of experiences. A key element in Japan’s emer-
gence as one of the world’s richest economies
was a reversal of isolationist policies, with a
firm commitment to “seek knowledge through-
out the world”.90, 91 And Arab  Human  De-
velopment Report 2003 identifies the lack of
openness to ideas as a major factor holding
back progress in that region.92

Effects within countries can be similar. The
United States is the leading example of a coun-
try founded on diversity and tolerance where
enormous  economic  success  has  followed.
Benefits can come directly from interactions
between groups. And businesses and entre-
preneurs can be drawn to cities and societies
where cultural freedom and diversity flourish.
A study by the Brookings Institution finds that
11 of the metropolitan areas in the United States
with the highest overall diversity are among
the top 15 high-technology areas.93 The impli-
cation is that diverse and tolerant environments
foster the creation and innovation necessary
for high-technology industries.

TODAY’S CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

This Report argues that multicultural approaches
to managing diversity (see table 2.2) need not
end  in  conflict,  fragmentation  and  weak

44

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

development. Indeed, such approaches may
help avoid problems by easing tensions before
they become acute. In the big picture the ar-
guments for these policies are clear. But for
policy-makers the contradictions, trade-offs and
clashes with other aspects of human develop-
ment can monopolize their attention.

For example, should London provide in-
struction in the 300 different languages that
students in its state schools speak when there
is so much demand for resources elsewhere?
Does affirmative action violate principles of
equity? How can a secular state balance the
varying needs of religious groups? These are dif-
ficult questions. Ignoring the problem will not
make it go away.

In some areas policies for cultural recogni-
tion will not interfere with human development.
In others innovative policy solutions are needed
to manage trade-offs. As the following chapters
show, the tensions and policy trade-offs can be
managed, despite what current discourse might
suggest, especially where the costs have been ex-
aggerated and the benefits ignored.

In a world where about 900 million people
belong to groups that experience cultural ex-
clusion in some form, promoting cultural liberty
is an enormous challenge. Almost twice as many
people are discriminated against or disadvan-
taged socially, economically or politically. The
rest of this Report focuses on the policy issues
for addressing the challenges to cultural liberty.

CHALLENGES FOR CULTURAL LIBERTY

45

How can states be more
inclusive? Democracy,
equitable development
and state cohesion are
essential. But also needed
are multicultural policies
that explicitly recognize
cultural differences

CHAPTER 3

Building multicultural democracies

Chapter 2 chronicles the widespread suppres-
sion of cultural liberty and the discrimination
based on cultural identity—ethnic, religious
and linguistic. How can states be more inclusive?
Democracy, equitable development and state co-
hesion are essential. But also needed are multi-
cultural policies that explicitly recognize cultural
differences. But such policies are resisted be-
cause ruling elites want to keep their power, and
so they play on the flawed assumptions of the
“myths” detailed in chapter 2. And these poli-
cies are challenged for being undemocratic and
inequitable. This chapter argues that multicul-
tural policies are not only desirable but also
feasible and necessary. That individuals can
have multiple and complementary identities.
That cultures, far from fixed, are constantly
evolving. And that equitable outcomes can be
achieved by recognizing cultural differences.
This chapter also argues that states can for-
mulate policies of cultural recognition in ways that
do not contradict other goals and strategies of
human  development,  such  as  consolidating
democracy, building a capable state and foster-
ing more equal socio-economic opportunities. To
do this, states need to recognize cultural differ-
ences in their constitutions, their laws and their
institutions.1 They also need to formulate poli-
cies to ensure that the interests of particular
groups—whether minorities or historically mar-
ginalized majorities—are not ignored or overri-
den by the majority or by other dominant groups.2

RESOLVING STATE DILEMMAS IN
RECOGNIZING CULTURAL DIFFERENCE

Pursuing multicultural policies is not easy—given
the complexities and controversial trade-offs—
and opponents of such policies criticize multi-
cultural interventions on several grounds. Some
believe that such policies undermine the build-
ing of a cohesive nation state with a homogeneous

cultural identity, the dominant political project of
the 20th century. Most states influenced by this
thinking were deeply committed to fostering a sin-
gle, homogeneous national identity with a shared
sense of history, values and beliefs. Recognition
of ethno-cultural diversity, especially of orga-
nized, politically active and culturally differenti-
ated groups and minorities, was viewed as a
serious threat to state unity, destabilizing to the
political and social unity achieved after historic
struggles3 (feature 3.1). Other critics, often clas-
sical liberals, argue that group distinctions—such
as reserved seats in parliaments for ethnic groups,
special advantages in access to jobs, or the wear-
ing of religious symbols—contradict principles of
individual equality.

The issues at stake are further complicated
by demands for cultural recognition by groups
that are not internally democratic or represen-
tative of all their members, or by demands that
restrict rather than expand freedoms. Demands
to continue traditional practices—such as the
hierarchies of caste in Hindu society—may re-
flect the interests of the dominant group in
communities intent on preserving traditional
sources of power and authority, rather than the
interests of all members of the group.4 Legit-
imizing such claims could risk solidifying un-
democratic practices in the name of “tradition”
and “authenticity”.5 It is an ongoing challenge
to respond to these kinds of political claims.

Everywhere around the world these de-
mands for cultural recognition and the critical
responses to them also reflect historical injus-
tices and inequities. In much of the developing
world contemporary complications of cultural
identity are intertwined with long histories of
colonial rule and its societal consequences.
Colonial views of cultural groups as fixed cat-
egories, formalized through colonial policies
of divide and rule (racial and ethnic categories
in the Caribbean6 or religious categories in

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

47

Feature 3.1   State unity or ethnocultural identity? Not an inevitable choice
Historically, states have tried to establish and en-
hance their political legitimacy through nation-
building strategies. They sought to secure their
territories  and  borders,  expand  the  adminis-
trative reach of their institutions and acquire the
loyalty and obedience of their citizens through
policies of assimilation or integration. Attaining
these  objectives  was  not  easy,  especially  in  a
context of cultural diversity where citizens, in
addition to their identification with their coun-
try, might also feel a strong sense of identity with
their community—ethnic, religious,  linguistic
and so on. 

these strategies involved many forms of cultural
exclusion, as documented in chapter 2, that
made it difficult for people to maintain their
ways of life, language and religion or to hand
down their values to their children. People feel
strongly about such matters, and so resentment
often festered. In today’s world of increasing
democratization and global networks policies
that deny cultural freedoms are less and less
acceptable. People are increasingly assertive
about protesting assimilation without choice.

• Adoption of state symbols celebrating the
dominant group’s history, heroes and culture,
reflected in such things as the choice of na-
tional holidays or the naming of streets, build-
ings and geographic characteristics.

defining them as the “national” language,
literature and history.

• Diffusion of the dominant group’s language
and culture through national cultural insti-
tutions, including state-run media and pub-
lic museums.

• Seizure of lands, forests and fisheries from mi-
nority groups and indigenous people and
declaring them “national” resources.

• Adoption of settlement policies encouraging
members of the dominant national group to
settle in areas where minority groups histor-
ically resided.

• Adoption of immigration policies that give
preference to immigrants who share the same
language, religion or ethnicity as the domi-
nant group.
These strategies of assimilation and inte-
gration sometimes worked to ensure political
stability, but at risk of terrific human cost and
denial of human choice. At worst, coercive as-
similation involved genocidal assaults and ex-
plusions of some groups. In less extreme cases

Assimilation policies were easier to pursue
with  illiterate  peasant  populations,  as  with
Turkey’s language reform in 1928 propagating
a single language and script. But with the rapid
spread of a culture of universal human rights
these conditions are fast disappearing. Efforts to
impose such a strategy would be greatly chal-
lenged today. In any case the historical evidence
suggests that there need be no contradiction be-
tween a commitment to one national identity
and recognition of diverse ethnic, religious and
linguistic identities.3

Bolstering multiple and complementary
identities
If a country’s constitution insists on the notion
of a single people, as in Israel and Slovakia, it

Most states feared that the recognition of
such difference would lead to social fragmenta-
tion and prevent the creation of a harmonious
society. In short, such identity politics was con-
sidered a threat to state unity. In addition, ac-
commodating these differences is politically
challenging, so many  states have  resorted to ei-
ther suppressing these diverse identities or ig-
noring them in the political domain. 

Policies of assimilation—often involving
outright suppression of the identities of ethnic,
religious or linguistic groups—try to erode the
cultural differences between groups. Policies of
integration seek to assert a single national iden-
tity by attempting to eliminate ethno-national and
cultural differences from the public and politi-
cal arena, while allowing them in the private do-
main.1 Both sets of policies assume a singular
national identity.

Nation building strategies privileging
singular identities
Assimilationist and integrationist strategies try to
establish singular national identities through
various interventions:2
• Centralization of political power, eliminat-
ing forms of local sovereignty or autonomy
historically enjoyed by minority groups, so
that all important decisions are made in fo-
rums where the dominant group constitutes
a majority.

• Construction of a unified legal and judicial
system, operating in the dominant group’s
language and using its legal traditions, and
the abolition of any pre-existing legal systems
used by minority groups.

• Adoption of official-language laws, which de-
fine the dominant group’s language as the
only official national language to be used in
the bureaucracy, courts, public services, the
army,  higher  education  and  other  official
institutions.

• Construction of a nationalized system of
compulsory education promoting standard-
ized curricula and teaching the dominant
group’s language, literature and history and

Multiple and complementary national identities 

Figure
1

Spain

Multiple and complementary identities

Percent

0

20

40

60

80

100

Spain

Catalonia

Basque Country

Galicia

Only Cat/
Basque/Gal

More Cat/Basque/
Galthan Spanish

As Spanish as 
Cat/Basque/Gal

More Spanish than 
Cat/Basque/Gal

Only 
Spanish

Belgium

Multiple and complementary identities

Percent

0

20

40

60

80

100

Belgium

Wallonia

Flanders

Brussels

Only Flemish/

Walloon

More Flemish/

Walloon than Belgian

As Belgian as 
Flemish/Walloon

More Belgian than 
Flemish/Walloon

Only 
Belgian

48

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

becomes difficult to find the political space to
articulate the demands of other ethnic, religious
or linguistic minorities and indigenous people.
Constitutions that recognize multiple and com-
plementary identities, as in South Africa,4 enable
political, cultural and socio-economic recogni-
tion of distinct groups. 

A cursory look around the globe shows that
national  identity  need  not  imply  a  single
homogeneous cultural identity. Efforts to impose
one can lead to social tensions and conflicts. A
state can be multi-ethnic, multilingual and multi-
religious.5 It can be explicitly binational (Bel-
gium) or multi-ethnic (India). Citizens can have
a solid commitment both to their state identity
and to their own cultural (or distinct national)
identity.6

Belgium and Spain show how appropriate
policies can foster multiple and complementary
identities (figure 1). Appropriate policies—
undertaken by Belgium since the 1830s and in
Spain since its 1978 Constitution—can diminish
polarization between groups within society, with
the majority of citizens now asserting multiple
and complementary identities. 

Obviously, if people felt loyalty and affection
only for their own group, the larger state could
fall  apart—consider  the  former  Yugoslavia.

Countries such as Iceland, the Republic of Korea
and Portugal are close to the ideal of a culturally
homogeneous nation-state. But over time even
states known for their homogeneity can be chal-
lenged by waves of immigration, as has happened
in the Netherlands and Sweden.

Fostering trust, support and identification
among all groups to build a democratic
“state nation’’
The solution could be to create institutions and
polices that allow for both self-rule that creates
a sense of belonging and a pride in one’s ethnic
group and for shared rule that creates attachment
to a set of common institutions and symbols. An
alternative to the nation state, then, is the “state
nation”, where various “nations”—be they eth-
nic, religious, linguistic or indigenous identities—
can coexist peacefully and cooperatively in a
single state polity.7

Case studies and analyses demonstrate that
enduring democracies can be established in poli-
ties that are multicultural. Explicit efforts are re-
quired to end the cultural exclusion of diverse
groups (as highlighted in the Spanish and Belgian
cases) and to build multiple and complementary
identities. Such responsive policies provide in-
centives to build a feeling of unity in diversity—

Figure
2

Trust, support and identification: poor and diverse countries can do 
well with multicultural policies

Support for democracy

Democracy is preferable to any other 
form of government (%) 1996–98a

Trust in institutions
Great deal, quite (%)

1995–97a

National identification

How proud are you to be a national of…

Great deal, quite (%) 1995–97a

United
States

Canadac
Australia
Spain

Brazil 
Switzerland

Austria

India 

Argentina
Belgium 

Germany 

Uruguay

India

Spain

Chile

Brazil

Korea, 
Rep. of

Canadac
Switzerland

Belgiumb
United 
States
Australia 

India

Austriab

Brazil 

Germany 
Spain

Argentina 

100

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

80

60

40

30

20

0

Note:

a “we” feeling. Citizens can find the institutional
and political space to identify with both their
country and their other cultural identities, to
build their trust in common institutions and to
participate in and support democratic politics. All
of these are key factors in consolidating and
deepening democracies and building enduring
“state-nations”.

India’s constitution incorporates this no-
tion. Although India is culturally diverse, com-
parative surveys of long-standing democracies
including India show that it has been very co-
hesive, despite its diversity. But modern India is
facing a grave challenge to its constitutional
commitment to multiple and complementary
identities with the rise of groups that seek to im-
pose a singular Hindu identity on the country.
These threats undermine the sense of inclusion
and violate the rights of minorities in India
today.8 Recent communal violence raises serious
concerns for the prospects for social harmony and
threatens to undermine the country’s earlier
achievements. 

And  these  achievements  have  been  con-
siderable.  Historically,  India’s  constitutional
design  recognized  and  responded  to  distinct
group claims and enabled the polity to hold to-
gether despite enormous regional, linguistic and
cultural diversity.9 As evident from India’s per-
formance on indicators of identification, trust
and support (figure 2), its citizens are deeply
committed to the country and to democracy, de-
spite the country’s diverse and highly stratified
society.  This  performance  is  particularly  im-
pressive  when  compared  with  that  of  other
long-standing—and  wealthier—democracies.
The challenge is in reinvigorating India’s com-
mitment to practices of pluralism, institutional
accommodation and conflict resolution through
democratic means.

Critical for building a multicultural democ-
racy is a recognition of the shortcomings of his-
torical  nation-building  exercises  and  of  the
benefits of multiple and complementary identi-
ties. Also important are efforts to build the
loyalties of all groups in society through identi-
fication, trust and support.

National  cohesion  does  not  require  the
imposition of a single identity and the denun-
ciation  of  diversity.  Successful  strategies  to
build  ”state-nations”  can  and  do  accommo-
date  diversity  constructively  by  crafting  re-
sponsive policies of cultural recognition. They
are effective solutions for ensuring the longer
terms objectives of political stability and social
harmony.

Percentages exclude ‘don’t know/no answer’ replies. a. The most recent year available during the period specified. b. Data refer to 
1992.  c. The most recent year during the period 1990–93.

Source: Bhargava 2004; Kymlicka 2004; Stepan, Linz and Yadav
2004.

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

49

South Asia, for example), continue to have pro-
found consequences.7 Contemporary states thus
cannot hope to address these problems without
some appreciation of the historical legacies of
racism, slavery and colonial conquest.

But while multicultural policies thus must
confront complexity and challenges in balanc-
ing cultural recognition and state unity, suc-
cessful resolution is possible (see feature 3.1).
Many states have accommodated diverse groups
and extended their cultural freedoms without
compromising their unity or territorial integrity.
Policy interventions to minimize exclusive and
conflictual political identities have often pre-
vented or helped to end violent conflict. Poli-
cies of multicultural accommodation have also
enhanced state capacity and promoted social har-
mony by bolstering multiple and complemen-
tary identities.

Redressing the cultural exclusion of mi-
norities and other marginalized groups requires
more than providing for their civil and political
freedoms through instruments of majoritarian
democracy and equitable socio-economic poli-
cies.8 It requires explicit multicultural policies
to ensure cultural recognition.9 This chapter

Redressing the cultural
exclusion of minorities
and other marginalized
groups requires explicit
multicultural policies to
ensure cultural
recognition

BOX 3.1

A rough guide to federalism

Federalism is a system of political organiza-
tion based on a constitutionally guaranteed
balance between shared rule and self-rule. It
involves at least two levels of government—
a central authority and its constituent re-
gional units. The constituent units enjoy
autonomy and power over constitutionally
defined subjects—they can also play a role
in shaping the policies of the central gov-
ernment. The degree and scope of autonomy
varies widely. Some countries, such as Brazil,
grant considerable powers to their regions.
Others, such as Argentina, retain overriding
control at the centre.

Some other important distinctions:
Coming together or holding together.
In “coming together” federal arrangements,
as in Australia or Switzerland, the regions
chose to form a single federal polity. In
“holding together” arrangements, such as in
Belgium, Canada and Spain, the central gov-
ernment devolved political authority to the
regions to maintain a single unified state.

Source: Stepan 2001.

One identity or many. “Mono-national”
or “national” federations assert a single national
identity, as in Australia, Austria and Germany.
“Multi-national” federations, such as Malaysia
and Switzerland, constitutionally recognize
multiple identities. Other states combine the
two. India and Spain assert a single national
identity but recognize plural aspects of their
heterogeneous polity—say, by accommodat-
ing diverse linguistic groups.

Symmetric  or  asymmetric.  In  sym-
metric federalism the constituent units have
identical—that is symmetric—powers, re-
lations and obligations relative to the cen-
tral  authority  and  each  other,  as  in
Australia. In asymmetric federalism some
provinces  enjoy  different  powers.  In
Canada, for example, asymmetric federal
powers provided a way of reconciling Que-
bec to the federal system by awarding it spe-
cific powers connected to the protection
and  promotion  of  French-Canadian  lan-
guage and culture.

explores how states are integrating cultural
recognition into their human development strate-
gies in five areas:
• Policies for ensuring the political partici-

pation of diverse cultural groups.

• Policies on religion and religious practice
• Policies on customary law and legal pluralism.
• Policies on the use of multiple languages.
• Policies  for  redressing  socio-economic

exclusion.

POLICIES FOR ENSURING THE POLITICAL
PARTICIPATION OF DIVERSE CULTURAL GROUPS

Many minorities and other historically margin-
alized groups are excluded from real political
power and so feel alienated from the state (chap-
ter 2). In some cases the exclusion is due to a
lack of democracy or a denial of political rights.
If so, moving to democracy will help. But some-
thing more is required, because even when
members of such groups have equal political
rights in a democracy, they may be consistently
underrepresented or outvoted, and so view the
central government as alien and oppressive.
Not surprisingly, many minorities resist alien or
oppressive rule and seek more political power.
That  is  why  a  multicultural  conception  of
democracy is often required. Several models of
multicultural democracies have developed in re-
cent years that provide effective mechanisms of
power  sharing  between  culturally  diverse
groups. Such arrangements are crucial for se-
curing the rights of diverse cultural groups and
for preventing violations of these rights by ma-
joritarian imposition or by the political domi-
nance of the ruling elite.

Considered here are two broad categories of
democratic arrangements in which culturally
diverse groups and minorities can share power
within political processes and state institutions.
The first involves sharing power territorially
through federalism and its various forms. Fed-
eral arrangements involve establishing territor-
ial subunits within a state for minorities to
exercise considerable autonomy (box 3.1). This
form of power-sharing arrangement is relevant
where minorities are territorially concentrated
and where they have a tradition of self-govern-
ment that they are unwilling to surrender.

50

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Several models of
multicultural democracies
provide effective
mechanisms of power
sharing between
culturally diverse groups 

The second category of arrangements in-
volves power sharing through consociations,
using a series of instruments to ensure the par-
ticipation of culturally diverse groups dispersed
throughout the country. These arrangements
address claims made by groups that are not ter-
ritorially concentrated or do not demand au-
tonomy or self-rule. Consociations are based on
the principle of proportionality: the ethnic or cul-
tural composition of society is proportionally mir-
rored in the institutions of the state. Achieving
proportionality requires specific mechanisms
and policies. Electoral arrangements such as
proportional representation can better reflect
group composition, as can the use of reserved
seats and quotas in the executive and legislature.
Both federal and consociational types of
power-sharing arrangements are common around
the world. Neither is a panacea, but there are
many successful examples of both. This chapter
looks at a particular kind of federal arrangement
and some specific mechanisms of consociation
that are particularly suited to enabling the political
participation of diverse cultural groups.

POWER SHARING THROUGH FEDERAL
ARRANGEMENTS: ASYMMETRIC FEDERALISM

Federalism provides practical ways of managing
conflict in multicultural societies10 through de-
mocratic and representative institutions—and of
enabling people to live together even as they
maintain their diversity.11 Sometimes the polit-
ical demands of culturally diverse groups can be
accommodated by explicitly recognizing group
diversity and treating particular regions differ-
ently from others on specific issues. In such
“asymmetric”  federal  systems  the  powers
granted to subunits are not identical. Some re-
gions have different areas of autonomy from
others. Federal states can thus accommodate
some subunits by recognizing specific distinc-
tions in their political, administrative and eco-
nomic structures, as Malaysia did when the
Borneo states of Sabah and Sarawak joined the
federation in 1963. This allows greater flexibil-
ity to respond to distinct demands and to ac-
commodate diversity. These special measures
enable territorially concentrated group distinc-
tions  to  politically  coexist  with  the  central

authority, thereby reducing violent clashes and
demands for secession.

There are several flourishing examples of
such  entities.  Almost  every  peaceful,  long-
standing democracy that is ethnically diverse is
not only federal but asymmetrically so. For in-
stance, Belgium is divided into three regions
(the Walloon, Flemish, and Brussels-Capital re-
gions), two established according to linguistic cri-
teria  (the  Walloon  region  for  French-  and
German-speaking people and the Flemish region
for Dutch-speaking people). The Swiss federa-
tion also encompasses different linguistic and
cultural identities.

In Spain the status of “comunidades autóno-
mas” has been accorded to the Basque country,
Catalonia, Galicia and 14 other entities. These
communities have been granted a broad, and
widely varying, range of autonomous powers in
such areas as culture, education, language and
economy. The three historic regions were given
distinct areas of autonomy and self-rule. The
Basque communities and Navarra have been
granted explicit tax and expenditure powers be-
yond those of other autonomous communities.
Spain’s willingness to accommodate the distinct
demands of its regions has helped to mitigate con-
flicts and separatist movements. Such proactive
interventions have helped to foster acceptance of
multiple identities and to marginalize the exclu-
sive ones—identities solely as Basque, Galician,
Catalan or Spanish (see feature 3.1).

Many federations have failed, however.12
Federal arrangements that attempted to create
ethnically “pure” mono-national subterritories
have broken down in many parts of the world.
Yugoslavia is a prominent example. The federal
arrangements were not democratic. The units
in the federation had been “put together” and
were ruled with highly unequal shares of politi-
cal and economic power among the key groups,
an arrangement that fostered ethnic conflict that
eventually became territorial conflict, and the
federation fell apart. This collapse is sometimes
attributed to a flawed federal design that failed
to establish free and democratic processes and
institutions through which ethnic groups could
articulate multiple identities and build comple-
mentarity. Instead it reinforced demands for
separation, thus ending in political disintegration.

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

51

The success of federal arrangements de-
pends on careful design and the political will to
enhance the system’s democratic functioning.
What matters is whether the arrangements ac-
commodate important differences, yet buttress
national loyalties. For example, federal structures
that merely respond to demands for the desig-
nation of “exclusive” or “mono-national” home-
republics for ethnic groups may go against the
idea of multiple and complementary identities.
Such political deals, and communal concessions
that do not foster loyalty to common institutions,
can introduce divisive tendencies in the polity,
which present ongoing challenges, as in the case
of Nigeria (box 3.2).

In addition, history shows that asymmetric
federalism, introduced early enough, can help re-
duce the likelihood of violent secessionist move-
ments. The avoidance of violent conflict through
various federal arrangements introduced in the
early stages of emerging secessionist movements

is often worth much more than the administra-
tive costs that such arrangements incur.13

Many states fear that self-rule or “home rule”
could undermine their unity and integrity. Yet
many states have granted territorial autonomy
without negative consequences. These efforts to
enhance group representation and participation
have sometimes staved off political violence and
secessionist  movements.  For  example,  after
decades-long struggle, the First Nations people
of northern Canada negotiated a political agree-
ment14 with the federal government to create
the self-governing territory of Nunavut in 1999.15
In Panama several indigenous people—the Bri
Bri, Bugle, Embera, Kuna, Naso, Ngobe and
Wounaan—have constituted semiautonomous re-
gions governed by local councils.

Article 1 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights expresses the world’s
agreement that “All peoples have the right of
self-determination. By virtue of that right they

The success of federal
arrangements depends on
careful design and the
political will to enhance
the system’s democratic
functioning

BOX 3.2

The challenge of federalism: Nigeria’s troubled political trajectory and prospects

Nigeria is home to more than 350 ethnic groups,
but more than half the country’s 121 million
people belong to three main groups: the Hausa-
Fulani, Muslims in the north; the Yoruba, fol-
lowers of both Christian and Islamic faiths, in the
South-West; and the Igbo, most of whom are
Christians, in the South-East. Smaller groups
have tended to cluster around these three groups,
creating unstable and ethnically divisive politics.
Africa’s largest country has had a troubled
political history marked by military coups and
failed civilian governments. The country has
had military governments for 28 of its 44 years
of independence. Nigeria is attempting to ensure
that its return to civilian rule after 16 years of dic-
tatorship under the Abacha regime will be a
genuine process of democratic consolidation.
The 1999 Constitution addresses the two
concerns of an excessively powerful centre and
parochial concerns at the state levels, as well as
the unhealthy dynamic of patronage, rent-seeking
and competition between these levels. It has in-
stituted several reforms, including:
• Gradually dissolving the three federal regimes
inherited from the colonial era and replacing
them with a decentralized system of 36 states
and 775 local governments. The three re-
gions were transformed into four in 1963.
The 4 regions became 12 states in 1967, 19 in

Source: Bangura 2004; Lewis 2003; Rotimi 2001.

1976, 21 in 1987, 30 in 1991 and 36 in 1999.
The hope was that this would encourage more
flexible ethnic loyalties and alliances. More im-
mediately, this expanding federal structure has
helped contain local ethnic disputes, diffus-
ing the power of the three major ethnic groups
and preventing the absolute domination of the
more than 350 smaller minority groups.

• Devising electoral rules to produce govern-
ments that would enjoy broadly national
and majority support. In the elections for the
Second Republic of 1979–83, a presiden-
tial candidate with a plurality of the votes
could be declared winner only after obtain-
ing at least 25% of the votes in two-thirds of
the states. The 1999 Constitution updated
the threshold rule: to compete for the elec-
tions a party must secure at least 5% of the
votes cast in at least 25 of the 36 states in local
government elections. While the threshold
rule relating to party formation was rescinded
in 2003, the threshold rule for declaring a
party the winner, and thus for forming a
government, still holds, encouraging the for-
mation of multi-ethnic parties. Many other
issues of federal relations introduced by the
1999 Constitution continue to be hotly con-
tested, including those on revenues, property
rights, legal codes and states’ prerogatives.

•

Instituting affirmative action policies in ed-
ucation and the civil service. This has come
to include rotation of the presidency among
six geopolitical zones: north-west, north-
east, north-central, south-west, south-east
and south-central and appointment of at
least one federal minister from each of the
36 states according to the zoning principle.
These measures provide a functional frame-
work for economic distribution that tries to
avoid unitary and centralizing excesses and
domination by the centre.
The return of democracy has reanimated re-
gional, ethnic, religious and local identities and
intensified  communal  mobilization.  This  has
led to the social violence that has engulfed the
country since the return to civilian rule, whereas
previously such conflicts were coercively sup-
pressed by the military regimes. Political stability
in Nigeria is still threatened by massive struc-
tural socio-economic inequalities between the
North  and  South,  the  high  level  of  state  de-
pendence  on  federally  collected  oil  revenues
and the intense competition and corruption of
public life linked to its distribution—and the
unresolved question of rotating the presidency
between  the  six  ethno-political  zones,  which
has incited violence and ethnic cleavages. The
challenges are tremendous—and ongoing.

52

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Another sign that these
struggles for cultural
recognition have entered
the global debate is the
recent meetings of the
Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues at the
United Nations

freely determine their political status and freely
pursue their economic, social and cultural de-
velopment”. The application of this principle to
people within independent states and to in-
digenous people remains controversial. The
constitutions of such countries as Mexico and
the Philippines have taken some steps to rec-
ognize the rights of indigenous people to self-
determination, but others avoid it.

One of the legal instruments indigenous
people have used to mobilize around these issues
is  the  International  Labour  Organization’s
Convention (169) Concerning Indigeonous and
Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries, passed
in 1989 and open for ratification since 1990.16
As of 2003 it had only 17 signatories—Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Dominica, Ecuador, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru and Venezuela.17 Chile’s Congress has
voted against several initiatives in this direction.
The Organization of Africa Unity approved the
African Charter on Human and People’s Rights,
but nowhere is the term “people” defined.

Another sign that these struggles for cultural
recognition have entered the global debate is the
recent meetings of the Permanent Forum on In-
digenous Issues at the United Nations. Political
developments seem to be concentrated in regions
of the world that have explicitly recognized
claims of indigenous people, who have mobilized
to contest their exclusion. Some see such mo-
bilizations as politically disruptive—as their vi-
olent and reactionary versions can be—but these
movements also reflect greater awareness of
cultural liberty. States can no longer afford to
ignore or suppress these claims.

There have been some imaginative initiatives
to grant autonomy and self-rule, especially when
groups extend across national boundaries. An
example is the Council for Cooperation on Sami
issues set up jointly by Finland, Norway and
Sweden.

POWER SHARING THROUGH CONSOCIATION:
PROPORTIONALITY AND REPRESENTATIVE

ELECTORAL ARRANGEMENTS

Consociation applies the principle of propor-
tionality in four key areas: through executive

power sharing, proportional representation in
electoral systems, provisions for cultural au-
tonomy, and safeguards in the form of mutual
vetoes. These instruments can help to prevent
one segment of society from imposing its views
on another. In their most effective form they can
help to reflect the diverse cultural composition
of a society in its state institutions. Consociation
arrangements are sometimes criticized as un-
democratic because they are seen as an instru-
ment of elite dominance, through the co-option
of opposition or vulnerable groups.18 But they
need not involve a “grand coalition” of parties:
they require only cross-community representa-
tion in the executive and legislature. The chal-
lenge is to ensure that neither self-rule (for
minorities) nor shared rule (of the state as a
whole) outweighs the other. These arrange-
ments also have to be addressed through pru-
dent and responsible politics.

This section focuses on two mechanisms of
consociations—executive power sharing and
proportional representation—that prevent the
dominance of a majority community.19 From a
constitutional point of view measures that priv-
ilege minorities in election procedures raise
questions of equal treatment. But small and
scattered minorities do not stand a chance of
being represented in majoritarian democracies
without assistance. Executive power sharing
can protect their interests. Proportionality in
such political and executive arrangements mir-
rors the diverse composition of society in its
state institutions.

Belize, Guyana, Suriname, and Trinidad
and  Tobago  have  long  used  power-sharing
mechanisms to address racial and ethnic divi-
sions, with varying success.20 The mechanisms
involve elements of autonomy (self-government
for each community) and integration (joint gov-
ernment of all the communities). Political power
is shared in executives, in legislatures and (in
principle) in judiciaries.21

Care has to be taken to ensure that a minor-
ity’s potential for winning the appropriate num-
ber of seats is not sabotaged—as in Northern
Ireland. During the era of “home rule” from
1920 to 1972 constituencies were repeatedly ger-
rymandered to the disadvantage of the Catholic
nationalist parties and others and in favour of the

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

53

Exclusion may be less
direct and perhaps even
unintended, as when the
public calendar does not
recognize a minority’s
religious holidays 

dominant Ulster Unionist Party, which governed
uninterrupted, often without taking the interests
of the nationalist minority into account. This
eventually provoked a long-lasting reaction of
conflict and violence. The Good Friday Agree-
ment of 1998 sought to avoid repeating this his-
tory. The agreement calls for key decisions at the
Assembly of Northern Ireland to be decided on
a “cross-community basis”. This requires either
parallel consent of both blocs independently or
in a weighted majority of 60% of votes, with
40% of voting members of each bloc.22 The idea
is that no important decision can be taken with-
out some support from both sides, providing a
framework for negotiation.

In Belgium the Assembly and Senate are
divided into language groups—one Dutch- and
one French-speaking group, with the German-
speaking group defined as a part of the French
group. Certain key questions have to be de-
cided by a majority in each group and by an over-
all majority of two-thirds of votes. In majoritarian
democracy the majority rules; in consociational
democracies power-sharing majorities from all
groups rule.

Proportional representation, another in-
strument of consociation, allows each significant
community to be represented politically in rough
accord with its share of the population, partic-
ularly when parties are ethnically based. Even
when they are not, proportional representation
provides greater incentives for political parties
to seek votes from dispersed groups who do
not form majorities in any particular geograph-
ical constituency—and this also boosts minor-
ity representation. Proportional representation
does not guarantee successful accommodation,
and a winner-takes-all system can sometimes
be compatible with multinational and multi-
lingual federations, as Canada and India have
demonstrated. But both countries also use other
measures to ensure political representation for
various groups, and winner-takes-all systems
can also lead to tyrannies of the majority.

None of the many electoral rules of pro-
portional representation provide perfect pro-
portionality. But they can address the problem
of winner-takes-all systems and enable greater
representation of minorities and other groups,
as shown in the impact of recent reforms in

New Zealand (box 3.3).23 Proportional repre-
sentation is most effective in stable democracies
and can remedy some of the major deficiencies
of majoritarian electoral systems by strengthening
the electoral voice of minorities. Proportional
representation is not the sole solution in all cir-
cumstances. Innovations in winner-takes-all sys-
tems can also bolster the voice of minorities,
though such arrangements are considerably
more difficult to engineer.

Other approaches to ensuring representa-
tion of cultural minorities include reserving seats
for certain groups, as New Zealand does for the
Maoris,24 India for scheduled tribes and castes and
Croatia for Hungarians, Italians, Germans and
others. Reserved seats and quotas are sometimes
criticized because they “fix” peoples’ identities and
preferences in the electoral mechanism. And
negotiating quotas and reservations can lead to
conflict and grievances. In Lebanon Muslim griev-
ances over a quota of 6:5 seats in the parliament
between Christians and Muslims, fixed on the
basis of the 1932 census, became an important
source of tension and led to civil war when the
demographic weight of the two communities
changed.25 These approaches can be more prob-
lematic than proportional electoral systems, which
leave people free to choose their identifications.

POLICIES ON RELIGION AND RELIGIOUS
PRACTICE

As chapter 2 shows, many religious minorities
around the world suffer various forms of exclu-
sion.  In  some  cases  this  is  due  to  explicit
discrimination against a religious minority—a
problem particularly common in non-secular
countries where the state has the task of up-
holding and promoting an established religion. But
in other cases the exclusion may be less direct and
perhaps even unintended, as when the public
calendar does not recognize a minority’s religious
holidays, or the dress codes in public institutions
conflict with a minority’s religious dress, or state
rules on marriage and inheritance differ from
those of a minority religion, or zoning regula-
tions conflict with a minority’s burial practices.
These sorts of conflicts can arise even in secular
states. Given the profound importance of religion
to people’s identities, it is not surprising that

54

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

BOX 3.3

Proportional representation or winner takes all? New Zealand makes a switch

Majoritarian democracies have a dismal record
on political participation by minorities, under-
representing them and marginalizing their elec-
toral voice. How can multicultural societies be
more inclusive and ensure adequate participation
of minorities and other marginalized cultural
groups? One way is through proportional rep-
resentation rather than winner-takes-all systems.
In winner-takes-all (also called first-past-the-
post) systems, the political party with the most
votes gets a majority of the legislative seats. In
the United Kingdom, for example, a party can
(and often does) win less than 50% of the vote
but gets a much bigger share of seats in the
House of Commons. In the 2001 election the
Labour party won 41% of the vote and walked
away with 61% of the seats. In the same election
Liberal Democrats received 19.4% of the vote but
only 7.5% of the seats. In proportional repre-
sentation systems legislatures are elected from
multiseat districts in proportion to the number
of votes received: 20% of the popular vote wins
20% of the seats.

Because winner-takes-all systems exclude
those who do not support the views of the party
in power, they do not lend themselves to cul-
turally inclusive environments. But in propor-
tional representation systems parties that get a
significant number of votes are likely to get a
share of power. As a rule, then, proportional rep-
resentation voting systems provide a more ac-
curate reflection of public opinion and are likely
to foster the inclusion of minorities (as long as
minorities organize themselves in political form).

Source: O’Leary 2004; Boothroyd 2004; Nagel 2004.

Several multicultural states rely on proportional
representation systems, including Angola, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Guyana and Latvia. In West-
ern Europe 21 of 28 countries use some form of
proportional representation.

Critics of proportional representation argue
that the incorporation of fragmented groups
could lead to unstable, inefficient governments,
with shifting coalitions; Italy is often cited. But
such problems are neither endemic nor insur-
mountable. Indeed, several mechanisms can pre-
vent stalemates and deadlocks. For example,
instituting minimum vote requirements, as in
Germany, or changing the number of districts
to reflect the geographic dispersion of public
opinion can alleviate these problems while main-
taining inclusive legislative systems. And stale-
mate  and  deadlock  may  be  preferable  to  a
minority imposing its will on the majority—as
often happens with governments elected under
winner-takes-all systems.

Others resist these policies on grounds that
such changes would entail tremendous upheavals
and political instability—as feared by the polit-
ical elite in many Latin American countries
where indigenous populations are increasingly
demanding greater political voice and repre-
sentation. However, this argument cannot be
used to defend policies that result in the con-
tinued exclusion of certain groups and sections.
Transitions to prudent politics that encourage
greater participation and enable more effective
representation are possible, as the experiences
of other democratic countries show.

Largely to address the underrepresentation
of  the  indigenous  Maori  population,  New
Zealand in 1993 voted to undertake a major
electoral reform, from winner takes all to pro-
portional representation. Colonial legislation
dating to 1867 assigned 4 of the 99 seats in gov-
ernment to the Maori, far short of their 15%
share in the population. Voters chose a mixed-
member proportional system, a hybrid in which
half the legislative seats come from single-seat,
winner-takes-all districts and half are allocated
according to the percentage of votes won by
each party.

New Zealand also incorporated a “dual
constituency” system in which individuals of
Maori descent were given the option of voting
either for an individual from the Maori roll or
for an individual on the general electoral roll.
Maori seats are allocated based on the Maori cen-
sus and by the proportion of Maori individuals
who choose to register on the Maori roll.

New Zealand’s first election under pro-
portional representation (in 1996) was difficult.
A  majority  coalition  did  not  form  for  nine
months, and public opinion swayed back in
favour of the winner-takes-all system. But the
1999 and 2002 elections ran smoothly, restoring
public support for proportional representation.
Maori political representation increased from
around 3% in 1993 to almost 16% in 2002. De-
spite problems along the way it is clear that elec-
toral  transition  went  a  long  way  towards
improving the representation of the Maori pop-
ulation in New Zealand.

religious minorities often mobilize to contest
these exclusions. If not managed properly, these
mobilizations can become violent. So it is vital for
states to learn how to manage these claims.

The state is responsible for ensuring policies
and mechanisms that protect individual choice.
This is best achieved when public institutions do
not discriminate between believers and non-be-
lievers, not just among followers of different re-
ligions. Secular principles have been proven to
work best towards these goals, but no one sin-
gle model of secularism is demonstrably better
than others in all circumstances. Various links be-
tween state and religious authorities have evolved
over time. Similarly, states that profess to be sec-
ular do so differently both in principle and in
practice. And these differences have implications

for the state’s ability to protect individual choice
and religious freedoms (box 3.4).

Sometimes problems arise because of too
many formal links between regions and the state
or too much influence by religious authorities
in matters of state. This can happen when, say,
a small clerical elite controls the institutions of
the state in accord with what it considers divinely
commissioned laws, as in Afghanistan under
the Taliban. These politically dominant reli-
gious elites are unlikely to tolerate internal dif-
ferences, let alone dissent, and unlikely to extend
freedoms even to their own members outside the
small ruling elite, much less to members of
other religious groups. Such states do not ac-
commodate other religious groups or dissenters
or treat them equally.

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

55

BOX 3.4

The many forms of secular and non-secular states and their effects on religious freedom

States have treated religion in different ways.

Non-secular states
A non-secular state extends official recognition
to specific religions and can assume different
forms depending on its formal and substantive
links with religious authority.
• A state governed by divine law—that is, a
theocracy, such as the Islamic Republic of
Iran run by ayatollahs or Afghanistan under
the Taliban.

• A state where one religion benefits from
a formal alliance with the government—
that is, having an “established” religion.
Examples  include  Islam  in  Bangladesh,
Libya and Malaysia; Hinduism in Nepal;
Catholicism  in  Argentina,  Bolivia  and
Costa  Rica;  and  Buddhism  in  Bhutan,
Burma and Thailand.

• A state that has an established church or
religion,  but  that  nonetheless  respects
more  than  one  religion,  that  recognizes
and perhaps attempts to nurture all reli-
gions without any preference of one over
the other. Such states may levy a religious
tax on all citizens and yet grant them the
freedom to remit the tax money to religious
organizations of their choice. They may fi-
nancially  assist  schools  run  by  religious
institutions  but  in  a  non-discriminatory
way. Examples of such states include Swe-
den and the United Kingdom. Both are vir-
tually secular and have established religions
only in name. Other examples of this pat-
tern of non-secular states are Denmark,
Iceland and Norway.

Source: Bhargava 2004.

Anti-religious, secular states
The state excludes religion from its own affairs
without excluding itself from the affairs of reli-
gion. In such a state the right to religious free-
dom is very limited, and often the state intervenes
to restrict religious freedoms and practice. Com-
munist regimes in China and former communist
regimes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
are examples.

Neutral or disengaged states
There are two ways of expressing this kind of neu-
trality. The state may profess a policy of “mutual
exclusion”, or the “strict separation of religion
and state”. This means that not only does the state
prevent religious authorities from intervening in
the affairs of state, but the state also avoids in-
terfering in the internal affairs of religious groups.
One consequence of this mutual exclusion is
that the state may be unable or unwilling to in-
terfere in practices designated as “religious” even
when they threaten individual rights and demo-
cratic values. Or the state may have a policy of
neutrality towards all religions. The clearest ex-
amples are the state of Virginia (after the dises-
tablishment of the Anglican Church in 1786), the
United States (particularly after the First Amend-
ment to its Constitution in 1791) and France, es-
pecially after the Separation Law of 1905.

Secular states asserting equal respect and
principled distance
The state is secular, in the sense that it does not
have an established church and does not promote
one religion over others, but rather accords equal
respect to all religions (and to non-believers).

However, it is willing to defend universal princi-
ples of human rights and equal citizenship and is
able to intervene in the internal affairs of reli-
gious groups in what can be called “principled dis-
tance”. This engagement may take the form of
even-handed support for religions (such as pub-
lic funding of religious schools or state recogni-
tion  of  religious  personal  law)  or  even  of
intervention to monitor and reform religious prac-
tices that contradict human rights (such as regu-
lating religious schools or reforming personal
laws to ensure gender equality). With principled
distance, whether the state intervenes or refrains
from interfering depends on what measures really
strengthen religious liberty and equality of citi-
zenship. The state may not relate to every religion
in exactly the same way or intervene to the same
degree or in the same manner. But it ensures that
the relations between religious and political in-
stitutions are guided by consistent, non-sectarian
principles of liberty and human rights.

An example is the secular design in the In-
dian Constitution. While the growth of com-
munal violence makes observers skeptical of the
secular credentials of Indian politicians these
days, the Constitution established India as a sec-
ular state. It was this policy of secularism with
principled distance that enabled the Indian state
in the early years after independence to recog-
nize the customary laws, codes and practices of
minority religious communities and enable their
cultural integration. It enabled positive inter-
ventions upholding principles of equality and lib-
erty by reforming a range of customary practices,
such as prohibiting erstwhile “untouchables”
from entering temples.

In other instances the state may profess neu-
trality and purportedly exclude itself from mat-
ters of religion and exclude religion from matters
of state—a policy of “mutual exclusion”. But in
reality this stance may become distorted through
policies that are blind to actual violations of re-
ligious freedoms or through ad hoc interventions
motivated by political expedience.

Whatever the historical links with religion,
states have a responsibility to protect rights and
secure freedoms for all their members and not
discriminate (for or against) on grounds of
religion. It is difficult to propose an optimal
design for the relations between state institutions
and religious authority. But non-discriminatory

states should protect three dimensions of reli-
gious freedom and individual choice:
• Every individual or sect within a religious
group should have the right to criticize, re-
vise or challenge the dominance of a par-
ticular interpretation of core beliefs. All
religions have numerous interpretations and
practices—they are multivocal—and no sin-
gle interpretation should be sponsored by the
state. Clergy or other religious hierarchies
should have the same status as other citizens
and should not claim greater political or
societal privilege.

• States must give space to all religions for in-
terfaith discussion and, within limits, for

56

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

critiques. People of one religion must be al-
lowed to be responsibly critical of the prac-
tices and beliefs of other religions.

• Individuals must be free not only to criticize
the religion into which they are born, but to
reject it for another or to remain without one.
Some challenges to secularism arise from a
country’s historical links with religion or from
the legacy of colonialism. The British divide-
and-rule  policies  in  South  Asia,  which  at-
tempted  to  categorize  religious  and  cultural
identities, fixing their relative positions in the
polity  and  in  society,  have  been  a  source  of
continuing political conflict even after the ter-
ritorial  partitions  in  the  region.26 These  his-
torically entrenched divisions remain as serious
barriers to secular policies in a region that has
witnessed  so  much  communal  trauma.  The
Spanish  colonial  rulers,  with  their  historical
links with the Catholic Church, left a legacy of
similar links between state and church in their
former colonies, especially in Latin America,
with implications for concerns of gender equal-
ity, among others.

Sometimes this historical baggage appears
in contemporary dilemmas—of whether to rec-
ognize different religious laws in a democratic
environment where all citizens have equality
before the law. As the ongoing discussions on
the uniform civil code in India demonstrates, the
arguments for women’s rights and principles of
equality get entangled with concerns for mi-
nority rights and cultural recognition (box 3.5).
Building consensus on these issues to advance
universal principles of human rights, gender
equality and human development has to be the
guiding principle for resolving them.27

POLICIES ON CUSTOMARY LAW AND LEGAL
PLURALISM

Certain religious and ethnic minorities and in-
digenous groups feel alienated from the larger
legal system, for a number of reasons. In some
countries judges and other court officials have
historically been prejudiced against them, or
ignorant of their conditions, resulting in the
unfair and biased application of the law. In

The arguments for
women’s rights and
principles of equality get
entangled with concerns
for minority rights and
cultural recognition 

BOX 3.5

Hindu and Muslim personal law: the ongoing debate over a uniform civil code

Legal pluralism and legal universalism are hotly
debated in India today. Should a single legal
system apply to members of all communities?
The differences highlight the apparent contra-
diction of the constitutional recognition of Hindu
and Muslim personal laws and the parallel con-
stitutional commitment to a uniform civil code.
The debate is thus embedded in larger concerns
about India as a multicultural secular state.

Personal laws, specific to different religious
communities, govern marriage, divorce, guardian-
ship, adoption, inheritance and succession. They
vary widely between and even within the same
community. Court cases involving personal law
also raise their own more particular issues, some-
times pitting minority religious groups’ rights
against women’s rights.

The debate over personal laws often comes

down to the following:
• Gender  equality—how patriarchal cus-
toms and laws, be they Hindu or Muslim,
treat men and women differently in terms
of their legal entitlements.

• Cultural freedoms and minority rights—
whether the state should reserve the right to

Source: Engineer 2003; Mody 2003; Rudolph 2001.

intervene in matters of religious practice to
assert liberty and equality while protecting
the right of groups to practice their religion.
It is important to understand the debate in
historical context. India’s leadership at inde-
pendence was committed to a secular India, not
just a state for its Hindu majority. This was po-
litically imperative given the fears of the Muslim
minority immediately after the brutal partition
of the subcontinent. The Indian Constitution
recognized and accommodated its colonially in-
herited system of legal pluralism as its multicul-
tural reality. The ultimate goal of a unified civil
code was included in the Constitution, and the
Special Marriages Act of 1954 offered couples a
non-religious alternative to personal laws.

A brief scan of legal developments over the
1980s and 1990s highlights how the argument for
uniformity  has  overlooked  concerns  for
equality—and how the secular agenda has been
depicted as being antithetical to the principle of
special recognition of the cultural rights of mi-
norities. The ongoing debate is important be-
cause of the contemporary political context.
Supporters  of  the  code  assert  principles  of

equality before the law, but fail to appreciate the
difficult position of minorities. This is particu-
larly relevant in the light of growing communal
tensions. The Muslim minority often views the
code as an underhand abrogation of their cul-
tural freedom.

Personal laws of all communities have been
criticized for disadvantaging women, and there
are strong arguments for reforming almost all tra-
ditional (and usually patriarchal) laws and cus-
toms in the country, bringing Hindu and Muslim
personal or customary laws in line with gender
equality and universal human rights. But im-
plementing equality—an objective that is central
to concerns of human development—is not the
same as implementing uniformity.

What is needed is internal reform of all cus-
tomary laws, upholding gender equality rather
than imposing identical gender-biased, preju-
dicial laws across all communities. Crucial in
this is a genuine effort to establish consensus on
the code. Legislation imposing uniformity will
only  widen  the  majority-minority  divide—
detrimental both for communal harmony and for
gender equality.

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

57

All legal systems must
conform to international
standards of human
rights, including gender
equality 

many countries indigenous people are almost en-
tirely unrepresented in the judiciary. This real-
ity of bias and exclusion is exacerbated by the
inaccessibility of the legal system to these groups
for additional reasons, including geographical
distance, financial cost and language or other cul-
tural barriers. 

Plural legal systems can counter this exclu-
sion. But some critics argue that plural legal
systems can legitimize traditional practices that
are inconsistent with expansion of freedoms.
Many traditional practices reject the equality of
women, for example, in property rights, inher-
itance, family law and other realms.28 But legal
pluralism does not require the wholesale adop-
tion of all practices claimed to be “traditional”.
The accommodation of customary law cannot
be seen as an entitlement to maintain practices
that violate human rights, no matter how “tra-
ditional” or “authentic” they may claim to be.29
From a human development perspective all
legal systems—whether unitary or plural—must
conform to international standards of human
rights, including gender equality. Other critics
therefore argue that if the legal system of the
larger society respects human rights norms, and
if indigenous people accept these norms, there
is no need to maintain legal pluralism. But even
where there is a consensus on human rights
norms, there may still be a valuable role for
legal pluralism. 

Plural legal systems exist in almost all soci-
eties, evolving as local traditions were historically
accommodated along with other formal sys-
tems of jurisprudence.30 Customary practices,
which acquired the force of law over time, co-
existed alongside introduced systems of ju-
risprudence. Such legal pluralism often had
roots in the colonial logic of protection of mi-
nority rights, which allowed certain customary
systems to continue while imposing the colo-
nizer’s own laws. 

COLONIAL CONSTRUCTIONS, YET
CONTEMPORARY REALITIES

The colonial imprint can be marked. Indeed, it
often  is  difficult  to  determine  which  legal
processes are genuinely traditional and which
can be seen as a hybrid by-product of colonial

manipulation and control. An added compli-
cation in separating authentic from imposed
practices is that colonial rule and its “civilizing
mission” unilaterally claimed responsibility for
introducing modern values, beliefs and institu-
tions to the colonies.31

In Africa European colonialists introduced
their own metropolitan law and system of courts.
But they retained much customary law and
many elements of the African judicial process
that they deemed consistent with their sense of
justice and morality. Western-type courts were
presided over by expatriate magistrates and
judges whose jurisdiction extended over all per-
sons, African and non-African, in criminal and
civil matters. Often referred to as “general
courts”, they applied European law and local
statutes based on European practices. A second
group of “native-authority courts” or “African
courts” or “people’s courts” comprised either
traditional chiefs or local elders. These courts
had jurisdiction over only Africans and for the
most part applied the prevailing customary law.
Throughout Malawi’s colonial history, for ex-
ample, jurisdiction over Africans was left to the
traditional courts for cases involving customary
law and for simple criminal cases.32

Towards the end of the colonial period, of-
ficials began to integrate the dual courts system,
with the general courts supervising the workings
of  the  customary  courts.  The  Anglophone
colonies retained much of the dual legal struc-
ture  created  during  colonial  rule  while  at-
tempting to reform and adapt customary law to
notions of English law. Francophone and Lu-
sophone colonies tried to absorb customary law
into the general law. Ethiopia and Tunisia abol-
ished some aspects of customary law. But in no
African country, either during or after the colo-
nial era, has customary law been totally disre-
garded or proscribed.

CUSTOMARY LAW CAN PROMOTE ACCESS TO
JUSTICE SYSTEMS

Accommodating customary law can help pro-
tect the rights of indigenous people and en-
sure a fairer application of the rule of law.
Efforts to accord public recognition to cus-
tomary law can help create a sense of inclusion

58

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

in the wider society. Often the most pragmatic
case for customary law, especially in parts of
failed states, is that the choice is between cus-
tomary law and no law. Recognizing the abil-
ity of indigenous people to adopt and administer
their own laws is also a repudiation of historic
prejudice—and can be an important part of
self-government for indigenous people.33

Countries  from  Australia  to  Canada  to
Guatemala to South Africa have recognized
legal pluralism. In Australia there has been a re-
newed focus on recognizing Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander customary law, which has
opened the way to indigenous community mech-
anisms of justice, aboriginal courts, greater re-
gional autonomy and indigenous governance. In
Canada most local criminal matters are dealt
with by the indigenous community so that the
accused can be judged by jurors of peers who
share cultural norms. In Guataemala the 1996
peace accords acknowledged the need to rec-
ognize Mayan law as an important part of gen-
uine reform (box 3.6).

In post-apartheid South Africa a ground-
swell of innovation is instilling new authority, re-
sources and dignity into customary law. The
aim is to rebuild trust in the criminal justice sys-
tem and respect for the rule of law and to rec-
ognize customary laws. The challenge lies in
integrating common and customary law in line
with the new constitution, enshrining such prin-
ciples as gender equality. This harmonization
process marks a major step in South Africa’s
enormous task of legal reform. The first step was
repealing apartheid laws. Next was reconsti-
tuting the Law Commission, dominated by con-
servative judges of the old regime. Now South
Africa must shape new laws to govern a new so-
cial order.

Customary law is often the only form of
justice known to many South Africans. About
half the population lives in the countryside,
where traditional courts administer customary
law in more than 80% of villages.34 These courts,
also found in some urban townships, deal with
petty theft, property disagreements and do-
mestic affairs—from marriage to divorce to in-
heritance. Justice is swift and cheap as the courts
are run with minimal formalities in venues close
to the disputants’ homes and charge less than

a dollar for a hearing. The judges use everyday
language, and the rules of evidence allow the
community to interject and question testimony. 
The  system  has  its  critics—particularly
women, who are barred from serving as judges
and are often discriminated against as litigants.
Even so, women’s groups, under the umbrella
of the Rural Women’s Movement, are on the
vanguard of efforts to recognize customary law
and adapt it to post-apartheid society. They are
leading discussions about how to elevate cus-
tomary law and make it fairer to women.

Still a concern, therefore, is how customary
law compromises or ensures human rights stan-
dards.35 Any legal system—conventional or
customary—is open to criticism over its formu-
lation. A legal tradition is a set of deeply rooted,
historically conditioned attitudes about the na-
ture of law, about the role of law in society,
about the proper organization and operation of
a legal system and about the way law should be
made, applied, studied, perfected and taught.

Accommodating
customary law can help
protect the rights of
indigenous people and
ensure a fairer application
of the rule of law

BOX 3.6

Access to justice and cultural recognition in Guatemala

For the more than 500 years since the arrival
of the Spanish conquistadors Guatemala’s in-
digenous people have suffered violent sub-
ordination and exclusion. The armed internal
conflict that lasted from 1960 until the sign-
ing of the peace accords in 1996 was partic-
ularly  devastating.  Indigenous  people,
constituting more than half the population,
endured massacres and gross violations of
human rights. The military dictatorship of
1970–85 undermined the independence of
local community authorities.

Little surprise, then, that rural com-
munities lost faith in the judicial system and
the rule of law. Public lynchings became
the alternative to the formal justice system,
notorious for its inability to sentence the
perpetrators of crimes and its tendency to
release criminals through a corrupt bail tra-
dition. The political establishment cynically
misrepresents the lynchings as the tradi-
tional practices of indigenous people.

The 1996 accords acknowledged the
need for genuine reform with commitments
to acknowledge traditional Mayan law and
authority. The Accord on Indigenous Iden-
tity and Rights, for example, states that “the
lack of knowledge by the national legislative

Source: Buvollen 2002.

body of the customary norms that regulate
indigenous community life as well as the
lack of access that the indigenous popula-
tion has to the resources of the national jus-
tice system, have caused negation of rights,
discrimination and marginalization”.

The government and the opposition

have agreed to:
•

Recognize the management of internal
issues of the indigenous communities
according to their own judicial norms.
Include cultural considerations in the
practice of law.

•

• Develop a permanent programme for
judges and members of the Public Min-
istry on the culture and identity of in-
digenous people.

• Ensure free judicial advisory services

for people with limited resources.

• Offer free services for interpretation of
judicial proceedings into indigenous
languages.
These developments are first steps in
acknowledging the distinct cultures of in-
digenous people in Guatemala. The chal-
lenge  now  is  to  develop  the  customary
systems in a way consistent with human
rights and gender equality.

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

59

Language conflicts can be
managed by providing
some spheres in which
minority languages are
used freely and by giving
incentives to learn other
languages, especially a
national or official
language 

POLICIES ON THE USE OF MULTIPLE LANGUAGES

By choosing one or a few languages over oth-
ers, a state often signals the dominance of those
for whom the official language is their mother
tongue. This choice can limit the freedom of
many non-dominant groups—feeding inter-
group tensions (see chapter 2). It becomes a way
of excluding people from politics, education, ac-
cess to justice and many other aspects of civic
life. It can entrench socio-economic inequalities
between groups. It can become a divisive po-
litical issue, as in Sri Lanka where, in place of
English, Sinhala (spoken by the majority) was
made the only official language in 1956 despite
the  opposition of the Tamil minority, who
wanted both Sinhala and Tamil recognized.

While it is possible and even desirable for a
state to remain “neutral” on ethnicity and reli-
gion, this is impractical for language. The citizenry
needs a common language to promote mutual un-
derstanding and effective communication. And
no state can afford to provide services and offi-
cial documents in every language spoken on its
territory. The difficulty, however, is that most
states, especially in the developing world and
Eastern Europe, are multilingual—and they are
the focus of much of the discussion here. Once
again, multicultural policies are needed.

In multilingual societies plural language
policies provide recognition to distinct linguis-
tic groups. Plural language policies safeguard the
parallel use of two or more languages by saying,
in essence, “Let us each retain our own lan-
guage in certain spheres, such as schools and uni-
versities, but let us also have a common language
for  joint  activities,  especially  in  civic  life.”
Language conflicts can be managed by provid-
ing some spheres in which minority languages
are used freely and by giving incentives to learn
other languages, especially a national or official
language. This can be promoted by an appro-
priate social reward structure, such as by mak-
ing facility in a national language a criterion for
professional qualification and promotion.

There is no universal “right to language”.36
But there are human rights with an implicit
linguistic content that multilingual states must ac-
knowledge in order to comply with their inter-
national obligations under such instruments as

the International Covenant on Civil and Politi-
cal Rights. Especially important are the rights to
freedom of expression and equality. Freedom of
expression and the use of a language are insep-
arable. This is the most obvious example of the
importance of language in matters of law. For ex-
ample, until 1994 members of the Kurd minor-
ity in Turkey were prohibited by law from using
their language in public. Reform of this law was
an important element in the government’s re-
sponse to the demands of the Kurdish minority.
In 2002 the Turkish Parliament passed legisla-
tion allowing private institutions to teach the
language of the sizeable Kurdish minority, and
the first Kurdish language teaching centre opened
in March 2004 in Batman, in the southeast.

Experience around the world shows that
plural language policies can expand opportu-
nities for people in many ways, if there is a de-
liberate effort to teach all citizens some of the
country’s major languages (box 3.7). Very often
what multilingual countries need is a three-
language formula (as UNESCO recommends)
that gives public recognition to the use of three
languages:
• One international language—in former colo-
nial countries this is often the official lan-
guage  of  administration.  In  this  era  of
globalization all countries need to be pro-
ficient in an international language to par-
ticipate in the global economy and networks.
• One lingua franca—a local link language
facilitates communication between different
linguistic groups such as Swahili in East
African countries, where many other lan-
guages are also spoken.

• Mother tongue—people want and need to
be able to use their mother tongue when it
is neither the lingua franca nor the interna-
tional language.
Countries need to recognize all three as of-
ficial languages or at least recognize their use and
relevance in different circumstances, such as in
courts or schools. There are many versions of
such three-language formulas, depending on
the country.

The main questions that states face on lan-
guage policy relate to the language of instruc-
tion  in  schools  and  the  language  used  in
government institutions.

60

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

BOX 3.7

Multilingual education in Papua New Guinea

Nestled between the South Pacific Ocean and
the Coral Sea, Papua New Guinea is the most
linguistically and culturally diverse nation in the
world, accounting for approximately a sixth of
the world’s 6,000 languages. A century of colo-
nial occupation created a lingua franca, a neo-
Melanesian pidgin, tok  pisin, derived from
English, German, Spanish, Malay and Papua
New Guinea’s own languages and spoken by
half of the population of 5 million.

To meet the needs of indigenous people for
relevant basic education, the Department of Ed-
ucation implemented a major education reform
in 1993, introducing mother tongue instruction
in the first three years of schooling. After that, the
medium of instruction is English. By 2001, 369 in-
digenous languages had been introduced in 3,600
elementary schools. A third of children now start
elementary school in their mother tongue.

Source: Klaus 2003; SIL International 2004a; CRIP 2004.

No  statistical  study  has  been  done,  but
there is abundant anecdotal evidence that chil-
dren become literate and learn English faster
and more easily when they start their school-
ing in their mother tongue. Access is improv-
ing, and the dropout rate, particularly of girls,
has come down. More than 70% of grade 6 stu-
dents go on to grade 7, compared with less than
40%  in  1992.  Lower-secondary  enrolments
have doubled since 1992, and upper-secondary
numbers  have  quadrupled.  Teachers  report
that children appear more self-confident and
inquisitive.

The education reform came after 20 years
of widespread public consultation, and imple-
mentation was gradual. Non-governmental or-
ganizations  got  grants  to  develop  a  writing
system for some languages that had never been
written before. Communities wanting to convert

their schools to the local language had to agree
to build new facilities, assist in the life of the
school or share their culture with the children.
The  learning  material  is  deliberately  simple:
copies of a prototype textbook are printed with
blank  lines  to  be  filled  in  with  the  local  lan-
guage. Costs were kept in check by using black
and white text and soft covers. Communities
choose local people with at least a grade 10 ed-
ucation as teachers. They are paid less than na-
tionally recruited certified teachers, but many
are pleased to be doing worthwhile work for a
steady income.

Papua New Guinea sought and received
large  donor  support  from  Australia  to  intro-
duce the reform, but it is expected that the sys-
tem will be cost-efficient and sustainable over
the longer term. Studies are under way to assess
its results.

LANGUAGE POLICY IN SCHOOLS

Low educational attainment continues to be a
major source of exclusion for immigrants, eth-
nic groups and indigenous people. In such cases
offering bilingual education not only recognizes
their cultural traditions but it can also enhance
learning and reduce educational disparities—
widening people’s choices (see box 3.7).

Children learn best when they are taught in
their mother tongue, particularly in the earliest
years. Experience in many countries shows that
bilingual education, which combines instruction
in  the  mother  tongue  with  teaching  in  the
dominant national language, can open educa-
tional and other opportunities. In the Philippines
students proficient in the two languages of the
bilingual education policy (Tagalog and English)
outperformed students who did not speak Taga-
log  at  home.  In  Canada  students  from  the
English-speaking majority in bilingual immer-
sion programmes outperform peers in tradi-
tional programmes of learning in the second
language (French). In the United States Navajo
students instructed throughout their primary
school years in their first language (Navajo) as
well as their second language (English) outper-
formed their Navajo-speaking peers educated
only in English.37

In Latin America bilingualism is an estab-
lished strategy for reducing the educational ex-
clusion of indigenous children, who have the
worst education indicators. Studies in Bolivia,
Brazil, Guatemala, Mexico, Paraguay and Peru
show that providing instruction to minority
groups in their own language and using teach-
ers from the same group is highly effective.
Bilingual education leads to much less repetition,
lower drop-out rates and higher educational
attainment  among  indigenous  children.  In
Guatemala the Q’eqchi’ communities, which
had fewer bilingual education opportunities
than three other indigenous groups surveyed,
had much higher drop-out and repetition rates.38
Studies in Africa find the same results, with
bilingual schools more effective than conven-
tional monolingual schools, as in Burkina Faso
(table 3.1). Studies of bilingual education in
Mali, Niger, Nigeria and Zambia find that it en-
sures continuity among families, communities
and schools, strengthening interactions among
them. It stimulates the production of school and
cultural materials in the second language, broad-
ening the body of knowledge and facilitating
learners’ integration into social and cultural life.
And it encourages a blending of cultures, since
it enhances the standing of both languages and
the cultures they convey. Monolingual schools,

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

61

TABLE 3.1
Indicators of internal output and costs of conventional and bilingual
schools in Burkina Faso

Indicator

Bilingual school

Conventional

monolingual school

14%

37 pupil years

16%

Chance of success in obtaining a 
primary education certificate

Average duration to gain a diploma
Internal output rate (allowing for 

repetition and drop-out)

Annual recurrent costs (teachers, supplies, 

maintenance) per student (total recurrent 
costs divided by number of students)

72%

6 pupil years

68%

77,447 CFA francs

104,962 CFA francs

Source: Ndoye 2003.

whether in a Western or an African language, per-
form much less well.39

India, too, has extensive experience with
multilingual education. For four decades it has
had a three-language formula in which each
child is taught in the official language of the state
(Bengali in West Bengal, for example), with the
two official national languages (English and
Hindi) as second and third languages. Indian
state boundaries have been drawn along lin-
guistic lines since 1956, so each state has one
dominant state language, each with its own
script, rich vocabulary and literature going back
hundreds, if not thousands of years.

Often, bilingual education is stigmatized as
being lower in quality, especially in the country’s
economic and political activities. Bilingual edu-
cation can then be thought to restrict opportu-
nities. Surveys among Hispanics in the American
Southeast show that most prefer English-only
classes and view their children’s “restricted”
early access to English as a deprivation. Bilin-
gualism should be introduced only where there
is demand for it. However, evidence suggests that
there is no trade-off between the two goals of
bilingual education and high quality education,
especially in teaching the dominant language.

Nor is cost a real issue. An examination of
the costs and benefits of bilingual education
for indigenous people in Guatemala estimated
that there would be a $5 million cost savings
thanks to reduced repetitions, savings equal to
the cost of providing primary education to about
100,000 students a year.40

It is true that the unit costs of producing
local language materials are often higher than
those of producing majority language materials
because of the smaller quantities. But sharing by

countries with the same local language can help
hold unit costs down. Costs include those for
modernizing and standardizing the orthography
of the local language and for developing mate-
rials, training teachers in their use and distrib-
uting them. These financial costs have to be
weighed against the social and political costs of
inequality and unfairness. And since local lan-
guage materials are produced in small quanti-
ties, they have little effect on the average unit cost
of producing materials in all languages. In Sene-
gal the production of materials in Wolof and
other local languages barely pushes up the
average unit cost of production of materials in
all languages since the number of French books
produced is much higher than the number of
Wolof or Pulaar language books.

Bilingual education is a long-term invest-
ment, but nowhere do the costs appear pro-
hibitive.  In  Guatemala  bilingual  education
accounted for 0.13% of the primary education
recurrent budget, increasing the unit cost of
primary education by 9% annually (over the
traditional Spanish-only instruction system).41
In India producing materials in local languages
adds 5–10% to total recurrent cost.42 But as
noted earlier, the gains can be massive, because
of fewer dropouts and repetitions.

Most countries in Sub-Saharan Africa have
local language education in schools in the first
three grades, but after that almost all countries
use  French,  English  or  Portuguese.  These
countries may find introducing local language ed-
ucation particularly difficult because of the many
languages spoken. But most languages are related,
and there are only 15 core language groups for
the 45 Sub-Saharan countries (box 3.8). Devel-
oping local language education would require
greater investment and regional cooperation to
standardize and develop these languages. Stan-
dardization would require translating texts into
these languages and introducing the texts to ed-
ucation at higher grades. These costs could be met
through some additional donor support.

Standardization of texts and translation into
the 15 core languages shared by communities
spread across several national boundaries would
help to keep costs down through economies of
scale. Cooperation among countries in the re-
gion would be required to make this work. In

62

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

the medium run such standardization would
help to bolster the role of these 15 core languages
as lingua franca and as the languages of the ed-
ucation and state administrative (legislative and
judicial) systems.

Bilingual schooling can run up against un-
favourable perceptions, problems of transition
from the first language to the second and poor
follow-up, evaluation and support systems. But
most of these problems are linked to poor plan-
ning and a failure to make adjustments in cur-
ricula, teaching, training and promotion of the
use  of  the  language  in  official  and  public
spheres.43 Once these conditions are met, bilin-
gual strategies improve learning, contribute to
a multicultural identity and have a transform-
ing effect on society.

Since knowledge of Western languages is
often a means of upward mobility, the goal is not
to remove Western languages, which would
narrow  choices  and  access  to  international
knowledge. The goal is to give local languages
equal or superior status. This reduces the heavy
burden of repetitions and drop-outs and thus
builds human skills.

LANGUAGE POLICY IN GOVERNMENT
INSTITUTIONS

In multilingual societies a multiple language
policy is the only way to ensure full democra-
tic participation. Otherwise, much of a coun-
try’s population can be excluded by an inability
to speak the official language of the state. The
Malawi  Parliament  uses  English  exclusively,
and the Constitution (1994) requires all can-
didates standing for Parliament “to speak and
to read the English language well enough to
take an active part in the proceedings of Par-
liament” (see chapter 5).44 The record of par-
liamentary  proceedings  is  also  published  in
English. The only way that people who do not
know English are informed about parliamen-
tary proceedings is through the national radio,
which  provides  highly  abridged  versions  in
Chichewa.

The exclusive use of English creates a bar-
rier between the political elite and the masses
and reduces the pool of possible legislators. It
can particularly disadvantage women, who are

less likely to be literate or fluent in English.
Tanzania has extended political participation in
the legislature to the majority through the de-
liberate  use  of  its  national  lingua  franca,
Kiswahili.

Language policies for the judiciary should
not deny justice. The use of English as the pri-
mary language of legal discourse is common in
Anglophone Africa, where judicial systems are
based on the British legal system. This often
alienates the people from the law since most of
them have little or no facility in English.

South Africa has attempted to widen choices
for non-English and non-Afrikaans speakers by
calling for 11 constitutionally recognized offi-
cial languages (since 1994)—9 indigenous, plus
English and Afrikaans. Despite an ambitious
court interpreter programme that puts most
other countries to shame, there is still a bias to-
wards  English.  One  study  of  the  courts  in
Qwaqwa in the Free State, a mainly Sesotho-
speaking area, found that even when the mag-
istrate, the prosecutor and the defendant were
all Africans who spoke Southern Sotho as their
mother tongue, the cases were conducted “in
mediocre English with the assistance of a court
interpreter from and into Sesotho for the ben-
efit of the defendant”.45

In multilingual societies a
multiple language policy
is the only way to ensure
full democratic
participation 

BOX 3.8

How many languages are there in Africa? 
85% of Africans speak 15 core languages

The profusion of languages in Africa gives the
impression of unending fragmentation. Closer
examination reveals convergences and struc-
tural similarities for superficially distinct
cultures, clans and languages. Colonial ad-
ministrators and missionaries, sometimes for
administrative expediency and sometimes
for proselytizing reasons (biblical transla-
tions, in particular), elevated small dialects to
the status of languages and narrow local
groups to the status of tribes. Just as colonial-
era ethnologists would eagerly “discover”
tribes that were often more appropriately
parts of much larger groups, so languages in
Africa have much greater affinity to each
other than is commonly believed.

Most of what are counted as distinct lan-
guages in Africa are actually dialects of core
languages. As first, second or third language

Source: Prah 2004.

speakers (most Africans are multilingual),
more than 75% of Africans speak 12 core
languages: Nguni, Soth-Tswana, Swahili,
Amharic, Fulful, Mandenkan, Igbo, Hausa,
Yoruba, Luo, Eastern Inter-lacustrine and
Western Interlacustrine (Kitara). Some 85%
of the African population of the continent
speak 15 core languages (the three addi-
tional  languages  are  Somali-Samburu-
Rendille, Oromo-Borana and Gur). Though
lexically different, these languages are sim-
ilar  morphologically,  syntactically  and
phonologically.

If linguists across national boundaries
in Sub-Saharan Africa were to work to-
gether to standardize vocabularies, it would
be possible to use these languages to teach
not just in the first three grades of primary
school, but eventually in higher grades.

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

63

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION

Recognition of linguistic diversity in Afghanistan’s Constitution

On 4 January 2004 Afghanistan’s new Consti-
tution was adopted by a Loya Jirga (or grand as-
sembly) of 502 representatives from all parts of
Afghanistan. While the adoption itself is a sig-
nificant milestone achieved over the past two
years, certain aspects of the new Constitution are
particularly noteworthy. For example, in rec-
ognizing the linguistic diversity in Afghanistan,
the Constitution takes a step that is unprece-
dented in the history not only of Afghanistan, but
of the region as a whole.

Afghanistan has two major official languages,
Pashto and Dari, which we have proudly spoken
for centuries. The Constitution provides for the
equal application of these two languages as the
official medium of communication in all state or-
ganizations. Many state institutions will need to
work to implement this, but some, including
my own Office, do this already. It is gratifying
to me as an Afghan, and as President, to be able
to switch between Dari and Pashto when speak-
ing publicly, as the occasion requires.

In addition to the two major official lan-
guages the delegates to the Loya Jirga agreed
to give official status to all minority languages
in the areas where these languages are spoken.

This is an important step that has precedence,
I think, only in societies that are strong and
solid.  It  is  a  powerful  indication  that,  even
though we are a society that has just emerged
from war and disorder, we have the courage and
broadmindedness to be inclusive and to rec-
ognize diversity. It makes us proud that today
our Baluch, Nuristani, Pamiri, Pashai, Turkmen
and  Uzbek  fellow  Afghans  are  enjoying  the
right to use their own languages and to have
them recognized as official. I am confident that
this step will make Afghanistan a stronger na-
tion, prouder than before, and an exemplary na-
tion in the region.

Having taken the first step, Afghanistan
now needs to work to make the words of the
Constitution a reality. While we are confident
about the feasibility of making regional lan-
guages official in their respective regions, it is in-
deed not a small task to put the infrastructure
in place for this purpose. To teach people to read
and write in their mother tongue requires in-
corporating the language into the school cur-
riculum.  This  will  require  changes  in  our
mainstream education system. We will need to
train more teachers and to print more books.

But above all, we need to proceed carefully
to ensure that making regional languages official
contributes to national integration, rather than
reinforcing the isolation of communities. In the 21st
century, people around the world are increasingly
searching for commonalities, including common-
ality in language. Learning a local language should
not become a countercurrent. And it should not
reduce the quality of education for our children.
The Loya Jirga representatives ensured that
our new Constitution represents not only the
deep aspirations of the nation but also the diverse
preferences of the people of Afghanistan. Turn-
ing their vision into reality may indeed be a chal-
lenge, but it is a challenge we are confident that
we can meet. Recognizing our diversity, while af-
firming our nationhood, will further solidify the
foundations of a democratic Afghanistan.

Hamid Karzai
President
Transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan

In Tanzania, by contrast, Kiswahili is the ju-
dicial language in the primary courts. Bills come
to Parliament in English but are debated in
Kiswahili, before being written into law in Eng-
lish.  In  the  lower  courts  both  English  and
Kiswahili are used, but sentences are written in
English. In 1980 Kiswahili was used 80% of the
time in lower courts; only English is used in
the high court.46

In 1987 New Zealand, with a 14% indige-
nous Maori population, declared Maori an of-
ficial language, giving any person (not just a
defendant)  the  right  to  speak  Maori  in  any
legal  proceeding,  regardless  of  the  person’s
proficiency in English.47 It is the judge’s re-
sponsibility to ensure that a competent inter-
preter  is  available.  Since  most  Maori  speak
English as their first language, this provision
views language as a right, not as a problem as
most other countries view it.

When a new language policy is being ex-
plored or implemented, a special state language
board should be created, as was done in Quebec,

Catalonia and the Baltic States. The board should
include experts to analyze the socio-lingual sit-
uation, draft policy proposals and organize lan-
guage learning programmes, especially needed if
a new language policy includes language re-
quirements for civil service jobs, licensing or
naturalization. If the state openly acknowledges
that facility in a language is required for access
to public services, it has a duty to assist and
monitor  the  acquisition  of  that  language—
otherwise conflict is inevitable between the de-
prived and the dominant. A state language board
with expert commissions and a permanent staff
naturally requires substantial resources, as do
language learning programmes.

With new states there may be unprecedented
opportunities to resolve ethnic conflicts by ne-
gotiating an agreement that involves trade-offs
for various groups. For instance, it may be pos-
sible to negotiate more language autonomy in re-
turn for less territorial self-rule. Under the recent
Ohrid agreement the Albanians in Macedonia
gave up claims to territorial autonomy in return

64

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

In addition to issues of
language use in national
institutions, there is also a
risk that national
information media could
be monopolized by
speakers of one (or two)
dominant languages 

for official-language status throughout the coun-
try. In newly independent Malaysia in 1956 the
Chinese accepted the public dominance of the
Malay language in return for a liberal natural-
ization policy. The Chinese diaspora safeguards
the survival of its languages by importing books,
supporting cultural associations and sending stu-
dents to Chinese universities abroad. In addition,
there are still Chinese language schools where the
Chinese community can study in Chinese as the
medium of instruction. Students in these schools
are merely required to sit an examination in the
national language, Bahasa Malaysia.

In Soviet Latvia Russian was the dominant
language, and Latvian was rarely used in official
affairs. Since independence in 1991 Latvian has
become the language of state and other public
affairs. A massive state-sponsored language pro-
gramme was begun so that Russian residents
could learn Latvian, in order to end a situation
in which mostly bilingual Latvians had to accom-
modate monolingual Russians. Russians have
been able to continue schooling in Russian-
language public schools.

Not that tensions have completely dissipated.
There are restrictions on the use of Russian on
signs and public election posters, and there are
time quotas for Russian on radio and television.48
In addition to issues of language use in na-
tional institutions, there is also a risk that national
information media could be monopolized by
speakers of one (or two) dominant languages.
Even though most countries that gained their in-
dependence after the collapse of the Soviet
Union have large Russian majorities, national-
ists attempt to protect the informational space
under their control from “foreign” influence—
that is, from the impact of Russian media—by
limiting newspapers and broadcasts in non-
state languages (Russian). That narrows people’s
choices, though satellite dishes can broaden
them by providing access to television pro-
gramming in Russian.

POLICIES FOR REDRESSING
SOCIO-ECONOMIC EXCLUSION

Ethnic minorities and indigenous people are
often the poorest groups in most parts of the
world.  As  chapter  2  documents,  they  have

shorter life expectancies and lower education at-
tainments and other social indicators. They also
are most likely to suffer socio-economic exclu-
sion. Redressing that exclusion requires a com-
bination of policies, including:
• Addressing unequal social investments to

achieve equality of opportunity.

• Recognizing legitimate collective claims to

land and livelihoods.

• Taking affirmative action in favour of dis-

advantaged groups.
But minorities are not always disadvantaged
in access to social and economic opportunities.
In fact, perhaps the most politically dangerous ex-
clusion occurs when an ethnic minority holds a
large part of the wealth (agricultural land, key in-
dustries and services). For example, the Chinese
in Burma, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines
and Thailand own a large part of the industry in
these countries.49 Their economic dominance
has been a factor in civil conflict, for example
when the Suharto regime was replaced in In-
donesia. Similarly, white settlers in southern
Africa have dominant control over agricultural
land. The response to such domination, whether
induced by the market or the colonial state, is
likely to take the form of affirmative action for the
disadvantaged majority.

ADDRESSING UNEQUAL SOCIAL INVESTMENTS
TO ACHIEVE EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY

Policies that promote growth with equity are nec-
essary to achieve socio-economic inclusion for
all groups. For most developing countries this
would include investing in the agricultural and
other labour-intensive sectors and broadening
access to assets, especially agricultural land. But
too often development policies become a source
of intergroup tension. In other words, devel-
opment itself can create, sustain and often in-
tensify inequalities between groups and between
individuals.

In many African countries state-based con-
trol and distribution of mineral resources be-
came a key source of ethno-regional wealth
differentials. Thus, in Sudan the discovery and
exploitation of oil became the major source of
post-independence conflict, with the govern-
ment annexing oil-bearing lands in the South.

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

65

In many countries public
spending in basic social
services systematically
discriminates against
minorities and
indigenous people 

And in Nigeria the oil resources in the South-
East and the use of oil revenues have heightened
ethnic tensions, sparking the civil war in Bi-
afra. Botswana, by contrast, used its mineral
wealth to invest in social infrastructure and
human development—perhaps precisely be-
cause it is almost entirely made up of a single eth-
nic group, the Batswana.50

As noted earlier, colonial governance en-
trenched ethnic identities in Africa. It also pro-
moted ethnic dominance through structures of
state power that gave predominance to some eth-
nic identities and not to others.51 External fac-
tors remain critical today. External forces are
usually subregional or interventions by neigh-
bouring states, as in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Liberia, Mozambique and Nigeria.
But developed country (often the former met-
ropolitan country) interventions, by govern-
ments or by multinationals, are more generalized
in Africa, albeit more prominent in the mineral
resource–rich African states (Angola, Democ-
ratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Sierra Leone).
Since international firms are usually in-
volved in the extractive industries in most de-
veloping countries, corporations should sign
on to the “Publish what you pay” campaign—
revealing publicly what they pay to developing
country governments in the form of taxes, roy-
alties and other fees. Such information would
make it much more difficult for developing
country governments to use the revenues and
rents from mineral resources to benefit partic-
ular ethnic groups or individuals. When such
information is publicly available, affected com-
munities can track the flow and use of resources.
They can question whether the resources ben-
efit only local or national elites. And they can
demand that resources also be made available
for investments in their area.

Indigenous people are more likely to be
poor than non-indigenous people (figure 3.1).
A World Bank study in Bolivia, Guatemala,
Mexico and Peru suggests that if human capi-
tal characteristics (health and education ser-
vices and their use) were equalized, much of the
earnings differential between indigenous and
non-indigenous workers would disappear.52
Distance cannot excuse a failure to provide ser-
vices: if logging and mining infrastructure can

be provided in the remotest corners of the Ama-
zon basin, so can social infrastructure.53

In many countries public spending in basic
social  services  systematically  discriminates
against minorities and indigenous people. The
low provision of services can be a result of lower
financial allocations or of distance and isolation.
Indigenous people often receive fewer health
care inputs and have worse health outcomes
than the average population. The Brazilian gov-
ernment spent $7 per capita on health care for
the indigenous population, compared with $33
on average for the country.54 Indigenous peo-
ple may also be underserved because health in-
frastructure  and  medical  personnel  are
concentrated in urban areas. In South Africa race
has been associated with major differences in in-
fant mortality rates and with enormous inequities
in the resources allocated per health interven-
tion (figure 3.2). In Mexico there are 79 hospi-
tal beds and 96 doctors per 100,000 people on
a national level, but the number of hospital
beds falls to 8 and doctors to 14 per 100,000 in
areas where indigenous people constitute more
than two-fifths of the population.55

In Bolivia and Peru surveys show that in-
digenous people are more likely to have been
sick  in  the  previous  month  than  are  non-
indigenous people but are much less likely to
consult a physician.56 Poorer uptake of health
services by indigenous people may sometimes
reflect their view that the services are culturally
inappropriate because they fail to consider the
spiritual dimensions of good health or fail to in-
corporate their traditional medicine, based on
herbs and other plants. These issues need to be
addressed if the health of indigenous people is
to improve, and this can be done without ad-
ditional financial resources.

The right to education is often also com-
promised for indigenous people. Bilingual ed-
ucation, though it can be very effective, often
remains underresourced and so of poor quality.
Indigenous children’s schooling also suffers
from a lack of school facilities in areas where they
live and a shortage of qualified teachers, partly
because indigenous education is given a lower
priority. The problem is often the low relevance
of teaching content, especially if teachers are not
drawn from indigenous communities.

66

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

It is not easy to universalize access to basic
services where there is ethnic fragmentation and
identities have been politicized. A study in Kenya
finds lower primary school funding in more eth-
nically diverse districts.57 Using a sample of US
cities, one study finds that the level and variety
of public goods provided worsens as ethnic di-
versity increases.58 Another US study shows that
individuals’ support for public welfare spending
increases if a larger fraction of welfare recipients
in their area belong to their racial group.59 So,
even though comparatively disadvantaged mi-
norities or groups may need favourable public
policies to enable them to escape deprivation,
such policies may not be forthcoming because of
the absence of a national consensus and the re-
quired tax base to finance such policies.

RECOGNIZING LEGITIMATE CLAIMS TO LAND
AND LIVELIHOODS

Rights to traditional lands. An important po-
litical trend over the last decade has been the rise
of powerful indigenous movements around the
world—from Bolivia to Cambodia to Canada
to Ecuador. At the core of these movements is
the demand to protect indigenous people’s rights
to historic lands and mineral wealth. These claims
have to be recognized for what they are: claims
for who owns the land and the right to use its soil
and resources (water, minerals, plants, forests).
Only then can policy instruments appropriately
address the claims. Indigenous people often have
a special relationship with the land—for many it
is still their source of livelihood and sustenance
and the basis of their existence as communities.
The right to own, occupy and use land collectively
is inherent in the self-conception of indigenous
people, and this right is generally vested not in
the individual but in the local community, the
tribe or the indigenous nation.

Convention 169 of the International Labour
Organization, adopted in 1989, calls on states
to respect indigenous lands and territories and
proclaims  the  right  of  indigenous  people  to
control  their  natural  resources.  But  only  17
countries have ratified it (mostly in Latin Amer-
ica). Many of the current conflicts over land and
territory relate to the possession, control, ex-
ploitation and use of natural resources. In many

Figure
3.1

100

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

50

0

Indigenous people are more likely than non-indigenous people to be 
poor in Latin America
Indigenous population, 1989–91
Non-indigenous population, 1989–91

87

54

64

48

81

79

50

18

Bolivia

Guatemala

Mexico

Peru

Source:

Psacharapoulos and Patrinos 1994; Helwege 1995.

Figure
3.2

Non-whites benefit less than whites from public health spending
in South Africa
Mid-1990s

Public health expenditure 
per person (rand)

Infant mortality rate (per 1,000)

White 
Indian
Coloured
African

597.1

7.3

9.9

356.2
340.2

137.8

36.3

54.3

Source:

Mehrotra and Delamonica forthcoming.

countries the state claims the right to control
such resources. And in many instances multi-
national  corporations  assert  their  own  eco-
nomic interests, unleashing conflicts. In Chile
one  law  recognizes  the  rights  of  indigenous
people over their lands, but other laws allow any
private  party  to  claim  possession  of  subsoil
and water resources on those lands, making it
hard  for  indigenous  communities  to  defend
their ancestral claims.

Some countries protect such claims through
legislation, but in many places indigenous peo-
ple lack private ownership title. Powerful eco-
nomic interests often turn communal possession
into private property. From southern Chile to the
Amazon basin to Canada’s northern forests to the
tropical jungles of South-East Asia to the bush
of southern Africa, there is no territory not cov-
eted by some international corporation. It is cov-
eted for its mineral wealth, its oil deposits, its
pastures, its forests, its medicinal plants, its suit-
ability for commercial plantations, its water re-
sources or its tourist potential. When the national
government signs agreements with international
companies for resources (logging, mines) on

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

67

Liberation struggles
against colonialism were
also struggles over access
to land 

lands inhabited by indigenous people without
their participation in decision-making, indigenous
people become victims of globalized development
(see chapter 5 for a more detailed discussion of
this issue).

The claims of indigenous people over land
and natural resources are collective and therefore
complex. The idea of collective rights is troubling
in a democracy because it seems to contradict
individual rights. But the lack of legal recogni-
tion of collective rights violates individual rights.
Countries such as Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador
and Mexico have begun to find ways to recog-
nize diversity in their constitutions. Countries
such as Bolivia, Ecuador and Mexico have also
recognized degrees of territorial autonomy.
Countries such as Bolivia, Brazil and Guatemala
have established institutions to address the
morass of incomplete or contradictory land ti-
tling and the challenge of land reform. And
countries such as the Philippines have recognized
the land rights of indigenous people (box 3.9).
In Africa the problem is similar, but with dif-
ferent  roots.  Despite  movements  towards
democracy over the last decade, in many cases
authoritarian regimes have broadly retained
control over security forces, economic resources
and funding from industrialized countries and
multilateral institutions. Economic austerity
programmes have often been used to advantage

by the ruling elites. And the dismantling of sig-
nificant parts of the public sector, which market-
oriented reforms usually require, without first
creating a true market, has recentralized power
in  many  cases.  In  that  sense  the  structural
adjustments of the 1980s and 1990s might be
said to have had similar outcomes to the na-
tionalizations of the 1960s and 1970s.

Unequal  ownership  of  land.  Indepen-
dence and reconciliation policies in Namibia and
Zimbabwe, and the end of apartheid in South
Africa, led many to believe that racial conflicts
would be mitigated. Liberation struggles against
colonialism were also struggles over access to
land, expropriated illegally during colonial
times. But the post-colonial failure of national
governments and their international partners to
mobilize finance to acquire land on the market
has fuelled perceptions that white landowners
are being protected. The legacy of racially un-
equal land control afflicts the main agricultural
settler areas of Namibia, South Africa and Zim-
babwe, as well as of Botswana, Malawi and
Swaziland. And the shift to the market has
brought new migrations of white farmers to
Mozambique and Zambia.

Most settler agriculture is on large farms,
claimed to be more efficient than the small sub-
sistence farms of black farmers. The fact that
large farms provide most of the agricultural

BOX 3.9

After decades of struggle the Philippine gov-
ernment passed the Indigenous People’s Rights
Act in 1997. This is the first time that a state in
the region explicitly recognized the rights of in-
digenous people to their ancestral domain, to self-
determination and to the free exercise of their
culture. The act affirms that native title is the
main basis of the ancestral domain rights of in-
digenous people. It offers an option to apply for
a Certificate of Ancestral Domain Title, which
formally acknowledges such rights.

As of July 2003 the National Commission on
Indigenous People announced that 11 Certifi-
cates  of  Ancestral  Domain  Titles  had  been
awarded covering 367,000 hectares. Around
76,000 indigenous people are direct beneficiar-
ies of these certificates, a tiny proportion of the
total indigenous population of 8 million.

Land rights in the Philippines

The act defines ancestral domain as all areas
belonging to indigenous cultural communities
and indigenous people. This includes lands, in-
land waters and coastal areas occupied or pos-
sessed  by  indigenous  people  since  time
immemorial. The interruption of this posses-
sion because of war, force majeure, deceit or
government projects does not invalidate the
right. Ancestral domain also includes forests,
pastures, burial grounds, worship areas, min-
eral and other resources that indigenous people
may no longer exclusively occupy and use but
to which they had access for their subsistence and
traditional activities.

This provision is important because it clearly
acknowledges the integral link of indigenous
cultures and traditions with the land. This is
consistent with Article 27 of the International

Source: National Commission on Indigenous Peoples 2004a, 2004b; UN 1994.

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which
protects linguistic, cultural and religious rights
and for indigenous people includes land, re-
source, subsistence and participation rights.

For those who were dispossessed of their
lands, the law recognizes their cultural rights. It also
recognizes their inherent right to self-governance
and self-determination and respects the integrity
of their values, practices and institutions. The
state thus guarantees their right to freely pursue
their economic, social and cultural development.
However, implementation of the act has
also proved difficult, primarily because of bu-
reaucratic inadequacies and discriminatory be-
haviour  of  politicians  and  civil  servants.
Indigenous people and their advocates must be
vigilant in converting words to actions. The in-
ternational community can help in this.

68

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Relying only on general
policies of economic
growth with equity for
removing such group
inequalities would take an
insupportably long time,
leading to resentment or
even civil conflict 

surplus for export and urban consumption ig-
nores the well established research in agricultural
economics: that small farms are more efficient
than large ones. Land reform thus has to become
a much greater state priority in the region.

Yet colonial land expropriations continue
to be reinforced by new land concessions to
foreign investors. Some of the biggest land-
owners in southern Africa are multinational
companies with cattle ranches and mining con-
cessions. These companies now control wildlife
and safari parks—in the name of eco-tourism—
which are growing in Mozambique, Namibia,
South Africa and Zimbabwe. Few of the bene-
fits of such activities go to the local inhabitants.
In response, some of these countries have begun
to take steps to alter the situation, such as set-
ting up smaller game parks that are not con-
trolled by large companies.

To date land reform in southern Africa has
been slow, and accelerating the process will re-
quire donor support. Land reform should prefer-
ably be carried out in a transparent manner
that allows poor, indigenous groups fair and
productive use of land, which in addition to
being a critical economic asset is a potent po-
litical symbol.

Land issues have remained relevant to race
relations in Latin America as well. In the mid-
20th century, as part of a corporatist state model,
laws recognized indigenous people as candi-
dates for citizenship rather than as objects of
local control. When the corporatist state granted
indigenous communities land titles and pro-
vided social services, it gave them the means for
securing a basic standard of living. And peas-
ant federations provided Indians with institu-
tional avenues for accessing and interacting
with the state.

However, in the 1980s and 1990s there has
been a steady erosion of the citizenship regimes
of corporatist states and a simultaneous politi-
cization of ethnic cleavages in the Andean and
Mesomerican countries of Bolivia, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Mexico and Peru. The dismantling
of rural programmes (including land reforms and
credit programmes) has increased uncertainty
about property regimes among Indian peas-
ants. Liberalizing states have made it clear that
they will not maintain (in Bolivia, Ecuador and

Mexico) or re-establish (in Guatemala and Peru)
special forms of property rights, credit and sub-
sidies for Indian peasants. Thus the contem-
porary period challenges access to the state and
its resources for poor indigenous people. Rural
organizing and protests respond to this mater-
ial uncertainty, as peasants fear indebtedness, de-
clining incomes and loss of land. Unless these
issues are addressed, indigenous people can-
not realize the promise of democracy in the re-
gion. The potential loss of land also affects the
viability and autonomy of local indigenous po-
litical institutions.60

TAKING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN FAVOUR OF
DISADVANTAGED GROUPS

Affirmative action policies allocate jobs, pro-
motions, public contracts, business loans, ad-
missions to higher education and legislative
seats on the basis of membership in a disad-
vantaged group. Such policies are needed when
the disadvantage is cultural exclusion. Relying
only on general policies of economic growth
with equity for removing such group inequali-
ties would take an insupportably long time,
leading to resentment or even civil conflict.

Some affirmative action policies allocate
numerical quotas; others set more flexibly de-
fined goals. Affirmative action can be voluntary
or legislatively mandated. In some countries,
such as Malaysia, affirmative action has been
used  as  a  policy  to  address  participation
exclusion—to remove group distinctions so that
racial, ethnic or linguistic identification is not
identical to low socio-economic status. In other
countries, such as South Africa, it is part of a pol-
icy of redressing past wrongs and reducing in-
equalities between groups (box 3.10).

Affirmative action has reduced intergroup
inequalities in places where it has been effectively
implemented. But studies of countries with ex-
tensive recorded data and a long history of af-
firmative action—India, Malaysia and the United
States and, over a shorter period, South Africa—
show that inequalities between individuals (ver-
tical inequalities) as opposed to inequalities
between groups (horizontal inequalities) have ei-
ther increased or remained stable. The Chinese
to Bumiputera disparity ratio in mean monthly

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

69

BOX 3.10

Experiences with affirmative action in Malaysia and South Africa

Affirmative action, defined as public policy to re-
duce group inequalities, takes different forms. In
South Africa over the past decade and Malaysia
over the past three decades, affirmative action
has increased the designated groups’ represen-
tation in the elite and middle classes, but progress
has not prevented increasing inequality between
rich and poor, both within the formerly disad-
vantaged groups, as well as generally through-
out society.

Malaysia
At independence in the late 1950s Malays and
other indigenous groups (Bumiputera), though
a numerical majority, were economically far be-
hind the Chinese minority. Malays owned only
10% of registered businesses and 1.5% of in-
vested capital. The Constitution granted Chinese
and Indian residents citizenship and at the same
time conferred special rights on Malays to land
ownership,  government  jobs,  education  and
business permits.

Following interethnic rioting in May 1969,
the government adopted the New Economic
Policy to eradicate poverty among all Malaysians
and to restructure Malaysian society so that
identification of race with economic function
and geographical location is reduced and even-
tually eliminated through rapid economic ex-
pansion. The government legislated Malay quotas
for trading and business licences and equity
ownership  and  provided  special  assistance
through credit, training and business sites. It
also acquired shares in private corporations on
behalf of the Bumiputera, with a view to achiev-
ing 30% corporate ownership.

While incomes have risen for all groups since
1969, group income disparities have fallen, an
impressive achievement. But income inequality

within groups has risen since the late 1980s, es-
pecially among the Bumiputera, where the gap be-
tween rich and poor has widened substantially.
The growing abuse of ethnic privileges, es-
pecially by the politically well connected, has
probably contributed to the cultural alienation
of recent decades, with dissent being expressed
among the Malays. With privatization opportu-
nities from the mid-1980s largely decided by
the government on a discretionary basis, there
have been accusations of rent-seeking. Thus
while the specific socio-economic targets of the
New  Economic  Program  have  been  largely
achieved, national unity has remained some-
what elusive. Identifying improved interethnic
relations almost exclusively with reduced dis-
parities in participation in business communities
and the middle class has generated greater eth-
nic resentment and suspicion on both sides.

South Africa
At the end of the apartheid era in 1995 whites
accounted for 13% of the population and earned
59% of personal income; Africans, 76% of the
population, earned 29%.1 In a 2000 survey of 161
large firms employing 560,000 workers, whites
still held 80% of management positions. The
racial wage differential was also substantial al-
though much smaller than before: at the end of
the 1990s white workers earned an average of five
times as much as Africans (although half of that
discrepancy was explained by a difference in
education and location).

In the post-apartheid era the democratic
government introduced a range of programs de-
signed to narrow these gaps. The 1998 Em-
ployment Equity Act requires employers to
submit data on compensation and benefits for
each occupational category by race and gender

and to take appropriate measures if dispropor-
tionate income differentials exist. Firms above
a certain size are obliged to provide the gov-
ernment with annual reports outlining how they
plan  to  make  their  workforce  more  demo-
graphically representative at all levels. The law
also states that a protected group member’s lack
of necessary “experience” is not sufficient rea-
son  for  hiring  someone  else  as  long  as  the
applicant has the “capacity to acquire, within a
reasonable time, the ability to do the job”.2 In
addition, “black empowerment charters” for
every industry set targets for the proportion of
shares that must be transferred to blacks (in-
digenous Africans, coloureds and Asians). Char-
ters have already been published for the oil,
mining and banking sectors. The general thrust
is that about a quarter of South African shares
should be in black hands within a decade or so.
How have these efforts worked? About half
of South Africa’s middle managers and a quar-
ter of top managers are black, up from hardly any
a decade ago. Blacks have been promoted es-
pecially fast in the public sector—the government
does not face competitors. However, since many
underqualified people had been promoted, the
government had to hire a large number of con-
sultants to assist them, but that situation is chang-
ing. Efficiency is an issue. Under procurement
rules black-owned firms can charge more and still
win government contracts, leaving less money for
public goods such as roads, bridges and houses.
As for the empowerment charters, it is still un-
clear how this transfer of shares will be funded.
The current practice of black empowerment
“has created no new products or independent
new companies that are not propped up by large
white  corporations”,  according  to  Moeletsi
Mbeki, a well known commentator.

1. “Coloureds” and “Asians” made up 11% of the population.
2. The employer “may not unfairly discriminate against a person solely on the grounds of that person’s lack of relevant experience”, South Africa Employment Equity Act, no 55 of 1998, section 20 (5).
Source: Sabbagh 2004; Jomo 2004; The Economist 2004a; van der Westhuizen. 2002; Schultz and Mwabo 1998.

household income declined from 2.3 in 1970 to
1.8 in 2000 and that for Indians and Bumiput-
era fell from 1.73 to 1.3 (figure 3.3). And after
decades of affirmative action policies in the
United States the percentage of African Amer-
icans  in  the  professions—lawyers,  judges,
physicians, engineers, college and university
professors—has increased (figure 3.4). Thus the
size of the African American elite has grown, and
the dilemma now may be whether the second
generation of this elite should continue to receive
the benefits. In fact, in university admissions

the shift from affirmative action to colour blind
policies, as enforced in Texas and California
since 1996, has led to significant drops in mi-
nority enrolment in elite institutions.

India has one of the longest histories of any
country in implementing affirmative action poli-
cies. Affirmative action rules (also known as
“reservations”) apply to three groups: the sched-
uled castes (Hindu untouchables and the de-
prived  segments  of  religious  minorities),
scheduled tribes and “other backward classes”
(caste groups that lie between the untouchables

70

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

and the twice-born Dvija). Colonial regimes ex-
cluded these three groups from the structure of
power. The result was that for centuries poverty
was systematically concentrated in certain social
groups. Reservations, which cover about 65% of
the population, are designed to bring power to
these peoples.

There are quotas for the scheduled castes
(15% of the population) and scheduled tribes
(8%) in legislative bodies at all government lev-
els (local, provincial and national), in govern-
ment jobs and in educational institutions.61
Since 1991 the other backward classes, the
largest and most heterogeneous group, have
had quotas in government jobs and higher ed-
ucation institutions (27% at the national and state
levels, a little over half of their proportion in the
population), but not in legislative bodies since
they constitute a majority in many states in India
and their representation in legislatures has in-
creased greatly through normal processes of
competitive politics.

Reservations have changed the nature and
composition of the Indian middle class. A size-
able portion of the middle class now consists of
the second and third generation beneficiaries of
reservations. At Independence the scheduled
castes, scheduled tribes and other backward
classes could aspire only to a limited degree of
upward mobility. Reservations have broadened
their opportunities. Education has become a
social and cultural value, helping to create an
upper crust whose members serve both as role
models and as “spearheads” for their people to
enter the economic and political mainstream.62
One result is that middle-class identity is no
longer perceived in ritual status terms.

Educational and occupational reservations
have also made a lasting impact on India’s po-
litical system. The entire structure of political
power has changed since Independence, be-
ginning with the south Indian states. A new po-
litical leadership has emerged from among the
scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other
backward classes. In almost all states the ben-
eficiaries of reservations occupy important po-
sitions in government and positions in lower
levels of the bureaucracy. This new political
class has ended the monopoly on power of the
Congress Party.

Figure
3.3

Group inequalities have declined in Malaysia, but personal
inequalities have not

Disparity ratio for mean monthly household incomes 
by ethnic group 

Distribution of personal income 

2.5

o
i
t
a
R

2.0

1.5

1.0

Chinese/Bumiputera

Indian/Bumiputera

1970

1979

1990

1999

2002

Source:

Jomo 2004.      

100

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

80

60

40

20

0

51.2

Top 20%

50.5

35.0

Middle 40%

35.5

13.8

Bottom 40%

14.0

1987

1999

Figure
3.4

10

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

5

0

The record of affirmative action in the United States is mixed

Report card on equality

Life expectancy (years)
Maternal deaths (per thousand births)
Infant mortality rate (per thousand births)
People below the poverty line (percent)
Unemployment rate (16 and older)
Unemployment rate (16- to 19-year-olds)

Blacks as share of professionals (percent)
1978
2003

Circa 1980

Circa 2000

White  
 74.4  
  6.7  
 10.9  
 10.2  
  6.3  
 15.5  

Black  
68.1  
21.5  
22.2  
32.5  
14.3  
38.5  

White  
77.7  
5.1  
5.2  
9.5  
3.5  
11.4  

Black
72.2
17.1
14
22.5
7.6
24.5

5.1

1.2
Lawyers and judges

5.6

5.5

2.0

Physicians

1.1

Engineers

6.1

2.6

Professors

Source:

U.S. Census Bureau 2004b; U.S. Department of Labor 2004.

While affirmative action policies have had
many successes, income inequalities between
individuals have continued to increase even 
in  societies  that  have  tried  to  reduce  group
inequalities through affirmative action (India,
Malaysia, South Africa and the United States).
True, these inequalities might have been worse
without the affirmative action policies. But to re-
duce individual inequalities and build truly in-
clusive and equitable societies, other policies are
needed—of  the  kind  discussed  in  previous
Human Development Reports—such as policies
that promote equitable economic development.
The original rationale of affirmative action
was to redress past racial wrongs. US blacks
were victimized first by slavery and then by a

BUILDING MULTICULTURAL DEMOCRACIES

71

There is no question that
affirmative action has
been necessary in the
countries examined here.
Most countries that have
adopted policies have also
experienced an increase in
overall inequalities in
personal income

century of legal, and frequently violent, dis-
crimination. Affirmative action was intended
as a temporary measure. Instead, it has become
a feature of US life. Now its rationale, sup-
ported not only by top universities but also by
most large companies and even the military, is
the pursuit of “diversity”. The United States is
slowly moving towards a model of formally
colour blind policies, whose most distinctive
feature is a principled negation of race as a legal
category. For example, one suggested policy
measure is to transform preferences based on
race to preferences based on economic class. For
university admissions, however, given that high-
scoring poor white students outnumber high-
scoring poor Hispanics and blacks on tests six
to one, class-based preference will not foster
racial equality.63

In India the intention was to end reservations
once affected groups caught up. That has not
happened. Instead, the preferences have be-
come self-perpetuating. Reserved legislative dis-
tricts, which were supposed to end 10 years
after the Constitution of 1950, have been ex-
tended at 10-year intervals. Following a strategy
of “we are more backward than you are”, peo-
ple try to get classified as members of preferred
castes to be eligible for preferences. Reservations
in some form now cover 65% of the population.
Such widespread gaming of the system has
increased the rancour, bordering on animosity,
of  the  “forward”  castes  and  classes  towards
the “backward” ones. Several confrontations
have resulted in the destruction of property and

the loss of life, raising the question of whether
the polarization is worth the preference. The
reasons:
• The scope of reservations in public em-
ployment has been widened from recruit-
ment to promotions.

• The broadening of reservations constricts

opportunities for the forward castes.

• Governments have used reservations as a

populist policy to get votes.

• The reservations have led to the relaxation
of standards for admitting members of the
designated classes into professional schools.
Despite these concerns affirmative action
policies have been quite successful in achieving
their goals, and political considerations will
probably prevent their retirement. And without
them, group inequalities and socio-economic
exclusions would likely be worse than they are
today. Hence, there is no question that affir-
mative action has been necessary in the coun-
tries examined here.

One worrying aspect remains. Most coun-
tries that have adopted such policies have also
experienced an increase in overall inequalities
in personal income (accompanied by growing
inequality within the underprivileged group).
This suggests strongly that many other forces re-
quire action on a broader front: unequal land
and resource ownership, inequalities in the pro-
vision of basic social services, and patterns of de-
velopment that exploit or exclude indigenous
people—just the factors underlying culturally
driven socio-economic exclusion.

72

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

CHAPTER 4

Confronting movements for cultural domination

This Report argues that people should be free to
be who they are, to choose their identities and
to live accordingly. It further argues that the
recognition of multiple and complementary
identities—with individuals identifying them-
selves as citizens of a state as well as members of
ethnic, religious and other cultural groups—is the
cornerstone of cultural liberty. But movements
hostile to these principles seek to eliminate di-
versity in the name of cultural superiority. Such
movements, and their underlying sources of sup-
port, must be confronted. The question is: How?
This chapter is about coercive movements
for cultural domination—those that are moti-
vated by an ideology of cultural supremacy and
domination and that use coercion to suppress
the cultural identities of others. These move-
ments are a familiar part of the political land-
scape  in  many  countries  and  may  even  be
growing in strength. 

It is important to clarify what is distinctive
about this sort of movement. Many types of
movements use coercive strategies of violence
or intimidation, but not all such movements
are movements for cultural domination. Many
historically  disadvantaged  or  subordinated
groups feel compelled to use coercive strategies,
particularly if they are excluded from or mar-
ginalized within the normal political process.
Their tactics may involve coercion, but their
goal is the pursuit of equal rights, power shar-
ing, autonomy and a more inclusive society (for
example, the Zapatistas in Mexico). Insofar as
the recommendations discussed in chapters 3
and 5 are adopted, the use of coercive strategies
by such groups would no longer be necessary
or justified.

This chapter, by contrast, focuses on move-
ments that typically seek to create ethnically or
religiously  “pure”  states  by  expelling,  coer-
cively assimilating or even killing anyone viewed
as “other”. For such movements the sorts of

This chapter focuses on
movements that typically
seek to create ethnically
or religiously “pure”
states by expelling,
coercively assimilating or
even killing anyone
viewed as “other”

multiculturalist policies defended in this Report
are anathema. It is the intolerance or hatred of
other ways—and organizing to spread that in-
tolerance while denying people choice over their
identities—that makes a movement coercive (fig-
ure 4.1). The target: freedom and diversity.

Such movements are often misleadingly de-
scribed as religious “fundamentalist” movements.
But it is important to emphasize that the focus
in this chapter is both broader and narrower
than the phenomenon of religious fundamental-
ism. On the one hand, many forms of religious
fundamentalism do not believe in the use of vi-
olence to achieve their aims. Nor do they neces-
sarily seek to coercively impose their ideology on
others. They may work solely within the demo-
cratic system. Tibetan or Trappist monks have
strong religious beliefs but do not impinge on the
religious freedom of others. On the other hand,
there are cases of coercive movements for cultural
domination that are not based primarily on reli-
gion, but rather on appeals to racial or ethnic pu-
rity. Thus, religious fundamentalism is neither a
necessary nor a sufficient condition to qualify as
a coercive movement for cultural domination.

Figure
4.1

Movements for cultural domination— 
not the same as all fundamentalist or 
all violent movements

Movements for cultural domination

Supremacist and seek to suppress 
other identities, even with violence 

Fundamentalist

groups
Not all 

fundamentalists 
seek to impose 
their ideology

Violent groups
Not all violent 
groups have an 
agenda of cultural 

domination

Source:

Human Development Report Office.

CONFRONTING MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL DOMINATION

73

The absence of democracy
often creates conditions for
the rise of such
movements, while political
accommodation can often
moderate the sources of
conflict and strengthen
liberal democracy 

How can states respond to such movements
without compromising their democratic princi-
ples? States have two options: to repress such
movements or to undermine their bases of sup-
port by democratically accommodating their un-
derlying concerns and grievances. States have a
legitimate right, and responsibility, to prosecute
criminal acts. At times, the use of force is neces-
sary. But states have to ensure that measures to
restrict movements for cultural domination do not
repress fundamental rights and freedoms. This
chapter argues that repression seldom works.
The absence of democracy often creates conditions
for the rise of such movements, while political ac-
commodation can often moderate the sources of
conflict and strengthen liberal democracy.

MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL DOMINATION—
TODAY’S CHALLENGES

Coercive and intolerant movements are not
new, but they have been on the rise. In many
countries movements for cultural domination are
becoming a prominent force in national politics.
Among the disturbing indications:
• In Europe extreme right parties have had
election successes in several countries, ob-
taining as much as 26.9% of the vote in
Austria in 1999 (figure 4.2).

• In North America and Europe hate crimes
and xenophobic violence—motivated by

Figure
4.2

Some European extreme right parties have won steadily increasing 
vote shares

Trends in national parliamentary elections

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

30

20

10

3

2

1

0

Austria-FPÖ

Italy-MSI/ANa.

Belgium-VB

France-FN

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2003

a. The AN party in Italy was in the electoral alliance Casa Delle Liberta, which included Forza Italia, Lega Nord and the New Italian 

Socialist Party (the alliance recieved 45.4% of the vote.) The vote percentage shown refers to the proportional part of the election, in 
which 155 of the 630 deputies are elected.

Source: Electionworld.org 2004; Ignazi 2003; Jackman and Volpert 1996; Widfeldt 2004.

racist,  ethnic  or  religious  bias—remain
widespread. In 2002 there were 12,933 such
crimes in Germany and 2,391 in Sweden,
3,597 prosecutions in the United Kingdom
and 7,314 offences in the United States.1
These countries are not unique in experi-
encing extreme intolerance; they are among
the few, however, that collect such data.

• In 2003, 13 of 65 (one in five) groups en-
gaging in terrorism could be identified as
seeking  religious  domination  or  ethnic
cleansing.2

• In Africa the Lord’s Resistance Army, which
aims to establish a government based on
the Ten Commandments, has inflicted bru-
tal violence in northern Uganda since 1988,
including kidnapping, torture and rape.
The Interahamwe Hutu rebels, perpetra-
tors of the 1994 genocide, continue to pose
a threat in Rwanda.

• In South Asia organized violent attacks on
Christian churches and missions have in-
creased. India, despite its long secular tradi-
tion, has experienced considerable communal
violence, with rising intensity: 36.2% of ca-
sualties due to communal violence since 1954
occurred in 1990–2002.3 In Pakistan certain
organizations (the Sipah-e-Sahaba, Lashkar-
e-Jhangvi and Tehreek-i-Jafariya)  have
stoked brutal sectarian violence between Sun-
nis and Shiites since 1989 (table 4.1).4

• In South-East Asia the militant Jemaah
Islamiyah,  with  networks  in  Indonsia,
Malaysia, the Philippines and Singapore,
seeks to establish an Asian Islamic state.
Some of its members were convicted for
the Bali bombing in October 2002.

• Such movements are often found on the
fringes, but they can also be segments of a
political party or even a state. In seeking to
impose a particular notion of national iden-
tity and ideology, while suppressing other
cultural identities, coercive states have com-
mitted some of the worst brutalities of recent
history—the genocide of non-communists by
the Khmer Rouge and the ethnic cleansing
of Muslims by Serbian forces in Kosovo.
Political activism for cultural domination
exists in all major religions. In the United States
Christian extremists bomb abortion clinics. In

74

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

TABLE 4.1
Casualties resulting from sectarian
violence in Pakistan, 1989–2003
Year

Number killed

Number injured

1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

18
32
47
58
39
73
59
86
193
157
86
149
261
121
102

102
328
263
261
247
326
189
168
219
231
189
..
495
257
103

.. Not available.
Note: Data for 2000 are for terrorist attacks using explosives only. Data
on casualties and incidents of other terrorist activity are not available.
Source: SATP 2004.

India Hindu extremists have fomented anti-
Muslim  violence  in  Gujarat  even  as  Muslim
extremists have targeted Hindus. The Jewish
Gush Emunim, a militant settler group, aims
to  recreate  Biblical  Israel  and  has  used  vio-
lence to expel Palestinians. The Armed Islamic
Group in Algeria threatens to kill those who do
not pray or women who choose not to wear a
headscarf. In Japan the Aum Shinrikyo cult,
which claimed to be associated with Buddhism,
poisoned  commuters  on  the  Tokyo  subway
system 
1995.
Nor is religion the only wellspring of ex-
tremism. Brutalities on the basis of ethnicity or
race include the attempted extermination of
Jews by the Nazis in Germany and the mas-
sacre of Tutsis by Hutus in Rwanda.

in 

IDENTIFYING MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL
DOMINATION

Movements for cultural domination share some
key elements. They distinguish themselves by
their cultural identity—whether ethnic, racial or
religious—and they attempt to impose their
ideology by coercion, even extermination. They:
• Believe in the superiority of their culture and

reject all others.

• Act on this belief to impose their ideology

on others and create a “pure” society.

• Often, though not always, resort to violence

to achieve their aims.

Movements for cultural
domination are
exclusionary and seek 
to impose their ideology
on others

Movements for cultural domination are su-
premacist and often predatory. They espouse
an ideology that demonizes other identities to jus-
tify the creation of a “pure”, sacred and homo-
geneous homeland. They view anyone who does
not belong to the core community as inferior, un-
wanted and unworthy of respect. The Jemaah Is-
lamiyah blames Indonesia’s problems on “Kaffir
Chinese and Christians”5— this is its justification
for seeking to create an Islamic state at the cost
of  Indonesian  secularism.  The  National
Alliance—the largest neo-Nazi organization in the
United States—wants to create a new government
“answerable to white people only”.6

Movements for cultural domination are ex-
clusionary and seek to impose their ideology on
others. They build support by engendering a
sense of fear that their own values and identity
are under threat (chapter 1). A study of ex-
treme right parties in Europe revealed com-
mon characteristics: they foment xenophobia,
leading to demands to create mono-cultural so-
cieties, to exclude “outsiders” from welfare
policies and to mould a strong state that can pro-
tect the nation from “evil forces”.7 Movements
of cultural domination also target members of
their own community by denigrating and sup-
pressing dissenting opinions and questioning in-
tegrity and loyalty (purity of faith or patriotism).
Other motives may be at work. Many eth-
nic conflicts are also about political or eco-
nomic power (chapter 2), and ethnic identity is
a way to mobilize allies. The Rwandan genocide,
for example, was a manifestation of the strug-
gle for political and economic power between
the Tutsi, excluded under the Hutu-dominated
government, and the Hutu, excluded under
colonial rule. What distinguishes these move-
ments is that they pursue cultural domination
in the name of identity. Inciting an ideology of
hatred against the Tutsis, the Hutu militants re-
defined Hutu identity in racial terms, claiming
that Hutus were the original inhabitants and de-
riding Tutsis as “foreigners” from Ethiopia.

Not all movements for cultural domination
are overtly violent. Threats, harassment and
electoral politics are also common tactics. More-
over, the same organization might use a range
of strategies—propaganda, electoral politics,
soliciting of external support, forcible demands

CONFRONTING MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL DOMINATION

75

When the state fails,
coercive movements 
may step in to offer
education, insurance or
law and order 

for local support, and guerrilla or terrorist cam-
paigns. Electoral politics is not always an alter-
native to coercion—many parties instil fear and
insecurity to gain votes and to threaten members
of other communities. While violence is not a
universal characteristic of coercive movements,
it is a common one. Coercive ideologies spread
intolerance, which can inspire acts of random vi-
olence. The Christian Identity movement in the
United States inspired racist shootings and mur-
ders by members of the Aryan Nations in 1998.

WHY DO THESE MOVEMENTS EXIST—AND
WHY IS THEIR INFLUENCE GROWING?

Ideology.  Discrimination.  Poverty  and  in-
equality. Manipulative leadership. A weak or in-
effectual state. Outside political interventions.
Linkages with alienated diaspora. All are among
the reasons for the rise and staying power of co-
ercive movements for cultural domination. Fail-
ures of development and governance can leave
a vacuum that coercive movements are only
too eager to fill. A consistent characteristic of
such movements is that they offer a simple
(often distorted) explanation for the world’s
failings—and a simple agenda to correct them
(expelling immigrants, killing members of other
communities).

Identity politics often has underlying eco-
nomic explanations of grievance or greed. In
Western Europe extreme right parties have
gained votes when there has been a significant
loss of trust in mainstream parties over issues
ranging from corruption to globalization.8 Re-
ligious movements offer doctrinal salvation to
people who see modernization as alien and re-
pressive in contexts where neither democrati-
zation  nor  economic  development  has
succeeded. So, even a threatened middle class
and professionally frustrated intelligentsia might
join the ranks of the economically and socially
marginalized in coercive movements. This was
evident in the role of the “oppositional lay in-
telligentsia” in the rise of many coercive Islamist
movements until the 1970s. In recent years cler-
ics have played the dominant role.9

When the state fails, coercive movements
may step in to offer education, insurance or law
and order. The Taliban initially helped secure

trading routes. The Gush Emunim briefly pro-
vided security to its members’ settlements in
the West Bank and Gaza. The Adolat brigades
in Uzbekistan gained popularity when they took
the law into their own hands to reduce crime and
lower food prices.

The lack of resources to send children to sec-
ular (government or private) schools is one rea-
son individuals rely on religious schools that
provide free education. In principle, this is un-
objectionable. Islamic schools, for example,
can provide cultural and economic benefits to
students who might otherwise not get an edu-
cation. But in some communities such schools
have also promoted coercive cultural ideologies
and encouraged students to engage in coercive
activities. While 2–3% of Pakistan’s Islamic
schools are said to be recruiting children into
coercive movements, only about half the esti-
mated 15,000–20,000 religious schools are of-
ficially registered.10 It becomes difficult for the
state to oversee and regulate such unregistered
schools. In Thailand 300 of the 550 Islamic
schools offer no secular education (the state is
investigating their involvement in recruiting
and training militants).11

But even state schools can preach intoler-
ance. Nazism was propagated in state schools.
Ideologies of white supremacy were part of the
curriculum in South Africa under the apartheid
regime.  Control  over  education  resources
permits states to revise textbooks to distort his-
tory, target particular communities and en-
courage racist stereotypes.

Leaders define the ideology of a movement.
One of their main functions is to interpret religious
doctrine to persuade members of the “divine”
rightness of their acts. Because militias have a
high risk of defection, leaders might demand that
members prove their loyalty by studying religious
texts for years or by committing acts of destruc-
tion. They also change the organization’s ideol-
ogy or target, depending on the circumstances.
And leaders convert wanton acts of coercion into
a corporate effort. They recruit, indoctrinate and
train their cadres (sometimes children). They
plan terrorist acts and prepare publicity materi-
als. And they secure funds to compensate family
members of cadres who die in action and are
then glorified as heroes (box 4.1).

76

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Long-term immigrant communities abroad
can contribute to the rise of coercive move-
ments in their countries of origin. As members
of the diaspora they struggle between retaining
their original identity and cultural traditions
and adapting to their new environment. When
they feel insecure or unappreciated, they may
separate themselves from mainstream society.
There is evidence of such dissatisfaction among
Muslim populations in Germany and the Nether-
lands.12 Coercive movements can exploit such
sentiments to tap the diaspora for financial and
political support. In the early 1990s “weekend
fighters” came from Germany to fight for their
ethnic groups in Bosnia.13

Many  of  these  underlying  factors  in  the
rise of movements of cultural domination also
inspire nationalist movements. Many of these
factors  are  the  reasons  why  discriminated-
against groups struggle for political rights. But
many movements for autonomy can be liberal
and  recognize  the  importance  of  accommo-
dating diversity within an autonomous region.
By contrast, movements for cultural domination
can arise even within the majority and politically
dominant group. Racists do not seek territor-
ial autonomy; instead, they target all who are
viewed as “other” or inferior. Movements for
cultural  domination  are  adept  at  using  peo-
ple’s  genuine  grievances  to  gain  supporters.
What distinguishes them is their agenda of cul-
tural superiority and elimination of diversity and
tolerance.

DILEMMAS FOR DEMOCRACIES—RESTRICTIVE
OR ACCOMMODATIVE MEASURES?

Coercive movements can be a powerfully desta-
bilizing force. A challenge for all states, they pre-
sent a particular dilemma for democratic ones.
If movements for cultural domination use violent
means, threaten law and order or deny the human
rights of their members, governments have every
right to take forceful action against them. But the
problem is much broader than crime and pun-
ishment. In states that respect the right of free
speech, movements for cultural domination use
the freedoms of democratic societies to try to un-
dermine them. It is possible—indeed, common—
to advocate exclusion, discrimination and the

denial of civil and political liberties without ever
breaking the law.

The dilemma is that democratic states, which
hold their values of freedom dear, do not want
to stand accused of improperly restricting free
speech and rights of assembly. Nor do they
want to ignore threats to communal peace or in-
timidation of minority groups. If the rights of
some groups are restricted, while the rest of so-
ciety enjoys them, there is a danger of provok-
ing  extreme,  even  violent  reactions.  The
challenge is to protect freedom while discour-
aging coercive movements.

Coercive  movements  tend  to  be  more
powerful, and threatening, in non-democratic
states. They make themselves heard through
violence and extremism because the public
sphere is otherwise closed to them. By defini-
tion, non-democratic states embody little or no
allegiance to such values as free speech or the
right to organize politically. For non-democra-
tic regimes the trade-off between liberty and re-
pression is less acute because there is less liberty
to start with.

For non-democratic governments, moving
towards more liberal politics can be an effective 

Coercive movements can
be a powerfully
destabilizing force

BOX 4.1

Leadership, ideological manipulation and recruiting supporters

Leaders of movements for cultural domina-
tion build group identities and mobilize their
followers to adopt coercive methods against
others. Leaders use their organizational skills
to gain supporters, modify ideologies to suit
their needs, arrange finances at home and
abroad and give weapons and training to
militant cadres. Such leaders pursue two
core aims: creating an ideology of intolerance
and altering the balance of political power.
The easiest way to breed intolerance is
to  use  self-serving  interpretations  of  his-
tory to describe and vilify other groups. By
doing so, leaders emphasize the quest for
justice and focus on the losses their group
allegedly  suffered.  The  focus  is  not  on
solving real grievances but on using osten-
sible grievances as rallying cries. The Web
site of the Bajrang Dal, a Hindu extremist
group, accuses the Indian state of appeas-
ing “anti-national elements (muslims)” and
demands that Indian Muslims “prove that

they  are  not  the  heirs  and  followers”  of
past invaders who destroyed Hindu temples.
In the United States after the 1993 Waco
tragedy involving Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation (FBI) agents and the Branch Da-
vidian cult, leaders of religious cults and
white  supremacist  organizations  tried  to
rally support by attacking the federal gov-
ernment for perpetrating what they claimed
was an injustice.

Leaders also seek to change the struc-
ture  of  governance,  such  as  substituting
theological law for secular rules, repudiat-
ing  electoral  processes  or  restricting  the
constitutional  rights  of  others.  All  these
measures serve to impose one group’s au-
thority and superiority over others. Notwith-
standing the violent activities of the Tamil
Tigers  (LTTE)  in  Sri  Lanka,  in  the  past
Buddhist  monks  have  regularly  opposed
any moves towards granting autonomy to
Tamils in the northeast.

Source: ADL 2003; The Economist 2000; Grove and Carter 1999; HinduUnity.org 2004; IRR 2003; Stern 2003.

CONFRONTING MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL DOMINATION

77

Restricting the activities
of coercive movements is
only the first step 

strategy (box 4.2). Democratic societies, better
suited to dealing with movements of cultural
domination, have more options.

RESTRICTIVE MEASURES

Restricting the activities of coercive movements
is the first step. When these movements threaten,
intimidate and violently target other groups,
states need to restrain them, even if that re-
quires the use of force. Common measures to re-
strict (and eventually eliminate) the activities
of coercive movements include:
• Erecting institutional barriers against coer-

cive political parties.

• Enacting  legislation  and  using  judicial

intervention.

• Applying force.

Erecting barriers against coercive political
parties. Institutional barriers that exclude certain
types of organizations from participating freely in
electoral politics or civil society are a common way
for democratic societies to keep cultural ex-
tremism from infecting the larger society. Barri-
ers include requiring a minimum share of votes
to enter the legislature, controlling campaign
funds, restricting access to broadcast services and

banning certain types of political parties through
constitutional provisions. Non-democratic gov-
ernments use similar measures to suppress op-
position, compromising their ability to deal with
coercive movements when a specific threat arises
because there are no lines of communication.

In Germany a political party must get 5% of
the national vote to take a seat in the legislature.
This threshold has helped to exclude from power
all major extreme right parties since the end of
the Second World War—the National Democ-
ratic Party (NPD), Republican Party (REP) and
the German People’s Union (DVU). Israel’s
threshold of 1.5%, by contrast, was not high
enough to keep Rabbi Kahane of the racist Kach
Party from winning a seat in the Knesset in 1984.
In response, parliament adopted section 7A of
the Basic Law, which blocks a slate of candidates
from participating in elections if its purposes in-
clude, among others, “denial of the democratic
character of the state” or “incitement to racism”.
The government banned Kach in 1988 for inciting
racism and declared it a terrorist organization in
1994. In both Germany and Israel coercive
groups, even if permitted to contest elections,
found their freedoms constrained when author-
ities identified them as hostile to the constitution.

BOX 4.2

Central Asia—the danger in restricting political and cultural liberties

By the end of Soviet rule in Central Asia Islam
was polarized and new Islamist movements had
emerged. There was official Islam, as regulated
(and suppressed) by the Soviet state; traditional
Islam, as organized around unofficial clergy;
and reformist Islam, as espoused by the ahl
al-Quran—“people of the Book”—who wanted
to establish “pure Islam” and believed in strict
adherence to Sharia law. With the repression of
movements expressing popular aspirations, each
successive religious movement became more
ideologically extreme and coercive.

Repression seldom works …
In  the  early  1990s  the  pan-Central  Asian  Is-
lamic Revival Party (IRP) sought to purify Islam
but lacked a coherent structure. Despite being
generally  moderate,  the  IRP  was  banned  in
Uzbekistan in 1991. Around the same time the
Adolat (justice) movement became a force, de-
manding  that  Uzbekistan  become  an  Islamic
state. It gained popularity as bands of volunteers

patrolled the Ferghana Valley to reduce crime
and demand lower food prices. Fearing alleged
links with the IRP, authorities prosecuted Adolat
leaders. This only boosted their popular appeal
and  forced  the  movement  underground.  In
1999–2000  the  Islamic  Movement  of  Uzbek-
istan (IMU), headed by former Adolat leaders,
sought to depose the Uzbek government and es-
tablish an Islamic state. 

Another Islamist group, the Hizb-ut Tahrir
(HT), has gained supporters throughout the
Ferghana Valley region of Kyrgyzstan, Tajik-
istan and Uzbekistan. It wants to establish an
Islamic caliphate in Central Asia. But it strongly
criticizes the violence of the IMU, relying in-
stead on grass-roots campaigns, distribution of
leaflets and similar tactics. However, the HT
also espouses radical ideas, rejecting democ-
racy, imposing Sharia and threatening the pos-
sible use of force in future. The HT has been
banned in all three states, but its popularity has
not waned. 

Source: Cornell and Spector 2002; The Economist 2003b; Rotar’ 2002; Rubin 2004; Zelkina 1999.

… but democratic accommodation can
Tajikistan’s civil war (1992–97) was largely a
power struggle between different ethnic groups.
After the United Tajik Opposition had been ex-
pelled from its strongholds, religious activists
took over its leadership and renamed the group
the Movement for the Islamic Revival of Tajik-
istan (MIRT), trying to reshape it as a religious
force. In areas under its control the MIRT threat-
ened to punish people who did not pray and
demanded that women wear veils. Many mod-
erate opposition leaders left the MIRT. After a
peace agreement in 1997 former opposition
members (including those from the relegalized
Islamic Revival Party of Tajikistan) received gov-
ernment positions. More moderate leaders joined
the party. The IRPT has kept its commitment—
surrendering weapons, upholding the constitu-
tion, supporting a secular democratic state. The
IRPT continues to advocate inclusion of religious
values in the legal system, though it has limited
political influence.

78

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

There is a practical
argument against the use
of force as the first option:
it often does not work

Such bans on political participation may be
legitimate if a party has been implicated in crim-
inal behaviour. But restrictions on political par-
ties only because they adhere to a particular
ideology might not work for two reasons. First,
a movement that expresses a genuine public
concern seldom withers away. Second, opposi-
tion against the regime can increase, and take
more extreme forms, if the public considers
such bans illegitimate. Morocco’s experience
shows that wider political participation can in-
crease moderation. After constitutional changes
expanded the electoral playing field, the Islamist
Justice and Development Party became the main
opposition party in 2002. Within a year its lead-
ers were arguing less about imposing Islamic law
and more about advancing development.

Enacting  legislation  and  using  judicial
intervention. Laws restricting coercive groups
differ in scope and implementation. Despite
strong anti-racism laws in Sweden the Parliament
rejected a ban on extreme right groups. But at
times stringent laws against terrorism become
necessary. In the United Kingdom the Anti-
Terrorism, Crime and Security Act of 2001 ex-
tended its scope to include both racially and
religiously aggravated crimes. This law and
India’s Prevention of Terrorism Act of 2002
extend the period of detention of suspects with-
out trial. Malaysia and Singapore have used
similar provisions for decades.

But there are lively debates about anti-terror
legislation almost everywhere—Germany, In-
donesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States—be-
cause there is also a danger that anti-terror laws,
enacted to deal with a crisis, will be abused or
will remain in use in perpetuity. It is important
to regularly review these laws for their need
and effectiveness to justify their continuing ap-
plication. The Indian government allowed its
earlier anti-terror law to lapse in 1995 after ac-
cusations of human rights abuses. The UK anti-
terror  law  was  introduced  as  a  temporary
measure in 1974 (in the wake of Northern Ire-
land-related terrorism) and amended in 1976,
1984, 1989 and 1996. When made permanent,
such laws compromise guarantees of civil lib-
erties in democratic societies. The UK legisla-
tion has no expiry date.

The effectiveness of laws that seek to cut the
ground out from under movements for cultural
domination depends not on how much they re-
strict civil liberties but on how much they pro-
tect them. The role of a functioning civilian
justice system is critical for prosecuting coercive
movements and individuals but also to serve as
a check on government actions.

Courts have come to different conclusions
about the proper balance between protecting lib-
erty and permitting the spread of hatred. In
1996 the Swedish Supreme Court interpreted a
1948 law that prohibited agitation against other
ethnic groups (hets mot folkgrupp) to allow the
banning of any display of emblems, symbols or
clothing connected with racial hatred. The Dutch
are also working through such complexities. In
early 2001 the mayor of the municipality of
Kerkrade invoked the Law on Public Events to
forbid a march by the Netherlands People’s
Union, an extreme right party with a racist ide-
ology. A court in Maastricht overturned the
order, and the march took place. The legiti-
macy of actions rests on acceptance of interna-
tionally recognized laws and norms. Coercive
movements often develop international net-
works. If due process of law is not followed in
one country, then a movement might gain sym-
pathy and support in other countries as well.

Applying force. All states, democratic or
not, have a right to use force when faced with
violent movements. What matters is how they
use it. The use of force loses much or all of its
legitimacy when the state restricts political rights,
avoids civilian jurisdiction or uses torture.

There is a practical argument against the
use of force as the first option: it often does not
work. Repression of the generally moderate
Islamic Revival Party in Uzbekistan in the early
1990s led to the growth of extremist groups
like the Adolat movement, and by 1999 the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan was attempt-
ing to overthrow the government and engaging
in terrorism (see box 4.2).

Ensuring that force is used legitimately is not
always easy. Force should be used only against
groups that are coercive, not against groups de-
manding rights for political participation. It is
sometimes difficult to make that distinction,
however. Members of the same movement might

CONFRONTING MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL DOMINATION

79

States should go beyond
restrictive measures to
contain intolerant
ideologies and coercive
movements

espouse different ideologies and objectives,
some coercive, others not. States become wary
that giving freedom to a coercive movement
could encourage more intolerance. Egypt shows
just how difficult it has been to identify coercive
movements—and yet how important it is to
choose the right policy response (box 4.3).

But certain strategies should be avoided.
States have resorted to torture, arguing that it is
justified under certain circumstances. No mat-
ter how infrequent or moderate the use, there is
always the danger of abuse when the law con-
dones such actions. In 1987 an Israeli judicial
commission recommended allowing “moderate
physical pressure” in interrogations.14 But the
abuse of Palestinian prisoners by Shin Bet, the
security service, became widespread. Recogniz-
ing this reality, the Israeli Supreme Court declared
all such methods illegal in 1999. As of March
2004, 58 of 191 United Nations member states
had not ratified the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treat-
ment or Punishment (indicator table 30).

Most democratic states, and even some non-
democratic ones, apply five basic principles in
their judicial processes: no arbitrary detention,

no torture, habeas corpus, access to trial by
civilian magistrate and access to a defence
lawyer. Confronting coercive movements does
not mean that these principles have to be com-
promised. Doing so makes restrictive measures
repressive—and even ineffective.

DEMOCRATIC ACCOMMODATION

States should avoid using only restrictive mea-
sures to contain intolerant ideologies and coer-
cive movements. Why? Because the measures can
undermine democratic principles—and are fre-
quently ineffective. There is no evidence, for
example, that banning political parties and move-
ments with a racist agenda ends racism. Move-
ments  for  cultural  domination  exploit  real
grievances; if banned, they simply go under-
ground. Restriction, especially repression, pro-
vokes resistance not only from the movements—it
can also turn popular opinion against the state.
Coercive movements are sustainable at least
in part because they give expression to peo-
ple’s concerns and sentiments. Such concerns
can be addressed only if they can be expressed
and understood.

BOX 4.3

Egypt—distinguishing between moderates and extremists

Islamist groups are not all alike. Treating them
so is not only poor politics, it is also ineffective
in addressing the concerns that animate them.
At the same time, distinguishing between groups
and their ideologies is not always easy. This can
be seen clearly in Egypt.

For the better part of a century Egypt has
contended with Islamist movements. The Mus-
lim Brotherhood (founded in 1928), al-Jama’a
al-Islamiyya and al-Jihad are the most promi-
nent. From the 1940s to the 1960s the Muslim
Brotherhood had a violent element involving
high-profile  assassinations  and  armed  plots
against  the  government.  But  in  the  past  two
decades some of its leaders have rejected rev-
olutionary  and  violent  methods  (they  claim
completely), even suggesting that violence con-
tradicts Islamic Sharia. 

The Muslim Brotherhood’s stated objectives
now are the establishment of an Islamic democ-
racy based on freedom, and the creation of a so-
ciety  with  social  justice  and  security  for  all
citizens. It seeks an Egypt governed by Sharia

law, while emphasizing the need to work within
the institutions of democracy.

The  Egyptian  state  allowed  the  Muslim
Brotherhood  to  run  for  election,  in  alliance
with other parties, in 1984 and 1987, without
officially recognizing it. The Brotherhood con-
tested in alliance with other parties (Wafd in
1984,  Liberal  and  Socialist  Labour  in  1987)
and scored impressive gains—initially 8 seats,
then 36. However, partly due to internal con-
flicts, the Brotherhood was equivocal in con-
demning violent acts committed by other groups
in the early 1990s. Such ambiguity about its ide-
ology has undercut the Brotherhood’s attempts
to position itself as a moderate political alter-
native. In the 1990s the government arrested
hundreds  of  Brotherhood  members  on  the
grounds that they were supporting terrorism.
Deciding  how  to  deal  with  the  Muslim
Brotherhood is difficult. Egypt would be in a
stronger position, however, if it acted from a po-
sition free from accusations of human rights
abuses. Excluding one of the country’s promi-

nent political organizations from public life is un-
tenable in the long term.

Al-Jama’a al-Islamiyya and al-Jihad, which
originated in the 1970s, have relied on violent
tactics  to  secure  their  objective  of  imposing
Sharia. The most gruesome attack was the mas-
sacre of 68 foreigners and Egyptians at a tem-
ple in Luxor in 1997 (the Muslim Brotherhood
denounced the attack). Since then these groups
have suffered ideological divisions. Some lead-
ers now reject violence, while others defend it.
The attacks on US embassies in Kenya and Tan-
zania in 1998 (both groups allegedly contributed
to them) highlighted the threats extremist ele-
ments pose. Alleged links to al-Qaeda have fur-
ther eroded their claims to political participation.
They are not allowed to enter elections.

As the world seeks solutions to the threats
posed by international terrorism, the Egyptian
experience shows how difficult it is to distinguish
between moderate and extremist groups. But
opening the political sphere to the moderates can
help to reduce the appeal of the extremists.

Source: Abed-Kotob 1995; Campagna 1996; Fahmy 1998; Gerges 2000.

80

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Allowing political parties that espouse co-
ercive ideologies to participate in elections might
provide a democratic channel for expressing
resentment, thereby reducing violence. The risk
is that such parties, on gaining power, might then
try to suppress cultural freedoms. Should the
state ban parties that want to coercively impose
Islamic Sharia law? Should a white-power group
in Sweden be allowed to operate freely?

This Report has already argued that univer-
sal values of human rights and individual freedoms
must not be sacrificed to claims of tradition or cus-
tomary law. But repressing a party for its ideol-
ogy risks undermining democratic processes and
might encourage the excluded to turn to vio-
lence. The experience of several countries suggests
four strategies to guide the actions of democra-
tic states—strategies that non-democracies can
learn from:
• Allowing normal democratic processes to

function.

• Prosecuting hate crimes.
• Paying attention to school curricula.
• Helping communities come to terms with

past hatred and violence.

Allowing normal democratic processes to
function. Suppression of political rights on
grounds of ideology seldom succeeds. In Algeria
a military intervention in 1992 annulled the
election of the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS)
party. This led to the emergence of a more mil-
itant group, the Armed Islamist Group (GIA).
The result: more than a decade of deadly vio-
lence and nearly 100,000 lives lost.15 Political ac-
commodation can split coercive movements
between those prepared to participate in elec-
tions or government and those not (box 4.4).
Mainstream parties in Europe tend to avoid
links with racist, anti-immigrant parties, but po-
litical realities have at times coaxed them into
bringing extreme right parties into a coalition.
Austria’s extreme right Freedom Party (FPÖ)
has been part of regional coalition governments
since the 1970s. After winning 26.9% of the
vote in 1999, it became a partner in the national
coalition government. But this was on the con-
dition that its leader, Jörg Haider, not be part
of the government; he even stepped down as
party chairman in 2000. Government policy re-
mained moderate: Austrian immigration policy

Democratic
accommodation can 
shed the hard light of
reality on the fringe 
appeal of extremism

BOX 4.4

Algeria—discontent, democratization and violence

The Algerian civil war is often portrayed as a con-
flict between Islamic fundamentalists and the
state. But the rise of intolerant and violent groups
resulted from failed democratization. Accom-
modative strategies in recent years have yielded
some initial positive results even as several other
challenges remain.

After an economic collapse in the 1980s
pressure for greater democratization increased.
The National Liberation Front (FLN) govern-
ment, which had ruled Algeria since indepen-
dence, introduced constitutional changes in 1989
to legalize political parties and curtail the role of
the military. It had also encouraged an Islamist
movement by significantly increasing religious
spending from 1982 to 1987. Beginning in 1988
the country prepared for its first multiparty
election, and the government dramatically cut re-
ligious spending to dampen the Islamist move-
ment’s growing appeal. In the December 1991
elections the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), which
wanted to establish an Islamic state, won 47% of
the vote in the first round. With the election
outcome almost certain, the government halted

the electoral process in early 1992. Democracy
had failed in Algeria.

While the failure had little to do with Islam,
Islam was a major factor in the crisis. An armed
Islamist movement had begun organizing in Al-
geria in 1990. Many groups, believing that democ-
racy was not the route to an Islamic state, stayed
out of the FIS. The FIS, arguing for democratic
processes, at first marginalized violent groups. But
it started losing credibility in the aftermath of the
1992 coup. By 1994, when armed groups op-
posing  dialogue  with  the  “apostate  regime”
(Hafez 2000, p. 577) united as the Armed Islamic
Group (GIA), the FIS formed its own military
wing—the Islamic Salvation Army (AIS).

The differences in ideology were substantial.
The GIA targeted civilians; the AIS declared such
methods un-Islamic and focused on military tar-
gets. The GIA considered violent jihad an Islamic
imperative; the AIS viewed it as only one of many
means to build an Islamic state. The GIA portrayed
an uncompromising struggle against infidels and
apostates; the AIS and FIS appealed to the pres-
ident to restore democracy and political rights.

These varying interpretations of Islam and its role
indicate why generalizations about Islam and Is-
lamist movements in Algeria are unhelpful.

Since 1997, when the AIS negotiated a cease-
fire with the military in return for a general
amnesty, Algeria has made some moves towards
reconciliation and democracy. In 1999 the gov-
ernment released political prisoners and passed
a Law of Civil Reconciliation to extend amnesty
to rebels who had not killed civilians, placed
bombs in public places or committed rape. In
elections in 2002 two Islamist-oriented parties
earned seats in the National Assembly.

Algeria has a long road ahead. The FIS con-
tinues to be disqualified from elections. The
GIA and the recently established Salafist Group
for Preaching and Combat continue to threaten
violence. Demands for cultural recognition by the
Berbers are another source of tension. Algeria’s
experience exemplifies the argument presented
throughout this Report: religion and ethnicity are
not intrinsically causes of conflict, and democ-
racy is a necessary but not sufficient condition
for guaranteeing cultural freedoms.

Source: Hafez 2000; Middle East Institute 2003; Testas 2002; Tremlett 2002.

CONFRONTING MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL DOMINATION

81

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION

Difference is not a threat but a source of strength

Most societies in the world today include more
than one culture, one community or one tradi-
tion. All too often in such a situation one element
may seek to dominate the society as a whole.
That approach can generate tension and conflict.
It is in the interests of all to work together to build
a society beneficial to all its members.

Northern Ireland and the European Union
are particularly strong examples of how the ex-
istence of more than one culture can prove to be
positive in the building and development of so-
ciety through a process of conflict resolution.

It is now almost four decades since the be-
ginnings of the civil rights movement in North-
ern Ireland, which has sought by peaceful means
the same rights and opportunities for all the
people living in Northern Ireland, irrespective of
their background or religion. Throughout those
years I have maintained that, when you have a
divided people, violence has absolutely no role
to play in healing the division or in solving the
problems—it only deepens the division. The
problem can be resolved only through peace, sta-
bility, agreement, consensus and partnership.
There cannot be victory for one side or the other.

So long as the legitimate rights of each com-
munity in Northern Ireland were not accom-
modated together in a new political framework
acceptable to all, the situation would continue to
give rise to conflict and instability. There needed
to be agreement.

That is the purpose of the 1998 Belfast Agree-
ment. It represents an accommodation that pro-
tects and promotes the identities and rights of all
political traditions, groups and individuals. No one
is asked to yield cherished convictions or beliefs.
Everyone is asked to respect the views and rights
of others as equal to his or her own.

I also believe that the European Union is
the best example of conflict prevention and con-
flict resolution in international history. It is im-
portant that we maintain and build on that
record.  European  visionaries  demonstrated 
that difference—whether of race, religion or
nationality—is not a threat, but is natural, positive
and a source of strength. It should never be the
source of hatred or conflict. A fundamental prin-
ciple of peace is respect for diversity.

I entered the European Parliament in 1979 on
the occasion of the first direct election to the

parliament by the voters of its then nine member
states. I will soon be stepping down from elected
public life, delighted in the knowledge that in
those 25 years the European Union has progressed
to the point that it will by then have expanded to
include 25 member states. This will end the arti-
ficial division of our continent created after the Sec-
ond World War and reunite our European family.
The European Parliament’s location is in Stras-
bourg, on the River Rhine, on the border between
France and Germany. When I first visited Stras-
bourg I walked across the bridge from Strasbourg
in France to Kehl in Germany and reflected on the
tens of millions of people who had been killed in
the numerous wars waged for control of territory.
The European Union has replaced those conflicts
with co-operation between its people. It has trans-
formed its wide range of traditions from a source
of conflict into a source of unifying strength.

John Hume, MP MEP
1998 Nobel Peace Prize Winner

did not become dramatically harsher, as had
been feared. And in 2002 the FPÖ won only 10%
of the vote, suffering from internal party divisions
(see figure 4.2).

Democratic accommodation can shed the
hard light of reality on the fringe appeal of ex-
tremism. Extreme right parties might initially
show populism-driven electoral success, but it is
not always easy to maintain the momentum. Many
European extreme right parties, like the Denmark
Progress Party (FRPd) or the German Republi-
can Party (REP), openly contested elections but
were rendered irrelevant when they received
miniscule proportions of the vote. Others like the
Social Movement Tricolour Flame (MS-FT) in
Italy got barely any support (figure 4.3).

Non-democratic countries, by definition, have
a narrow public space for political contests. This
can encourage the growth of coercive movements,
but it also limits the state’s ability to confront
them in a way that the public deems legitimate.
Prosecuting hate crimes. Failure to prose-
cute hate crimes only encourages coercive move-
ments to advance their agenda through threats

and violence. Legislation that specifically tar-
gets hate crimes is controversial. Critics ask why
bigotry should be considered more reprehensible

Figure
4.3

Democratic participation can expose the 
fringe appeal of extreme right parties
Share of vote in national parliamentary elections

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

7

6

3

2

1

0

Denmark-FRPd

Germany-REP

Italy-MS-FT

Sweden-NyD

1990

1995

2000

2002

Source:

Electionworld.org 2004; Ignazi 2003; Jackman and Volpert 1996; 
Widfeldt 2004; Susning.nu 2004; Swedish Election Authority 2002.

82

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

than, say, greed, and claim that such laws come
close to prosecuting thoughts not deeds, perilous
territory for democracies.

The case for hate crime legislation rests on
two premises. First, hate crimes have symbolic
relevance—they are intended to send a mes-
sage to an entire community and therefore, in
a sense, threaten all its members. The crime is
greater than the physical or verbal assault in-
volved. Second, a potential victim can do little
to prevent attack. Since it is religious or ethnic
identity that motivates such crimes—often im-
mutable characteristics—the threat is constant.
Cultural liberty is about allowing individuals
to make choices; hate crime is about coercing
them into a straitjacket of someone else’s design.
Having hate crime laws on the books is not
enough. To identify potential threats countries
need to collect data on hate crimes or xeno-
phobic violence. The European Monitoring
Centre on Racism and Xenophobia, which as-
sists EU countries with standard procedures
for collecting such data, undertakes compara-
tive analysis for the region. States must also
have the political will to take a stand against in-
tolerance. Of the 191 member states of the
United Nations, 56 states (29%) have not ratified

the International Convention on the Preven-
tion and Punishment of the Crime of Geno-
cide (indicator table 30).

Paying attention to school curricula. States
should ensure that religious schools are not
exempt from state regulation and that their stu-
dents receive a broad-based education. Some
countries have made encouraging efforts in this
direction. Pakistan recently sanctioned a $100
million programme for including secular subjects
in the curricula of religious schools.16 In Malaysia
the government is introducing the J-QAF pro-
ject to incorporate a comprehensive Islamic stud-
ies syllabus in the national education system;
students will thus get both religious and secular
education. In Indonesia since the early 20th
century  the  Muhammadiyah  and  Nahdlatul
Ulama movements have run schools that have the
same syllabus as public schools in addition to their
religious curriculum. The State University of
Islamic Studies also promotes humanities and so-
cial sciences within Islamic education systems.
The curriculum of state schools also de-
serves attention. UNESCO has been engaged in
several projects in Central America, western
and southern Africa and southeastern Europe
for the promotion of human rights in teacher

States must have the
political will to take a
stand against intolerance 

BOX 4.5

United States—targeting intolerance and hatred

The United States has used a mix of strategies to
respond to cultural extremism. These strategies
have targeted intolerance, but they have not
compromised fundamental rights and freedoms.

Protecting freedom of speech
and expression
The United States targeted the Ku Klux Klan in
the 1920s and American Nazis in the 1930s. But
since then the evolution of the US legal system has
been towards strongly defending the First Amend-
ment to the Constitution, which guarantees free-
dom of speech and the right to assemble peaceably.
A famous case during the 1970s involved the neo-
Nazi National Socialist Party (NSPA), which de-
manded the right to march in Skokie, Illinois, a
town with a large Jewish population. In 1978 the
Illinois Supreme Court permitted the NSPA to
march, arguing that “[s]peech can be restricted
only when it interferes in a physical way with other
legitimate activities” (Pehdazur 2001, p. 349).

Recording hate crimes
Yet the United States also has been recording
hate crimes for a longer time than many other
countries. In 1990 Congress enacted the Hate
Crimes Statistics Act and amended it in 1994.
Hate crimes are categorized according to the
bias-motivation for a criminal act—race, reli-
gion, ethnicity, disability and sexual orientation.
Law enforcement agencies have several guide-
lines to objectively determine whether a crime
was motivated by a bias—clothing, drawings
and symbols, oral and written comments, acts on
religious holidays and so forth. Lately, debate has
begun on extending the scope of biases consid-
ered as hate crimes. A bill was introduced in the
Oregon State Senate to extend the law to eco-
terrorist and anti-capitalist actions.

Prosecuting militants
In the United States criminal prosecutions and civil
law suits have been pursued with vigour against

violent racist groups, with long jail sentences
handed down to their leaders. Consequently, sev-
eral groups have become bankrupt and fallen
into disarray in recent years—Aryan Nations, the
Creativity Movement, Greater Ministries Inter-
national. Others, like the Hammerskin Nation,
have also suffered but continue to pose a threat.

Helping communities
Finally, the Department of Justice has tried to
resolve hate crimes at the community level. It es-
tablished the Community Relations Service in
1964 to provide several services targeted at re-
ducing hate crime activity: mediation to resolve
communitywide tensions; technical assistance
and training for local officials, police officers
and residents on how to recognize hate crimes
and share information; public awareness pro-
grammes and planning for contingencies such as
marches and demonstrations that might exac-
erbate tensions.

Source: ADL 2003; De Kadt 2004; DoJ 2001; FBI 1999; Levin 2001; Pehdazur 2001.

CONFRONTING MOVEMENTS FOR CULTURAL DOMINATION

83

training programmes. The Asia-Pacific Centre
of Education for International Understanding,
in the Republic of Korea, develops education
curricula to promote understanding of diverse
cultures in the region. Cameroon’s teacher train-
ing programmes include courses on tolerance
and international understanding. Subjects like
ethics and civics have become compulsory in pri-
mary and secondary education. Croatia has
begun  producing  textbooks  incorporating
human rights education in both national (nurs-
ery, primary and secondary) and non-formal
education programmes.

Helping communities come to terms with
past hatred and violence. Coercive movements,
often the product of entrenched historical an-
tagonisms, cannot be wiped out unless these an-
tagonisms are dealt with. South Africa’s Truth
and Reconciliation Commission set in motion
successful efforts in this direction. The use of
community institutions (like the Gacaca Courts
in Rwanda) appears to have had some success
in healing wounds in the community. Commu-
nities in Angola and Mozambique are using tra-
ditional purification rituals to help traumatized
child soldiers re-establish relations with their

families and larger communities. In Sweden
joint projects between police and schools and
youth centres have reduced ethnic tensions and
provide alternative activities for youth.17

As countries like Afghanistan emerge from
violent conflict, efforts to keep coercive move-
ments at bay require strong state institutions (in-
clusive constitutions, fair legislative processes
and independent judiciaries) and sound strate-
gies  for  reintegration.  Over  several  decades
the United States has used such a mix of poli-
cies  to  effectively  target  racist  groups  and
individuals. Criminal acts are met with force,
but  fundamental  rights  have  also  been  pro-
tected (box 4.5).

*

*

*

Movements for cultural domination exist be-
cause they tap into people’s real grievances and
concerns. Wishing them away, pretending they
do not exist or simply outlawing them only gives
them more legitimacy to grow. To choke off
coercive movements for cultural domination,
states need to respond constructively, openly and
legitimately to the forces that animate them.

To choke off coercive
movements for cultural
domination, states need
to respond constructively,
openly and legitimately 
to the forces that 
animate them 

84

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Policies that regulate the
advance of economic
globalization must
promote, rather than
quash, cultural freedoms 

CHAPTER 5

Globalization and cultural choice

“I do not want my house to be walled in on
all  sides  and  my  windows  to  be  stuffed.  I
want the cultures of all lands to be blown
about my house as freely as possible. But I
refuse to be blown off my feet by any.”

—Mahatma Gandhi1

When historians write of the world’s recent his-
tory, they are likely to reflect on two trends: the
advance of globalization and the spread of
democracy. Globalization has been the more
contentious, because it has effects both good and
bad, and democracy has opened space for peo-
ple to protest the bad effects. So, controversies
rage over the environmental, economic and so-
cial consequences of globalization. But there is
another domain of globalization, that of cul-
ture and identity, which is just as controversial
and even more divisive because it engages or-
dinary people, not just economists, government
officials and political activists.

Globalization has increased contacts be-
tween people and their values, ideas and ways
of life in unprecedented ways (feature 5.1). Peo-
ple are travelling more frequently and more
widely. Television now reaches families in the
deepest rural areas of China. From Brazilian
music in Tokyo to African films in Bangkok, to
Shakespeare in Croatia, to books on the history
of the Arab world in Moscow, to the CNN
world news in Amman, people revel in the di-
versity of the age of globalization.

For many people this new diversity is ex-
citing, even empowering, but for some it is dis-
quieting and disempowering. They fear that
their country is becoming fragmented, their val-
ues lost as growing numbers of immigrants
bring new customs and international trade and
modern communications media invade every
corner of the world, displacing local culture.
Some even foresee a nightmarish scenario of
cultural homogenization—with diverse national

cultures giving way to a world dominated by
Western values and symbols. The questions go
deeper. Do economic growth and social progress
have to mean adoption of dominant Western val-
ues? Is there only one model for economic pol-
icy, political institutions and social values?

The fears come to a head over investment,
trade and migration policies. Indian activists
protest the patenting of the neem tree by foreign
pharmaceutical companies. Anti-globalization
movements protest treating cultural goods the
same as any other commodity in global trade and
investment agreements. Groups in Western Eu-
rope oppose the entry of foreign workers and
their families. What these protesters have in
common is the fear of losing their cultural iden-
tity, and each contentious issue has sparked
widespread political mobilization.

How should governments respond? This
chapter argues that policies that regulate the ad-
vance of economic globalization—the move-
ments of people, capital, goods and ideas—must
promote, rather than quash, cultural freedoms.
It looks at three policy challenges that are among
the most divisive in today’s public debates:
• Indigenous people, extractive industries
and traditional knowledge. Controversy
rages over the importance of extractive in-
dustries for national economic growth and
the socio-economic and cultural exclusion
and dislocation of indigenous people that
often accompany mining activities. Indige-
nous people’s traditional knowledge is rec-
ognized by the Convention on Biological
Diversity but not by the global intellectual
property rights regime as embodied in the
World Intellectual Property Organization
and the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellec-
tual Property Rights agreement.

• Trade in cultural goods. International trade
and  investment  negotiations  have  been
divided over the question of a “cultural

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

85

Feature 5.1   What’s new about globalization’s implications for identity politics?
Cross-border flows of investment and knowl-
people  had  both  communal  land  ownership
edge, films and other cultural goods, and peo-
and mineral rights over their territory and that
ple are not new phenomena. Indigenous people
attempts to dispossess them constituted racial
have struggled for centuries to maintain their
discrimination.  Indigenous  people  now  own
identity and way of life against the tide of for-
or control more than 16% of Australia, with the
eign  economic  investment  and  the  new  set-
Indigenous Land Corporation expected to be
tlers  that  often  come  with  it.  As  chapter  2
fully funded with a A$1.3 billion capital base,
shows, new settlers have spread their culture,
to  be  used  to  purchase  land  for  indigenous
sometimes  by  design,  often  by  failing  to  re-
people  unable  to  gain  ownership  by  other
means.6
spect  indigenous  ways  of  life.  Similarly,  the
free flow of films has been an essential part of
the development of the industry since the early
20th century. And people have moved across
national borders from the earliest times. In-
ternational  migration  has  risen  in  recent
decades but is still below 3% of world popu-
lation, no higher than it was when it last peaked
100 years ago.1

medicinal value, food varieties that consumers
demand and other valuable knowledge. En-
trepreneurs were quick to see the market po-
tential  if  they  could  patent  and  sell  this
knowledge.  So  traditional  knowledge  is  in-
creasingly  misappropriated,  with  many  “in-
ventions” falsely awarded patents. Examples
include the medicinal properties of the sacred
Ayahuasca  plant  in  the  Amazon  basin
(processed  by  indigenous  communities  for
centuries); the Maca plant in Peru, which en-
hances  fertility  (known  by  Andean  Indians
when  the  Spanish  arrived  in  the  16th  cen-
tury); and a pesticidal extract from the neem
tree used in India for its antiseptic properties
(common knowledge since ancient times).

Developing countries seldom have the re-
sources to challenge false patents in foreign
jurisdictions—indigenous people even less so.
A  March  2000  study  concluded  that  7,000
patents had been granted for the unauthorized
use of traditional knowledge or the misappro-
priation of medicinal plants.5

But indigenous groups are increasingly as-
sertive. Globalization has made it easier for in-
digenous people to organize, raise funds and
network with other groups around the world,
with  greater  political  reach  and  impact  than
before. The United Nations declared 1995–2004
the International Decade for the World’s In-
digenous People, and in 2000 the Permanent
Forum on Indigenous Issues was created. In Au-
gust  2003  the  Canadian  government  recog-
nized the ownership claims of the Tlicho Indians
over a diamond-rich area in the Northwest Ter-
ritories.  In  October  2003  the  Constitutional
Court of South Africa ruled that indigenous

Figure
1

Rapid increases in investments 
in extractive industries in 
developing countries, 1988–97

Inflows in mining, quarrying and petroleum
5,671

3,580

1988 1997

2,037

561

599

1,219

$
S
U

 
f
o
 
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

South and 
East Asia
Source: UNCTAD 1999.

Latin America

Developing
countries

What makes these flows a stronger source
of identity politics today? Are old problems
worsening? Are new problems emerging? Or
are people simply freer, with more capacity to
claim their rights? For each case, the answer
is  different  but  contains  an  element  of  all
three.

Indigenous people and flows of
investment and knowledge
Globalization has accelerated the flows of in-
vestment that profoundly affect the livelihoods
of many indigenous people. In the last 20 years
more than 70 countries have strengthened leg-
islation to promote investment in extractive in-
dustries such as oil, gas and mining. Foreign
investment in these sectors is up sharply (figure
1). For example, investments in mining explo-
ration and development in Africa doubled be-
tween 1990 and 1997.2

Because so many of the world’s untapped
natural  resources  are  located  in  indigenous
people’s  territories,  the  global  spread  of  in-
vestments  in  mining  and  the  survival  of  in-
digenous people are inextricably linked (see
map 5.1 and table 5.1). These trends have in-
creased  pressure  on  indigenous  people’s
territories, resulting in forcible displacement
in Colombia,  Ghana,  Guyana,  Indonesia,
Malaysia,  Peru  and  the  Philippines.3 If  cur-
rent  trends  continue,  most  large  mines  may
end up being on the territory of indigenous
people.4

Globalization  has  also  heightened  de-
mand for knowledge as an economic resource.
Indigenous  people  have  a  rich  resource  of
traditional  knowledge—about  plants  with

Flows of cultural goods—films and other
audiovisual products
The controversy over cultural goods in inter-
national trade and investment agreements has
intensified because of exponential growth in
the quantity of trade, increasing concentration
of the film industry in Hollywood and the grow-
ing influence of films and entertainment on
youth lifestyles.

World trade in cultural goods—cinema,
photography,  radio  and  television,  printed
matter,  literature,  music  and  visual  arts—
quadrupled, from $95 billion in 1980 to more
than $380 billion in 1998.7 About four-fifths of
these flows originate in 13 countries.8 Hollywood
reaches 2.6 billion people around the world,
and Bollywood 3.6 billion.9

In the film industry US productions reg-
ularly  account  for  about  85%  of  film  audi-
ences worldwide.10 In the audiovisual trade
with  just  the  European  Union,  the  United
States had an $8.1 billion surplus in 2000, di-
vided  equally  between  films  and  television
rights.11 Of  98  countries  around  the  world
with comparable data, only 8 produced more
films  than  they  imported  annually  in  the
1990s.12 China, India and the Philippines are
among the largest producers in the number of
films per year. But the evidence changes when
revenue is considered. Of global production
of more than 3,000 films a year Hollywood ac-
counted for more than 35% of total industry
revenues. Furthermore, in 1994–98, in 66 of
73 countries with data, the United States was
the first or second major country of origin of
imported films.13

The European film industry, by contrast,
has been in decline over the past three decades.
Production is down in Italy, which produced
92 films in 1998, and Spain, which produced
85, while remaining unchanged in the United
Kingdom  and  Germany.14 France  is  the  ex-
ception.  Production  there  increased  to  183
films  in  1998.15 The  share  of  domestic  films

86

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

viewed between 1984 and 2001 declined dra-
matically in much of Europe, with the excep-
tion of France and Germany, where policies
support  the  domestic  film  industry.  For  the
same period, the share of US films increased
across most of the continent (figure 2).

The international dominance of US films
is  just  one  aspect  of  the  spread  of  Western
consumer culture. New satellite communica-
tions technologies in the 1980s gave rise to a
powerful new medium with global reach and
to such global media networks as CNN. The
number of television sets per thousand people
worldwide  more  than  doubled,  from  113  in
1980 to 229 in 1995. It has grown to 243 since
then.16 Consumption patterns are now global.
Market research has identified a “global elite”,
a  global  middle  class  that  follows  the  same
consumption style and prefers “global brands”.
Most striking are “global teens”, who inhabit
a “global space”, a single pop culture world,
soaking  up  the  same  videos  and  music  and
providing a huge market for designer running
shoes, t-shirts and jeans.

Flows of people
Policies on immigration have become socially di-
visive in many countries. Debates are not just
about jobs and competition for social welfare re-
sources but about culture—whether immigrants
should be required to adopt the language and
values of their new society. Why are these issues
more prominent today? What has globalization
got to do with it?

Globalization is quantitatively and quali-
tatively reshaping international movements of
people,  with  more  migrants  going  to  high-
income countries and wanting to maintain their
cultural identities and ties with their home coun-
tries (table 1).

People have always moved across borders,
but the numbers have grown over the last three
decades.  The  number  of  international  mi-
grants—people living outside their country of
birth—grew from 76 million in 1960 to 154
million in 1990 and 175 million in 2000.17 Tech-
nological advances make travel and communi-
cation easier, faster and cheaper. The price of
a plane ticket from Nairobi to London fell from
$24,000 in 1960 to $2,000 in 2000.18 The tele-
phone, the Internet and the global media bring
the realities of life across the globe into the liv-
ing room, making people aware of disparities in
wages and living conditions—and eager to im-
prove their prospects.

TABLE 1
Top 10 countries by share of migrant
population, 2000
(Percent)

United Arab Emirates
Kuwait
Jordan
Israel
Singapore
Oman
Switzerland
Australia
Saudi Arabia
New Zealand

Source: UN 2003a.

68
49
39
37
34
26
25
25
24
22

Politics also influence the flow of people.
Repression can push people to leave; so can
greater openness. Political transitions in the
former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and the
Baltics made it possible for many people to
leave for the first time in decades. But more
than the numeric increase, the structure of mi-
gration has changed radically.

• Changing demographics. For Western Eu-
rope, Australia and North America, the
growth in migration in the last decade was
almost entirely concentrated in flows from

Figure
2

Fewer domestic films, more US 
films: evolving film attendance, 
1984–2001

Share of US films

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

81

74

77

66

1984

2001

47

48

39

60

62

53

US

France

Italy

Spain

UK

Germany

5

19

22 18

17

17 16

34

45 42

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

97 94

Share of domestic films

poor to rich countries. In the 1990s the
foreign-born population in more developed
regions increased by 23 million.19 Today, al-
most 1 in 10 people living in those countries
was born elsewhere.20

•

Irregular migration has reached unprece-
dented  levels:  up  to  30  million  people
worldwide do not have legal residency sta-
tus in the country where they live.21

• Circular migration. People who decide
to migrate today are more likely to return
to their place of birth, or to move on to a
third  country,  than  to  stay  in  the  first
country  to  which  they  migrate.  With
cheaper  communication  and  travel,  mi-
grants stay in closer touch with their home
communities.

• Diaspora  network. Having  friends  and
family abroad makes migration easier. Di-
aspora  networks  provide  shelter,  work
and assistance with bureaucracy. So mi-
grants coming from the same country tend
to concentrate where others have settled:
92%  of  Algerian  immigrants  to  Europe
live in France, and 81% of Greek immi-
grants in Germany.22 Chinese illegal emi-
gration has swelled the diaspora to some
30–50 million people.23

• Remittances. In little more than 10 years
remittances to developing countries went
from $30 billion in 1990 to nearly $80 bil-
lion in 2002.24 Remittances sent from Sal-
vadorans abroad amounted to 13.3% of El
Salvador’s GDP in 2000.25

• Asylum  seekers and refugees. About
9% of the world’s migrants are refugees
(16 million people). Europe hosted more
than  2  million  political  asylum  seekers 
in  2000,  four  times  more  than  North
America.26

•

Feminization. Women have always mi-
grated as family members, but today more
women  are  migrating  alone  for  work
abroad, leaving their families at home. For
the Philippines, women made up 70% of
migrant workers abroad in 2000.27

Source:

Cohen 2004.

Source: ATSIA 2003; CSD and ICC 2002; Moody 2000; WIPO
2003d; World Bank 2004; Cohen 2004; Kapur and McHale
2003; IOM 2003b, 2003c, 2004; UN 2002a, 2002b, 2003a.

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

87

The aim of multicultural
policies is to protect
cultural liberty and
expand people’s
choices—in the ways
people live and identify
themselves—and not to
penalize them for these
choices

exception” for films and audiovisual goods,
which would permit them to be treated dif-
ferently from other goods.

• Immigration. Managing the inflow and in-
tegration of foreign migrants requires re-
sponding to anti-immigrant groups, who
argue that the national culture is threat-
ened, and to migrant groups, who demand
respect for their ways of life.
The extreme positions in these debates often
provoke regressive responses that are nationalis-
tic, xenophobic and conservative: close the coun-
try off from all outside influences and preserve
tradition. That defence of national culture comes
at great costs to development and to human
choice. This report argues that these extreme
positions are not the way to protect local cultures
and identities. There need not be a choice between
protecting local identities and adopting open
policies to global flows of migrants, foreign films
and knowledge and capital. The challenge for
countries around the world is to design country-
specific policies that widen choices rather than
narrow them by supporting and protecting na-
tional identities while also keeping borders open.

GLOBALIZATION AND MULTICULTURALISM

The impact of globalization on cultural liberty
deserves special attention. Previous Human
Development Reports have addressed sources
of economic exclusion, such as trade barriers that
keep markets closed to poor countries’ exports,
and of political exclusion, such as the weak
voice of developing countries in trade negotia-
tions. Removing such barriers will not itself
eliminate a third type of exclusion: cultural ex-
clusion. That requires new approaches based on
multicultural policies.

Global flows of goods, ideas, people and
capital can seem a threat to national culture in
many ways. They can lead to the abandonment
of traditional values and practices and the dis-
mantling of the economic basis on which the sur-
vival of indigenous cultures depends. When
such global flows lead to cultural exclusion,
multicultural policies are needed to manage
trade, immigration and investments in ways that
recognize cultural differences and identities.
And the exclusion of traditional knowledge

from global regimes for intellectual property
needs to be explicitly recognized, as does the cul-
tural impact of such goods as films and the cul-
tural identity of immigrants.

The aim of multicultural policies is not to
preserve tradition, however, but to protect cul-
tural liberty and expand people’s choices—in the
ways people live and identify themselves—and
not to penalize them for these choices. Pre-
serving tradition can help to keep the options
open, but people should not be bound in an im-
mutable box called “a culture”. Unfortunately,
today’s debates about globalization and the loss
of cultural identity have often been argued in
terms of upholding national sovereignty, pre-
serving the ancient heritage of indigenous peo-
ple and safeguarding national culture in the
face of growing inflows of foreign people, films,
music and other goods. But cultural identities
are heterogeneous and evolving—they are dy-
namic processes in which internal inconsisten-
cies and conflicts drive change (box 5.1).

Four principles should inform a strategy

for multiculturalism in globalization:
• Defending tradition can hold back human

development.

• Respecting  difference  and  diversity  is

essential.

• Diversity thrives in a globally interdependent
world when people have multiple and com-
plementary identities and belong not only to
a local community and a country but also to
humanity at large.

• Addressing imbalances in economic and po-
litical power helps to forestall threats to the
cultures of poorer and weaker communities.

DEFENDING TRADITION CAN HOLD BACK
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

The first principle is that tradition should not
be confused with freedom of choice. As chap-
ter 1 points out, “To argue for cultural diver-
sity on the ground that this is what the different
groups of people have inherited is clearly not rea-
soning based on cultural liberty”. Furthermore,
tradition can work against cultural freedom.
“Cultural conservatism can discourage—or
prevent—people from adopting a different
lifestyle, indeed even from joining the lifestyle

88

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

that others, from a different cultural back-
ground, standardly follow in the society in ques-
tion.” There is much to cherish in traditional
values and practices, and much that is consonant
with universal values of human rights. But there
is also much that is challenged by universal
ethics, such as inheritance laws that are biased
against women, or decision-making procedures
that are not participatory and democratic.

Taking the extreme position of preserving
tradition at all cost can hold back human de-
velopment. Some indigenous people fear that
their ancient cultural practices are endangered
by the inflow of foreign investment in extractive
industries or that sharing traditional knowledge
necessarily leads to its misuse. Some have reacted
to violations of their cultural identity by shut-
ting out all new ideas and change, trying to pre-
serve tradition at all cost. Such reactions reduce
not only cultural choices but also social and
economic choices for indigenous people. Sim-
ilarly, anti-immigrant groups often defend na-
tional identities in the name of tradition. This
narrows their choices as well by shutting coun-
tries off from the socio-economic benefits of im-
migration, which brings new skills and workers
to an economy. And defending national cul-
tural industries through protectionism reduces
the choices for consumers.

In no society are lifestyles or values static. An-
thropologists have discarded concerns with reify-
ing cultures and now see importance in how
cultures change, continuously influenced by in-
ternal conflicts and contradictions (see box 5.1).

RESPECTING DIVERSITY

BOX 5.1

Culture—paradigm shift in anthropology

For many years, defining cultural and social
anthropology as the study of the cultural
dimension of people would have raised few
objections. “A culture” was understood as
synonymous with what before had been
called “a people”.

During the past two decades, however,
the concept of “culture”, and by extension
the idea of “cultural difference” and the
underlying assumptions of homogeneity,
holism and integrity, have been re-evaluated.
Cultural difference is no longer viewed as a
stable, exotic otherness. Self-other relations
are increasingly considered to be matters
of power and rhetoric rather than essence.
And cultures are increasingly conceived of
as reflecting processes of change and inter-
nal contradictions and conflicts.

But just as anthropologists were losing
faith in the concept of coherent, stable and
bounded cultural “wholes”, the concept was
being embraced by a wide range of culture
builders worldwide. Anthropological works

are increasingly being consulted by people try-
ing to assign to groups the kinds of general-
ized cultural identities that anthropologists
now find deeply problematic. Today, politi-
cians, economists and the general public want
culture defined in precisely the bounded,
reified, essentialized and timeless fashion re-
cently discarded by anthropologists.

Culture and cultural diversity have be-
come political and juridical realities, as stated
in the first Article of the UNESCO Uni-
versal Declaration on Cultural Diversity
(2001): “cultural diversity is as necessary
for humankind as biodiversity is for nature.
In this sense, it is the common heritage of
humanity and should be recognized and af-
firmed for the benefit of present and future
generations”. Many people have grasped at
least part of the anthropological message:
culture is there, it is learned, it permeates
everyday life, it is important and it is far
more responsible for differences among
human groups than are genes.

Source: Preis 2004 citing Brumann 1999; Clifford 1988; Rosaldo 1989; Olwig, Fog and Hastrup 1997; UNESCO 2002.

it is not diversity that inevitably leads to conflict
but the suppression of cultural identity and so-
cial, political and economic exclusion on the
basis of culture that can spark violence and ten-
sions. People may be fearful of diversity and its
consequences, but it is opposition to diversity—
as in the positions of anti-immigrant groups—that
can polarize societies and that fuels social tensions.

DEVELOPING MULTIPLE AND
COMPLEMENTARY IDENTITIES—LIVING
LOCALLY AND GLOBALLY

The second principle is that diversity is not an
end in itself but, as chapter 1 points out, it pro-
motes cultural liberty and enriches people’s
lives. It is an outcome of the freedoms people
have and the choices they make. It also implies
an opportunity to assess different options in
making these choices. If local cultures disappear
and countries become homogeneous, the scope
for choice is reduced.

Much of the fear of a loss of national identity
and culture comes from the belief that cultural di-
versity inevitably leads to conflict or to failed de-
velopment. As chapter 2 explains, this is a myth:

The third principle is that globalization can ex-
pand cultural freedoms only if all people develop
multiple and complementary identities as citi-
zens of the world as well as citizens of a state and
members of a cultural group. Just as a culturally
diverse state can build unity on multiple and
complementary identities (chapter 3), a culturally
diverse world needs to do the same. As global-
ization proceeds, this means not only recognizing
local and national identities but also strengthen-
ing commitments to being citizens of the world.
Today’s intensified global interactions can
function well only if governed by bonds of

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

89

shared values, communication and commit-
ment. Cooperation among people and nations
with different interests is more likely when all
are bound and motivated by shared values and
commitments. Global culture is not about the
English language or brand name sneakers—it is
about universal ethics based on universal human
rights and respect for the freedom, equality and
dignity of all individuals (box 5.2).

Today’s interactions also require respect for
difference—respect for the cultural heritage of
the thousands of cultural groups in the world.
Some people believe that there are contradictions
between the values of some cultural traditions
and advances in development and democracy.
As chapter 2 shows, there is no objective evi-
dence for claiming that some cultures are “in-
ferior” or “superior” for human progress and the
expansion of human freedoms.

States develop national identities not only to
unify the population but also to project an iden-
tity different from that of others. But unchanging

notions of identity can lead to morbid mistrust
of people and things foreign—to wanting to bar
immigrants, fearing that they would not be loyal
to their adopted country or its values, or want-
ing to block flows of cultural goods and ideas,
fearing that homogenizing forces would destroy
their national arts and heritage. But identities are
seldom singular. Multiple and complementary
identities are a reality in many countries—and
people have a sense of belonging to the coun-
try as well as to a group or groups within it.

ADDRESSING ASYMMETRIC POWER

The  fourth  principle  is  that  asymmetries  in
flows of ideas and goods need to be addressed,
so that some cultures do not dominate others
because of their economic power. The unequal
economic  and  political  powers  of  countries,
industries  and  corporations  cause  some  cul-
tures to spread, others to wither. Hollywood’s
powerful  film  industry,  with  access  to  enor-

Multiple and
complementary identities
are a reality in many
countries

BOX 5.2

All cultures share a commonality of basic values
that are the foundation of global ethics. That in-
dividuals can have multiple and complemen-
tary identities suggests that they can find these
commonalities of values.

Global ethics are not the imposition of
“Western” values on the rest of the world. To
think so would be both artificially restrictive of
the scope of global ethics and an insult to other
cultures, religions and communities. The prin-
cipal source of global ethics is the idea of human
vulnerability and the desire to alleviate the suf-
fering of every individual to the extent possible.
Another source is the belief in the basic moral
equality of all human beings. The injunction to
treat others as you would want to be treated
finds explicit mention in Buddhism, Christian-
ity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism,
Taoism and Zoroastrianism, and it is implicit in
the practices of other faiths.

It is on the basis of these common teach-
ings across all cultures that states have come to-
gether to endorse the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, supported by the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on
Economic and Social Rights. Regional treaties,
such  as  the  European  Convention  for  the
Protection  of  Human  Rights,  the  American

Sources of global ethics

Convention of Human Rights and the African
Charter on Human and People’s Rights, have
taken similar initiatives. More recently, the UN’s
Millennium  Declaration,  adopted  by  the  full
membership of the General Assembly in 2000,
recommitted itself to human rights, fundamen-
tal freedoms and respect for equal rights to all
without distinction.

There are five core elements of global ethics.
• Equity. Recognizing the equality of all in-
dividuals regardless of class, race, gender,
community or generation is the ethos of
universal values. Equity also envelops the
need to preserve the environment and nat-
ural resources that can be used by future
generations.

• Human rights and responsibilities. Human
rights are an indispensable standard of in-
ternational conduct. The basic concern is to
protect the integrity of all individuals from
threats to freedom and equality. The focus
on individual rights acknowledges their ex-
pression of equity between individuals,
which outweighs any claims made on behalf
of group and collective values. But with
rights come duties: bonds without options
are oppressive; options without bonds are
anarchy.

Source: World Commission on Culture and Development 1995; UN 2000a.

•

• Democracy. Democracy serves multiple
ends: providing political autonomy, safe-
guarding fundamental rights and creating
conditions for the full participation of citi-
zens in economic development. At the global
level democratic standards are essential for
ensuring participation and giving voice to
poor countries, marginalized communities
and discriminated against minorities.
Protection of minorities. Discrimination
against minorities occurs at several levels:
non-recognition, denial of political rights,
socio-economic exclusion and violence.
Global ethics cannot be comprehensive un-
less minorities receive recognition and equal
rights within a larger national and global
community. The promotion of tolerance is
central to the process.
Peaceful conflict resolution and fair ne-
gotiation. Justice and fairness cannot be
achieved by imposing pre-conceived moral
principles. Resolution of disagreements must
be sought through negotiations. All parties
deserve a say. Global ethics does not mean
a single path towards peace or development
or modernization. It is a framework within
which societies can find peaceful solutions
to problems.

•

90

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Development divorced from its human or cul-
tural context is growth without a soul. Eco-
nomic  development  in  its  full  flowering  is
part of a people’s culture.

—World Commission on Culture 
and Development 1995

Indigenous peoples are proponents and repre-
sentatives  of  humanity’s  cultural  diversity.
Historically, however, indigenous peoples have
been marginalized by dominant societies and have
often faced assimilation and cultural genocide.

In the multicultural societies growing up
around them, indigenous peoples seek an end to
such marginalization and fringe dwelling. They

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION

Indigenous peoples and development

have much to contribute to society, and they
bring to both national and international debates
valuable advice about the great issues facing hu-
manity in this new millennium.

In May 2003 the Permanent Forum on In-
digenous Issues stressed in its Second Session the
importance of recognizing cultural diversity in
development processes and the need for all de-
velopment to be sustainable. Recommendation
8 of the Second Session calls for “instituting a
legal framework that makes cultural, environ-
mental and social impact assessment studies
mandatory” (E/2003/43). The forum also ex-
pressed concern over development practices
that do not take into account the characteristics

of indigenous communities as groups, thus sig-
nificantly undermining meaningful ways of par-
ticipatory development.

Indigenous peoples have dynamic living cul-
tures and seek their place in the modern world.
They are not against development, but for too
long they have been victims of development and
now demand to be participants in—and to ben-
efit from—a development that is sustainable.

Ole Henrik Magga
Chairman of the UN Permanent 
Forum on Indigenous Issues

mous resources, can squeeze the Mexican film
industry  and  other  small  competitors  out  of
existence. Powerful corporations can outbid in-
digenous people in using land rich in resources.
Powerful countries can outnegotiate weak coun-
tries in recognition of traditional knowledge in
World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements.
Powerful and exploitative employers can vic-
timize defenceless migrants.

FLOWS OF INVESTMENT AND KNOWLEDGE—
INCLUDING INDIGENOUS PEOPLE IN A
GLOBALLY INTEGRATED WORLD

Indigenous people see globalization as a threat
to their cultural identities, their control over
territory and their centuries-old traditions of
knowledge and artistic expression (see feature
5.1). They fear that the cultural significance of
their territories and knowledge will go unrec-
ognized—or that they will receive inadequate
compensation for these cultural assets. In these
situations globalization is often blamed.

One reaction is to opt out of the global
economy and to oppose the flows of goods and
ideas. Another is to preserve tradition for its own
sake, without accounting for individual choice
or democratic decision-making. But there are al-
ternatives. Preserving cultural identity need not
require staying out of the global economy. There
are ways of ensuring the cultural and socio-
economic inclusion of indigenous people based

on respect for cultural traditions and the shar-
ing of the economic benefits of resource use.

WHY DO SOME INDIGENOUS PEOPLE FEEL
THREATENED?

Central to ensuring the inclusion of indigenous
people in a global world are how national gov-
ernments and international institutions deal
with investments in indigenous territories and
protect traditional knowledge. The historical ter-
ritories of indigenous people are often rich in
minerals and oil and gas deposits (map 5.1,
table 5.1 and feature 5.1). That can set up the
potential for conflict between promoting na-
tional economic growth through extractive in-
dustries and protecting the cultural identity
and economic livelihood of indigenous people.
The traditional knowledge, innovations and
practices of indigenous people, developed over
many generations and collectively owned by
the community, can have practical uses in agri-
culture, forestry and health. Conflict can arise
between recognizing collective ownership and
following the modern intellectual property
regime, which focuses on individual rights.

Extractive industries. The cultural identity
and socio-economic equity of indigenous peo-
ple can be threatened in several ways by the ac-
tivities of extractive industries. First, there is
inadequate recognition of the cultural signifi-
cance of the land and territories that indigenous

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

91

TABLE 5.1
Indigenous population in
Latin America
Percent

Map
5.1

Much extractive and infrastructural 
activity in developing countries is 
in areas where indigenous people 
live

Country

Bolivia
Guatemala
Peru
Ecuador
Honduras
Mexico
Panama
Chile
El Salvador
Nicaragua
Colombia
Paraguay
Argentina
Venezuela
Costa Rica
Brazil
Uruguay

Share of total
population

71.0
66.0
47.0
38.0
15.0
14.0
10.0
8.0
7.0
5.0
1.8
1.5
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.4
0.4

Source: De Ferranti and others 2003.

Latin America, 2003

BELIZE

HONDURAS

NICARAGUA

VENEZUELA

MEXICO
GUATEMALA

EL SALVADOR

COSTA RICA

COLOMBIA

PANAMA

ECUADOR

GUYANA

SURINAME

FRENCH GUIANA

BRAZIL

PERU

BOLIVIA

PARA

G

U

AY

ARGENTINA

URUGUAY

SOUTH

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

PACIFIC OCEAN

C
H
I
L
E

Note: Black dots represent 
areas with high prevalence of 
indigenous people and with 
intense extractive and infra-
structural activities (mining, oil 
exploration, dam and road 
construction, industrial agriculture, 
fisheries, electricity plants, 
biopiracy, logging).

South-East Asia and Pacific, 2003

 

A
E

A S

SOUTH CHIN

THAILAND

BRUNEI

MALAYSIA

PHILIPPINES

NORTHERN
MARIANA
ISLANDS

PACIFIC OCEAN

PAPUA
NEW
GUINEA

INDONESIA

INDIAN OCEAN

TIMOR-LESTE

Source:

Tebtebba and International Forum on Globalization 2003.

people inhabit. Indigenous people have strong
spiritual connections to their land, which is
why some of them oppose any investment in
extractive industries within their territories. For
instance,  some  groups  of  San  Bushmen  in
Botswana oppose the exploration licences that
the government has granted to Kalahari Dia-
monds Ltd.

Second, there is plausible concern about
the impact of extractive industries on local liveli-
hoods. When mineral extraction leads to the
widespread displacement of communities and
loss of their farmlands, it affects both their sense
of cultural identity and their source of sustain-
able livelihood. The Lihir Gold Mine in Papua
New Guinea has destroyed sacred sites of the

Lihirians and sharply reduced their ability to sub-
sist by hunting game.

Third, indigenous groups complain about
unfair exclusion from decision-making. And
when consultations with local communities do
occur, they often leave much to be desired. Keep-
ing such concerns in mind, the World Bank used
a new approach to support the Chad–Cameroon
Pipeline project.2 By law, net incomes were to be
deposited in an offshore account to ensure an-
nual publication of audits and reduce corruption.
Further, 10% of revenues were earmarked for a
Future Generations Fund. Civil society repre-
sentatives and a member of the opposition were
to be part of a monitoring board. The project had
to comply with the Bank’s safeguard policies on
environmental assessments and resettlement.
And two new national parks were planned to
compensate for the loss of a small forest area. The
project highlights the innovative steps interna-
tional institutions are taking to build capacity and
transparency and ensure targeted benefit sharing.
But some indigenous groups believe that this
has been inadequate. Fewer than 5% of the
Bagyéli people affected by the pipeline were em-
ployed on the project. They received little com-
pensation and few of the promised health care
facilities.3 In countries with very weak institutional
structures, project partners face major challenges
in effectively implementing well conceived pro-
jects. This does not mean that investments need
to be stopped; rather, even greater efforts are
needed.

Fourth, indigenous people feel cheated when
their physical resources are misappropriated
without adequate compensation. There was very
limited involvement of local people on the Yana-
cocha gold mine in the Cajamarca region in
Peru (a joint venture between Peruvian and US
mining companies and the International Finance
Corporation). Some of the tax revenues were to
go to the indigenous inhabitants, but they re-
ceived less than they were promised.4 Ecuador
is home to one of the largest confirmed oil re-
serves in Latin America. Companies pay about
$30 million in taxes for a special Amazon de-
velopment fund, but little of that money reaches
the indigenous communities.5

These issues highlight the conflict between
national sovereignty over resources and the

92

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

The solution is not to block
flows of investment or
knowledge or to preserve
tradition for its own sake.
Human development aims
at expanding an
individual’s choices 

special rights of indigenous people to their
territories and the mineral resources they contain.
For instance, Ecuador’s Constitution does not
give native Indians any rights to the oil and gas
within their territories. While it is not necessary
that such rights be constitutionally guaranteed,
it is necessary that indigenous people have a say
in the use of resources within their territories.
Traditional knowledge. The traditional
knowledge of indigenous groups has attributes
of communal ownership and sometimes has spir-
itual significance. Intellectual property regimes
fail to recognize either the community ownership
or spiritual significance of traditional knowl-
edge. The laws protect the work of individual,
identifiable authors or inventors and spell out
how others can use their work. The Quechua In-
dians in Peru oppose the commercial exploita-
tion of their traditional knowledge but can do
little about it. The Maori in New Zealand believe
that even when their knowledge is publicly dis-
closed, there is no automatic right to use it—that
right must be determined collectively.

There is also a danger of wrongly awarding
intellectual property rights, so that communities
that have produced, preserved or developed
traditional knowledge over several generations
are not compensated for its use. To qualify for
patent protection an invention must fulfil three
strict criteria: it must be novel, not obvious and
industrially useful. Since traditional knowledge
does not always meet these criteria, the inter-
national intellectual property regime does not
explicitly protect it. Researchers can appropri-
ate traditional knowledge and apply for a patent,
claiming  to  have  invented  a  new  product.
Copyright  protection  can  also  be  wrongly
awarded for the appropriation.

Misappropriation of traditional knowledge
need not be deliberate. Sometimes it arises from
mistakenly treating traditional knowledge as
part of the public domain, where intellectual
property protection does not apply. Traditional
knowledge, because it is known publicly within
the community (and sometimes outside it), is
more prone to appropriation without compen-
sation to the community that developed it than
are other types of intellectual property. The
Sami Council of Scandinavia argues that even
if its knowledge is publicly known, the public

domain principle ignores obligations to the
community.

The Convention on Biological Diversity rec-
ognizes traditional knowledge, in contrast to
the global intellectual property rights regime ad-
ministered under the World Intellectual Prop-
erty Organization (WIPO) and the agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights (TRIPS). Article 8(j) stipulates that
contracting parties must preserve and maintain
the knowledge and innovations of indigenous
and local communities. It also seeks the wider
application of traditional knowledge “with the
approval and involvement of the holders of
such knowledge” and encourages “equitable
sharing of the benefits”. Article 10(c) of the
convention encourages the “customary use of bi-
ological resources in accord with traditional
cultural practices”. The issue, then, is to find
ways to reconcile the provisions of different in-
ternational intellectual property regimes in order
to protect traditional knowledge for the bene-
fit of the indigenous community and promote
its appropriate use within wider society.

POLICY OPTIONS AND CHALLENGES FOR
PROTECTING RIGHTS AND SHARING BENEFITS

The solution is not to block flows of investment
or knowledge or to preserve tradition for its own
sake. Human development aims at expanding an
individual’s choices, through growth that favours
the poor and through equitable socio-economic
opportunities within a democratic framework
that protects liberties. Addressing the concerns
of indigenous people will require global, na-
tional and corporate policies that advance human
development goals (box 5.3).

International institutions are already look-
ing for ways to mitigate some of the problems.
In 2001 the World Bank commissioned an ex-
tractive industries review to determine how
such projects can assist in poverty reduction
and sustainable development. Based on dis-
cussions with governments, non-governmental
organizations, indigenous people’s organiza-
tions, industry, labour unions and academia,
the 2004 report recommends pro-poor public
and corporate governance, effective social and
environmental policies and respect for human

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

93

BOX 5.3

Private companies and indigenous people can work together for development

Is it possible for private companies to work co-
operatively with indigenous people and to gain
in the process? Yes. Consider these examples.

Pilbara region, Australia
Hamersley Iron Pty Ltd has been exporting ore
from the natural resource–rich Pilbara region
since the mid-1960s. While Aboriginal pop-
ulations  remained  concentrated  in  welfare-
dependent towns, the company’s need for skilled
labour led to a massive influx into the region of
non-indigenous people. The Aboriginal groups
began to oppose the development of newer
mines and demanded discussions on the com-
pany’s activities on traditional lands. In 1992
Hamersley established the Aboriginal Training
and Liaison Unit, to provide job training, increase
business development in the area and improve
infrastructure and living conditions while pre-
serving the aboriginal heritage and culture. By
1997 the Gumala Aboriginal Corporation had
signed joint venture agreements with Hamers-
ley to develop newer mines. Aboriginal men

Source: International Council on Metals and the Environment 1999.

would receive training in operating machinery,
and services would be contracted to the local
communities. Hamersley would contribute more
than A$60 million for these purposes.

Raglan project, Canada
After a 1975 agreement to settle land ownership
issues in northern Quebec between indigenous
groups and the provincial and federal govern-
ments, the Inuit received financial compensation
to set up the Makivik Corporation as a heritage
fund. In 1993 Makivik signed a Memorandum
of Understanding with Falconbridge Ltd (later
the Raglan Agreement) to guarantee benefits
from planned mining projects in the region, in-
cluding priority employment and contracts for
the  Inuit,  profit  sharing  and  environmental
monitoring. Falconbridge will pay an estimated
C$70  million  to  an  Inuit  trust  fund  over  18
years. Archaeological sites were also identified
and  marked  as  off  limits  to  mining,  and  the
rights of Inuit employees to hunt outside the
Raglan site were assured.

Red Dog Mine, United States
In the 1970s the Inupiat people of Northwest
Alaska  successfully  blocked  Cominco  Inc.’s
interest in exploiting zinc-lead deposits at the
Red Dog site. After several years of negotia-
tions the Northwest Alaska Native Association
(NANA) and Cominco signed an agreement in
1982 to allow mining to go forward. Cominco
agreed  to  compensate  the  Inupiat  through
royalties,  to  include  NANA  representatives
in an advisory committee, to employ indige-
nous people and to protect the environment.
In lieu of taxes Red Dog would pay $70 mil-
lion into the Northwest Arctic Borough over
24 years. By 1998 Cominco had invested $8.8
million  in  technical  training  almost  entirely
for NANA shareholders employed in the pro-
ject.  NANA  has  also  monitored  the  impact
on subsistence activities and forced efforts to
reduce effluent flows into streams. Cominco
has maintained a flexible work schedule that
allows  Inupiat  employees  to  continue  their
traditional way of life.

rights. WIPO’s General Assembly established
an Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge and Folklore in October 2000. It is
reviewing mechanisms for protecting traditional
knowledge while increasing the participation
of indigenous people.

States and international institutions need
to collaborate in continuing to adjust global
rules  and  national  laws  in  ways  that  more
successfully take into account the concerns of
indigenous people, giving them a genuine stake
in the flows of investments, ideas and knowledge.
Three measures are essential:
• Explicitly recognizing indigenous people’s
rights over their physical and intellectual
property.

• Requiring consultations with indigenous
communities and their participation for the
use of any resource, thus ensuring informed
consent.

• Empowering communities by developing

strategies to share benefits.
Loans to companies or countries for projects
that wrongly appropriate property must be
withdrawn, and patents granted to others who

have misappropriated traditional knowledge
should be revoked.

Recognizing rights. Many states have laws
that explicitly recognize indigenous people’s
rights over their resources. In a 2002 report
the UK Commission on Intellectual Property
Rights argued that national legislation is needed
to address specific circumstances. The Philip-
pines has laws requiring informed consent for
access to ancestral lands and indigenous knowl-
edge and for equitable sharing of benefits.
Guatemalan law promotes the wider use of tra-
ditional knowledge and cultural expressions
by  placing  them  under  state  protection.
Bangladesh, the Philippines and the African
Union recognize the customary practices of
communities and the community-based rights
to biological resources and associated tradi-
tional knowledge.

Requiring participation and consultation.
Including the local community in decision-
making is not only democratic—it also ensures
against future disruption of projects. Having
learned from the Yanacocha mine, the Antam-
ina zinc and copper mine in Peru involved
indigenous communities in decision-making at

94

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

the start of operations in 2001. But consultations
have to be meaningful. This requires carefully
identifying the affected groups and providing full
information about the likely costs and benefits
of a project.

Consultations can also prevent the false ap-
propriation of genetic resources and traditional
knowledge. Countries now demand disclosure
of the origin of plants and other genetic mate-
rial before granting patents. The Andean Com-
munities, Costa Rica and India, among others,
include this provision in laws and regulations.
Documenting traditional knowledge is often
essential for protecting it, as is being done by the
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library in India
and a similar initiative in China. Lao PDR has
a Traditional Medicines Resource Centre. In
Africa, where much traditional knowledge is
oral, documentation would diminish possibili-
ties for uncompensated exploitation of knowl-
edge. But in Latin America some indigenous
people worry that documentation, by making
their knowledge more accessible, would facili-
tate exploitation. 

Documentation does not prejudice rights. It
preserves knowledge in written form and prevents
others from claiming it as their own. WIPO has
an Online Portal of Databases and Registries of

Traditional and Genetic Resources for use by
patent examiners. The Consultative Group on In-
ternational Agricultural Research has linked its
information to the portal. And India has con-
tributed its Health Heritage Test Database.

Sharing benefits. Opportunities for bene-
fit sharing in extractive industries are exten-
sive, including education, training, preferential
employment for local people, financial com-
pensation, business opportunities and environ-
mental commitments. In Papua New Guinea,
where indigenous communities own 97% of the
land, small mining projects have assisted in
poverty alleviation. At the Bulolo mine a well
planned closure allowed the mining company to
use  its  infrastructure  to  develop  a  timber
plantation—which remains financially viable
35 years after the mine was closed.6 Companies
in other countries have also had success in-
volving local communities in decision-making
and profit sharing.

While multilateral negotiations on protect-
ing traditional knowledge within the intellectual
property rights regime continue, countries are
discovering ways of using existing systems to do
so (box 5.4). Industrial designs protect carpets
and headdresses in Kazakhstan. Geographical
indications protect liquors and teas in Venezuela

Documenting traditional
knowledge is often
essential for protecting it

BOX 5.4

Using intellectual property rights to protect traditional knowledge

Respecting traditional knowledge does not mean
keeping it from the world. It means using it in
ways that benefit the communities from which
it is drawn.

Australia’s intellectual property rights laws do
not cover traditional knowledge, but certifica-
tion trademarks are used to identify and authen-
ticate products or services provided by indigenous
people. In the 1995 Milpurrurru case—Aboriginal
designs were reproduced on carpets without prior
consent—an Australian court judged that “cultural
harm” had been caused due to trademark viola-
tion and awarded compensation of A$70,000
(WIPO 2003c). In the 1998 Bulun Bulun case a
court judgement found that an indigenous per-
son owed fiduciary obligations to his community
and could not exploit indigenous art contrary to
the community’s customary law.

In Canada trademarks are used to protect
traditional symbols, including food products,
clothing and tourist services run by First Nations.
Source: Commission on Intellectual Property Rights 2002; WIPO 2003c.

The Copyright Act protects tradition-based cre-
ations like woodcarvings, songs and sculptures.
In 1999 the Snuneymuxw First Nation used the
Trademarks Act to protect 10 religious petro-
glyphs (ancient rock paintings) from unautho-
rized reproduction and to stop the sale of goods
bearing these images.

Other countries have explicitly recognized
traditional knowledge and customary legal sys-
tems. Greenland retains its Inuit legal tradition
within its Home Rule Government. Over the past
150 years written Inuit literature has documented
cultural heritage. Cultural heritage is treated as
dynamic and not restricted to traditional as-
pects alone. Both traditional and modern cultural
expressions are respected and enjoy equal pro-
tection under law.

A more celebrated case involves the San
Bushmen of southern Africa. An anthropologist
noticed in 1937 that the San ate the Hoodia cac-
tus to stave off hunger and thirst. Based on this

knowledge the South African Council for Scien-
tific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in 1995
patented the Hoodia cactus’s appetite-suppressing
element (P57). By 1998 revenues from the li-
censing fee for developing and marketing P57 as
a slimming drug had risen to $32 million (Com-
mission on Intellectual Property Rights 2002).
When the San alleged biopiracy and threatened
legal action in 2002, the CSIR agreed to share
future royalties with the San.

Recognition of traditional culture can occur
at the regional level as well. Article 136(g) of De-
cision 486 of the Commission of the Andean
Community states that signs may not be regis-
tered as marks if they consist of the names of in-
digenous, Afro-American or local communities.
The Colombian government used Article 136(g)
to reject an application for registration of the term
“Tairona”, citing it as an invaluable heritage of
the country—the Taironas inhabited Colom-
bian territory in the pre-Hispanic period.

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

95

Globalization can bring
recognition to indigenous
people who have
developed their resources
over the centuries

and Viet Nam. Copyrights and trademarks are
used for traditional art in Australia and Canada.
In many cases these measures have resulted in
monetary benefits for the community as well. 
Discussions at WIPO are focusing on how
to complement intellectual property provisions
with  unique  national  approaches.  One
proposal—the compensatory liability approach—
envisages rights for both the patent owner and
the owner of traditional knowledge. While the
patent owner would have to seek a compulsory
licence to use the traditional knowledge resource,
the owner would also have the right to com-
mercialize the patented invention after paying roy-
alties to the patent owner. This mechanism avoids
restricting scientific progress and makes benefit
sharing economically significant.

By promoting flows of investments and
knowledge, globalization can bring recognition
to indigenous people who have developed their
resources over the centuries. But national and
international rules on global trade and invest-
ment  must  also  account  for  the  cultural
sensitivities and customary property rights of in-
digenous people. Respecting cultural identity
and promoting socio-economic equity through
participation and benefit sharing are possible as
long as decisions are made democratically—by

BOX 5.5

The debate on cultural goods and the 

Multilateral Agreement on Investments fiasco

After the Uruguay Round of trade negoti-
ations ended in 1994, some countries wanted
to set up a mechanism to liberalize, regulate
and enforce global investment flows. This
set the stage in 1998 for the Multilateral
Agreement on Investments (MAI). The ob-
jective was to create a single multilateral
regulatory framework to replace some 1,600
bilateral investment treaties. Among other
provisions the MAI aimed at introducing the
“national  treatment”  principle  of  non-
discrimination to investment rules and for-
eign investors. Country of origin would
have ceased to be a factor when applying
rules on investment and trade in services in
order to stop discrimination against for-
eign investment and facilitate its flows.

As  the  MAI  was  being  negotiated
within  the  OECD,  though,  a  number  of

Source: UNESCO 2000b, 2000c; Public Citizen 2004.

countries inserted exceptions and reserva-
tions  that  weakened  the  initiative.  Con-
cerned  about  the  effect  that  MAI  could
have on cultural industries and fearing loss
of leeway to subsidize or protect national in-
dustries, France introduced clauses for cul-
tural industries. Motivated by a number of
objections  to  the  negotiations,  including
the  treatment  of  cultural  goods  like  any
other  merchandise,  non-governmental
groups  in  Australia,  Canada,  India,  New
Zealand,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
United  States  joined  the  French  govern-
ment’s  campaign  against  the  agreement.
The initiative collapsed, demonstrating how
contentious  these  issues  are  and  compli-
cating future talks on trade in services and
investment  that  affect  countries’  cultural
diversity.

states, by companies, by international institutions
and by indigenous people.

FLOWS OF CULTURAL GOODS—WIDENING
CHOICES THROUGH CREATIVITY AND DIVERSITY

During the 1994 countdown to the Uruguay
Round of multilateral trade negotiations, a group
of French movie producers, actors and directors
was able to insert a “cultural exception” clause
in trade rules, excluding cinema and other au-
diovisual goods from their provisions. The clause
acknowledges the special nature of cultural
goods as traded commodities. The Uruguay
Round text provided a precedent for other trade
agreements to allow countries to exempt cultural
goods from trade agreements and adopt policies
to protect such industries at home. Some ex-
ceptions for trade in cultural goods were writ-
ten  into  the North  American  Free  Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994. In the acrimo-
nious debates over the Multilateral Agreement
on Investments in the OECD in 1998 the cul-
tural exception was one of the most bitterly
contested issues, propelling the collapse of ne-
gotiations (box 5.5).

At the preparatory meetings in Cancun for
the Doha Round in 2003 negotiations reportedly
foundered over the Singapore Issues—trade fa-
cilitation, transparency in government pro-
curement, trade and investment, and trade and
competition.7 The United States had asked for
a freeze on the extension of the cultural excep-
tion, to avoid bringing Internet-related audio-
visual activities into the negotiations. The Free
Trade Area of the Americas ministerial meeting
in Miami in November 2003 faced similar chal-
lenges for cultural goods, and no clear agreement
was reached.

So, whether to treat cultural goods like any
other commercial good or to make them an ex-
ception has become a hotly contested issue in
international trade negotiations. Positions remain
polarized. On one side are those who consider
cultural products as commercial as apples or cars
and therefore subject to all the rules of inter-
national trade. On the other side are those who
view cultural products as assets conveying val-
ues, ideas and meaning and therefore deserving
of special treatment.

96

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

WHY HAS PUBLIC SUPPORT RALLIED BEHIND
THE CULTURAL EXCEPTION?

The cultural exception has mobilized public
support that politicians find difficult to ignore.
The cultural exception touches people’s concerns
that their national cultures might be swept away
by the economic forces of the global market,
threatening their cultural identity. The most
extreme advocates of the cultural exception
fear that foreign films and television programmes
will spread foreign culture and eventually oblit-
erate local cultures and traditional values.

No doubt nationalism, traditionalism and
economic advantage motivate many who advo-
cate banning foreign products. But are the fears
of those who predict a narrowing of cultural
choices justified? In fact, free flows of foreign
products widen cultural choices and do not
necessarily weaken commitment to the national
culture. Teenagers the world over listen to rap,
but that has not meant the death of classical
music or local folk music traditions. Attempts
to close off foreign influences have had limited
impact. Not until 1998 did the Republic of
Korea gradually start to lift a half-century-old
ban on Japanese music and film. Yet it is very
likely that Koreans had access to Japanese pop
culture,  particularly  animation  and  manga
(comic books), well before the ban was eased.
Restricting foreign influence does not promote
cultural freedom. But that does not mean that
cultural goods are not different in some ways
from other commercial goods.

Why  are  cultural  goods  different?  Cul-
tural goods convey ideas, symbols and lifestyles
and are an intrinsic part of the identity of the
community that produces them. There is little
disagreement that cultural products need some
public support to flourish. Subsidies for muse-
ums, ballet, libraries and other cultural products
and services are widespread and accepted in
all free market economies.

The disagreement is over whether films and
audiovisual  products  are  cultural  goods  or
merely entertainment. While it can be debated
whether cinema and television programmes
have intrinsic artistic value, it is clear that they
are cultural goods in that they are symbols of
ways of life. Films and audiovisual products are

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

powerful conveyors of lifestyles and carry social
messages (see feature 5.1). They can have a
powerful cultural impact. Indeed, they are con-
tested precisely because of their impact on
choices about identity.8

Why do cultural goods need public sup-
port? The reasons behind the arguments for
public intervention have to do with the way
cultural goods are consumed and produced.
Both give advantage to large economies and
large industries with access to large financial re-
sources and lead to asymmetric flows of films
and television programmes (figure 5.1).9
• Cultural goods are experience goods. Cul-
tural products are consumed through ex-
perience: because of the subjective nature of
these  goods,  consumers  will  not  know
whether they like the good until after they
have consumed it. So prices will not reflect
the quality of the product or the satisfaction
it is likely to give to the consumer. Market-
ing campaigns, advertising and commercial
reviews—amplified by word of mouth—
are consumers’ principal sources of infor-
mation,  giving  a  massive  advantage  to
producers with greater command over re-
sources for marketing and distribution.
Many small local producers will struggle to
access the market, particularly producers
operating from developing countries.

Whether to treat cultural
goods like any other
commercial good 
has become a hotly
contested issue

Figure
5.1

Top-grossing ﬁlms of all time at the international (non-US) box ofﬁce 
were US films, April 2004

 

 

 

Year
US Films
Titanic  
       1997  
Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King         2003  
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone  
       2001  
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets          2002  
Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers  
       2002  
Jurassic Park   
       1993  
Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring    2001  
       2003  
Finding Nemo  
Independence Day  
       1996  
Star Wars: Episode I: The Phantom Menace      1999  
  
Non-US Films

 
 

Country
of origin

Total gross revenue (millions of US$)

 US 
 US
 US 
 US 
 US 
 US 
 US 
 US 
 US
 US 

Sen to Chihiro no kamikakushi  
The Full Monty  
Four Weddings and a Funeral  
Bridget Jones’ Diary  

 

 

Japan 

       2001  
       1997   UK 
       1994   UK 
       2001   UK

Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

44
69
86
96

Source:

The Internet Movie Database 2004.

1,235
696
651
604
581
563
547
513
505
491

254
211
191
183

97

Cultural products and
creative activities, if left
to the market, could
wither and diversity 
could decline 

• Large producers can benefit from econo-
mies of scale. Smaller and less well financed
producers are penalized in these markets be-
cause they cannot enjoy the economies of
scale that characterize many cultural in-
dustries, especially films and other audio-
visual products.10 The cost of making a
movie is the same whether it is shown one
time or a million times. The more times it
is shown, the higher the returns. When the
film reaches a big market—thanks to large
domestic  demand,  widespread  under-
standing of the language spoken in the film
and strong advertising campaigns—it is
much likelier to become an international
success. The same is true for other cultural
goods. Countries and corporations with
greater financial leverage can benefit from
these economies of scale by capturing large
markets and enjoying their exclusive ad-
vantages in markets with few other large
producers (table 5.2).

POLICY OPTIONS AND CHALLENGES—
PROTECTION OR PROMOTION?

For these reasons, cultural products and creative
activities, if left to the market, could wither and
diversity could decline. What is the solution?
Cultural protectionism and quotas? Or pro-
duction subsidies?

Protection. As argued in past Human De-
velopment Reports, raising barriers to reduce
flows of imports can be problematic, a conclu-
sion that applies to trade in cultural goods as well.
Trade barriers to reduce or block imports de-
feat the expansion of diversity and choice. Yet
many countries have set production and broad-
casting quotas for locally produced programmes
on radio, television and films to guarantee a
minimum market share. Hungary has a quota of
15% for national programmes on public chan-
nels.11 And the Republic of Korea’s screen quota
system, based on minimum days of domestic pro-
jections each year, probably contributed to the
increase in domestic market share and exports.
But aggressive quota-based policies have
not always resulted in greater variety and choice.
Some critics point out that high quotas make
local producers depend more on quotas and
less on holding production costs down. Some
also argue that protection can reduce the qual-
ity of goods.12

Promotion. Some countries have successfully
maintained healthy cultural industries while also
keeping trade links open. Argentina and Brazil
offer financial incentives to help domestic in-
dustries, including tax breaks. In Hungary 6%
of television receipts go to the production of
Hungarian films. France spends some $400 mil-
lion a year to support its film industry, one of the
few thriving in Europe, producing more than 180

TABLE 5.2
Policy choices for the promotion of the domestic film and audiovisual industry—market and industry size matter

Advantages

Disadvantages

Policy solutions

Large producing countries
(more than 200 productions)

Large home markets, expanding
broadcasting audiences allow higher
returns

Lowers market competition and the
production of cultural and artistic films

Medium-size producing countries
(from 20 to 199 productions)

Small producing countries
(fewer than 20 productions)

State and legal financial support
guarantee the existence of a national
infrastructure and markets, allowing
for a public sector role and higher
quality films

Creativity does not suffer from high
technical and organizational
competition or financial constraints;
the very limited financing does not
seek immediate returns

Source: Human Development Report Office based on UNESCO 200a.

National legal protectionism could
impede international free film trade

Specialized taxation incentives to
encourage independent film-makers
and specialized distributors to make
more films

New international legal frameworks
to allow better and more balanced
exchanges, expanding national
production capacities

Small domestic markets reflect a
structural lack of investment in the film
industry, limiting the number of
national productions; unfair
asymmetric international trade
practices also diminish domestic
production

As with communications and computer
technologies, digital technologies can
create new and less expensive
production opportunities, thus
overcoming distribution and
production bottlenecks

98

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

films annually (box 5.6 and feature 5.1).13, 14 The
French-German worldwide success, Le Fabuleux
Destin d’Amélie Poulain, shows the possibili-
ties for cross-border co-productions.15

Studios and equipment can also be sup-
ported. Since 1996 the Egypt Film Society has
built film studios with financing from a private-
public partnership. Other developing economies
are trying to do the same. As with all subsidies,
there are challenges to make them work. Who
should decide on the criteria for making grants?
How should such decisions be made? The mea-
sures depend largely on the size of the domes-
tic market (see table 5.2).

The 2001 Declaration on Cultural Diversity
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) set the
stage for a number of international initiatives to
encourage action in setting standards for cultural
diversity, including the Round Table on Cultural
Diversity and Biodiversity for Sustainable De-
velopment, the Summit on the Francophonie,
the annual Meeting of the International Network
on Cultural Policy and the UN resolution pro-
claiming 21 May as “World Day for Cultural Di-
versity  for  Dialogue  and  Development”.
Preparatory work has begun for a legally bind-
ing convention to secure the diversity of cultural
expression.

The emergence or consolidation of cultural
industries should also be supported. Coopera-
tion can support development of the necessary
infrastructure and skills to create domestic
markets and help local cultural products reach
global markets. Small business incubators can
encourage small and medium-size companies in
music, fashion and design. International funds
could be mobilized to finance the translation of
books and the subtitling or dubbing of local
films in international languages. Skills in these
fields could be formalized in business schools
and through exchanges on the economics of cul-
tural industries.

Cultural tourism and partnerships with the
World Tourism Organization can disseminate
advice to host communities. And partnerships
with parliaments, ministries of culture and na-
tional statistical offices can gather best prac-
tices on cultural exchanges, data gathering and
policy-making.

BOX 5.6

France’s successful support of domestic cultural industries

Under the “cultural exception” (l’excep-
tion  culturelle)  introduced  during  the
Uruguay Round of trade negotiations and
resolutely defended by the French govern-
ment in the mid-1990s, the state promotes
and pays for the production of Gallic cul-
ture—a successful example of public sup-
port for cultural industries.

The government subsidizes the pro-
duction of televised versions of French fiction,
a popular staple of public television. France
imposes a 40% minimum quota of French lan-
guage radio transmissions. (Canada has a
similar system.) These measures have cre-
ated opportunities for artists who might oth-
erwise  not  have  been  able  to  crack  the

Source: Financial Times 2004.

domestic market and have made France the
largest film producer in Europe, effectively
countering competition from Hollywood.

The French government robustly de-
fends the cultural exception—but for how
much longer will it be able to do so? The
new  menace  comes  not  from  the  usual
suspects—Hollywood or the World Trade
Organization—but from Brussels. The Eu-
ropean Commission is considering limiting
the amount of support that countries are al-
lowed to provide to their domestic pro-
duction. If the new rules are passed, a strong
wave of opposition is likely to come from
groups that fear a loss of national identity
through excess foreign films.

TABLE 5.3
Top 10 cities by share of
foreign born population,
2000/01
Percent

Miami
Toronto
Los Angeles
Vancouver
New York City
Singapore
Sydney
Abidjan
London
Paris

59
44
41
37
36
33
31
30
28
23

Source: UN HABITAT 2004; U.S. Census
Bureau 2004b; World Cities Project 2002;
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2001; Statistics
Canada 2004.

FLOWS OF PEOPLE—MULTIPLE IDENTITIES
FOR GLOBAL CITIZENS

Almost half the people in Toronto and Los An-
geles are foreign born, and more than a quarter
are in Abidjan, London and Singapore (table
5.3). Driven by globalization, the number of mi-
grants soared in the last decade, especially to the
high-income countries of Western Europe, North
America and Australia (figure 5.2). And with the
growing availability of the Internet and the low
cost of air travel, more immigrants are maintain-
ing closer ties with their countries of origin (see
feature 5.1). Globalization is not only bringing cul-
tural groups together. It is altering the rules of en-
gagement. Democratization and a growing respect
for human rights are bringing increasing politi-
cal freedom and a sense of entitlement to fair
treatment and are legitimizing protest.

Immigration gives rise to an array of concerns
on both sides. Receiving countries struggle with
issues of cultural freedom. Should Muslim girls
be allowed to wear headscarves to state schools
in France (box 5.7)? Similar debates rage over
whether education should be provided in Span-
ish in US schools or whether Sikh motorcyclists
should be permitted to wear a turban instead of
a standard helmet in Canada. Immigrants protest
a lack of recognition for their cultural identities
as well as discrimination in jobs, housing and ed-
ucation. In many countries these concerns are met
by the counter-protests of local populations,

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

99

Figure
5.2

Unprecedented growth in international migration to Europe, North 
America, Australia and New Zealand, but refugees remain a small 
proportion, 1990–2000

1990 2000

Refugees

Number of migrants

175

154

62

57

20

16

World

1
2
Europe

s
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

180

160

140

120

60

40

20

0

Source:

UN 2002a.

Figure
5.3

More and more 
governments (rich 
and poor) want to 
control immigration, 
1976–2001 

Governments viewing 
immigration as “too high”

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

50

40

30

20

10

0

50

40

30

20

10

0

More developed regions

Less developed regions

Governments adopting 
policies to reduce immigration

More developed regions

Less developed regions

1976

1986

2001

Source:

UN 2002a.

44

42

41

28

16 16

6

5

Australia /
New Zealand

10

9

6

Asia

Africa

7 6

4

1

Latin America
and Caribbean

1

1

North
America

who fear that their national identities and values
are also being challenged. “They don’t adopt
our way of life and values”, say those opposed
to immigration. “Respect our way of life and
our cultures and our human rights”, retort im-
migrant communities and their allies.

One response would be to acknowledge di-
versity and promote the inclusion of immigrants,
addressing both the social, economic and polit-
ical exclusions they suffer and living mode ex-
clusion, giving recognition to their identities. An
alternative, advocated by anti-immigrant groups,
would be to close countries to flows of people—
reversing the trend of increasing diversity (figure
5.3). The political agenda of France’s National
Front Party, for example, proposes to turn back
the flow of immigration, revoking family reuni-
fication programmes, expelling undocumented
aliens, developing programmes to return immi-
grants to their countries of origin and giving cit-
izens preference in employment, social assistance
and other areas.16 Italy’s Northern League and
National Alliance parties (both members of the
ruling coalition) are introducing legislation to limit
immigration to people who have an employ-
ment contract in Italy and to provide aid to
countries to stop illegal immigration.17

But this choice between acknowledging di-
versity and closing the country to immigration
may be a false one if national cultures are not
really threatened by diversity.

DOES CULTURAL DIVERSITY THREATEN
NATIONAL CULTURES?

Those fearing that immigrants threaten national
values make three arguments: that immigrants do
not “assimilate” but reject the core values of the
country; that immigrant and local cultures clash,
inevitably leading to social conflict and frag-
mentation; and that immigrant cultures are in-
ferior and if allowed a foothold would undermine
democracy and retard progress, a drain on eco-
nomic and social development. Their solution is
to manage diversity by reducing immigrant flows
and acculturating immigrant communities.

Single or multiple identities. Underlying
fears of losing national culture is an implicit be-
lief that identities are singular. But people do not
have single, fixed identities. They have multiple
and often changing identities and loyalties. In the
words of Long Litt-Woon, chairperson of the
Drafting Group of the Council of Europe’s Con-
ference on Diversity and Cohesion: “I am often
asked how long I have lived [in Norway]; ‘20
years’, I say. The next remark often is ‘Oh, you
are almost Norwegian!’ The assumption here is
that I have become less Malaysian because it is
common to think about identity as a zero sum
game; if you have more of one identity, you have
less of another. Identity is somehow imagined to
be like a square box with a fixed size.”18

Some groups of immigrants may want to re-
tain their cultural identities. But that does not
mean that they do not develop loyalties to their
new country. People of Turkish ancestry in
Germany may speak Turkish at home well into
the second generation, but they also speak Ger-
man. Mexicans in the United States may cheer
for the Mexican football team but serve in the
US Army.

Suspicions about the loyalties of immigrants
have been common. But they are misplaced.
Suspecting divided loyalties, the US and Cana-
dian governments interned their citizens of
Japanese descent during World War II. Yet
soldiers of Japanese descent serving in the US

100

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

BOX 5.7

Should Muslim girls be allowed to wear head-
scarves in state schools in France? Would that
contradict the principles of secularism (laïcité)
and respect for freedom of religion? Does this
freedom require public spaces to be kept free of
religious influence? Or would that constitute
discrimination against the Muslim immigrant
community? Or does the headscarf reflect sub-
jugation of women by men? Few controversies
have aroused as much passion—on both sides—
and raised more penetrating challenges to ac-
commodating cultural diversity in recent years.
The controversy dates to 1989, when a sec-
ondary school expelled three young women who
wore headscarves in class on the grounds that this
violated French principles of secularism. This
triggered massive public debate. The Council of
State declared that the wearing of religious to-
kens is not in itself incompatible with secular-
ism as long as it did not have an “ostentatious
or militant” character. The Ministry of Educa-
tion appointed a special mediator to deal with
future such incidents.

The controversy quieted down until De-
cember 2002, when a girl in a predominantly im-
migrant neighbourhood in Lyon appeared in
school wearing a headscarf. The headscarf had
been reduced nearly to a headband, covering nei-
ther her forehead nor her ears. The principal

Source: Zolberg 2003; Gutmann 1995; The Economist 2004b.

The headscarf dilemma in France

called in her parents and demanded that the
girl stop wearing a headscarf to school. The par-
ents protested that they had already accommo-
dated French norms by reducing the headscarf
to a headband. The mediator was called in but
was unable to find an acceptable solution. Some
teachers threatened to go on strike if the student
were allowed to continue to wear the headscarf
in school.

The affair quickly turned into a politicized
debate. Members of the National Assembly on
both the left and the right proposed a law ex-
plicitly prohibiting the wearing of headscarves in
schools and other public spaces. Leftist intellec-
tuals quickly took positions for and against: ei-
ther in defence of freedom of expression and
against discrimination against Muslims, or in

Are you in favour of, or opposed to,
a law banning signs or dress that
conspicuously display religious
affiliation? (21 January 2004)

Group

In favour (%)

Opposed (%)

All French
Left
Right
Muslims
Muslim women

69
66
75
42
49

29
33
24
53
43

defence  of  secularism  and  values  of  gender
equality, since it was thought that many girls
were being intimidated into wearing the head-
scarf. In 2003 the Ministry of Education and the
National Assembly established a committee of en-
quiry. In July an Independent Commission on the
Application of Secularism in the Republic pro-
posed a ban on the wearing of any obvious reli-
gious symbols in schools, including the headscarf.
Ultimately, the legislation was passed, but
opinions were divided. Positions did not fall as
might  be  expected  along  typical  divides:
left–right, non-Muslim–Muslim, or women–men.
Opinion polls taken just prior to the vote showed
Muslim women equally divided for and against
the new law (see table).

The case highlights the dilemmas that coun-
tries face in trying to accommodate the religious
and other cultural differences of immigrant com-
munities. As in this case there are difficult trade-
offs and complex arguments. Those who defend
the ban argue that it is a defence of freedom—
freedom of religion and freedom of women from
subordination. But so do those who argue against
the ban—freedom against discrimination and
unequal opportunities. Such trade-offs of prin-
ciples are particularly difficult in public educa-
tion, which is intended to impart the values of
the state.

and Canadian armies exhibited high levels of val-
our and loyalty, becoming some of the most
decorated heroes. In 1960 there were fears in the
United States that a Roman Catholic President
might have loyalties to the Pope beyond and
above his loyalties to the United States, fears that
President John F. Kennedy had to actively com-
bat as a candidate in 1960.

Concerns about national identity are some-
times also expressed through denunciations of im-
migrant cultures as “inferior”, with claims that
allowing immigrants to flourish would retard the
country’s progress and development. But this
Report has demonstrated how little foundation
there is for the arguments of cultural determin-
ism. To be sure, many immigrant groups—though
by no means all groups or in all countries—do
have high rates of unemployment and lower than
average educational achievement. But the rea-
sons have to do with the multiple disadvantages
they suffer rather than any culturally determined

group characteristics—disadvantages that can
be remedied with appropriate policies of inclu-
sion, as chapter 3 proposes.

For most societies accommodating multiple
identities does not happen overnight. It means
coming to see as familiar differences that were
once considered “alien”. Social scientists call
this a shifting and blurring of the boundaries that
separate “us” and “not us”. The confrontations
in France over Muslim girls wearing headscarves
to school or in the United States over instruction
in Spanish in primary school are about people
fighting to maintain boundaries as they have
been drawn. Islam and Spanish are symbols of
the “not us”. Admitting them as part of “us” sug-
gests giving in to the dangers seen looming ahead:
communal conflict and loss of cultural identity.
In  accommodating  multiple  identities,
societies debate two questions: How different
can we afford to be? How alike must we be?
Accepting multiple identities is a major social

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

101

Closing doors to
immigration is neither
practical nor in the
interest of national
development 

transformation. But history shows that it does
happen. Almost all European countries have un-
dergone such a transformation. Today, being
different is no longer the difference between
being an Alsatien and being a Breton but be-
tween being a Sri Lankan and being a Scot,
creating a broader category of “us”.

Immigration supports economic growth
and development. Closing doors to immigra-
tion is neither practical nor in the interest of na-
tional development. Far from being a drain on
development, immigrants are a source of skills,
labour, ideas and know-how. Economists have
long argued that the gains from liberalizing mi-
gration dwarf those from removing barriers to
world trade. From Indian technology entre-
preneurs in Silicon Valley in the United States
to West African nurses throughout Europe to
Chinese  investors  in  Australia  to  Filipino
domestic workers in Saudi Arabia, immigrants’
contributions to innovation, enterprise and skill
are daily reminders of their value to society. 

In today’s knowledge economy countries
compete by creating and attracting top talent.
In 1990, for example, foreign-born students
earned 62% of engineering doctorates in the
United States, and more than 70% of foreign-
born students who get doctorates in the United
States stay in the United States.19, 20 Often among
the more entrepreneurial in society, immigrants
invest in small businesses and rejuvenate urban
neighbourhoods—in Europe they are creating
commercial zones in abandoned areas to gen-
erate thousands of jobs.21

Today, countries of Western Europe and
Japan,  facing  the  prospect  of  aging  and
shrinking populations, are in dire need of fresh
inflows of people. Western Europe’s working
age population is forecast to fall from 225 mil-
lion in 1995 to 223 million by 2025.22 Accord-
ing to UN Population Division estimates, Europe
will have to double its intake of immigrants just
to maintain its population size by 2050.23

Barriers to entry have not been removed
for people as they have been for goods and cap-
ital. Yet migration has climbed rapidly in the
1990s, including undocumented migration that
has proliferated in the 1990s, reaching almost
30 million people worldwide (see feature 5.1).
Efforts to reverse the flows of people fight

against the tide of globalization.24 Significantly
reducing immigration would require measures
that are difficult to implement in democracies.

POLICY OPTIONS AND CHALLENGES—
CULTURAL RECOGNITION AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC
AND POLITICAL INCLUSION

Countries with historically large numbers of
immigrants have followed two approaches to in-
tegration, differentialism and assimilation. Dif-
ferentialism means maintaining clear boundaries
between groups and respecting them as separate
communities. Differentialist policies have typi-
cally been used when the state organizes immi-
gration to fill temporary labour needs and does
not expect migrants to become full members of
the local community. Examples are guest work-
ers in Germany in the 1960s and 1970s and do-
mestic servants in Saudi Arabia today. 

The other approach, assimilation, seeks to
make immigrants become “more like us”. The
state and other institutions encourage immi-
grants to learn the predominant national lan-
guage and adopt the social and cultural practices
of the receiving community. By the time immi-
grants’ children have passed through the primary
institutions of the new society, especially pub-
lic schools, they will be almost indistinguish-
able from the rest of the local community. The
image of the US “melting pot” best represents
this approach.

These two approaches, effective in earlier
decades, are inadequate in diverse societies that
need  to  build  respect  for  differences  and  a
commitment to unity. Culturally diverse soci-
eties are not predestined to disintegrate or to lose
their national cultures and identities. But ac-
commodating diversity requires efforts to build
cohesion in managing immigration and the in-
tegration of migrants into society. Just as there
are many ways in multi-ethnic states for ethnic
minorities to feel pride in their own community
as well as strong loyalty to the state, so too can
immigrants  become  full  members  of  their
adopted countries and still maintain ties to their
countries of origin. The challenge is to craft poli-
cies that integrate the objectives of unity and re-
spect for difference and diversity. Differentialism
does not build commitment to the country among

102

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

immigrants or provide adequate social protection.
And guest worker programmes can be a source
of exploitation and conflicts—“we wanted work-
ers, but we got people” was the reaction of some
(box 5.8). Assimilation does not accommodate
difference or respect for diversity, nor does it ex-
plicitly address asymmetry.

Immigrants are more inclined today—and
more able—than in the past to maintain close
connections with family and community in their
place of birth. Such connections are not new, but
the influence on social, economic and political
behaviour is different, thanks to the ease of mod-
ern communication and travel. Immigrants want
to keep a foot in each world—one in their place
of birth and the other in their adopted country.
Multiculturalism has recently become a third
approach to incorporating immigrants, one that
recognizes the value of diversity and supports
multiple identities. It began in Canada in the
early 1960s, when Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau
articulated the idea in response to the challenges
of a diverse population of indigenous people,
French and English settlers and recent immi-
grants, with major divisions and inequalities
among them. Australia introduced such a pol-
icy in the 1990s, after concluding that it was the
only way to create cohesion amid diversity.

Multiculturalism is not only about recogniz-
ing different value systems and cultural practices

within society—it is also about building a com-
mon commitment to core, non-negotiable val-
ues, such as human rights, rule of law, gender
equality, and diversity and tolerance.25 Australia
describes this as “United in Diversity”. Such a
policy emphasizes not only the freedom of in-
dividuals to express and share their cultural val-
ues but also their obligations to abide by mutual
civic obligations.

Although there is a historical sequence to
these models of immigrant integration, at any
one time countries use all three approaches.
While not adopting multiculturalism as an ex-
plicit state policy, many countries are intro-
ducing elements of this approach as they struggle
to manage growing diversity. The challenge in-
volves addressing cultural exclusions along three
dimensions, with a common theme of building
unity and respecting difference:
• Addressing cultural exclusion by recognizing
cultural identities (living mode exclusion).
• Addressing socio-economic exclusion (par-

ticipation exclusion).

• Addressing exclusion from civic participa-
tion and citizenship rights (participation
exclusion).
Addressing cultural exclusion by recog-
nizing  cultural  identities. Immigrant com-
munities might not suffer explicit discrimination
and suppression of their way of life, but most

Multiculturalism is about
building a common
commitment to core,
non-negotiable values

BOX 5.8

Temporary contracts—welcoming workers but not people does not work

As states struggle to control the flow of workers
in the globalized labor market, many are exper-
imenting with temporary migration programmes.
Immigrants recruited under such programmes are
not offered citizenship; they are expected to
work for a set period of time and then to go
back “home”, making little impact on national
culture and identity. Things rarely work that
way, however.

Nearly every region at some time has re-
cruited  temporary  workers  to  meet  specific
economic needs. In the 19th century hundreds
of thousands of South Indians were recruited
to the rubber plantations of Malaysia and to the
sugar  cane  plantations  of  Trinidad  and  To-
bago.  In  the  United  States  an  agricultural
labour programme that started as a temporary
solution to a shortage during World War II
Source: Bach 2004.

became a labour recruitment programme last-
ing several decades. A number of European
countries, including Germany and the Nether-
lands, experimented with “guest worker” pro-
grammes in the 1960s and early 1970s. More
recently, Middle Eastern oil-producing states
have  turned  to  temporary  labour  for  con-
struction and other projects. South Africa con-
tinues  to  depend  on  temporary  migrants  to
mine its natural resources and, in just the last
few years, Mexico has designed a programme
for 39,000 temporary workers from Guatemala
to harvest coffee.

Such programmes have provided opportu-
nities for many to work and earn, sending billions
home in remittances. But these programmes
have also created marginalized communities. In
the now famous phrase used to describe the

European guest worker programme, “We re-
cruited workers, but we got people.”

Many temporary workers often decide to
stay, despite government efforts to prevent this—
and then bring their families, creating commu-
nities of the undocumented. But because they are
excluded from the mainstream, they create ghetto
communities—feeding anti-immigrant senti-
ments. Explicit legal restrictions and powerful
informal social obstacles, such as physically seg-
regated housing compounds, also prevent im-
migrants from participating fully in society.

These situations leave immigrants without
protection from their home countries or their
host countries. Legal residents without citizen-
ship can be abused by employers and have lit-
tle recourse to the legal or social services of the
host country.

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

103

do suffer from a lack of support to practice it.
Perhaps more important, they often suffer from
the rejection of values felt to be in conflict with
core national values or from a social prejudice
that their culture is inferior (see box 5.7).

Combating social prejudice and xenopho-
bia is critical to building social harmony and
unity in diverse societies. Greater respect and
understanding for cultures can be fostered by
providing positive and accurate images in the
media, teaching the history of other cultures in
schools and preparing museum exhibitions that
demonstrate respect for cultural diversity and
address socio-economic discrimination and in-
equalities (box 5.9).

Religion is the most contested of cultural
identities. Greater recognition has enormous
practical value, making it easier to obtain per-
mits to build places of worship, establish bur-
ial grounds and hold celebrations. It also has
great symbolic value, demonstrating respect for
other cultures. The celebration of Eid at the
White House in 1996 was a strong sign of respect
for the millions of Muslims in the United States.
Controversies arise over support to religion in
secular states. As chapter 3 shows, secularism
does not necessarily mean no involvement by the
state in religion. The state can support religious

Some of the most divisive
issues of “us” and “not
us” concern traditional or
religious practices
thought to contradict
national values or 
human rights

BOX 5.9

How Berlin promotes respect for cultural difference

Berlin has earned a reputation in Germany
as a pioneer in promoting the integration of
immigrants. Berlin was the first among the
federal states to establish an office to ad-
dress obstacles to integration. In 1981 under
the motto “Miteinander leben” (living with
one another), the Commissioner’s Office of
the Berlin Senate for Migration and Inte-
gration established a campaign for toler-
ance, respect for others and understanding.
It conducts outreach activities in neigh-
bourhoods with a high proportion of immi-
grants and public information campaigns
describing the basic principles of the policy.
The office also provides counselling and
legal consultations in 12 languages, helping
immigrants find jobs and tackle discrimina-
tion. Together with non-governmental or-
ganizations, the office organizes regular
training for the police on relations towards

immigrants and conducts annual surveys on
local attitudes towards immigrants.

The Commissioner’s Office builds ca-
pacity  among  immigrant  organizations,
helps  immigrants  organize  into  self-help
groups and is a primary information source
for people seeking advice on integration.
Half of its €6.5 million annual budget goes
to  funding  immigrant  organizations  and
groups.

The Commissioner’s Office has
brought integration concerns to the atten-
tion  of  the  media  and  the  public.  It  has
opened a direct channel of communication
between  immigrants  and  government.  It
has also focused on activities for both im-
migrant populations and ethnic Germans,
showing  that  integration  is  a  two-way
process.  Many  other  federal  states  have
copied Berlin’s example.

Source: IOM 2003c; European Union 2004; Independent Commission on Migration to Germany 2001.

activity in ways that do not favour one religion
over another, such as support to all religious
schools. But the religions of immigrants are not
always treated the same as the religion of the ma-
jority population.

Some of the most divisive issues of “us”
and “not us” concern traditional or religious
practices that are thought to contradict national
values or human rights. Cultural recognition
does not simply mean defending tradition. It
means promoting cultural liberty and human de-
velopment. And immigrant communities them-
selves need to challenge “traditional values”
that conflict with core national values or human
rights.

Addressing socio-economic inclusion. The
175 million people who live outside their coun-
tries of birth are a very mixed group. From highly
skilled  professionals  to  the  young  men  and
women who are smuggled across borders to
work in sweat shops, they include people who
have been in the country for decades and those
who arrived only yesterday. And the ranks of “im-
migrant communities” that are politically mobi-
lized expand beyond the 175 million to include
the relatives and even friends of immigrants.

Not all immigrants suffer socio-economic
exclusion. For those who do, that exclusion takes
many different forms. The biggest problem is that
in many countries the poverty of immigrant
groups divides society. It gives rise to anti-
immigrant movements and accusations that im-
migrants are unwilling or unable to be productive
members of society, that they live together in ghet-
tos with no interest in integrating with the rest
of  society.  State  support  to  address  socio-
economic exclusion of immigrant groups is there-
fore a critical part of building social harmony.
Education and language are the first step.
Many countries have proactive programmes
for integration that offer instruction in the coun-
try’s national language. More controversial is the
use of immigrants’ mother tongues in schools
and in official communication. No single for-
mula is appropriate for all situations. But ob-
jections to the use of mother tongues are often
more ideological than pragmatic. People learn
better, respect laws and generally participate in
the life of a community more fully if they can
understand better. Learning the language of

104

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Extending the civic rights
traditionally associated
with citizenship to non-
citizens is a critical step,
as is the recognition of
dual nationality 

the state is critical, but there will be lags in
achieving proficiency.

Also controversial is the issue of social wel-
fare protection for non-citizens, including un-
documented residents. The fear—difficult to
prove or disprove—is that social protection en-
courages more inflows of people, who in turn
become dependent on the state. But the reality
is that without welfare protection, the broader
social consequences would be worse. And states
have an obligation to protect and promote
human rights—for all their residents.

Addressing exclusion from civic partici-
pation and citizenship rights. Many immigrants
are not citizens. For that reason they are ex-
cluded from the bundle of obligations and rights
that states and their citizens have to each other.
Without such rights immigrants lack access to the
jobs and services that help them become fully
contributing members of society. They also lack
protection from abuse. Naturalization is intended
to be the answer, but most states are beginning
to rethink their policies in response to rising
flows, temporary and circular movements and
transnational multiple identities.

Extending the civic rights traditionally as-
sociated with citizenship to non-citizens is a
critical step, as is the recognition of dual na-
tionality. Many countries, including Denmark,
the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden, have
extended voting rights to non-citizens in local
elections. In other countries, like Belgium, such
rights are likely to be extended soon. Some 30
countries now acknowledge dual nationality.
But there are also contradictory trends of re-
strictions on access to long-term residence, nat-
uralization and citizenship, and social services.
For example, California recently made it im-
possible for immigrants without legal residence
to acquire drivers’ licences, effectively exclud-
ing them from many jobs and other activities es-
sential in everyday life.

A globally interdependent world needs a
new approach to citizenship for native residents

and immigrants that incorporates the funda-
mental  principles  of  human  rights  into  a
multicultural strategy for advancing human
development—a strategy that benefits everyone.

*

*

*

States, communities, institutions and individu-
als all have to make choices:
• Should states seek to impose a homogeniz-
ing and unchanging national identity? Or
should they celebrate diversity, helping to
foster syncretic and evolving societies?

• Should communities protect tradition even
if it narrows choice and freedoms? Or should
they use their common knowledge and re-
sources for exchange and mutual benefit?
• Should international institutions persist with
rules that adhere to particular cultural and
legal traditions? Or should they recognize,
respect and promote the products and re-
sources of other cultures, strengthening the
legitimacy of institutions?

• Should  individuals  restrict  themselves 
to singular identities? Or should they rec-
ognize themselves as part of an interlinked
humanity?
Democracy and equitable growth are im-
portant in fostering cultural inclusion. But they
are not enough. Multicultural policies for cultural
inclusion—recognizing differences, supporting
diversity and mitigating asymmetries of power—
are also needed. Individuals have to shed rigid
identities if they are to become part of a diverse
society. International institutions have to respect
other cultural traditions and create enabling con-
ditions for developing local cultural resources.
Poor countries and marginalized communities
have to be given a greater voice in negotiations
involving their cultures and rights and fair com-
pensation for the use of their resources. Only
under these circumstances will multiple and
complementary identities evolve across national
boundaries. Only then will identity and free-
dom flourish in a culturally diverse world.

GLOBALIZATION AND CULTURAL CHOICE

105

Notes

Chapter 1
1. Smith 1976.
2. Kymlicka and Norman 2000; Benhabib 2002; Kymlicka
1990; Stepan 2001; Taylor 1992.
3. Fraser and Honneth 2003.
4. Hart 1955, pp. 175–91.
5. Sen 2004c.
6. Sen 2004c.
7. Sandel 1998.
8. Sandel 1998.
9. Crowley 1987.
10. Sen 1999, 2001.
11. Appiah 1996, p. 84.
12. This section is drawn from Sen 2002.
13. As quoted in Mokyr 1983, p. 291.
14. This section is drawn from Sen 2004b.
15. Harrison and Huntington 2000, p. xiii.
16. Kymlicka and Norman 2000; Stepan 2001; Young 2000.
17. Sen 2003.
18. Aston 1972.
19. Mandela 1994, p. 21.
20. Okin 1999.

Chapter 2
1. Kymlicka 1996.
2. HDRO calculations based on CIA 2003.
3. Statistics Canada 2004.
4. Kymlicka 2004.
5. UNDP 2003e.
6. Dragoljub 2000.
7. Gurr 2000.
8. While there is no internationally agreed on definition of in-
digenous people, a widely accepted understanding of indige-
nous people may be found in UNDP 2004a.
9. UNDP 2004c.
10. Stavenhagen 2004.
11. Minority Rights Group International 2003.
12. Bell-Fiakoff 1993, pp. 110–21; Kiernan 1999; The Bangkok
Post 2000; 2001. The vast majority of this reduction in num-
bers was from introduced diseases. The extent of intent is un-
clear, and it appears to be more of a case of non-prevention.
13. Indigenous Australia 2003.
14. During 1992.
15. UN 2002a.
16. HDRO calculations based on Wanner 2002. Total refers
to 15 European countries with data: Austria, Belgium, Den-
mark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Liechten-
stein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden
and Switzerland.
17. The Guardian 2001.
18. Migration Information Source 2003.
19. UN 2002a.

20. UN 2002a.
21. Kelso and Vasagar 2002.
22. Statistical feature 1, The state of human development,
in this volume.
23. Statistical feature 1, The state of human development,
in this volume.
24. Statistical feature 1, The state of human development,
in this volume.
25. Statistical feature 1, The state of human development,
in this volume.
26. Calculations based on the Polity IV Project 2003.
27. Kymlicka 2004.
28. Wikipedia 2004.
29. Zolberg 2004.
30. Human Rights Watch 2002.
31. Human Rights Watch 2002.
32. International Federation of Human Rights 2003.
33. Zolberg 2004.
34. UNESCO 2003b.
35. UNESCO 2003b.
36. Calculations based on UNESCO 2000c.
37. SIL International 2004b.
38. The Minorities at Risk (MAR) Project 2003.
39. Calculations based on the Minorities at Risk (MAR) Project
2003.
40. Human Rights Watch 2003.
41. Libanio 2004.
42. Kanyinga 2003.
43. Fraenkel 2003.
44. Premdas 2003.
45. Calculations based on the Minorities at Risk (MAR) Project
2003.
46. UNDP 2000c.
47. Dragoljub 2000.
48. Alvim 2002.
49. Bryld and others 2003.
50. UNDP 2003e.
51. UNDP 2000c.
52. Kymlicka 2004.
53. Kymlicka 2004.
54. Arizpe 2004.
55. Sen 2004b.
56. Huntington 1996.
57. Sen 2004b.
58. Sen 2004b.
59. See, for example, Inglehart 1997.
60. Sen 2004b
61. Inglehart and Baker 2000; Sen 2004b.
62. Barro and McLeary 2003.
63. Sen 2004b.
64. Sen 2004b.
65. See, for example, Etounga-Manguelle 2000.

NOTES

107

66. Sen 2004b.
67. Indicator table 13.
68. UNDP 2003b.
69. Sen 2004b.
70. Stepan and Robertson 2003, pp. 30–44.
71. Sen 2004b.
72. Stepan and Robertson 2003. Countries with average GDP
per capita under $1,500.
73. UNDP 2003a.
74. UNDP 2003a.
75. Not counting the peoples of former European colonies.
76. Marshall and Gurr 2003.
77. Huntington 1996.
78. Stewart 2003.
79. Cohen 1974; Alexander and McGregor 2000; Ranger 1983;
Turton 1997, pp. 77–94.
80. Collier and Hoeffler 2001.
81. Justiniano 2004.
82. Stewart 2003.
83. Stewart 2002.
84. See, for example, Easterley and Levine 1997, pp. 1203–50.
85. See, for example, Easterley and Levine 1997, pp. 1203–50.
86. Snodgrass 1995.
87. The Economist 2002a.
88. Kapur and McHale 2003, pp. 48–57.
89. Kapur and McHale 2003, pp. 48–57.
90. “Charter oath” as cited in Sen 2004b.
91. Sen 2004b.
92. UNDP 2003a.
93. Florida and Gates 2002, pp. 32–35.

Chapter 3
1. Benhabib 1996.
2. Kymlicka and Norman 2000.
3. Moncrieffe 2004, pp 32–33, has an interesting discussion of
the founding ideology of the revolutionary movement in Cuba,
which argues that the racial problem was subsumed within the
general battle against social injustice in all is manifestations.
4. Sheth 2004.
5. Okin 1999.
6. Moncrieffe 2004.
7. Prashad 2001.
8. Kymlicka 1996.
9. Young 2000.
10. Requejo 2001.
11. Young 1999.
12. Snyder 2000, p. 327.
13. Martínez-Herrera 2002, pp. 1–22.
14. Alfred 1995.
15. Watts 1998.
16. ILO 2003.
17. ILO 2003.
18. Luter and Deschouwer 1999.
19. Fleiner 2003.
20. Moncrieffe 2004.
21. O’Leary 2004.
22. O’Leary 2004.
23. Boix 1999, pp. 609–24.
24. Nagel 2004.
25. O’Leary 2004.
26. Cohn 1996; Kaviraj 1992; Hansen 2001; Corbridge and
Harriss 2000; Dirks 2004.
27. Phillips 2001.
28. Care 1999. 
29. Schacher 2001.
30. Tetley 1999. 
31. Dirks 2004.
32. Kuruk 2002.
33. Thompson 2001.

34. Haffajee 1999.  
35. Zorzi 2002.
36. This was unequivocally shown by the European Court of
Human Rights in the Belgian linguistic case (de Varennes
1996, pp. 291–300).
37. Dutcher 1982.
38. Cummings and Tamayo 1994.
39. Ndoye 2003.
40. Patrinos and Velez 1996.
41. Patrinos and Velez 1996.
42. India 2004.
43. Ndoye 2003.
44. Matiki 2003.
45. Moeketsi 1999.
46. Temu 2000.
47. Eades 2004, pp. 23 and 113–33.
48. De Varennes 1996, pp. 291–300.
49. Chua 2003.
50. Duncan, Jefferis and Molutsi 2000.
51. Moyo 2004.
52. Psacharopoulos and Patrinos 1994.
53. UNICEF 2004.
54. United Nations Association of Great Britain and North-
ern Ireland 2004.
55. UNICEF 2004.
56. Psacharopoulos and Patrinos 1994.
57. Miguel 1999.
58. Alesina, Baqir and Easterly 1997.
59. Luttmer 1997.
60. Yashar 2004.
61. Sheth 2004.
62. For instance, in the Surat District of Gujarat in the 1960s
about 80% of primary school teachers were members of tribal
groups. This enabled members of the tribal groups in the dis-
trict to access political power in Gujarat. They have become
members of the legislative assembly and members of Parlia-
ment (which was mechanically possible through quotas) and
also ministers and chief minister of the state. This political power
was then used to acquire other linkages.
63. Sabbagh 2004.

Feature 3.1
1. Kymlicka 2004.
2. Kymlicka 2004.
3. Stepan, Linz and Yadav 2004.
4. Breytenbach 2000.
5. Keating 2002.
6. Linz and Stepan 1996.
7. Stepan 2001.
8. Bhargava 2004.
9. Stepan, Linz and Yadav 2004.

Chapter 4
1. CPS 2002; DUMC 2002; EUMC 2002; FBI 2002; SSS
2002. The number for the United States does not include hate
crimes motivated by sexual orientation or disability.
2. RAND Corporation 2004.
3. Engineer 2004. Casualties include numbers killed and in-
jured. For 1954–94 the data are from Home Ministry records.
For 1995–2002 the data are from newspaper accounts.
4. Noting the threat posed by extremist organizations, in Au-
gust 2001 Pakistan banned the Lashkar-e-Jhangvi. In January
2002 it banned the Sipah-e-Sahaba and Tehreek-i-Jafariya
(South Asia Monitor 2003).
5. Symonds 2003.
6. ADL 2003.
7. Mudde 2000.
8. Eatwell 2000.
9. Arjomand 1989, cited in De Kadt 2004, p. 23.

108

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

10. Sands 2003. Estimates are those of Pakistan’s Minister of
Education, Zubaida Jalal.
11. Macan-Markar 2004.
12. Entzinger 2003; Meyer 2001.
13. Kaldor and Muro 2003, p. 179.
14. The Economist 2003a, p. 19.
15. Testas 2002.
16. AFP 2004.
17. Widfeldt 2001.

Chapter 5
1. Gandhi 1921.
2. World Bank 2002.
3. Tebtebba and Forest Peoples Programme 2003.
4. World Bank 2002.
5. Forero 2003; The New York Times 2003.
6. World Bank 2004.
7. European Union 2003.
8. In the United States, for example, these have become some
of the strongest export sectors, providing much needed export
revenues at a time when the country is facing a ballooning trade
deficit.
9. Assuming a $3 admission price, an estimated 1 in every 10
people around the world saw the film Titanic. Moreover, its
titanic $200 million production cost is dwarfed by its rev-
enues: over $1.8 billion worldwide of which $1.2 billion came
from abroad (Internet Movie Database 2004). Such cost struc-
tures often create very high entry costs in domestic—let alone
international—markets that justify public intervention.
10. Extensive literature on this matter and more details on the
theory behind how the industry works can be found in Vogel
2001.
11. Cohen 2004.
12. The quality of French audiovisual programming deterio-
rated rapidly after the introduction of a heavy system of quo-
tas for national content (Cohen 2004).
13. Riding 2003.
14. Cohen 2004.
15. Cross-subsidization initiatives like this are already raising
concerns by some groups, who often attack them on nation-
alistic grounds (Buck 2004).

16. Front National 2004.
17. Lega Nord 2004.
18. Council of Europe 2000.
19. Bhagwati 2003, pp. 98–104.
20. IOM 2003c.
21. Niessen 2000.
22. Geddes 2002.
23. UN 2000b.
24. The Economist 2002a.
25. IOM 2003a.

Feature 5.1
1. IOM 2003b.
2. ATSIA 2003.
3. World Bank 2004.
4. CSD and ICC 2002.
5. Moody 2000.
6. WIPO 2003d.
7. UNESCO 2000a.
8. UNESCO 2000b.
9. Mishra 2003.
10. UNESCO 2000a.
11. Riding 2003.
12. UNESCO 2000a.
13. UNESCO 2000a.
14. Cohen 2004.
15. Cohen 2004.
16. World Bank 2003.
17. UN 2003a.
18. IOM 2003b.
19. UN 2002a.
20. UN 2002a.
21. IOM 2004.
22. Wanner 2002.
23. IOM 2003c.
24. Kapur and McHale 2003, pp. 48–57.
25. UN 2002b.
26. UN 2002b.
27. IOM 2003c.

NOTES

109

Bibliographic note

Chapter 1 draws on Agarwal 1994; Ambedkar 2002; Appadurai
1996; Appiah 1996; Appiah and Gates 1995; Arizpe 2000; Aston
1972; Avrami, Mason, and De La Torre 2000; Basu 1992; Ben-
habib 1996, 2002; Blau 1993, 2001; Crowley 1987; Fraser 1995,
1997; Fraser and Honneth 2003; Goody 1996; Granovetter 1985;
Greif  1994;  Gutmann  1994,  1995;  Gutmann  and  Thompson
1996;  Habermas  1975,  1996;  Harrison  and  Huntington  2000;
Hart 1955; Huntington 1996; Kymlicka 1990; Kymlicka and Nor-
man 2000; Lenoir 1989; Linz and Stepan 1996; Mandela 1994;
Mansbridge 1998; Mokyr 1983; Nussbaum 1995; Nussbaum and
Glover 1995; Okin 1999; Ostrom 1990, 1998; Pattanaik 1998; Plat-
teau 2000; Putnam 1993; Putnam, Leonardi, and Nanetti 1993;
Rodgers,  Gore,  and  Figueirdo  1995;  Runciman  1966;  Sandel
1998; Sen 1984, 1999, 2001, 2002, 2004a, 2003, 2004c, Forth-
coming;  Silver  1995;  Smith  1976;  Stepan  2001;  Taylor  1992;
Throsby  1999;  Townsend  1979;  UN  2000a;  UNESCO  1998,
2000c; Weber 1976; and Young 2000.

Chapter 2 draws on Afrikanska Språk 2004; Alexander and
McGregor 2000; Alvim 2002; Ansari 2002; The Arizona Repub-
lic 2003; Arizpe 2004; The  Associated  Press 2003; Australian
Bureau of Statistics 2004; The Bangkok Post 2000, 2001; Barro
and McCleary 2003; Bell-Fiakoff 1993; Bengwayan 2003; Bird
2003; Brindis and others 2002; Bromley 1974; CIA 2003; Cohen
1974; Collier and Hoeffler 2001; Davenport 2004; Discover France
2000; Douglas 1988; Dragoljub 2000; During 1992, 1993; Easter-
ley and Levine 1997; Etounga-Manguelle 2000; France, Ministère
de Jeunesse, Éducation et Recherche 2004; FBI 2004; Florida and
Gates 2002; Fraenkel 2003; Fukuda-Parr 2001; Goldstone 1998;
The  Guardian 2001; Gurr 1993, 2000; Human Rights Watch
2002, 2003; Huntington 1996; IOE 2003; IOM 2003c; India, Min-
istry of Personnel 2002; India, Office of the Registrar General
2004; Indigenous Australia 2003; Inglehart 1997; Inglehart and
Wayne 2000; International Federation of Human Rights 2003; Ja-
cobs 2003; Justiniano 2004; Justino and Litchfield 2003; Kanyinga
2003; Kapur and McHale 2003; Kelso and Vasagar 2002; Kiernan
1999; Kymlicka 2004; Lavery 2004; Libanio 2004; Linz and Stepan
1996; Marshall 2000; Marshall and Gurr 2003; Mexico, Ministry
of Health 2004; Migration Information Source 2003; The Mi-
norities at Risk Project 2003; Minority Rights Group International
2003; NARAL Pro Choice 2004; The New York Times 2003;
Nicaragua Network 2004; Opondo 2004; The Pew Research Cen-
ter 2003; The Polity IV Project 2003; Ponzio 2004; Premdas 2003;
Ranger 1983; Rutter 1998; Schwenken 2003; Sen 2002, 2004b; SIL
International 2004b; Smith 1986, 1991; Snodgrass 1995; Stam-
atopoulou 2002; Statistics Canada 2004; Statistics Sweden 2004;
Stavenhagen 2004; Stepan and Robertson 2003; Stepanov 2004;
Stewart 2002, 2003; Third World Network 2003; Turton 1997; UN
2002a, 2003b, 2004; UNDP 2000a, 2000b, 2000c, 2002a, 2002b,
2003a, 2003b, 2003c, 2003e, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c; UNESCO
2000c; 2003b, 2004a; Valdés 2002; WHO 2001; Walden 2000; Wan-
ner 2002; Wikipedia 2004; World Values Survey 2004; World
Bank 2004; and Zolberg 2004.

Chapter 3 draws on Addison and Rahman 2001; Alesina,
Baquir, and Easterly 1997; Austin and O'Neill 2000; Awakuni
and Mio 2000; Bangura 2004; Baqir and Easterly 1997; Bardhan
1997; Baron and Diermeier 2001; Barry 2001; Bauböck 2001;

Bauböck and Rundell 1998; Benhabib 1996; Bgoya and others 1997;
Bhargava 2004; Bird 2003; Boix 1999; Boothroyd 2004; Boulle 1984;
Bowen and Derek 1998; Breytenbach 2000; Brint and Renéo 2001;
Brock-Utne 2002; Brown and Ganguly 1997; Bryld and others 2003;
Burnley 2001; Buvollen 2002; Caballero 2003; Care 1999; Carens
2000; Chua 2003; Cohn 1996; Congleton 2000; Congleton, Kyri-
acou and Bacaria 1999; Conversi 2002; Corbridge and Harriss
2000; CRIP 2004; Cummings and Tamayo 1994; De Varennes
1996; Delgado-Moreira 2000; D'Ercole and Salvini 2003; Dirks
2004; Donders 2003; Doomernik 2001; Duncan and Molutsi 2000;
Dunleavy and O'Leary 1987; Dutcher 1982; Eades 2004; The
Economist 2004a; Edgerton 1996; Elazar 1998; Engineer 2003; Fa-
funwa 1990; Feldman 2002; Fleiner 2003; Fossas 1999; Fraser
1989; Funke 2001; Gill 2001; Giovarelli and Akmatova 2002;
Goodman 2004; Griffiths and Nerenberg 2002; Grillo 1998; Grin
2003; Halfin 2002; Hammer and Schulz 2003; Hansen 2001; Hard-
ing and Narayan 2000; Harris and Reilly 1998; Hastrup 2001;
Helwege 1995; Hoodfar and Pazira 2003; ILO 2001, 2003; Indian
and Northern Affairs Canada 2004; India, Ministry of Education
2004; Jarkko and Smith 2001; Jefferis and Molutsi 2000; Jomo 2004;
Jureidini 2001; Kanbur 2001; Kaviraj 1992; Kearns and Sarat
1997, 1999; Keating 2002; Kertzer and Arel 2002; Klaus 2003; Knop
2002; Knowles and Amit-Talai 1996; Kuruk 2002; Kymlicka 1990,
1996, 1998, 2001, 2004; Kymlicka and Norman 2000; Leibfried and
Rieger 2003; Lewis 1998, 2003; Lewis and Miller 2003; Licha
2002; Linz and Stepan 1978; Linz and Yadav 2004; Ljiphart 1984;
Lott 1998; Loury 2001; Lukes and Joppke 1999; Luter and De-
schouwer 1999; Luttmer 1997; Macedo 2000; Malhotra 2002;
Martínez-Herrera 2002; Matiki 2003; Mazrui 1996; McRae 1974;
Medrano 2002; Mehrotra and Delamonica Forthcoming; Miguel
1999; Modood and Werbner 1997; Mody 2003; Moeketsi 1999;
Moghadam 2004; Moncrieffe 2004; Moya 2002; Moyo 2004; My-
erson 1991; Nagel 2004; National Commission on Indigenous
Peoples 2004a, 2004b; Ndoye 2003; Neville 2001; Ocampo 2001;
Office of Personnel Management 2003; Okin 1999; O'Leary 2004,
Forthcoming; Parekh 2000; Patrinos and Velez 1996; Patterson and
Susser 2001; Phillips 2001; Prah 2000, 2004; Prashad 2001; Preis
2004; Psacharopoulos and Patrinos 1994; Reiss 2002; Renshon 2001;
Requejo 2001; Richey 2003; Rotimi 2001; Rubin 2004; Rudolph
2001; Russell 2002; Sabbagh 2004; Sarat and Simon 2003; Schacher
2001; Schultz and Mwabo 1998; Schulze 1999; Sepúlveda 2003;
Sheth 2004; SIL International 2004a; South Africa, Ministry of
Labour 2004; Snyder 2000; Stepan 2001; Subirats 2003; Taiaiake
1995; Tauli-Corpus 2004; Temu 2000; Tetley 1999; Thompson 2001;
Tran 2000; UN 1994; UNDP 2003d; UNICEF 2001, 2004; United
Nations Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 2004;
U.S. Census Bureau 2004b; U.S. Department of Labor 2004; Van
der Westhuizen 2002; Vuchelen 2003; Watts 1998, 1999, 2002; Wil-
lett 1998; World Bank 2003; Wright 2001; Yashar 2004; Young
1999, 2000; and Zorzi 2002.

Chapter 4 draws on Abed-Kotob 1995; Abuza 2002; ADL
2003; AFP 2004; Arjomand 1989; Barraclough 1998; Berman
2003; Bhavnani and Backer 2000; Brumberg 2002; Byman and oth-
ers 2001; Campagna 1996; Caplan 1987; Chicuecue 1997; CNN
2003; Conner 1986; Cornell and Spector 2002; CPS 2002; De
Kadt 2004; DUMC 2002; Eatwell 2000; The Economist 2000,

110

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

2003a, 2003b; Electionworld.org 2004; Engineer 2004; Entelis
2002; Entzinger 2003; Esman 1986; EUMC 2002; Fahmy 1998; FBI
1999, 2002; Gerges 2000; Godmer and Kestel 2001; Grove and
Carter 1999; Gurr 1993; Hafez 2000; Haubrich 2003; HinduU-
nity.org 2004; Hoffman 1998-99; Honwana 1999; Iganski 2002;
Ignazi 2003; IRR 2003; Jackman and Volpert 1996; Jeness 2002;
Kaldor and Muro 2003; Kogacioglu 2003; Koh 2002; Leone and
Angrig 2003; Levin 2001; Levin and McDevitt 1999; Mabry 1998;
Macan-Markar 2004; Mamdani 2001; Martínez-Herrera 2002;
Marty and Appleby 1991, 1993, 1995; Mayer 2001; Meyer 2001;
Middle East Institute 2003; The Minorities at Risk Project 2003;
Moreau Yousafazai, and Hussain 2003; Mudde 2000; Pehdazur
2001; Prah 2004; RAND Corporation 2004; Roberts 2002; Rotar
2002; Rubin 2004; Sands 2003; SATP 2004; Scott 2003; Sen 2004a;
Shain 1994-95; Shain and Barth 2003; Sheffer 1986, 1993; Sivan
2003; South Asia Monitor 2003; SSS 2002; Stern 2000, 2003; Sus-
ning.nu 2004; Swedish Election Authority 2002; Symonds 2003;
Testas 2002; Tremlett 2002; UNESCO 2001; U.S. Department of
Justice 2001; Van Holsteyn 2003; Wahlbeck 2002; Wanandi 2002;
Wedgwood 2002; Widfeldt 2001, 2004; Moreau, Yousafzai and
Hussain 2003; Zelkina 1999; and Zhao 1998.

Chapter 5 draws on Aleinikoff and Klusmeyer 2000; ATSIA
2003; Australian Bureau of Statistics 2001; Bach 2004; Bhagwati
2003; Brucker and others 2001; Brumann 1999; Buck 2004; CBD
2002; Clifford 1988; Cohen 2004; Commission on Intellectual

Property Rights 2002; Coombe 1998; Council of Europe 2000;
Coussey 2000; CSD and ICC 2002; De Ferranti and others 2003;
Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs 2003; Doomernik 2001; Droege and Soete 2001; The Econ-
omist 2002a, 2002b, 2004b; European Union 2003; European
Union 2004; Fermin 2001; Financial Times 2004; Forero 2003;
Front National 2004; Garson and Loizillon 2003; Geddes 2002;
Ghosh 2003; Graeme 2003; Independent Commission on Migra-
tion to Germany 2001; Inglis 2004; International Council on Met-
als and the Environment 1999; The Internet Movie Database 2004;
IOM 2003a, 2003b, 2003c, 2004; Kongolo 2001; Koopmans 2002;
Kymlicka 2003; Lega Nord 2004; McPhail 2000; Mgbeoji 2001;
Mishra 2003; Moody 2000; Niessen Jan 2000; Norchi 2000; OECD
2003; Olwig and Hastrup 1997; Ostergard and Altman 2001;
Papademetriou 2003; Preis 2004; Public Citizen 2004; Riding
2003; Rodwin 2002; Rosaldo 1989; Salomon and Sengupta 2003;
Sen 2004a; Stalker 2002; Statistics Canada 2004; Stavenhagen
2004; Tebtebba and Forest Peoples Programme 2003; Tebtebba
and International Forum on Globalization 2003;  UIS 2001; UN
2000b, 2002a, 2002b, 2003a; UNCTAD 1999; UNDP 1999; UN-
ESCO 2000a, 2000b, 2000c, 2002, 2003a, 2003c, 2004b; UN
HABITAT forthcoming; U.S. Census Bureau 2004a; WIPO 2003b,
2003c, 2003d, 2004; World Bank 2002, 2004; World Commission
on Culture and Development 1995; Yashar 2004; and Zolberg 2001,
2004.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTE

111

Bibliography

Background papers

Conceptual studies
Arizpe, Lourdes. 2004. “Notes on Cultural Policies and Best Prac-

tices in Cultural Diversity.”
Bach, Robert. 2004. “Migration.”
Cohen, Elie. 2004. “Économie de L’Exception Culturelle.”
De Kadt, Emanuel. 2004. “Curbing Coercive Identities.”
Deere, Carolyn. 2003. “Building Inclusive Societies: Managing

Diversity.”

Dirks, Nicholas. 2004. “Colonial and Postcolonial Histories: Com-

parative Reflections on the Legacies of Empire.”

Kymlicka, Will. 2004. “Culturally Responsive Policies.”
O’Leary, Brendan. 2004. “Building Inclusive States.”
Sabbagh, Daniel. 2004. “Affirmative Action Policies: An Interna-

tional Perspective.”

Sen, Amartya. 2004a. “Cultural Freedom and Human Development.”
Stavenhagen, Rodolfo. 2004. “Indigenous Peoples in Comparative

Perspective.”

Stepan, Alfred, Juan J. Linz, and Yogendra Yadav. 2004. “”Na-
tion State” or “State Nation”?: Conceptual Reflections and
Some Spanish, Belgian and Indian Data.”

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004. “BCPR
(Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery) Geneva: Con-
tribution to HDR2004.”

Regional studies
Bhargava, Rajeev. 2004. “Inclusion and Exclusion in South Asia:

The Role of Religion.”

Jomo, K. S., with Wee Chong Hui 2004. “Affirmative Action and
Exclusion in Malaysia: Ethnic and Regional Inequalities in a
Multicultural Society.”

Moghadam, Valentine. 2004. “Cultural Traditions and Gender

Equality in the Arab Region.”

Moncrieffe, Joy. 2004. “Ethnic Diversity and State Response in the

Caribbean.”

Moyo, Sam. 2004. “Dominance of Ethnic and Racial Groups: The

African Experience.”

Prah, Kwesi Kwaa. 2004. “African Wars and Ethnic Conflict—

Rebuilding Failed States.”

Rubin, Barnett R. 2004. “Central Asia: Wars and Ethnic Con-

flicts—Rebuilding Failed States.”

Sheth, D. L. 2004. “Caste, Ethnicity and Exclusion in South Asia:
The Role of Affirmative Action Policies in Building Inclusive
Societies.”

Yashar, Deborah. 2004. “Citizenship and Ethnic Politics in Latin

America: Building Inclusive Societies.”

Zolberg, Aristide. 2004. “The Democratic Management of Cultural
Differences: Building Inclusive Societies in Western Europe
and North America.”

References

Abed-Kotob, Sana. 1995. “The Accommodationists Speak: Goals
and Strategies of the Muslim Brotherhood of Egypt.” Inter-
national Journal of Middle East Studies 27(3): 321–39.

Abuza, Zachary. 2002. “Tentacles of Terror: Al Qaeda’s South-
east Asian Network.” Contemporary Southeast Asia 24(3):
427–65.

Addison, T., and A. Rahman. 2001. “Why is So Little Spent on Ed-
ucating the Poor?” Discussion Paper 2001/29. World Insti-
tute for Development Economics Research, Helsinki.

ADL (Anti-Defamation League). 2003. “Extremism in America.”

[http://www.adl.org/learn/ext_us/]. December 2003.

AFP (Agence France Presse). 2004. “Pakistan Approves 100 Mil-

lion Dollars to Reform Religious Schools.” 7 January.

Afrikanska Språk. 2004. “Small and Endangered Languages of
Africa: A Bibliographical Survey.” Stockholm. [http://www.
african.gu.se/research/elbiblio.html]. February 2004.

Agarwal, Bina. 1994. A Field Of One’s Own; Gender and Land
Rights in South Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Aleinikoff, T. Alexander, and Douglas Klusmeyer, eds. 2000.
From Migrants to Citizens: Membership in a Changing
World. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 1997. Public
Goods and Ethnic Divisions. NBER Working Paper 6009.
Washington, DC: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alexander, J., and J. McGregor. 2000. “Ethnicity and the Politics of
Conflict: The Case of Matabeleland.” In S. F. Nafziger and R.
Vayrynen, eds. War, Hunger and Displacement: The Origin
of Human Emergencies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Alfred, Taiaiake. 1995. Heeding the Voices of Our Ancestors: Mo-
hawk Politics and the Rise of Native Nationalism. Toronto:
Oxford University Press.

Alvim, Marta. 2002. “Mixed Race, Mixed Feeling.” Los Angeles.

[http://www.brazil.com/cvmar02.com]. February 2004.

Ambedkar, B. R. 2002. “Basic Features of the Indian Constitution.”
In Valerian Rodriguez, ed. The Essential Writings of B.R.
Ambedkar. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Ansari, Humayun. 2002. “Muslims in Britain.” Minority Rights
Group International, London. [http://www.minorityrights.
org/admin/Download/Pdf/muslimsinbritain.pdf]. February
2004.

Appadurai, Arjun. 1996. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions
of Globalization. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Appiah, K. Anthony. 1996. “Race, Culture, Identity: Misunderstood
Connections.” In K. Anthony Appiah and Amy Gutmann, eds.
Color  Consciousness:  The  Political  Morality  of  Race.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Appiah, K. Anthony, and Henry Gates. 1995. Identities. Chicago:

University Chicago Press.

Arizpe, Lourdes. 2000. “Cultural Heritage and Globalization.” In
Erica Avrami, Randall Mason, and Marta De La Torre, eds.
Values  and  Heritage  Conservation. Los Angeles: Getty
Conservation Institute.

The Arizona Republic. 2003. “English-Only Latinos on the Rise.”
5 May. [http://www.azcentral.com/arizonarepublic/news/ar-
ticles/0505speakingspanish.html]. February 2004.

Arjomand, Said Amir. 1989. “The Emergence of Islamic Political
Ideologies.” In James A. Beckford and Thomas Luckman, eds.
The Changing Face of Religion. London: Sage.

112

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

The Associated Press. 2003. “Falun Gong Turns to International
Courts in Campaign Against Chinese Leadership.” 26 Sep-
tember. [http://www.rickross.com/reference/fa_lun_gong/
falun282.html]. February 2004.

Aston, W. G. 1972. Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Ear-

liest Time to A.D. 697. Tokyo: Tuttle.

ATSIA (Office of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, De-
partment of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs,  Australia).  2003.  “Land  and  Native  Title.”
[http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/atsia/facts/pdf/land.pdf].
December 2003.

Austin, Dennis, and Michael O’Neill, eds. 2000. Democracy and

Cultural Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2004. “Indigenous Health: Greater
Risks, Shorter Life Expectancy.” Canberra. [http://www.abs.
gov.au/Ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/39A210FEEAE928D4CA
256AB7007FBBFE]. February 2004.

Australian Bureau of Statistics, Community Relations Commission,
Census Statistics. 2001. “The People of New South Wales.”
[http://www.crc.nsw.gov.au/statistics/Nsw/SydneyStatistical
Division4pp.pdf]. March 2004.

Avrami, Erica, Randall Mason, and Marta De La Torre, eds. 2000.
Values  and  Heritage  Conservation. Los Angeles: Getty
Conservation Institute.

Awakuni, Gene, and Jeffery Scott Mio. 2000. Resistance to Multi-
culturalism:  Issues  and  Interventions. Philadelphia and
London: Brunner/Mazel.

The Bangkok Post. 2000. “Australia’s Aboriginal Genocides.” 10

September.

———. 2001. “The Genocide of Native Americans.” 29 July.
Bangura, Yusuf. 2004. “Ethnic Structure, Inequality and Gover-
nance of the Public Sector.” United Nations Research Insti-
tute for Social Development, Geneva.

Bardhan, Pranab. 1997. “Method in the Madness? A Political
Economy Analysis of the Ethnic Conflicts in Less Devel-
oped Countries.” World Development 25(9): 1381–98.

Baron, David P., and Daniel Diermeier. 2001. “Elections, Gov-
ernments and Parliaments in Proportional Representation Sys-
tems.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 933–67.
Barraclough, Steven. 1998. “Al-Azhar: Between the Government
and the Islamists.” The Middle East Journal 52(2): 236–49.
Barro, Robert J., and Rachel M. McCleary. 2003. “Religion and Eco-
nomic Growth.” Cambridge, Mass. [http://post.economics.
harvard.edu/faculty/barro/papers/Religion_and_Economic_
Growth.pdf]. March 2004.

Barry, Brian. 2001. Culture and Equality: An Egalitarian Cri-

tique of Multiculturalism. Cambridge: Polity.

Basu, Alaka. 1992. Culture, the Status of Women and Demo-

graphic Behaviour. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Bauböck, Rainer, and John Rundell, eds. 1998. Blurred Bound-
aries:  Migration,  Ethnicity  and  Citizenship. Aldershot:
Ashgate.

Bauböck, Rainer. 2001. “Multinational Federalism: Territorial or
Cultural Autonomy?” Willy Brandt Series of Working Papers.
School of International Migration and Ethnic Relations.
Malmö University, Malmö, Sweden. [http://racoon.mah.se/
Forsk.nsf/0/2e9cc319839b3a2dc1256cf5005a4f8e/$FILE/
Workingpaper201.pdf]. February 2004.

Bell-Fiakoff, Andrew. 1993. “A Brief History of Ethnic Cleansing.”

Foreign Affairs 72(3): 110–21.

Bengwayan, Michael A. 2003. “Intellectual and Cultural Property
Rights of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Asia.” Minority
Rights Group International, London.

Benhabib, Seyla, ed. 1996. Democracy and Difference: Contest-
ing the Boundaries of the Political. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.

Benhabib, Seyla. 2002. The  Claims  of  Culture:  Equality  and
Diversity in the Global Era. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.

Berman, Eli. 2003. Hamas,  Taliban  and  the  Jewish  Under-
ground: An Economist’s View of Radical Religious Mili-
tias. NBER  Working  Paper  10004.  Cambridge,  Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research.  [http://www.nber
.org/ papers/w10004]. January 2004.

Bgoya, W., N. Billany, M. Lujanen, R. Noonan, T. Paajanen, and E.
Syrjanen. 1997. “The Economics of Publishing Educational Ma-
terials in Africa.” Working Group on Books and Learning
Materials, Perspectives on African Book Development. The As-
sociation for the Development of Education in Africa, London.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 2003. “Borders Beyond Control.” Foreign Af-

fairs 82(1): 98–104.

Bhavnani, Ravi, and David Backer. 2000. “Localized Ethnic Con-
flict and Genocide: Accounting for Differences in Rwanda
and Burundi.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 44(3): 283–306.
Bird, Karen. 2003. “The Political Representation of Women and
Ethnic Minorities in Established Democracies: A Frame-
work for Comparative Research.” Paper presented at the
Academy for Migration Studies in Denmark, Aalborg Uni-
versity, 11 November, Aalborg, Denmark. [http://www.
socsci.mcmaster.ca/polisci/emplibrary/amidpaper.pdf]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

Blau, Judith. 1993. Social  Contracts  and  Economic  Markets.

New York: Plenum.

Blau, Judith, ed. 2001. The Blackwell Companion to Sociology.

Oxford: Blackwell.

Boix, Charles. 1999. “Setting the Rules of the Game. The Choice
of Electoral Systems in Advanced Democracies.” American
Political Science Review 93: 609–24.

Boothroyd, David. 2004. “United Kingdom Election Results.”
London. [http://www.election.demon.co.uk/ge2001.html].
February 2004.

Boulle, L. J. 1984. South Africa and the Consociational Option:

A Constitutional Analysis. Cape Town: Juta.

Bowen, W., and B. Derek. 1998. The Shape of the River: Long-Term
Consequences of Considering Race in College and Univer-
sity Admissions. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Breytenbach, W. J. 2000. “Democracy in South Africa: What Kind
and Is It Consolidating?” Bureau for Economic Research. Uni-
versity of Stellenbosch, Johannesburg. [http://www.kas.org.za/
Publications/SeminarReports/ConsolidatingDemocracy/
Consolidating%20Democracy.pdf]. February 2004.

Brindis, C. D., A. K. Driscoll, M. A. Biggs, and L. T. Valderrama. 2002.
“Fact Sheet on Latino Youth: Immigrant Generation.” Center
for Reproductive Health Research and Policy. Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Health Sciences and
the Institute for Health Policy Studies. University of California
at San Francisco, San Francisco. [http://reprohealth.ucsf.edu/
articles/Latino.imm.pdf]. February 2004.

Brint, Michael, and Lukic Renéo, eds. 2001. Culture, Politics and
Nationalism in the Age of Globalization. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Brock-Utne, Birgit. 2002. “Language, Democracy and Education
in Africa.” Discussion Paper 15. Nordiska Afrikainstitut.
Uppsala, Sweden.

Bromley, Yulian. 1974. Soviet  Ethnology  and  Anthropology

Today. The Hague: Mouton.

Brown, Michael E., and Sumit Ganguly, eds. 1997. Government
Policies  and  Ethnic  Relations  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific.
Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press.

Brucker, Herbert, Gil Epstein, Barry McCormick, Gilles Saint-
Paul, Alessandra Venturini, and Klaus Zimmermann. 2001.
“Managing Migration in the European Welfare State.” Third
European Conference of the Fondazione Rodolfo Debenedetti
“Immigration Policy and the Welfare State,” June, Trieste,
Italy. [http://www.frdb.org/images/customer/copy_0_paper1
_23jun01.pdf]. February 2004.

Brumann, Christoph. 1999. “Writing for Culture. Why a Suc-
cessful Concept Should not be Discarded.” Current  An-
thropology 40.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

113

Brumberg, Daniel. 2002. “Islamists and the Politics of Consensus.”

Journal of Democracy 13(3): 109–15.

Bryld, Erik, Heather Bryant, Nanako Tsukahara, Leela Sthapit, and
Mayline Py. 2003. “Rural Urban Linkages (RLL) Under the
Rural Urban Partnership Programme (RUPP): A Case of
Affirmative Action for Dalits in Nepal.” United Nations De-
velopment Programme, Kathmandu.

Buck, Tobias. 2004. “Brussels Call for Bigger Budget Will Irk

Rich States.” Financial Times. 9 January.

Burnley, Ian H. 2001. The Impact of Immigration on Australia:
A Demographic Approach. South Melbourne and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Buvollen, Hans Petter. 2002. “Cultural and Legal Barriers to Jus-
tice in Guatemala.” UNDP Access to Justice Workshop,
1 March,  Oslo.  [http://www.undp.org/governance/cd/
documents/34.pdf]. February 2002.

Byman, Daniel L., Peter Chalk, Bruce Hoffman, William Rosenau
and David Brannan. 2001. Trends in Outside Support for
Insurgent Movements. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND.

Caballero, Gonzalo. 2003. “The Dynamics of the Spanish Insti-
tutional Evolution Towards Economic, Social and Political
Decentralization, 1950–2000: Markets, Democracy and Fed-
eralism for Economic Development.” Paper presented at
the 2003 European Association for Evolutionary Political
Economy Conference, 7 November, Maastricht, Nether-
lands. [http://eaepe.infonomics.nl/papers/caballero.pdf].
March 2004.

Campagna, Joel. 1996. “From Accommodation to Confrontation:
The Muslim Brotherhood in the Mubarak Years.” Journal
of International Affairs 50(1): 278–304.

Caplan, Lionel. 1987. Studies  in  Religious  Fundamentalism.

Houndsmills and London: Macmillan.

Care, Jennifer Corrin. 1999. “Conflict Between Customary Laws
and Human Rights in the South Pacific.” Paper presented
at the 12th Commonwealth Law Conference, 1 September,
Kuala Lumpur. [http://www.mlj.com.my/articles/
JenniferCorrin-Care.htm]. February 2004.

Carens, Joseph H. 2000. Culture, Citizenship and Community:
A Contextual Exploration of Justice as Evenhandedness.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

CBD (Convention on Biological Diversity). 2002. “Traditional
Knowledge and the Convention on Biological Diversity.”
[http://www.biodiv.org/programmes/socio-eco/traditional/].
February 2004.

Chicuecue, Noel Muchenga. 1997. “Reconciliation: The Role of
Truth Commissions and Alternative Ways of Healing.”
Development in Practice 7(4): 483–86.

Chua, Amy. 2003. World on Fire: How Exporting Free Market
Democracy Breeds Ethnic Hatred and Global Instability.
New York: Doubleday.

CIA (Central Intelligence Agency). 2003. “The World Factbook
2003.” Washington, DC. [http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/
factbook/]. February 2004.

Clifford, James. 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-
Century  Ethnography,  Literature  and  Art. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

CNN.  2003.  “U.S.  Court  Rebukes  Bush  Over  Gitmo.” 
18 December. [http://www.cnn.com/2003/LAW/12/18/
court.gitmo/index.html]. February 2004.

Cohen, Abner. 1974. Two-Dimensional Man: An Essay on the
Anthropology of Power and Symbolism in Complex So-
ciety. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press.

Cohn,  B.  1996.  Colonialism  and  Its  Forms  of  Knowledge:
The  British  in  India. Princeton:  Princeton  University
Press.

Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler. 2001. “Greed and Grievance in
Civil War.” World Bank, Washington, DC. [http://www.
worldbank.org/research/conflict/papers/greedgrievance_
23oct.pdf]. February 2004.

Commission on Intellectual Property Rights. 2002. “Integrating In-
tellectual Property Rights and Development Policy: Report
of the Commission on Intellectual Property Rights.” London.
[http://www.iprcommission.org/graphic/documents/
final_report.htm]. February 2004.

Congleton, Roger D. 2000. “A Political Efficiency Case for Fed-
eralism in Multinational States: Controlling Ethnic Rent-
Seeking.” In G. Galeotti, P. Slamon, and R. Wintrobe, eds.
Competition and Structure: The Political Economyof Col-
lective Decisions: Essays in Honor of Albert Breton. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Congleton, Roger D., Andreas Kyriacou, and Jordi Bacaria. 1999.
“Political and Economic Origins of Asymmetric Federal-
ism:  A  Model  of  Endogenous  Centralization.”  [http://
selene.uab.es/jbacaria/Economia_Aplicada/asymfed3.pdf].
March 2004.

Conner, Walker. 1986. “The Impact of Homelands Upon Dias-
poras.” In Gabriel Sheffer, ed. Modern Diaspora in Inter-
national Politics. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Conversi, Daniele, ed. 2002. Ethnonationalism in the Contem-
porary Word: Walker Connor and the Study of Nation-
alism. London: Routledge.

Coombe, Rosemary J. 1998. “Intellectual Property, Human Rights
and Sovereignty: New Dilemmas in International Law Posed
by the Recognition of Indigenous Knowledge and the Con-
servation of Biodiversity.” Indiana Journal of Global Legal
Studies 6(1): 59–115.

Corbridge, Stuart, and John Harriss. 2000. Reinventing India.

Cambridge: Polity Press.

Cornell, Svante E., and Regine A. Spector. 2002. “Central Asia: More
than Islamic Extremists.” The Washington Quarterly 25(1):
193–206.

Council of Europe. 2000. “Conference on Diversity and Cohesion:
New Challenges for the Integration of Immigrants and
Minorities.” [http://www.coe.int/T/E/Social_Cohesion/
Migration/Documentation/Publications_and_reports/
Reports_and_proceedings/20001201_CDMG(2000)35_
ProceedingsNamur.asp]. March 2004.

Coussey, Mary. 2000. “Framework of Integration Policies.” Di-
rectorate General III–Social Cohesion, Directorate of Social
Affairs and Health. Council of Europe, Brussels.

CPS (Crown Prosecution Service). 2002. “Racist Incident Monitoring
Annual Report 2001–2002.” London. [http://www.cps.gov.uk/
Home/CPSPublications/Scheme/reports.htm]. January 2004.
CRIP (Curriculum Reform Implementation Project). 2004. “Cur-
riculum Reform in Papua New Guinea.” Port Moresby.
[http://www.pngcurriculumreform.ac.pg/text/
CURRICULUM%20REFORM%20IN%20PAPUA%20
NEW%20GUINEA.pdf]. February 2004.

Crowley, B. 1987. The Self, the Individual and the Community.

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

CSD (Commission on Sustainable Development Indigenous Peo-
ples’ Caucus) and ICC (Inuit Circumpolar Conference).
2002. “Dialogue Paper by Indigenous People.” Preparatory
Committee for the World Summit on Sustainable Develop-
ment First Substantive Session, New York. [http://www.treaty
council.org/new_page_5241221.htm]. March 2004.

Cummings, S. M., and S. Tamayo. 1994. “Language and Educa-
tion in Latin America: An Overview.” Human Resources
Development and Operations Policy Working Papers. World
Bank, Washington, DC.

Davenport, Christian. 2004. “Minorities At Risk: Dataset Users
Manual 030703.” The Minorities At Risk (MAR) Project.
Center for International Development and Conflict Man-
agement. University of Maryland, Baltimore. [http://www.
cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/mar/margene/MAR-codebook_
040903.doc]. February 2004.

De Ferranti, David, Guillermo Perry, Francisco H. G. Ferreira,
and Michael Walton. 2003. “Inequality in Latin America

114

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

and the Caribbean: Breaking with History?” World Bank,
Washington, DC.

De Varennes, F. 1996. “Law, Language and the Multiethnic State.”

Language and Communication 16(3): 291–300.

Delgado-Moreira, Juan M. 2000. Multicultural Citizenship of the

European Union. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Af-
fairs, Australia. 2003. “Multicultural Australia: United in
Diversity.” Canberra. [http://www.immi.gov.au/multicultural/
australian/index.htm]. February 2004.

D’Ercole, Marco Mira, and Andrea Salvini. 2003. “Towards
Sustainable Development: The Role of Social Protection.” So-
cial, Employment and Migration Working Papers. Organi-
zation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Geneva.
[http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/19/2/16362056.pdf]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

Directorate of Social Affairs and Health. 2000. “Diversity and
Cohesion: New Challenges for the Integration of Immigrants
and Minorities.” Council of Europe, Strasbourg, France.
[http://www.social.coe.int/en/cohesion/action/publi/
migrants/EDéfis.pdf]. February 2004.

Discover France. 2000. “French National Holidays, Festivals, Re-
ligious Celebrations.” Paris. [http://www.discoverfrance.net/
France/DF_holidays.shtml]. March 2004.

Donders, Yvonne. 2003. Towards a Right to Cultural Identity?

Antwerpen and Oxford: Intersentia.

Doomernik, Jeroen. 2001. “Immigration, Multiculturalism and
the Nation State in Western Europe.” Paper presented at the
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development
Conference on Racism and Public Policy, 3 September, Dur-
ban, South Africa. [http://www.unrisd.org/unrisd/website/
projects.nsf/(httpProjectsForResearchHome-en)/CE2B1BCD4
B5F5D3A80256B4900530E39?OpenDocument]. February
2004.

Douglas, W. A. 1988. “A Critique of Recent Trends in the Analy-
sis of Ethnonationalism.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 11(2):
192–206.

Dragoljub, Ackovic. 2000. “Roma in Serbia: Introducing Romany
Language and Culture into Primary Schools.” Minority Rights
Group International, London.

Droege, Susanne, and Birgit Soete. 2001. “Trade-Related Intellec-
tual Property Rights, North-South Trade, and Biological Diver-
sity.” Environmental and Resource Economics 19(2): 149–63.
DUMC (Dutch Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia).
2002. “Racial Violence and Violence Incited by the Extreme
Right  2001  and  2002.”  Rotterdam,  The  Netherlands.
[http://www.lbr.nl/internationaal/DUMC/publicatie/ar_racial
_violence2001.pdf]. January 2004.

Duncan, T., K. Jefferis, and P. Molutsi. 2000. “Botswana: Social
Development in a Resource-Rich Country.” In Santosh
Mehrotra and Jolly Richard, eds. Development  with  a
Human  Face:  Experiences  in  Social  Achievement  and
Economic Growth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Dunleavy, Patrick, and Brendan O’Leary. 1987. Theories of the
State:  The  Politics  of  Liberal  Democracy. Basingstoke:
MacMillan Education.

During, A. T. 1992. “Guardians of the Land: Indigenous Peoples
and the Health of the Earth.” Worldwatch Paper 112. World-
watch Institute. Washington, DC. [http://www.worldwatch.
org/pubs/paper/112.html/]. February 2004.

———. 1993. Supporting  Indigenous  Peoples  in  State  of  the
World 1993: A Worldwatch Institute Report on Progress
Toward a Sustainable Society. New York: W.W. Norton.
Dutcher, N. 1982. “The Use of First and Second Languages in Pri-
mary Education.” Working Paper. World Bank, Education
Department Washington, DC.

Eades, D. 2004. “Participation in a Second Language and Second
Dialect Speakers in the Legal System.” Annual Review of
Applied Linguistics 23: 113–33.

Easterley, William, and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s Growth
Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions.” The  Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112(4): 1203–250.

Eatwell, Roger. 2000. “The Rebirth of the ‘Extreme Right’ in
Western Europe?” Parliamentary Affairs 53(3): 407–25.
The Economist. 2000. “Sri Lanka Backs Away from Devolution.”

10 August.

———. 2002a. “Survey on Migration.” 2 November.
———. 2002b. “The Best of Reasons.” 31 October.
———. 2003a. “Ends, Means and Barbarity: Special Report on Tor-

ture.” 11 January.

———. 2003b. “Religion, Politics and Moderation.” 17 May.
———. 2004a. “Africa’s Engine.” Survey: Sub-Saharan Africa. 15

January.

———. 2004b. “The War of the Headscarves.” 7 February.
Edgerton, Susan Huddleston. 1996. Translating  the  Curricu-
lum: Multiculturalism into Cultural Studies. New York and
London: Routledge.

Elazar, Daniel. 1998. Constitutionalizing Globalization. Lanham,

Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield.

Electionworld.org.  2004.  “Elections  Around  the  World.”

[http://www.electionworld.org/]. February 2004.

Engineer, Asghar Ali. 2003. “Uniform Civil Code or Legal Plural-
ism.” Institute of Islamic Studies and Center for Study of So-
ciety and Secularism, Mumbai. [http://ecumene.org/IIS/
csss114.htm]. February 2004.

———. 2004. Communal Riots After Independence: A Com-

prehensive Account. New Delhi: Shipra.

Entelis, John P. 2002. “Morocco: Democracy Denied.” Le Monde
Diplomatique. 1 October. [http://mondediplo.com/2002/
10/13morocco]. February 2004.

Entzinger, Han. 2003. “Nationale Identiteit en burgerschap.”

Civis Mundi 42(1): 22–26.

Esman, Milton J. 1986. “Diasporas and International Relations.”
In Gabriel Sheffer, ed. Modern Diaspora in International
Politics. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Etounga-Manguelle, Daniel. 2000. “Does Africa Need a Cultural Ad-
justment Program?” In Lawrence E. Harrison and Samuel P.
Huntington, eds. Culture Matters. New York: Basic Books.
EUMC (European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenopho-
bia). 2002. “Racism and Xenophobia in the EU Member
States: Trends, Developments and Good Practice in 2002.”
Annual Report 2002, Part 2. Vienna. [http://eumc.eu.int/
eumc/index.php?fuseaction=content.dsp_cat_content&catid=
3fb38ad3e22bb]. January 2004.

European Union. 2003. “The Doha Development Agenda: Out-
come of the WTO Ministerial, European Parliament Reso-
lution on the 5th Ministerial Conference of the WTO in
Cancun.” [http://europa.eu.int/comm/trade/issues/
newround/doha_da/epr250903_en.htm]. March 2004.

———. 2004. “The Commissioner of Foreign Affairs of the Berlin
Senate (Die Auslanderbeauftagte des Senats von Berlin).”
Berlin. [http://europa.eu.int/comm/employment_social/
fundamental_rights/pdf/legisln/mslegln/de_berlin_en.pdf].
March 2004.

Fafunwa, B. 1990. “Using National Languages in Education: A Chal-
lenge to African Educators.” In African Thoughts on the
Prospects of Education for All. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
Fahmy, Ninette S. 1998. “The Performance of the Muslim Broth-
erhood in the Egyptian Syndicates: An Alternative Formula
for Reform?” The Middle East Journal 52(4): 551–62.

FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation). 1999. “Hate Crime Data Col-
lection Guidelines.” Washington, DC. [http://www.fbi.gov/ 
ucr/ucr.htm#hate]. April 2004.

———. 2002. “Hate Crime Statistics 2002.” Washington, DC.

[http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/ ucr.htm#hate]. January 2004.

———. 2004. “Uniform Crime Reports: Hate Crime Statistics.”
Washington, DC. [http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm#hate].
February 2004.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

115

Feldman, Leonard C. 2002. “Redistribution, Recognition and the
State: The Irreducibly Political Dimension of Injustice.” Po-
litical Theory 30(3): 410–40.

Fermin, Alfons. 2001. “The Justification of Mandatory Integration
Programmes for New Immigrants.” European Research Cen-
tre on Migration and Ethnic Relations, Utrecht.

Financial Times. 2004. “French Filmmakers Fear for L’Excep-

tion Culturelle.” 9 January.

Fleiner, Thomas, ed. 2003. Multicultural Federalism: The Swiss

Case. Fribourg, Switzerland: The Institute of Federalism.

Florida, Richard, and Gary Gates. 2002. “Technology and Toler-
ance: Diversity and High Tech Growth.” The Brookings Re-
view 20(1): 32–35.

Forero, Juan. 2003. “Seeking Balance: Growth vs. Culture in Ama-

zon.” The New York Times. 10 December.

Fossas, Enric. 1999. “Asymmetry and Pluriantionality in Spain.”
Working  Paper,  Universitat  Autònoma  de  Barcelona.
[http://www.diba.es/icps/working_papers/docs/Wp_i_167.pdf].
March 2004.

Fraenkel, Jon. 2003. “Ethnic Structure, Inequality and Public Sec-
tor Governance in the Fiji Islands.” Ethnic Conflict, Inequality
and Public Sector Governance Country Studies. United Na-
tions Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva.

France, Ministère de Jeunesse, Éducation et Recherche. 2004.
“Bulletin Officiel: Calendrier des Fêtes Légales.” [http://www.
education.gouv.fr/bo/2004/4/MENA0302913C.htm]. March
2004.

Fraser, Nancy, and Axel Honneth. 2003. Redistribution or Recog-
nition? A Political-Philosophical Exchange. London: Verso
Books.

Fraser, Nancy. 1989. Unruly Practices: Power, Discourse and Gen-

der in Contemporary Social Theory. Cambridge: Polity.

———. 1995. “From Redistribution to Recognition? Dilemmas of
Justice in a ‘Postsocialist’ Age.” New Left Review 212: 68–93.
———. 1997. Justice Interrupts: Critical Reflections on the ‘Post-

socialist’ Condition. New York: Routledge.

Front National. 2004. “Nos Propositions: Identite.” [http://www.

frontnational.com/doc_prop_identite.php]. March 2004.

Fukuda-Parr, Sakiko. 2001. “In Search of Indicators of Culture and
Development: Review of Progress and Proposals for Next
Steps.” Text for the World  Culture  Report. New York.
[http://www.undp.org/hdro/events/rioforum/fukudaparr2.
pdf]. February 2004.

Funke, Hajo. 2001. “Europe at the Threshold: Fairness or Fortress?
Racism, Public Policy and Anti-racist Concepts.” Paper pre-
sented at the United Nations Research Institute for Social De-
velopment  Conference  on  Racism  and  Public  Policy,
3 September,  Durban.  [http://www.unrisd.org/unrisd/
website/projects.nsf/(httpProjectsForResearchHome-en)/
CE2B1BCD4B5F5D3A80256B4900530E39?OpenDocu-
ment]. February 2004.

Gandhi, Mohandas. 1921. “English Learning.” Young  India.

1 June.

Garson, Jean-Pierre, and Anais Loizillon. 2003. “Changes and
Challenges, Europe and Migration from 1950 to Present.”
Paper presented at the conference jointly organized by the
European Commision and the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Develoment, “The Economic and Social As-
pects of Migration”, 21–22 January, Brussels. [http://www.
oecd.org/dataoecd/15/3/15516948.pdf]. February 2004.

Geddes, Andrew. 2002. “Europe’s Ageing Workforce.” BBC On-
line. 20 June. [http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/
2053581.stm]. February 2004.

Gerges, Fawaz A. 2000. “The End of the Islamist Insurgency in
Egypt?: Costs and Prospects.” The  Middle  East  Journal
54(4): 592–612.

Ghosh, Bimal. 2003. “Elusive Protection, Uncertain Lands: Mi-
grants’ Access to Human Rights.” International Organization
for Migration, Geneva.

Gill, Emily R. 2001. Becoming Free: Autonomy and Diversity
in the Liberal Polity. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Giovarelli, Renée, and Cholpon Akmatova. 2002. “Local Institu-
tions that Enforce Customary Law in the Kyrgyz Republic and
their Impact on Women’s Rights.” Agriculture and Rural De-
velopment E-Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Godmer, Laurent, and Laurent Kestel. 2001. “Extremism and
Democratic Coalitions: The Institutional Integration of
Extreme Right Parties in the Regional Parliaments of Ger-
many, Austria and France.” Paper presented at the European
Consortium for Political Research Conference, 6 April,
Grenoble, France. [http://www.essex.ac.uk/ecpr/events/
jointsessions/paperarchive/grenoble.asp?section=14]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

Goldstone, Leo. 1998. “Cultural Statistics.” In Ruth Towse, ed. A
Handbook of Cultural Economics. Cheltenham, UK: Ed-
ward  Elgar.  [https://dspace.ubib.eur.nl/retrieve/1351/
TOWSE+EBOOK_pages0189-0194.pdf]. February 2004.
Goodman, Diane J. 2004. Promoting Diversity and Social Jus-
tice:  Educating  People  From  Privileged  Groups. Thou-
sand Oaks, Calif. and London: Sage.

Goody, Jack. 1996. The  East  in  the  West. Cambridge: Cam-

bridge University Press.

Graeme, Hugo. 2003. “Circular Migration: Keeping Development
Rolling.”  Migration  Policy  Institute,  Washington,  DC.
[http://www.migrationinformation.org/Feature/display.cfm
?ID=129]. February 2004.

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action and Social Structure:
The Problem of Embeddedness.” American Journal of So-
ciology 91: 481–510.

Greif, Avner. 1994. “Cultural Beliefs and Organization of Society: A
Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Indi-
vidualist Societies.” Journal of Political Economy 102: 912–50.
Griffiths, Ann L., and Karl Nerenberg, eds. 2002. Handbook of
Federal Countries, 2002. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-
Queen’s University Press.

Grillo, R. D. 1998. Pluralism  and  the  Politics  of  Difference:
State, Culture and Ethnicity in Comparative Perspective.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Grin, Francois. 2003. Language Policy Evaluation and the Eu-
ropean Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Berke-
ley, Calif.: University of California Press.

Grove, A. K., and N. A. Carter. 1999. “Not All Blarney is Cast in
Stone: International Cultural Conflict in Northern Ireland.”
Political Psychology 20(4): 725–65.

The  Guardian. 2001.  “The  Truth  of  Multicultural  Britain.”

25 November.

Gurr, Ted Robert. 1993. Minorities At Risk: A Global View of
Ethnopolitical Conflicts. Washington, DC: United States In-
stitute for Peace Press.

———. 2000. People  Versus  States. Washington, DC: United

States Institute for Peace Press.

Gutmann, Amy, and Dennis Thompson. 1996. Democracy and Dis-

agreement. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Gutmann, Amy, ed. 1994. Multiculturalism. Princeton: Prince-

ton University Press.

Gutmann, Amy. 1995. “Challenges of Multiculturalism in Demo-
cratic Education.” Princeton. [http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/
EPS/PES-Yearbook/95_docs/gutmann.html. February 2004.
Habermas, Juergen. 1975. Legitimation Crisis. Boston: Beacon Press.
———. 1996. Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Dis-
course Theory of Law and Democracy. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.

Hafez, Mohammed M. 2000. “Armed Islamist Movements and Po-
litical Violence in Algeria.” The Middle East Journal 54(4):
572–91.

Haffajee, Ferial. 1999. "South Africa: Blending Tradition and
Change." UNESCO  Courier. November. [http://www.
unesco.org/courier/1999_11/uk/dossier/txt23.htm].

116

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Halfin, Igal, ed. 2002. Language and Revolution: Making Mod-
ern Political Identities. London and Portland: Frank Cass.
Hammer, Juliane, and Helena Lindholm Schulz. 2003. The Pales-
tinian Diaspora: Formation of Identities and Politics of
Homeland. London: Routledge.

Hansen, Thomas Blom. 2001. The Saffron Wave: Democracy and
Hindu  Nationalism  in  Modern  India. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Harding, Sandra, and Uma Narayan, eds. 2000. Decentering the
Center: Philosophy for a Multicultural, Postcolonial and
Feminist World. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Harris, Peter, and Ben Reilly. 1998. “Democracy and Deep-Rooted
Conflict: Options for Negotiators.” International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance, Stockholm.

Harrison, Lawrence E., and Samuel P. Huntington, eds. 2000. Cul-
ture Matters: How Values Shape Human Progress. New
York: Basic Books.

Hart, H. L. A. 1955. “Are There Any Natural Rights?” The Philo-

sophical Review 64: 175–91.

Hastrup, Kirsten, ed. 2001. Legal Cultures and Human Rights:
The Challenge of Diversity. The Hague and London: Kluwer
Law Interantional.

Haubrich, Dirk. 2003. “September 11, Anti-Terror Laws and Civil
Liberties: Britain, France and Germany Compared.” Gov-
ernment and Opposition 38(1): 1–28.

Helwege, Ann. 1995. “Poverty in Latin America: Back to the
Abyss?” Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Af-
fairs 37(3): 99–123.

HinduUnity.org. 2004. “HinduUnity.org: Promoting and Sup-
porting the Ideals of the Bajrang Dal—V.H.P., Youth Wing
Bharat.” [http://hinduunity.org/aboutus.html]. April 2004.
Hoffman, Bruce. 1998–99. “Revival of Religious Terrorism Begs
for Broad U.S. Policy.” Rand Review 22(2). [http://www.
rand.org/publications/randreview/issues/rr.winter98.9/
methods.html. December 2003.

Honwana, Alcinda. 1999. “Non-Western Concepts of Mental
Health.” [http://earlybird.qeh.ox.ac.uk/rfgexp/rsp_tre/
student/nonwest/toc.htm]. March 2004.

Hoodfar, Homa, and Nelofer Pazira. 2003. “Building Civil Soci-
eties: A Guide for Social and Political Activism.” Santa Cruz,
Calif. [http://www2.ucsc.edu/globalinterns/cpapers/hoodfar
.pdf]. February 2004.

Human Rights Watch. 2002. “Human Rights Watch Statement:
Freedom of Religion—On the Occasion of the OSCE Human
Dimension Implementation.” New York. [http://www.hrw.
org/press/2002/09/osce-religion0912.htm]. February 2004.
———.  2003.  “Nationality  and  Statelessness.”  New  York.
[http://www.hrw.org/campaigns/race/nationality.htm]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

Huntington, Samuel P. 1996. The Clash of Civilizations and the Re-
making the World Order. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Iganski, Paul. 2002. “Hate Crimes Hurt More, But Should They
Be More Harshly Punished.” In Paul Iganski, ed. The Hate
Debate: Should Hate Be Punished as a Crime? London:
Profile Books.

Ignazi, Piero. 2003. Extreme Right Parties in Western Europe.

New York: Oxford University Press.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2001. “Vietnam Desk
Review.” Project to Promote ILO Policy on Indigenous and
Tribal Peoples (Convention 169), Geneva.

———. 2003. ILO Convention on Indigenous and Tribal Peo-

ples: A Manual. Geneva.

Independent Commission on Migration to Germany. 2001. “Struc-
turing  Immigration,  Fostering  Integration.”  Berlin.
[http://www.eng.bmi.bund.de/Annex/en_14626/
Download_Summary.pdf]. February 2004.

Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. 2004. “Aboriginal Custom-
ary Law.” Ottawa. [http://www.ainc-inac.gc.ca/pr/pub/
matr/acl_e.html]. February 2004.

India, Ministry of Education.  2004. Personal communication on

human resource development. March. New Delhi.

India, Ministry of Personnel. 2002. “Holidays to be Observed in
Government Offices During the Year 2002.” Department of
Personnel and Training, New Delhi. [http://persmin.nic.in/
circular/jcm3.html#6]. February 2004.

India, Office of the Registrar General. 2004. “Census of India.”

New Delhi. [http://www.censusindia.net/]. March 2004.

Indigenous  Australia.  2003.  “What  is  Cultural  Heritage?”
[http://www.dreamtime.net.au/indigenous/culture.cfm].
February 2004.

Inglehart, Ronald. 1997. Modernization  and  Postmoderniza-
tion: Cultural, Economic, and Political Change in 43 So-
cieties. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Inglehart, Ronald, and Wayne Baker. 2000. “Modernization, Cul-
tural Change, and the Persistence of Traditional Values.”
American Sociological Review 65: 19–51.

Inglis, Christine. 2004. “Multiculturalism: New Policy Responses
to Diversity.” Policy Paper No. 4. United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, Paris.

International Council on Metals and the Environment. 1999.

“Mining and Indigenous Peoples: Case Studies.” Ottawa.

International Federation of Human Rights. 2003. “Discrimination
Against Religious Minorities in Iran.” Paris. [http://www.fidh.
org/asie/rapport/2003/ir0108a.pdf]. February 2004.

The Internet Movie Database. 2004. “International All-Time Box
Office Chart.” [http://us.imdb.com/Charts/intltopmovies].
March 2004.

IOE (International Organisation of Employers). 2003. “Migra-
tion in Europe: Political, Social and Economic Dimensions.”
Background Document. London. [http://www.ioe-emp.org/
ioe_emp/pdf/migration_IOE_Moscow.pdf]. February 2004.
IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2003a. “Inte-
gration  of  Migrants:  The  IOM  Approach.”  Geneva.
[http://www.iom.si/pdf/Integration%20master.pdf]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

———. 2003b. “Migration in a World of Global Change. New
Strategies and Policies for New Realities.” IOM Migration Pol-
icy and Research. Geneva.

———. 2003c. “World Migration Report 2003: Managing Migra-
tion Challenges and Responses for People on the Move.”
Geneva.

———. 2004. “Assisted Returns Service.” [http://www.iom.int/en/who/

main%5Fservice%5Fareas%5Fassisted.shtml]. March 2004.

IRR (Institute of Race Relations). 2003. “Norway: Progress Party
(FrP).” [http://www.irr.org.uk/europe/norway.html]. De-
cember 2003.

Jackman, Robert W., and Karin Volpert. 1996. “Conditions Favour-
ing Parties of the Extreme Right in Western Europe.” British
Journal of Political Science 26(1): 501–21.

Jacobs, Dirk. 2003. “The Arab European League: The Rapid
Growth of a Radical Immigrant Movement.” Paper pre-
sented at the European Consortium for Political Research
Conference, 18 September, Marburg, Germany. [http://www.
essex.ac.uk/ecpr/events/generalconference/marburg/
papers/21/5/Jacobs.pdf]. February 2004.

Jarkko, Lars, and Tom W. Smith. 2001. “National Pride in Cross-
National Perspective.” National Opinion Research Center.
University of Chicago, Chicago. [http://spitswww.uvt.nl/
web/iric/papers/pap1e1.doc]. February 2004.

Jeness, Valerie. 2002. “Contours of Hate Crime Politics and Law in
the United States.” In Paul Iganski, ed. The Hate Debate:
Should Hate be Punished as a Crime? London: Profile Books.
Jureidini, Ray. 2001. “Migrant Workers and Xenophobia in the Mid-
dle East.” Keynote address at the United Nations Research
Institute for Social Development Conference on Racism and
Public Policy, 3 September, Durban. [http://www.unrisd.org/
80256B3C005BCCF9/httpNetITFrame?ReadForm&parent
unid=8EAB85CCEBB1C65480256B6D00578762&parent

BIBLIOGRAPHY

117

doctype=paper&netitpath=http://www.unrisd.org/unpublished_/
specialevents_/djureidi/content.htm]. February 2004.

Justiniano, Freddy. 2004. “Correspondence on the Political Situ-
ation in Bolivia and Ecuador.” United Nations Development
Programme, Regional Bureau for Latin America and the
Caribbean, New York. March 2004.

Justino, Patricia, and Julie Litchfield. 2003. “Economic Exclusion
and Discrimination: The Experience of Minorities and In-
digenous Peoples.” Minority Rights Group International, Lon-
don. [http://www.minorityrights.org/admin/Download/pdf/
IP_EconomicExclusion_JustinoLitchfield.pdf]. February 2004.
Kaldor, Mary, and Diego Muro. 2003. “Religious and Nationalist Mil-
itant Groups.” In H. Anheier, M. Glasius, and M. Kaldor, eds.
Global Civil Society 2003. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kanbur, Ravi. 2001. “Economic Policy, Distribution and Poverty:
Nature of Disagreements.” Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York. [http://people.cornell.edu/pages/sk145/papers/
Disagreements.pdf]. February 2004.

Kanyinga, Karuti. 2003. “Ethnic Structure, Inequality and Gover-
nance of the Public Sector in Kenya.” Ethnic Structure, In-
equality and Public Sector Governance Country Studies. United
Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva.
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale. 2003. “Migration’s New Pay-

off.” Foreign Policy 139: 48–57.

Kaviraj, Sudipto. 1992. “The Imaginary Institution of India.” In
Partha Chatterjee and Gyanendra Pandey, eds. Subaltern
Studies VII. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Kearns, Thomas R., and Austin Sarat. 1997. Identities, Politics and

Rights. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

———. 1999. Cultural Pluralism, Identity Politics and the Law.

Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Keating, Michael. 2002. “Plurinational Democracy in a Post-
Sovereign Order.” Queen’s Papers on Europeanisation.
Institute of European Studies. Queen’s University of Belfast,
Belfast. [http://www.qub.ac.uk/ies/onlinepapers/poe1-02.pdf].
February 2004.

Kelso, Paul, and Jeevan Vasagar. 2002. “Muslims Reject Image of

Separate Society.” The Guardian. 17 June.

Kertzer, David I., and Dominique Arel, eds. 2002. Census and Iden-
tity: The Politics of Race, Ethnicity and Language in Na-
tional Censuses. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kiernan, Ben. 1999. “Sur La Notion de Génocide.” Le Débat.

1 March.

Klaus, David. 2003. “The Use of Indigenous Languages in Early
Basic Education in Papua New Guinea: A Model for Else-
where?” Language and Education: An International Jour-
nal 17(2).

Knop, Karen. 2002. Diversity and Self-Determination in Inter-

national Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Knowles, Caroline, and Vered Amit-Talai. 1996. Re-situating
Identities: The Politics of Race, Ethnicity and Culture. Or-
chard Park, New York: Broadview Press.

Kogacioglu, Dicle. 2003. “Dissolution of Political Parties by the
Constitutional Court in Turkey: Judicial Delimitation of the
Political Domain.” International Sociology 18(1): 258–76.
Koh, Harold Hongju. 2002. “The Case against Military Commis-
sions.” The American Journal of International Law 96(2):
337–44.

Kongolo, Tshimanga. 2001. “Towards a More Balanced Coexis-
tence of Traditional Knowledge and Pharmaceuticals Pro-
tection in Africa.” Journal of World Trade 35(2): 349–61.
Koopmans, Ruud. 2002. “Good Intentions Sometimes Make Bad
Policies: A Comparison of Dutch and German Integration
Policies.” Migrantenstudies 18: 87–92.

Kuruk, Paul. 2002. “African Customary Law and the Protection
of Folklore.” Bulletin Volume XXXVI Number 2. United Na-
tions Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Paris.
Kymlicka, Will, and Wayne Norman, eds. 2000. Citizenship in Di-

verse Societies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kymlicka, Will. 1990. Contemporary Political Philosophy: An

Introduction. Oxford: Clarendon.

———. 1996. Multicultural Citizenship: A Liberal Theory of Mi-

nority Rights. Oxford: Clarendon.

———. 1998. Finding Our Way: Rethinking Ethnocultural Re-
lations in Canada. Toronto and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

———. 2001. Politics in the Vernacular: Nationalism, Multi-
culturalism  and  Citizenship. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

———. 2003. “Immigration, Citizenship, Multiculturalism: Ex-
ploring the Links.” The Political Quarterly 74(1): 195–208.
Lavery, David. 2004. “Universal Language: American Film and
Monoculture at Century’s End.” Paper presented at the annual
conference of the South Central Modern Language Associa-
tion, 31 October, Dallas. [http://mtsu32.mtsu.edu:11072/
Writing/Universal%20Language.htm]. February 2004.

Lega  Nord.  2004.  “Stop  Ai  Clandestini.”  [http://www.
leganord.org/a_2_docpolitici_clandestini.htm]. March 2004.
Leibfried, Stephan, and Elmar Rieger. 2003. Limits of Globalization:
Welfare States and the World Economy. Cambridge: Polity.
Lenoir, Rene. 1989. Les Exclus: Un Francais sur Dix. Paris: Edi-

tions de Seuil.

Leone, Richard C., and Greg Angrig Jr., eds. 2003. The War on
Our Freedoms: Civil Liberties in an Age of Terrorism. New
York: Century Foundation and Public Affairs Books.

Levin, Brian. 2001. “Extremism and the Constitution: How Amer-
ica’s Legal Evolution Affects the Response to Extremism.”
The American Behavioral Scientist 45(4): 714–55.

Levin, Jack, and Jack McDevitt. 1999. “Hate Crimes.” In Ency-
clopedia of Violence, Peace and Conflict. San Diego: Aca-
demic Press. [http://www.violence.neu.edu/publication4.html].
January 2004.

Lewis, Bernard. 1998. The Multiple Identities of the Middle East.

London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson.

Lewis, Justin, and Toby Miller, eds. 2003. Critical Cultural Policy
Studies: A Reader. Malden, Mass. and Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, Peter. 2003. “Nigeria: Elections in a Fragile Regime.” Jour-

nal of Democracy 14(3).

Libanio, José Carlos. 2004. Correspondence on the Share of Afro-

Brazilian Cabinet Members. March. Sao Paolo.

Licha, Isabel. 2002. “Citizen Participation and Local Government
in Latin America: Advances, Challenges and Best Practices.”
Paper presented at the Citizenship Participation in the Con-
text of Fiscal Decentralization Conference, 2 September,
Kobe. [http://www.adb.org/Documents/Events/2002/
Citizen_Participation/Overview_LAC.pdf]. February 2004.
Linz, Juan J., and Alfred Stepan, eds. 1978. The Breakdown of
Democratic Regimes. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press.

Linz, Juan J., and Alfred Stepan. 1996. Problems of Democratic
Transition and Consolidation: Southern Europe, South
America and Post-Communist Europe. Baltimore and Lon-
don: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Ljiphart, Arend. 1984. “Proportionality by Non-PR Methods:
Ethnic Representation in Belgium, Cyprus, Lebanon, New
Zealand, West Gemany and Zimbabwe.” In A. Ljiphart and
B. Grofman, eds. Choosing  an  Electoral  System:  Issues
and Alternatives. New York: Praeger.

Lott, Juanita Tamayo. 1998. Asian Americans: From Racial Cat-
egory to Multiple Identities. Walnut Creek, Calif., and Lon-
don: Altamira Press.

Loury, Glenn. 2001. “Racial Justice and Affirmative Action Poli-
cies: The Superficial Morality of Colour-Blindness in the
United States.” Paper presented at the United Nations Re-
search Institute for Social Development Conference on
Racism and Public Policy, 3 September, Durban. [http://www.
unrisd.org/80256B3C005BCCF9/httpNetITFrame?
ReadForm&parentunid=0A3B836D101A5A4580256B6D005

118

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

78931&parentdoctype=paper&netitpath=http://www.
unrisd.org/unpublished_/specialevents_/dloury/content.htm].
February 2004.

Lukes, Steven, and Christian Joppke. 1999. Multicultural Ques-

tions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Luter, Kurt Richard, and Kris Deschouwer, eds. 1999. Party Elites
in Divided Societies: Political Parties in Consociational
Democracy. London: Routledge.

Luttmer, E. 1997. “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribu-

tion.” Journal of Political Economy 109(3): 500–28.

Mabry, Tristan James. 1998. “Modernization, Nationalism and
Islam: An Examination of Ernest Gellner’s Writings on Mus-
lim Society with Reference to Indonesia and Malaysia.”
Ethnic and Racial Studies 21(1): 64–88.

Macan-Markar, Marwaan. 2004. “Thailand: Amid Violence, Final
Bell Tolls for Islamic Schools.” Inter Press Service. 20 Feb-
ruary.

Macedo, Stephen. 2000. Diversity and Distrust: Civic Education
in a Multicultural Democracy. Cambridge, Mass. and Lon-
don: Harvard University Press.

Malhotra, Anshu. 2002. Gender, Caste and Religious Identities:
Restructuring Class in Colonial Punjab. Oxford and New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Mamdani, Mahmood. 2001. When  Victims  Become  Killers:
Colonialism,  Nativism,  and  the  Genocide  in  Rwanda.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Mandela, Nelson. 1994. A Long Walk to Freedom. Boston: Little,

Brown and Co.

Mansbridge, Jane. 1998. Beyond Self-Interest. Chicago: Chigaco

University Press.

Marshall, Monty G., and Ted Robert Gurr. 2003. Peace and Con-
flict: A Global Survey of Armed Conflicts, Self-Determination
Movements and Democracy. Baltimore: Center for Interna-
tional Development and Conflict Management.

Marshall, Paul, ed. 2000. Religious Freedom in the World: A
Global  Report  on  Freedom  and  Persecution. Nashville:
Broadman & Holman Publishers.

Martínez-Herrera, Enric. 2002. “Nationalist Extremism and Out-
comes of State Policies in the Basque Country, 1979–2001.”
International Journal on Multicultural Societies 4(1): 1–22.
Marty, Martin E., and R. Scott Appleby, eds. 1991. Fundamentalisms
Observed. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1993. Fundamentalisms and the State: Remaking Poli-
ties, Economies, and Militance. Chicago and London: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.

———. 1995. Fundamentalisms  Comprehended. Chicago and

London: University of Chicago Press.

Matiki, A. J. 2003. “Linguistic Exclusion and the Opinions of

Malawian Legislators.” Language Policy 2(2): 133–52.

Mayer, Jean-François. 2001. “Cults, Violence and Religious Ter-
rorism: An International Perspective.” Studies in Conflict
and Terrorism 24(5): 361–76.

Mazrui, A. 1996. “Perspectives: The Muse of Modernity and the
Quest for Development.” In P. Altbach and S. Hassan, eds.
The Muse of Modernity: Essays on Culture as Develop-
ment in Africa. Trenton: Africa World Press.

McPhail, Kathryn. 2000. “How Oil, Gas, and Mining Projects
Can Contribute to Development.” Finance and Development
37(4): 46–49.

McRae, Kenneth D., ed. 1974. Consociational Democracy: Po-
litical Accommodation in Segmented Societies. Toronto:
McClelland and Stewart.

Medrano, Juan Díez. 2002. “Thematic Introduction.” International
Journal on Multicultural Societies 4(1). [http://www.unesco.
org/most/vl4n1intro.htm]. February 2004.

Mehrotra, Santosh, and Enrique Delamonica. Forthcoming. Public
Spending for the Poor: Getting the Fundamentals Right.
In Social and Macroeconomic Policy. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

Meyer, Thomas. 2001. Identity Mania. Fundamentalism and the
Politicization of Cultural Differences. London and New
York: Zed Books.

Mexico, Ministry of Health. 2004. “Mexico National Health Pro-
gramme, 2001–2006.” Mexico City. [http://www.gob.mx/
wb2/egobierno/egob_Programa_Nacional_de_Salud ]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

Mgbeoji, Ikechi. 2001. “Patents and Traditional Knowledge of the
Uses of Plants: Is a Communal Patent Regime Part of the So-
lution to the Scourge of Biopiracy?” Indiana  Journal  of
Global Legal Studies 9(1): 163–86.

Middle East Institute. 2003. “Algeria.” [http://www.mideasti.org/

countries/countries.php?name=algeria]. March 2004.

Migration Information Source. 2003. “Canada: Policy Legacies, New
Directions  and  Future  Challenges.”  Washington,  DC.
[http://www.migrationinformation.org/Profiles/display.cfm
?ID=20]. February 2004.

Miguel. T. 1999. “Ethnic Diversity and School Funding in Kenya.”
Economics Working Papers Archive. Washington University,
St. Louis.

The Minorities at Risk (MAR) Project. 2003. MARGene:  Mi-
norities  At  Risk  Data  Generation  and  Management
Program. Center for International Development and Con-
flict  Management,  University  of  Maryland,  Baltimore.
[http://www. cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/mar/data.htm]. Febru-
ary 2004.

Minority Rights Group International. 2003. “Indigenous Peoples
and Poverty: The Cases of Bolivia, Guatemala, Honduras and
Nicaragua.” Executive Summary. London. [http://www.
minorityrights.org/Dev/mrg_dev_title12_LatinAmerica/
mrg_dev_title12_LatinAmerica_8.htm]. February 2004.

Mishra, Pankaj. 2003. “Hurray for Bollywood.” The New York

Times. 28 February.

Modood, Tariq, and Pnina Werbner, eds. 1997. The Politics of
Multiculturalism in the New Europe: Racism, Identity and
Community. London: Zed Books.

Mody, Anjali. 2003. “It Is About Equality, Not Uniformity.” The

Hindu. 10 August.

Moeketsi, R. 1999. Discourse in a Multilingual and Multicultural
Courtroom: A Court Interpreter’s Guide. Pretoria: J. L.
Van Schaik.

Mokyr, Joel. 1983. Why Ireland Starved: A Quantitative and An-
alytical History of the Irish Economy, 1800–1850. Lon-
don: Allen and Unwin.

Moody, R. 2000. “The Decade of Destruction: How the Mining Com-
panies Betrayed their Promised Greening.” [http://www.mines
andcommunities.org/Company/decade.htm]. March 2004.
Moreau, Ron, Sami Yousafzai, and Zahid Hussain, with Michael

Hirsh. 2003. “Holy War 101.” Newsweek. 1 December.

Moya, Paula M. 2002. Learning  From  Experience:  Minority
Identities, Multicultural Struggles. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Mudde, Cas. 2000. The Ideology of the Extreme Right. Man-

chester: Manchester University Press.

Myerson, Roger B. 1991. “Proportional Representation, Approval
Voting and Coalitionally Straightforward Elections.” Dis-
cussion Paper 928. Center for Mathematical Studies in Eco-
nomics and Management Science. Northwestern University,
Chicago. [http://www.kellogg.nwu.edu/research/math/dps/
928.pdf]. February 2004.

Nagel, Jack H. 2004. “Stormy Passage to a Safe Harbour? Pro-
portional Representation in New Zealand.” In Henry Miller,
ed. Making  Every  Vote  Count:  Reassessing  Canada’s
Electoral System. Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview Press.
NARAL Pro Choice. 2004. “Clinic Violence and Intimidation.”
[http://www.naral.org/facts/terrorism.cfm]. February 2004.
National Commission on Indigenous Peoples. 2004a. “Latest
News.” Manila. [http://www.ncip.gov.ph/news/newsdisplay.
php?articleid=66]. February 2004.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

119

———. 2004b. “Republic Act 8371.” Manila. [http://www.ncip.

gov.ph/indexmain.php]. February 2004.

Ndoye, Mamadou. 2003. “Bilingualism, Language Policies and Ed-
ucational Strategies in Africa.” International Institute for
Education Planning. United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, Paris.

Neville, Alexander. 2001. “Language, Education and Race Rela-
tions.” Paper presented at the United Nations Research In-
stitute on Sustainable Development Conference on Racism
and Public Policy, 3 September, Durban. [http://www.
unrisd.org/unrisd/website/projects.nsf/(httpProjectsForRe-
searchHome-en)/CE2B1BCD4B5F5D3A80256B4900530E39
?OpenDocument]]. February 2004.

The  New  York  Times. 2003.  “Just  As  Mexican  Movies  Be-
come Chic Again, the Government Pulls Its Support.” 11
December.

Nicaragua Network. 2004. “CAFTA: A Shotgun Wedding?”
[http://www.nicanet.org/alerts/cafta_negociations_2.htm].
February 2004.

Niessen Jan. 2000. “Diversity and Cohesion: New Challenges for
the Integration of Immigrants and Minorities.” Council of Eu-
rope, Strasbourg.

Norchi, Charles H. 2000. “Indigenous Knowledge as Intellectual

Property.” Policy Sciences 33(3/4): 387–98.

Nussbaum, Martha. 1995. Women and Human Development:
The Capabilities Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Nussbaum, Martha, and Jonathan Glover, eds. 1995. Women, Cul-

ture and Development. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Ocampo, José Antonio. 2001. “Rethinking the Development
Agenda.”  Paper  presented  at  the  American  Economic
Associations Annual Meeting, 5 January, New Orleans.
[http://www.undp.org/rblac/documents/poverty/
rethinking_dev_agenda.pdf]. February 2004.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment). 2003. Trends in International Migration, Annual Re-
port 2003 Edition. Paris: SOPEMI. [http://www.oecd.org/
document/17/0,2340,en_2649_33931_28703185_1_1_1_1,00.
html]. February 2004.

Office of Personnel Management. 2003. “2003 Federal Holidays.”
Washington, DC. [http://www.opm.gov/fedhol/2003.asp].
February 2004.

Okin, Susan Moller, ed. 1999. Is  Multiculturalism  Bad  for

Women. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

O’Leary, Brendan. Forthcoming. “Multi-National Federalism, Power-
Sharing, Federacy and the Kurds of Iraq.” In Brendan O’Leary,
John McGarry, and Khaled Salih, eds. The Future of Iraq and
Kurdistan. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Olwig, Karen Fog, and Kirsten Hastrup, eds. 1997. Siting Culture.
The Shifting Anthropological Object. New York: Routledge.
Opondo, Abiero. 2004. “Ethnicity: A Cause of Political Instabil-
ity in Africa?” [http://129.194.252.80/catfiles/2731.pdf].
February 2004.

Ostergard Jr., Robert L., Matthew Tubin, and Jordan Altman. 2001.
“Stealing from the Past: Globalisation, Strategic Formation
and the Use of Indigenous Intellectual Property in the Biotech-
nology Industry.” Third World Quarterly 22(4): 643–56.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution
of  Institutions  for  Collective  Action. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Development Working Paper 74. World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Pattanaik, Prasanta. 1998. “Cultural Indicators of Well-Being:
Some Conceptual Issues.” In World Culture Report: Cul-
ture, Creativity and Markets. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
Patterson, Thomas C., and Ida Susser, eds. 2001. Cultural Diversity
in the United States: A Critical Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pehdazur, Ami. 2001. “Struggling with the Challenges of Right-
Wing Extremism and Terrorism within Democratic Bound-
aries: A Comparative Analysis.” Studies  in  Conflict  and
Terrorism 24(5): 339–59.

The Pew Research Center. 2003. “Globalization With Few Dis-
contents.” Washington, DC. [http://www.globalpolicy.org/
globaliz/cultural/2003/0603globalopinion.htm]. February
2004.

Phillips, Anne. 2001. “Multiculturalism, Universalism and the
Claims of Democracy.” Programme Paper Number 7. Democ-
racy, Governance and Human Rights. United Nations Re-
search  Institute  for  Social  Development,  Geneva.
[http://www.unrisd.org/unrisd/website/projects.nsf/
(httpProjectsForResearchHome-en)/CE2B1BCD4B5F5D3A
80256B4900530E39?OpenDocument]. February 2004.

Platteau, Jean-philippe. 2000. Institutions,  Social  Norms  and
Economic Development. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic
Publishers.

The Polity IV Project. 2003. Political  Regime  Characteristics
and Transitions, 1800–2002. Center for International De-
velopment and Conflict Management, University of Maryland,
Baltimore. [http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

Ponzio, Richard. 2004. “Solomon Island’s Ethnic Difference Not
the Cause of Conflict.” United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, Solomon Islands, Honiara.

Prah, Kwesi Kwaa. 2000. African Languages for the Mass Edu-

cation of Africans. Cape Town: CASAS.

Prashad, Vijay. 2001. “Cataracts of Silence: Race on the Edge of
Indian Thought.” Paper presented at the United Nations
Research Institute for Social Development Conference on
Racism and Public Policy, 3 September, Durban. [http://www.
unrisd.org/unrisd/website/projects.nsf/(httpProjectsFor
ResearchHome-en)/CE2B1BCD4B5F5D3A80256B4900530E39
?OpenDocument]. February 2004.

Preis, Ann-Belinda. 2004. “Culture—Paradigm Shift in Anthro-
pology.” United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cul-
tural Organization, Paris.

Premdas, Ralph. 2003. “Ethnic Conflict, Inequality and Public Sec-
tor Governance in A Multi-Ethnic State: The Case of Trinidad
and Tobago.” Ethnic Conflict, Inequality and Public Sector
Governance Country Studies. United Nations Research In-
stitute for Social Development, Geneva.

Psacharopoulos, G., and H. Patrinos. 1994. “Indigenous People
and Poverty in Latin America.” In G. Psacharopoulos and
H. Patrinos, eds. Indigenous People and Poverty in Latin
America. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Public Citizen. 2004. “Global Trade Watch: Promoting Democ-
racy by Challenging Corporate Globalization.” [http://www.
citizen.org/trade]. March 2004.

Putnam, Robert, R. Leonardi, and R. Y. Nanetti. 1993. Making
Democracy  Work:  Civic  Traditions  in  Modern  Italy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

———. 1998. The  Comparative  Study  of  Public  Economies.

Putnam, Robert. 1993. “The Prosperous Community: Social Cap-

Memphis: P.K. Seidman Foundation.

Papademetriou, Demetrios. 2003. “Policy Considerations for Im-
migrant Integration.” Migration Policy Institute, Washing-
ton, DC. February 2004.

Parekh, Bhikhu. 2000. Rethinking Multiculturalism: Cultural Di-

versity and Political Theory. Basingstoke: Palgrave.

Patrinos, H., and E. Velez. 1996. “Costs and Benefits of Bilingual
Education in Guatemala: A Partial Analysis.” Human Capital

ital and Public Life.” American Prospect 13: 35–42.

RAND Corporation. 2004. Correspondence on Terrorist Groups

1996–2003. March. Arlington.

Ranger, T. 1983. “The Invention of Tradition in Colonial Africa.”
In E. Hobsbawm and T. Ranger, eds. The  Invention  of
Tradition. Cambridge: Canto.

Reilly, Benjamin. 2002. “Internal Conflict and Regional Security

in Asia and the Pacific.” Pacific Review 14 (1): 10–11.

120

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Reiss, Timothy. 2002. Against Autonomy: Global Dialectics of

Cultural Exchange. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Renshon, Stanley A., ed. 2001. One America? Political Leader-
ship, National Identity and the Dilemmas of Diversity.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

Requejo, Ferran. 2001. “Federalism and the Quality of Democracy
in Plurinational Contexts: Present Shortcomings and Possible
Improvements.” Paper presented at the European Consortium
for Political Science Research Conference, 6 April, Grenoble,
France. [http://www.essex.ac.uk/ecpr/events/jointsessions/
paperarchive/grenoble/ws4/requejo.pdf]. February 2004.

Richey, W. 2003. “Affirmative Action’s Evaluation: How the De-
bate has Changed Since the 1970s.” The Christian Science
Monitor. 28 March.

Schultz, Paul T., and Germano Mwabo. 1998. “Labor Unions and
the Distribution of Wages and Employment in South Africa.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51(4).

Schulze, Karl. 1999. The  Constitution,  Multiculturalism  and
Our  Changing  Form  of  Government:  A  Guide  for  the
Future. London: Minerva.

Schwenken, Helen. 2003. “RESPECT for All: The Political Self-
Organization of Female Migrant Domestic Workers in the
European  Union.”  Refuge  21(3):  45–52.  [http://www
.uni-kassel.de/fb5/globalisation/docs/diss/schwenken_refuge
_2003.pdf]. February 2004.

Scott, Rachel. 2003. “An ‘Official’ Islamic Response to the Egypt-
ian Al-Jihad Movement.” Journal  of  Political  Ideologies
8(1): 39–61.

Riding, Alan. 2003. “Filmmakers Seek Protection from U.S. Dom-

Sen, Amartya. 1984. Resources, Values and Development. Cam-

inance.” The New York Times. 5 February.

bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Roberts, Adam. 2002. “Counter-Terrorism. Armed Force and the

———. 1999. Reason Before Identity. Oxford: Oxford University

Laws of War.” Survival 44(1): 7–32.

Press.

Rodgers, Gerry, Charles Gore, and Jose B. Figueirdo, eds. 1995.
Social Exclusion: Rhetoric, Reality, Responses. Geneva: In-
ternational Institute for Labour Studies.

Rodwin, Victor G. 2002. “World Cities Project.” New York Uni-
versity, International Longevity Center, New York [http://
www.nyu.edu/projects/rodwin/world_cp.htm]. March 2004.
Rosaldo, Renato. 1989. Culture and Truth: The Remaking of So-

cial Analysis. Boston: Beacon Press.

Rotar’, Igor’. 2002. “Under the Green Banner: Islamic Radicals in
Russia and the Former Soviet Union.” Religion, State & So-
ciety 30(2): 89–153.

Rotimi, Suberu. 2001. Federalism and Ethnic Conflict in Nige-
ria. Washington,  DC:  United  States  Institute  of  Peace
Press.

Rudolph, Susanne H. 2001. “Living With Difference in India:
Legal Pluralism and Legal Universalism in Historical Con-
text.” In Gerald James Larson, ed. Religion and Personal
Law in Secular India: A Call to Judgment. Bloomington
and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

———. 2001. “Other People.” The New Republic. 18 December.
———. 2002. “Civilizational Imprisonments: How to Misunderstand

Everybody in the World.” The New Republic. 10 June.

———. 2003. “Democracy and its Global Roots.” The New Re-

public. 6 October.

———. 2004a. “Cultural Freedom and Human Development.”
———. 2004b. “How Does Culture Matter?” In Vijayendra Rao
and Michael Walton, eds. Culture and Public Action: A
Cross-Disciplinary Dialogue on Development Policy. Stan-
ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.

———. 2004c. “Elements of a Theory of Human Rights.” Philoso-

phy and Public Affairs 32(Fall).

———. Forthcoming. Identity and Innocence. New York: Norton.
Sepúlveda, Magdalena M. 2003. The  Nature  of  Obligations
Under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. Antwerpen and Oxford: Intersentia.

Shain, Yossi, and Aharon Barth. 2003. “Diasporas and Interna-
tional Relations Theory.” International Organization 57(3):
449–79.

Runciman, W. G. 1966. Relative Deprivation and Social Justice.

Shain, Yossi. 1994–95. “Ethnic Diasporas and U.S. Foreign Pol-

London: Routledge.

Russell, Cheryl. 2002. Racial  and  Ethnic  Diversity:  Asians,
Blacks, Hispanics, Native Americans and Whites. Ithaca:
New Strategist Publications.

Rutter, Terri L. 1998. “Study Finds ‘Life Gap’ in the United States.”
Harvard Public Health Review Fall 1998. [http://www.hsph.
harvard.edu/review/life_gap.shtml]. February 2004.

Salomon, Margot E., and Arjun Sengupta. 2003. “The Right to De-
velopment: Obligations of States and the Rights of Minori-
ties  and  Indigenous  Peoples.”  Minority  Rights  Group
International, London. [http://www.minorityrights.org/].
February 2004.

Sandel, Michael. 1998. Liberalism  and  the  Limits  of  Justice.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sands, David R. 2003. “Effort to Rein in Madrassas Begun; Edu-
cator Predicts 10 Years of Work.” The Washington Times.
7 November.

Sarat, Austin, and Jonathan Simon, eds. 2003. Cultural Analysis,
Cultural Studies and the Law: Moving Beyond Legal Real-
ism. Durham: Duke University Press.

SATP (South Asia Terrorism Portal). 2004. “Sectarian Violence
in Pakistan.” [http://www.satp.org/satporgtp/countries/
pakistan/database/sect-killing.htm]. March 2004.

Schacher, Ayelet. 2001. Multicultural  Jurisdictions:  Cultural
Differences and Women’s Rights. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Schoorl, J. J., and Friesen, W. 2000. “Restoration of Law and
Order by Regional Intervention Force Allows for the Return
of the Displaced.” [http://www.db.idpproject.org/Sites/
idpSurvey.nsf/wViewSingleEnv/Solomon+IslandsProfile+
Summary]. February 2004.

icy.” Political Science Quarterly 109(5): 811–41.

Sheffer, Gabriel. 1986. “A New Field of Study: Modern Diaspo-
ras in International Politics.” In Gabriel Sheffer, ed. Mod-
ern  Diaspora  in  International  Politics. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.

———. 1993. “Ethnic Diasporas: A Threat to their Hosts?” In
Myron Weiner, ed. International Migration and Security.
Boulder: Westview Press.

SIL International. 2004a. Ethnologue: Languages of the World.

Houston.

———. 2004b. “HDR2004 Comments and Contributions from
SIL  International.”  Washington,  DC  and  Houston.
[http://www.sil.org/sildc/index.htm]. February 2004.

Silver, Hilary. 1995. “Reconceptualizing Social Disadvantage:
Three Paradigms of Social Exclusion.” In Gerry Rodgers,
Charles Gore, and Jose B. Figueirdo, eds. Social Exclusion;
Rhetoric, Reality, Responses. Geneva: International Insti-
tute for Labour Studies.

Sivan, Emmanuel. 2003. “The Clash Within Islam.” Survival 45(1):

25–44.

Smith, Adam. 1976 [1776]. An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and
Causes of the Wealth of Nations, eds. Campbell, R. H. and
A. S. Skinner. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Smith, Anthony. 1986. The Ethnic Origin of Nations. Oxford:

Blackwell.

———. 1991. “The Nation: Invented, Imagined, Reconstructed.”
Millennium Journal of International Studies 20: 353–68.
Snodgrass, Donald R. 1995. “Successful Economic Development in
a Multi-ethnic Society: The Malaysian Case.” The Harvard In-
stitute for International Development, Cambridge, Mass. [http://
www.hiid.harvard.edu/pub/pdfs/503.pdf]. February 2004.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

121

Snyder, Jack. 2000. From Voting to Violence: Democraticization

and Nationalist Conflict. New York: W.W. Norton.

South Africa, Ministry of Labour.  2004. “South Africa Employ-
ment Equity Act.” No. 55, Section 20(5). Pretoria. [http://www
.labour.gov.za/docs/legislation/eea/]. February 2004.

South Asia Monitor. 2003. “Musharraf Bans Resurfacing Militant
Groups, Orders Crackdown.” [http://www.southasiamonitor
.org/pak/2003/nov/16head4.htm]. April 2004.

SSS (Swedish Security Service). 2002. “Offences Related to National
Internal Security.” Stockholm. [http://www.sakerhetspolisen
.se/Publikationer/brott_2002.pdf]. January 2004.

Stalker, Peter. 2002. “Migration Trends and Migration Policy in

Europe.” International Migration 40(5): 151–79.

Stamatopoulou, Elsa. 2002. “Cultural Politics or Cultural Rights:
UN Human Rights Responses.” Office of the High Com-
missioner on Human Rights, New York.

Statistics Canada. 2004. Proportion of Foreign-Born Population,
Census Metropolitan Areas. Ottawa. [http://www.statcan
.ca/english/Pgdb/demo46b.htm]. February 2004.

Statistics Sweden. 2004. Population Statistics. Stockholm. [http://www

.scb.se/templates/Product____25799.asp]. February 2004.

Distinction and Extinction: The Harmonization and Stan-
dardization of African Languages. Cape Town: CASAS.

Testas, Abdelaziz. 2002. “The Roots of Algeria’s Religious and Eth-
nic Violence.” Studies in Conflict and Terrorism 25(3): 161–83.
Tetley, William Q. C. 1999. “Mixed Jurisdictions: Common Law
Versus Civil Law (Codified and Uncodified).” International
Institute  for  the  Unification  of  Private  Law,  Rome.
[http://www.unidroit.org/english/publications/review/
articles/1999–3.htm]. February 2004.

Third World Network. 2003. “More than 200 Organizations from
35 Nations Challenge US Patent on Neem.” [http://www.
twnside.org.sg/title/neem-ch.htm]. February 2004.

Thompson, Charles D. 2001. Maya Identities and the Violence

of Place: Borders Bleed. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Throsby, David. 1999. “Cultural Capital.” Journal of Cultural Eco-

nomics 23: 3–12.

Townsend, Peter. 1979. Poverty in the United Kingdom. Lon-

don: Penguin Books.

Tran, Luan-Vu N. 2000. Human  Rights  and  Federalism:  A
Comparative Study on Freedom, Democracy and Cultural
Diversity. The Hague and London: Martinus Nijhoff.

Stepan, Alfred. 2001. Arguing  Comparative  Politics. Oxford:

Tremlett, Giles. 2002. “Death and Dissent as Algeria Goes to the

Oxford University Press.

Stepan, Alfred, and Graeme Robertson. 2003. “An ‘Arab’ More than
a ‘Muslim’ Electoral Gap.” Journal of Democracy 14(3): 30–44.
Stepanov, Valery. 2004. “Russian Experience in the North In-
digenous Statistics.” PFII/2004/WS.1/5. Department of So-
cial and Economic Affairs. United Nations, New York.

Stern, Jessica. 2000. “Pakistan’s Jihad Culture.” Foreign Affairs

79(6): 115–26.

———. 2003. “The Protean Enemy.” Foreign Affairs 82(4): 27–40.
Stewart, Frances. 2002. “Horizontal Inequalities: A Neglected Di-
mension of Development.” Queen Elizabeth House Work-
ing  Paper  S81,  Oxford.  [http://www2.qeh.ox.ac.uk/
research/wpaction.html?jor_id=239]. February 2004.

———. 2003. “Conflict and the Millennium Development Goals.”
Background Paper for Human Development Report 2003.
United Nations Development Programme, New York.

Stiefel, Leanna, Amy Ellen Schwartz, and Dylan Conger. 2003. “Lan-
guage Proficiency and Home Languages of Students in New
York City Elementary and Middle Schools.” New York Uni-
versity, Taub Urban Research Center, New York. [http://urban
.nyu.edu/education/nyclanguage.pdf]. February 2004.

Subirats, Joan. 2003. “Nations Without States in Europe.” Paper pre-
sented at the King Juan Carlos I of Spain Center at New York
University, 8 April, New York. [http://www.nyu.edu/pages/
kjc/lectures/nations_without_states3.doc]. February 2004.

Susning.nu.  2004.  “Ny  demokrati.”  [http://susning.nu/Ny_

demokrati]. March 2004.

Swedish Election Authority. 2002. “Resultat Övriga Riksdagsval—
en Komplettering.” [http://www.val.se/utils/pdf/tillagg_
ovriga.pdf]. March 2004.

Symonds, Peter. 2003. “The Political Origins and Outlook of Je-
maah Islamiyah, Part I.” [http://www.wsws.org/articles/
2003/nov2003/jis1-n12.shtml]. March 2004.

Tauli-Corpus, Victoria. 2004. “Land Rights in the Philippines.” In-
digenous Peoples’ International Centre for Policy Research
and Education (Tebtebba), Baguio City, Philippines.

Taylor, Charles. 1992. “The Politics of Recognition.” In Multi-
culturalism and the “Politics of Recognition.” Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Tebtebba and Forest Peoples Programme. 2003. Extracting
Promises:  Indigenous  Peoples,  Extractive  Industries  &
the World Bank. Baguio City, Philippines.

Tebtebba  and  International  Forum  on  Globalization.  2003.
“Globalization: Effects on Indigenous Peoples.” [http://www.
tebtebba.org/]. March 2004.

Temu, A. 2000. “The Development of National Language: A Sur-
vey of Kiswahili in Tanzania.” In Kwesi Kwaa Prah, ed. Between

Polls.” The Guardian. 31 May.

Turton, D. 1997. “War and Ethnicity: Global Connections and
Local Violence in North East Africa and Former Yugoslavia.”
Oxford Development Studies 25: 77–94.

UN (United Nations). 1994. “General Comment No. 23 (50) (Ar-
ticle  27).”  United  Nations  Document  CCPR/C/21/
Rev.1/Add.5. Adopted at the 50th Session of the Human
Rights Committee, 6 April, New York.

———. 2000a. “Millennium Declaration.” A/RES/55/2, 18 Sep-
tember.  New  York.  [http://www.un.org/millennium/
declaration/ares552e.pdf]. March 2003.

———. 2000b. “Replacement Migration: Is It a Solution to Declining
and  Ageing  Populations?”  Department  of  Economic 
and  Social  Affairs,  Population  Division.  New  York.
[http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/migration/
migration.htm]. March 2004.

———. 2002a. “International Migration Report 2002.” Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. New
York.  [http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/
ittmig2002/2002ITTMIGTEXT22–11.pdf]. February 2004.
———.  2002b.  “International  Migration  Report  Website.”
[http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/ittmig2002/
ittmigrep2002.htm ]. March 2004.

———. 2003a. “Trends in Total Migrant Stock by Sex. 1960–2000.”
2003 Revision to the International Migration Report 2002.
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Di-
vision. New York.

———. 2003b. World Population Prospects 1950–2050: The
2002  Revision. Department of Economic and Social Af-
fairs, Population Division, New York

———. 2004. “Data Collection Pertaining to Indigenous Peoples:
Issues and Challenges.” PFII/2004/WA.1/13. Department of
Economic and Social Affairs. New York.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop-

ment). 1999. World Investment Report. Geneva.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 1999. Human
Development Report 1999: Globalization with a Human
Face. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2000a. Human  Development  Report  2000:  Human
Rights and Human Development. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

———. 2000b. “Namibia Human Development Report 2000/2001:

Gender and Violence in Namibia.” Windhoek.

———. 2000c. “South Africa Human Development Report 2000:
Transformation  for  Human  Development.”  Pretoria.
[http://www.undp.org.za/sahdr2000/sahdr20002.html]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

122

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

———. 2002a. Human Development Report 2002: Deepening
Democracy in a Fragmented World. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.

———. 2002b. “Situacíon Del Desarrollo Human En Las Comar-

cas Indígenas.” Panama City.

———. 2003a. Arab Human Development Report 2003: Build-

ing a Knowledge Society. Amman.

———. 2003b. Human Development Report 2003: Millennium
Development Goals: A Compact Among Nations to End
Human Poverty. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 2003c. “Indonesia.” Crisis Prevention and Recovery Unit.

Jakarta.

———. 2003d. “Report of the United Nations Development Pro-
gramme to the 59th Session of the United Nations Commission
on Human Rights.” E/CN.4/2003/128. New York. [http://www
.unhchr.ch/huridocda/huridoca.nsf]. February 2004.

———. 2003e. “Roma Human Development Report: The Roma in
Central and Eastern Europe: Avoiding the Dependency
Trap.” Bratislava. [http://www.roma.undp.sk]. February
2004.

———.  2004a.  “About  Indigenous  Peoples:  A  Definition.”
New York. [http://www.undp.org/csopp/cso/NewFiles/
paboutdef.html]. February 2004.

———. 2004b. “UNDP and Indigenous Peoples: A Policy of En-
gagement.” Civil Society Organization, Bureau for Resources
and Strategic Partnerships. New York. [http://www.undp.org/
cso/policies.html]. February 2004.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Or-
ganization). 1998. World Culture Report: Culture, Creativ-
ity and Markets. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.

———. 2000a. “A Survey on National Cinematography.” Culture
Sector, Division of Creativity, Cultural Industries and Copy-
right. Paris.

———. 2000b. “Study of International Flows of Cultural Goods

between 1980 and 1998.” Paris.

———. 2000c. World Culture Report: Cultural Diversity, Con-

flict and Pluralism. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.

———. 2001. “Synthesis of Reports by Member States in the Con-
text of the Permanent System of Reporting on Education for
Peace, Human Rights, Democracy, International Under-
standing and Tolerance, General Conference 31st Session.”
31 C/INF.5. Paris.

———. 2002. “Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity.” Cul-

tural Diversity Series No. 1. Paris.

———. 2003a. “Desirability of Drawing Up an International
Standard-Setting Instrument on Cultural Diversity, General
Conference 32nd Session.” 32 C/52. Paris.

———-. 2003b. “Language Vitality and Endangerment.” Paper pre-
sented at the “International Expert Meeting on the UN-
ESCO Programme: Safeguarding Languages,” 10 March,
Paris. [http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php@URL_
ID=9105&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201
.html]. February 2004.

———. 2003c. “Preliminary Draft International Convention for the
Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, General
Conference 32nd Session.” 32 C/26. Paris.

———. 2004a.  “Culture,  Trade  and  Globalization.”  Paris.
[http://www.unesco.org/culture/industries/trade/index
.shtml]. March 2004.

———. 2004b. “What Was the Draft Multilateral Agreement on In-
vestments (MAI)?” [http://www.unesco.org/culture/industries
/trade/html_eng/question20.shtml#20]. March 2004.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Or-
ganization)–UIS (Institute of Statistics). 2001. “Fast Facts: Did
You Know? International Trade in Cultural Goods.” Paris.
[http://www.uis.unesco.org]. February 2004.

UN HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Programme).
Forthcoming. State of the World’s Cities Report 2004. Draft
chapter on transnational migration. Nairobi.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2001. State of the

World’s Children 2001. New York.

———. 2004. “Ensuring the Rights of Indigenous Children.” Inno-
centi  Digest 11.  Innocenti  Research  Center,  Rome.
[http://www.unicef.org/irc]. February 2004.

United Nations Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
2004. “Help For Brazil’s Indians.” London and New York.
[http://www.una-uk.org/Environment/brazil2.html]. Feb-
ruary 2004.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2004a. “Adding Diversity From Abroad:
The Foreign-Born Population 2000.” Washington, DC.
[http://www.census.gov/population/pop-profile/2000/
chap17.pdf]. February 2004.

———. 2004b. “United States Census 2000.” [http://www.census

.gov/]. March 2004.

U.S. Department of Justice. 2001. “Hate Crime: The Violence of
Intolerance.” [http://www.usdoj.gov/crs/ pubs/htecrm.htm].
April 2004.

U.S. Department of Labor. 2004. “Latest Numbers.” Bureau of

Labor Statistics. [http://www.bls.gov/]. March 2004.

Valdés, Julio Carranza. 2002. “Cultural Development Indicators:
Towards a New Dimension of Human Well-Being.” Paper
presented at the International Symposium for Cultural Sta-
tistics, 21 October, Montréal. [http://www.colloque2002
symposium.gouv.qc.ca/PDF/Carranza_paper_Symposium.pdf].
February 2004.

Van Beetz, Freek. 2000. “The Legal Instruments Required in the
Strategy for a Successful Integration Policy in the Nether-
lands.” Paper presented at the Strategies for Implementing
Integration Policies Conference, 4 May, Prague.

Van der Westhuizen, Janis. 2002. Adapting  to  Globalization:
Malaysia, South Africa, and the Challenges of Ethnic Re-
distribution with Growth. Westport: Praeger.

Van Holsteyn, Joop J. M. 2003. “Beating a Dead Horse? The Dutch
State and the Defense of Democracy Against Right-Wing Ex-
tremism.” Paper presented at the European Consortium for
Political  Research  Conference,  28  March,  Edinburgh.
[http://www.essex.ac.uk/ecpr/events/jointsessions/ 
paperarchive/edinburgh.asp?section=4]. February 2004.

Vogel, H. L. 2001. Entertainment Industry Economics: A Guide for
Financial Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vuchelen, Jef. 2003. “Electoral Systems and the Effects of Politi-
cal Events on the Stock Market: The Belgian Case.” Eco-
nomics and Politics 15(1): 85–102.

Wahlbeck, Osten. 2002. “The Concept of Diaspora as an Analyt-
ical Tool in the Study of Refugee Communities.” Journal of
Ethnic and Migration Studies 28(2): 221–38.

Walden, Bello. 2000. “2000: A Year of Global Protest Against
Globalization.” New York. [http://www.globalpolicy.org].
February 2004.

Wanandi, Jusuf. 2002. “Islam in Indonesia: Its History, Development
and Future Challenges.” Asia-Pacific Review 9(2): 104–12.
Wanner, Philippe. 2002. “Migration Trends in Europe.” European
Population Papers Series No. 7. European Population Com-
mittee. Council of Europe, Strasbourg. [http://www.coe
.int/t/e/social_cohesion/population/No_7_Migration_trends_
in_Europe.pdf]. February 2004.

Watts, Ronald L. 1998. “Federal Systems and Accommodation of
Distinct Groups: A Comparative Survey of International
Arrangements for Aboriginal Peoples.” Institute of Intergov-
ernmental Relations. Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario.
[http://www.iigr.ca/pdf/publications/146_Federal_Systems_
and_Acco.pdf]. February 2004.

———. 1999. Comparing Federal Systems. Montreal and Kingston:

McGill-Queen’s University Press.

———-. 2002. “The Relevance Today of the Federal Idea.” Paper
presented at the International Conference on Federalism,
27 August, St. Gallen. [http://www.forumfed.org/federalism/
Watts.asp?lang=en]. February 2004.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

123

Weatherall, Kimberlee. 2001. “Culture, Autonomy and Djulibinya-
murr: Individual and Community in the Construction of Rights
to Traditional Designs.” Modern Law Review 64(2): 215–42.
Weber, Max. 1976 [1930]. The Protestant Ethics and the Spirit
of Capitalism, republished with a new introduction by An-
thony Giddens. London: Allen and Unwin.

Wedgwood, Ruth. 2002. “Al Qaeda, Terrorism, and Military Com-
missions.” The  American  Journal  of  International  Law
96(2): 328–37.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. “International Decade
of the World’s Indigenous People.” Report by the Secretariat.
Geneva. [http://www.who.int/gb/EB_WHA/PDF/WHA54/
ea5433.pdf]. February 2004.

Widfeldt, Anders. 2001. “Responses to the Extreme Right in Swe-
den: The Diversified Approach.” Working Paper 10. Keele
European Parties Research Unit, Keele. [http://www.keele
.ac.uk/depts/spire/Working%20Papers/KEPRU/KEPRU%20
Working%20papers.htm]. February 2004.

———. 2004. Correspondence on the vote shares of European ex-
treme  right  parties  between  1990  and  2003.  February.
Aberdeen.

Wikipedia. 2004. “Religious Persecution.” Tampa. [http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Religious_persecution]. February 2004.
Willett, Cynthia, ed. 1998. Theorizing  Multiculturalism:  A
Guide to the Current Debate. Cambridge, Mass. and Ox-
ford: Blackwell.

WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization). 2003a. “Com-
posite Study on the Protection of Traditional Knowledge.”
WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/8. Intergovernmental Committee on In-
tellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowl-
edge and Folklore. Geneva.

———. 2003b. “Consolidated Analysis of the Legal Protection of
Traditional Cultural Expressions.” WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/3.
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Ge-
netic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore. Geneva.
———. 2003c. “Information on National Experiences with the
Intellectual Property Protection of Traditional Knowledge.”
WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/INF/2. Intergovernmental Committee
on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional
Knowledge and Folklore. Geneva.

———. 2003d. “Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and

Folklore Fifth Session Report.” WIPO/GRTKF/IC/5/15.
Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore.
Geneva.

———. 2004. “Revised Version of Traditional Knowledge: Policy
and Legal Options.” WIPO/GRTKF/IC/6/4 Rev. Inter-
governmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Ge-
netic  Resources,  Traditional  Knowledge  and  Folklore.
Geneva.

World Bank. 2002. World Development Report 2003: Sustain-
able Development in a Dynamic World. New York: Ox-
ford University Press.

———. 2003. World Development Indicators 2003. Washington,

DC.

———. 2004. “Striking a Better Balance: Extractive Industries Re-

view Final Report.” Washington, DC.

World Commission on Culture and Development. 1995. “Our
Creative Diversity: Report of the World Commission on Cul-
ture and Development.” Paris.

World Values Survey. 2004. “World Values Survey.”

[http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org]. February 2004.

Wright, Sue. 2001. “Language and Power: Background to the
Debate on Linguistic Rights.” International Journal on Mul-
ticultural Societies 3(1). [http://www.unesco.org/most/
l3n1wri.htm]. February 2004.

Young, Crawford, ed. 1999. The Accommodation of Cultural Di-

versity: Case Studies. Basingstoke: MacMillan Press.

Young, Iris Marion. 2000. Inclusion and Democracy. Oxford: Ox-

ford University Press.

Zelkina, Anna. 1999. “Islam and Security in the New States of Cen-
tral Asia: How Genuine is the Islamic Threat?” Religion, State
& Society 27(3/4): 355–72.

Zhao, Susheng. 1998. “A State-Led Nationalism: The Patriotic
Education Campaign in Post-Tiananmen China.” Commu-
nist and Post-Communist Studies 31(3): 287–302.

Zolberg, Aristide. 2001. “Introduction.” In Aristide Zolberg and
Peter Benda, eds. Global Migrants, Global Refugees. New
York: Berghahn Books.

Zorzi, Christine. 2002. “The ‘Irrecognition’ of Aboriginal Customary
Law.”  Lawyers  Information  Network,  Melbourne.
[http://www.link.asn.au/downloads/papers/indeginous/
p_in_09.pdf]. February 2004.

124

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
INDICATORS

Statistical feature 1: The state of human development
Statistical feature 2: Note to table 1: About this year’s human development index
INDICATOR TABLES

127

137

I. MONITORING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: ENLARGING PEOPLE’S CHOICES . . . 

1 Human development index
139
2 Human development index trends
3 Human and income poverty: developing countries
4 Human and income poverty: OECD, Central & Eastern Europe & CIS

147

143

150

II. . . . TO LEAD A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE . . .

152

5 Demographic trends
6 Commitment to health: resources, access and services
7 Water, sanitation and nutritional status
8 Leading global health crises and risks
9 Survival: progress and setbacks

164

160

168

156

III. . . . TO ACQUIRE KNOWLEDGE . . .

10 Commitment to education: public spending
11 Literacy and enrolment
12 Technology: diffusion and creation

176

180

172

IV. . . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

192

184

13  Economic performance
14  Inequality in income or consumption
15  Structure of trade
16  Rich country responsibilities: aid
17  Rich country responsibilities: debt relief and trade
18 Flows of aid, private capital and debt
19  Priorities in public spending
202
20  Unemployment in OECD countries

206

196

188

198

197

V. . . . WHILE PRESERVING IT FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS . . .

21 Energy and the environment

207

VI. . . . PROTECTING PERSONAL SECURITY . . .

22 Refugees and armaments
23 Victims of crime

215

211

VII. . . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN

217

24  Gender-related development index
221
25  Gender empowerment measure
26  Gender inequality in education
225
27  Gender inequality in economic activity
28  Gender, work burden and time allocation
29 Women’s political participation

234

229

233

VIII. HUMAN AND LABOUR RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS 

30  Status of major international human rights instruments
31  Status of fundamental labour rights conventions
242

238

32 Human development indices: a regional perspective
33 Basic indicators for other UN member countries

250

246

Note on statistics in the Human Development Report
251
Technical note 1: Calculating the human development indices
Technical note 2: Identifying top priority and high priority countries for the Millennium Development Goals
Definitions of statistical terms
Statistical references
277
Classification of countries
283
Index to indicators

268

279

258

265

Statistical feature 1   The state of human development
People are the real wealth of nations. Indeed,
the basic purpose of development is to enlarge
human freedoms. The process of development
can expand human capabilities by expanding
the choices that people have to live full and cre-
ative lives. And people are both the beneficia-
ries of such development and the agents of the
progress and change that bring it about. This
process must benefit all individuals equitably
and build on the participation of each of them.
This  approach  to  development—human
development—has  been  advocated  by  every
Human Development Report since the first in
1990.

The ideas behind this development para-
digm are not new—they are at least as old as
Aristotle. Aristotle argued that “wealth is evi-
dently  not  the  good  we  are  seeking;  for  it  is
merely  useful  and  for  the  sake  of  something
else.”  Immanuel  Kant  similarly  asserted  that
human beings should be seen as ends in them-
selves,  rather  than  as  a  means  to  other  ends.
And parallel ideas are reflected in the writings
of Adam Smith, Robert Malthus and John Stu-
art Mill—to name just a few.

The range of capabilities that individuals
can  have,  and  the  choices  that  can  help  to
expand them, are potentially infinite and vary
by individual. However, public policy is about
setting priorities, and two criteria are helpful
in identifying the most important capabilities
for  assessing  meaningful  global  progress  in
achieving human well-being, the purpose of this
Report. First, these capabilities must be uni-
versally valued. Second, they must be basic to
life, in the sense that their absence would fore-
close  many  other  choices.  For  these  reasons
Human Development Report focuses on four
important  capabilities:  to  lead  a  long  and
healthy life, to be knowledgeable, to have access
to the resources needed for a decent standard
of living and to participate in the life of the
community.

democratic  participation  in  decision-making
or  equal  rights  for  men  and  women  do  not
depend  on  incomes.  For  these  reasons  the
Report presents an extensive set of indicators
(33 tables and almost 200 indicators) on impor-
tant  human  outcomes  achieved  in  countries
around the world, such as life expectancy at
birth or under-five mortality rates, which reflect
the capability to survive, or literacy rates, which
reflect the capability to learn. They also include
indicators on important means for achieving
these capabilities, such as access to clean water,
and on equity in achievement, such as the gaps
between men and women in schooling or polit-
ical participation.

While this rich array of indicators provides
measures  for  evaluating  progress  in  human
development in its many dimensions, policy-
makers also need a summary measure to eval-
uate  progress,  particularly  one  that  focuses
more  sharply  on  human  well-being  than  on
income.  For  this  purpose  Human  Develop-
ment Reports have since their inception pub-
lished  the  human  development  index,  later
complemented by indices looking specifically
at gender (gender-related development index
and  gender  empowerment  measure)  and
poverty (human poverty index; table 1). These
indices give an overview of some basic dimen-
sions  of  human  development,  but  they  must
be complemented by looking at their underly-
ing data and other indicators.

But for a long time development policy
debates seemed to forget this simple, yet pro-
found truth. Caught up with the rise and fall of
national incomes, economists often lost sight of
the real end of development—people’s well-
being. Economic growth is merely a means—
albeit an important one—for achieving this end.

Measuring human development
It is easier to measure national incomes than
human  development.  And  many  economists
would  argue  that  national  income  is  a  good
indicator of human well-being. While there is
evidently a strong relationship, since economic
growth is an important means to human devel-
opment, human outcomes do not depend on
economic growth and levels of national income
alone. They also depend on how these resources
are used—whether for developing weapons or
producing food, building palaces or providing
clean  water.  And  human  outcomes  such  as

TABLE 1
HDI, HPI-1, HPI-2, GDI—same components, different measurements

Index

Human
development
index (HDI)

Human poverty
index for
developing
countries (HPI-1)

Human poverty
index for high-
income OECD
countries (HPI-2)

Gender-related
development
index (GDI)

Longevity

Knowledge

Life expectancy at birth

• Adult literacy rate
• Combined gross enrolment ratio

for primary, secondary and tertiary
schools

Probability at birth of not
surviving to age 40

Adult literacy rate

Probability at birth of not
surviving to age 60

Percentage of adults lacking
functional literacy skills

Decent standard of living

GDP per capita (PPP US$)

Deprivation in economic provisioning, 
measured by:
• Percentage of people without

sustainable access to an improved
water source

• Percentage of children under five

underweight for age

Percentage of people living below the
income poverty line (50% of median
adjusted disposable household income)

Participation or exclusion

—

—

Long-term unemployment
rate (12 months or more)

Female and male life
expectancy at birth

• Female and male adult literacy rates
• Female and male combined gross

Estimated female and male earned 
income

—

enrolment ratio for primary,
secondary and tertiary schools

THE STATE OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

127

Human development index
The human development index (HDI) focuses
on  three  measurable  dimensions  of  human
development:  living  a  long  and  healthy  life,
being educated and having a decent standard
of living (see Technical note 1). Thus it com-
bines measures of life expectancy, school enrol-
ment, literacy and income to allow a broader
view  of  a  country’s  development  than  does
income alone.

Although the HDI is a useful starting point,
it is important to remember that the concept of
human development is much broader and more
complex than any summary measure can cap-
ture, even when supplemented by other indices.
The HDI is not a comprehensive measure. It
does not include important aspects of human
development, notably the ability to participate
in  the  decisions  that  affect  one’s  life  and  to
enjoy the respect of others in the community. A
person can be rich, healthy and well educated,
but without this ability human development is
impeded.  The  omission  of  this  dimension  of
human development from the HDI has been
highlighted  since  the  first  Human  Develop-
ment  Reports—and  drove  the  creation  of  a
human freedom index in 1991 and a political
freedom index in 1992. Neither measure sur-
vived past its first year, a testament to the dif-
ficulty of adequately quantifying such complex
aspects of human development.

This  difficulty  does  not  make  the  many
aspects of participation, such as political free-
dom and equal respect in the community, any
less  important  to  human  development  than
the dimensions included in the HDI. In fact,
these  issues  have  been  explored  extensively
in Human  Development  Reports.  Human
Development Report 2002 dealt with democ-
racy  and  its  importance  to  human  develop-
ment. This year’s report introduces a related
and vitally important aspect of human devel-
opment:  cultural  liberty.  Leading  a  full  life
includes being free to follow different cultural
practices  and  traditions  without  facing  dis-
crimination  or  disadvantage  in  participating
politically, economically or socially.

The HDI clearly illustrates the distinction
between  income  and  human  well-being.  By
measuring average achievements in health, edu-
cation and income, the HDI can give a more
complete  picture  of  the  state  of  a  country’s
development than can incomes alone. Bolivia,
with  a  much  lower  GDP  per  capita  than

Guatemala, has achieved a higher HDI because
it has done more to translate that income into
human development (figure 1). Tanzania, one
of the world’s poorest countries, has an HDI
comparable to that of Guinea, a country almost
four times richer. Conversely, countries at the
same level of income have large differences in
HDI—Viet Nam has roughly the same income
as Pakistan but a much higher HDI, due to its
higher life expectancy and literacy (figure 2).
Indicator table 1 highlights these differences in
another  way  by  comparing  HDI  ranks  with
ranks  in  GDP  per  capita  (last  column).  Sri
Lanka ranks 96 of 177 countries in HDI, much
higher than its GDP rank of 112. These exam-
ples highlight the importance of policies that
translate wealth into human development. In
particular, well designed public policy and pro-
vision of services by governments, local com-
munities and civil society can advance human
development even without high levels of income
or economic growth.

This does not mean, however, that eco-
nomic growth is unimportant. Economic growth
is an important means to human development,
and when growth stagnates over a prolonged

period, it becomes difficult to sustain progress
in human development.

Gender-related development index
The HDI measures average achievements in a
country, but it does not incorporate the degree
of gender imbalance in these achievements. Two
countries with the same average level of adult
literacy (say 30%) may have different disparities
in rates between men and women (one could
have a rate of 28% for women and 32% for men
while the other could have a rate of 20% for
women and 40% for men). Such differences in
disparities would not be reflected in the HDI for
the two countries. The gender-related develop-
ment index (GDI), introduced in Human Devel-
opment Report 1995, measures achievements
in the same dimensions using the same indica-
tors as the HDI but captures inequalities in
achievement between women and men. It is sim-
ply the HDI adjusted downward for gender
inequality. The greater the gender disparity in
basic human development, the lower is a coun-
try’s GDI relative to its HDI. The countries with
the worst disparities between their GDI and
HDI values are Saudi Arabia, Oman, Pakistan,

Same HDI, different income

Figure
1

Figure
2

Same income, different HDI 

development index

GDP per capita (PPP US$)

GDP per capita (PPP US$)

development index

Income

2002

Human

2002

Human

2002

Income

2002

0.70

0.60

Guatemala

Bolivia

0.50

Guinea

4500

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

4000

3000

2000

Jordan

Egypt

Viet Nam

Pakistan

Tanzania

0.40

Source:

Indicator table 1.

0

1000

Source:

Indicator table 1.

0.80

0.70

0.60

0.50

0.40

128

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Yemen and India, indicating a need for greater
attention to gender equality. Sweden, Denmark,
Australia, Latvia and Bulgaria have the closest
correspondence between HDI and GDI. Full
results and ranks are in indicator table 24.

Gender empowerment measure
The HDI does not include a measure of par-
ticipation,  an  aspect  of  human  development
that  is  central  to  gender  equity.  The  gender
empowerment measure (GEM) reveals whether
women  take  an  active  part  in  economic  and
political life. It focuses on gender inequality in
key areas of economic and political participation
and decision-making. It tracks the share of seats
in parliament held by women; of female legis-
lators,  senior  officials  and  managers;  and  of
female  professional  and  technical  workers—
and  the  gender  disparity  in  earned  income,
reflecting  economic  independence.  Differing
from the GDI, the GEM exposes inequality in
opportunities in selected areas. It has been cal-
culated  for  78  countries  (for  full  results  and
ranking, see indicator table 25). The top three
countries are Norway, Sweden and Denmark,
which  have  opened  significant  opportunities
for women to participate in economic and polit-
ical life. But all countries can do more to expand
the opportunities for women: only nine coun-
tries  have  GEM  values  higher  than  0.8  (out
of 1)—most have a long way to go to achieve full
empowerment of women.

Human poverty index
The HDI measures the average progress of a
country  in  human  development.  Human
Development  Report  1997 introduced  the
human poverty index (HPI), which focuses on
the  proportion  of  people  below  a  threshold
level in basic dimensions of human develop-
ment,  much  as  the  poverty  headcount  mea-
sures the proportion of people below an income
threshold. The human poverty index for devel-
oping  countries  (HPI-1)  uses  different  vari-
ables than the index for high-income OECD
countries (HPI-2), as shown in table 1. Indi-
cator tables 3 and 4, respectively, give the full
results and rankings of these indices. As with
the HDI, these indices provide a more complete
view of poverty because they go beyond mea-
sures of income poverty. For developing coun-
tries  Barbados,  Uruguay,  Chile,  Costa  Rica
and Cuba rank highest, with human poverty
levels  of  5%  or  lower.  Burkina  Faso,  Niger,

Mali, Ethiopia and Zimbabwe have the high-
est human poverty levels of the countries in the
index—all above 50%.

For high-income OECD countries HPI-2
shows a different picture from that shown by
the  HDI.  These  countries  tend  to  have  very
similar HDI values, because of their high over-
all levels of development. But when variables
and dimensions of deprivation are used that are
specifically  adapted  to  the  situation  in  these
countries  and  to  the  different  meaning  of
poverty there (such as social exclusion), there
are substantial differences. For the 17 countries
with data, human poverty as measured by HPI-2
varies from 6.5% in Sweden to 15.8% in the
United States. And there are large differences
between HDI and HPI-2 ranks: Australia ranks
3rd in the HDI but 14th in the HPI-2. Lux-
embourg ranks 15th in the HDI but 7th in the
HPI-2, reflecting differences in how well these
countries have distributed the overall human
development achieved.

Trends in human development
Progress  in  human  development  during  the
20th century was dramatic and unprecedented.
Between 1960 and 2000 life expectancy in devel-
oping countries increased from 46 to 63 years.1
Mortality  rates  for  children  under  five  were
more than halved.2 Between 1975, when one of
every two adults could not read, and 2000 the

share  of  illiterate  people  was  almost  halved.3
Real  per  capita  incomes  more  than  doubled,
from $2,000 to $4,200.4 But despite this impres-
sive  progress,  massive  human  deprivation
remains. More than 800 million people suffer
from  undernourishment  (table  2).  Some  100
million children who should be in school are not,
60 million of them girls. More than a billion peo-
ple survive on less than $1 a day. Some 1.8 bil-
lion  people  live  in  countries  where  political
regimes do not fully accommodate democratic,
political and civil freedoms.5 And about 900 mil-
lion people belong to ethnic, religious, racial or
linguistic groups that face discrimination.6

The Millennium Development Goals
Recognizing these problems, world leaders at
the  United  Nations  Millennium  Summit  in
September 2000 expressed an unprecedented
determination  to  end  world  poverty.  They
declared  their  commitment  not  only  to  the
people of their own countries but to the peo-
ple of the world. The 189 countries at the sum-
mit  adopted  the  Millennium  Declaration,
committing themselves to do their utmost to
achieve key objectives of humanity in the 21st
century,  including  eradicating  poverty,  pro-
moting  human  dignity  and  achieving  peace,
democracy and environmental sustainability.
Stemming from the Declaration were the Mil-
lennium Development Goals—a set of 8 goals,

TABLE 2
Eliminating poverty: massive deprivation remains, 2000
(Millions)

Living
on less
than $1
(PPP US$)

a day

323
8

261
432

56

Region

Sub-Saharan

Africa

Arab States
East Asia and
the Pacific

South Asia
Latin America

and the
Caribbean

Central & Eastern 

Europe & CIS

World

21
1,100

a. 1998–2000.
Source: World Bank 2003a, 2004f; UNESCO 2003; UN 2003.

Total

under-

nourished a

Children
population Primary age Primary age under age
five dying
each year

children not
in school

girls not
in school

People
without
access
improved

water
sources

People
without
access to
adequate
sanitation

185
34

212
312

53

33
831

44
7

14
32

2

3
104

23
4

7
21

1

1
59

5
1

1
4

0

0
11

273
42

453
225

72

29
1,197

299
51

1,004
944

121

..
2,742

THE STATE OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

129

Figure
3

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

60
45
30
15
0

60
45
30
15
0

40
30
20
10

0

40
30
20
10
0

100
75
50
25
0

100
75
50
25
0

n
e
c
r
e
P

t 100
75
50
25
0

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

100
75
50

25
0

Not enough progress toward the Millennium Development Goals

Poverty: Proportion of people living on less than $1 a day (%)

World

Sub-Saharan Africa

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Regional distribution of population living
on less than $1 a day, 2000  (% of total)

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

Latin America and 
the Caribbean 5.1

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CISa 1.9

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

South Asia

Latin America and

the Caribbean

GOAL

2000

1990
Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CISa

2015

South Asia
 39.2

GOAL

GOAL

Sub-Saharan
Africa 29.3

Arab States
0.7

East Asia and
the Pacific 23.7

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

Global total: 1,100 million in 2000

Hunger: Undernourished people (as % of total population)

World

Sub-Saharan Africa

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Regional distribution of population

undernourished, 1998–2000 (% of total)

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

Latin America and 
the Caribbean 6.4

1990-92

1999-2001

2015

1990-92

1999-2001

2015

1990-92

1999-2001

2015

1990-92

1999-2001

2015

South Asia

GOAL

Latin America and

the Caribbean

GOAL

South Asia
 37.6

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS 4.0

Sub-Saharan
Africa 22.2

Arab States
4.1

East Asia and
the Pacific 25.6

1990-92

1999-2001

2015

1990-92

1999-2001

2015

Global total: 831 million in 2000

Primary education: Net primary enrolment ratio (%)

World

Sub-Saharan Africa

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

South Asia

Latin America and

the Caribbean

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

Regional distribution of primary age children 

not in school, 2000  (% of total)

Latin America and 
the Caribbean 1.9

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS 2.5

South Asia
31.7

Sub-Saharan
Africa 43.0

East Asia and
the Pacific 13.7

Arab States 7.2

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

Global total: 104 million in 2000

Gender equality: Ratio of girls to boys in primary school (%)

World

Sub-Saharan Africa

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

South Asia

Latin America and

the Caribbean

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

Regional distribution of primary age girls not 

in school, 2000 (% of total)

Latin America and 
the Caribbean 1.9

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS 2.2

South Asia
36.6

Sub-Saharan
Africa 39.9

East Asia and 
the Pacific 11.9

Arab States 7.6

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

Global total: 59 million in 2000

130

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Figure
3

s
h
t
r
i
b
 
e
v
i
l
 
0
0
0
,
1
 
r
e

200
150
100
50
0P

s
h
t
r
i
b
 
e
v
i
l
 
0
0
0
,
1
 
r
e

200
150
100
50
0P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

t
n
e
c
r
e
P

100
75
50
25
0

100
75
50
25
0

100
75
50
25
0

100
75
50
25
0

Not enough progress towards the Millennium Development Goals

Child mortality: Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

World

Sub-Saharan Africa

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Regional distribution of children dying each year 

under age five, 2002 (% of total)

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

Latin America and 
the Caribbean 3.7

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS 1.5

GOAL

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

South Asia

Latin America and

the Caribbean

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS

South Asia
33.4

Sub-Saharan
Africa 42.8

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

East Asia and
the Pacific 12.2

Arab States 5.8

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

Global total: 11 million in 2002

Access to water: People with access to an improved water source (%)

World

Sub-Saharan Africa

East Asia and the Pacific

GOAL

GOAL

GOAL

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

South Asia

Latin America and

the Caribbean

GOAL

GOAL

Regional distribution of people without access to 

improved water source, 2000 (% of total)

Latin America and 
the Caribbean 6.6

Central and Eastern 
Europe and the CIS 2.7

South Asia
20.6

East Asia and
the Pacific 41.4

Sub-Saharan
Africa 24.9

Arab States 
3.9

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

Global total: 1,197 million in 2000

Access to sanitation: People with access to improved sanitation (%)

World

GOAL

Sub-Saharan Africa
GOAL

East Asia and the Pacific

Regional distribution of people without access to 

adequate sanitation, 2000 (% of total)

GOAL

Latin America and 
the Caribbean 5.0

Sub-Saharan 
Africa 12.4

Arab States 2.1

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

South Asia

Latin America and

the Caribbean

GOAL

GOAL

South
Asia 39.0

East Asia and
the Pacific 41.5

1990

2000

2015

1990

2000

2015

Global total: 2,742 million in 2000

a: 
Sources:

Refers to population living on less than $2 a day. 
World Bank 2003a (income); FAO 2003, World Bank 2004f (hunger); UNESCO 2003 (primary education); UNESCO 2003 (gender equality); UN 2003, World Bank 2004f (child mortality); World Bank 2004f (access to 
water); World Bank 2004f (access to sanitation).

THE STATE OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

131

18  targets  and  48  indicators—that  establish
concrete,  time-bound  targets  for  advancing
development  and  reducing  poverty  by  2015
or earlier (see Index to Millennium Develop-
ment Goal indicators at the end of this feature).

As Human  Development  Report  2003
argued, human development and the Millen-
nium  Development  Goals  share  a  common
motivation  and  vital  commitment  to  pro-
moting  human  well-being.  The  progress  of
countries  and  regions  on  the  Millennium
Development  Goals  since  1990  highlights  a
key  aspect  of  development  over  the  past
decade: rapid progress for some, but reversals
for an unprecedented number of other coun-
tries  (figure  3).  The  picture  that  emerges  is
increasingly one of two very different groups
of countries: those that have benefited from
development,  and  those  that  have  been  left
behind (tables 3–5).

An  examination  of  regional  progress  on
selected Millennium Development Goals reveals
several noteworthy trends (see figure 3). East
Asia  and  the  Pacific  stands  out  as  being  on
track for all the goals for which trend data are
available. The number of people living on less
than $1 a day in the region was almost halved
during  the  1990s.  South  Asia  is  also  making
rapid progress on a number of goals. But despite
the impressive pace of these two regions, which
together  account  for  almost  half  the  world’s
population,  human  development  is  proceed-
ing too slowly. Only two of the goals, halving
income poverty and halving the proportion of
people  without  access  to  safe  water,  will  be
met at the pace of progress of the last decade,
and progress on the others, hunger reduction
and access to sanitation, is nearly on track (fig-
ure 4). But even progress on these goals is dri-
ven mainly by the rapid development of China
and India. 

Other  regions,  particularly  Sub-Saharan
Africa, are performing much less well. At the
current pace Sub-Saharan Africa will not meet
the goal for universal primary education until
2129 or the goal for reducing child mortality
by  two-thirds  until  2106—100  years  away,
rather than the 11 called for by the goals. In
three  of  the  goals—hunger,  income  poverty
and access to sanitation—no date can be set
because the situation in the region is worsen-
ing, not improving.

TABLE 3
Progress and setbacks: child mortality
(Per 1,000 live births)
Country

2002

1990

Change

TABLE 4
Progress and setbacks: primary education
(Net primary enrolment ratio, percent)
Country

1990/91 2001/02 Change

Best performers
Bhutan
Guinea
Bangladesh
Egypt
Lao, PDR
Eritrea
Worst performers
Iraq
Botswana
Zimbabwe
Swaziland
Cameroon
Kenya

Source: UNICEF 2003b.

166
240
144
104
163
147

50
58
80
110
139
97

94
169
77
41
100
89

125
110
123
149
166
122

–72
–71
–67
–63
–63
–58

75
52
43
39
27
25

Best performers
Dominican Republic
Guinea
Kuwait
Morocco
Mauritania
Malawi
Worst performers
Angola
Azerbaijan
Congo, Dem. Rep.
United Arab Emirates
Myanmar
Nepal

Source: Indicator table 11.

58
25
49
57
35
50

58
101
54
100
99
85

97
61
85
88
67
81

30
80
35
81
82
70

39
36
36
32
31
31

–28
–21
–20
–19
–18
–14

TABLE 5
Progress and setbacks: income poverty
(People living under the national poverty line, percent)

Country

Year

Share

Year

Share

Change a

(percentage points)

Good performers
Azerbaijan
Uganda
India
Jordan
Cambodia
Guatemala
Bangladesh
Poor performers
Zimbabwe
Morocco
Pakistan
Hungary

1995
1993
1993–94
1991
1993–94
1989
1995–96

1990–91
1990–91
1993
1993

68.1
55.0
36.0
15.0
39.0
57.9
51.0

25.8
13.1
28.6
14.5

2001
1997
1999–2000
1997
1997
2000
2000

1995–96
1998–99
1998–99
1997

49.6
44.0
28.6
11.7
36.1
56.2
49.8

34.9
19.0
32.6
17.3

–18.5
–11.0
–7.4
–3.3
–2.9
–1.7
–1.2

9.1
5.9
4.0
2.8

Note: Comparisons should not be made across countries because national poverty lines vary considerably.
a. A minus sign indicates an improvement—less poverty.
Source: World Bank 2004f.

The unprecedented reversals of the 1990s
Looking beyond regional averages reveals many
tragic reversals. An unprecedented number of
countries saw development slide backwards in
the 1990s. In 46 countries people are poorer
today than in 1990. In 25 countries more peo-
ple go hungry today than a decade ago.

These reversals can also be seen clearly in
the  HDI.  This  is  particularly  troubling—in
previous decades, virtually no country experi-
enced  a  decline  in  the  HDI.  The  index  has
moved steadily upward, though usually slowly
because three of its key components—literacy,
school enrolment and life expectancy—take
time to change. So when the HDI falls, that
indicates crisis. Countries are depleting their

TABLE 6
Countries experiencing a drop in the
human development index, 1980s and
1990s
Period

Countries

Number

1980–90

1990–2002

3

20

Democratic Republic of
Congo, Rwanda, Zambia
Bahamas, Belize,
Botswana, Cameroon,
Central African Republic,
Congo, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Kazakhstan,a
Kenya, Lesotho, Moldova,a
Russian Federation,a
South Africa, Swaziland,
Tajikistan,a Tanzania,a
Ukraine,a Zambia,
Zimbabwe

a. Country does not have HDI data for 1980–90, so drop may
have begun before 1990.
Source: Indicator table 2.

132

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Figure
4

2000

s
r
a
e
Y

2015

2100

2150

2200

Timeline: when will the Millennium Development Goals be achieved if progress does not accelerate?

Poverty

Hunger

Achieved

Arab Statesa
East Asia & the Pacific

Primary
education
East Asia & the Pacific
Latin America &
the Caribbeana
Central & Eastern 
Europe & the CISa

South Asia
World

East Asia & the Pacific

Latin America &
the Caribbean

World
South Asia

Arab States

World
South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Gender
equality
East Asia & the Pacific
Latin America &
the Caribbeana
Central & Eastern 
Europe & the CISa
Worlda

South Asia
Arab States
Sub-Saharan Africa

Reversal

Latin America &
the Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern 
Europe & the CIS

Arab States
Sub-Saharan Africa

Child
mortality

Access to
water
Central & Eastern 
Europe & the CISa

Access to
sanitation

South Asia
World
Latin America &
the Caribbean

East Asia & the Pacific
Sub-Saharan Africa

Latin America &
the Caribbean

East Asia & the Pacific
South Asia
Arab States
World

Sub-Saharan Africa

Central & Eastern 
Europe & the CIS

East Asia & the Pacific
World
South Asia
Latin America &
the Caribbean

Sub-Saharan Africa

a.
Source:

Region is considered achieved as it has low human poverty (below 10%) in most recent year for the relevant goal (See technical note 2)
Calculated on the basis of figure 3.

basis for development—their people, who are
their real wealth.

Since 1990, 20 countries have suffered a
reversal in the HDI. By contrast, only 3 (of 113
countries with available data) saw their HDI
decline in the 1980s (table 6). The reversals in
these  countries,  together  with  stagnation  in
others, do much to explain the overall decel-
eration in HDI progress in the last decade (fig-
ure  5).  Of  the  20  countries  experiencing
reversals, 13 are in Sub-Saharan Africa. Much
of this is due to the HIV/AIDS epidemic and
its massive impact on life expectancy. The other
reversals are mainly in countries in the Com-
monwealth of Independent States (CIS), many
of which started on a downward trend in the
mid-1980s, reflected in the data as a drop in
incomes and HDI between 1990 and 1995. The
region’s HDI started to improve again in the
later half of the 1990s.

The drop in many countries’ HDI signals a
problem; looking at key indicators of progress

towards the Millennium Development Goals
reveals its depth. Without significant changes,
countries experiencing reversals or stagnation
have little chance of achieving the goals.

Priority countries
For each goal there are countries where the sit-
uation  is  particularly  urgent—where  failed
progress is combined with brutally low starting
levels. These top priority countries are in great-
est need of the world’s attention, resources and
commitments (see Technical note 2). In high pri-
ority countries the situation is less desperate, but
progress is still insufficient. These countries are
either making progress from low levels of devel-
opment or achieving slow (or negative) progress
from higher levels.

There are 27 top priority countries that are
failing  in  several  goals:  21  in  Sub-Saharan
Africa, 3 in the Arab States and 1 each in East
Asia and Pacific, South Asia and Latin America
and the Caribbean (figure 6). In these countries

development is failing across the board. They
require the world’s attention and resources if
they are to achieve the Millennium Develop-
ment Goals. Another 27 high priority countries
face serious challenges across the goals. Again,
Sub-Saharan Africa has the greatest number,
at  17,  and  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and
the CIS and the Arab States have 3 each, East
Asia and the Pacific has 2, and South Asia and
Latin America and the Caribbean have 1 each.
Grouping countries into top priority, high
priority and other categories is useful, but such
efforts  should  be  viewed  with  caution.  The
underlying data for individual goals are often
measured imprecisely, and some country clas-
sifications  will  change  as  the  data  improve.
Moreover,  many  countries  are  missing  too
much  data  for  individual  goals  to  be  given
proper  overall  classifications.  Thus  some  of
the 30 countries in the “other” category would
be top or high priority countries if the under-
lying  data  were  more  complete.  (Examples

THE STATE OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

133

include Kyrgyzstan and Pakistan.) In addition,
the classification criteria used here are plausible
but only one among many reasonable choices.

No single factor can explain the predica-
ments of the top and high priority countries. But
24 of these 54 countries also saw incomes fall
during  the  decade.  And  the  countries  from
Sub-Saharan Africa tend to share common fea-
tures. Many are landlocked or have a large por-
tion of their populations living far from a coast.
In  addition,  most  are  small—only  four  have
more than 40 million people. Being far from
world  markets  and  having  a  small  economy
make it much harder to diversify from primary
commodities to less volatile exports with more
value  added.  Indeed,  primary  commodities
account for more than two-thirds of exports in
16 of the 23 top or high priority Sub-Saharan
countries with data. Many of the region’s pri-
ority  countries  also  have  other  serious  con-
cerns:  in  22  countries  more  than  5%  of  the
population has HIV/AIDS, and in 9 countries
there were violent conflicts in the 1990s.

In other regions top priority countries face
other  challenges.  Many  countries  in  the  CIS,
for  example—while  also  facing  some  of  the
structural  problems  affecting  Sub-Saharan
Africa—are trying to make the transition to a
market economy, a process that has been much
more successful in Central and Eastern Europe.
In the Arab States constraints are unrelated to
income, deriving instead from a failure to con-
vert  income  into  human  development  and
progress towards the goals.

So what needs to be done to achieve the Mil-
lennium Development Goals? No matter how
that question is answered, the top priority and
high priority countries must be front and centre.
The issues they face and ways to resolve them
were considered in detail in Human Develop-
ment Report 2003.

1. Calculated on the basis of life expectancy data from UN
2003. 2. UNICEF 2003b. 3. UNESCO Institute for Statistics
2003a. 4. Calculated on the basis of GDP per capita (PPP
US$)  data  from  World  Bank  2004f. 5.  Polity  IV  2002.
6. Chapter 2.

Figure
5

Global disparities in HDI 
Human development index

1.00

.900

x
e
d
n
I
 
t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
D
 
n
a
m
u
H

l

.800

.700

.600

.500

Latin America and the Caribbean

East Asia and the Pacific

High-income OECD

Central and Eastern
Europe and the CIS

Arab States

South
Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

.400

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2002

Source:

Calculated on the basis of data on life expectancy from UN 2003; data on adult literacy rates from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003a; data 
on combined gross enrolment ratios from UNESCO 1999 and UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c; and data on GDP per capita (1995 PPP 
US$) and GDP per capita (current PPP US$) from World Bank 2004f.

Top and high priority countries

Figure
6

Top priority
High priority
No data 

Region
Arab States
East Asia & the Pacific
Latin America and Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS

Top priority
countries
3
1
1
1
21
0

High priority
countries
3
2
1
1
17
3

Level of human
poverty (in goal)

Low

Medium

High
Priority

High

Top

Priority

High
Priority

Source: See Technical note 2.

Moderate

Slow or
reversing
Progress towards the goal

Fast

134

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Index to Millennium Development Goal indicators in the indicator tables

Goals and targets

Indicators for monitoring progress

Indicator table

Goal 1 Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Target 1
Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people 

whose income is less than $1 a day

1. Proportion of population below $1 (PPP) a day
2. Poverty gap ratio (incidence ✕ depth of poverty)
3. Share of poorest quintile in national consumption

Target 2
Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people 

4. Prevalence of underweight children under five years of age
5. Proportion of population below minimum level of dietary

who suffer from hunger

energy consumption

Goal 2 Achieve universal primary education
Target 3
Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, 7. Proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who reach grade 5

6. Net enrolment ratio in primary education

will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling

8. Literacy rate of 15- to 24-year-olds

Goal 3 Promote gender equality and empower women
Target 4
Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary 
education, preferably by 2005, and to all levels of 
education no later than 2015

Goal 4 Reduce child mortality
Target 5
Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the 

under-five mortality rate

Goal 5 Improve maternal health
Target 6
Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the 

maternal mortality ratio

Goal 6 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Target 7
Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the spread 

of HIV/AIDS

9. Ratio of girls to boys in primary, secondary and tertiary education
10. Ratio of literate women to men ages 15–24
11. Share of women in wage employment in the non-agricultural sector 4
12. Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments

13. Under-five mortality rate
14. Infant mortality rate
15. Proportion of one-year-old children immunized against measles

16. Maternal mortality ratio
17. Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel

18. HIV prevalence among pregnant women ages 15–24 5
19. Condom use rate of the contraceptive prevalence rate

19a. Condom use at last high-risk sex
19b. Percentage of 15- to 24-year-olds with comprehensive correct

knowledge of HIV/AIDS

20. Ratio of school attendance of orphans to school attendance of

non-orphans ages 10–14

Target 8
Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the incidence 

21. Prevalence and death rates associated with malaria
22. Proportion of population in malaria-risk areas using effective malaria

of malaria and other major diseases

prevention and treatment measures

Goal 7 Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 9
Integrate the principles of sustainable development into 

country policies and programmes and reverse the loss of 
environmental resources

23. Prevalence and death rates associated with tuberculosis
24. Proportion of tuberculosis cases detected and cured under directly

observed treatment, short course (DOTS)

25. Proportion of land area covered by forest
26. Ratio of area protected to maintain biological diversity to surface area
27. Energy use (kilograms of oil equivalent) per $1 GDP (PPP)

3

14

3, 7

7 1, 33 1

11, 33

11
11

26 2
26 3

25, 29

9, 33

9
6

9
6

8

8 6
8 7

8 8

8

219

THE STATE OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

135

Goals and targets

Goal 7, continued
Target 9, continued

Indicators for monitoring progress

Indicator table

28. Carbon dioxide emissions per capita and consumption of 

ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons (ODP tons)

29. Proportion of population using solid fuels

Target 10
Halve by 2015 the proportion of people without sustainable 

30. Proportion of population with sustainable access to an improved

water source, urban and rural

access to safe drinking water and sanitation

31. Proportion of population with access to improved sanitation, 

urban and rural

32. Proportion of households with access to secure tenure

21 10

7 11, 33 11

7 12

Target 11
By 2020 to have achieved a significant improvement in the 

lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers

Goal 8 Develop a global partnership for development
Target 12
Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, 
non-discriminatory trading and financial system

Includes a commitment to good governance, development, 

and poverty reduction—both nationally and 
internationally

Target 13
Address the special needs of the least developed countries
Includes: tariff and quota-free access for least-developed 

Official development assistance
33. Net ODA, total and to least developed countries, as a percentage

of OECD/DAC donors’ gross national income GNI

34. Proportion of total bilateral, sector-allocable ODA of OECD/DAC 
donors to basic social services (basic education, primary health care, 
nutrition, safe water and sanitation)

35. Proportion of bilateral ODA of OECD/DAC donors that is untied
36. ODA received in landlocked countries as proportion of their gross 

national incomes

37. ODA received in small island developing States as proportion of their

16 13

16
16

countries’ exports; enhanced programme of debt relief for 
HIPCs and cancellation of official bilateral debt; and more  Market access
generous ODA for countries committed to poverty reduction 38. Proportion of total developed country imports (by value and excluding

gross national incomes

Target 14
Address the special needs of landlocked countries and small  

island developing States

Target 15
Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing
countries through national and international measures in 
order to make debt sustainable in the long term

Target 16
In cooperation with developing countries, develop and 

implement strategies for decent and productive work for youth

Target 17
In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access 

to affordable essential drugs in developing countries

Target 18
In cooperation with the private sector, make available the  
benefits of new technologies, especially information and 
communications

arms) from developing countries and from the least developed countries, 
admitted free of duties

39. Average tariffs imposed by developed countries on agricultural 

products and textiles and clothing from developing countries

40. Agricultural support estimate for OECD countries as a percentage 

of their gross domestic product

41. Proportion of ODA provided to help build trade capacity
Debt sustainability
42. Total number of countries that have reached their HIPC decision points
and number that have reached their HIPC completion points (cumulative)

43. Debt relief committed under HIPC Debt Initiative 14
44. Debt service as a percentage of exports of goods and services

17

18

45. Unemployment rate of 15- to 24-year-olds, male and female and total

20 15

46. Proportion of population with access to affordable essential drugs on

a sustainable basis

47. Telephone lines and cellular subscribers per 100 people
48a. Personal computers in use per 100 people
48b. Internet users per 100 people

6 

12 16

12

Note: Millennium Development Goal (MDG) indicators are identified in the indicator tables by the symbol MDG in orange above the relevant columns.
1. Tables 7 and 33 present this indicator as undernourished people as percent of total population. 2. Table presents female enrolment ratio as percent of male ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary education levels separately.
3. Table presents data on female youth literacy rate as percent of male rate. 4. Table 27 includes data on female employment by economic activity. 5. Table 8 presents HIV prevalence among people ages 15–49. 6. Table includes
data on malaria cases per 100,000 people. 7. Table includes data on children under age five with insecticide-treated bed nets and children under age five with fever treated with anti-malarial drugs. 8. Table includes data on
tuberculosis cases per 100,000 people. 9. Table presents this indicator as GDP per unit of energy use (1995 PPP US$ per kilogram of oil equivalent). 10. Table includes data on carbon dioxide emissions per capita. 11. Tables 7 and
33 include data on population with sustainable access to an improved water source for urban and rural combined. 12. Table includes data on population with sustainable access to improved sanitation for urban and rural combined.
13. Table includes data on official development assistance (ODA) to least developed countries as percent of total ODA. 14. Table 17 includes data on bilateral debt relief pledges to the HIPC trust fund and gross bilateral debt
forgiveness. 15. Table includes data on unemployment rate of 15- to 24-year-olds as total and female rate as percent of male rate for OECD countries only. 16. Table presents telephone lines and cellular subscribers separately.

136

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

quality and reliability and are not presented in
other indicator tables showing similar data.

Statistical feature 2   Note to table 1: About this year’s human development index
data. In calculating the HDI, a literacy rate of
The human development index (HDI) is a com-
99.0% is applied for those countries. 
posite index that measures the average achieve-
ments in a country in three basic dimensions of
human development: a long and healthy life, as
measured by life expectancy at birth; knowl-
edge, as measured by the adult literacy rate and
the combined gross enrolment ratio for primary,
secondary and tertiary schools; and a decent
standard of living, as measured by GDP per
capita in purchasing power parity (PPP) US dol-
lars. The index is constructed using indicators
that  are  currently  available  globally,  and  a
methodology that is simple and transparent (see
Technical note 1).

Owing to a lack of comparable data, 16 UN
member countries cannot be included in the
HDI. For these countries basic human devel-
opment indicators are presented in table 33.

Data sources
Life expectancy at birth. The life expectancy
estimates are from the 2002 Revision of World
Population Prospects (UN 2003). They are pre-
pared biannually by the United Nations Popu-
lation Division on the basis of data from national
population censuses and surveys. In the 2002
Revision, the United Nations Population Divi-
sion made significant adjustments to further
incorporate the demographic impact of the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. It anticipates a more seri-
ous and prolonged impact of the epidemic in the
most affected countries than previous revisions
did. The impact of the disease is explicitly mod-
eled for 53 countries, up from the 45 considered
in the 2000 Revision (UN 2001).

The life expectancy estimates published by
the United Nations Population Division are five-
year averages. The life expectancy estimates for
2002 shown in indicator table 1 and those under-
lying indicator table 2 are obtained through
linear interpolation based on these five-year
averages.

Adult literacy rate. The adult literacy rate
is defined as the percentage of people ages 15 and
above who can, with understanding, both read
and write a short simple statement related to
their everyday life. Literacy data using this def-
inition are usually collected during national pop-
ulation censuses, generally conducted every 5 or
10 years, or from household surveys. 

This report uses data on adult literacy rates
from the United Nations Educational, Scien-
tific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Insti-
tute for Statistics (UIS) March 2004 Assessment
(UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004a), which
combines direct national estimates with UIS
estimates. The national estimates, made available
to UIS only recently, are obtained from national
censuses or surveys between 1995 and 2004.
The UIS estimates, produced in July 2002, were
based on national data collected before 1995. 
Many high-income OECD countries, hav-
ing attained universal primary schooling for their
populations, no longer collect literacy statistics
in national population censuses or household sur-
veys and thus are not included in the UNESCO

In collecting literacy data, many countries
estimate the number of literate people based on
self-reported data. Some use educational attain-
ment data as a proxy, but measures of school
attendance  or  grade  completion  may  differ.
Because definitions and data collection methods
vary across countries, literacy estimates should be
used with caution (UNDP 2000, box 2, p. 143).
The UIS, in collaboration with other part-
ners, is actively pursuing an alternative method-
ology  for  measuring  literacy,  the  Literacy
Assessment and Monitoring Programme (LAMP;
see box 5 in Note on statistics). LAMP seeks to
go beyond the current simple categories of lit-
erate and illiterate by providing information on
a continuum of literacy skills.

For details on both the 2002 UIS estimation
methods and the new literacy data collection
methodology, see http://www.uis.unesco.org/.
Combined gross enrolment ratio for pri-
mary, secondary and tertiary schools. Gross
enrolment ratios are produced by the UNESCO
Institute for Statistics based on enrolment data
collected from national governments (usually
from administrative sources) and population
data from the United Nations Population Divi-
sion’s 2002  Revision  of World  Population
Prospects (UN 2003). The ratios are calculated
by dividing the number of students enrolled in
all levels of schooling by the total population in
the official age group corresponding to these
levels. The tertiary age group is set to five cohorts
immediately following on the end of upper sec-
ondary school in all countries.

Countries are usually asked to report num-
bers of students enrolled at the beginning of the
academic year in each level of education as
defined by the International Standard Classifi-
cation of Education (ISCED). A revised version
of ISCED was introduced in 1997, which led to
some changes in the classifications of national
programmes of education. These changes, how-
ever, have less impact on the estimation of com-
bined  gross  enrolment  ratios  for  primary,
secondary and tertiary schools.

Though intended as a proxy for educational
attainment, the combined gross enrolment ratio
does not reflect the quality of education out-
comes. Even when used to capture access to
education opportunities, it can hide important
differences among countries because of differ-
ences in the age range corresponding to a level

While the concept of human development
is much broader than any single composite index
can measure, the HDI offers a powerful alter-
native to income as a summary measure of human
well-being. It provides a useful entry point into
the rich information contained in the subse-
quent indicator tables on different aspects of
human development.

Country coverage
The HDI in this Report, presented in indicator
table 1, refers to 2002. It covers 175 UN mem-
ber countries, along with Hong Kong, China
(SAR) and the Occupied Palestinian Territo-
ries. As a result of improvements in data avail-
ability,  two  countries—Timor-Leste  and
Tonga—are included in the HDI table for the
first time.

Data availability affects the HDI country
coverage. To enable cross-country comparisons,
the HDI is, to the extent possible, calculated
based on data from leading international data
agencies available when the Report was pre-
pared (see Data sources below). But for a num-
ber of countries data are missing for one or more
of the four HDI components. 

In response to the desire of countries to be
included  in  the  HDI table,  and  striving  to
include as many UN member countries as pos-
sible, the Human Development Report Office
has made special efforts in a number of cases to
obtain  an  estimate  from  other  international,
regional or national sources when data are lack-
ing from the primary international data agencies
for one or two of the HDI components for a
country. In a very few cases, the Human Devel-
opment  Report  Office  has  produced  an  esti-
mate. These estimates from sources other than
the primary international agencies (see descrip-
tions below) are documented in the footnotes
to indicator table 1. They are often of varying

ABOUT THIS YEAR’S HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX

137

of education and in the duration of education
programmes. Such factors as grade repetition can
also create distortions in the data. 

Measures such as mean years of schooling
of a population or school life expectancy more
adequately capture education outcomes and ide-
ally would replace gross enrolment ratios in the
HDI. However, such data are not yet regularly
available for a sufficient number of countries.
Expanding the coverage and quality of such
data should be a priority for the international sta-
tistical community.

As currently defined, the combined gross
enrolment ratio does not take into account stu-
dents enrolled in other countries. Current data
for  many  smaller  countries,  such  as  Luxem-
bourg and Seychelles, where many people pur-
sue tertiary education abroad, could significantly
underrepresent actual access to education or the
educational  attainment  of  a  population  and
thus lead to a lower HDI value. For instance,
the combined gross enrolment ratio for Lux-
embourg is estimated at 75% but rises to 85%
when students enrolled abroad are taken into
account.1 Though the differences in the result-
ing  HDI  values  are  small  (0.933  and  0.944,
respectively), the HDI ranking of Luxembourg
would change from 15 to 4 due to the small dif-
ferences  in  the  HDI  values  among  the  high
human development countries. However, data
on such a revised gross enrolment ratio are not
widely available for other countries and so can-
not yet be used in the HDI.

GDP per capita (PPP US$). To compare
standards of living across countries GDP per
capita needs to be converted into purchasing
power parity (PPP) terms that eliminate differ-
ences in national price levels. The GDP per
capita (PPP US$) data for the HDI are pro-
vided for 163 countries by the World Bank based
on price data from the latest International Com-
parison Program (ICP) surveys and GDP in
local currency from national accounts data. 

The ICP survey covered 118 countries for
which  PPPs  have  been  estimated  directly  by
extrapolating from the latest benchmark results.
For countries not included in the benchmark

surveys, estimates are made using econometric
regression.  For  countries  not  covered  by  the
World  Bank,  PPP  estimates  provided  by  the
Penn World Tables of the University of Penn-
sylvania are used.2

In a limited number of cases where reliable
PPP estimates are not available from the two
international sources, the Human Development
Report Office has worked with regional and
national agencies to obtain a PPP estimate for a
country. For example, in the case of Cuba, a
technical team of national and international
experts has been formed to explore different
methodologies for obtaining a better PPP esti-
mate. The results of this effort will be reflected
in future Reports.

Though much progress has been made in
recent decades, the current PPP data set suffers
a number of deficiencies, including lack of uni-
versal coverage, of timeliness of the data and of
uniformity in the quality of results from differ-
ent regions and countries. Filling gaps in coun-
try  coverage  using  econometric  regression
requires strong assumptions, and extrapolation
over time means that the results become increas-
ingly weak as the distance lengthens between the
reference survey year and the current year.

The importance of PPPs in economic analy-
sis underlines the need for improvement in PPP
data. A new Millennium Round of the ICP has
been established and promises much improved
PPP data for economic policy analysis, includ-
ing international poverty assessment (Note on
statistics, box 6).

Comparisons over time and across editions of
the Report
The HDI is an important tool for monitoring
long-term trends in human development. To
facilitate trend analysis across countries, the
HDI is calculated at five-year intervals for the
period 1975–2002. These estimates, presented in
indicator table 2, are based on a consistent
methodology and on comparable trend data
available when the Report is prepared.

As international data agencies continually
improve their data series, including updating

historical data periodically, the year-to-year
changes in the HDI values and rankings across
editions of the Human Development Report
often reflect revisions to data—both specific to
a country and relative to other countries—rather
than real changes in a country. In addition, occa-
sional changes in country coverage could also
affect the HDI ranking of a country, even when
a consistent methodology is used to calculate
the HDI. As a result, a country’s HDI rank
could drop considerably between two consecu-
tive Reports, but when comparable, revised data
are used to reconstruct the HDI for recent years,
the HDI rank and value may actually show an
improvement.

For  these  reasons  HDI  trend  analyses
should  not  be  based  on  data  from  different
editions of the Report. Indicator table 2 pro-
vides up-to-date HDI trend data based on con-
sistent data and methodology. For HDI values
and ranks recalculated for 2001 (the reference
year  of  the  HDI  in  Human  Development
Report 2003) based on data and country cov-
erage  comparable  to  this  year’s  Report,  see
http://hdr.undp.org/.

HDI for high human development countries
The HDI in this Report is constructed to com-
pare country achievements across all levels of
human development. The indicators currently
used in the HDI yield very small differences
among the top HDI countries, and thus the top
of the HDI rankings often reflects only the very
small differences in these underlying indicators.
For these high-income countries an alternative
index—the human poverty index (shown in indi-
cator table 4 and discussed in Statistical fea-
ture 1, The state of human development)—can
better reflect the extent of human deprivation
that still exists among these populations and
help direct the focus of public policies.

For further discussions on the use and lim-
itations of the HDI, see Statistical feature 1, The
state of human development.

1. Statec 2004.
2. Aten, Heston and Summers 2001, 2002.

138

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

MONITORING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: ENLARGING PEOPLE’S CHOICES . . .

Combined

gross enrolment
ratio for primary,

Human

GDP

development per capita
(PPP US$)

secondary
and tertiary

schools

(%) 

2001/02 c

GDP

per capita
(PPP US$)

2002

Life

expectancy

Education

index

index

GDP
index

index
(HDI)
value
2002

1 Human

development
index

HDI rank a

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

Life

expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

78.9
80.0
79.1
79.3
78.3

78.7
79.7
77.0
81.5
76.9

79.1
78.1
77.9
78.5
78.3

78.9
76.6
78.2
78.2
79.2

78.7
79.1
79.9
78.2
78.0

76.1
76.2
75.4
77.1
78.2

78.3
75.3
76.2
74.1
72.7 m

71.6
73.8
71.7
70.0 r
73.9

72.5
73.6
76.0
76.5
78.0

75.2
72.0
74.1
74.6
70.9

Adult
literacy

rate

(% ages 15  
and above)

2002 b

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

97.7 e, f, k

98.5 e, f, k
95.3
93.5 f, k
97.3 e, f, k
92.5 l

92.5 e, f, k
99.7 e
97.9 e, f, k
99.7 f, n
96.8 l

92.6

.. e
93.9 l
97.0
91.9 l

99.8 e, l
99.7 e, f, k
99.3 e, f, k
97.8 r
88.5

99.6 e, l
99.7 e, l
95.7 l
82.9
95.8

97.7
84.2 f, l
98.1 l
77.3
99.7 e, l

98 f
114 g, h
113 g, h
95 f
99 f

111 f, g
90 f
92 h
84 h
90 f

88 f
113 f, g
106 f, g
91 f
75 f, i

91 f
96 f
101 g, h
88 h
92 h

82 f
92
72
86 f
87 m

93 f
90 f
92 h
88 f
74 f

77 f
78 h
73
94 h
85

96 f
90 h
86 h
97 f
79

90 f
74 h
79 f
76 f
69

85 h
82
73
68
87 f

36,600
26,050
28,260
29,480
29,100

27,570
29,750
35,750
26,940
36,360

30,010
26,150
26,190
29,220
61,190 j

26,920
30,940
21,740
27,100
21,460

26,430
19,530
26,910
18,720
24,040

18,280
18,540
16,950
15,290
18,360 f

17,640
15,780
19,210 f, o
10,880
18,232 p, q

12,260
10,560
13,400
12,420
17,170

10,320
12,840
9,820
16,240 q
8,840 q

7,830
19,844 f, s
10,240
22,420 f, q
9,210

0.90
0.92
0.90
0.90
0.89

0.90
0.91
0.87
0.94
0.86

0.90
0.88
0.88
0.89
0.89

0.90
0.86
0.89
0.89
0.90

0.89
0.90
0.91
0.89
0.88

0.85
0.85
0.84
0.87
0.89

0.89
0.84
0.85
0.82
0.80

0.78
0.81
0.78
0.75
0.81

0.79
0.81
0.85
0.86
0.88

0.84
0.78
0.82
0.83
0.76

0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.99

0.99
0.96
0.97
0.94
0.96

0.95
0.99
0.99
0.96
0.91

0.96
0.98
0.99
0.95
0.97

0.93
0.94
0.86
0.95
0.91

0.97
0.96
0.97
0.95
0.89

0.87
0.92
0.87
0.96
0.90

0.98
0.96
0.95
0.98
0.85

0.96
0.91
0.90
0.81
0.87

0.94
0.83
0.90
0.74
0.95

0.99
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.95

0.94
0.95
0.98
0.93
0.98

0.95
0.93
0.93
0.95
1.00

0.93
0.96
0.90
0.94
0.90

0.93
0.88
0.93
0.87
0.92

0.87
0.87
0.86
0.84
0.87

0.86
0.84
0.88
0.78
0.87

0.80
0.78
0.82
0.80
0.86

0.77
0.81
0.77
0.85
0.75

0.73
0.88
0.77
0.90
0.75

0.956
0.946
0.946
0.943
0.942

0.942
0.941
0.939
0.938
0.936

0.936
0.936
0.935
0.934
0.933

0.932
0.932
0.926
0.925
0.922

0.920
0.908
0.903
0.902
0.902

0.897
0.895
0.888
0.888
0.883

0.875
0.868
0.867
0.853
0.853

0.853
0.850
0.848
0.844
0.843

0.842
0.842
0.839
0.838
0.834

0.833
0.833
0.830
0.824
0.823

rank
minus

HDI rank d

1
19
9
5
6

7
1
-4
6
-7

-4
8
6
-4
-14

0
-12
6
-5
5

-3
5
-6
5
-3

6
3
9
11
1

3
7
-5
14
-2

10
13
3
6
-4

10
1
11
-6
14

16
-21
4
-26
6

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

139

Combined

gross enrolment
ratio for primary,

Human

GDP

Life

expectancy

Education

index

index

GDP
index

development per capita
(PPP US$)

index
(HDI)
value
2002

1 Human

development
index

HDI rank a

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Life

expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

67.1
76.7
73.3
71.4
73.9 r

70.9
66.7
72.6
73.0
73.5

74.6
69.9
68.4
71.9
73.6

74.0
71.0
73.6
70.5
69.5

72.4
68.0
72.1
72.3
69.8

69.1
72.1
66.2
75.6
73.5

69.6
72.3
69.8
67.2
69.7

66.9
74.0
70.4
70.7
70.9

72.1
72.7
65.3 f, n
70.9
73.1 n

72.5
73.5
66.7
71.5
70.7

Adult
literacy

rate

(% ages 15  
and above)

2002 b

95.5 f, k
96.9
90.5 l
98.5
85.8 f, n

98.6
99.6 e
81.7
88.7 l
96.0 w, x

92.3
99.7 e
98.8 l
84.3 l
98.7 l

94.6
94.0 w, x
93.1
97.3 l
99.6 e

94.8 f, n
86.4 l
92.1
74.4
98.7

92.6 l
77.9
99.4 e
87.6 f, n
86.5 f, k

92.9 f, l
99.4 e, l
92.6 l
97.2
85.0 z

98.8 f, l
83.1 f, n
86.5 l
91.6 z
90.9

97.0 w, x
73.2
94.4 f, n
90.9 l
76.4 f, n

92.1
100.0 e, w, x
84.4
76.9 l
91.0 l

secondary
and tertiary

schools

(%) 

2001/02 c

74 f, t
78
74 h
64
69 r

76 f
88 h
97 h
70 h
70 f

73 f
88
82
69
69 f

64 y
74 h
71
68 f
84

74
92 h
68
63
69

73 f
57
81
75 h
78

73 h
72
81 h
78
88 h

81 f, t
64
68 h
72 h
77 h

69
75 h
65 f
68 f
74 f

65 h
69
77 h
71 f
72 f, aa

GDP

per capita
(PPP US$)

2002

17,280 f
5,259 f, s, u
8,970
9,430
10,920

7,130
8,230
7,570 v
9,120
6,470

6,170
5,520
6,850 q
10,810
4,830

5,970 f, o
6,590 p, q
5,380
6,560
4,870

5,300
7,770
6,370 q
13,340
5,600 q

7,010
12,650 q
5,870
3,980
4,360

5,440
3,120
4,170
4,798 f, p, q
5,010

4,300 f
5,460
6,390
4,610 q
4,220

3,210
6,760
7,280
4,580
5,640

3,570
2,260
6,640 q
6,080
3,580

0.70
0.86
0.81
0.77
0.82

0.77
0.69
0.79
0.80
0.81

0.83
0.75
0.72
0.78
0.81

0.82
0.77
0.81
0.76
0.74

0.79
0.72
0.78
0.79
0.75

0.74
0.79
0.69
0.84
0.81

0.74
0.79
0.75
0.70
0.74

0.70
0.82
0.76
0.76
0.76

0.78
0.79
0.67
0.76
0.80

0.79
0.81
0.70
0.78
0.76

0.88
0.91
0.85
0.87
0.80

0.91
0.95
0.87
0.83
0.87

0.86
0.95
0.93
0.79
0.89

0.84
0.87
0.86
0.88
0.94

0.88
0.88
0.84
0.71
0.89

0.86
0.71
0.93
0.83
0.84

0.86
0.90
0.89
0.91
0.86

0.93
0.77
0.80
0.85
0.86

0.88
0.74
0.85
0.83
0.76

0.83
0.89
0.82
0.75
0.85

0.86
0.66
0.75
0.76
0.78

0.71
0.74
0.72
0.75
0.70

0.69
0.67
0.71
0.78
0.65

0.68
0.70
0.67
0.70
0.65

0.66
0.73
0.69
0.82
0.67

0.71
0.81
0.68
0.61
0.63

0.67
0.57
0.62
0.65
0.65

0.63
0.67
0.69
0.64
0.62

0.58
0.70
0.72
0.64
0.67

0.60
0.52
0.70
0.69
0.60

0.815
0.809
0.802
0.801
0.800

0.796
0.795
0.794
0.793
0.793

0.791
0.790
0.787
0.785
0.781

0.781
0.780
0.778
0.778
0.777

0.777
0.775
0.773
0.770
0.769

0.768
0.768
0.766
0.764
0.758

0.758
0.754
0.753
0.752
0.752

0.752
0.751
0.751
0.751
0.750

0.746
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.743

0.740
0.739
0.738
0.737
0.735

rank
minus

HDI rank d

-16
39
5
1
-8

10
3
6
-2
15

18
24
5
-15
31

15
6
21
5
25

19
-9
4
-32
10

-9
-33
4
28
21

7
33
22
13
7

16
0
-12
9
14

23
-23
-28
5
-11

16
29
-27
-19
11

140

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Combined

gross enrolment
ratio for primary,

Human

GDP

development per capita
(PPP US$)

secondary
and tertiary

schools

(%) 

2001/02 c

GDP

per capita
(PPP US$)

2002

Life

expectancy

Education

index

index

GDP
index

index
(HDI)
value
2002

1 Human

development
index

HDI rank a

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan ae
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Life

expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

70.1
72.3
70.6
63.2
70.0

71.7
69.5
69.5
49.1
68.4

66.6
69.0
68.8
63.7
68.8

68.6
63.7
69.4
48.8
68.6

65.7
56.6
69.7
69.0
68.5

45.3
63.7
41.4
68.6
57.4

57.8
57.2
57.4
63.0
54.3

60.6
35.7
61.1
55.5
59.6
46.8

60.8
49.9
48.3
36.3
45.7

33.9
45.2
59.8
53.4
51.6

Adult
literacy

rate

(% ages 15  
and above)

2002 b

77.1 f, k,z
90.2 m
79.7
96.5 f, n
75.7

82.9
99.3 e
68.9
84.2 f, k
97.0 w, ac

87.9
90.3 f, l
99.0 e
86.7 l
80.0 l

99.5 e, l
97.8 l
76.7 z
86.0
55.6 f, l

69.9
71.0 w, x
83.1 m
76.6 m
50.7

83.3
61.3 l
78.9
34.0 m
69.4

73.8
85.3
64.6 f, k
47.0 w, x
66.4

56.2
80.9
41.1
59.9
44.0
67.9 z

41.5 f, l
59.6
82.8
81.4 z
68.9

90.0
84.3
49.0
67.3 f, k
66.8

69
79
66
75 f
73 h

59
76
70 h
58
81

65 h
64
62
86 h
62 f, aa

73
70
65 h
77
76 f, t

56 h
74 h
62
50 m
57

71
55 f
70
59
59

46
48
41
.. ad
59

45
61
54
36
61
56 h

37 f
67
48 h
65
71

58 h
53
53 f
45
45 f, t

6,690

.. ab
4,890 q
4,260 q
5,000 q

3,620
1,670
5,760 q
30,130 f,q
1,620

3,230
2,300
1,470
2,460
2,600 q

980
1,710
2,470 q
10,070 q
3,810

4,080 q
6,590
1,317 f,s
1,590 q
3,810

6,210 q
2,670 q
8,170
2,890 q
2,060 q

2,130 q
1,027 v
2,270 q
1,969 f,s
1,720

1,690 q
4,550
1,700
1,820 q
1,370
2,000

1,940
1,480 q

980

2,420 q
1,390 q

2,400 f
1,020
870
740
860

0.75
0.79
0.76
0.64
0.75

0.78
0.74
0.74
0.40
0.72

0.69
0.73
0.73
0.64
0.73

0.73
0.64
0.74
0.40
0.73

0.68
0.53
0.75
0.73
0.72

0.34
0.64
0.27
0.73
0.54

0.55
0.54
0.54
0.63
0.49

0.59
0.18
0.60
0.51
0.58
0.36

0.60
0.41
0.39
0.19
0.34

0.15
0.34
0.58
0.47
0.44

0.74
0.86
0.75
0.89
0.75

0.75
0.91
0.69
0.76
0.92

0.80
0.82
0.87
0.86
0.74

0.90
0.89
0.73
0.83
0.62

0.65
0.72
0.76
0.68
0.53

0.79
0.59
0.76
0.42
0.66

0.65
0.73
0.57
0.48
0.64

0.53
0.74
0.45
0.52
0.50
0.64

0.40
0.62
0.71
0.76
0.70

0.79
0.74
0.50
0.60
0.59

0.70
0.52
0.65
0.63
0.65

0.60
0.47
0.68
0.95
0.46

0.58
0.52
0.45
0.53
0.54

0.38
0.47
0.54
0.77
0.61

0.62
0.70
0.43
0.46
0.61

0.69
0.55
0.73
0.56
0.50

0.51
0.39
0.52
0.50
0.47

0.47
0.64
0.47
0.48
0.44
0.50

0.49
0.45
0.38
0.53
0.44

0.53
0.39
0.36
0.33
0.36

0.732
0.726
0.720
0.719
0.717

0.710
0.709
0.704
0.703
0.701

0.692
0.691
0.681
0.681
0.672

0.671
0.668
0.667
0.666
0.653

0.649
0.648
0.645
0.624
0.620

0.607
0.595
0.589
0.570
0.568

0.568
0.551
0.542
0.536
0.534

0.530
0.519
0.509
0.505
0.504
0.501

0.497
0.495
0.494
0.493
0.493

0.491
0.488
0.482
0.469
0.466

rank
minus

HDI rank d

-31
21
-9
-1
-12

4
35
-25
-103
33

2
12
36
6
3

45
21
1
-66
-12

-15
-50
29
21
-17

-48
-10
-67
-13
1

-3
26
-8
0
2

4
-37
1
-3
11
-9

-7
5
17
-24
4

-25
11
16
20
15

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

141

Combined

gross enrolment
ratio for primary,

Human

GDP

development per capita
(PPP US$)

secondary
and tertiary

schools

(%) 

2001/02 c

GDP

per capita
(PPP US$)

2002

Life

expectancy

Education

index

index

GDP
index

index
(HDI)
value
2002

1 Human

development
index

HDI rank a

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

Life

expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

52.3
49.4
45.8
53.9
52.7

52.7
49.3
38.9
48.9
50.7

43.5
41.2
32.7
37.8
40.1

44.7
41.4
39.8
45.5
38.5

45.2
40.8
48.5
45.8
46.0
34.3

64.6
50.6
66.3
69.8
70.5
63.2
46.3
69.5
77.1
78.3

77.4
67.2
49.1

78.3
70.0
59.1

66.9

Adult
literacy

rate

(% ages 15  
and above)

2002 b

41.2
51.9
65.5 f, k
37.8 f, k
56.7 f, k

39.3
58.6 f, m
69.2
41.0 w, x
39.8

77.1
49.7 f, k
79.9
61.8
42.0 w, ac

45.8
62.7 f, k
48.6 z
41.5
46.5

39.6 f, k
50.4
19.0 f, l
12.8 f, l
17.1
36.0 w, x

76.7
52.5
63.3
90.3
88.6
57.6
63.2
99.3
..
..

..
80.4
54.3

..
89.7
63.6

..

44
52 f, t
24
45 h
33

38 h
75
53
29 f
52 h

31 f
42
45
74 h
30 f

35 f
27 f, aa
31
34
41

37 f
33
26 f
22 h
19
45 f

60
43
60
65
81
54
44
79
87
93

89
64
40

92
71
51

64

2,220 q
1,610 q
1,990 q
1,690 q
890 q

1,580

.. af
1,270 q
2,100
1,070

580
1,520
840
580

2,130 q

1,020 q
650 q
1,170 q
780 q
1,050 q

710 q
630 q
930

1,100 q
800 q
520

4,054
1,307
5,069
4,768
7,223
2,658
1,790
7,192
24,904
29,000

24,806
4,269
1,184

28,741
5,908
2,149

7,804

0.45
0.41
0.35
0.48
0.46

0.46
0.41
0.23
0.40
0.43

0.31
0.27
0.13
0.21
0.25

0.33
0.27
0.25
0.34
0.22

0.34
0.26
0.39
0.35
0.35
0.16

0.66
0.43
0.69
0.75
0.76
0.64
0.35
0.74
0.87
0.89

0.87
0.70
0.40

0.89
0.75
0.57

0.70

0.42
0.52
0.52
0.40
0.49

0.39
0.64
0.64
0.37
0.44

0.62
0.47
0.68
0.66
0.38

0.42
0.51
0.43
0.39
0.45

0.39
0.45
0.21
0.16
0.18
0.39

0.71
0.49
0.61
0.83
0.86
0.57
0.56
0.93
0.94
0.97

0.95
0.75
0.50

0.97
0.84
0.59

0.76

0.52
0.46
0.50
0.47
0.36

0.46
0.26
0.42
0.51
0.40

0.29
0.45
0.36
0.29
0.51

0.39
0.31
0.41
0.34
0.39

0.33
0.31
0.37
0.40
0.35
0.28

0.62
0.42
0.65
0.64
0.72
0.55
0.48
0.72
0.92
0.95

0.92
0.63
0.41

0.94
0.68
0.51

0.73

0.465
0.463
0.454
0.452
0.439

0.437
0.436
0.431
0.425
0.421

0.407
0.399
0.389
0.388
0.381

0.379
0.365
0.361
0.359
0.354

0.350
0.339
0.326
0.302
0.292
0.273

0.663
0.446
0.651
0.740
0.777
0.584
0.465
0.796
0.911
0.935

0.915
0.695
0.438

0.933
0.756
0.557

0.729

rank
minus

HDI rank d

-25
-9
-21
-15
8

-11
19
-6
-30
-5

12
-16
3
9
-38

-8
4
-15
-1
-14

-1
0
-11
-20
-8
-1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

Note: Aggregates for columns 5-8 are based on all data in the table. For detailed notes on the data, see Statistical feature 2, Note to table 1: About this year’s human development index.
a. The HDI rank is determined using HDI values to the fifth decimal point. b. Data refer to estimates produced by UNESCO Institute for Statistics in July 2002, unless otherwise specified. Due to differences in method-
ology and timeliness of underlying data, comparisons across countries and over time should be made with caution. c. Data refer to the 2001/02 school year, unless otherwise specified. Data for some countries may
refer to national or UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates. For details, see http://www.uis.unesco.org/. Because data are from different sources, comparisons across countries should be made with caution. d. A pos-
itive figure indicates that the HDI rank is higher than the GDP per capita (PPP US$) rank, a negative the opposite. e. For purposes of calculating the HDI, a value of 99.0% was applied. f. Data refer to a year other than
that specified. g. For purposes of calculating the HDI, a value of 100% was applied. h. Preliminary UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimate, subject to further revision. i. The ratio is an underestimate, as many secondary
and tertiary students pursue their studies in nearby countries (see Statistical feature 2, Note to table 1: About this year’s human development index). j. For purposes of calculating the HDI, a value of $40,000 (PPP US$)
was applied. k. UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003a. Data are subject to further revision. l. Census data. m. Data are from national sources. n. Data are from the Secretariat of the Caribbean Community, based on
national sources. o. World Bank 2003b. p. Preliminary World Bank estimate, subject to further revision. q. Estimate based on regression. r. Data are from the Secretariat of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States,
based on national sources. s. Aten, Heston, and Summers 2002. Data differ from the standard definition. t. Data refer to the 1999/2000 school year. They were provided by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics for Human
Development Report 2001 (see UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2001). u. Efforts to produce a more accurate and recent estimate are ongoing (see Statistical feature 2, Note to table 1: About this year’s human devel-
opment index). v. Aten, Heston, and Summers 2001. Data differ from the standard definition. w. Data refer to a year or period other than that specified, differ from the standard definition or refer to only part of a coun-
try. x. UNICEF 2003b. y. UNDP 2002a. z. Survey data. aa. UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003b. ab. In the absence of an estimate of GDP per capita (PPP US$), the Human Development Report Office estimate of
$2,302, derived using the value of GDP in US dollars and the weighted average ratio of PPP US dollars to US dollars in the Arab States, was used. ac. UNICEF 2000. ad. Because the combined gross enrolment ratio
was unavailable, the Human Development Report Office estimate of 49% was used. ae. Estimates are based primarily on information for northern Sudan. af. The estimated value of $478 was used (UNDP 2002b).
Source: Column 1: UN 2003, unless otherwise noted; column 2: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004a, unless otherwise noted; column 3: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c, unless otherwise noted; column 4: World Bank
2004f, unless otherwise noted; aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the World Bank; column 5: calculated on the basis of data in column 1; column 6: calculated on the basis of data in columns
2 and 3; column 7: calculated on the basis of data in column 4; column 8: calculated on the basis of data in columns 5-7; see technical note 1 for details; column 9: calculated on the basis of data in columns 4 and 8.
142

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

2 Human

development
index trends

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

MONITORING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: ENLARGING PEOPLE’S CHOICES . . .

1975

0.866
0.863
0.847
0.869
0.865

0.845
0.862
0.866
0.854
0.810

0.878
0.845
0.839
0.842
0.838

0.852
0.872
0.847
..
0.836

0.841
0.794
0.760
0.832
0.724

0.785
..
0.705
0.804
..

0.726
..
..
0.784
..

..
..
0.777
..
..

..
..
0.703
0.761
0.745

0.759
..
..
0.744
..

1980

0.886
0.873
0.864
0.885
0.877

0.862
0.885
0.886
0.879
0.825

0.889
0.853
0.859
0.856
0.850

0.867
0.881
0.853
0.860
0.853

0.856
0.818
0.799
0.847
0.761

0.800
..
0.741
0.827
0.791

0.763
..
..
0.799
..

..
..
0.793
..
0.746

..
..
0.738
0.776
0.770

0.779
..
..
0.777
0.795

1985

0.897
0.885
0.877
0.908
0.891

0.876
0.895
0.899
0.894
0.844

0.895
0.862
0.876
0.870
0.856

0.880
0.889
0.867
0.868
0.867

0.865
0.839
0.826
0.860
0.784

0.823
..
0.779
0.837
0.812

0.789
..
..
0.808
..

..
..
0.807
..
0.779

..
..
0.761
0.778
0.774

0.785
..
..
0.785
0.807

1990

1995

2000

0.911
0.895
0.892
0.928
0.907

0.897
0.913
0.914
0.910
0.869

0.909
0.883
0.899
0.893
0.882

0.902
0.897
0.874
0.887
0.885

0.887
0.857
0.862
0.870
0.821

0.847
..
0.817
0.851
0.835

0.824
..
..
0.810
..

0.817
0.802
0.807
..
0.808

0.823
..
0.784
..
0.791

0.803
..
0.806
0.805
0.807

0.935
0.928
0.932
0.933
0.927

0.927
0.919
0.926
0.924
0.893

0.918
0.921
0.913
0.913
0.908

0.919
0.912
0.904
0.911
0.903

0.904
0.880
0.879
0.875
0.859

0.876
0.852
0.852
0.859
0.855

0.850
0.843
..
0.832
..

0.796
0.816
0.810
..
0.825

0.789
..
0.814
0.810
0.810

0.816
..
0.798
0.803
0.765

0.954
0.943
0.942
0.939
0.938

0.940
0.939
0.935
0.934
0.926

0.932
0.932
0.933
0.931
0.928

0.929
0.929
0.921
..
0.917

0.915
0.907
..
0.894
..

0.892
0.883
0.878
0.888
0.880

0.873
0.856
..
0.854
..

0.839
0.843
0.837
..
0.835

0.829
..
0.835
0.834
0.829

..
..
0.823
..
0.808

2002

0.956
0.946
0.946
0.943
0.942

0.942
0.941
0.939
0.938
0.936

0.936
0.936
0.935
0.934
0.933

0.932
0.932
0.926
0.925
0.922

0.920
0.908
0.903
0.902
0.902

0.897
0.895
0.888
0.888
0.883

0.875
0.868
0.867
0.853
0.853

0.853
0.850
0.848
0.844
0.843

0.842
0.842
0.839
0.838
0.834

0.833
0.833
0.830
0.824
0.823

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

143

2 Human

development
index trends

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

1975

..
..
0.688
0.735
..

..
..
..
0.614
..

0.708
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.716
..
..

..
0.644
0.661
0.493
..

0.613
0.602
..
0.687
..

0.659
..
0.653
..
0.642

..
..
0.590
0.667
..

..
0.516
..
0.523
..

0.613
..
0.617
..
0.630

1980

0.809
..
0.734
0.768
..

0.768
..
..
0.657
..

0.735
..
..
0.658
..

..
..
0.730
..
..

..
0.680
0.689
0.546
..

0.651
0.656
..
0.695
..

0.683
..
0.686
..
0.672

..
..
0.614
0.701
0.639

..
0.574
..
0.557
..

0.648
..
0.648
0.707
0.674

1985

0.820
..
0.753
0.786
..

0.788
..
..
0.693
..

0.746
..
..
0.689
0.691

..
..
0.739
..
..

..
0.695
0.706
0.640
..

0.676
0.671
..
0.699
..

0.698
..
0.692
..
0.696

..
..
0.651
0.708
0.663

..
0.623
..
0.593
..

0.674
..
0.670
0.717
0.696

1990

0.825
..
0.761
0.791
..

0.795
0.813
..
0.720
..

0.748
0.785
..
0.723
0.702

..
..
0.759
0.771
0.798

..
0.714
0.727
0.696
..

0.707
0.707
0.767
0.726
0.673

0.722
0.751
0.719
..
0.706

..
..
0.683
0.719
0.682

..
0.656
..
0.627
..

0.698
..
0.678
0.747
0.710

1995

0.812
..
0.776
0.793
..

0.784
0.771
..
0.759
..

0.771
0.752
..
0.747
0.702

..
..
0.768
0.769
0.751

..
0.739
0.751
0.733
0.741

0.742
0.741
0.725
0.737
0.732

0.744
0.708
0.735
..
0.733

..
..
0.713
0.738
0.707

..
0.696
..
0.683
..

0.719
..
0.699
0.768
0.719

2000

..
..
0.800
0.806
..

0.791
..
..
0.789
..

0.791
0.775
..
0.775
0.740

..
..
0.776
0.773
0.762

..
0.771
0.771
0.761
0.762

..
0.764
0.744
0.752
0.752

0.751
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.751
0.741

..
0.734
..
0.721
..

..
..
0.731
0.773
..

2002

0.815
0.809
0.802
0.801
0.800

0.796
0.795
0.794
0.793
0.793

0.791
0.790
0.787
0.785
0.781

0.781
0.780
0.778
0.778
0.777

0.777
0.775
0.773
0.770
0.769

0.768
0.768
0.766
0.764
0.758

0.758
0.754
0.753
0.752
0.752

0.752
0.751
0.751
0.751
0.750

0.746
0.745
0.745
0.745
0.743

0.740
0.739
0.738
0.737
0.735

144

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

2 Human

development
index trends

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

1975

0.565
..
0.590
0.677
..

0.534
..
0.504
..
..

0.467
..
..
0.512
0.517

..
..
0.565
0.655
0.438

0.510
..
..
..
0.429

..
0.411
0.503
..
..

0.439
..
0.423
..
..

..
0.516
0.345
0.344
0.291
0.415

0.346
0.396
0.451
0.457
..

0.547
0.445
..
0.400
0.324

1980

0.569
..
0.590
0.683
..

0.576
..
0.554
..
..

0.529
..
..
0.548
0.568

..
..
0.576
0.672
0.487

0.546
..
..
..
0.474

..
0.437
0.574
..
..

0.467
..
0.444
..
..

0.479
0.544
0.363
0.372
0.330
0.462

0.373
0.445
0.497
0.499
..

0.572
0.490
..
0.433
0.385

1985

0.610
..
0.610
0.679
..

0.611
..
0.603
0.483
..

0.582
..
..
0.580
0.599

0.719
0.650
0.584
0.697
0.539

0.559
..
..
..
0.510

..
0.476
0.633
..
..

0.481
..
0.465
..
0.422

0.498
0.565
0.388
0.394
0.372
0.504

0.405
0.445
0.541
0.517
0.395

0.629
0.515
..
0.429
0.401

1990

0.649
..
0.648
0.697
0.623

0.635
..
0.642
0.504
..

0.623
0.610
0.736
0.603
0.624

0.719
0.656
0.589
0.729
0.577

0.583
..
..
..
0.542

..
0.514
0.675
..
..

0.511
..
0.482
..
0.449

0.501
0.611
0.417
0.427
0.418
0.519

0.444
0.474
0.532
0.544
0.395

0.617
0.540
0.392
0.436
0.430

1995

0.693
..
0.686
0.706
0.675

0.663
0.687
0.664
0.528
..

0.662
0.649
0.684
0.635
0.646

0.651
0.629
0.624
0.735
0.608

0.613
..
..
..
0.571

0.667
0.548
0.666
..
0.540

0.532
..
0.522
..
0.485

0.509
0.606
0.445
0.465
0.455
0.508

0.473
0.486
0.530
0.549
0.404

0.571
0.524
0.435
0.443
0.455

2000

0.723
..
0.713
0.724
..

0.683
..
0.693
0.670
..

0.680
0.686
0.673
0.670
..

0.655
0.658
0.643
0.690
..

0.642
..
..
..
0.603

0.625
0.579
0.620
..
0.551

0.560
..
0.540
..
0.520

0.521
0.548
0.497
0.492
0.488
..

..
0.491
0.487
0.513
..

0.511
0.496
0.469
0.469
..

2002

0.732
0.726
0.720
0.719
0.717

0.710
0.709
0.704
0.703
0.701

0.692
0.691
0.681
0.681
0.672

0.671
0.668
0.667
0.666
0.653

0.649
0.648
0.645
0.624
0.620

0.607
0.595
0.589
0.570
0.568

0.568
0.551
0.542
0.536
0.534

0.530
0.519
0.509
0.505
0.504
0.501

0.497
0.495
0.494
0.493
0.493

0.491
0.488
0.482
0.469
0.466

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

145

2 Human

development
index trends

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

1975

0.339
..
..
0.283
..

0.315
..
0.341
..
0.288

..
0.382
0.466
0.315
..

0.260
0.410
0.334
..
..

0.254
0.282
0.232
0.239
0.237
..

1980

0.362
0.443
..
..
..

0.332
..
0.386
..
0.324

..
0.416
0.474
0.347
..

0.260
0.418
0.351
..
0.298

0.262
0.306
0.262
0.262
0.257
..

1985

1990

0.382
0.459
..
..
..

0.359
..
0.397
..
0.351

..
0.428
0.485
0.360
..

0.301
0.425
0.373
0.281
0.286

0.282
0.332
0.269
0.287
0.250
..

0.387
0.455
..
..
..

0.382
..
0.351
..
0.356

0.413
0.429
0.466
0.368
..

0.326
0.414
0.375
0.305
0.310

0.311
0.338
0.288
0.302
0.259
..

1995

0.423
0.448
0.450
0.418
0.410

0.398
..
0.341
..
0.381

0.406
0.410
0.418
0.408
..

0.335
0.380
0.366
0.319
0.318

0.339
0.311
0.309
0.312
0.265
..

2000

0.449
..
0.452
0.448
0.430

0.425
..
0.413
..
0.406

0.403
0.402
0.389
0.395
..

0.363
..
..
0.345
0.342

0.354
0.325
..
0.323
0.279
..

2002

0.465
0.463
0.454
0.452
0.439

0.437
0.436
0.431
0.425
0.421

0.407
0.399
0.389
0.388
0.381

0.379
0.365
0.361
0.359
0.354

0.350
0.339
0.326
0.302
0.292
0.273

Note: The human development index values in this table were calculated using a consistent methodology and data series. They are not strictly comparable with those in earlier Human Development Reports. For detailed
discussion, see Statistical feature 2, Note to table 1: About this year’s human development index.
Source: Columns 1-6: calculated on the basis of data on life expectancy from UN 2003; data on adult literacy rates from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003a; data on combined gross enrolment ratios from UNESCO
1999 and UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c; and data on GDP per capita (1995 PPP US$) and GDP per capita (current PPP US$) from World Bank 2004f; column 7: column 8 of table 1.

146

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

3 Human and

income poverty
Developing countries

HDI rank

High human development

23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
25 Singapore
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica
46 Uruguay
47 Qatar

49 United Arab Emirates
51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
61 Panama
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius

67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia

74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)
76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
79 Jamaica

80 Lebanon
81 Fiji
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan
92 Tunisia

93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica
96 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic

MONITORING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: ENLARGING PEOPLE’S CHOICES . . .

Population

MDG

without

Probability

at birth
of not
surviving

Children
sustainable
under
access to an weight
for age †
improved
to age 40 a, † (% ages 15 water source † (% under
(% of cohort) and above)
age 5)

Adult

illiteracy
rate b, †

MDG

Population below
income poverty line

(%)

National

Human poverty index

(HPI-1)

Rank

Value
(%)

2000-05

2002

(%)
2000

$1 a day d $2 a day e poverty line
1995-2002 c 1990-2002 c 1990-2002 c 1990-2001 c

..
6
..
1
..

..
..
..
..
..

3
..
4
2
..

..
..
5
12
8
..

29
..
9
..
16

..
11
..
18
10

50
..
22
30
13

14
42
28
17
23

..
19
15
7
39

..
24
..
36
26

..
6.3
..
2.5
..

..
..
..
..
..

4.1
..
4.4
3.6
..

..
..
5.0
9.1
7.7
..

15.3
..
7.7
..
11.3

..
8.5
..
11.8
8.1

31.5
..
13.1
15.8
9.2

9.5
21.3
15.0
11.4
13.2

..
12.0
10.6
7.2
19.2

..
13.2
..
18.2
13.7

1.8
1.9
3.4
2.6
2.9

2.8
5.1
..
..
4.0

4.1
2.6
3.7
4.4
5.1

3.4
16.0
4.1
7.6
9.1
..

4.5
4.2
6.8
8.9
4.6

6.5
5.9
5.7
11.5
8.4

5.0
6.6
10.2
5.2
4.9

4.3
5.4
7.4
10.2
10.2

3.9
8.0
8.0
6.6
4.9

..
7.1
..
5.1
14.6

6.5 g
7.5 h
2.1 g
0.3
3.2 h

6.1 h
3.0
8.1 h

..
11.5

4.3 h
17.1
4.2
2.3
15.8 h, j

22.7
4.5 g
3.1
9.5 h
1.5
..

18.3
11.3 h
7.7
1.2 h
15.7 h

..
6.9
..

13.6 h
7.9

25.6
1.3
7.4 h
22.1
12.4

13.5 g
7.1 h, j
7.4 h
2.8
15.0 l

..

13.5 h
8.4 l
9.1
26.8

..

9.1 h

..
7.9
15.6

..
0
8
0
0

..
..
..
2
..

7
..
5
2
..

..
3
9
12
10
9

28
..
10
0
0

18
17
2
13
9

61
1
16
5
8

0
53
14
0
20

7
18
22
4
20

5
25
3
23
14

..
14 i
..
6 i
..

..
5
6 i
..
9

1
10
5
5
6

14
..
4
8
7 i
10 i

5
12
7
..
15

13
5 i
14 i
6
7

24
..
19 i
14
6

3
8 i
28
30
7

..
8
5
5
4

..
11
5 i
29
5

..
..
<2
..
..

..
3.3
..
..
..

<2
..
2.0
<2
..

..
..
..
9.9
12.4
..

..
<2
7.2
..
..

..
15.0
..
8.2
8.2

..
..
<2
..
<2

..
..
14.6
..
18.1

..
<2
14.9
<2
<2

..
16.6
..
6.6
<2

..
..
<2
..
..

..
14.3
..
..
..

9.6
..
9.5
3.9
..

..
..
..
26.3
39.0
..

..
9.3
17.6
..
..

..
32.0
..
22.4
22.6

..
..
32.5
..
13.3

..
..
46.4
..
37.7

..
10.3
30.3
7.4
6.6

..
46.7
..
45.4
<2

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

17.0
..
22.0
..
..

..
..
..

10.1 k
21.0
..

..

15.5 k
37.3
..
..

..

31.3 k

..
17.4
64.0

..
..
13.1
..
18.7

..
..
36.8
..
49.0

..
..
21.8
11.7
7.6

..
4.6
..
25.0
28.6

HPI-1
rank
minus
income
poverty
rank f

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

1
..
-10
0
..

..
..
..
-12
-17
..

..
..
-11
..
..

..
-20
..
-7
-13

..
..
15
..
9

..
..
-5
..
-19

..
12
-16
3
28

..
-14
..
11
18

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

147

3 Human and

income poverty
Developing countries

HDI rank

99 Belize
100 Ecuador
101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador

104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde
106 Syrian Arab Republic
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras
117 Mongolia

118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt
121 Guatemala
122 Gabon

123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco
126 Namibia
127 India

128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia
131 Ghana
132 Myanmar

133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.
136 Comoros
137 Swaziland

138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Population

MDG

without

Probability

at birth
of not
surviving

Children
sustainable
under
access to an weight
for age †
improved
to age 40 a, † (% ages 15 water source † (% under
(% of cohort) and above)
age 5)

Adult

illiteracy
rate b, †

2000-05

2002

MDG

Population below
income poverty line

(%)

National

(%)
2000

$1 a day d $2 a day e poverty line
1995-2002 c 1990-2002 c 1990-2002 c 1990-2001 c

Human poverty index

(HPI-1)

Rank

Value
(%)

33
20
31
..
34

21
40
25
43
54

35
41
27
32
38

37
52
47
44
..

..
..
56
64
48

76
..
74
46
45

62
..
66
49
..

72
51
69
61

71
65
53
85
60

91
63
67
58
57

16.7
12.0
16.4
..
17.0

12.9
19.7
13.7
21.9
32.7

17.8
20.0
14.4
16.6
19.1

18.3
31.7
30.9
22.5
..

..
..
34.5
37.7
31.4

43.5
..
42.6
26.0
25.4

37.0
..
40.3
31.4
..

42.2
31.6
41.2
36.9

41.9
38.0
31.9
47.9
36.4

52.0
37.5
40.3
35.9
35.1

11.3
10.3
7.0
5.2
9.9

17.6
7.6
5.7
9.3
36.4

10.8
10.7
16.0
13.8
13.0

10.3
44.9
8.6
14.1
28.1

10.0
6.8
9.4
52.3
15.3

61.9
7.3
24.0
25.8
24.6

19.0
17.3
27.9
18.1
70.5

17.3
27.6
19.3
44.2

17.8
37.9
39.3
68.1
41.1

74.8
49.5
19.1
29.0
34.9

23.1 h
9.0 h
22.9 g, j, l

..
20.3

1.4 g
24.3
17.1
31.1
15.8 g

12.1
9.7 h, j
13.3 h
20.0 h
2.2 h

23.3 l
14.0
44.4 h, j
30.1
..

..
..
49.3
16.7
38.7 h

21.1
..
30.6
26.2
14.7

35.4 g

..
33.6
43.8
19.1

58.9
40.1
56.0
32.1 l

58.5 h, j
40.4
17.2
18.6 l
31.1

10.0
15.7
51.0
32.7 g
33.2

8
15
8
14
23

6
26
20
11
56

22
23
17
12
40

23
14
3
8
14

..
29
20
23
16

5
12
70
27
28

58
38
63
4
..

3
25
12
42

10
46
49
22
48

17
43
31
53
38

6 i
15
11
4
12

14
14 i
7
6
19

26
33
10
17
13

10
12
11
24
12

13
21 i
9
24
47

13
20 i
45
25
35

35 i
19
40
25
10

48
17
48
21

38
25
14
18
23

13
21
46
33
36 i

..
17.7
<2
..
31.1

<2
..
..
<2
..

7.5
17.7
14.4
23.8
13.9

45.1
7.1
3.1
16.0
..

..
..
<2
34.9
34.7

23.5
..
34.1
44.8
..

..
..
26.3
..
..

36.0
..
37.7
17.1

13.4
..
..
36.4
..

36.0
23.0
15.7
49.1
70.2

..
40.8
7.3
..
58.0

6.1
..
..
15.1
..

52.4
63.7
34.3
44.4
50.0

79.9
23.8
43.9
37.4
..

..
..
14.3
55.8
79.9

50.1
..
77.7
78.5
..

..
..
73.2
..
..

82.8
..
82.5
50.6

65.6
..
..
56.1
..

64.2
58.6
45.2
83.3
90.8

..
35.0
..
..
48.3

35.0
..
..
12.2
..

27.1
50.9
62.7
53.0
36.3

47.9
..
16.7
56.2
..

..
..
19.0
..
28.6

..
..
36.1
39.5
..

37.5
..
38.6
..
40.0

49.8
..
42.0
40.2

32.6
32.3 k

..
..
44.0

34.9
52.0
41.8
71.3
34.1

HPI-1
rank
minus
income
poverty
rank f

..
-20
21
..
-21

14
..
..
30
..

7
-5
-5
-17
4

-31
20
20
1
..

..
..
36
-5
-12

11
..
3
-23
..

..
..
1
..
..

-3
..
-7
8

24
..
..
6
..

12
4
15
-20
-27

148

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

3 Human and

income poverty
Developing countries

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Population

MDG

without

Probability

at birth
of not
surviving

Children
sustainable
under
access to an weight
for age †
improved
to age 40 a, † (% ages 15 water source † (% under
(% of cohort) and above)
age 5)

Adult

illiteracy
rate b, †

2000-05

2002

MDG

Population below
income poverty line

(%)

National

(%)
2000

$1 a day d $2 a day e poverty line
1995-2002 c 1990-2002 c 1990-2002 c 1990-2001 c

Human poverty index

(HPI-1)

Rank

Value
(%)

87
68
55
81
70

77
..
78
..
80

59
79
90
83
..

88
75
84
92
89

86
82
93
95
94
..

48.3
41.1
34.3
45.8
41.8

44.1
..
44.7
..
45.7

36.0
45.0
50.4
46.8
..

49.6
42.9
47.7
55.5
49.8

48.0
45.8
58.9
65.5
61.4
..

30.5
37.3
42.9
29.6
27.5

27.7
33.0
54.3
35.9
34.6

46.4
51.7
70.1
59.6
49.2

42.9
47.2
55.3
43.3
56.0

41.3
50.5
35.3
43.4
38.7
57.5

58.8
48.1
34.5 g
62.2 g
43.3 g

60.7
..
30.8
..
60.2

22.9
50.3 g
20.1
38.2
..

54.2
37.3 g
51.4 l
58.5
53.5

60.4 g
49.6
81.0 h, j
87.2 h, j
82.9
..

63
54
0
38
54

22
..
59
52
37

32
19
36
43
62

73
55
30
76
43

44
22
35
58
41
43

32
17
18
17
44

23
43
27
23
23

29
21
28
25
31

28
31
24
47
26

25
45
33
34
40
27

25.9
..
..
59.3
..

26.3
..
35.7
..
..

19.9
15.5
63.7
41.7
..

..
..
66.6
26.3
37.9

..
58.4
72.8
44.9
61.4
57.0

63.1
..
..
82.9
..

67.8
..
84.6
..
..

59.7
50.4
87.4
76.1
..

..
..
84.0
80.7
78.4

..
89.2
90.6
81.0
85.3
74.5

46.3
65.0 k
45.1
64.0
53.0

33.4
..
51.2
40.0
33.0

35.7
36.8
72.9
65.3
..

64.0
..
..
44.2
69.4

48.7
..
63.8
45.3
63.0 k
68.0 k

HPI-1
rank
minus
income
poverty
rank f

18
..
..
-7
..

9
..
3
..
..

3
24
-2
1
..

..
..
-7
20
6

..
-5
-2
9
3
..

† Denotes indicators used to calculate the human poverty index (HPI-1). For further details, see technical note 1. 
a. Data refer to the probability at birth of not surviving to age 40, multiplied by 100. They are medium-variant projections for the period specified. b. Data refer to estimates produced by UNESCO Institute
for Statistics in July 2002, unless otherwise specified. Due to differences in methodology and timeliness of underlying data, comparisons across countries and over time should be made with caution. c. Data refer to the
most recent year available during the period specified. d. Poverty line is equivalent to $1.08 (1993 PPP US$). e. Poverty line is equivalent to $2.15 (1993 PPP US$). f. Income poverty refers to the percentage of the popu-
lation living on less than $1 a day. All countries with an income poverty rate of less than 2% were given equal rank. The rankings are based on countries for which data are available for both indicators. A positive figure
indicates that the country performs better in income poverty than in human poverty, a negative the opposite. g. UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003a. Data are subject to revision. h. Census data. i. Data refer to a year
or period other than that specified, differ from the standard definition or refer to only part of a country. j. Data refer to a year between 1995 and 1999. k. Data refer to a period other than that specified. l. Survey data.
Source: Column 1: determined on the basis of the HPI-1 values in column 2; column 2: calculated on the basis of data in columns 3-6, see technical note 1 for details; column 3: UN 2003; column 4: UNESCO Institute
for Statistics 2004a; columns 5 and 6: UNICEF 2003b; columns 7-9: World Bank 2004f; column 10: calculated on the basis of data in columns 1 and 7.

HPI-1 ranks for 
95 developing countries

1 Barbados
2 Uruguay 
3 Chile
4 Costa Rica
5 Cuba
6 Singapore
7 Jordan
8 Trinidad and Tobago
9 Panama
10 Colombia
11 Venezuela
12 Mexico
13 Jamaica
14 Lebanon
15 Paraguay
16 Mauritus
17 Maldives

18 Brazil
19 Turkey
20 Ecuador
21 Guyana
22 Thailand
23 Peru
24 China
25 Syrian Arab Republic
26 Dominican Republic
27 Bolivia
28 Philippines
29 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
30 Saudi Arabia
31 Iran, Islamic Rep.
32 Honduras
33 Belize
34 El Salvador
35 Indonesia
36 Sri Lanka
37 Nicaragua

38 Mongolia
39 Tunisia
40 Cape Verde
41 Viet Nam
42 Fiji
43 Algeria
44 Guatemala
45 Myanmar
46 Ghana
47 Egypt
48 India
49 Comoros
50 Oman
51 Sudan
52 South Africa
53 Congo
54 Equatorial Guinea
55 Djibouti
56 Morocco
57 Nigeria

58 Madagascar
59 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
60 Uganda
61 Cameroon
62 Papua New Guinea 
63 Kenya
64 Namibia
65 Togo
66 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.
67 Yemen
68 Haiti
69 Nepal
70 Eritrea
71 Pakistan
72 Bangladesh
73 Iraq
74 Cambodia
75 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the 
76 Botswana
77 Senegal

78 Rwanda
79 Côte d’Ivoire
80 Benin
81 Gambia
82 Burundi
83 Malawi
84 Central African Republic 
85 Lesotho
86 Guinea-Bissau
87 Mauritania
88 Chad 
89 Mozambique
90 Zambia 
91 Zimbabwe 
92 Ethiopia 
93 Mali
94 Niger
95 Burkina Faso

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

149

4 Human and

income poverty
OECD, Central &
Eastern Europe & CIS

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
24 Greece
26 Portugal
27 Slovenia

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
48 Croatia
50 Latvia

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
60 Macedonia, TFYR
62 Belarus
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
69 Romania
70 Ukraine
78 Kazakhstan
82 Armenia

MONITORING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: ENLARGING PEOPLE’S CHOICES . . .

Probability

at birth
of not
surviving

to age 60 b, †
(% of cohort)

2000-05

People
lacking
functional
literacy
skills †
(% ages
16-65)
1994-98 c

Human poverty index

(HPI-2) a

Rank

Value
(%)

Long-term

Population below
income poverty line

(%)

unemployment d, † 50% of
median
income e, †
1990-2000 f

labour force)

(% of

2002

$11 a day
1994-95 f, g

$4 a day
1996-99 f, h

2
1
14
12
3

13
..
17
10
16

..
15
4
..
7

8
5
..
6
9

11
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

7.1
6.5
12.9
12.2
8.2

12.4
..
15.8
11.1
15.3

..
14.8
8.4
..
10.5

10.8
9.1
..
10.3
11.0

11.6
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

8.3
7.3
8.8
8.7
8.7

9.4
7.6
12.6
7.5
9.3

9.1
8.9
10.2
9.5
9.7

10.0
11.0
9.8
9.2
8.8

8.6
7.4
9.1
11.7
11.8

7.7
12.2
20.4
15.6
19.6

19.5
15.2
14.5
21.4

18.6
28.9
13.3
22.8
11.3

13.7
20.3
23.0
27.0
14.9

8.5
7.5
17.0
16.6
10.5

18.4 j
..
20.7

.. k

22.6

..
21.8
10.4
..
.. k

.. k

9.6
18.4
14.4

.. k

.. k
..
..
48.0
42.2

..
15.7
..
42.6
33.8

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

0.2
1.1
1.3
0.7
0.8

3.4
0.4
0.5
1.7
1.2

0.6
1.2
2.2
0.8
0.7 m

3.0
0.8
0.7
4.1
4.6

5.3
..
5.0
1.8
..

..
3.7
..
9.6
2.6

..
11.1
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

6.4
6.5
14.3
12.8
7.3

8.0
..
17.0
11.8 l
12.3

9.3
12.5
5.4
8.0
6.0

8.0
9.2
..
8.3
10.1

12.7
13.5
..
..
8.2

..
4.9
12.4
8.6
6.7

..
7.0
..
..

..
18.8
..
..
..

..
8.1
..
..
..

4.3
6.3
17.6
7.4
7.1

..
..
13.6
..
..

..
15.7
4.8
..
0.3

9.9
..
..
7.3
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
<1

..
<1
18
10
<1

17
8
..
28

22
53
..
..
..

..
23
25
62
..

HPI-2
rank
minus
income
poverty
rank i

-1
-3
-2
-3
-2

7
..
0
-1
4

..
2
3
..
5

2
-4
..
-2
-1

-3
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

150

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

4 Human and

income poverty
OECD, Central &
Eastern Europe & CIS

HDI rank

86 Turkmenistan
91 Azerbaijan
97 Georgia
107 Uzbekistan
110 Kyrgyzstan

113 Moldova, Rep. of
116 Tajikistan

Probability

at birth
of not
surviving

to age 60 b, †
(% of cohort)

2000-05

People
lacking
functional
literacy
skills †
(% ages
16-65)
1994-98 c

Human poverty index

(HPI-2) a

Rank

Value
(%)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

24.8
18.5
16.2
21.8
23.7

22.8
22.8

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

Long-term

Population below
income poverty line

(%)

unemployment d, † 50% of
median
income e, †
1990-2000 f

labour force)

(% of

2002

HPI-2
rank
minus
income
poverty
rank i

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

$11 a day
1994-95 f, g

$4 a day
1996-99 f, h

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..
..
88

82
..

† Denotes indicators used to calculate the human poverty index (HPI-2). For further details, see technical note 1.
Note: This table includes Israel and Malta, which are not OECD member countries, but excludes the Republic of Korea, Mexico and Turkey, which are. For the human poverty index and related indicators for these coun-
tries, see table 3. 
a. The human poverty index (HPI-2) is calculated for selected high-income OECD countries only. b. Data refer to the probability at birth of not surviving to age 60, multiplied by 100. They are medium-variant projections
for the period specified. c. Based on scoring at level 1 on the prose literacy scale of the International Adult Literacy Survey. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. More recent data will be
available shortly. d. Data refer to unemployment lasting 12 months or longer. e. Poverty line is measured at 50% of equivalent median adjusted disposable household income. f. Data refer to the most recent year avail-
able during the period specified. g. Based on the US poverty line, $11 (1994 PPP US$) a day per person for a family of three. h. Poverty line is $4 (1990 PPP US$) a day. i. Income poverty refers to the percentage of the
population living on less than 50% of the median adjusted disposible household income. A positive figure indicates that the country performs better in income poverty than in human poverty, a negative the opposite. j.
Data refer to Flanders. k. For purposes of calculating the HPI-2, an estimate of 15.1%, the unweighted average of countries with available data, was applied. l. Smeeding 1997. m. Data are based on small samples and
should be treated with caution.
Source: Column 1: determined on the basis of HPI-2 values in column 2; column 2: calculated on the basis of data in columns 3-6; see technical note 1 for details; column 3: calculated on the basis of survival data from
UN 2003; column 4: OECD and Statistics Canada 2000, unless otherwise noted; column 5: calculated on the basis of data on long-term unemployment and labour force from OECD 2004d; column 6: LIS 2004; column 7:
Smeeding, Rainwater, and Burtless 2000; column 8: Milanovic 2002; column 9: calculated on the basis of data in columns 1 and 6.

HPI-2 ranks for 17 selected OECD countries

1 Sweden
2 Norway
3 Netherlands
4 Finland 
5 Denmark
6 Germany

7 Luxembourg
8 France
9 Spain
10 Japan
11 Italy
12 Canada

13 Belgium
14 Australia
15 United Kingdom
16 Ireland
17 United States

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

151

5 Demographic

trends

. . . TO LEAD A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE . . .

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

1975

4.0
8.2
13.9
23.1
13.7

9.8
0.2
220.2
111.5
3.2

6.3
55.4
4.7
7.6
0.4

52.7
5.1
3.1
78.7
35.6

55.4
3.4
4.4
9.0
2.3

9.1
1.7
35.3
0.2
0.6

0.3
10.0
0.2
26.0
0.1

1.4
34.0
10.5
(.)
0.3

3.3
4.7
10.3
1.0
2.1

2.8
0.2
4.3
0.5
2.5

Total population

(millions)
2002 b

2015 b

Annual 
population
growth rate
1975-
2002 2002-15 b

Urban population

(% of total) a

Population under  Population age
65 and above

age 15

Total fertility rate
(births per woman)
2015 b 1970-75 c 2000-05 c

1975

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

(% of total)

(% of total)

4.5
8.9
19.5
31.3
16.1

10.3
0.3
291.0
127.5
3.9

7.2
59.1
5.2
8.1
0.4

59.8
5.4
3.8
82.4
41.0

57.5
6.3
7.0
11.0
4.2

10.0
2.0
47.4
0.3
0.8

0.4
10.2
0.3
38.0
0.1

1.3
38.6
9.9
(.)
0.7

3.5
5.4
15.6
2.4
4.1

3.4
0.6
4.4
2.9
2.3

4.7
9.0
21.7
34.1
16.8

10.5
0.3
329.7
127.2
4.4

7.0
61.3
5.3
8.1
0.5

62.8
5.4
4.2
82.5
41.2

55.5
7.8
7.9
10.9
4.7

10.0
1.9
49.7
0.3
0.9

0.4
10.1
0.5
43.4
0.1

1.2
38.2
9.3
(.)
0.9

3.2
5.4
18.0
3.4
5.0

3.7
0.7
4.3
3.6
2.1

0.4
0.3
1.3
1.1
0.6

0.2
1.0
1.0
0.5
0.8

0.5
0.2
0.4
0.3
0.8

0.5
0.2
0.8
0.2
0.5

0.1
2.3
1.7
0.7
2.3

0.4
0.5
1.1
0.3
1.0

0.9
0.1
2.9
1.4
1.2

-0.3
0.5
-0.2
-0.3
3.5

0.2
0.5
1.5
3.3
2.6

0.7
4.7
0.1
6.5
-0.2

0.3
0.1
0.8
0.7
0.3

0.1
0.6
1.0
(.)
0.9

-0.2
0.3
0.1
-0.1
1.2

0.4
0.1
0.6
(.)
(.)

-0.3
1.6
0.9
(.)
0.9

(.)
-0.2
0.4
0.3
0.6

0.4
-0.1
2.0
1.0
0.7

-1.1
-0.1
-0.5
-0.3
1.8

-0.6
0.1
1.1
2.4
1.6

0.6
1.3
-0.3
1.5
-0.9

68.2
82.7
85.9
75.6
56.9

94.5
86.6
73.7
56.8
53.6

55.7
82.7
58.3
65.3
73.7

72.9
82.1
82.8
81.2
69.6

77.6
83.3
91.6
80.1
65.4

97.2
92.7
79.8
65.3
59.6

67.6
89.0
61.0
65.8
91.6

76.1
85.2
85.8
87.9
76.4

86.4
84.3
94.9
84.0
71.4

97.5
94.1
83.6
67.7
63.6

68.7
90.2
62.1
67.2
94.1

79.0
86.8
87.0
90.0
78.1

65.6
86.6
89.7
55.3
100.0

67.3
91.6
100.0
60.6
100.0

69.2
92.4
100.0
65.2
100.0

27.7
42.4
48.0
40.8
45.2

80.4
63.7
62.0
81.0
33.3

67.6
55.4
52.8
35.0
85.8

55.7
46.3
78.4
83.8
42.5

83.4
84.8
45.1
83.6
65.4

54.1
50.8
80.1
51.1
69.0

91.4
74.2
75.5
89.9
49.8

69.4
61.8
64.7
32.4
89.9

66.8
57.2
86.6
96.2
60.1

92.4
91.8
58.6
85.0
66.3

60.9
52.6
83.0
59.1
71.6

93.7
75.7
82.8
92.2
53.3

71.4
64.0
70.0
32.5
91.4

67.5
60.8
90.2
96.9
66.8

94.4
93.6
64.6
87.2
66.3

19.7
17.9
20.1
18.4
18.4

17.2
23.0
21.6
14.3
20.9

16.2
18.7
17.8
16.2
19.0

18.6
18.5
22.6
15.2
14.3

14.1
27.9
15.7
14.7
21.1

16.6
15.0
20.3
20.0
22.1

19.4
15.7
30.6
27.3
..

16.7
17.9
16.4
..
29.2

19.0
18.4
27.8
26.1
30.4

24.6
26.6
16.9
25.8
16.5

16.6
15.7
17.3
14.8
16.4

15.5
18.7
20.3
13.0
20.3

12.6
15.9
15.8
12.4
17.6

17.8
16.3
19.3
13.2
13.2

12.3
24.8
12.9
13.2
12.9

15.3
12.1
15.5
16.4
18.9

17.0
13.2
25.4
24.4
..

14.2
14.6
13.3
..
23.2

16.0
15.4
23.6
22.6
23.9

22.5
21.7
16.5
20.8
13.0

15.2
17.4
12.5
12.8
13.8

17.3
11.5
12.2
18.2
11.3

16.4
15.9
15.3
15.8
13.4

16.2
15.0
11.9
17.1
17.0

18.7
9.9
11.0
18.2
7.6

16.0
14.6
7.8
10.0
11.8

12.5
13.9
2.9
9.9
..

15.8
12.5
14.8
..
2.7

14.5
11.5
7.5
1.4
5.5

13.1
1.5
16.3
1.3
15.8

18.0
21.4
15.5
16.4
17.4

19.5
13.5
14.2
26.0
13.4

22.0
17.8
20.3
19.5
14.4

18.5
19.2
14.6
20.8
19.2

22.3
11.4
13.6
20.9
13.1

18.0
18.5
11.9
11.1
14.9

18.0
18.6
4.4
11.0
..

18.2
14.8
17.4
..
3.9

16.4
13.6
9.8
3.5
7.4

13.7
4.6
17.8
4.2
18.3

2.2
1.9
2.5
2.0
2.1

1.9
2.8
2.0
2.1
3.8

1.8
2.0
1.6
2.0
2.0

2.3
2.0
2.8
1.6
2.9

2.3
3.8
2.9
2.3
2.6

2.7
2.2
4.3
2.7
2.5

2.1
2.2
5.4
3.1
..

2.2
2.3
2.1
..
5.9

2.3
2.5
3.6
6.9
4.3

3.0
6.8
2.0
6.4
2.0

1.8
1.6
1.7
1.5
1.7

1.7
2.0
2.1
1.3
1.9

1.4
1.6
1.7
1.3
1.7

1.9
1.8
2.0
1.4
1.2

1.2
2.7
1.0
1.3
1.4

1.5
1.1
1.4
1.5
1.9

1.8
1.2
2.5
2.4
..

1.2
1.3
1.2
..
2.7

1.3
1.3
2.4
2.7
2.3

2.3
3.2
1.7
2.8
1.1

152

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

5 Demographic

trends

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

1975

0.2
9.3
59.1
1.0
0.1

8.7
134.2
2.4
12.3
1.7

1.7
9.4
0.1
0.9
2.4

3.7
0.4
12.7
21.2
49.0

0.1
108.1
25.4
0.9
0.2

41.3
7.3
14.1
2.0
2.8

0.6
2.8
42.0
0.1
15.2

2.5
0.1
41.0
2.7
1.9

Total population

(millions)
2002 b

2015 b

Annual 
population
growth rate
1975-
2002 2002-15 b

0.3
11.3
102.0
1.3
0.1

8.0
144.1
5.4
24.0
2.0

3.1
9.9
0.1
1.2
3.1

4.1
0.4
25.2
22.4
48.9

0.1
176.3
43.5
2.8
0.2

62.2
23.5
15.5
2.6
3.6

0.8
3.1
78.6
0.3
26.8

4.8
0.1
70.3
5.7
5.3

0.4
11.5
119.6
1.3
0.1

7.2
133.4
6.9
29.6
2.2

3.8
9.4
0.1
1.3
3.4

4.3
0.5
31.2
21.6
44.4

0.2
202.0
52.2
3.9
0.2

69.6
32.7
15.3
3.0
4.2

0.9
3.0
96.3
0.4
32.0

5.8
0.1
82.1
7.7
7.0

1.8
0.7
2.0
0.9
0.6

-0.3
0.3
3.0
2.5
0.7

2.1
0.2
0.4
1.1
1.0

0.4
0.6
2.5
0.2
(.)

1.3
1.8
2.0
4.1
0.6

1.5
4.4
0.3
1.0
1.0

1.4
0.3
2.3
3.0
2.1

2.4
0.8
2.0
2.9
3.7

0.9
0.2
1.2
0.3
0.4

-0.8
-0.6
1.8
1.6
0.4

1.6
-0.4
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.3
0.7
1.6
-0.3
-0.7

0.7
1.0
1.4
2.7
1.1

0.9
2.5
-0.1
1.0
1.2

0.8
-0.3
1.6
2.8
1.4

1.5
0.5
1.2
2.2
2.1

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

5.7
5.7
0.1
927.8 d
0.1

8.3
9.7
0.1
1,294.9 d
0.1

9.5
11.1
0.1
1,402.3 d
0.1

13.5
4.9
5.0
0.1
6.9

18.9
5.2
8.6
0.3
12.8

20.6
4.7
10.1
0.3
15.2

1.4
2.0
-0.5
1.2 d
0.3

1.3
0.2
2.0
2.3
2.3

1.0
1.0
-0.3
0.6 d
0.2

0.7
-0.7
1.2
1.8
1.3

1975

73.4
64.2
62.8
63.0
34.2

57.5
66.4
60.9
37.7
50.6

49.0
50.3
24.4
43.4
32.7

31.3
49.5
75.8
42.8
58.3

23.6
61.2
60.0
19.6
21.1

23.8
58.3
52.2
44.1
67.0

36.7
63.0
35.6
18.1
61.5

47.6
27.0
41.6
39.0
57.8

51.5
49.9
32.6
17.4
55.3

22.0
49.5
45.7
50.2
42.4

Urban population

(% of total) a

Total fertility rate
(births per woman)
2015 b 1970-75 c 2000-05 c

Population under  Population age
65 and above

age 15

(% of total)

(% of total)

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

89.2
75.5
75.2
75.0
37.4

69.4
73.3
86.0
63.3
59.4

56.8
70.5
33.2
43.1
43.2

43.9
75.4
87.4
54.5
67.2

30.1
82.4
76.0
77.0
22.2

31.6
87.2
55.8
52.1
87.2

51.0
64.6
60.2
28.4
73.5

45.1
57.2
65.8
56.6
78.9

50.2
63.4
40.0
37.7
71.7

21.1
52.2
58.9
48.2
61.3

91.6
78.1
78.8
79.7
43.4

74.0
74.3
89.0
71.0
62.0

61.7
75.2
38.2
47.3
51.2

51.1
81.6
90.0
56.4
68.9

36.8
88.4
81.3
82.6
24.7

36.7
91.1
58.2
54.2
90.1

60.1
64.2
69.2
35.2
78.0

50.0
68.6
71.9
64.3
81.1

51.3
68.1
49.5
49.5
76.2

22.5
51.6
64.6
51.8
67.6

29.0
20.3
32.8
23.3
..

14.8
16.5
31.3
33.2
22.0

31.2
17.1
37.1
25.3
28.5

17.6
31.0
33.0
17.1
16.5

30.4
28.3
32.1
37.2
40.8

25.6
39.1
26.0
30.8
29.6

32.7
21.4
36.6
43.1
33.6

34.6
31.1
30.7
38.8
38.0

30.1
28.5
..
23.7
..

25.0
19.2
32.5
37.9
33.1

24.5
16.3
26.4
19.7
..

12.6
13.7
28.7
27.2
20.0

27.5
14.1
31.4
21.0
22.9

14.1
27.0
27.6
15.4
13.2

26.0
24.1
27.0
36.0
35.5

22.0
34.5
21.4
25.8
24.0

27.6
14.4
29.9
39.6
27.5

27.4
26.0
25.0
34.2
31.6

23.5
22.6
..
19.4
..

21.3
15.2
28.3
31.1
27.1

5.5
10.2
5.0
6.9
..

16.3
13.2
3.7
4.3
10.4

5.7
14.2
5.9
6.2
6.2

10.8
5.3
4.6
13.9
14.6

5.4
5.4
4.9
2.1
4.5

5.8
2.7
7.5
7.1
6.2

3.7
9.2
3.7
3.2
5.0

4.5
6.7
5.7
3.6
3.0

6.1
5.9
..
7.1
..

8.3
14.4
6.8
10.0
..

18.0
14.3
5.5
6.1
12.2

7.5
14.3
5.2
8.2
8.1

13.6
6.2
6.6
14.8
16.1

6.2
7.5
6.5
3.0
4.4

8.1
3.4
8.4
7.7
6.5

5.8
9.9
4.9
3.1
6.5

4.6
7.1
6.7
4.3
4.0

5.9
6.7
..
9.4
..

6.9
13.8
4.6
4.4
5.0

9.3
14.9
6.4
4.8
6.6

3.4
3.5
6.5
3.5
..

2.2
2.0
7.6
5.2
3.0

4.9
2.3
5.5
3.2
4.7

2.6
5.3
4.9
2.6
2.2

5.7
4.7
5.0
7.2
5.7

5.0
7.3
3.5
5.0
4.9

4.2
3.0
6.0
7.0
6.0

6.2
5.5
5.2
5.7
7.8

4.3
6.2
..
4.9
..

4.1
2.6
5.6
6.3
6.0

2.3
1.6
2.5
1.6
..

1.1
1.1
3.0
2.9
1.9

2.7
1.2
3.7
1.9
2.3

1.3
2.5
2.7
1.3
1.2

2.3
2.2
2.6
5.0
4.1

1.9
4.5
2.0
2.4
2.2

2.9
1.2
3.2
5.3
2.9

2.7
2.2
2.4
3.8
3.6

2.1
2.0
..
1.8
..

2.0
1.4
2.7
3.2
2.8

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

153

5 Demographic

trends

Total population

1975

(millions)
2002 b

2015 b

Annual 
population
growth rate
1975-
2002 2002-15 b

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
33.4
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories 1.3
4.1
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
0.7
0.3
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

7.5
14.0
16.0
0.2
3.3

134.4
48.0
3.8
4.8
3.0

3.4
1.4
2.5
25.8
39.3

6.0
0.6
0.1
0.2
17.3

0.9
620.7
0.8
0.1
7.1

9.9
30.2
2.9
1.2
3.0

0.3
0.5
75.2
16.7
13.4
7.6

70.3
2.3
1.5
1.1
10.8

6.1
13.6
6.9
7.9
54.9

68.1
3.4
6.4
0.8
0.5

17.4
25.7
31.3
0.5
5.1

217.1
80.3
4.3
8.6
6.8

6.2
2.6
5.3
44.8
70.5

12.0
1.3
0.2
0.5
30.1

81.4
5.3
7.6
0.8
0.6

23.0
30.7
38.1
0.7
5.9

250.4
94.7
4.2
10.8
8.8

7.3
3.1
7.0
44.3
90.0

16.2
1.6
0.2
0.6
36.5

2.0
1,049.5
1.8
0.2
13.8

2.2
1,246.4
1.7
0.3
18.4

20.5
48.9
5.6
2.2
5.5

0.7
1.1
143.8
32.9
24.6
15.7

149.9
4.8
3.6
1.8
25.0

12.8
31.5
19.3
16.9
120.9

26.4
55.8
7.2
3.0
7.3

1.0
1.1
181.4
41.4
32.0
18.9

204.5
6.4
5.2
1.7
39.3

13.0
36.9
30.7
24.0
161.7

2.6
3.7
1.6
0.1
1.8

3.1
2.3
2.5
2.8
1.6

1.8
1.9
0.4
2.2
3.0

2.2
2.1
2.8
2.0
2.2

2.6
2.9
2.4
3.2
2.0

2.8
1.9
2.8
2.7
2.5

2.7
1.8
2.5
2.3
2.2

3.2
2.7
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.7

2.8
2.8
3.2
1.7
3.1

2.7
3.1
3.8
2.8
2.9

1.4
3.3
1.3
(.)
1.8

2.2
1.4
1.5
2.5
1.2

1.1
1.3
-0.1
1.7
2.0

1.2
1.4
2.1
-0.1
1.9

2.3
1.8
2.3
2.5
1.5

0.9
1.3
-0.3
2.2
2.2

1.9
1.0
1.9
2.5
2.1

2.6
(.)
1.8
1.8
2.0
1.4

2.4
2.2
2.8
-0.4
3.5

0.1
1.2
3.6
2.7
2.2

Urban population

(% of total) a

Population under  Population age
65 and above

age 15

Total fertility rate
(births per woman)
2015 b 1970-75 c 2000-05 c

1975

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

(% of total)

(% of total)

45.8
59.6
41.5
30.0
21.4

45.1
39.1
40.3
27.1
37.9

19.3
18.9
35.8
41.3
32.1

35.5
48.7
48.9
48.0
43.5

36.7
40.0
27.3
9.1
37.8

20.6
21.3
12.8
15.7
10.3

30.1
23.9
11.9
3.5
11.1

21.2
14.0
9.9
18.9
5.0
26.9

26.4
16.3
34.8
10.8
8.3

19.6
12.9
14.8
16.4
23.4

65.9
70.8
59.3
37.1
55.1

50.1
36.8
58.3
47.1
34.0

44.5
25.2
45.9
62.9
45.2

25.0
56.7
56.9
56.5
42.1

45.9
83.1
37.7
16.2
56.8

31.9
28.1
51.1
22.4
18.0

45.0
28.9
13.2
8.2
20.2

34.4
23.4
23.9
38.0
14.6
50.6

33.7
34.5
53.1
17.8
12.2

34.5
38.2
25.3
26.3
45.9

73.9
75.6
64.2
44.2
64.8

52.4
37.0
65.3
58.2
35.4

57.8
32.4
50.0
69.0
51.3

24.4
59.5
62.8
62.7
44.9

51.9
89.1
40.3
20.9
64.8

39.8
32.2
57.5
28.6
26.1

51.1
37.6
14.5
12.6
27.4

43.0
27.0
29.6
49.3
20.5
59.9

39.5
43.3
59.3
21.0
14.2

41.4
51.8
31.3
30.7
55.5

32.6
46.1
35.1
30.0
39.9

38.3
34.5
33.5
43.6
32.6

29.9
31.7
21.2
39.0
40.7

37.4
33.2
41.9
33.2
35.2

43.0
41.0
40.2
42.9
31.8

43.2
33.3
39.8
40.6
41.9

40.1
32.3
41.2
41.8
42.0

42.3
43.7
38.3
39.7
40.2
42.4

41.5
43.9
46.8
39.9
50.1

43.1
42.1
48.7
44.6
44.6

26.8
42.1
29.4
25.5
32.6

32.2
26.2
27.4
43.0
26.4

25.3
25.3
16.5
32.8
33.5

28.5
26.6
34.9
29.2
31.7

37.4
35.0
36.4
36.5
27.9

37.5
27.7
37.4
34.9
37.4

34.9
26.8
34.0
37.8
36.8

38.5
39.7
31.9
34.8
35.6
37.8

38.1
40.3
46.2
38.2
49.7

39.6
36.5
47.2
41.7
40.6

4.5
3.4
5.3
5.1
4.4

3.0
4.9
4.2
3.9
6.3

5.1
5.4
9.7
4.4
3.6

4.8
3.8
3.1
3.9
4.6

3.6
4.6
4.5
2.6
4.4

3.7
5.1
2.7
3.4
2.9

3.3
4.6
2.4
4.3
3.5

2.4
3.3
3.2
3.5
3.7
3.7

3.7
3.1
2.9
4.7
2.6

3.4
2.9
2.3
3.0
3.1

4.9
3.0
6.5
6.6
3.5

3.6
5.0
4.9
3.6
5.9

6.4
5.5
10.9
5.3
4.5

4.6
4.1
3.8
6.0
5.4

3.9
4.3
3.8
3.4
5.1

4.6
6.3
4.5
4.0
3.6

4.1
5.9
2.8
4.5
3.7

3.0
4.6
3.8
4.4
4.2
4.1

4.0
3.5
2.8
5.4
2.3

4.2
3.4
2.2
3.1
3.4

6.4
7.7
6.1
4.9
7.0

7.5
6.3
7.4
5.7
4.7

5.2
6.7
2.6
6.5
7.1

6.8
7.3
6.8
5.4
5.7

6.5
5.3
5.4
7.2
6.9

6.6
5.4
6.7
6.1
5.5

6.9
5.8
6.1
5.9
6.2

7.1
6.9
6.2
6.7
5.8
6.3

6.3
7.1
6.3
5.7
7.1

7.6
8.1
8.4
6.6
6.9

2.3
5.6
2.9
2.3
3.3

3.3
2.4
2.8
5.9
2.6

2.4
2.3
1.4
3.8
3.7

3.1
2.4
3.7
2.6
3.3

4.4
4.0
4.0
4.4
2.7

4.6
3.0
3.7
4.1
4.8

4.1
2.9
4.1
5.0
4.8

4.9
4.5
3.5
4.4
4.3
4.6

5.1
5.3
6.3
3.8
7.1

3.9
4.0
7.0
5.7
5.4

154

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

5 Demographic

trends

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

1.4
4.9
0.2
0.6
2.1

4.8
0.7
4.4
4.1
3.0

16.2
6.8
5.1
5.2
6.2

4.1
23.9
2.1
33.1
10.6

0.7
3.7
6.3
6.1
4.8
2.9

2.8
8.2
0.7
1.4
4.0

9.9
0.7
8.3
8.4
6.6

36.3
16.4
10.7
11.9
13.2

8.3
51.2
3.8
69.0
18.5

1.4
6.6
12.6
12.6
11.5
4.8

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

2,961.2 T 4,936.9 T
700.9 T
296.6 T
1,917.6 T
530.2 T
1,480.3 T
641.0 T
408.9 T
1,148.1 T
911.6 T

353.7 T
143.4 T
1,310.5 T
317.9 T
842.1 T
305.8 T
366.6 T
925.6 T
766.2 T

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

972.3 T

1,201.3 T
2,678.4 T 4,165.2 T
755.8 T

354.5 T

782.0 T
1,847.5 T
1,437.1 T

941.2 T
2,720.7 T
2,560.8 T

Total population

1975

(millions)
2002 b

2015 b

Annual 
population
growth rate
1975-
2002 2002-15 b

Urban population

(% of total) a

Population under  Population age
65 and above

age 15

(% of total)

(% of total)

Total fertility rate
(births per woman)
2015 b 1970-75 c 2000-05 c

4.0
9.7
0.8
1.9
5.9

13.2
1.1
10.6
11.2
9.1

45.9
19.8
12.7
15.2
19.3

12.1
74.2
4.6
93.8
22.5

2.1
9.8
19.0
18.6
18.3
6.4

5,868.2 T
941.9 T
389.7 T
2,124.6 T
622.5 T
1,805.3 T
843.1 T
398.4 T
1,227.7 T
962.9 T

1,282.0 T
4,759.1 T
1,021.6 T

997.7 T
3,027.9 T
3,169.0 T

2.5
1.9
4.3
3.4
2.4

2.7
0.3
2.3
2.7
2.8

3.0
3.3
2.8
3.0
2.8

2.6
2.8
2.3
2.7
2.1

3.0
2.2
2.6
2.7
3.3
1.8

1.9
2.5
2.7
1.4
1.9
2.1
2.7
0.4
0.8
0.6

0.8
1.6
2.8

0.7
1.4
2.1

1975

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

2015 b

2002 b

2.7
1.3
1.5
2.2
3.0

2.2
2.8
1.9
2.3
2.5

1.8
1.5
1.3
1.9
2.9

2.9
2.8
1.4
2.4
1.5

2.9
3.1
3.1
3.0
3.6
2.3

1.3
2.3
2.1
0.8
1.2
1.5
2.1
-0.2
0.5
0.4

0.5
1.0
2.3

0.4
0.8
1.6

1.1

20.3
21.7
61.6
17.0
12.7

34.2
8.9
4.0
16.3
21.9

10.1
32.1
34.8
7.7
17.4

15.6
29.5
33.7
9.5
8.7

16.0
3.2
16.2
6.3
10.6
21.4

26.4
14.7
41.7
20.4
61.2
21.3
21.0
56.8
67.3
69.9

68.9
28.1
19.4

70.1
35.7
20.7

37.2

60.5
36.9
83.3
26.1
19.5

48.9
7.6
16.6
34.2
43.8

34.4
44.4
35.4
15.9
34.9

24.5
31.2
42.2
15.4
34.5

33.2
9.6
31.6
17.4
21.6
38.1

41.4
26.1
54.2
40.2
76.2
29.6
35.0
62.8
75.7
77.3

77.1
42.2
32.4

77.8
52.8
31.2

47.8

73.9
45.5
87.6
27.8
26.5

57.9
9.5
40.5
44.2
53.5

46.8
51.0
40.8
22.2
44.9

31.1
39.7
50.3
19.8
48.5

43.5
14.6
40.9
23.2
29.7
47.6

48.6
33.4
58.8
51.0
80.8
34.3
42.4
63.7
79.0
80.4

80.3
49.3
39.9

80.9
61.0
37.5

53.5

43.2
39.1
43.0
40.9
45.5

43.5
39.3
45.2
44.0
45.6

45.3
41.8
46.5
46.2
47.5

46.7
46.8
43.1
45.7
44.0

47.1
46.9
49.2
48.9
50.0
44.2

32.2
42.9
37.1
25.8
31.1
34.8
44.3
19.5
20.2
18.2

20.0
29.3
44.6

18.3
26.3
37.0

29.4

41.7
35.1
40.3
36.6
41.7

39.0
30.2
43.5
41.5
42.1

40.2
37.3
44.7
44.9
47.9

46.5
47.2
40.4
43.1
41.2

46.9
45.8
48.7
47.7
49.7
44.1

28.2
40.1
33.5
21.4
26.3
29.6
41.9
16.3
17.9
16.5

17.8
24.8
42.1

16.6
22.3
32.8

26.1

3.3
3.9
3.2
3.5
2.1

2.4
2.8
2.5
2.9
2.7

2.3
3.2
3.0
3.5
2.7

3.1
2.6
4.0
2.9
3.2

3.1
2.9
2.4
2.7
2.0
2.9

5.2
3.1
3.7
6.5
5.6
4.7
3.0
12.2
13.3
14.8

13.4
6.0
3.0

14.6
7.0
4.3

7.1

3.5
4.5
3.8
4.4
2.4

2.7
3.8
2.9
3.1
2.8

2.7
3.9
3.2
3.6
2.6

2.8
2.6
4.0
3.2
3.5

2.8
2.5
2.1
2.4
1.9
3.0

6.4
3.3
4.3
8.4
7.3
5.6
3.3
13.2
16.0
18.0

16.2
7.4
3.2

17.7
8.6
5.0

8.3

6.5
5.8
7.2
6.5
6.5

7.0
6.2
8.3
7.0
7.1

6.8
7.4
7.8
7.4
6.6

6.7
6.5
5.7
6.8
6.6

7.1
6.8
7.1
7.8
8.1
6.5

5.4
6.6
6.7
5.0
5.1
5.6
6.8
2.5
2.5
2.2

2.5
4.9
6.8

2.2
4.5
5.9

4.5

5.8
4.0
5.7
4.7
5.4

5.0
3.8
5.7
5.8
5.7

5.1
4.7
5.6
6.1
7.2

6.7
6.7
4.9
6.1
5.6

7.1
6.8
7.0
6.7
8.0
6.5

2.9
5.1
3.8
2.0
2.5
3.3
5.4
1.4
1.8
1.7

1.8
2.4
5.6

1.7
2.1
3.7

2.7

4,068.1 T e 6,225.0 T e 7,197.2 T e 1.6

a. Because data are based on national definitions of what constitutes a city or metropolitan area, cross-country comparisons should be made with caution. b. Data refer to medium-variant projections. c. Data refer to es-
timates for the period specified. d. Population estimates include Taiwan, province of China. e. Data refer to the total world population according to UN 2003. The total population of the 177 countries included in the main
indicator tables was estimated to be 4,063 million in 1975, and projected to be 6,217 million in 2002 and 7,188 million in 2015.
Source: Columns 1-3, 13 and 14: UN 2003; column 4: calculated on the basis of columns 1 and 2; column 5: calculated on the basis of columns 2 and 3; columns 6-8: UN 2004h; columns 9 and 10: calculated on the
basis of data on population under age 15 and total population from UN 2003; columns 11 and 12: calculated on the basis of data on population ages 65 and above and total population from UN 2003. 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

155

MDG
Births

MDG

Population with

attended
by skilled Physicians
health

(per 
100,000
people)
1990-
2003 c

. . . TO LEAD A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE . . .

6 Commitment to

health:
resources, access
and services

MDG

Oral

HDI rank

2001

2001

2001

Health expenditure

Public

Private

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

Against

Against
Per capita tuberculosis measles
(PPP US$)

(%)
2002

(%)
2002

One-year-olds
fully immunized

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

6.9
7.5
6.2
6.8
5.7

6.4
7.6
6.2
6.2
4.9

6.3
6.2
5.3
5.6
5.4

7.3
7.0
6.4
8.1
5.4

6.3
6.0
..
5.2
1.3

6.4
6.3
2.7
4.3
3.9

6.0
6.7
2.5
5.1
4.1

4.3
4.4
5.1
3.2
2.9

4.2
5.1
2.9
3.0
4.9

5.1
2.3
7.3
2.6
3.4

1.2
1.3
3.0
2.8
3.3

2.5
1.6
7.7
1.8
1.6

4.7
1.4
1.7
2.5
0.6

2.3
1.5
1.9
2.7
2.2

2.1
2.7
..
4.1
2.6

2.9
2.1
3.3
2.2
4.3

2.8
0.6
0.6
4.4
1.9

1.2
1.7
1.7
1.6
1.3

1.8
0.6
3.9
0.8
2.3

5.9
0.8
1.6
0.8
3.1

2,920
2,270
2,532
2,792
2,612

2,481
2,643
4,887
2,131
1,935

3,322
1,989
1,845
2,259
2,905

2,567
2,503
1,724
2,820
1,607

2,204
1,839
..
1,522
993

1,618
1,545
948
940
941

813
1,129
638
1,130
770

562
629
914
576
664

478
681
792
612
562

971
782
726
921
509

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
90

..
..
99
..
..

83
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
88
98

82
98
89
..
..

..
97
99
99
99

99
95
99
99
..

99
98
94
..
91

99
99
99
98
99

88
94
94
96
96

75
88
91
98
73

79
83
96
78
91

85
99
85
89
97

70
95
..
88
91

87
94
97
92
86

65
..
99
97
98

95
98
99
99
99

98
99
95
99
94

92
99
95
94
98

rehydration

therapy
use rate

(%)
1994-
2002 c

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

Contra-
ceptive

prevalence

rate a
(%)
1995-
2002 c

..
..
..
75
..

..
..
76
56
..

82
84 e
..
51
..

..
..
75
..
81

60
..
..
..
62

..
..
81
..
..

..
72
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
62

47
..
..
50
..

..
43
..
28
48

personnel

(%)
1995-
2002 c

100 d
100 d
100
98
100

100 d

..
99
100
100

..
99
100 d
100 d
100 d

99 d
100 d
100
100 d

..

..
99 d
..
..
100

100
100 d
100
91
100

98 d
99
99
98
..

..
99 d
..
99
98

..
..
100
98
98

100
98
100
96
100

sustainable
access to
affordable
essential
drugs b

(%)
1999

95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100

95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100

95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100

95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100

95-100
95-100
..
95-100
95-100

95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100
95-100

95-100
80-94
95-100
50-79
80-94

95-100
80-94
95-100
50-79
95-100

80-94
95-100
80-94
95-100
95-100

50-79
95-100
95-100
95-100
80-94

367
287
247
187
328

419
352
279
202
239

350
164
311
323
254

330
366
219
363
329

607
375
160
438
140

318
219
180
137
269

291
342
99
304
132

313
220
355
117
169

403
326
115
160
160

387
220
238
177
291

156

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

6 Commitment to

health:
resources, access
and services

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Public

Private

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

2001

2001

3.2
6.2
2.7
1.7
3.4

3.9
3.7
1.6
2.1
5.8

4.8
4.8
3.4
2.0
2.4

2.8
5.7
3.8
5.2
2.9

2.9
3.2
3.6
2.4
4.7

2.1
3.4
1.9
2.9
3.4

2.7
3.2
1.5
5.6
2.6

3.0
3.8
3.6
3.1
4.5

1.1
4.9
3.8
2.0
4.3

1.8
1.4
2.2
2.4
2.3

2.4
1.0
3.4
2.2
2.2

0.9
1.7
1.3
1.8
1.0

2.2
0.7
2.1
1.4
1.3

4.8
3.8
2.3
1.4
1.4

1.6
4.4
1.9
0.6
1.0

1.6
1.2
1.2
4.0
8.8

1.3
4.6
1.8
1.1
2.1

1.1
2.2
1.5
4.9
5.0

0.5
1.6
1.5
3.4
1.7

1.9
2.2
3.9
2.9
2.3

2001

1,220
229
544
388
614

303
454
239
345
331

458
464
223
323
150

268
398
386
460
176

272
573
356
343
199

254
591
204
253
673

224
273
169
263
231

245
358
294
332
412

48
463
445
224
312

122
108
353
278
177

..
99
99
..
..

98
97
99
99
91

92
99
99
87
94

91
..
90
99
98

95
99
85
98
98

99
98
99
90
..

99
97
75
98
90

99
90
77
65
..

99
97
..
77
98

99
91
99
97
99

92
98
96
88
99

90
98
91
92
98

79
99
90
84
96

89
73
78
98
99

97
93
89
99
99

94
97
95
86
96

88
91
73
99
95

88
99
82
82
95

97
94
94
79
98

99
73
92
89
80

MDG

Oral

One-year-olds
fully immunized

Health expenditure

Against

Against
Per capita tuberculosis measles
(PPP US$)

(%)
2002

(%)
2002

MDG
Births

MDG

Population with

attended
by skilled Physicians
health

(per 
100,000
people)
1990-
2003 c

rehydration

therapy
use rate

(%)
1994-
2002 c

..
..
..
6
..

..
..
..
..
..

7
..
..
..
48

11
24
10
..
..

..
18
..
88
..

..
..
20
2
30

..
40
28
..
29

31
..
15
..
..

27
..
..
29
..

..
33
22
..
..

Contra-
ceptive

prevalence

rate a
(%)
1995-
2002 c

..
73
67
38
..

42
..
40
..
..

..
50
..
..
58

48
42
..
64
68

..
77
77
24
..

72
32
66
66
61

..
61
47
..
69

62
..
64
57
56

55
..
..
84
..

..
41
65
..
66

personnel

(%)
1995-
2002 c

99 d
100
86
96
100

..
99
94
97
97

90
100
92
99
99

100
85
94
98
100

100
88
86
95
100

99
91
99
95
89

100
97
58
70
59

97
100
81
71
97

84
90
99
76
100

97
96
98
83
69

163
596
156
75
105

344
420
120
68
219

121
450
35
85
137

145
50
200
189
299

58
206
94
137
34

30
153
345
85
274

34
287
115
78
103

300
88
123
49
205

359
70
81
164
49

43
463
190
102
145

sustainable
access to
affordable
essential
drugs b

(%)
1999

80-94
95-100
80-94
50-79
50-79

80-94
50-79
95-100
50-79
50-79

80-94
50-79
95-100
95-100
50-79

80-94
95-100
80-94
80-94
50-79

50-79
0-49
80-94
80-94
95-100

95-100
95-100
50-79
95-100
80-94

95-100
0-49
50-79
50-79
50-79

50-79
80-94
95-100
0-49
95-100

50-79
50-79
95-100
80-94
80-94

95-100
0-49
50-79
80-94
0-49

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

157

MDG

Oral

One-year-olds
fully immunized

MDG
Births

MDG

Population with

attended
by skilled Physicians
health

(per 
100,000
people)
1990-
2003 c

6 Commitment to

health:
resources, access
and services

HDI rank

2001

2001

2001

Health expenditure

Public

Private

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

Against

Against
Per capita tuberculosis measles
(PPP US$)

(%)
2002

(%)
2002

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

2.8
..
3.7
4.2
3.8

2.4
2.7
3.1
1.2
1.9

0.6
1.5
2.9
3.5
3.2

1.0
4.6
3.8
3.6
1.9

2.3
1.7
1.5
4.7
2.0

4.7
0.9
4.4
2.3
1.8

2.8
0.4
3.9
3.6
1.7

1.9
2.3
1.6
0.7
1.5
1.2

1.0
1.4
1.4
4.3
3.4

2.8
1.7
1.6
1.3
0.8

3.6
..
4.3
1.1
0.7

3.0
0.9
1.0
0.8
2.1

1.8
3.7
2.9
1.8
2.9

2.3
1.8
4.0
5.1
2.0

2.5
1.9
0.7
0.3
3.1

2.2
4.2
2.2
1.6
10.0

1.9
1.7
0.5
0.4
1.4

1.2
1.1
2.0
2.8
3.6
2.1

3.0
1.5
0.8
1.2
2.5

3.4
6.2
3.0
0.7
2.6

422
..
376
215
165

427
91
169
106
108

77
134
112
125
153

43
122
158
652
153

199
197
22
133
199

342
80
381
107
184

60
26
144
64
51

29
167
58
39
63
42

85
45
22
101
57

142
114
69
20
31

99
96
92
91
92

99
98
98
73
99

77
97
99
94
94

98
98
84
94
98

96
89
99
76
90

83
81
99
90
63

91
80
71
83
65

90
95
95
48
85
77

67
84
51
83
96

80
91
74
73
54

99
94
93
95
85

98
97
81
51
98

76
96
94
79
97

84
98
98
78
97

92
55
85
78
96

68
67
90
44
52

81
75
71
78
55

71
72
77
49
71
62

57
58
37
70
77

58
78
65
61
40

rehydration

therapy
use rate

(%)
1994-
2002 c

..
43
..
7
..

..
19
24
..
13

5
20
19
40
..

20
32
18
..
..

15
..
25
..
..

8
..
..
..
..

22
11
..
..
20

22
7
49
13
11
23

19
15
13
10
..

50
30
..
30
24

Contra-
ceptive

prevalence

rate a
(%)
1995-
2002 c

73
..
60
37
53

..
67
64
..
60

57
78
62
53
62

34
67
69
56
56

38
33
29
..
50

..
48 f
40
..
24

22
33
26
..
32

26
28
54
..
39
19

28
26
..
30
23

54
39
21
19
15

personnel

(%)
1995-
2002 c

90
97
90
86
89

76 d
96
92
65
98

64
70
99
69
56

71
97
67
84
61

41
86
79
85
40

78
43
94
89
32

44
56
53
24
19

62
70
12
86 d
11
60

20
49
..
60
39

73
44
22
46
42

110
84
126
26
17

142
293
85
25
272

16
54
271
76
87

212
278
62
25
218

109
..
47
13
49

29
51
29
12
16

9
30
6
5
61

7
15
23
16
5
7

68
6
25
7
5

6
14
22
9
27

sustainable
access to
affordable
essential
drugs b

(%)
1999

80-94
..
80-94
0-49
80-94

80-94
50-79
95-100
0-49
50-79

80-94
80-94
50-79
50-79
0-49

0-49
50-79
0-49
80-94
80-94

50-79
0-49
0-49
80-94
50-79

80-94
0-49
80-94
..
0-49

0-49
50-79
80-94
80-94
50-79

80-94
95-100
50-79
0-49
0-49
50-79

50-79
50-79
50-79
80-94
50-79

50-79
0-49
50-79
50-79
0-49

158

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

6 Commitment to

health:
resources, access
and services

HDI rank

2001

2001

2001

Health expenditure

Public

Private

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

Against

Against
Per capita tuberculosis measles
(PPP US$)

(%)
2002

(%)
2002

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & the CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

2.6
2.7
4.1
3.2
3.7

2.8
5.8
3.1
1.9
2.1

2.1
1.0
3.0
2.7
2.8

2.0
1.5
2.3
1.4
4.0

3.2
2.1
1.7
1.8
1.4
2.6

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

1.0
2.4
2.9
3.3
2.0

2.0
4.0
2.5
1.6
2.4

2.3
5.2
2.7
5.1
1.6

0.6
1.9
2.2
2.1
1.9

2.7
1.5
2.7
1.2
2.3
1.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

45
56
90
78
36

63
..
44
61
39

26
127
52
39
70

17
12
58
14
47

37
19
30
27
22
26

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

98
71
52
99
91

70
83
99
71
94

88
66
92
78
82

67
55
70
76
78

70
84
73
72
47
70

80
76
86
79
95
81
73
97
..
..

..
84
71

..
87
77

81
53
62
90
84

54
47
69
54
78

89
56
85
69
74

55
45
35
52
58

47
75
33
46
48
60

72
62
82
79
91
68
58
96
90
90

92
78
57

90
86
64

81 g

75 g

MDG

Oral

One-year-olds
fully immunized

MDG
Births

MDG

Population with

attended
by skilled Physicians
health

(per 
100,000
people)
1990-
2003 c

rehydration

therapy
use rate

(%)
1994-
2002 c

..
..
..
27
30

33
7
4
21
35

21
25
28
..
7

36
11
34
..
27

13
10
22
37
38
29

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

Contra-
ceptive

prevalence

rate a
(%)
1995-
2002 c

8
27
..
10
8

13
..
13
6
19

25
15
34
31
6

8
31
28
8
6

8
16
8
12
14
4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

personnel

(%)
1995-
2002 c

57
24
..
55
21

58
24
31
35
66

36
63
43
56
45

16
61
44
6
44

35
25
41
31
16
42

55
33
67
73
83
37
42
97
95
99

97
62
35

99
80
41

58 g

sustainable
access to
affordable
essential
drugs b

(%)
1999

50-79
0-49
80-94
80-94
50-79

50-79
..
0-49
80-94
50-79

50-79
80-94
50-79
0-49
0-49

0-49
..
50-79
50-79
50-79

0-49
0-49
50-79
50-79
50-79
0-49

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

14
25
13
4
5

10
..
2
13
10

4
9
7
..
5

3
7
4
3
2

17
1
4
4
3
9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

a. Data usually refer to married women ages 15-49; the actual age range covered may vary across countries. b. The data on access to essential drugs are based on statistical estimates received from World Health Orga-
nization (WHO) country and regional offices and regional advisers and through the World Drug Situation Survey carried out in 1998-99. These estimates represent the best information available to the WHO Department
of Essential Drugs and Medicines Policy to date and are currently being validated by WHO member states. The department assigns the estimates to four groupings: very low access (0-49%), low access (50-79%), medium
access (80-94%) and good access (95-100%). These groupings, used here in presenting the data, are often employed by the WHO in interpreting the data, as the actual estimates may suggest a higher level of accuracy
than the data afford. c. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. d. Data refer to a year or period other than that specified, differ from the standard definition or refer to only part of a country.
e. Excluding Northern Ireland. f. Excluding the state of Tripura. g. Data refer to the world aggregate from UNICEF 2003b.
Source: Columns 1-3: WHO 2004b; columns 4-6 and 8: UNICEF 2003b; column 7: UN 2004g; column 9: WHO 2004d; column 10: WHO 2004a.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

159

7 Water,

sanitation 
and nutritional
status

. . . TO LEAD A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE . . .

MDG

MDG

Population with
sustainable access

to improved sanitation

Population with

sustainable access to an
improved water source

(%)

(%)

MDG

Undernourished people

(% of total population)

MDG

Children
under
weight
for age
(% under
age 5)

Children
under
height
for age
(% under
age 5)

Infants
with low

birthweight

(%)

HDI rank

1990

2000

1990

2000

1990/92 a

1999/2001 a

1995-2002 b

1995-2002 b

1998-2002 b

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

..
100
100
100
100

..
..
100
..
..

100
100
100
100
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
100

..
..
..
..
100

100
..
..
82
..

..
..
99
..
..

..
..
97
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
100
100
100
100

..
..
100
..
..

100
100
100
100
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
100

..
..
63
100
100

100
..
..
..
..

..
..
99
96
..

..
100
96
..
93

94
..
..
..
..

100
100
100
100
100

..
..
100
..
..

100
100
100
100
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
100

..
100
..
..
100

100
..
..
94
..

..
..
99
..
..

..
..
90
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

100
100
100
100
100

..
..
100
..
..

100
100
100
100
..

..
100
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
100

..
100
92
100
100

100
..
..
..
..

..
..
99
98
..

..
100
93
..
95

98
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
8
22
7

6
..
..
4
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

4
..
..
..
..

..
5
4
4
6

3
..
12
..
6

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
1 c
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
14 c

..
..
..
6 c
..

..
1 c
..
5
6 c

..
..
2 c
..
9

..
..
1
10
5

5
6
1
14
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
2 c
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
11 c

..
..
..
7 c
..

..
2 c
..
12
5 c

..
..
3 c
..
10

..
..
2
24
6

8
8
1
17
..

5
4
7
6
..

8 c
4
8
8
6

6
8
4
7
8

7
5
6
7
6 c

6
8
..
8
8

8
6
4
10 c
..

6
7
10
7
..

4
6
9
9
8

4
7
5
7
7

8
10
6
15 c
5

160

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

7 Water,

sanitation 
and nutritional
status

MDG

MDG

Population with
sustainable access

to improved sanitation

Population with

sustainable access to an
improved water source

(%)

(%)

MDG

Undernourished people

(% of total population)

MDG

Children
under
weight
for age
(% under
age 5)

Children
under
height
for age
(% under
age 5)

Infants
with low

birthweight

(%)

HDI rank

1990

2000

1990

2000

1990/92 a

1999/2001 a

1995-2002 b

1995-2002 b

1998-2002 b

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

..
..
70
99
..

..
..
97
..
..

..
..
..
100
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
71
83
84
..

79
..
..
99
..

..
..
74
..
60

..
..
87
93
98

..
76
..
29 d
..

85
..
66
..
70

100
98
74
99
95

100
..
97
..
..

92
..
..
99
91

..
93
68
53
99

89
76
86
92
99

96
100
99
99
99

43
..
83
56
71

..
96
90
94
99

81
84
97
40
83

94
100
67
50
86

..
..
80
91
..

..
..
71
..
..

..
..
..
100
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
83
94
37
..

80
..
..
93
..

..
..
87
..
74

..
..
79
63
97

..
75
..
71
..

68
..
83
..
71

97
91
88
90
91

100
99
72
..
..

90
100
100
100
97

..
82
83
58
98

98
87
91
39
99

84
95
91
92
100

47
..
86
100
80

..
93
82
78
96

78
80
95
75
97

77
79
86
92
85

..
8
5
13
..

..
..
..
3
..

20
..
..
6
..

..
13
11
..
..

..
12
17
..
..

28
4
..
14
3

..
..
26
..
40

..
..
..
18
4

..
..
..
17
..

29
..
27
..
8

..
11
5
12
..

16
4
..
..
10

26
3
..
5
4

8
11
18
..
4

..
9
13
..
..

19
3
22
9
3

..
51
22
..
11

7
..
3
13
6

21
..
..
11
..

25
26
25
..
4

..
4
8
7 c
10 c

..
3
5
12
6

7
..
..
15
14

4
13
5 c
6 c
3

14 c
6
7
24
..

19 c
14
4
6
3

8 c
3
28
30
7

12
..
8
5
5

7
4
..
11
5 c

29
3
5
6 c
15

..
5
18
5 c
7 c

..
13
15
..
7

14
..
..
10
32

10
10
13 c
8 c
15

11 c
11
14
23
..

16 c
20
10
6
12

3 c
13
30
25
25

22
..
16
11
8

13
12
..
16
6 c

14
12
6
..
27

7
6
9
23
8

10
6
7 c
10
5

10 c
5
0
13
3

4
13
7
9
5

8
10 c
9
8
4 c

9
11 c
8
9
6

10
7
20
22
11 c

6
10
16
9 c
10 c

11
7
9
6
10

22
6
14
6
16

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

161

7 Water,

sanitation 
and nutritional
status

MDG

MDG

Population with
sustainable access

to improved sanitation

Population with

sustainable access to an
improved water source

(%)

(%)

MDG

Undernourished people

(% of total population)

MDG

Children
under
weight
for age
(% under
age 5)

Children
under
height
for age
(% under
age 5)

Infants
with low

birthweight

(%)

HDI rank

1990

2000

1990

2000

1990/92 a

1999/2001 a

1995-2002 b

1995-2002 b

1998-2002 b

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

..
..
73
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

47
29
..
52
61

..
..
76
86
87

70
..
..
..
58

33
16
60
..
..

61
..
82
..
..

98
..
41
58
20
77

36
37
..
..
..

56
80
32
36
53

83
100
82
87
71

90
89
92
53
100

55
47
99
70
75

90
30
85
87
98

81
53
..
34
68

41
28
66
100
17

72
64
82
70
30

98
..
48
62
28
79

62
34
..
49
79

62
87
38
42
54

..
..
66
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

71
55
..
71
83

..
..
70
86
94

76
..
..
..
75

72
68
93
..
..

53
..
40
..
..

88
..
94
67
67
51

83
51
..
..
45

78
45
..
44
53

92
86
77
94
74

80
85
89
44
77

78
77
92
83
88

60
60
77
86
97

92
86
..
71
80

77
84
95
88
30

73
72
42
62
37

96
..
97
75
88
58

90
54
51
78
52

83
57
69
47
62

5
..
12
21
..

5
..
5
..
..

9
27
..
26
23

..
34
30
..
5

16
11
..
..
6

20
25
18
..
43

35
10
25
..
29

..
10
35
31
18
33

26
33
37
27
23

43
44
35
35
13

5
..
14
14
..

4
26
6
..
7

6
19
12
22
20

71
38
29
..
3

25
7
..
..
7

7
21
24
..
38

12
7
27
..
22

..
12
32
25
17
27

19
25
30
25
19

39
37
33
36
8

11
4
12
14
14 c

7
19
6
19
11

26
33
3
10
17

..
13
10
12
11

24
12
13
21 c
9

24
47
13
20 c
45

25
35
35 c
19
40

25
10
48
17
48
21

38
25
14
18
23

13
21
46
33
36 c

15
9
23
11
16 c

18
31
18
39
25

..
36
10
26
29

..
25
20
25
21

46
21
29
27 c
24

24
46
23
19 c
45

26
34
..
40
41

42
30
45
..
51
35

37
22
19
46
39

27
35
52
49
43 c

7
9
13
12
13

6
7
7
13
7 c

10 c
9
5
9
14

15
8
13
15
12

13
14
..
13 c
11 c

16 c
30
10
6
11

11
15
11 c
15
14

25
9
30
31
21
11

19 c
15
..
14
12

11
11
32 c
14
12

162

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

7 Water,

sanitation 
and nutritional
status

MDG

MDG

Population with
sustainable access

to improved sanitation

Population with

sustainable access to an
improved water source

(%)

(%)

MDG

Undernourished people

(% of total population)

MDG

Children
under
weight
for age
(% under
age 5)

Children
under
height
for age
(% under
age 5)

Infants
with low

birthweight

(%)

HDI rank

1990

2000

1990

2000

1990/92 a

1999/2001 a

1995-2002 b

1995-2002 b

1998-2002 b

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

30
23
..
..
..

57
..
..
55
20

84
46
63
73
..

18
..
24
8
..

44
87
70
..
15
..

..
..
..
..
72
22
54
..
..
..

..
..
44

..
..
30

..

33
28
91
37
13

70
..
8
58
23

90
52
78
76
44

29
21
25
12
43

56
88
69
29
20
66

51
44
83
48
77
37
53
..
..
..

..
51
51

..
61
43

61 e

37
53
..
..
..

72
..
..
45
..

38
80
52
49
..

..
..
48
25
..

..
69
55
..
53
..

..
..
..
..
82
72
52
..
..
..

..
..
57

..
..
..

..

37
46
100
62
46

78
..
41
48
63

68
81
64
57
38

27
45
70
24
57

56
78
65
42
59
57

78
62
86
76
86
85
57
93
..
..

..
82
62

..
82
76

82 e

14
65
..
22
..

23
..
43
40
20

35
18
45
49
61

58
31
50
..
69

..
49
25
22
42
46

21
35
13
..
14
26
31
..
..
..

..
19
30

..
..
26

..

10
49
..
27
61

24
..
41
28
16

43
15
50
33
49

34
75
44
42
53

..
70
21
17
34
50

17
37
13
..
11
22
32
10
..
..

..
14
31

..
10
24

..

32
17
18
17
44

23
43
27
23
23

29
21
28
25
31

28
31
24
47
26

25
45
33
34
40
27

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

35
23
26
19
38

25
47
41
26
31

44
25
47
49
45

29
38
39
52
44

30
57
38
37
40
34

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

42
21
..
17
21 c

18
10
9
12
16

13
17
10
16
12

17 c
12
14
15
14 c

22
16
23
19
17
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

a. Data refer to the average for the years specified. b. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. c. Data refer to a year or period other than that specified, differ from the standard definition
or refer to only part of the country. d. Data from the World Bank 2004f. e. Data refer to the world aggregate from UNICEF 2003b.
Source: Columns 1 and 3: UN 2004d, based on a joint effort by the United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization; column 2, 4, 7-9: UNICEF 2003b, based on a joint effort by the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization; columns 5 and 6: FAO 2003.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

163

8 Leading global

health crises
and risks

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

. . . TO LEAD A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE . . .

MDG

Condom use at

last high-risk sex b

(% ages 15-24)

MDG
Malaria
cases c

HIV prevalence a Women
1996-
(% ages 15-49)
2002 h

2003

Men
1996-
2002 h

(per 100,000

people)
2000

MDG

Children under age 5

With fever

treated
bed nets

treated
insecticide- with anti-
malarial
drugs
(%)
1999-
2001 h

With

(%)
1999-
2001 h

0.1 [0.0-0.2]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]
0.1 [0.1-0.2]
0.3 [0.2-0.5]
0.2 [0.1-0.4]

0.2 [0.1-0.3]
0.2 [0.1-0.3]
0.6 [0.3-1.1]
<0.1 [<0.2]
0.1 [0.0-0.3]

0.4 [0.2-0.6]
0.1 [0.1-0.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
0.3 [0.1-0.4]
0.2 [0.1-0.4]

0.4 [0.2-0.7]
0.2 [0.1-0.3]
<0.1 [<0.2]
0.1 [0.1-0.2]
0.7 [0.3-1.1]

0.5 [0.2-0.8]
0.1 [0.1-0.2]
0.1 [<0.2]
0.2 [0.1-0.3]
0.2 [0.1-0.5]

0.4 [0.2-0.7]
<0.1 [<0.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
1.5 [0.4-5.4]
..

0.2 [0.1-0.3]
0.1 [<0.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
0.7 [0.3-1.1]
..

1.1 [0.4-2.1]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]
..
0.2 [0.1-0.3]

0.1 [<0.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
0.3 [0.2-0.5]
..
0.6 [0.3-1.0]

0.3 [0.2-0.5]
..
<0.1 [<0.2]
..
0.6 [0.3-1.0]

..
..
..
72
..

..
..
65
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
33

..
..
..
..
..

..
18
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
18
..
..

..
..
..
..
66

..
..
..
72
..

..
..
65
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
49

..
..
..
..
..

..
17
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
33
..
..

..
..
..
..
69

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
9
..
..

..
..
..
1
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
42

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

MDG

Tuberculosis cases

Per

100,000
people e

2002

Detected

under
DOTS
(%) f
2002

Cured
under
DOTS
(%) g
2001

Prevalence
of smoking d
(% of adults)

Women

2000

Men
2000

5
4
6
5
7

11
3
4
44
13

8
12
10
12
11

14
13
11
8
30

6
9
95
22
44

37
25
138
20
6

5
13
58
61
52

59
36
37
14
68

73
28
20
53
19

37
70
74
26
83

26
59
25
52
54

64
48
87
33
..

..
..
..
41
69

..
..
48
52
..

63
58
51
..
39

94
68
..
24
46

44
57
121
51
60

61
55
39
49
12

62
35
112
..
79

70
39
..
25
78

87
62
66
67
..

64
67
70
75
..

..
..
..
64
..

..
..
9
67
..

40
79
78
..
88

78
82
..
..
92

100
73
56
64
67

64
77
46
..
87

75
87
83
..
72

85
60
..
62
73

32
19
18
23
29

26
..
22
13
31

28
26
20
19
..

30
29
25
31
25

17
24
..
29
3

7
20
5
..
..

..
22
..
34
..

20
25
27
..
..

16
30
18
2
7

14
..
32
1
13

31
19
21
27
37

30
..
26
53
32

39
27
27
30
..

39
32
25
39
42

32
33
..
47
27

30
30
65
..
..

..
36
..
47
..

44
44
44
..
..

51
55
26
30
29

32
..
34
18
49

164

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

8 Leading global

health crises
and risks

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

MDG

Condom use at

last high-risk sex b

(% ages 15-24)

MDG
Malaria
cases c

HIV prevalence a Women
1996-
(% ages 15-49)
2002 h

2003

Men
1996-
2002 h

(per 100,000

people)
2000

MDG

Children under age 5

With fever

treated
bed nets

treated
insecticide- with anti-
malarial
drugs
(%)
1999-
2001 h

With

(%)
1999-
2001 h

3.0 [1.8-4.9]
0.1 [<0.2]
0.3 [0.1-0.4]
3.2 [1.2-8.3]
..

<0.1 [<0.2]
1.1 [0.6-1.9]
0.3 [0.1-0.6]
0.4 [0.2-0.7]
<0.1 [<0.2]

0.9 [0.5-1.5]
0.5 [0.2-0.8]
..
..
..

<0.1 [<0.2]
1.7 [0.5-5.8]
0.7 [0.4-1.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
1.4 [0.7-2.3]

..
0.7 [0.3-1.1]
0.7 [0.4-1.2]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]
..

1.5 [0.8-2.8]
..
0.2 [0.1-0.3]
1.2 [0.6-2.2]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]

0.1 [0.0-0.2]
0.1 [0.1-0.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
..
0.5 [0.3-0.9]

<0.1 [<0.2]
..
<0.1 [<0.2]
0.5 [0.2-0.8]
..

<0.1 [<0.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
..
0.1 [0.1-0.2]
..

<0.1 [<0.2]
0.2 [0.1-0.4]
1.7 [0.9-3.0]
2.4 [0.8-6.9]
0.3 [0.1-0.5]

..
..
57
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
32
29
..
..

..
..
65
38
69

..
..
..
..
19

..
..
..
79
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
0
12
..
..

..
..
57
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
26
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
59
..
..
..

..
..
28
..
69

..
43
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

44
..
48
..
..

..
..
8
1
..

..
1
2
57
..

36
..
..
1 i
..

..
2,954
94
..
..

..
344
250
27
..

130
32
(.)
..
..

..
4
15
..
258

1
..
17
124
3

19
1
..
1
..

1,110
5
6
657
728

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
3
..
..
..

..
..
1
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

1
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

1
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

MDG

Tuberculosis cases

Per

100,000
people e

2002

Detected

under
DOTS
(%) f
2002

60
14
44
19
8

60
181
20
120
54

50
125
41
137
41

65
103
54
189
143

21
94
69
13
44

179
59
149
9
15

43
106
540
46
246

125
41
50
109
6

109
26
8
272
23

73
99
125
55
210

50
91
73
..
92

43
6
..
78
37

88
..
164
25
24

47
..
65
41
..

72
10
9
106
75

73
37
93
68
68

66
28
58
92
84

36
0
..
8
72

43
92
..
27
36

79
50
43
117
31

Cured
under
DOTS
(%) g
2001

64
93
83
..
100

87
67
..
79
88

65
..
92
93
98

98
..
80
78
..

50
67
85
90
77

75
77
78
78
91

85
90
88
97
90

75
80
..
86
86

66
90
..
96
100

80
67
85
66
82

Prevalence
of smoking d
(% of adults)

Women

2000

Men
2000

..
26
18
8
..

24
10
..
4
32

20
5
..
3
18

..
..
39
25
19

..
29
21
2
..

3
1
7
..
35

..
1
11
..
16

1
..
24
6
10

1
8
..
4
..

2
15
17
..
17

..
48
51
42
..

49
63
..
49
40

56
55
..
45
60

..
..
42
62
51

..
38
24
16
..

44
22
60
..
46

..
64
54
..
42

27
..
65
24
48

30
62
..
67
..

26
61
24
..
46

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

165

8 Leading global

health crises
and risks

HDI rank

MDG

Condom use at

last high-risk sex b

(% ages 15-24)

HIV prevalence a Women
1996-
(% ages 15-49)
2002 h

2003

Men
1996-
2002 h

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

0.1 [0.1-0.2]
..
0.7 [0.3-1.1]
2.5 [0.8-7.7]
..

<0.1 [<0.2]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]
0.1 [<0.2]
..
0.1 [<0.2]

0.1 [0.0-0.2]
0.4 [0.2-0.7]
0.2 [0.1-0.3]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]
1.8 [1.0-3.2]

<0.1 [<0.2]
<0.1 [<0.2]
0.2 [0.1-0.3]
[17.8-24.3]
<0.1 [<0.2]

1.1 [0.6-1.8]
8.1 [4.1-15.3]
..
..
0.1 [0.0-0.2]

21.3 [18.2-24.7]
[0.4-1.3]
37.3 [35.5-39.1]
..
2.6 [1.5-4.4]

3.1 [1.9-5.0]
1.2 [0.6-2.2]
0.6 [0.3-1.0]
..
0.1 [<0.2]

..
38.8 [37.2-40.4]
[<0.2]
2.3 [0.7-7.2]
0.3 [0.2-0.5]
6.9 [4.8-9.8]

0.1 [0.0-0.2]
4.1 [2.7-6.4]
4.9 [2.1-11.0]
28.9 [26.3-31.7]
4.1 [2.8-6.6]

24.6 [21.7-27.8]
6.7 [4.7-9.6]
0.1 [0.0-0.2]
1.7 [0.8-2.7]
5.4 [3.6-8.0]

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

MDG

Children under age 5

With fever

treated
bed nets

treated
insecticide- with anti-
malarial
drugs
(%)
1999-
2001 h

With

(%)
1999-
2001 h

..
..
..
8
..

..
..
..
1
..

0
16
..
..
..

2
..
..
..
..

1
..
23
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

9
0
..
0
..
1

..
2
..
..
0

..
3
..
0
..

..
..
..
3
..

..
..
..
49
..

4
7
..
..
..

69
..
..
..
..

..
..
61
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

61
..
..
..
..

63
26
..
50
..
66

..
60
..
..
..

..
65
..
61
..

MDG
Malaria
cases c

(per 100,000

people)
2000

27
..
11
3,074
..

(.)
1
2 i
2,744 j
(.)

920
95
..
378
541

303
..
402
143
(.)

386

2,148 k

..
15,172
(.)

1,502
7
48,704
3,260
476

15,344
224
1,688
285
759

1,930
2,835
40
13,934
33

2,900 k

58

7,701 k
5,880
0 i
46

5,410
545
15,160 i
..
30

MDG

Tuberculosis cases

Per

100,000
people e

2002

Detected

under
DOTS
(%) f
2002

Cured
under
DOTS
(%) g
2001

Prevalence
of smoking d
(% of adults)

Women

2000

Men
2000

37
38
83
157
352

54
134
51
362
164

609
263
233
312
98

169
270
83
366
38

108
307
308
126
100

478
344
338
147
734

371
176
543
205
359

121
769
447
346
271
238

379
688
435
449
550

452
579
145
407
565

60
..
57
11
31

42
24
114
..
45

30
82
19
75
114

3
69
85
96
53

45
73
..
57
83

76
31
73
37
52

41
73
15
31
43

..
31
32
33
64
60

13
6
69
61
47

46
49
49
62
12

84
..
88
90
42

81
76
84
..
81

86
93
66
82
86

..
87
83
65
82

85
49
..
89
87

68
85
78
88
92

42
81
67
93
77

..
36
84
80
88
62

77
55
66
71
56

71
80
80
69
79

3
..
12
..
..

10
9
7
..
16

4
4
18
18
11

..
26
..
11
2

18
..
..
..
2

35
3
..
..
8

4
22
28
..
15

..
2
24
1
29
..

9
..
..
1
17

1
32
29
..
2

27
..
38
..
..

51
49
44
..
60

59
51
46
43
36

..
68
..
42
35

38
..
..
..
35

65
29
..
..
66

28
44
46
..
41

..
25
54
24
48
..

36
..
..
39
52

34
67
60
..
15

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
8
..

..
..
17
20
..

..
33
..
..
..

..
40
75
..
43

20
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
16

..
22
12
..
44

42
14
..
13
21

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
22
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
48
..
..
..

..
51
88
..
..

33
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
52
31

..
41
..
..
62

69
43
..
..
38

166

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

8 Leading global

health crises
and risks

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

MDG

Condom use at

last high-risk sex b

(% ages 15-24)

HIV prevalence a Women
1996-
(% ages 15-49)
2002 h

2003

Men
1996-
2002 h

0.6 [0.3-1.1]
5.6 [2.5-11.9]
..
1.2 [0.3-4.2]
2.7 [0.9-7.3]

0.8 [0.4-1.7]
..
5.1 [3.4-7.6]
3.2 [1.2-8.2]
1.9 [1.1-3.3]

8.8 [6.4-11.9]
7.0 [4.9-10.0]
16.5 [13.5-20.0]
14.2 [11.3-17.7]
3.9 [1.6-9.4]

4.8 [3.1-7.2]
4.2 [1.7-9.9]
13.5 [8.3-21.2]
[3.9-8.5]
12.2 [9.4-15.7]

..
6.0 [4.1-8.8]
1.9 [0.6-5.9]
4.2 [2.7-6.5]
1.2 [0.7-2.3]
..

1.2 [1.0-1.6]
3.4 [2.6-4.8]
0.3 [0.1-0.5]
0.2 [0.1-0.3]
0.7 [0.4-1.0]
0.6 [0.3-1.0]
7.7 [6.3-9.7]
0.6 [0.3-0.9]
0.3 [0.2-0.5]
..

0.3 [0.2-0.5]
0.7 [0.5-1.0]
5.0 [4.0-6.6]

0.3 [0.2-0.5]
0.7 [0.5-0.8]
1.8 [1.2-2.9]

1.1 [0.9-1.5]

..
19
..
..
..

..
..
23
17
19

21
25
33
32
..

3
13
..
17
..

..
..
14
41
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
30
..
..
..

..
..
55
32
34

31
56
42
38
..

2
..
..
30
..

..
..
30
55
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

MDG
Malaria
cases c

(per 100,000

people)
2000

11,150 i
15 i
715 i
17,340 k
3,479

11,925
..
6,510
75,386
10,697 l

1,207 i
12,152
34,204
25,948
8,773

197 i
2,960 i
2,207 m
556 j
18,115

2,421 i
48,098
4,008 k

619

1,693 k

..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

MDG

Children under age 5

With fever

treated
bed nets

treated
insecticide- with anti-
malarial
drugs
(%)
1999-
2001 h

With

(%)
1999-
2001 h

MDG

Tuberculosis cases

Per

100,000
people e

2002

Detected

under
DOTS
(%) f
2002

Cured
under
DOTS
(%) g
2001

Prevalence
of smoking d
(% of adults)

Women

2000

Men
2000

..
..
..
15
..

2
..
5
..
7

2
1
1
3
2

1
1
2
..
..

7
1
..
..
1
2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
12
..
55
4

36
..
13
..
60

53
58
58
27
63

32
45
69
3
..

58
31
..
..
48
61

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

437
392
1,161
325
480

438
734
598
375
131

472
634
588
462
398

388
594
438
508
547

316
531
695
272
386
628

307
449
131
313
92
343
495
132
25
21

26
278
480

22
197
405

257

..
41
45
73
14

54
59
29
54
98

43
25
40
36
91

42
52
49
33
45

43
28
15
18
..
36

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
75
78
71
80

53
73
..
74
79

81
73
75
70
66

..
77
61
76
77

51
80
50
65
..
80

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
9
..
2
..

..
..
4
44
..

12
2
10
9
..

..
6
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
11
..
34
..

..
..
7
60
..

50
42
35
20
..

24
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

a. Data refer to point and range estimates based on new estimation models developed by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Range estimates are presented in square brackets. b. Because of
data limitations, comparisons across countries should be made with caution. Data for some countries may refer to only part of the country or differ from the standard definition. c. Data refer to malaria cases reported to
the World Health Organization (WHO) and may represent only a fraction of the true number in a country. d. The age range varies across countries but in most is 18 and older or 15 and older. e. Data refer to the preva-
lence of all forms of tuberculosis. f. Calculated by dividing the new smear-positive cases of tuberculosis detected under the directly observed treatment, short course (DOTS) case detection and treatment strategy by the
estimated annual incidence of new smear-positive cases. Values can exceed 100% because of intense case detection in an area with a backlog of chronic cases, overreporting (for example, double counting), overdiag-
nosis or underestimation of incidence (WHO 2003). g. Data refer to the percentage of new smear-positive cases registered for treatment under the DOTS case detection and treatment strategy in 2001 that were success-
fully treated. h. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. i. Data refer to 1999. j. Data refer to 1995. k. Data refer to 1998. l. Data refer to 1997. m. Data refer to 1994.
Source: Column 1: UNAIDS 2004; aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the UNAIDS; columns 2 and 3: UNICEF 2003b, based on data from a joint effort by the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), UNAIDS and the WHO; column 4: UN 2004e, based on data from the WHO; columns 5 and 6: UNICEF 2003b; columns 7-9: WHO 2004e; columns 10 and 11: World Bank 2004f, based on data from
the WHO and the National Tobacco Information Online System.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

167

9 Survival:

progress and
setbacks

HDI rank 

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

. . . TO LEAD A LONG AND HEALTHY LIFE . . .

Life expectancy at birth

(years)

1970-75 c

2000-05 c

MDG

Infant mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

MDG

Under-five

mortality rate

Probability at birth of
surviving to age 65 a
Female
Male

(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

(% of cohort)

2000-05 c

(% of cohort)
2000-05 c

MDG
Maternal mortality b
Ratio
Ratio

reported
(per 100,000
live births)
1985-2002 d

adjusted
(per 100,000
live births)

2000

74.4
74.7
71.7
73.2
74.0

71.4
74.3
71.5
73.3
71.3

73.8
72.0
70.7
70.6
70.7

72.4
73.6
71.7
71.0
72.9

72.1
71.6
72.0
72.3
69.5

68.0
69.8
62.6
69.4
71.4

70.6
70.1
68.3
67.1
..

70.5
70.5
69.3
..
63.3

71.3
70.0
63.4
67.0
67.8

68.7
62.1
69.6
62.2
70.1

78.9
80.1
79.2
79.3
78.3

78.8
79.8
77.1
81.6
77.0

79.1
78.2
78.0
78.5
78.4

79.0
76.6
78.3
78.3
79.3

78.7
79.2
79.9
78.3
78.1

76.2
76.3
75.5
77.2
78.3

78.4
75.4
76.3
74.2
..

71.7
73.9
71.9
..
74.0

72.7
73.7
76.1
76.6
78.1

75.3
72.2
74.2
74.7
71.0

13
11
17
19
13

21
13
20
14
20

15
18
13
26
19

18
14
17
22
27

30
24
..
38
22

53
25
43
40
29

25
21
58
59
..

21
32
36
..
55

23
25
78
49
62

48
45
34
61
21

4
3
6
5
5

5
3
7
3
6

5
5
4
5
5

4
4
6
4
4

4
6
..
5
3

5
4
5
12
5

5
4
6
16
12

10
8
8
20
13

8
8
10
9
9

14
11
7
8
17

15
15
20
23
15

29
14
26
21
27

18
23
16
33
26

24
19
20
26
34

33
27
..
54
27

62
29
54
54
33

32
24
78
71
..

26
36
39
..
75

28
29
98
59
83

57
65
42
83
26

4
3
6
7
5

6
4
8
5
6

6
7
5
5
5

6
4
6
5
6

6
6
..
5
4

6
5
5
14
6

5
5
6
19
16

12
9
9
24
16

9
9
12
10
11

15
16
8
9
21

90.8
91.6
90.7
90.1
89.7

90.4
90.7
86.4
93.0
89.0

91.0
89.4
91.1
90.7
89.8

91.0
86.5
88.3
90.2
92.2

91.4
90.5
92.3
91.5
90.5

89.3
88.7
89.0
89.0
90.8

90.2
88.3
87.9
85.3
..

83.7
86.5
82.6
..
84.8

84.9
86.5
86.3
87.2
88.3

85.8
80.3
86.3
86.6
82.8

83.5
86.1
83.8
83.9
83.5

82.5
85.9
78.1
85.0
82.0

82.9
83.2
79.9
81.6
82.7

80.2
79.8
82.6
81.7
82.3

82.4
86.2
84.4
82.3
83.3

77.4
76.2
73.9
82.2
83.9

85.5
74.8
84.8
72.3
..

59.9
68.8
62.7
..
78.1

62.8
68.9
76.8
82.3
81.1

73.2
72.8
71.1
80.0
59.2

6
5
..
..
7

..
..
8
8
6

5
7
6
..
0

10
10
15
8
0

7
5
..
1
6

8
17
20
0
0

..
3
0
41
..

46
4
5
130
46

13
16
23
5
29

26
5
2
3
25

16
2
8
6
16

10
0
17
10
5

7
13
6
4
28

17
5
7
8
4

5
17
..
9
30

5
17
20
95
47

0
9
37
82
..

63
13
16
..
28

13
3
31
5
43

27
7
8
54
42

168

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

9 Survival:

progress and
setbacks

HDI rank 

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Life expectancy at birth

(years)

1970-75 c

2000-05 c

MDG

Infant mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

MDG

Under-five

mortality rate

Probability at birth of
surviving to age 65 a
Female
Male

(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

(% of cohort)

2000-05 c

(% of cohort)
2000-05 c

MDG
Maternal mortality b
Ratio
Ratio

reported
(per 100,000
live births)
1985-2002 d

adjusted
(per 100,000
live births)

2000

66.5
70.7
62.4
65.9
..

71.0
69.7
52.8
63.0
67.5

66.2
71.5
62.6
62.9
67.7

67.5
64.0
65.7
69.2
70.1

65.3
59.5
61.6
52.1
56.1

61.0
53.9
64.4
69.0
65.0

60.6
72.5
58.1
51.4
55.4

60.7
61.6
57.9
65.9
56.5

69.0
55.6
..
63.2
..

65.1
69.2
59.7
67.6
58.8

67.1
76.7
73.4
71.3
..

70.9
66.8
72.8
73.1
73.6

74.7
70.1
68.6
72.0
73.7

74.0
71.1
73.7
70.5
69.7

72.5
68.1
72.2
72.4
70.0

69.3
72.3
66.3
75.7
73.5

69.8
72.4
70.0
67.4
69.8

67.1
74.1
70.5
70.9
71.0

72.2
72.8
..
71.0
..

72.6
73.6
66.7
71.4
70.8

38
34
79
49
..

28
29
105
46
85

46
22
..
64
68

60
..
47
46
22

..
95
69
126
106

74
118
..
49
45

50
..
60
157
115

..
..
150
57
77

..
135
..
85
..

65
36
91
56
87

13
7
24
17
12

14
18
16
8
22

19
17
16
17
26

15
31
19
19
16

17
30
19
11
20

24
23
61
17
28

17
30
29
58
30

76
22
36
26
27

74
21
20
31
13

17
24
32
34
25

49
43
110
57
..

32
36
160
63
120

68
27
..
86
82

82
..
61
57
27

..
135
108
200
160

102
185
..
64
54

61
..
90
255
178

..
..
201
76
107

..
201
..
120
..

100
46
128
77
140

16
9
29
20
14

16
21
19
8
26

25
20
20
19
30

18
40
22
21
20

19
36
23
13
25

28
28
76
20
32

21
35
38
77
39

98
25
42
30
33

105
26
25
39
15

19
29
38
40
29

69.6
85.1
82.1
78.8
..

83.2
78.0
81.5
83.9
84.1

85.1
81.6
73.0
82.4
87.7

85.2
79.6
83.5
81.5
81.1

77.4
76.5
80.8
82.4
78.2

79.9
81.1
76.7
85.4
83.6

75.1
85.4
78.0
69.5
77.0

74.2
84.2
81.0
79.8
77.3

81.3
84.6
..
81.3
..

84.6
85.6
72.0
77.9
78.6

56.8
79.1
71.5
67.5
..

64.9
48.4
73.4
73.3
75.8

76.3
56.4
69.9
66.6
80.1

74.1
68.4
73.2
63.7
56.5

71.2
59.7
70.9
75.4
65.1

62.4
75.7
53.1
78.9
77.2

67.3
70.3
69.9
69.5
68.0

60.6
78.6
71.0
71.4
71.2

68.0
75.2
..
72.7
..

73.5
69.2
62.3
72.5
70.3

..
30
79
70
150

15
37
77
30
15

70
14
..
21
20

10
110
60
34
18

30
160
78
23
..

36
..
50
97
100

38
22
170
350
190

9
93
130
190
41

25
69
1
53
67

92
67
230
140
160

60
33
83
160
..

32
67
97
41
23

160
35
..
24
55

31
110
96
49
35

..
260
130
87
130

44
23
210
87
150

75
55
200
110
410

31
..
70
170
41

94
120
..
56
..

92
32
150
140
130

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

169

9 Survival:

progress and
setbacks

HDI rank 

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Life expectancy at birth

(years)

1970-75 c

2000-05 c

MDG

Infant mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

MDG

Under-five

mortality rate

Probability at birth of
surviving to age 65 a
Female
Male

(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

(% of cohort)

2000-05 c

(% of cohort)
2000-05 c

MDG
Maternal mortality b
Ratio
Ratio

reported
(per 100,000
live births)
1985-2002 d

adjusted
(per 100,000
live births)

2000

55.3
56.6
58.2
60.0
57.5

57.0
64.2
54.5
40.5
63.1

49.2
50.3
64.8
46.7
53.8

63.4
53.8
55.1
53.7
52.1

53.7
48.7
56.5
55.6
52.9

49.9
50.3
56.1
54.0
40.3

49.9
49.3
44.7
43.2
40.4

48.9
47.3
45.2
43.6
43.3
45.7

49.0
45.5
55.0
49.5
46.3

56.0
50.9
39.8
44.9
44.0

70.3
72.4
70.7
63.2
70.2

71.9
69.7
69.7
49.1
68.6

66.8
69.2
68.9
63.9
68.9

68.8
63.9
69.5
47.7
68.8

65.8
56.6
69.9
69.2
68.7

44.3
63.9
39.7
68.8
57.4

57.9
57.3
57.6
63.2
54.5

60.8
34.4
61.4
55.6
59.9
46.2

61.0
49.7
48.2
35.1
46.2

33.1
44.6
60.0
53.6
51.5

122
..
111
81
..

90
..
143
165
111

104
55
46
147
116

78
..
113
..
157

115
..
..
71
119

104
127
99
107
..

112
122
106
156
145

159
132
145
104
165
127

120
128
100
128
100

86
96
194
109
120

35
23
33
54
29

23
52
39
101
52

33
30
27
56
32

53
58
32
52
35

36
60
75
20
39

55
67
80
34
96

57
77
70
74
87

59
106
51
64
66
95

83
79
81
64
82

76
78
79
84
110

191
..
162
101
..

129
..
234
281
146

172
81
61
243
170

111
..
165
..
235

168
..
..
99
184

155
202
142
160
..

190
179
147
267
218

215
196
239
172
250
215

181
216
160
190
170

138
156
303
180
201

42
25
39
72
38

28
68
49
152
61

45
39
32
71
42

72
71
41
65
41

49
91
118
24
43

67
93
110
42
138

100
109
94
94
100

79
149
77
94
91
166

107
141
108
87
141

123
122
107
136
183

79.5
81.6
77.6
67.1
79.5

80.0
76.9
76.9
44.2
77.2

72.5
77.2
76.4
68.0
73.4

75.4
67.4
75.2
37.4
78.0

70.5
52.0
79.1
76.0
77.1

30.8
67.5
21.7
73.1
56.9

55.8
58.9
51.5
66.1
52.9

61.8
15.2
61.1
54.6
57.6
36.8

61.9
42.6
37.5
19.2
33.5

8.3
30.6
60.0
51.5
44.5

71.8
75.1
67.3
54.8
68.1

74.7
65.7
72.8
39.2
61.5

64.2
68.8
60.2
60.0
65.4

66.2
57.6
66.5
24.9
67.9

59.0
48.6
68.9
70.2
69.4

24.7
61.9
17.3
66.3
47.6

50.1
47.7
45.0
61.1
47.8

55.3
11.0
57.9
48.3
56.4
31.7

60.0
36.9
31.1
8.5
30.6

9.2
26.1
54.5
46.7
42.0

37
..
120
190
76

110
34
140
..
44

380
95
44
390
110

45
160
120
150
84

190
520
..
550
230

270
540
330
68
440

210
230
370
260
530

..
230
380
550
540
430

530
480
..
..
510

700
590
350
490
..

76
100
150
170
150

160
24
140
880
110

230
130
36
420
110

100
110
230
230
84

240
420
..
130
220

300
540
100
130
450

540
360
300
420
650

480
370
380
590
740
730

500
570
510
550
880

1,100
1,000
570
550
800

170

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

9 Survival:

progress and
setbacks

HDI rank 

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

Life expectancy at birth

(years)

1970-75 c

2000-05 c

MDG

Infant mortality rate
(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

MDG

Under-five

mortality rate

Probability at birth of
surviving to age 65 a
Female
Male

(per 1,000 live births)
1970
2002

(% of cohort)

2000-05 c

(% of cohort)
2000-05 c

MDG
Maternal mortality b
Ratio
Ratio

reported
(per 100,000
live births)
1985-2002 d

adjusted
(per 100,000
live births)

2000

43.4
48.5
41.0
38.0
44.3

41.8
40.0
44.6
37.3
44.0

46.5
45.4
49.7
41.0
38.0

39.0
45.8
43.0
41.8
41.1

36.5
43.9
38.2
41.2
38.2
35.0

55.5
43.8
51.9
60.5
61.1
49.8
45.2
69.2
70.4
71.6

70.7
57.8
45.0

71.6
62.9
48.7

59.8

52.5
49.5
45.7
54.1
52.7

52.9
49.5
39.3
49.1
50.6

43.3
41.0
32.4
37.5
40.1

44.7
41.8
39.5
45.5
38.1

45.3
40.9
48.6
45.7
46.2
34.2

64.7
50.7
66.4
69.9
70.6
63.3
46.1
69.6
77.2
78.4

77.5
67.3
49.1

78.4
70.1
59.2

66.9

150
148
160
183
..

164
..
124
197
149

129
158
109
189
180

..
148
149
160
163

..
138
225
163
197
206

108
150
128
84
86
129
139
34
40
22

32
102
138

22
85
126

96

120
79
100
91
47

79
89
96
109
93

104
102
108
114
154

117
129
115
114
125

130
114
122
107
156
165

61
99
48
32
27
69
108
18
11
5

9
45
104

5
30
80

56

250
221
241
319
..

279
..
209
345
252

218
239
181
330
300

..
245
248
239
278

..
233
400
290
330
363

166
244
197
122
123
206
231
43
53
28

42
154
225

28
121
202

146

183
123
143
126
89

138
126
183
169
156

165
176
192
183
260

200
205
180
171
197

211
190
222
207
265
284

89
157
62
42
34
95
178
22
14
7

11
61
164

7
37
120

81

50.5
36.1
37.1
51.3
43.7

52.5
44.0
24.1
42.8
47.8

29.2
25.5
10.6
21.3
31.1

36.4
31.4
24.0
35.8
26.3

39.4
26.6
41.0
34.5
39.9
23.5

69.2
44.7
72.5
79.0
78.7
66.4
36.1
80.6
88.1
89.5

88.4
74.3
41.2

89.5
79.5
59.1

72.9

44.4
34.5
33.2
45.8
35.4

40.0
39.1
22.7
40.3
38.8

26.1
24.8
11.3
19.7
26.4

32.4
27.9
21.0
32.3
19.8

33.7
25.1
37.3
32.1
37.6
19.4

62.0
40.7
65.6
70.0
66.5
61.4
32.0
58.8
78.7
80.9

78.9
65.2
38.5

80.9
68.4
54.1

64.4

750
520
74
..
1,000

560
..
1,100
530
500

530
600
650
1,100
..

830
950
1,100
870
1,100

910
..
580
480
590
1,800

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

1,000
680
730
540
630

690
660
1,400
740
850

1,500
690
750
1,800
1,700

1,100
990
1,100
850
1,000

1,100
1,000
1,200
1,000
1,600
2,000

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

a. Data refer to the probability at birth of surviving to age 65, multiplied by 100. b. Annual number of deaths of women from pregnancy-related causes. The reported column shows figures reported by national authori-
ties. The adjusted column shows results of adjusted figures based on reviews by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Health Organization (WHO) and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) to account
for well-documented problems of underreporting and misclassification. c. Data refer to estimates for the period specified. d. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
Source: Columns 1, 2, 7 and 8: UN 2003; columns 3 and 5: UNICEF 2004; columns 4, 6, 9 and 10: UNICEF 2003b. 

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

171

. . . TO ACQUIRE KNOWLEDGE . . .

10 Commitment
to education:
public
spending

Public expenditure on education a
As % of total

As % of GDP

government expenditure

Public expenditure on education by level b

(% of all levels)

Pre-primary
and primary

Secondary

Tertiary

HDI rank

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

7.1
7.4
5.1
6.5
6.0

5.0
5.4
5.2
..
5.2

5.1
4.9
5.6
5.4
3.0

5.4
..
6.2
..
4.4

3.1
6.3
..
2.5
..

4.2
..
3.5
7.8
3.5

4.3
..
..
1.1
7.8

..
..
5.8
2.7
4.2

4.6
5.1
2.5
4.8
4.4

3.0
3.5
..
1.9
3.8

6.8
7.6
4.6
5.2
5.0

5.8 e
6.0 e
5.6
3.6
4.3

5.6
4.6
6.3
5.9
4.1

5.7
8.3
6.6
4.6
4.4

5.0
7.3
4.1
3.8
..

5.8
..
3.6
6.5
5.6

4.9 e
4.4
..

4.6 e
7.5 e

7.4
5.4
5.1
7.7
..

..
4.1
3.9
..
4.7

2.5
..

4.2 e

..
5.9

14.6
13.8
14.8
14.2
14.8

..
..
12.3
..
10.2

18.7
..
11.9
7.6
10.4

..
..
..
..
9.4

..
11.3
..
..
..

..
..
22.4
22.2
11.3

8.3
..
..
10.9
14.8

..
..
7.8
..
14.6

13.8
..
10.4
3.4
20.8

15.9
..
..
14.6
10.8

16.2
..
13.8
..
10.4

11.6
..
15.5
10.5
13.5

..
..
12.2
11.0
8.5 e

11.4
15.3
..
9.9
..

9.5
..
21.9
7.0
..

12.7
..
17.4
16.7
..

..
9.7
9.1 e
13.7 e

..

..
12.2
14.1
14.7
..

..
13.8
17.5
..
21.1

11.8
..
..
..
..

39.5
47.7
2.2
..
21.5

23.3
59.5
..
..
37.8

49.9
29.7
27.9
23.7
..

27.3
..
30.5
..
29.3

33.0
43.0
26.6
34.1
29.6

44.6
..
44.4
37.5
38.5

25.1
..
24.1
3.4
28.2

..
42.8
55.4
..
..

..
..
60.1
53.4
..

37.5
..
..
..
11.2

48.3
33.8
35.4
..
33.7

33.3 e

..
39.2
37.8
30.9

35.3
34.4
27.0
27.0
..

31.2
29.6
30.6
22.8
35.4

33.8
45.2
25.1
30.2
..

35.2
..
42.3
33.4 e
32.6

..
26.4
..

43.3 e

..

44.5
44.8
32.0
28.5
..

..
25.8
51.2
..
50.1

39.2
..
..
51.9
33.3

24.7
19.6
57.4
62.2
37.7

42.9
25.6
..
..
40.1

25.1
43.8
39.4
46.6
..

40.7
..
25.3
..
45.0

63.2
31.3
38.8
45.1
36.5

32.5
..
34.1
37.6
50.3

44.7
..
26.1
44.9
40.7

..
17.5
23.9
..
45.8

..
..
17.3
13.6
..

30.3
..
..
..
56.3

20.6 e
37.7
40.1
..
39.7

45.0 e

..
34.5
39.8
34.1

39.0
48.4
40.0
45.0
..

49.8
36.7
40.1
49.0
41.8

48.7
29.7
32.7
40.7
..

43.0
..
37.3
33.9
50.3

..
50.5
..

35.6 e

..

34.1
38.0
38.8
31.5
..

..
51.3
34.3
..
30.7

31.5
..
..
46.4
48.7

15.2
13.2
32.0
28.6
32.1

16.5
14.9
..
..
20.4

19.7
19.6
23.9
19.1
..

13.8
..
37.4
..
15.4

..
16.2
30.8
19.5
29.3

16.3
..
7.4
19.2
3.8

14.6
..
9.5
46.7
9.5

..
22.0
15.2
..
..

..
..
20.3
16.0
..

22.6
..
..
..
11.6

25.4
28.0
22.9
35.7
26.5

19.2 e

..
26.3
15.1
30.3

23.1
17.2
32.9
24.0
..

17.6
30.0
24.7
24.5
22.8

16.4
17.9
33.2
24.0
..

18.1
..
13.5
29.9
17.1

..
19.3
..

18.4 e

..

16.8
16.0
21.6
21.2
..

..
20.5
14.5
..
19.2

29.2
..
..
..
16.3

172

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

10 Commitment 
to education:
public
spending

Public expenditure on education a
As % of total

As % of GDP

government expenditure

Public expenditure on education by level b

(% of all levels)

Pre-primary
and primary

Secondary

Tertiary

HDI rank

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

4.0
..
3.6
3.6
..

5.2
3.5
..
5.2
..

4.7
4.9
..
3.5
5.8

..
8.1
3.0
2.8
5.2

..
..
2.5
3.1
3.4

3.5
6.5
3.2
4.7
..

4.6
7.0
2.9
4.0
2.2

4.3
6.4
2.2
1.1
8.4

..
6.0
5.1
2.3
..

2.6
..
..
4.7
2.8

..
8.5
5.1
4.0
3.2

..
3.1
2.7
7.9
4.1 e

4.3
6.0
5.0
3.3
..

..
..
..

3.5 e
4.2

7.3 e
4.0
4.4
4.2 e
4.5 e

5.0
..
..
6.3
2.9

5.5 e
3.2
3.2
..
3.3

..
9.3
3.7
4.7 e
4.6

3.5
6.8 e

..
..

5.0 e

1.3
2.5
2.4
6.2
1.0 e

17.8
12.3
12.8
11.6
..

..
..
..
18.3
..

20.9
..
..
11.8
..

..
..
12.0
7.3
19.7

..
..
16.0
11.1
10.7

20.0
17.8
17.6
12.8
..

..
20.5
10.1
10.0
..

21.0
13.8
..
9.1
17.1

23.5
13.5
13.2
12.8
..

8.1
..
..
18.5
17.2

..
16.8
22.6
16.7 e

..

..
10.6
..
20.0
..

7.5 e

..

14.0 e
13.3
..

..
..
..
..
15.0

20.7 e
10.4
18.0 e

..
14.6

31.0
..
..
12.3
11.1

19.4 e

..
..
..
21.1

..

13.4 e

..

11.2 e
20.6

23.1
17.4 e

..
..
..

..
13.1
13.2
20.9
8.0 e

..
25.7
32.3
42.5
..

70.7
..
..
34.3
..

37.0
57.7
..
37.7
..

..
60.5
23.5
52.1
54.9

48.2
..
39.3
54.1
52.6

56.2
78.8
..
37.4
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
58.1
..
..

..
39.8
64.1
..
..

..
..
..
61.0
34.4

..
39.4
48.6
59.6 e
36.9 e

..
..

17.8 e
28.1
..

40.8 e

..
49.2 f
32.0
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
38.7
47.0
36.4 e, f
43.0

42.3
..
..
36.8
..

35.0 e, f

..
60.6
..
..

..
48.9
37.8 e, f
53.9 e
51.7

..

33.3 e, f

..
..

64.4 e

..
..

46.3 e
44.9
45.3 e

..
39.0
29.6
36.8
..

..
..
..
34.4
..

23.3
16.2
..
36.4
..

..
14.5
4.5
22.1
15.0

23.3
..
30.9
37.0
25.2

21.6
..
..
33.2
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
29.4
22.6
62.4

..
36.4
31.7
..
..

84.3
..
..
20.2
34.2

..
36.4
34.4
32.3 e
37.3 e

..
..

14.2 e
34.5
..

33.9 e

..
28.9
38.3
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
37.6
33.1
51.4 e
23.8

20.5
..
..
33.8
..

48.9 e

..
21.9
..
..

..
25.5
30.1
29.0 e
48.3

..

45.0 e

..
..

30.1 e

..
..

18.9 e
35.1
44.5 e

..
14.4
16.5
11.9
..

13.9
..
..
19.9
..

21.3
14.4
..
16.6
..

..
8.8
40.7
9.6
15.1

12.8
..
20.7
7.4
0.0

14.6
21.2
..
21.1
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
25.8
35.1

..
18.5
0.0
..
..

13.4
..
..
8.1
18.3

..
17.1
14.5
3.7 e
15.1 e

..
..
52.7
32.1
..

25.3 e

..
..
15.6
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
21.6
19.9
1.8 e
33.2

21.7
..
..
19.2
..

16.0 e
29.8
13.7
..
..

..
5.2
32.2
17.1 e

..

8.3
21.7 e

..
..
..

..
..
10.9
16.2
9.1 e

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

173

10 Commitment
to education:
public
spending

Public expenditure on education a
As % of total

As % of GDP

government expenditure

Public expenditure on education by level b

(% of all levels)

Pre-primary
and primary

Secondary

Tertiary

HDI rank

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

4.1
..
1.9
3.4
..

4.1
..
5.3
..
8.3

1.0
..
..
2.3
..

9.7
12.1
3.4
6.2
3.7

1.4
..
..
..
5.3

7.6
3.9
6.7
4.6
..

3.2
..
..
..
..

..
5.7
1.5
0.9
2.0
3.2

2.6
5.5
5.0
6.1
1.5

..
6.7
..
2.1
0.9

5.0
..

2.5 e
4.1 e

..

4.0
..
..
0.5
3.1

1.3
..
4.0
6.0
..

2.4
6.5 e

..
5.7
..

1.7
3.9 e

..

3.5 e
5.1

7.9
4.1
2.1
10.5
2.0

4.1 e
1.3
2.3 e
5.2
3.2

..
5.5
2.3
..
3.4
5.4

1.8 e
4.8
3.2
10.0
2.5 e

10.4 e
6.2 e
10.0 e
2.5
..

22.4
..
16.6
4.4
..

17.3
20.4
21.1
..
22.5

..
7.5
..
..
..

24.7
17.6
9.7
..
..

11.8
..
..
..
26.1

..
12.2
17.0
..
..

24.3
..
..
..
..

..
19.5
10.3
2.8
8.5
19.6

7.4
26.4
14.4
12.2
11.5

..
17.0
..
..
..

21.7
..

19.4 e
8.6 e

..

11.1
..
..
1.6
18.6

9.8
..
15.0
18.4
..

..
..
13.8
..
..

11.4
..
..

15.4 e

..

21.0
12.7
25.6
26.7
15.3

..

18.1 e
17.5 e
12.9
10.6

..
..
15.8
..
13.9
22.1

7.8 e
23.2
12.6
18.4
..

..

22.3 e
32.8
..
..

33.2
..
..
..
..

38.5
..
..
..
8.5

..
..
..
..
..

6.9
13.9
..
75.6
..

31.1
..
..
..
34.8

..
38.9
..
59.8
..

29.2
..
..
..
..

42.4
31.2
45.6
..
48.2
70.5

..
30.4
..
..
..

54.1
50.3
..
49.1
..

26.8
..

61.2 e

..
..

..
..
..

39.1 e

..

37.8
..
..
38.1
..

..
..
47.5 f
47.2
..

..

35.6 e

..
..
48.0 f

59.0
38.4
53.2
27.9
75.5

..

46.6 e, f
71.4 e

..
46.9

..
37.7
45.1 f
..
59.2 f
..

..

48.6 e
32.7
49.3
..

..
..
..
48.0 f
..

39.2
..
..
..
..

28.2
..
..
..
57.9

..
..
..
..
..

57.0
48.8
..
..
..

12.9
..
..
..
48.9

..
27.0
..
26.6
..

34.3
..
..
..
..

28.2
24.5
42.2
..
15.7
..

..
25.8
..
..
..

28.6
18.8
..
35.6
..

36.3
..

20.8 e

..
..

39.2
..
..

30.7 e

..

38.8
..
..
19.0
..

..
..
..
31.3
..

..

38.9 e

..
..
51.5

27.2
40.1
23.8
57.4
11.2

..

27.0 e
24.3 e

..
19.0

..
31.1
43.8
..
23.1
..

..
29.3
27.3
27.7
..

..
..
..
33.0
..

13.6
..
..
..
..

21.3
..
..
..
10.0

..
..
..
..
..

9.1
14.5
..
21.5
..

21.2
..
..
..
16.2

..
14.9
..
3.4
..

11.0
..
..
..
..

17.3
26.0
8.7
..
23.3
29.5

..
29.0
..
..
..

12.3
21.6
..
..
..

18.5
..
6.7
..
..

..
..
..

30.1 e

..

23.4
..
..
26.6
..

..
..
..
14.5
..

..

25.5 e

..
..
0.3

12.0
20.3
18.6
10.5
5.0

..
26.4
4.3 e

..
12.6

..
22.4
11.1
..
12.1
..

..
17.4
32.6
16.7
..

..
..
..

11.9 e

..

174

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

10 Commitment 
to education:
public
spending

Public expenditure on education a
As % of total

As % of GDP

government expenditure

Public expenditure on education by level b

(% of all levels)

Pre-primary
and primary

Secondary

Tertiary

HDI rank

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

1990 c

1999-2001 d

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

..
1.4
..
3.8
..

3.9
..
..
..
..

3.2
..
2.4
3.3
3.9

..
..
2.2
3.4
3.9

..
3.4
..
2.7
3.2
..

3.6 e

..
..

2.7 e
2.7

3.2 e

..

2.8 e
1.9 e
3.3 e

..
4.6
1.9
4.1 e
2.8 e

2.0 e

..
..
4.8
2.4 e

2.1
3.6 e
2.8 e

..
2.3
..

..
20.0
10.5
14.6
..

26.9
..
..
..
..

11.4
..
8.7
11.1
10.7

..
..
..
9.4
12.0

..
16.7
..
..
18.6
..

..
..
..

14.2 e

..

..
..
..

25.6 e

..

..
21.5
..
..
..

..
..
..
13.8
..

4.8
20.7 e

..
..
..
..

33.3
53.1
58.0
41.6
..

43.9
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
44.7
96.3

..
..
..
53.9
49.8

..
46.8
..
..
..
..

54.5 e, f

..
..
..
45.8 f

..
..

48.7 e

..

57.4 e

..

42.4 e

..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
38.0
45.7 e

..
49.2 f
..

37.7
19.0
21.7
21.2
..

25.7
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
13.1
..

..
..
..
28.1
15.7

..
29.1
..
..
..
..

31.4 e

..
..
..
10.0

..
..

16.7 e

..

25.5 e

..

32.5 e

..
..
..

25.9 e

..
..
..
..

..
35.0
39.7 e

..
24.5
..

24.9
9.1
11.5
17.8
..

24.0
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
20.2
3.7

..
..
..
12.1
9.9

..
22.0
..
..
..
..

14.1 e

..
..
..
..

..
..

34.7 e

..

16.4 e

..

25.1 e

..
..
..

16.6 e

..
..
..
..

..
26.9
14.6 e

..
16.2
..

Note: As a result of limitations in the data and methodological changes, comparisons of education expenditure data across countries and over time must be made with caution. For detailed notes on the data see http://www.uis.un-
esco.org/.
a. Data refer to total public expenditure on education, including current and capital expenditure. See the definitions of statistical terms. b. Data refer to current public expenditure on education. Data may not be strictly
comparable between 1990 and 1999-2001 as a result of methodological changes. Expenditures by level may not sum to 100 as a result of rounding or the omission of the categories expenditures in postsecondary edu-
cation and expenditures not allocated by level. c. Data may not be comparable between countries as a result of differences in method of data collection. d. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period
specified. e. Data refer to a UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimate where no national estimate is available. f. Data refer to primary school expenditure only.
Source: Columns 1, 3 and 5: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003c; columns 2, 4 and 7-10: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004b; column 6: calculated on the basis of data on public expenditure on education by pre-
primary and primary levels from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004b.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

175

11 Literacy and

enrolment

. . . TO ACQUIRE KNOWLEDGE . . .

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

MDG

MDG

Net primary

Net secondary

MDG

Children

Adult literacy rate a
(% ages 15 and above)
1990

2002

Youth literacy rate a

enrolment ratio b

enrolment ratio b, c

reaching grade 5

(% ages 15-24)
1990
2002

(%)

(%)

1990/91

2001/02 d

1990/91

2001/02 d

(% of grade 1 students)
2000/01 d
1990/91

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
96.3

97.7
91.4
89.7
94.9
88.8

87.2
99.6
95.9
99.4
94.3

88.4
..
85.5
95.7
..

99.8
99.6
99.1
..
82.1

99.3
..
94.0
76.7
93.9

96.5
77.0
96.9
71.0
99.8

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
95.3
..
..
92.5 j

..
99.7
..
99.7
96.8 j

92.6
..
93.9 j
97.0
91.9 j

99.8 j
..
..
..
88.5

99.6 j
99.7 j
95.7 j
82.9
95.8

97.7
84.2 j, k
98.1 j
77.3
99.7 j

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
99.6

99.8
98.7
98.2
99.5
99.0

99.5
99.8
99.8
99.8
99.7

97.5
..
97.9
98.2
..

99.8
99.8
99.7
..
95.6

99.8
..
98.1
87.5
97.4

98.7
90.3
99.6
84.7
99.8

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
99.5
..
..
99.5 j

..
99.8
..
99.8
99.8 j

98.7
..
99.1 j
98.6
99.1 j

99.8 j
..
..
..
98.6

99.7 j
99.6 j
99.0 j
93.1
98.4

99.1
94.8 j, k
99.6 j
91.4
99.7 j

100
100
99
98
95

96
101
97
100
90

84
100
98
88
81

101
98
101
84
103

103
92
..
95
96

102
104
104
80
87

97
87
90
94
..

100
97
91
..
99

..
..
88
49
87

92
89
74
100
92

101 f
102 g
96 g
100 f
100 f

101 f
101 f
93 g
101 g
94 f

99 f
101 f
100 f
91 f
96 f

100 f
99 h
98 g
83 g
104 g

100 f
100
98
95 f
..

..
93 f
101 g
103
95 f

98 f
88 g
..

108 g
106

98 f
98 g
91 g
102 f
91

97 f
87 g
89 f
85
91

90 g
94
88
81
91 f

88
85
79
89
84

87
..
85
97
80

80
81
93
..
..

..
87
85
..
..

..
..
..
83
..

..
..
86
..
69

78
..
..
..
..

..
76
75
..
85

..
..
55
..
37

..
70
57
58
..

95 f
99 g
88 g
98 f
90 f

..
82 f
85 g
101 g
82 f

88 f
95 f
95 f
88 f
80 f

92 f
89 h
92 f
88 g
94 g

88 h
89
72
85 f
..

85 f
96 f
89 g
87
88 f

80 f
89 g
..
81 g
98

92 f
91 g
92 g
106 f
81

92 f
87 g
75 f
77
51

72 g
78
86
72
89 f

100
100
..
..
..

..
..
..
100
100

80
..
100
..
..

96
94
92
..
..

..
..
100
100
..

..
..
99
..
100

99
..
..
..
..

..
98
98
..
89

..
..
..
..
82

94
64
..
80
..

..
..
..
..

100 h

..
99 h
..
..
98 h

99
..
100
..
99

98 i
100 h

..
..
..

96
99
..
..
..

..
..
100
95
99 h

99 h
97
93
93
91

99 h
99
..
90 h
99

..
..

100 h

..
94

89
..
..
97
..

Tertiary
students
in science,
math and
engineering

(% of

all tertiary
students)
1994-97 e

18
31
32
..
20

..
20
..
23
30

31
29
37
28
..

25
21
21
31
31

28
..
..
..
..

31
29
34
21
17

13
34
6
30
..

32
..
32
..
..

38
43
43
23
18

24
..
38
27
29

176

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

11 Literacy and

enrolment

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

MDG

MDG

Net primary

Net secondary

MDG

Children

Adult literacy rate a
(% ages 15 and above)
1990

2002

Youth literacy rate a

enrolment ratio b

enrolment ratio b, c

reaching grade 5

(% ages 15-24)
1990
2002

(%)

(%)

1990/91

2001/02 d

1990/91

2001/02 d

(% of grade 1 students)
2000/01 d
1990/91

Tertiary
students
in science,
math and
engineering

(% of

all tertiary
students)
1994-97 e

94.4
95.1
87.3
96.8
..

97.2
99.2
68.1
80.7
..

89.0
99.5
..
79.8
77.0

..
..
88.9
97.1
99.4

..
82.0
88.4
54.7
98.0

92.4
66.2
98.8
82.2
80.3

88.6
97.5
91.7
94.8
85.5

..
..
77.9
90.3
81.5

..
59.1
..
78.3
..

88.7
..
79.4
89.1
87.6

..
96.9
90.5 j
98.5
..

98.6
99.6
81.7
88.7 j
..

92.3
99.7
98.8 j
84.3 j
98.7 j

94.6
..
93.1
97.3 j
99.6

..
86.4 j
92.1
74.4
98.7

92.6 j
77.9
99.4
87.6
..

92.9 j, k
99.4 j
92.6 j
97.2
85.0 l

98.8 j, k

..
86.5 j
91.6 l
90.9

..
73.2
..
90.9 j
..

92.1
..
84.4
76.9 j
91.0 j

96.5
99.3
95.2
99.6
..

99.4
99.8
91.0
94.8
..

95.3
99.8
..
91.1
94.8

..
..
96.0
99.3
99.8

..
91.8
94.9
85.6
99.0

98.1
85.4
99.8
91.2
92.1

97.8
99.5
97.3
98.1
94.5

..
..
92.7
95.6
96.7

..
84.1
..
95.3
..

95.1
..
87.5
96.0
95.5

..
99.8
96.6 j
99.8
..

99.7
99.8
97.0
97.2 j
..

97.0
99.8
99.2 j
94.5 j
99.4 j

99.6
..
98.2
97.8 j
99.9

..
94.2 j
97.2
98.5
99.5

98.0 j
93.5
99.8
94.5
..

99.3 j, k
99.8 j
95.1 j
99.2
96.6 l

99.8 j, k

..
95.5 j
96.3 l
99.4

..
94.3
..
98.9 j
..

97.0
..
91.7
84.2 j
96.4 j

90
92
100
91
..

86
99
96
94
94

92
86
92
95
95

..
78
88
81
80

95
86
68
69
112

76
59
88
96
78

105
..
96
87
88

..
..
89
93
94

101
94
..
97
..

90
97
58
94
98

86
96
101 g
94
..

93 f
..
..
95 g
93 f

99
94
105
93
97 f

..
97 g
92
93 f
82

103
97 g
87
75
95

86
59
90
95 g
90

100 g
85
93 g
96
100 g

..
92
88 g
92 g
91 g

80
97 g
84 f
93 f
91 f

105 g
91
97 g
96 f
102

..
69
45
..
..

63
..
..
..
..

50
..
83
..
..

..
..
19
..
..

..
15
..
..
..

..
31
..
64
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
42
26
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
31
..

79
83
60 g
68
..

86 f
..
..
69 g
82 f

62
78
72 f
62
74 f

..
63 g
57
80 f
91

70
72 g
54
68
61

..
53
84
75 g
..

76 g
85
56 g
31 h
66 f

..
52
..
50 g
80 g

76
68 g
46 f
..
84 f

..
71 i
41 g
60 f
50

..
92
80
..
..

91
..
..
98
..

..
..
90
98
..

..
..
86
..
98

..
..
62
97
..

..
83
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
98
70
..

..
87
..
86
..

94
..
..
67
..

..
95 h
90
98 h
..

..
..
..
..
..

89
..
83
99
..

..
..
96
..
..

97
..
61
96
94

94 i
94
..
90
94

88
..
79
..
86

..
85 h
..
77
98 i

..
95
..
99 i
85

..
..
66
81 h
78

..
21
31
41
..

25
49
..
..
38

27
33
..
17
22

..
..
..
32
..

..
23
31
31
..

21
18
42
20
17

..
33
..
..
..

..
..
22
22
27

..
27
..
53
..

29
48
25
..
..

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

177

11 Literacy and

enrolment

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

MDG

MDG

Net primary

Net secondary

MDG

Children

Adult literacy rate a
(% ages 15 and above)
1990

2002

Youth literacy rate a

enrolment ratio b

enrolment ratio b, c

reaching grade 5

(% ages 15-24)
1990
2002

(%)

(%)

1990/91

2001/02 d

1990/91

2001/02 d

(% of grade 1 students)
2000/01 d
1990/91

Tertiary
students
in science,
math and
engineering

(% of

all tertiary
students)
1994-97 e

63.2
..
72.4
97.2
63.8

64.8
98.7
52.9
73.3
..

79.5
90.4
97.5
78.1
68.1

98.2
97.8
62.7
81.2
47.1

61.0
..
..
..
38.7

74.9
49.3
68.1
..
62.0

58.5
80.7
56.6
..
56.5

53.8
71.6
34.2
45.8
30.4
57.9

35.4
44.2
67.1
78.0
56.1

80.7
70.8
32.7
58.0
48.7

..
..
79.7
..
75.7

82.9
99.3
68.9
..
..

87.9
90.3 j, k
99.0
86.7 j
80.0 j

99.5 j
97.8 j
76.7 l
86.0
55.6 j, k

69.9
..
..
..
50.7

83.3
61.3 j
78.9
..
69.4

73.8
85.3
..
..
66.4

56.2
80.9
41.1
59.9
44.0
67.9 l

41.5 j, k
59.6
82.8
81.4 l
68.9

90.0
84.3
49.0
..
66.8

86.3
..
83.8
99.8
81.5

79.9
99.6
77.3
92.7
..

95.0
94.1
99.8
92.6
79.7

99.8
98.9
68.2
88.5
61.3

73.4
..
..
..
55.3

87.4
64.3
83.3
..
73.5

81.8
88.2
68.6
..
70.1

56.7
85.1
42.0
65.0
46.6
81.1

47.4
63.5
92.5
87.2
70.1

93.9
89.8
50.0
72.2
73.6

..
..
88.9
..
89.1

95.2
99.7
89.9
..
..

98.0
..
99.8
97.3 j
88.9 j

99.8 j
97.7 j
86.2 l
91.8
73.2 j, k

80.1
..
..
..
69.5

92.3
..
89.1
..
80.3

92.2
91.4
..
..
79.3

59.0
91.2
49.7
79.1
62.7
..

53.9 j, k
77.4
97.8
.. l
80.2

97.6
95.8
67.9
..
88.6

92
..
73
89
94

92
78
93
91
92

97
90
89
91
90

77
90
72
88
84

64
86
..
83
57

83
..
85
71
67

52
99
66
..
63

57
77
71
43
85
74

35
75
79
73
53

86
74
52
65
60

87
95
89
98 h
101 g

98
..
95 g
85
90

92 g
94
78
94 g
87

105
87
82 g
90
90

85 g
78 f
98
..
88

78
83 f
81
93
86

60
82
77
..
83

55 h
77
87
46 h
70 f
..

..
95
..
84
..

83 g
70
67 f
69
..

..
..
..
67
..

43
..
54
..
..

39
..
..
29
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
29
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
19
..
..
..

..
18
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
81
46
75 h
53 g

39
..
62 g
26 h
..

47 h
65
68
67 f
..

79
71
37 g
62 f
81

28 g
..
..
..
31 f

38
..
55 f
28
21

32
35
23
..
31

..
32
44
..
..
..

..
27 h
..
22
14 f

40 g
24
35 h
11 i
..

90
..
..
93
..

96
..
95
..
..

84
..
..
..
..

..
..
46
75
..

..
..
..
85
75

..
..
97
..
..

80
..
59
..
..

..
76
..
94
..
..

..
51
63
71
..

..
..
..
22
..

94
..
67
95 i
93

92
..
96
33
..

89
89
..
78
..

..
..
54
65 h
99 h

56
100
61
..
84

94
59 h
89
95
70

..
60
60
91
62

..
74
65
84 i
78
81 i

..
84
..
67
..

..
..
86 h
34
..

36
10
20
25
..

31
..
50
..
..

28
..
44
..
26

23
25
31
18
15

..
..
..
..
29

4
25
27
..
23

..
37
..
..
..

..
22
..
..
14
..

..
11
..
13
15

23
..
6
20
41

178

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

11 Literacy and

enrolment

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

MDG

MDG

Net primary

Net secondary

MDG

Children

Adult literacy rate a
(% ages 15 and above)
1990

2002

Youth literacy rate a

enrolment ratio b

enrolment ratio b, c

reaching grade 5

(% ages 15-24)
1990
2002

(%)

(%)

1990/91

2001/02 d

1990/91

2001/02 d

(% of grade 1 students)
2000/01 d
1990/91

34.8
39.7
53.0
25.6
46.4

28.4
..
53.3
..
26.4

62.9
38.5
68.2
51.8
..

27.7
47.5
33.2
28.6
33.5

27.2
37.0
18.8
16.3
11.4
..

67.3
43.0
50.8
79.8
85.0
47.0
50.8
98.7
..
..

..
71.8
42.5

..
81.6
53.3

..

41.2
51.9
..
..
..

39.3
..
69.2
..
39.8

77.1
..
79.9
61.8
..

45.8
..
48.6 l
41.5
46.5

..
50.4
19.0 j, k
12.8 j, k
17.1
..

76.7
52.5
63.3
90.3
88.6
57.6
63.2
99.3
..
..

..
80.4
54.3

..
89.7
63.6

..

45.8
54.8
73.2
42.2
60.9

40.1
..
72.7
..
40.4

83.1
52.6
81.2
63.2
..

48.0
68.9
52.1
43.0
48.8

44.1
51.6
27.6
24.9
17.0
..

85.5
54.9
68.4
95.1
92.7
..
66.8
99.7
..
..

..
90.5
59.0

..
93.7
..

..

49.6
66.2
..
..
..

52.9
..
84.9
..
55.5

91.6
59.9 k
89.2
72.5
..

69.9
..
58.5 l
57.4
62.8

..
66.1
24.2 j, k
19.4 j, k
24.5
..

88.1
64.3
81.2
98.0
94.8
..
76.8
99.6
..
..

..
93.0
69.3

..
96.3
..

..

35
22
31
48
16

47
..
67
25
45

50
46
79
50
58

36
54
53
23
45

38
53
20
26
24
41

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

67
..
34
73 g
43

58 g
..
84
61
71 h

54
63
66
81 g
30 h

58
35 i
..
46
60

45 h
53
38 i
35 g
34
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
7
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
5
..
6
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

15
..
17
28 g
21

..
20 f
..
12 i
20 f

..
..
20
29 g
..

8 f
12 i
..
15
11

..
8
..
8 f
5
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

75
..
87
..
..

85
..
60
59
55

79
73
..
64
..

53
55
24
..
33

..
62
73
70
62
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

55
..
86
70 i
..

68
..
40
84 h
84 h

78
69 i
77
54
..

45
..
..
61
52

38 i
64
84
64
71
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

Tertiary
students
in science,
math and
engineering

(% of

all tertiary
students)
1994-97 e

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
42
18

39
..
..
..
..

14
..
..
36
46

..
..
..
19
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

a. Data refer to estimates produced by UNESCO Institute for Statistics in July 2002, unless otherwise specified. Due to differences in methodology and timeliness of underlying data, comparisons across countries and over
time should be made with caution. b. The net enrolment ratio is the ratio of enrolled children of the official age for the education level indicated to the total population of that age. Net enrolment ratios exceeding 100%
reflect discrepancies between these two data sets. c. Enrolment ratios are based on the new International Standard Classification of Education, adopted in 1997 (UNESCO 1997), and so may not be strictly comparable
with those for earlier years. d. Data on net enrolment ratios refer to the 2001/02 school year, and data on children reaching grade 5 to the 2000/01 school year, unless otherwise specified. Data for some countries may
refer to national or UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates. For details, see http://www.uis.unesco.org/. Because data are from different sources, comparisons across countries should be made with caution. e. Data refer
to the most recent year available during the period specified. f. Data refer to the 2000/01 school year. g. Preliminary UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimate, subject to further revision. h. Data refer to the 1999/2000
school year. i. Data refer to the 1998/99 school year. j. Census data. k. Data refer to a year between 1995 and 1999. l. Survey data.
Source: Columns 1 and 3: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003a; columns 2 and 4: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004a; columns 5-10: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c ; column 11: calculated on the basis of
data on tertiary students from UNESCO 1999.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

179

12 Technology:
diffusion and
creation

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

. . . TO ACQUIRE KNOWLEDGE . . .

MDG

MDG

Telephone mainlines a

Cellular subscribers a

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

MDG

Internet users
(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

Patents
granted

to residents
(per million

people)
2000

Receipts of
royalties

and

Research

and

licence development Researchers
fees

in R&D

(R&D)

(US$ per expenditures
person)
2002

(% of GDP)
1996-2002 b

(per million

people)

1990-2001 b

502
681
456
565
464

393
510
547
441
281

574
441
534
418
481

495
567
434
441
316

388
343
450
389
346

243
211
306
281
419

360
158
136
93
124

204
86
96
237
191

212
135
66
188
101

134
220
172
224
234

734
736
539
635
618

494
653
646
558
502

744
591
523
489
797

569
689
448
651
506

481
453
565
491
463

421
506
489
494
688

523
362
256
219
269

351
295 c
361
500
261

270
268
230
204
251

280
286
417
291
301

46
54
11
22
5

4
39
21
7
7

18
19
52
10
2

5
29
16
4
1

5
3
24
0
17

1
0
2
0
5

0
0
7
(.)
0

0
0
(.)
0
10

0
0
1
12
0

0
9
(.)
19
0

844
889
640
377
745

786
906
488
637
763

789
841
867
786
1,061

647
833
622
727
824

939
955
942
845
796

825
835
679
361
584

699
849
401 c
178
553

650
363
676
106
579

475
544
428
519
111

193
433
535
647
394

7.1
5.8
5.9
3.7
3.3

(.)
0.0
8.0
0.2
0.0

5.8
0.9
4.0
1.3
0.0

0.5
1.0
0.0
1.4
0.1

0.2
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

502.6
573.1
481.7
512.8
506.3

328.3
647.9
551.4
448.9
270.9

351.0
423.1
508.9
409.4
370.0

313.8
512.8
484.4
411.9
156.3

352.4
301.4
430.1
154.7
504.4

193.5
375.8
551.9
111.5
293.7

303.0
256.3
102.3 c
112.0
145.2

327.7
230.0
157.6
212.8
245.6

144.4
160.4
237.5
105.8
193.1

119.0 c
113.4
180.4
313.2
133.1

88
235
68
36
177

73
7
298
884
9

188
71
5
138
145

174
59
145
205
42

82
75
6
(.)
27

5
93
490
0
0

54
26
..
4
..

1
24
18
..
..

24
15
2
..
0

2
..
26
0
40

37.9
169.7
15.5
54.0
122.1

86.4 c
0.1
151.7
81.8
63.6

..
130.4
107.5
13.6
274.8

54.2
..
23.0
45.7
9.0

9.4
61.7
28.4 c

1.1
..

3.1
3.8
17.4
1.9
3.2

3.2
4.4
..
0.5
..

3.7
0.9
35.3
..
..

0.1
..
0.4
0.0
0.4

0.0
..
19.1
..
1.5

1.6
4.6
1.5
1.9
1.9

2.0
3.0
2.8
3.1
1.2

2.6
1.9
3.4
1.9
..

2.2
2.1
1.0
2.5
1.0

1.1
5.0
0.4
0.7
2.1

0.8
1.6
3.0
..
0.3

..
1.3
..
0.4
..

0.7
0.7
0.9
..
..

0.6
0.6
0.5
0.2
0.2

0.2
..
1.0
..
0.4

4,377
5,186
3,439
2,978
2,572

2,953
6,639
4,099
5,321
2,190

3,592
2,666
7,110
2,313
..

2,718
3,476
2,197
3,153
1,948

1,128
1,563
93
1,400
4,052

1,754
2,258
2,880
..
400

96 d

1,466
..
684
..

1,947
1,473
1,440
..
..

2,303
1,774
419
212
530 d

276
591 d

1,187
..
1,078

180

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

12 Technology:
diffusion and
creation

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

MDG

MDG

Telephone mainlines a

Cellular subscribers a

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

MDG

Internet users
(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

Patents
granted

to residents
(per million

people)
2000

Receipts of
royalties

and

Research

and

licence development Researchers
fees

in R&D

(R&D)

(US$ per expenditures
person)
2002

(% of GDP)
1996-2002 b

(per million

people)

1990-2001 b

274
31
65
141
253

242
140
48
89
148

93
154
46
52
13

..
92
76
102
136

129
65
69
60
26

24
77
80
45
155

58
157
10
29
26

60
124
121
27
72

86
37
177
6
164

7
99
48
92
48

406
51 c
147
250
488

368
242
118 c
190
271

122
299
113
270
71

237
164
113
194
216

320
223
179
92
57

105
151
130
169
199

119
143
42
102
66

77
234
281
47
127

113
117
316
167
304

47
131
110
114
110

8
0
1
0
0

0
0
0
5
0

0
0
0
2
0

0
0
(.)
0
0

0
(.)
0
2
0

1
1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
(.)

0
0
1
0
(.)

0
(.)
2
(.)
0

(.)
0
(.)
0
0

390
2
255
278
490

333
120
13
377
177

189
47
34
288
276

196
225
256
236
84

89
201
106
183
15

260
228
64
533
227

110
19
191
149
86

2
85
347
288
229

107
52
71
161
120

49
102
207
188
121

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

192.3
10.7 c
98.5
106.0
128.2

80.8
40.9
22.5
319.7
48.4

41.4 c
81.6
29.2
99.1
3.9

26.2
41.6
50.6
101.5
18.0

82.4 c
82.2
46.2
70.9
22.2

77.6
64.6
15.7
228.4
117.1

61.0
15.8
44.0
53.4
93.5

1.7 c
59.8
72.8
17.3
57.7

36.9
51.7
141.5
46.0
160.3

10.6
14.9
36.4
108.9
41.6

..
0
1
0
0

18
99
..
..
17

0
35
..
..
0

0
..
1
38
99

0
0
(.)
..
..

3
(.)
72
0
0

..
31
(.)
..
(.)

0
0
(.)
..
..

0
..
0
5
0

0
49
..
0
0

..
..
0.5
..

0.0 c

0.5
1.0
..
0.5
1.6

0.0
0.1
..
0.0
..

..
..
0.0
0.1
0.1

..
0.6
0.1
..
..

0.1
0.0
0.0
2.3
..

..
..
(.)
12.4
0.1

..

0.0 c
0.0
32.1
..

..
1.7
0.0 c
0.1
0.0 c

..
1.1
..
0.0
..

..
0.6
0.4
0.1
..

0.5
1.2
..
0.4
..

0.4
..
..
0.3
..

..
..
0.4
0.4
0.9

..
1.1
0.2
..
..

0.1
..
0.3
..
..

..
..
..
..
0.1

..
..
0.6
0.0
6.3

0.4
0.5
..
1.1
..

0.2
0.3
..
..
0.1

..
489
225
456
..

1,167
3,494
361
160
387

95
1,893
..
360
..

..
..
193
879
2,118

..
323
101
4
..

74
..
716

8 d
..

50 d

1,313
156
..
229

..
..
306
166
1,948

2,799
336
..
584
..

191
2,421
..
..
83

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

181

12 Technology:
diffusion and
creation

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

MDG

MDG

Telephone mainlines a

Cellular subscribers a

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

MDG

Internet users
(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

Patents
granted

to residents
(per million

people)
2000

Receipts of
royalties

and

Research

and

licence development Researchers
fees

in R&D

(R&D)

(US$ per expenditures
person)
2002

(% of GDP)
1996-2002 b

(per million

people)

1990-2001 b

40
..
24
20
24

41
69
32
4
72

6
1
106
28
17

45
32
13
93
30

21
22
19
15
16

39
6
21
18
(.)

3
2
8
4
2

8
17
2
3
3
3

8
3
7
7
2

13
8
11
3
3

187
87
103
92
160

123
66
61
17
77

37
48
161
68
48

37
53
32
107
110

71
25
41
15
38

65
40
87
33
3

13
7
11
28
11

13
34
5
21
14
7

25
10
7
13
2

25
10
28
4
5

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
(.)
0
0

(.)
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
(.)
(.)

(.)
0
0
0
(.)

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

(.)
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

33
93
138
99
98

23
7
13
63
10

55
23
77
105
49

2
89
38
304
67

131
215
13
2
209

80
12
241
24
28

21
1
3
0
10

0
66
8
6
1
43

8
35
67
45
16

30
37
21
10
13

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

48.5
30.4
46.5
142.2
36.4

12.9
10.9
16.0
3.6
29.8

37.7
18.5
34.1
32.4
25.2

0.5
20.6
16.8
68.2
28.2

33.3
19.2
72.8
5.0
23.6

26.7
15.9
29.7 c
34.6
2.2

7.8
0.5
13.7
14.5
2.7

4.2
19.4
1.5
2.6
3.4
3.8

10.3
41.0
1.5
9.7
4.0

43.0
12.5
5.1
3.5
3.5

4
..
..
..
..

3
16
0
..
13

0
(.)
47
..
(.)

3
32
1
0
1

(.)
..
..
..
0

..
0
0
..
..

0
..
..
..
..

..
0
..
0
..
..

(.)
..
..
0
0

(.)
(.)
..
0
..

..
..
0.2
45.0
1.2

..
..
..
..
0.5

..
..
0.3
0.2
0.0

0.1
0.0 c

..
1.0
0.5

0.0
..
..
..
0.4

1.9
(.)
..
..
..

..
(.) c
..
..
..

..
0.1
(.)
..
..
..

(.)
(.) c
..
5.9
(.)

..

0.2 c

..
(.)
..

..
..
(.)
..
..

0.2
..
..
..
0.2

..
..
0.6
0.3
..

..
..
0.1
..
0.2

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
0.8

..
..
..
0.1
..

590
..
47
..
..

29
1,754
..
..
581

130 d
274
329
123
73

660
531
73
992
493

103 d

..
..
..
..

..
157
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
51
..
..
3

69
102
33
..
24

..
..
..
15
15 d

182

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

12 Technology:
diffusion and
creation

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

MDG

MDG

Telephone mainlines a

Cellular subscribers a

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

MDG

Internet users
(per 1,000 people)
1990
2002

Patents
granted

to residents
(per million

people)
2000

3
7
11
7
..

6
..
2
2
3

3
6
8
3
8

1
1
2
3
3

6
1
1
2
1
3

29
3
79
18
89
7
5
120
365
439

290
24
4

420
49
6

81

12
16
15
29
9

22
0
3
3
9

5
20
8
7
6

2
(.)
2
5
5

9
3
5
5
2
5

96
7
81
142
166
41
15
226
516
590

507
111
11

584
168
28

175

0
0
0
0
0

0
..
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

(.)
0
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
10
13

10
(.)
(.)

13
(.)
(.)

2

92
17
23
75
0

55
0.0
14
12
32

22
62
13
8
9

4
11
3
1
14

0
7
5
8
1
14

101
10
85
159
191
13
39
189
588
650

582
104
15

653
176
17

184

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
..
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

(.)
0.0
0.0
(.)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.6
3.2

2.5
0.0
0.0

3.1
0.0
0.0

0.5

3.7
9.6
6.9
18.8
2.3

10.4
..
3.1
4.6
7.4

2.3
5.5
4.8
2.6
2.9

1.9
0.9
1.3
0.7
2.7

4.0
1.2
2.4
2.1
1.3
1.6

40.9
2.8
28.0
60.9
81.2
14.9
9.6
71.8
383.1
450.5

382.6
37.3
5.9

445.8
59.5
13.0

99.4

..
..
..
0
..

..
..
..
..
..

0
..
0
(.)
..

..
..
..
0
0

..
..
..
..
..
0

..
..
..
..
1
..
..
30
290
360

253
3
..

350
5
..

48

Receipts of
royalties

and

Research

and

licence development Researchers
fees

in R&D

(R&D)

(US$ per expenditures
person)
2002

(% of GDP)
1996-2002 b

(per million

people)

1990-2001 b

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.0
(.)
(.) c

0.0
(.)
..
0.0
0.3 c

..
..
..
0.0
0.0 c

..
0.0
(.) c
..
..
..

0.3
(.)
0.2
0.5
0.8
(.)
0.1
1.7
68.4
85.6

66.4
0.2
(.)

82.9
0.5
(.)

12.9

..
..
..
..
..

(.)
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.2
..
..

0.6 e

..
..
1.6
0.5 e

..
..
1.0
2.6
2.6

2.6
..
..

2.6
0.7 e

..

2.5

..
..
..
..
..

2

30 d
..

174 d

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
47
..
..

..
21 d
..
16
..
..

384 f
..
..
607 f
285 f
160 f
..
2,289 f
2,908 f
3,483 f

2,890 f
555 f
..

3,449 f
751 f
..

1,096 f

a. Telephone mainlines and cellular subscribers combined form an indicator for Millennium Development Goal 8; see Index to Millennium Development Goal indicators in Statistical feature 1, The state of human devel-
opment. b. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. c. Data refer to 2001. d. Data refer to a year prior to 1990. e. Data refer to 1999. f. Data refer to 1996.
Source: Columns 1-6: ITU 2004; column 7: calculated on the basis of data on patents granted to residents from WIPO 2004 and data on population from UN 2003; column 8: calculated on the basis of data on popula-
tion from UN 2003 and data on receipts of royalties and licence fees from World Bank 2004f, based on data from the International Monetary Fund; columns 9 and 10: World Bank 2004f, based on data from the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the World Bank.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

183

13 Economic

performance

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

GDP

US$

billions
2002

PPP US$
billions
2002

GDP per capita
US$
2002

2002

PPP US$

GDP per capita

GDP per capita

Average

annual growth rate

Highest

(%)

value during
1975-2002
(PPP US$)

Year of
highest
value

1990-
2002

1975-
2002

annual change in

consumer price index

(%)

1990-2002

2001-02

190.5
240.3
409.4
714.3
417.9

245.4
8.4
10,383.1
3,993.4
121.4

267.4
1,566.3
131.5
204.1
21.0

1,431.3
172.9
58.6
1,984.1
653.1

1,184.3
103.7
161.5
132.8
87.0

121.6
22.0
476.7
2.5
10.1

3.9
69.5
..
102.0
0.7

6.5
189.0
65.8
0.4
7.7

13.8
23.7
64.2
35.4
16.8

12.1
17.5
22.4
71.0
8.4

166.1
232.5
555.7
924.7
469.9

284.9
8.4

10,308.0 a
3,425.1
142.5

218.8
1,549.1
136.1
235.2
27.2

1,601.4
166.3
85.6
2,235.8
878.0

1,524.7
128.2
182.6
199.0
100.1

186.1
36.4
807.3
4.1
13.8 c

7.0
161.1
..
412.7
..

16.6
407.7
136.1
0.6
12.0

35.8
69.0
153.1
37.8
34.9

26.3
..
45.7
..
21.5

41,974
26,929
20,822
22,777
25,886

23,749
29,749
36,006
31,407
30,982

36,687
26,444
25,295
25,356
47,354

24,061
32,179
14,872
24,051
15,961

20,528
15,792
23,800
12,494
20,886

11,948
11,181
10,006
9,423
13,210

9,748
6,808
..
2,797
8,320

4,792
4,894
6,481
7,745
11,007

3,977
4,403
4,115
15,193
4,271

3,609
28,634
5,025
22,051
3,595

36,600
26,050
28,260
29,480
29,100

27,570
29,750
35,750 a
26,940
36,360

30,010
26,150
26,190
29,220
61,190

26,920
30,940
21,740
27,100
21,460

26,430
19,530
26,910
18,720
24,040

18,280
18,540
16,950
15,290
18,150 c

17,640
15,780
..
10,880
..

12,260
10,560
13,400
12,420
17,170

10,320
12,840
9,820
16,240
8,840

7,830
..
10,240
..
9,210

2.8
1.5
1.9
1.5
1.9

1.9
1.7
2.0
2.6
4.4

0.9
2.1
2.0
2.1
4.0

1.7
1.6
1.0
2.0
2.2

2.0
2.0
4.4
1.1
5.0

2.9
..
6.1
1.2
4.7

4.4
..
..
0.4
3.0

-0.2 b

..
1.0
5.3 b
1.1 b

..

0.3 b
4.1
-1.2 b
1.2

1.3
..
..
-2.8
-0.5

3.0
2.0
2.6
2.2
2.2

1.8
2.1
2.0
1.0
6.8

0.4
2.4
2.5
1.9
3.7

1.6
2.1
2.1
1.3
2.3

1.5
1.8
2.2
2.2
3.8

2.5
4.2 b
4.7
1.6
3.2

3.6
1.4
..
1.7
2.6

2.3
4.2
2.4
3.5
1.5

-0.3
2.1
4.4
-1.7 b
2.7

1.4
..
2.1
(.)
0.2

36,750
26,050
28,260
29,480
29,100

27,570
30,600
35,750
26,940
36,360

30,230
26,150
26,190
29,230
61,190

26,920
30,940
21,740
27,190
21,460

26,430
21,330
26,910
18,720
24,650

18,280
18,540 b
16,950
15,900
18,360 b

18,610
15,780 b

..
13,440
..

12,260 b
10,560 b
13,400
12,420 b
17,170 b

11,820 b
12,840 b
9,820
29,180 b
9,650

9,680
..

10,240 b
47,790 b
11,050

2001
2002
2002
2002
2002

2002
2001
2002
2002
2002

2001
2002
2002
2001
2002

2002
2002
2002
2001
2002

2002
2000
2002
2002
2000

2002
2002
2002
2000
2001

2000
2002
..
1998
..

2002
2002
2002
2002
2002

1990
2002
2002
1975
1999

1998
..
2002
1975
1989

2.2
1.8
2.3
1.8
2.5

1.9
3.1
2.6
0.5
2.6

1.4
2.7
1.6
2.1
2.0

1.6
2.1
1.9
2.1
3.6

3.4
8.3
4.1
7.7
1.5

4.2
19.8 b
4.7
2.4
3.4

2.9
6.7 b

..
7.2
2.2

16.7 b
21.0
18.0
3.4 b
0.7 b

22.7 b
8.3 b
7.7
1.9
14.6

27.5
2.6
61.3
..

21.7 b

1.3
2.1
3.0
2.2
3.5

1.6
5.2
1.6
-0.9
4.7

0.6
1.6
0.8
1.8
2.1

1.9
2.4
2.7
1.3
3.1

2.5
5.6
-3.0
3.6
-0.4

3.5
3.0
2.8
0.2
2.8

1.7
1.8
..
25.9
0.2

3.6
1.9
5.5
..
..

0.4
3.3
2.5
1.4
9.2

14.0
1.0
2.0
..
2.0

184

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

13 Economic

performance

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

GDP

US$

billions
2002

PPP US$
billions
2002

GDP per capita
US$
2002

2002

PPP US$

GDP per capita

GDP per capita

Average

annual growth rate

Highest

(%)

value during
1975-2002
(PPP US$)

Year of
highest
value

1990-
2002

1975-
2002

annual change in

consumer price index

(%)

1990-2002

2001-02

4.8 d

5.1 d

15,797 d

16,690 d

..
637.2
9.6
0.7

15.5
346.5
19.1
94.9
3.8

12.3
14.3
0.1
4.5
4.8

5.6
1.0
94.3
45.7
41.5

0.7
452.4
80.9
20.3
0.3

126.9
188.5
24.6
7.9
17.3

1.9
2.4
78.0
0.6
56.5

7.7
0.4
183.7
5.5
9.3

6.1
21.0
0.4
1,266.1
0.2

16.6
3.4
21.7
0.8
24.3

..
904.6
12.3
0.8

56.8
1,185.6
..
221.7
13.2

18.1
54.8
0.7
13.1
15.2

..
..
135.1
146.2
237.3

0.8
1,355.0
278.6
33.8
1.0

431.9
276.9
87.4
10.4
19.4

4.5
9.6
333.5
..
134.1

20.1 c
0.6
444.8
25.4
21.8

26.2
66.2
0.7
5,860.9
0.4

67.7
11.7
57.2
1.5
45.9

..
6,320
7,384
10,449

1,944
2,405
3,512
3,905
1,860

4,182
1,441
1,347
3,740
1,535

1,362
2,199
3,760
2,052
851

4,124
2,593
1,850
8,002
1,484

2,060
8,612
1,656
3,008
3,894

2,281
771
975
2,182
2,113

1,601
3,082
2,638
1,000
1,799

745
2,149
4,060
989
3,438

873
656
2,514
3,332
1,897

..
8,970
9,430
10,920

7,130
8,230
..
9,120
6,470

6,170
5,520
6,850
10,810
4,830

..
..
5,380
6,560
4,870

5,300
7,770
6,370
13,340
5,600

7,010
12,650
5,870
3,980
4,360

5,440
3,120
4,170
..
5,010

4,250 c
5,460
6,390
4,610
4,220

3,210
6,760
7,280
4,580
5,640

3,570
2,260
6,640
6,080
3,580

1.5 b

..
0.9
0.8
4.3 b

0.1 b

..
..
4.0
..

1.0
..

1.9 b
4.6 b
0.3 b

..
-0.8
-1.0
-1.1 b
-6.6 b

3.7 b
0.8
1.5
2.2
..

5.2
-2.5
..
0.4
3.6 b

0.9
..
0.2
..
-0.6

-4.4 b
3.3
1.8
0.7
0.3

..
2.1
3.7 b
8.2
3.3 b

3.4
-5.2
1.9
2.8
0.1

0.1 b
3.5 b
1.4
2.9
2.6

(.)
-2.4
..
3.6
-0.7

2.5
0.2
2.2
4.0
6.0

18.0 b
0.5
-1.0
0.1
-6.0

0.2
1.3
0.4
0.9
3.2 b

2.9
-0.6
-0.7
-0.1
3.1

1.8
1.7
1.1
4.7 b
2.2

-3.2
1.1
1.3
-0.5
0.9

0.2 b
3.1
2.7
8.6
1.4

3.4
-3.9
4.2
1.7
(.)

17,930 b

..
9,240
9,430
10,920 b

7,890 b
11,030 b

..
9,280
7,350 b

6,510
5,520 b
6,850 b
10,810 b
4,830 b

..
..
7,810
6,810 b
9,550 b

5,850 b
7,770
6,720
13,710

.. b

7,080
23,980
5,920 b
4,060
4,520 b

5,610
3,460 b
4,460
..
5,740

7,130 b
5,490
6,470
5,270
5,100

3,580 b
6,760
7,700 b
4,580
6,180 b

3,590
6,910
6,640
6,080
3,690

1989
..
2000
2002
2002

1988
1989
..
2000
1991

2000
2002
2002
2002
2002

..
..
1977
1990
1989

1998
2002
1997
2001
..

1996
1977
1990
1991
1997

1999
1990
1982
..
1981

1992
2000
2000
1981
1987

1992
2002
2000
2002
2000

2000
1985
2002
2002
1988

2.0
..
17.7
5.4 b

..

94.0
75.2 b

..
3.3
6.5 b

1.1

258.0 b

3.9
6.6
21.6 b

..

88.0 b
43.2
85.5
116.7 b

2.6
134.1
18.3
-0.1
3.7

4.3
0.7
45.6 b
19.7
..

3.2
44.7 b
7.6
5.6
20.9

..
2.0
75.5
12.0
3.1

109.1 b

4.0
2.3 b
6.7
1.7

9.8
17.7 b
8.3
1.7
38.6

2.2
..
5.0
..
..

5.8
15.8
..
1.8
0.1

1.0
42.5
10.4
6.7
7.8

..
..
22.4
22.5
..

1.6
8.4
3.2
-0.7
8.1

0.6
-0.5
5.9
7.1
..

0.8
1.1
3.1
0.9
0.2

..
0.8
45
10.5
1.8

2.8
2.8
..
-0.6
-0.1

9.6
5.6
5.2
2.2
12.5

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

185

13 Economic

performance

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

GDP

US$

billions
2002

PPP US$
billions
2002

GDP per capita
US$
2002

2002

PPP US$

108.2
3.4
14.3
0.7
0.6

20.8
7.9
55.9
2.1
1.6

172.9
35.1
1.6
7.8
6.6

1.2
1.1
4.0
104.2
89.9

23.3
5.0
0.1
0.2
36.1

2.9
510.2
5.3
0.2
4.0

6.2
..
2.8
0.6
1.7

0.3
1.2
47.6
13.5
5.5
9.1

59.1
1.4
3.0
0.7
5.8

8.3
12.3
10.0
4.4
43.5

438.3
..
31.4
3.3
2.3

61.5
42.1
180.4
14.0 c
8.1

682.9
185.4
6.2
21.6
17.7

6.1
4.2
13.2
456.8
252.6

48.9
8.7
..
0.7
112.9

12.3
2,799.6
14.0
0.6
25.7

43.1
..
12.2
..
9.5

1.0
4.9
230.0
59.5
33.1
31.5

281.3
7.0
3.6
4.3
34.1

30.5 c
31.9
16.2
12.2
113.6

1,652
1,051
2,226
937
1,345

1,224
314
1,785
4,394
320

817
436
382
886
966

193
457
749
2,299
1,354

1,941
3,780
326
541
1,218

1,463
487
3,080
1,138
321

304
..
523
695
304

437
1,091
351
412
230
575

408
291
825
402
236

639
393
537
268
328

6,690
..
4,890
4,260
5,000

3,620
1,670
5,760
29,780 c
1,620

3,230
2,300
1,470
2,460
2,600

980
1,710
2,470
10,070
3,810

4,080
6,590
..
1,590
3,810

6,210
2,670
8,170
2,890
2,060

2,130
..
2,270
..
1,720

1,690
4,550
1,700
1,820
1,370
2,000

1,940
1,480
980
2,420
1,390

2,370 c
1,020
870
740
860

GDP per capita

GDP per capita

Average

annual growth rate

Highest

(%)

1990-
2002

2.2
-4.9 b
2.3
4.1
3.4

1.8
-0.9
0.3
20.8
-3.2

2.1
5.9
-6.9
1.1
0.3

-8.1
0.2
1.5
(.)
2.5

1.3
-0.2
-0.4
-2.4
0.8

0.9
4.0
2.5
-0.1
4.1 b

1.8
5.7 b
0.5
3.6
3.8

-1.4
0.1
3.1
3.1
2.3
-0.1

1.1
-0.7
-1.6
2.4
3.9

-0.8
-0.6
2.5
-0.9
-0.3

1975-
2002

-0.4
..
0.2
0.6
3.0 b

0.9
-1.5 b
-0.2
12.7 b
-3.6 b

4.2
5.0 b
-5.4 b
-0.4
0.1

-9.0 b
-0.3 b
-2.9
-0.7
2.8

0.1
-1.5
-0.6 b
1.6
1.3

-0.2 b
3.3
5.1
0.2 b

..

0.3
1.8 b
0.4
4.0 b
3.3 b

-1.0 b
1.8
1.9
0.9
2.1
-0.6

2.6
-1.2
(.)
3.2
2.6 b

(.)
0.3
..
-1.6
-0.6

value during
1975-2002
(PPP US$)

Year of
highest
value

8,290
..
5,330
4,400
5,000 b

3,630
1,850 b
6,190
30,130 b
2,530 b

3,430
2,300 b
3,890 b
2,650
2,820

2,730 b
2,110 b
5,250
12,410
3,810

4,170
11,560
..
2,580
3,810

8,940 b
2,670
8,170
3,860 b
2,060 b

2,130
..
2,840
..

1,720 b

2,140 b
4,690
1,700
1,820
1,410
2,810

1,980
2,180
1,290
2,420
1,390 b

3,060 b
1,180

870 b

1,250
1,070

1976
..
1978
1997
2002

1998
1991
1985
2001
1990

1997
2002
1990
1978
1979

1988
1989
1977
1981
2002

1980
1976
..
1996
2002

1980
2002
2002
1984
2002

2002
..
1994
..
2002

1985
1998
2002
2002
2001
1986

2000
1980
1996
2002
2002

1998
1990
2002
1975
1977

annual change in

consumer price index

(%)

1990-2002

2001-02

23.6
..
7.2
5.8 b
4.9

5.1
..
14.0
..

18.7 b

14.0
2.9 b
18.5 b
7.5
17.2

..

39.0 b
27.1 b
8.1
7.5

9.4
4.6 b

..

10.8 b
3.3

9.5
8.3
9.8
2.7
4.7 b

27.4
25.4
10.0
8.4 b
30.0

..
9.2
5.0
66.8 b
7.4
5.5

8.6
7.2
7.9 b
9.0 b
8.5

36.1
13.3
32.6 b
16.8
27.8

14.3
..
1.9
5.3
1.5

-1.8
..
1.4
..
2.1

12.7
3.8
5.1
0.9
7.7

..
..
..
10.0
2.7

8.0
..
..
..
2.8

11.3
4.4
8.0
..
3.2

14.8
57.1
11.8
..
10.6

..
12.0
4.9
..
-0.9
2.8

3.3
3.1
4.6
33.1
-0.3

140.1
2.0
..
15.9
12.9

186

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

13 Economic

performance

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

GDP

US$

billions
2002

PPP US$
billions
2002

1.0
3.4
0.6
0.4
0.6

5.0
0.4
1.7
3.2
2.7

9.4
11.7
3.7
1.9
11.2

2.0
5.7
1.0
6.1
3.6

0.2
0.7
3.4
3.1
2.2
0.8

6.2
13.3
1.4
2.4
3.8

15.8
..
10.4
16.2
7.0

20.4
25.1
8.6
6.2
28.0

8.5
33.7
4.5
52.6
19.3

1.0
4.5
10.5
13.0
9.1
2.7

348
415
861
257
150

503
497
212
415
411

267
707
361
177
857

240
111
274
90
195

141
102
296
264
190
150

6,189.3 T
204.7 T
712.3 T
2,562.6 T
1,676.1 T
757.1 T
303.5 T
971.1 T
26,298.9 T
25,129.9 T

19,848.5 T
897.7 T
1,466.3 T
9,046.9 T
3,796.1 T
3,898.7 T
1,157.4 T
2,914.7 T
28,491.5 T
26,368.2 T

26,924.9 T 29,435.4 T
17,763.5 T
4,659.1 T
233.9 T
860.0 T

25,767.9 T
5,138.5 T
1,123.9 T

27,115.7 T
16,174.9 T
5,359.9 T

31,927.2 T

48,151.1 T

1,264
298
2,462
1,351
3,189
516
469
2,396
22,987
27,638

22,690
1,120
322

27,312
1,877
451

5,174

GDP per capita
US$
2002

2002

PPP US$

GDP per capita

GDP per capita

Average

annual growth rate

Highest

(%)

1975-
2002

0.3
-2.3
-4.6 b
-0.2
..

-0.1
..
-0.6
1.5 b
0.6

0.6 b
-2.0
-2.1
0.2
-1.5 b

(.)
0.0
-1.5
0.2 b
2.0 b

-0.3
-0.9
-0.2
1.1
-1.9
-3.3

2.3
0.5 b
0.1
5.9
0.7
2.4
-0.8
-1.5 b
2.0
2.1

2.0
1.7
0.1 e

2.1
1.4
2.2 e

1.3

1990-
2002

1.6
-3.0
-3.8
(.)
1.5 b

1.2
..
0.3
1.7
2.1

0.7
-0.1
-1.2
1.1
-0.1

-0.5
..
-0.2
2.3
4.5

-2.2
-3.9
1.7
1.6
-0.8
-5.9

2.8
1.4
1.0
5.4
1.3
3.2
(.)
-0.9
1.7
1.7

1.7
2.1
0.3 e

1.7
2.0
2.3 e

1.2

value during
1975-2002
(PPP US$)

Year of
highest
value

2,220
3,050

.. b

2,070
1,010 b

1,640
..
1,420
2,100 b
1,070

580 b

2,680
1,470
640

2,850 b

1,100
2,400
1,670

780 b
1,050 b

1,070
930
930 b

1,100
1,360
1,120

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

2002
1980
..
1986
1998

1976
..
1983
2002
2002

2002
1978
1976
1979
1992

1977
1975
1977
2002
2002

1997
1991
2002
2002
1979
1982

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

annual change in

consumer price index

(%)

1990-2002

2001-02

5.7
19.8
..

4.0 b

..

4.6
..

13.3 b

..

7.2 b

17.8
6.3
52.7 b
32.6
563.0

7.7
693.8
4.6
4.0
26.6

27.5
15.3
4.6
4.9
5.4
24.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

3.8
9.9
..
..
..

2.2
..
2.5
..
2.5

4.6
3.1
..
14.7
108.9

5.2
24.9
2.9
1.6
16.8

-0.6
-1.4
5.0
2.2
2.6
-3.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

2,220
1,610
1,990
1,690
890

1,580
..
1,270
2,100
1,070

580
1,520
840
580
2,130

1,020
650
1,170
780
1,050

710
630
930
1,100
800
520

4,054
1,307
5,069
4,768
7,223
2,658
1,790
7,192
24,904
29,000

24,806
4,269
1,184

28,741
5,908
2,149

7,804

a. In theory, for the United States the value of GDP in PPP US dollars should be the same as that in US dollars, but practical issues arising in the calculation of the PPP US dollar GDP prevent this. b. Data refer to a period
shorter than that specified. c. Data refer to 2001. d. Data refer to 2000. e. India’s growth rate accounts for most of the difference in average annual growth rates of low income and low human development countries.
Source: Columns 1 and 2: World Bank 2004f, aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the World Bank; columns 3 and 4: calculated on the basis of GDP and population data from World Bank
2004f, aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the World Bank; columns 5 and 6: World Bank 2004b, aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the World Bank
using least squares method; columns 7 and 8: based on GDP per capita PPP US$ time series from World Bank 2004f; columns 9 and 10: calculated on the basis of data on the consumer price index from World Bank
2004f.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

187

14 Inequality in

income or
consumption

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina d
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay d
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

MDG

Share of income or consumption

(%)

Poorest 10% Poorest 20% Richest 20% Richest 10%

Inequality measures

Richest
10% to
poorest
10% a

Richest
20% to
poorest
20% a

Gini index b

3.9
3.6
2.0
2.5
2.8

2.9
..
1.9
4.8
2.8

2.6
2.1
4.0
3.1
3.5

2.8
2.6
2.2
3.2
2.8

2.3
2.4
2.0
2.9
1.9

2.0
3.6
2.9
..
..

..
4.3
..
1.0
..

1.9
2.9
2.6
..
..

3.2
3.1
1.2
..
1.4

1.8
..
3.4
..
2.9

9.6
9.1
5.9
7.0
7.3

8.3
..
5.4
10.6
7.1

6.9
6.1
9.6
8.1
8.4

7.2
8.3
6.4
8.5
7.5

6.5
6.9
5.3
7.1
5.0

5.8
9.1
7.9
..
..

..
10.3
..
3.1
..

6.1
7.3
7.7
..
..

7.9
8.8
3.3
..
4.2

4.8
..
8.3
..
7.6

37.2
36.6
41.3
40.4
40.1

37.3
..
45.8
35.7
43.3

40.3
44.0
36.7
38.5
38.9

40.2
35.8
43.8
36.9
40.3

42.0
44.3
50.7
43.6
49.0

45.9
35.7
37.5
..
..

..
35.9
..
56.4
..

44.0
42.5
37.5
..
..

40.0
34.8
62.2
..
51.5

50.1
..
39.6
..
40.3

23.4
22.2
25.4
25.0
25.1

22.6
..
29.9
21.7
27.6

25.2
28.5
22.6
23.5
23.8

25.1
21.3
27.8
22.1
25.2

26.8
28.2
34.9
28.5
32.8

29.8
21.4
22.5
..
..

..
22.4
..
38.9
..

28.5
27.4
22.8
..
..

24.9
20.9
47.0
..
34.8

33.5
..
24.5
`
25.9

6.1
6.2
12.5
10.1
9.0

7.8
..
15.9
4.5
9.7

9.9
13.8
5.6
7.6
6.8

9.1
8.1
12.5
6.9
9.0

11.6
11.7
17.8
10.0
17.7

15.0
5.9
7.8
..
..

..
5.2
..
39.1
..

14.9
9.3
8.9
..
..

7.9
6.7
40.6
..
25.1

18.9
..
7.3
..
8.9

3.9
4.0
7.0
5.8
5.5

4.5
..
8.4
3.4
6.1

5.8
7.2
3.8
4.7
4.6

5.6
4.3
6.8
4.3
5.4

6.5
6.4
9.7
6.2
9.7

8.0
3.9
4.7
..
..

..
3.5
..
18.1
..

7.2
5.8
4.9
..
..

5.1
4.0
18.7
..
12.3

10.4
..
4.8
..
5.3

25.8
25.0
35.2
33.1
32.6

25.0
..
40.8
24.9
35.9

33.1
36.0
26.9
30.0
30.8

32.7
24.7
36.2
28.3
32.5

36.0
35.5
43.4
35.4
42.5

38.5
28.4
31.6
..
..

..
25.4
..
52.2
..

37.2
31.6
24.4
..
..

31.9
25.8
57.1
..
46.5

44.6
..
29.0
..
32.4

Survey
year

2000 c
2000 c
1994 c
1998 c
1994 c

1996 c

..

2000 c
1993 c
1996 c

1992 c
1999 c
2000 c
1997 c
2000 c

1995 c
1997 c
1997 c
2000 c
1990 c

2000 c
1997 c
1996 c
1998 c
1998 c

1997 c
1998/99 c
1998 c

..
..

..

1996 c

..

2001 c

..

2000 c
1999 e
1999 e

..
..

2000 e
1996 c
2000 c

..

2000 c

2000 c

..

2001 e

..

1998 c

188

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

14 Inequality in

income or
consumption

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Survey
year

..
..

2000 c
1992 c

..

2001 c
2000 e

..

1997 c
1998 e

2000 c
2000 e

..
..

2002 e

2001 e

..

1998 c
2000 e
1999 e

1995 c
1998 c
1999 c

..
..

2000 e

..

2001 e
2000 e

..

..

1998 e
2000 e

..

2000 c

1998 e

..

2000 e
1999 c
1997 e

2001 e
2000 e

..

2001 e

..

1995 e
2001 e
1998 c

..

1998 e

MDG

Share of income or consumption

(%)

Poorest 10% Poorest 20% Richest 20% Richest 10%

Inequality measures

Richest
10% to
poorest
10% a

Richest
20% to
poorest
20% a

Gini index b

..
..
1.0
2.1
..

2.4
1.8
..
1.7
3.3

0.7
3.5
..
..
3.8

3.9
..
0.6
3.3
3.7

2.0
0.5
0.8
..
..

2.5
..
3.4
2.7
..

..
2.6
2.2
..
0.7

2.6
..
2.3
0.6
3.3

3.1
2.3
..
1.8
..

3.5
2.3
2.1
..
0.9

..
..
3.1
5.5
..

6.7
4.9
..
4.4
8.4

2.4
8.4
..
..
9.1

9.5
..
3.0
8.2
8.8

5.2
2.0
2.7
..
..

6.1
..
8.2
6.7
..

..
6.7
5.4
..
2.9

6.1
..
6.1
2.2
7.6

7.4
6.0
..
4.7
..

8.0
6.4
5.1
..
3.3

..
..
59.1
45.9
..

38.9
51.3
..
54.3
36.7

60.3
39.1
..
..
37.4

35.8
..
53.4
38.4
37.8

48.3
64.4
61.8
..
..

50.0
..
39.6
46.0
..

..
45.1
52.3
..
53.2

47.5
..
46.7
60.2
44.4

44.5
47.3
..
50.0
..

42.8
43.6
53.3
..
58.0

..
..
43.1
29.9
..

23.7
36.0
..
38.4
22.1

43.3
24.1
..
..
22.4

21.4
..
36.3
23.6
23.2

32.5
46.7
46.5
..
..

33.8
..
24.2
30.3
..

..
29.7
36.3
..
37.2

31.7
..
30.7
43.6
29.8

29.5
31.5
..
33.1
..

28.0
27.9
37.9
..
41.6

..
..
45.0
14.4
..

9.9
20.3
..
22.1
6.8

62.3
6.9
..
..
5.9

5.4
..
62.9
7.2
6.4

16.2
85.0
57.8
..
..

13.4
..
7.1
11.4
..

..
11.5
16.5
..
49.9

12.3
..
13.3
70.4
9.1

9.7
13.4
..
18.4
..

7.9
12.0
17.7
..
44.9

..
..
19.3
8.3
..

5.8
10.5
..
12.4
4.4

24.7
4.6
..
..
4.1

3.8
..
17.9
4.7
4.3

9.2
31.5
22.9
..
..

8.3
..
4.8
6.9
..

..
6.8
9.7
..
18.4

7.7
..
7.7
27.3
5.9

6.0
7.9
..
10.7
..

5.3
6.8
10.5
..
17.3

..
..
54.6
40.3
..

31.9
45.6
..
49.2
28.2

56.4
30.4
..
..
28.2

26.2
..
49.1
30.3
29.0

42.6
59.1
57.6
..
..

43.2
..
31.3
37.9
..

..
37.9
46.1
..
49.8

40.8
..
40.0
56.8
36.4

36.5
39.8
..
44.7
..

34.4
36.9
47.4
..
43.7

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

189

14 Inequality in

income or
consumption

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Survey
year

1998 e

..

2000 c
1999 e

..

..

2000 e
1995 e

..

2001 e

2002 e
1998 e
2001 e
1999 e
1999 c

1998 e
1998 e
2001 c
1995 e
1999 e

2000 c

..
..
..

1998/99 e

1993 c
1999/2000 e
1993 e

..

1997 e

1999 e

..

1996 e

..

1997 e

..

1994 c
2000 e

..

1995/96 e
2001 e

1998/99 e

..
..

1995 e
1999 e

1995 e
1997 e
1998 e
2001 e
1996/97 e

MDG

Share of income or consumption

(%)

Poorest 10% Poorest 20% Richest 20% Richest 10%

Inequality measures

Richest
10% to
poorest
10% a

Richest
20% to
poorest
20% a

Gini index b

2.0
..
0.9
1.3
..

..
3.6
2.8
..
3.9

3.6
3.6
2.8
1.3
0.9

3.2
2.1
1.2
0.7
3.7

0.9
..
..
..
2.6

0.5
3.9
0.7
..
2.9

2.1
..
1.7
..
3.2

..
1.0
3.9
..
3.2
2.3

3.7
..
..
0.5
2.3

1.8
2.3
3.0
1.9
1.6

5.1
..
2.9
4.5
..

..
9.2
7.0
..
9.1

8.4
8.0
7.1
4.0
2.7

8.0
5.6
3.6
2.0
8.6

2.6
..
..
..
6.5

1.4
8.9
2.2
..
6.9

5.6
..
4.5
..
7.6

..
2.7
9.0
..
7.6
5.6

8.8
..
..
1.5
5.9

4.6
5.6
7.4
4.9
4.4

49.9
..
57.1
49.7
..

..
36.3
42.6
..
38.3

43.3
44.5
43.7
49.1
58.9

40.0
51.2
59.7
66.5
43.6

64.1
..
..
..
46.6

78.7
41.6
70.3
..
47.6

46.6
..
56.5
..
45.0

..
64.4
41.3
..
44.8
50.9

42.3
..
..
66.5
49.7

55.7
51.2
41.2
53.5
55.7

33.7
..
40.6
33.8
..

..
22.0
26.8
..
23.3

28.5
29.9
28.4
32.0
42.2

25.2
37.0
45.0
46.9
29.5

48.3
..
..
..
30.9

64.5
27.4
56.6
..
33.8

30.0
..
40.5
..
30.6

..
50.2
26.7
..
29.8
35.4

28.3
..
..
48.3
34.9

40.3
36.1
25.9
36.6
40.8

17.2
..
47.4
25.9
..

..
6.1
9.6
..
6.0

7.8
8.4
10.2
24.6
49.1

8.0
17.8
36.1
65.1
8.0

55.1
..
..
..
11.7

128.8
7.0
77.6
..
11.6

14.1
..
23.8
..
9.7

..
49.7
6.8
..
9.3
15.7

7.6
..
..
105.0
14.9

22.0
15.6
8.6
19.2
24.9

9.7
..
19.8
11.1
..

..
4.0
6.1
..
4.2

5.2
5.6
6.2
12.3
21.5

5.0
9.1
16.8
33.6
5.1

24.4
..
..
..
7.2

56.1
4.7
31.5
..
6.9

8.4
..
12.6
..
6.0

..
23.8
4.6
..
5.9
9.1

4.8
..
..
44.2
8.4

12.0
9.1
5.6
11.0
12.8

43.0
..
53.2
43.2
..

..
26.8
35.3
..
29.0

34.3
36.1
36.2
44.7
55.0

34.7
44.0
55.1
59.3
34.4

48.3
..
..
..
39.5

70.7
32.5
63.0
..
40.4

30.0
..
50.9
..
37.0

..
60.9
31.8
..
36.7
44.6

33.0
..
..
63.2
43.0

56.8
44.5
33.4
47.5
50.6

190

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

14 Inequality in

income or
consumption

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

MDG

Share of income or consumption

(%)

Poorest 10% Poorest 20% Richest 20% Richest 10%

Inequality measures

Richest
10% to
poorest
10% a

Richest
20% to
poorest
20% a

Gini index b

2.5
..
..
1.5
..

2.6
..
4.2
2.6
..

2.8
2.2
1.1
1.9
..

..
..
0.7
3.9
2.5

2.1
1.7
1.8
1.8
0.8
0.5

6.2
..
..
4.0
..

6.4
..
9.7
6.4
..

6.8
5.5
3.3
4.9
..

..
..
2.0
9.1
6.5

5.2
5.1
4.6
4.5
2.6
1.1

45.7
..
..
55.2
..

48.2
..
39.1
47.2
..

45.5
51.1
56.6
56.1
..

..
..
65.0
39.4
46.5

53.4
48.0
56.2
60.7
53.3
63.4

29.5
..
..
38.0
..

33.5
..
24.2
32.0
..

30.1
35.9
41.0
42.2
..

..
..
47.7
25.5
31.7

39.3
32.8
40.4
46.3
35.4
43.6

12.0
..
..
25.4
..

12.8
..
5.8
12.3
..

10.8
16.2
36.6
22.7
..

..
..
69.2
6.6
12.5

19.0
19.3
23.1
26.2
46.0
87.2

7.4
..
..
13.8
..

7.5
..
4.0
7.3
..

6.7
9.2
17.3
11.6
..

..
..
32.7
4.3
7.2

10.3
9.5
12.2
13.6
20.7
57.6

39.0
..
..
38.0
..

41.3
..
28.9
40.3
..

38.2
45.2
52.6
50.3
..

..
..
61.3
30.0
39.6

47.0
33.3
50.5
48.2
50.5
62.9

Survey
year

2000 e

..
..

1998 e

..

1995 e

..

1983/85 e
1994 e

..

1993 e
1998 e
1998 e
1997 e

..

..
..

1993 e
2000 e
1996/97 e

1993 e
1998 e
1994 e
1998 e
1995 e
1989 e

Note: Because the underlying household surveys differ in method and in type of data collected, the distribution data are not strictly comparable across countries.
a. Data show the ratio of the income or consumption share of the richest group to that of the poorest. Because of rounding, results may differ from ratios calculated using the income or consumption shares in columns 2-5.
b. The Gini index measures inequality over the entire distribution of income or consumption. A value of 0 represents perfect equality, and a value of 100 perfect inequality. c. Survey based on income. d. Data refer to urban
areas only. e. Survey based on consumption.
Source: Columns 1-5 and 8: World Bank 2004a; columns 6 and 7: calculated on the basis of income or consumption data from World Bank 2004a.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

191

15 Structure of

trade

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

Imports of

Exports of

goods and services

goods and services

Primary exports Manufactured exports
(% of merchandise

(% of merchandise

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

exports)

exports)

High-technology

exports

(% of manufactured  Terms of trade
(1980 = 100) a

exports)

HDI rank

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

2001

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

34
28
17
26
51

69
33
11
9
52

36
27
24
38
100

22
31
27
25
20

20
45
124
28
..

39
..
30
52
57

99
43
..
5
67

..
22
29
83
95

61
36
31
58
41

18
..
..
40
49

27
37
22
39 b
56

78
38
14
10
83 b

38
28
30
51
127

25
39
32
32
30

26
46
142
27
..

41 b
56
39
55
..

89
67
..
13
81

94
31
67
71
65

60
80
32
40
47

20
..
55
..
56

40
29
17
26
54

71
34
10
10
57

36
24
23
40
104

21
36
27
25
16

20
35
133
18
..

33
..
29
49
52

85
45
..
10
62

..
29
31
52
116

52
27
35
45
35

24
..
..
65
48

41
43
20
44 b
62

82
40
10
11
98 b

44
26
38
52
145

27
45
33
35
28

27
37
151
21
..

31 b
58
40
52
..

88
65
..
28
78

84
28
64
46
81

54
73
36
48
42

22
..
46
..
45

67
16
73
36
37

..
91
22
3
26

6
19
17
12
..

23
35
75
10
24

11
13
4
46
27

19
..
6
55
45

4
..
100
71
..

..
36
35
..
91

..
..
87
94
66

61
84
..
54
..

74
13
65
30
26

17 b
85
14
3
8

7
16
14
13
12 b

16
29
68
9
21 b

10
7
5
47 b
11

13 b
10
8
47
45

4 b
10
..
66 b
..

28
18
11
27 b
87 b

41 b
15
80 b
..
37

63
89
27
..
41

33
83
24
59
59

..
8
74
96
70

94
79
83
88
..

77
60
23
89
75

88
87
95
54
72

80
..
94
43
55

96
..
(.)
29
(.)

..
59
63
..
9

..
..
11
6
27

39
16
..
46
..

22
81
29
63
74

79 b
14
81
93
88

93
79
85
82
86 b

81
66
28
86
78

88
93
95
52 b
85

86
90
92
50
55

96 b
89
12
31
5

72
82
86
73 b
13 b

58 b
85
18 b
..
63

37
10
73
4 b
59

12
13
8
14
16

..
10
33
24
41

12
24
8
8
..

16
15
4
11
6

8
10
..
2
40

4
..
18
..
6

45
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
5
3
..

..
..
..
..
..

22
16
16
14
28

11 b
6
32
24
41

21
31
24
15
19 b

21
22
10
17
7

9
20
17
10 b
60

7
5
32
16
3

62 b
14
4
7
..

12
3
25
(.) b
(.) b

5 b
3
3 b
..
37

3
0
12
2 b
4

123
103
86
93
105

..
..
114
126
96

..
100
107
..
..

..
..
117
106
123

125
122
100
76
75

..
..
84
..
..

..
..
..
81
..

..
285
85
..
..

..
..
39
..
122

102
..
..
..
..

192

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

15 Structure of

trade

Imports of

Exports of

goods and services

goods and services

Primary exports Manufactured exports
(% of merchandise

(% of merchandise

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

exports)

exports)

High-technology

exports

(% of manufactured  Terms of trade
(1980 = 100) a

exports)

HDI rank

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

2001

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

..
..
20
29
87

37
18
31
72
36

34
44
65
71
23

..
44
20
26
29

84
7
15
31
..

42
32
..
52
100

67
46
33
64
14

..
77
18
39
93

39
51
63
14
81

38
46
44
62
32

..
18 c
29
43
68

60
24
36
97
57

29
74
58 b
57
43

59
45
17
41
52

59
14
21
35
82 c

57
23
46
60
41

65 b
47
49
67
17

47 b
59
30
43
67

51
49
57
26
63

43
39
35
74 b
31

..
..
19
45
89

33
18
40
75
26

38
46
34
64
15

..
42
39
17
28

73
8
21
53
..

34
41
..
48
18

62
35
28
24
16

..
66
13
33
62

44
44
42
18
55

29
40
34
64
33

..
16 c
27
47
60

53
35
48
114
38

28
70
13 b
61
19

26
21
29
35
56

55
16
20
57
33 c

65
41
47
39
14

71 b
30
49
88
16

47 b
48
30
31
46

44
45
47
29
55

36
27
26
55 b
24

..
..
56
73
..

..
..
95
46
..

78
..
..
34
..

..
26
90
26
..

..
47
74
94
..

36
93
..
31
..

63
..
31
..
82

..
..
32
..
..

..
31
..
27
..

42
..
..
..
98

57 c
90 b
16
54 b
..

37 c
69
..
19 b
30 b

88
33
..
27
14

..
22 c
89 b
18
32

76
44 b
62
84
..

22 b
91 b
81 b
27 c
31 b

55
39
8
..
79

92 c
91
15
84 b
32

93
19 b
..
10
..

25
65 b
..
..
90

..
..
43
27
..

..
..
5
54
..

21
..
21
66
..

..
74
10
73
..

28
52
25
5
4

63
7
..
69
..

36
..
38
..
18

..
..
68
10
51

..
69
20
72
32

54
..
..
15
2

37 b
10 b
84
46 b
..

61 b
22
..
79
70 b

12
64
4 c
73
86

..
78 c
13
81
67

24
54 b
38
15
..

74 b
10
19 b
64
69 b

44
61
50
38
21

7 c
9
84
15
68

6
82
24
90
54

74
35 b
34 b
1
10

..
..
8
..
..

..
..
0
38
..

..
..
0
1
..

..
..
4
2
..

..
7
..
2
0

21
..
..
..
..

12
..
..
..
..

..
..
1
(.)
1

..
2
..
..
..

1
..
..
..
(.)

1 b
29 b
21
3 b
..

3 b
13
..
58
1 b

1
4
0 c
2
1

..
(.) c
3
3
5

8
19 b
7
2
..

31 b
(.)
10 b
(.)
3 b

1
2
65
0
2

5 c
0
2
3
3

8
4
8
23
8

1
38 b
1 b
0
7

..
..
33
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

86
..
..
109
..

..
..
55
..
..

..
136
83
..
..

60
..
..
..
..

..
..
96
..
39

..
..
89
147
113

..
81
..
..
..

..
..
58
..
43

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

193

15 Structure of

trade

Imports of

Exports of

goods and services

goods and services

Primary exports Manufactured exports
(% of merchandise

(% of merchandise

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

exports)

exports)

High-technology

exports

(% of manufactured  Terms of trade
(1980 = 100) a

exports)

HDI rank

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

2001

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

24
..
31
80
44

28
48
25
70
50

24
45
51
24
40

35
53
46
19
33

25
31
72
73
32

67
9
50
77
13

26
5
49
32
25

35
74
14
..
22
17

23
45
46
109
19

23
31
20
28
29

29
47
41
106
68

28
34
26
..
43

29
60
79
27
53

72
81
49
31
23

28
39
95
..
37

49
16
37
..
67

55
..
..
39
..

31
100
19
13
29
28

19
50
54
107
27

22
30
39
23
44

22
..
19
63
13

28
29
23
32
29

25
36
49
23
36

28
24
25
24
20

21
46
14
47
26

52
7
55
49
6

17
3
41
28
11

14
75
6
..
11
20

16
33
54
16
7

23
26
14
17
43

31
12
27
93
31

37
38
36
..
39

35
56
54
22
37

58
67
23
34
16

16
59
44
..
32

48
15
51
..
59

43
..
..
22
..

15
91
14
15
16
27

19
33
81
51
12

24
27
38
16
38

..
..
62
..
..

64
..
97
..
..

65
..
..
95
91

..
..
92
..
57

76
..
..
..
48

..
28
..
..
..

..
..
89
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
91

21
89
..
..
..

68
71
..
85
..

91
..
41
78
..

90 c
..
98 c
..
67

44 b
..
69
78 b
74

87 c
64
80
37
47

65
98 c
..
..
35 b

47 b
22 b
9 b
86 c
..

85 c
..
98 c
..
..

..
53 b
8 b
97
..
93

14
50 b
..
..
92

62
76
..
..

100 c

..
..
38
..
..

36
..
3
..
..

35
..
..
5
9

..
..
8
..
42

24
..
..
..
52

..
71
..
13
..

..
..
10
..
..

..
..
77
..
83
9

79
9
..
..
..

31
29
..
14
..

9
..
58
22
96 b

7
..
2 c
..
33

54
..
31
17
26

13 c
36
19
63
35

35
2 c
..
..
66

52 b
75
91 b
8 c
..

16 b
..
2 c
..
..

8 c
76
92 b
3
67 c
7

85
43
..
..
8

38
24
..
..
(.) c

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

1
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
2
..
20
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
(.)
..
..
3

(.)
..
..
..
..

2
4
..
8
..

3
..
6
7
1 b

1
..
4 c
..
6

16
..
4
7
2

42 c
(.)
5
5
1

7
7 c
..
..
11

1 b
5
(.) b
1 c
..

3 b
..
19 c
..
..

1 c
1
(.) b
7
(.) c
1

1
1
..
..
12

3
10
..
..
(.) c

..
..
103
..
100

..
..
60
..
..

..
..
..
53
87

..
..
56
83
46

73
46
..
..
114

..
136
137
..
..

53
..
..
..
..

91
100
68
..
..
102

77
89
84
76
..

118
91
..
140
48

194

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

15 Structure of

trade

Imports of

Exports of

goods and services

goods and services

Primary exports Manufactured exports
(% of merchandise

(% of merchandise

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

exports)

exports)

High-technology

exports

(% of manufactured  Terms of trade
(1980 = 100) a

exports)

HDI rank

1990

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

61
20
..
72
..

30
..
14
31
26

37
27
37
33
21

28
29
28
12
36

37
28
34
24
22
24

23
23
38
33
12
14
26
25
18
18

19
19
27

19
19
19

19

2002

68
36
63 c
72
85

41
..
25
30
26

24
30
42
43
70

65
21
17
34
38

77
19
41
22
25
40

30
34
30
45
19
20
35
40
21
21

22
27
30

22
28
25

23

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

2001

46
18
..
60
..

25
..
6
31
14

13
32
36
24
39

13
30
15
8
8

10
8
17
11
15
22

24
14
38
34
14
11
27
25
18
18

19
20
23

19
20
17

19

39
13
45 c
54
29

31
..
8
24
14

17
48
29
25
77

12
18
12
16
24

45
7
32
9
16
18

33
23
36
49
21
19
34
42
21
21

22
30
26

22
32
25

24

..
15
44
..
..

77
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
95
100

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
65
..
..
..
20
19

20
..
..

19
..
..

..

..
..
..
82 c
..

49
..
98 b
72 b
94 b

83 b
85 c
86
90 b
..

..
..
..
86
91 b

..
..
..
81 b
95 b
..

..
..
..
..
40
..
..
..
16
16

16
..
..

15
..
..

..

..
85
8
..
..

23
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
5
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
2
..
..
..

61
..
20
75
34
71
..
..
78
79

78
50
..

79
48
49

74

..
..
..
17 c
..

51
..
3
28 b
6 b

17 b
21
14
10 b
..

..
..
..
14
8 b

..
1 b
..
19 b
3 b
..

73
..
17 b
86
48 b
56
35 c
55
81
81

82
57
29 c

82
60
58

78

..
14
0
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
(.)
0

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
7
..
..
..
18
18

18
..
..

18
..
..

18

..
..
..
3 c
..

4
..
1
(.) b
(.) b

2 b
3
2
3 b
..

..
..
..
..
3 b

..
2 b
..
7 b
8 b
..

20
..
2
28
16
4
4 c
11
22
23

22
18
1 c

23
19
9

21

135
45
..
55
..

91
..
138
..
101

..
90
48
62
..

94
..
40
..
50

57
31
90
166
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

a. The ratio of the export price index to the import price index measured relative to the base year 1980. A value of more than 100 means that the price of exports has risen relative to the price of imports. b. Data refer to
2001. c. Data refer to 2000.
Source: Columns 1-10: World Bank 2004f, based on data from United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the International Monetary Fund; aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report
Office by the World Bank; column 11: calculated on the basis of data on terms of trade from World Bank 2004f.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

195

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

Net official development assistance

(ODA) disbursed

16 Rich country

responsibilities:
aid

HDI rank

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland
11 Switzerland

12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg
16 France

17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain
21 Italy

24 Greece
26 Portugal

Total a
(US$

millions)
2002

1,517
1,848
916
2,011
3,068

996
13,140
9,731
360
863

4,581
434
488
139
5,125

1,540
110
4,980
1,559
2,157

253
293

MDG

As % of GNI

ODA per capita
of donor country

(2001 US$)

MDG

ODA to least

developed countries b

(% of total)

MDG

ODA to basic
social services c

(% of total)

MDG
Untied

bilateral ODA

(% of total)

1990 d

2002

1990

2002

1990

2002

1995/96

2001/02

1990

2002

1.17
0.91
0.34
0.44
0.92

0.46
0.21
0.31
0.16
0.32

0.27
0.65
0.11
0.21
0.60

0.94
0.23
0.42
0.20
0.31

..
0.24

0.33

0.89
0.83
0.26
0.28
0.81

0.43
0.13
0.23
0.40
0.32

0.31
0.35
0.26
0.77
0.38

0.96
0.22
0.27
0.26
0.20

0.21
0.27

0.23

283
170
45
80
164

83
58
87
17
109

52
122
20
68
111

213
24
90
21
50

..
17

72

333
207
47
64
190

97
46
76
93
118

78
83
61
316
86

286
28
60
38
37

23
28

65

44
39
18
30
33

41
19
19
37
43

32
38
36
39
32

39
19
28
20
41

..
70

28

37
32
19
17
35

33
23
20
53
27

23
33
33
40
30

33
25
25
15
45

13
37

26

10.7
14.2
5.9
8.9
11.7

9.2
19.0
2.0
0.5
6.5

24.4
8.9
2.6
..
..

13.1
1.7
8.8
8.3
7.3

19.3
4.2

8.1

15.1
11.8
17.7
22.4
26.7

20.4
27.0
4.8
30.8
19.8

29.9
14.3
14.7
..
..

7.8
8.3
10.3
11.5
10.7

3.9
3.1

17.3

61
87
33
47
56

..
..
89
..
78

..
31
32
..
64

..
100
62
..
22

..
..

68

99
79
57
61
89

..
..
83
100
95

100
82
69
..
92

82
76
87
60
..

14
33

85

DAC

58,274 T

Note: DAC is the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
a. Some non-DAC countries and areas also provide ODA. According to OECD 2004e, net ODA disbursed in 2002 by the Czech Republic, Estonia, Iceland, Israel, the Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia,
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates and other small donors, including Taiwan (province of China), Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, totalled $3,201 million. China also provides aid but does not disclose the amount. b. Includes
imputed multilateral flows that make allowance for contributions through multilateral organizations. These are calculated using the geographic distribution of disbursements for the year specified. c. Data refer to the aver-
age for the years specified, and refer to the percentage of sector-allocable ODA. d. Data for individual countries (but not the DAC average) include forgiveness of non-ODA claims.
Source: Columns 1-7: OECD 2004b, aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); columns 8-11: UN 2004e, aggregates cal-
culated for the Human Development Report Office by the OECD.

196

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

17 Rich country

responsibilities:
debt relief and
trade

HDI rank

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland
11 Switzerland

12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg
16 France

17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain
21 Italy

24 Greece
26 Portugal

Debt relief

Bilateral pledges

Gross

to the HIPC
trust fund a
(US$ millions)

2003

bilateral debt
forgiveness
(US$ millions)
1990-2002

127
109
14
165
242

64
750
256
25
93

436
51
50
4
258

80
2
333
165
217

17
24

237
121
77
1,471
1,915

711
8,482
4,170
..
311

2,493
156
369
..
13,549

377
..
6,034
1,092
1,775

..
470

Trade

Goods imports

Average tariff
barriers and
non-tariff

equivalents b

2000

From developing countries
Share of

Total

(US$ millions)

2002

total imports

(%)
2002

32.0
10.0
13.4
10.2
9.6

9.9
7.4
13.0
9.9
22.2

9.8
10.1
10.0
..
9.8

9.8
12.1
9.9
9.7
9.7

9.8
9.8

9,357
11,374
38,187
52,879
60,389

43,845
598,695
217,224
15,114
14,567

90,787
6,956
12,116
377
81,259

9,329
8,810
98,168
63,993
71,139

15,222
10,058

18
14
41
21
30

19
48
59
20
14

23
13
13
2
23

14
33
19
31
24

28
18

From least developed countries

Total

(US$ millions)

2002

233
247
183
805
1,164

5,469
13,621
3,181
308
192

2,872
301
291
7
4,856

360
45
4,095
2,965
2,547

218
649

Share of

total imports

(%)
2002

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.6

2.4
1.1
0.9
0.4
0.2

0.7
0.6
0.3
(.)
1.4

0.5
0.2
0.8
1.4
0.9

0.4
1.2

Note: This table presents data for members of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
a. The Debt Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) is a mechanism for debt relief, jointly overseen by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Bilateral and multilateral creditors have provided
debt relief through this framework since 1996. Includes pledges through the European Union. b. This measure is an aggregate measure of trade barriers towards developing countries. It measures monetary barriers (tariffs)
as well as quotas and subsidies, in manufactures, textiles, agricultural products, and fuels, weighted by endogeneity-corrected import volume.
Source: Column 1: IMF and IDA 2004; column 2: Calculated on the basis of data on debt cancellation from OECD 2004f; column 3: Roodman 2004; columns 4-7: Calculations based on import data from UN 2004a.

OECD country support to domestic agriculture
(% of GDP)

MDG

1990

2002 a

Australia
Canada
Czech Republic
European Union b
Hungary
Iceland
Japan
Korea
Mexico
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Slovak Republic
Switzerland
Turkey
United States

OECD

0.8
1.7
..
2.2
..
4.6
1.7
8.7
2.9
0.5
3.2
..
..
3.3
4.3
1.2

1.8

0.3
0.8
1.7
1.3
2.8
1.6
1.4
4.5
1.4
0.3
1.5
1.3
1.6
2.0
4.1
0.9

1.2

a. Provisional data. b. No data are available for individual member countries of the European Union.
The member countries in 2002 were Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Aus-
tria, Finland and Sweden joined in 1995 and thus are not included in the data for 1990.
Source: OECD 2004a.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

197

18 Flows of aid,

private capital
and debt

HDI rank 

High human development
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore
26 Portugal

27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus
31 Malta

32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles
36 Estonia

37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain
41 Lithuania

42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica
46 Uruguay

47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia
51 Bahamas

52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development
56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

Official development

assistance (ODA) received a

(net disbursements)

Per capita

(US$)
2002

Net foreign direct
investment inflows b

As % of GDP

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

1990

2002

Other

private flows b, c

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

MDG

Total debt service

As % of GDP
1990

2002

As % of exports of
goods and services
1990

2002

119.6 d
0.6 d

..

1.8 d

..

86.1
-1.7 d
12.8
62.3 d
28.8

38.3 d
-5.0 d

(.)
97.8
51.5 d

30.0 d
47.5 d
683.8
99.5
42.4 d

35.1 d
-1.5
1.9 d
1.3
4.0

3.7 d
37.5
1.4 d
37.1 d
17.2 d

5.4
1.3
-5.6
192.1

47.9 d
9.0 d
1.9 d
3.6
135.2

11.5
4.0 d

217.2
19.8
100.9

142.3
26.9
2.3
31.3 d
9.9 d

2.6
0.1
..
(.)
..

..
(.)
0.2
0.7
0.2

(.) d
..
0.1
9.8
..

2.2 d
0.2 d
5.1
3.2
..

(.) d
0.3
(.)
4.0
0.6

(.)
..
(.)
..
0.1

..
0.1
0.4
1.2

0.1 d
(.) d
0.1
1.1
..

1.9
..
26.3
3.7
0.5

..
15.5
0.2
0.6 d
0.4 d

0.7 d
(.) d
..
(.) d
..

0.8
(.) d
0.1
0.5 d
0.3

0.6 d

..
(.)
1.1
1.1 d

0.6 d
0.7 d
8.0
0.9
1.1 d

0.8 d
(.)
(.) d
(.)
0.1

(.)
0.7
(.)
1.0 d

..

..
(.)
-0.1
1.9

2.5 d
0.4 d
0.1
0.1
7.3

0.3
0.3 d
16.4
0.5
6.6

10.5
1.2
0.1
1.5 d
1.2 d

0.3
..
1.2
15.1
3.7

..
0.3
0.7
2.3
2.0

..
..
1.3
5.5
..

0.2
0.9
30.7
..
..

..
2.2
0.0
2.8
0.0

..
..
..
..
-0.6

..
1.0
2.2
..

..
..
..
5.3
..

2.6
..
0.2
1.7
..

..
..
0.9
0.0
..

1.6
7.9
(.)
7.0
3.5

8.5
0.4
0.7
6.1
-11.0

13.4
..
0.8
8.8
4.4

2.2
1.3
22.7
..
5.2

16.9
2.7
(.)
3.9
1.5

..
4.4
..
4.5
5.2 e

..
2.3
7.6
..

3.9
0.9
..
3.4
2.0

0.5
1.7
1.8
0.6
2.8

5.2
..
0.7
2.5
1.7

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
-1.5
-1.7
..

(.)
-1.4
-0.3
..
..

..
5.1
..
-2.5
-2.1

..
..
..
..
..

..
2.7
-3.5
..

..
..
..
-4.2
..

-0.1
..
-0.1
1.9
..

..
..
-1.2
(.)
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

1.5
..
-0.1
-0.3
20.0

0.5
-1.0
4.7
..
0.3

6.1
1.7
..
-0.4
-0.6

..
11.7
..
1.3
..

..
-0.7
0.0
..

1.3
1.4
..
1.7
0.9

1.0
-0.1
0.0
-1.6
(.)

0.1
..
-2.5
4.4
-3.1

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
4.4
5.9
..

1.6
12.8
1.9
..
..

..
9.1
..
8.8
10.6

..
..
..
..
..

..
4.3
8.9
..

..
..
..
9.8
..

6.5
..
1.7
6.5
..

..
..
10.3
(.)
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

6.5
..
5.7
2.1
12.0

7.1
22.6
10.7
..
9.3

14.3
12.0
..
4.0
10.6

..
13.5
..
7.7
..

..
6.8
2.8
..

8.8
4.1
..
8.5
6.3

13.6
1.4
2.0
5.5
1.2

2.8
..
7.9
6.8
7.8

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
37.0
9.0
..

4.9
34.3
2.9
..
..

..
25.9
..
23.9
40.8

..
..
..
..
..

..
20.7
19.3
..

..
..
..
12.6
..

6.2
..
2.9
8.8
..

..
..
23.3
0.3
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

9.5
..
18.3
2.6
13.7

22.5
33.9
22.6
..
16.6

19.3
32.9
..
8.9
40.0

..
25.9
..
15.8
..

..
23.2
5.7
..

15.9
11.3
..
7.3
15.8

19.7
2.1
5.9
8.2
3.4

6.9
..
25.6
18.6
13.7

Total
(US$

millions)
2002

754.0 d
4.0 d

..

7.4 d

..

170.9
-81.7 d

3.4
49.6 d
11.3

392.7 d
-1.7 d
0.1
7.9
68.9 d

1,159.8 d
471.5 d
28.6
70.6
146.9 d

189.4 d
-22.6

4.6 d
5.3
13.4

2.2 d

166.5

4.2 d
86.4 d
5.3 d

61.0
135.5
-7.2
14.0

381.3 d
1,300.9 d
10.4 d
85.9
276.6

35.3
39.4 d
22.3
23.9
317.0

587.4
11.6
57.1
700.8 d
483.8 d

198

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

18 Flows of aid,

private capital
and debt

HDI rank 

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

33.5
375.9
441.0
40.8
37.8

295.5
26.9
188.3
24.3
455.8

34.1
293.5
559.7
27.5
491.3

40.5
4.8
635.8
56.7
534.3

349.4
475.0
9.5
1,475.8
29.9

344.0
312.6
156.7
22.2
216.0

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
115.8
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories 1,616.5
233.5
103 El Salvador
64.8
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde
92.2

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

80.8
189.4
361.0
20.2
186.0

1,308.1
1,276.8
141.7
681.0
434.9

168.4
208.5
517.5
656.8
1,286.1

Official development

assistance (ODA) received a

(net disbursements)

Total
(US$

millions)
2002

Per capita

(US$)
2002

Net foreign direct
investment inflows b

As % of GDP

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

1990

2002

Other

private flows b, c

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

MDG

Total debt service

As % of GDP
1990

2002

As % of exports of
goods and services
1990

2002

226.5
2.1
10.1
14.7
214.2

4.8
1.1
12.2
9.2
126.8

41.0
95.5
7.1
88.9
18.4

8.5
40.1
9.0
9.9
100.3

42.1
48.8
117.5
1.1
381.7

18.2
60.4
18.2
88.6
16.9

1.7
470.9
36.4
84.9
203.1

4.7
7.4
11.5
42.0
36.7

6.0
15.9
33.2
78.8
64.1

27.2
81.5
97.0
14.7
18.2

3.1
(.)
0.2
0.6
42.6

0.9
(.)
..
5.9
8.9

3.8
..
2.9
9.8
1.5

..
7.8
0.8
1.1
22.1

..
3.2
6.3
0.6
11.9

9.1
..
1.4
7.6
1.6

0.1
..
7.2
42.6
31.8

5.6
..
0.2
46.0
..

1.5
2.9
..
11.2
14.7

..
..
32.9
..
12.6

5.1
0.1
0.5
0.2
14.5

0.2
(.)
0.8
0.3
2.6

1.8
12.4
0.7
4.4
0.9

0.5
1.3
0.3
1.0
5.7

5.7
2.3
2.3
0.1
12.1

2.1
9.2
0.7
2.6
0.9

0.1
47.6
1.6
9.0
15.0

0.4
2.4
0.6
1.0
11.6

0.8
3.6
8.7
8.7
6.6

13.9
18.6
12.9
0.6
1.4

11.3
0.2
1.2
1.4
5.9

2.9
..
..
3.0
0.2

6.9
..
1.2
2.6
0.2

..
3.9
0.5
1.5
0.9

..
0.6
5.8
1.0
7.8

0.5
..
1.9
4.3
1.2

-0.3
..
(.)
2.0
0.1

0.6
..
(.)
8.4
..

1.0
2.8
..
0.6
1.4

..
..
0.0
..
1.7

3.4
3.7
2.5
0.2
0.5

0.7
..
10.5
6.1
1.5

4.1
4.7
1.4
1.9
4.2

1.3
5.3
0.6
-0.4
0.6

22.9
3.8
9.9
3.9
5.8

1.5
4.9
4.4
3.0
5.2

(.)
..
1.5
6.1
2.4

1.1
0.8
1.9
15.3
0.3

-0.9
4.0
6.8
8.7
2.2

0.7
7.0
4.3
0.7
0.7

-0.2
-0.1
-0.4
-3.8
0.0

2.3
..
..
-1.0
0.2

-1.2
..
0.2
0.5
0.1

..
0.0
0.8
-0.2
5.3

..
-1.6
0.1
1.3
-0.1

0.1
..
(.)
1.4
0.6

(.)
..
0.1
-4.1
(.)

-0.1
..
-0.7
0.0
..

1.6
0.0
..
-0.5
1.0

..
..
2.0
..
-0.2

4.5
-1.5
-1.3
-5.8
0.0

-2.3
..
7.5
0.7
26.3

-0.3
-0.1
3.1
2.3
1.3

..
2.1
3.6
1.0
-0.9

-1.3
4.0
23.3
-0.2
0.7

-0.2
-0.5
1.8
9.0
3.4

0.7
..
8.5
-0.1
0.2

(.)
-1.0
-0.1
0.0
-3.7

-3.2
-1.8
-2.1
-1.0
-0.6

-1.6
(.)
0.8
(.)
-0.2

1.6
1.8
9.7
7.0
4.9

6.2
..
..
14.4
3.5

7.9
..
8.1
4.1
1.8

..
2.2
4.9
6.2
15.6

..
11.6
1.5
2.0
3.5

4.8
..
3.3
5.0
10.5

0.5
..
4.3
74.5
1.7

9.7
..
14.2
3.9
..

8.7
2.7
..
7.9
12.8

..
..
1.6
..
7.1

4.0
11.4
8.6
8.6
3.0

15.6
..
16.7
10.7
12.7

1.5
3.1
11.8
3.5
5.9

..
3.7
15.0
5.9
6.3

3.1
6.8
6.2
2.4
4.5

4.3
3.8
3.1
22.3
9.0

1.3
..
3.2
10.8
3.5

1.2
9.2
7.5
0.2
10.8

9.8
3.4
14.1
6.1
6.0

6.5
4.7
3.8
4.5
2.3

2.1
22.2
40.9
12.3
5.8

16.9
..
..
26.9
3.3

12.0
..
27.0
4.8
10.8

..
2.9
29.4
12.4
20.4

..
24.5
3.1
11.7
5.6

13.8
..
10.4
7.5
32.5

3.2
..
15.3
..
4.8

21.8
..
63.4
12.1
..

33.3
..
..
38.6
35.3

..
..
3.9
..
20.4

7.2
68.9
40.2
14.2 f
10.8 e

23.1
..
34.4
18.4
51.0

5.9
8.8
20.2
4.5
32.8

..
7.6
46.8
10.5
8.7

6.5
13.5
13.6
8.2
7.9

9.8
11.0
6.4
36.5
28.7

4.1
..
7.7
10.7 g, h
7.6

3.0
24.3
..
..
25.3

24.8
6.0 g, i
19.9
27.7 g, j
12.3 g, h

10.2
6.7
11.7 g, j
12.5
10.3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

199

18 Flows of aid,

private capital
and debt

HDI rank 

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

Official development

assistance (ODA) received a

(net disbursements)

Total
(US$

millions)
2002

Per capita

(US$)
2002

Net foreign direct
investment inflows b

As % of GDP

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

1990

2002

Other

private flows b, c

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

MDG

Total debt service

As % of GDP
1990

2002

As % of exports of
goods and services
1990

2002

248.7
71.9
26.0
26.3
636.2

135.1
1,462.7
37.6
27.5
486.9

652.8
120.5
203.3
73.5
278.3

32.5
24.7
912.8
350.9
365.5
631.9

2,143.7
51.0
419.8
76.4
637.9

200.6
393.1
583.7
372.6
313.8

355.4
155.7
77.8
60.5
230.4

448.8
219.8
356.1
249.6
220.3

1,232.8
1,068.8
640.6
377.1
421.4

20.7
55.1
166.0
56.8
21.2

68.9
1.4
21.2
133.0
35.3

31.9
2.5
36.4
33.5
50.3

43.5
23.1
6.3
10.7
14.9
40.2

14.3
10.6
115.5
42.5
25.5

15.6
12.5
30.2
22.0
2.6

126.6
18.9
112.3
43.6
57.7

45.5
297.6
43.1
29.9
33.6

34.0
65.3
59.9
31.8
32.0

2.6
2.2
95.0
21.7
4.1

5.2
0.4
3.9
33.0
3.7

9.6
..
12.8
16.5
17.3

17.3
6.1
7.0
6.2
11.7
4.0

2.8
16.0
7.8
23.0
15.5

3.9
13.9
8.4
12.9
0.9

23.3
5.9
46.4
31.3
..

14.4
..
11.3
10.4
14.5

27.5
6.4
14.6
26.8
2.6

1.1
1.4
51.8
11.0
1.8

4.7
0.3
0.7
11.7
12.2

10.6
..
7.2
12.4
16.6

12.7
2.1
1.9
2.6
6.6
7.0

3.6
3.7
13.9
10.7
11.0

2.4
3.2
5.8
8.5
0.7

36.7
4.5
13.0
17.0
35.9

8.9
56.6
20.6
7.8
8.2

13.1
9.1
17.3
19.8
3.7

0.6
1.2
0.0
4.9
0.6

..
0.1
2.5
8.7
0.0

0.3
..
4.8
0.6
0.7

0.2
3.4
(.)
0.0
0.0
-1.0

0.6
1.1
0.0
2.8
0.0

-0.1
0.7
-2.7
0.7
2.1

0.7
0.0
(.)
0.0
..

1.0
..
0.3
0.6
3.4

0.0
0.4
6.2
1.2
-3.3

0.5
2.5
6.0
-2.8
1.2

..
0.6
0.7
6.4
1.3

0.8
..
1.8
0.1
1.5

0.6
3.8
0.1
4.7
0.2
1.0

1.4
5.4
11.0
11.3
2.6

0.3
0.4
1.1
0.2
2.9

1.2
0.2
0.6
12.0
3.3

1.9
..
0.2
0.0
1.5

2.6
2.0
5.3
0.3
11.7

-0.1
0.5
-0.2
-1.5
1.2

..
0.5
-0.5
-0.1
0.0

-0.3
..
1.5
-0.9
0.0

0.0
-0.5
0.2
0.0
-0.4
-0.1

-0.2
0.3
-3.6
(.)
0.4

1.1
0.8
3.3
-0.5
-0.4

-0.1
0.0
-0.1
-2.4
..

-0.2
..
-0.1
-0.7
(.)

0.1
0.1
-0.3
0.1
5.6

-0.2
0.3
0.0
-1.1
-1.1

..
0.4
(.)
0.0
0.0

-0.4
..
-3.4
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
(.)
-0.5

-0.8
0.0
0.0
-1.1
(.)

-0.4
-0.1
0.0
0.0
-1.5

0.4
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0

(.)
..
0.0
(.)
0.0

-0.3
-1.0
-0.3
0.0
1.0

2.8
3.0
4.9
5.5
6.9

..
2.6
2.8
1.6
2.7

6.2
..
17.2
1.8
1.1

0.4
5.3
2.5
0.4
1.9
4.6

4.8
5.3
19.0
3.8
3.4

5.4
9.2
3.5
7.2
11.7

14.3
1.2
3.6
11.9
..

5.7
..
0.8
6.0
2.1

4.2
11.7
6.2
7.1
3.2

1.8
8.3
12.1
2.4
10.2

..
2.6
1.1
0.9
0.5

3.4
..
9.9
1.1
2.7

1.9
1.7
1.5
0.2
1.8
3.9

4.8
0.9
0.8
9.4
1.4

0.7
3.7
1.7
1.7
3.4

6.6
0.8
2.0
5.4
1.4

4.3
..
1.3
4.2
2.3

1.5
7.1
8.3
1.9
7.7

12.6
6.4
34.0
11.9
21.5

..
31.9
4.3
2.1
..

36.8
18.4
37.2
5.5
8.7

2.3
5.7
25.8
8.7
15.7
20.5

21.3
11.9
35.3
4.2
81.4

23.1
35.4
5.6
45.5
22.6

29.8
11.0
..
22.2
..

20.0
..
14.2
20.0
8.2

32.9
35.4
14.9
29.3
8.1

7.5
11.7
31.8 g, h
6.9 e
23.9

..
14.9
2.0
1.0 f
0.8

8.0 g, h
2.9 f, g, i
12.7 f
4.6
9.0 f, g, i

.. g, i

1.7
7.3
0.8 g, i
8.8

.. g, h

17.8
2.5 g, i
1.0 g, i
11.8
7.1 g, j

..

13.6 g, i
3.3 g, i
9.9 g, h
8.6

.. g, j
..
..
.. g, h

4.7

12.6 g, h

..

14.9 g, h
13.6 g, h
9.6 g, j

8.9 g, j
14.1 g, i
27.1 g, h
7.6 g, h
10.0 g, i

200

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

18 Flows of aid,

private capital
and debt

Official development

assistance (ODA) received a

(net disbursements)

HDI rank 

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Total
(US$

millions)
2002

233.0
806.7
59.8
1,306.7
2,057.6

59.4
172.1
472.1
472.7
298.5
353.4

55,150.0 T
Developing countries
17,282.3 T
Least developed countries
7,015.6 T
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
7,724.0 T
Latin America and the Caribbean 5,063.1 T
6,851.4 T
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
17,854.0 T
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
7,140.0 T
OECD
High-income OECD

..
..

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

476.3 T
26,070.9 T
17,379.9 T

88.0 T
18,288.2 T
29,622.2 T

61,567.8 T

Per capita

(US$)
2002

27.9
15.8
15.7
18.9
111.0

41.0
26.1
37.4
37.4
25.9
74.2

8.8
24.7
24.2
3.9
8.6
4.5
26.3
31.2
..
..

..
6.5
24.2

..
7.4
11.8

9.7

Net foreign direct
investment inflows b

As % of GDP

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

1990

2002

Other

private flows b, c

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

MDG

Total debt service

As % of GDP
1990

2002

As % of exports of
goods and services
1990

2002

18.0
9.6
16.8
11.8
40.7

52.7
23.3
19.9
10.6
16.0
9.4

1.5
11.7
2.7
..
0.4
1.1
..
..
..
..

..
1.2
8.5

..
0.9
3.5

..

11.6
14.1
5.7
21.6
57.2

29.2
23.9
14.0
15.1
13.7
45.1

0.7
8.9
0.8
0.3
0.3
0.7
..
..
..
..

..
0.5
7.4

..
0.3
2.5

..

0.5
-0.2
(.)
0.1
0.4

0.8
0.1
0.2
(.)
1.6
5.0

1.0
0.1
0.9
2.3
0.7
(.)
..
..

1.0 k
1.0 k

1.0 k
0.7
0.5

1.0 k
0.9
0.4

1.0 k

45.0
0.6
0.4
1.2
11.3

0.5
0.0
3.0
0.3
0.4
0.6

2.5
2.9
0.6
3.6
2.7
0.6
2.4
3.5
1.9 k
1.9 k

2.0 k
2.2
2.9

1.9 k
2.7
1.2

2.0 k

(.)
-0.1
(.)
-0.7
1.0

(.)
-0.5
(.)
(.)
0.4
0.6

0.4
0.4
-0.1
0.6
0.5
0.3
0.2
(.)
..
..

..
0.3
0.3

..
0.3
0.5

..

(.)
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-0.7

0.0
-0.3
0.0
0.0
-0.4
0.0

-0.1
..
0.5
-0.3
-0.6
0.3
-0.3
1.5
..
..

..
0.1
-0.5

..
0.3
-0.5

..

0.7
3.7
2.0
2.7
3.2

3.4
3.7
2.8
1.1
4.0
3.3

3.5
2.7
4.0
3.0
4.0
2.6
3.8
0.5
..
..

..
2.9
6.2

..
3.0
4.2

..

1.5
16.2
0.1
1.8
2.1

7.3
3.2
2.7
1.7
1.3
2.9

4.8
2.3
2.3
3.4
8.2
2.5
4.1
7.3
..
..

..
5.5
4.0

..
6.3
3.9

..

4.4
..
13.2
39.0
26.2

31.0
43.4
12.3
6.8
17.4
10.1

19.9
16.2
14.9
17.9
23.7
19.5
20.4
13.5
..
..

..
18.5
21.6

..
17.9
27.0

..

.. g, h
.. g, i
.. g, i
9.7 g, h
6.1 g, j

.. g, h
59.0 g, i
7.0 g, j
16.0 g, j
.. g, h
.. g, h

17.8
7.7
6.7
12.1
30.8
11.9
10.6
17.0
..
..

..
16.7
11.1

..
18.1
15.0

..

Note: This table presents data for countries included in Parts I and II of the Development Assistance Committee’s (DAC) list of aid recipients (OECD 2004e). The denominator conventionally used when comparing official
development assistance and total debt service to the size of the economy is GNI, not GDP (see the definitions of statistical terms). GDP is used here, however, to allow comparability throughout the table. With few excep-
tions the denominators produce similar results.
a. ODA receipts are total net ODA flows from DAC countries as well as Czech Republic, Iceland, Israel, the Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates and other small
donors, including Taiwan (province of China), Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. A negative value indicates that the repayment of ODA loans exceeds the amount of ODA received. Aggregates do not include net official aid.
See the definitions of statistical terms. b. A negative value indicates that the capital flowing out of the country exceeds that flowing in. c. Other private flows combine non-debt-creating portfolio equity investment flows,
portfolio debt flows and bank and trade-related lending. See the definitions of statistical terms. d. Data refer to net official aid. See the definitions of statistical terms. e. Data refer to 2000. f. Data refer to 2001. g. Country
included in the Debt Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs). h. Decision point reached under the HIPC Initiative. i. Decision and completion points not yet reached under the HIPC Initiative. j. Completion
point reached under the HIPC Initiative. k. Data used to calculate the aggregate include countries not shown in table.
Source: Column 1: OECD 2004f; aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); column 2: calculated on the basis of data on
ODA from OECD 2004f; aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the OECD; columns 3 and 4: calculated on the basis of data on ODA from OECD 2004f and data on GDP from World Bank
2004f; columns 5, 6, 11 and 12: World Bank 2004f; aggregates calculated for the Human Development Report Office by the World Bank; columns 7 and 8: calculated on the basis of data on portfolio investment (bonds
and equity), bank and trade-related lending and GDP data from World Bank 2004f; columns 9 and 10: calculated on the basis of data on total debt service and GDP from World Bank 2004f.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

201

19 Priorities
in public
spending

HDI rank 

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on education a

(% of GDP)

on health b
(% of GDP)

Military expenditure c

(% of GDP)

Total debt service d

(% of GDP)

1990 e

1999-2001 f

1990

2001

1990

2002

1990

2002

7.1
7.4
5.1
6.5
6.0

5.0
5.4
5.2
..
5.2

5.1
4.9
5.6
5.4
3.0

5.4
..
6.2
..
4.4

3.1
6.3
..
2.5
..

4.2
..
3.5
7.8
3.5 i

4.3
..
..
1.1
7.8

..
..
5.8
2.7
4.2

4.6
5.1
2.5
4.8
4.4

3.0
3.5
..
1.9
3.8

6.8
7.6
4.6
5.2
5.0

5.8 g
6.0 g
5.6
3.6
4.3

5.6
4.6
6.3
5.9
4.1

5.7
8.3
6.6
4.6
4.4

5.0
7.3
4.1
3.8
..

5.8
..
3.6
6.5
5.6

4.9 g
4.4
..

4.6 g
7.5 g

7.4
5.4
5.1
7.7
..

..
4.1
3.9
..
4.7

2.5
..

4.2 g

..
5.9

6.4
7.6
5.3
6.8
5.7

6.6
6.8
4.7
4.6
4.8

5.7
5.1
6.4
5.2
5.7

6.7
7.0
5.8
5.9
5.2

6.3
3.8
1.6
4.7
1.0

4.1
..
1.8
5.0
..

..
4.8
1.6
4.2
3.6

1.9
4.8
..
2.7
..

3.0
5.0
2.2
4.0
6.7

2.0
..
9.5
0.8
2.7

6.8
7.4
6.2
6.8
5.7

6.4
7.6
6.2
6.2
4.9

6.4
6.3
5.3
5.5
5.4

7.3
7.0
6.4
8.1
5.4

6.3
6.0
..
5.2
1.3

6.3
6.3
2.6
4.3
3.9

6.0
6.7
2.5
5.1
4.1

4.3
4.6
5.1
3.2
2.9

4.2
5.1
3.1
3.5
4.9

5.1
2.2
7.3
2.6
3.4

2.9
2.6
2.1
2.0
2.5

2.4
0.0
5.3
0.9
1.2

1.8
4.0
1.6
1.0
0.9

3.5
2.0
1.9
2.8 h
1.8

2.1
12.2
..
4.7
4.9

2.7
..
3.7
..
5.0

0.9
..
6.7 j
1.3
4.0

..
2.7
2.8
..
5.1

..
..
4.3
48.5
0.0

2.5
..
..
6.2
..

2.1
1.9
1.9
1.2
1.6

1.3
0.0
3.4
1.0
0.7

1.1
2.4
1.2
0.8
0.9

2.5
1.6
1.1
1.5
1.2

2.1
9.2
..
4.3
5.2

2.1
1.5
2.7
..
1.6

0.9
2.1
7.0
1.2
1.7

1.9
1.9
1.8
..
3.9

1.8
1.9
3.9
10.4
0.0

1.7
..
2.5
3.7
1.8

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
4.4
5.9

..
1.6
12.8
1.9
..

..
..
9.1
..
8.8

10.6
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
6.5
..
5.7
2.1

12.0
7.1
22.6
10.7
..

9.3
14.3
12.0
..
4.0

10.6
..
13.5
..
7.7

202

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

19 Priorities 
in public
spending

HDI rank 

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on education a

(% of GDP)

on health b
(% of GDP)

Military expenditure c

(% of GDP)

Total debt service d

(% of GDP)

1990 e

1999-2001 f

1990

2001

1990

2002

1990

2002

4.0
..
3.6
3.6
..

5.2
3.5
..
5.2
..

4.7
4.9
..
3.5
5.8

..
8.1
3.0
2.8
5.2

..
..
2.5
3.1
3.4

3.5
6.5
3.2
4.7
..

4.6
7.0
2.9
4.0
2.2

4.3
6.4
2.2
1.1
8.4

..
6.0
5.1
2.3
..

2.6
..
..
4.7
2.8

..
8.5
5.1
4.0
3.2

..
3.1
2.7
7.9
4.1 g

4.3
6.0
5.0
3.3
..

..
..
..

3.5 g
4.2

7.3 g
4.0
4.4
4.2 g
4.5 g

5.0
..
..
6.3
2.9

5.5 g
3.2
3.2
..
3.3

..
9.3
3.7
4.7 g
4.6

3.5
6.8 g

..
..

5.0 g

1.3
2.5
2.4
6.2
1.0 g

2.8
4.9
1.8
2.5
2.8

4.1
2.5
..
1.5
9.2

4.6
2.5
3.7
..
3.3

..
3.5
2.5
2.8
3.0

2.1
3.0
1.2
2.0
2.8

0.9
..
3.2
2.6
..

2.0
..
1.5
3.6
1.3

4.0
4.4
2.2
0.7
3.6

2.7
3.0
3.3
2.2
3.9

1.5
3.0
1.6
2.2
1.5

3.2
6.2
2.7
1.7
3.4

3.9
3.7
1.6
2.0
5.8

4.8
4.8
3.4
2.0
2.4

2.8
5.7
3.7
5.2
2.9

2.9
3.2
3.6
2.4
4.8

2.1
3.4
1.9
2.9
..

2.7
3.2
1.5
5.6
2.6

3.0
3.8
..
3.0
4.5

..
4.9
3.8
2.0
4.3

1.8
1.4
2.2
2.3
2.3

..
..
0.5
..
..

3.5
12.3 k

..
2.6
..

1.3
..
..
0.3
5.9

..
..
1.8 j
4.6
..

..
1.9
2.2
16.5
..

2.3
12.8
..
..
7.6

2.3
..
1.4
..
..

..
..
3.5
1.2
9.9

..
2.0
..
2.7
..

2.1
..
..
1.2
1.9

..
..
0.5
..
..

2.7
4.0
2.4
2.4
2.8

..
1.4
..
0.2
1.2

..
..
1.4
2.3
2.9

..
1.6
4.2
12.3
..

1.4
9.8
1.0
..
4.7

1.8
2.7
1.0
..
1.5

..
..
4.9
0.9
8.4

2.0
..
..
2.5
..

3.1
0.9
..
..
2.8

..
..
4.3
8.9
..

..
..
..
9.8
..

6.5
..
1.7
6.5
..

..
..
10.3
(.)
..

1.6
1.8
9.7
7.0
4.9

6.2
..
..
14.4
3.5

7.9
..
8.1
4.1
1.8

..
2.2
4.9
6.2
15.6

..
11.6
1.5
2.0
3.5

4.8
..
3.3
5.0
10.5

..
..
6.8
2.8
..

8.8
4.1
..
8.5
6.3

13.6
1.4
2.0
5.5
1.2

2.8
..
7.9
6.8
7.8

4.0
11.4
8.6
8.6
3.0

15.6
..
16.7
10.7
12.7

1.5
3.1
11.8
3.5
5.9

..
3.7
15.0
5.9
6.3

3.1
6.8
6.2
2.4
4.5

4.3
3.8
3.1
22.3
9.0

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

203

19 Priorities
in public
spending

HDI rank 

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on education a

(% of GDP)

on health b
(% of GDP)

Military expenditure c

(% of GDP)

Total debt service d

(% of GDP)

1990 e

1999-2001 f

1990

2001

1990

2002

1990

2002

4.1
..
1.9
3.4
..

4.1
..
5.3
..
8.3

1.0
..
..
2.3
..

9.7
12.1
3.4
6.2
3.7

1.4
..
..
..
5.3

7.6
3.9
6.7
4.6
..

3.2
..
..
..
..

..
5.7
1.5
0.9
2.0
3.2

2.6
5.5
5.0
6.1
1.5

..
6.7
..
2.1
0.9

5.0
..

2.5 g
4.1 g

..

4.0
..
..
0.5
3.1

1.3
..
4.0
6.0
..

2.4
6.5 g

..
5.7
..

1.7
3.9 g

..

3.5 g
5.1

7.9
4.1
2.1
10.5
2.0

4.1 g
1.3
2.3 g
5.2
3.2

..
5.5
2.3
..
3.4
5.4

1.8 g
4.8
3.2
10.0
2.5 g

10.4 g
6.2 g
10.0 g
2.5
..

1.5
..
1.4
2.9
..

0.4
4.6
3.0
1.0
4.7

0.6
0.9
4.4
2.1
3.3

4.9
6.4
7.0
3.1
1.8

1.8
2.0
..
5.0
0.9

3.7
0.9
1.7
2.6
..

1.3
1.0
3.1
1.7
0.0

2.9
1.9
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.9

1.1
1.4
1.5
2.6
..

3.2
2.4
1.1
..
1.0

2.7
..
3.7
4.2
3.8

2.4
2.7
3.1
1.2
1.9

0.6
1.5
2.8
3.5
3.2

1.0
4.6
3.8
3.6
1.9

2.3
1.7
1.5
4.7
2.0

4.7
0.9
4.4
2.2
1.7

2.8
0.4
3.9
3.6
1.7

1.9
2.3
1.5
0.6
1.5
1.2

1.0
1.5
1.4
4.3
3.4

2.8
1.7
1.5
1.3
0.8

2.9
..
2.7
0.9
..

6.9
..
1.5
..
..

1.8
7.9
..
2.4
..

..
5.7
4.0 j
3.8
3.9

1.5
..
..
..
4.1

5.6 j
2.7
4.1
..
3.1

0.4
3.4
2.1
..
..

..
2.1
1.0
3.6
0.9
1.5

5.8
3.1
..
4.5
3.0

4.5
2.9
8.5
1.2
0.9

4.0
..
0.8
..
0.7

6.1
..
3.7
..
1.5

1.2
..
0.4
1.7
0.8

1.4
2.3
1.4
1.6
2.7

0.6
..
..
..
4.3

2.9
2.3
4.0
..
2.7

0.6
..
..
..
..

..
..
1.1
2.8
1.4
1.4

4.7
..
..
2.7
2.4

3.2
1.7
7.1
..
1.1

0.5
..
4.3
74.5
1.7

9.7
..
14.2
3.9
..

8.7
2.7
..
7.9
12.8

..
..
1.6
..
7.1

2.8
3.0
4.9
5.5
6.9

..
2.6
2.8
1.6
2.7

6.2
..
17.2
1.8
1.1

0.4
5.3
2.5
0.4
1.9
4.6

4.8
5.3
19.0
3.8
3.4

5.4
9.2
3.5
7.2
11.7

1.3
..
3.2
10.8
3.5

1.2
9.2
7.5
0.2
10.8

9.8
3.4
14.1
6.1
6.0

6.5
4.7
3.8
4.5
2.3

1.8
8.3
12.1
2.4
10.2

..
2.6
1.1
0.9
0.5

3.4
..
9.9
1.1
2.7

1.9
1.7
1.5
0.2
1.8
3.9

4.8
0.9
0.8
9.4
1.4

0.7
3.7
1.7
1.7
3.4

204

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

19 Priorities
in public
spending

Public expenditure

Public expenditure

on education a

(% of GDP)

on health b
(% of GDP)

Military expenditure c

(% of GDP)

HDI rank 

1990 e

1999-2001 f

1990

2001

1990

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

..
1.4
..
3.8
..

3.9
..
..
..
..

3.2
..
2.4
3.3
3.9

..
..
2.2
3.4
3.9

..
3.4
..
2.7
3.2
..

3.6 g

..
..

2.7 g
2.7

3.2 g

..

2.8 g
1.9 g
3.3 g

..
4.6
1.9
4.1 g
2.8 g

2.0 g

..
..
4.8
2.4 g

2.1
3.6 g
2.8 g

..
2.3
..

..
1.2
..
2.2
..

0.7
..
1.7
2.0
1.6

1.6
1.5
2.6
..
1.4

..
..
..
0.9
3.6

1.1
1.1
1.6
1.0
..
..

2.6
2.7
4.1
3.2
3.7

2.8
5.8
3.1
1.9
2.1

2.0
1.0
3.0
2.7
2.8

2.0
1.5
2.3
1.4
4.0

3.2
2.1
1.7
2.0
1.4
2.6

3.8
..
6.3
1.1
..

2.0
..
3.7
2.4 j
1.8

2.0 j
1.3
3.7
1.3
5.8

..
..
1.6 j
8.5
10.1

..
3.4
2.1
3.0
..
1.4

2002

1.9
..
..
0.9
23.5

1.5
0.0
3.3
2.9
..

1.5
..
..
..
3.7

1.4
..
1.0
5.2
2.4

..
7.6
..
1.8
1.1
2.2

Total debt service d

(% of GDP)

1990

2002

14.3
1.2
3.6
11.9
..

5.7
..
0.8
6.0
2.1

4.2
11.7
6.2
7.1
3.2

0.7
3.7
2.0
2.7
3.2

3.4
3.7
2.8
1.1
4.0
3.3

6.6
0.8
2.0
5.4
1.4

4.3
..
1.3
4.2
2.3

1.5
7.1
8.3
1.9
7.7

1.5
16.2
0.1
1.8
2.1

7.3
3.2
2.7
1.7
1.3
2.9

a. Data refer to total public expenditure on education, including current and capital expenditures. b. Data for some countries may differ slightly from data presented in table 6 from WHO 2004b. c. As a result of a num-
ber of limitations in the data, comparisons of military expenditure data over time and across countries should be made with caution. For detailed notes on the data see SIPRI 2003. d. For aggregates, see table 18. e. Data
may not be comparable between countries as a result of differences in methods of data collection. f. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. g. Data refer to UNESCO Institute for Statistics
estimate when national estimate is not available. h. Data refer to the Federal Republic of Germany before reunification. i. Data refer to the Office of Greek Education only. j. Data refer to 1991. k. Data refer to the former
Soviet Union.
Source: Column 1: Calculated on the basis of GDP and public expenditure data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003c; column 2: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004b; columns 3 and 4: World Bank 2004f; columns
5 and 6: SIPRI 2004a; columns 7 and 8: calculated on the basis of data on GDP and total debt service from World Bank 2004f.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

205

20 Unemployment

in OECD
countries

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
24 Greece
26 Portugal
28 Korea, Rep. of
32 Czech Republic

37 Poland
38 Hungary
42 Slovakia
53 Mexico

Medium human development

86 Turkey

OECD f

. . . TO HAVE ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES NEEDED FOR A DECENT STANDARD OF LIVING . . .

Unemployment rate

Youth unemployment  rate

Unemployed

people

(thousands)

2002

Total
(% of

Average
annual
(% of

labour force)

2002

labour force)
1992-2002

Female
(% of

male rate)

2002

Total

(% of labour
force ages
15-24) b
2002

Female
(% of

male rate)

2002

MDG

94.3
176.2
631.3
1,276.2
169.9

329.9
5.3
8,388.7
3,586.6
82.1

131.4
1,508.5
236.9
229.5
5.8

2,442.8
129.4
102.5
3,396.0
2,082.9

2,163.2
435.7
272.3
708.0
374.1

3,430.8
238.8
487.0
548.6

2,473.0

36,137.5 T

4.0
4.0
6.3
7.6
2.3

7.3
3.3
5.8
5.4
4.4

3.1
5.2
9.1
5.3
3.0

9.0
4.5
5.2
8.1
11.4

9.1
10.0
5.1
3.1
7.3

19.9
5.9
18.6
2.7

10.3

6.9

4.4
6.4
8.1
9.0
4.8

8.4
3.6
5.4
3.8
9.6

3.3
7.3
12.5
5.3
2.8

10.8
6.1
7.1
7.9
14.6

10.8
10.1
5.5
3.5
6.0

14.4 d
8.7
15.1 e
3.5

7.7

6.9

89
84
94
88
128

125
82
95
91
81

109
77
100
96
188

128
102
106
95
203

177
236
146
73
153

109
88
101
104

91

107

11.5
12.8
12.4
13.7
5.9

15.7
7.2
12.0
10.0
7.7

5.7
11.0
20.7
6.3
7.0

20.2
7.1
11.4
9.7
22.2

26.3
25.7
11.5
8.1
16.0

43.9
12.6
37.4
4.9

19.5

13.1

85
86
87
77
87

95
46
87
76
74

54
68
97
94
168

125
59
98
70
149

139
181
143
70
115

102
90
91
124

87

94

Long-term 

unemployment a

(% of total

unemployment)

Women

2002

3.9
18.2
17.1
8.8
26.4

53.6
13.3
8.1
22.4
18.0

24.5
17.1
21.2
23.3
26.5 c

35.2
22.4
11.5
50.3
44.5

60.1
55.7
36.2
1.2
51.1

52.0
41.7
61.2
0.4

36.4

30.9

Men
2002

8.3
23.1
25.9
10.3
26.9

45.9
9.5
8.9
36.2
35.9

19.3
26.9
27.3
16.4
28.6 c

32.2
17.2
16.9
46.0
34.3

58.2
47.1
34.8
3.1
50.3

45.1
47.0
58.5
1.2

27.3

28.5

a. Data refer to unemployment lasting 12 months or longer. b. The age range for the youth labour force may be 16-24 for some countries. c. Data are based on a small sample and must be treated with caution. d. Data
refer to the average annual rate in 1993-2002. e. Data refer to the average annual rate in 1994-2002. f. Aggregates for the group of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries are
from OECD 2004c.
Source: Columns 1, 2 and 5: OECD 2004c; columns 3, 4 and 6: calculated on the basis of data on male and female unemployment rates from OECD 2004c; columns 7 and 8: OECD 2004d.

206

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

21 Energy
and the
environment

. . . WHILE PRESERVING IT FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS . . .

Ratification of environmental treaties a

Traditional fuel
consumption
(% of total energy

requirements)

Electricity 
consumption
per capita

(kilowatt-hours)

HDI rank

2001

1980

2001

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

5.1 c
33.1
7.9
4.6
1.1

1.5
0.0
4.0
1.2
1.1

6.8 d
0.5
24.7
13.3
1.6

5.7 e
11.5
6.3
2.3
3.9

2.0 f
0.0
0.4
5.0
0.1

9.7
7.5
1.9
5.9
1.3

..
2.1
0.0
3.9
..

19.0
5.2
4.0
50.0
0.0

15.1
1.8
16.2
0.0
30.1

39.1
0.0
6.4
0.0
48.7

22,400 c
11,700
6,599
14,243
4,560

5,177
13,838
10,336
4,944
3,106

5,878 d
5,022
8,372
4,988
10,879

4,633 e
5,059
7,270
..
2,906

3,364 f
3,187
2,449
2,413
2,836

1,750
..
1,051
1,333
1,692

1,627
..
2,430
1,413
794

..
3,419
2,920
..
4,784

..
..
1,054
6,849
964

1,163
10,616
..
6,204
..

29,290 c
17,355
11,205
18,212
6,905

8,818
28,260
13,241
8,203
6,417

8,499 d
6,631
16,273
8,110
15,602

8,351 e
8,173
10,366
7,207
5,986

5,770 f
6,591
6,127
5,082
8,010

4,539
6,372
6,632
3,086
4,679

4,932
6,368
8,459
2,453
2,481

5,777
3,595
3,886
2,500
10,350

3,095
5,273
2,851
15,309
1,727

2,380
16,677
3,455
13,948
2,617

MDG

GDP per unit 
of energy use
(1995 PPP US$ per 
kg of oil equivalent)
1980
2001

MDG

Carbon dioxide emissions

Per capita
(metric tons)

1980

2000

Share of
world
total
(%)
2000

Cartagena
Protocol

on

Biosafety

4.4
3.4
3.4
2.4
3.7

3.6
2.8
2.6
5.1
4.1

7.0
4.1
2.8
5.6
1.9

4.8
4.9
4.9
3.7
6.2

6.5
5.6
10.2
7.5
3.4

8.4
..
3.8
..
4.5

6.4
..
3.5
7.3
..

1.9
..
3.3
..
1.4

..
..
4.9
2.3
8.9

7.6
..
..
..
32.7

5.5
4.0
4.2
3.2
5.2

4.3
2.3
4.0
5.8
7.0

7.0
5.8
3.6
6.8
5.0

5.3
7.3
4.0
5.6
6.0

7.8
..
9.9
5.8
2.9

6.4
4.5
3.5
..
5.0

8.3
3.2
..
6.8
..

2.8
3.9
4.7
..
1.5

3.7
3.1
5.6
2.2
8.3

9.7
..
4.7
..
4.1

9.5
8.6
13.8
17.1
10.8

13.3
8.2
20.4
7.9
7.4

6.5
10.3
11.9
6.9
28.9

9.0
12.3
5.6
..
5.3

6.6
5.4
3.2
5.4
12.5

2.8
..
3.3
2.7
5.2

2.7
..
35.5
3.8
1.5

..
12.8
7.7
..
23.4

..
..
2.5
18.0
1.1

2.0
56.3
..
34.8
..

11.1
5.3
18.0
14.2
8.7

10.0
7.7
19.8
9.3
11.1

5.4
9.6
10.3
7.6
19.4

6.2
8.4
8.3
9.6
7.0

7.4
10.0
5.0
8.5
14.7

5.9
7.3
9.1
4.4
8.5

7.2
11.6
..
3.9
2.8

11.7
7.8
5.4
..
29.1

3.4
6.6
3.9
21.9
1.4

1.6
69.5
4.4
21.0
2.5

0.2
0.2
1.4
1.8
0.6

0.4
(.)
23.1
4.9
0.2

0.2
2.3
0.2
0.3
(.)

1.5 e
0.2
0.1
3.2
1.2

1.8 f
0.3
0.1
0.4
0.2

0.2
0.1
1.8
(.)
(.)

(.)
0.5
(.)
0.6
(.)

0.1
1.2
0.2
(.)
0.1

(.)
0.1
0.2
0.2
(.)

(.)
0.2
0.1
0.2
(.)

●
●

●●
●

●●
●●

●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●

–
●●

●●
●
●●
●

●

●●
●●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●●

●●

●●

●

●

Kyoto
Protocol
to the

on

Framework Framework Convention
Convention Convention
on Climate on Climate
Change b

Biological
Diversity

Change

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
–
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
–
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
–
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

207

21 Energy 
and the
environment

Traditional fuel
consumption
(% of total energy

requirements)

Electricity 
consumption
per capita

(kilowatt-hours)

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

2001

..
24.5
15.0
0.7
..

5.3
3.4
1.2
2.3
9.6

20.2
5.8
0.0
30.4
6.3

7.4
6.7
2.6
11.7
1.1

..
35.7
19.1
..
33.3

15.9
(.)
..
8.5
1.0

32.1
1.1
33.4
0.0
25.4

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

..
..
11.7
28.7
2.0

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

0.0
10.4
0.0
7.8
..

34.8
27.2
11.3
31.3
22.5

1980

4,062
1,029
999
1,900
984

4,371
..
1,588
740
..

930
..
109
482
1,204

..
4,442
2,379
3,061
..

504
1,145
726
847
252

340
1,969
..
834
1,056

489
..
373
25
579

..
276
554
233
366

..
434
281
307
149

113
..
582
370
423

2001

5,407
1,363
2,228
4,219
1,375

4,681
6,081
4,021
3,039
3,338

1,770
3,340
356
1,592
1,743

2,303
4,359
3,659
2,345
3,465

1,816
2,122
1,010
5,119
600

1,804
6,018
3,964
2,539
3,025

633
1,413
599
420
874

1,908
780
1,849
1,124
1,507

2,422
1,106
1,168
1,139
1,038

354
1,379
1,233
669
865

Ratification of environmental treaties a

MDG

GDP per unit 
of energy use
(1995 PPP US$ per 
kg of oil equivalent)
1980
2001

..
..
4.9
2.0
..

1.5
1.5
..
4.3
..

6.1
..
..
..
2.7

..
..
2.7
..
..

..
6.7
6.5
7.5
..

4.8
5.6
..
2.7
..

..
..
8.3
..
7.2

..
..
5.2
6.7
5.4

..
6.5
..
1.2
..

5.1
6.0
5.4
..
2.6

..
..
5.3
1.3
..

2.5
1.6
..
3.6
..

5.1
1.9
..
..
6.4

4.8
..
2.4
3.4
1.4

..
6.2
7.9
3.0
..

4.8
2.0
1.7
2.1
3.2

..
3.3
6.8
..
9.4

1.3
..
4.9
6.1
3.7

1.7
7.0
..
4.2
..

7.3
4.2
5.7
..
4.4

MDG

Carbon dioxide emissions

Per capita
(metric tons)

1980

38.0
3.2
3.7
15.4
2.3

8.5
..
8.8
2.0
..

1.8
..
0.4
0.6
1.8

..
6.7
6.0
8.6
..

1.0
1.5
1.4
5.3
0.6

0.9
14.0
..
4.0
2.1

1.2
..
0.8
0.3
1.4

..
0.4
1.7
0.5
2.2

..
1.5
0.5
1.5
0.5

0.2
..
1.1
1.3
1.7

2000

5.9
2.8
4.3
20.5
5.2

5.2
9.9
10.9
6.2
5.5

2.2
5.9
1.2
2.4
0.9

4.8
5.0
6.5
3.8
6.9

..
1.8
1.4
8.2
0.8

3.3
18.1
8.1
4.2
3.5

0.9
1.1
1.0
1.8
1.1

7.5
..
3.3
0.7
3.2

3.6
1.9
2.1
2.2
1.4

0.6
1.2
3.0
3.3
2.0

Share of
world
total
(%)
2000

Cartagena
Protocol

on

Biosafety

(.)
0.1
1.8
0.1
(.)

0.2
5.9
0.2
0.6
(.)

(.)
0.2
(.)
(.)
(.)

0.1
(.)
0.7
0.4
1.4

(.)
1.3
0.2
0.1
(.)

0.8
1.5
0.5
(.)
0.1

(.)
(.)
0.3
(.)
0.1

0.1
(.)
0.9
(.)
0.1

0.1
0.1
(.)
11.5
(.)

(.)
(.)
0.1
(.)
0.1

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●●

●

●●
●
●●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●●

●●

●
●

Kyoto
Protocol
to the

on

Framework Framework Convention
Convention Convention
on Climate on Climate
Change b

Biological
Diversity

Change

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●●

●

●

●

●
●●

●
●
●

●

●

●●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

208

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

21 Energy
and the
environment

Traditional fuel
consumption
(% of total energy

requirements)

Electricity 
consumption
per capita

(kilowatt-hours)

HDI rank

2001

1980

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
0.1
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories ..
39.9
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
47.6
..
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

0.0
0.0
8.4
75.0
0.0

24.8
32.5
2.2
23.6
62.1

..
3.3
54.6
12.9 g
12.6

65.3
21.3
..
66.7
2.5

.. h

24.3

.. h

50.0
95.1

84.5
81.1
68.6
84.1
81.6

..
.. h

63.6
80.1
88.0
71.6

26.6
88.6
65.6

.. h

95.0

68.6
70.6
3.2
84.4
82.3

570
..
336
545
55

433
..
381
83
..

94
78
..
292
259

..
1,119
363

3,181 g
433

245
766
96
93
254

.. h

173

.. h

171
15

450
44
406
17
68

26
.. h
30
47
17
168

176
74
98
.. h
28

1,020
109
..
49
108

2001

1,985
..
661
1,189
102

1,528
1,971
866
49
2,396

469
389
1,572
469
650

2,499
1,308
485

4,313 g
1,129

481
1,214
118
71
569

.. h

561

.. h

4,813
18

404
118
255
241
130

26
.. h

115
81
63
226

479
125
137

.. h
66

950
140
164
51
154

Ratification of environmental treaties a

MDG

GDP per unit 
of energy use
(1995 PPP US$ per 
kg of oil equivalent)
1980
2001

MDG

Carbon dioxide emissions

Per capita
(metric tons)

1980

2000

Share of
world
total
(%)
2000

Cartagena
Protocol

on

Biosafety

4.5
..
4.0
..
..

4.3
..
7.6
..
..

3.3
..
..
5.1
4.4

..
..
5.3
4.2
5.0

6.5
3.1
..
..
10.6

..
3.1
..
..
..

4.4
..
..
..
..

..
..
9.7
2.3
2.4
4.4

3.5
6.6
1.9
..
..

2.5
1.6
..
..
1.3

3.0
..
6.2
..
..

3.5
0.7
5.0
..
3.2

3.7
4.0
1.7
4.3
4.6

1.7
..
..
3.5
4.5

5.7
4.2
..
..
9.0

9.3
4.4
..
..
..

4.3
..
..
..
..

..
..
9.7
3.3
3.5
4.2

3.8
4.2
3.3
..
..

2.8
1.8
3.8
..
1.1

3.0
..
0.5
2.3
0.4

2.2
..
3.5
0.3
..

0.6
0.3
..
0.8
0.6

..
4.1
0.7
7.7
1.1

0.7
8.9
0.5
0.4
0.8

..
0.5
1.1
0.5
(.)

0.2
0.1
0.6
(.)
0.1

0.1
0.8
0.1
0.2
(.)
0.4

0.4
0.2
0.2
..
0.1

1.3
0.4
..
0.2
1.0

4.9
..
1.1
2.1
0.3

3.3
4.8
2.9
0.4
0.9

1.3
0.7
1.5
1.3
0.7

0.6
3.1
0.7
7.4
2.2

0.9
2.8
0.6
0.4
1.3

1.0
1.1
2.3
0.4
(.)

0.3
0.2
0.5
0.5
0.1

0.1
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.4

0.8
0.4
0.5
..
0.1

1.2
0.3
0.5
0.1
0.3

1.3
..
(.)
(.)
(.)

0.2
0.5
0.4
(.)
(.)

1.1
0.2
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
1.4
0.6

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
0.2

(.)
4.4
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
0.1
(.)
(.)
(.)

0.4
(.)
(.)
..
(.)

0.1
(.)
(.)
(.)
0.1

●

●

●●

●●
●
●
●
●●

●
●
●
●
●

●●

●●
●
●

●

●
●●

●

●

●●
●

●●
●●
●●
●
●

●●
●

●
●

Kyoto
Protocol
to the

on

Framework Framework Convention
Convention Convention
on Climate on Climate
Change b

Biological
Diversity

Change

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

209

21 Energy
and the
environment

Traditional fuel
consumption
(% of total energy

requirements)

Electricity 
consumption
per capita

(kilowatt-hours)

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

2001

36.9
54.0
..
71.4
77.8

72.5
..
92.8
90.6
81.9

92.8
75.1
87.1
86.6
79.2

97.8
94.6
87.5
95.2
90.5

66.7
96.6
88.3
91.7
77.3
92.0

21.4
Developing countries
84.1
Least developed countries
5.9
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
10.9
Latin America and the Caribbean 21.4
South Asia
23.4
62.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.0
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
4.5
OECD
High-income OECD
4.1

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

4.5
13.4
75.8

4.0
9.3
43.5

10.7

1980

2001

60
58
416
70
..

115
..
32
85
37

41
220
1,125
66
214

10
161
29
..
364

18
12
15
16
39
62

388
83
626
329
1,019
171
434
3,284
5,761
6,698

5,700
387
157

6,614
667
166

1,573

61
67
286
95
61

151
..
23
97
75

85
233
598
76
125

12
93
29
30
70

43
73
34
24
41
55

1,035
95
1,783
1,194
1,888
554
495
3,326
8,503
10,105

8,520
1,022
218

10,030
1,541
400

2,361

Ratification of environmental treaties a

MDG

GDP per unit 
of energy use
(1995 PPP US$ per 
kg of oil equivalent)
1980
2001

MDG

Carbon dioxide emissions

Per capita
(metric tons)

1980

2000

Share of
world
total
(%)
2000

Cartagena
Protocol

on

Biosafety

..
6.5
..
..
..

3.6
..
..
..
2.0

..
4.6
1.3
..
2.9

..
5.3
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

3.3
..
5.1
1.9
5.7
3.5
3.0
..
3.6
3.5

3.6
2.6
2.4

3.5
2.7
3.1

3.2

..
5.8
..
..
..

4.3
..
..
..
2.9

1.2
3.7
1.2
..
2.2

..
1.9
..
2.2
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

4.2
3.7
3.4
4.2
5.7
4.3
2.4
2.0
4.7
4.7

4.7
3.7
2.2

4.7
3.7
3.6

4.2

0.4
0.1
1.0
0.2
..

0.5
..
0.1
0.2
0.1

0.1
0.6
0.6
0.1
0.8

(.)
0.1
(.)
(.)
0.3

0.7
(.)
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2

1.3
0.1
3.0
1.4
2.4
0.5
1.0
..
11.0
12.2

10.9
1.3
0.4

12.2
2.3
0.5

3.4

1.2
0.2
0.6
0.2
0.1

0.4
..
0.1
0.2
0.3

0.1
0.7
0.2
0.1
0.5

(.)
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0.2
(.)
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

1.9
0.2
4.1
2.3
2.7
1.1
0.8
7.3
10.9
12.5

10.9
2.3
0.3

12.4
3.4
0.9

3.8

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
..
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

36.9
0.4
4.5
17.6
5.6
6.3
1.9
12.2
51.0
46.2

52.8
38.7
1.0

47.8
37.6
8.5

100.0 i

●●
●
●●

●

●●
●●
●●

●

●●

●●

●●
●
●

●
●
●●

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-

-

Kyoto
Protocol
to the

on

Framework Framework Convention
Convention Convention
on Climate on Climate
Change b

Biological
Diversity

Change

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-

-

●
●

●

●
●

●

●●
●

●
●

●●

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-

-

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-

-
-
-

-

● Ratification, acceptance, approval, accession or succession. ●● Signature.
a. Information is as of 24 March 2004. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety was signed in Cartagena in 2000, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in New York in 1992, the Kyoto Protocol to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Kyoto in 1997 and the Convention on Biological Diversity in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. b. Has not yet entered into force. c. Includes Svalbard and Jan Mayen
Islands. d. Includes Liechtenstein. e. Includes Monaco. f. Includes San Marino. g. Data refer to the South African Customs Union, which includes Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Namibia. h. Included in the data for
South Africa. i. Data refer to the world aggregate from CDIAC 2004. Data refer to total carbon dioxide emissions, including those of countries not shown in the main indicator tables as well as emissions not included in
national totals, such as those from bunker fuels and oxidation of non-fuel hydrocarbon products.
Source: Column 1: Calculated on the basis of data on traditional fuel consumption and total energy requirements from UN 2004c; columns 2-3: UN 2004b; columns 4-7: World Bank 2004f; aggregates calculated for
the Human Development Report Office by the World Bank; column 8: calculated on the basis of data on carbon dioxide emissions from CDIAC 2004; columns 9-12: UN 2004f.

210

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

22 Refugees and

armaments

. . . PROTECTING PERSONAL SECURITY . . .

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

Internally
displaced
people

(thousands)

2003 a, c

Refugees a

By country
of asylum
(thousands)

2003

By country
of origin d
(thousands)

2003

0
0 f
0 f
0
0 f

0 f
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0 f
0 f

0 f
0 f
0 f
0
0

0
0 f
0
0 f
0

0 f
0
0
..
0

0 f
0
..
0
..

0
0
0
..
0 f

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
13
0
0

56
142 f
59 f
133
148 f

13 f
(.)
453
2
6

49
277
13
14 f
1 f

132 f
74 f
6 f
960
6

12
4 f
2
3 f
(.)

(.) f
2
(.)
..
(.)

(.) f
2
..
3
..

(.)
2
7
..
0 f

(.)
(.)
(.)
2
14

(.)
(.)
4
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
..

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
..
(.)
(.)

(.)
1
(.)
(.)
(.)

..
6
(.)
(.)
(.)

1
14
2
..
(.)

1
(.)
1
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
215
(.)
2

Conventional arms transfers b

(1990 prices)

Exports

Share e

(%)

Total armed forces
Index

Thousands

(1985 = 100)

Imports

(US$ millions)

1994

2003

US$

millions

2003

99
258
263
333
143

52
..
725
596
48

113
38
179
65
(.)

6
66
16
..
636

151
829
..
1,262
171

433
11
665
..
46

(.)
(.)
(.)
177
..

15
8
4
..
10

(.)
30
113
37
(.)

8
10
57
554
12

(.)
23
485
94
132

27
..
515
210
2

41
555
125
55
1

120
7
71
69
97

348
318
..
1,957
121

68
14
299
..
(.)

(.)
111
(.)
127
..

16
420
(.)
..
(.)

(.)
(.)
156
21
(.)

(.)
10
(.)
922
29

150
186
30
556
268

6
(.)
4,385
(.)
(.)

35
525
10
2
..

1,753
3
(.)
1,549
124

277
212
..
(.)
(.)

(.)
..
36
..
(.)

..
48
..
(.)
..

(.)
89
(.)
..
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
..

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

1999-2003

2002

2002

1
1
(.)
1
1

(.)
0
34
0
0

(.)
5
(.)
(.)
..

7
(.)
0
6
(.)

2
1
..
(.)
(.)

0
..
(.)
..
0

..
(.)
..
(.)
..

0
(.)
0
..
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
0
..

(.)
(.)
(.)
0
0

27
34
51
52
50

39
..
1,414
240
11

28
210
32
35
1

260
23
9
296
178

217
162
..
178
61

44
9
686
1
10

2
49
7
70
1

6
163
33
..
11

14
26
81
16
..

24
12
51
42
6

72
52
72
63
47

43
..
66
99
77

138
63
87
63
129

56
77
70
62
56

56
114
..
88
110

60
..
115
60
100

263
24
171
65
42

..
51
32
..
382

..
..
80
129
..

75
207
..
97
..

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

211

22 Refugees and

armaments

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Internally
displaced
people

(thousands)

2003 a, c

Refugees a

By country
of asylum
(thousands)

2003

By country
of origin d
(thousands)

2003

..
0
0
..
..

0
368
0
0
0

0
0
..
0 f
0

327
0 f
0
0
0

..
0
2,040
0
..

0
0
0
..
0

..
0
0
..
0

0
..
0
0
0

576
0
..
0
..

386
260
..
0
0

..
1
6
..
..

4
10
12
(.)
(.)

1
1
..
0 f
(.)

23
0 f
(.)
2
3

..
3
(.)
0
..

119
241
16
..
3

..
239
(.)
..
1

14
..
2
(.)
1

(.)
(.)
..
299
..

(.)
4
..
1
6

..
3
(.)
(.)
..

1
67
1
(.)
5

(.)
3
(.)
(.)
2

167
(.)
(.)
6
58

..
(.)
16
(.)
..

(.)
(.)
4
(.)
19

(.)
6
(.)
..
2

1
..
147
(.)
1

248
2
..
100
..

81
10
(.)
(.)
(.)

Conventional arms transfers b

(1990 prices)

Exports

Share e

(%)

Total armed forces
Index

Thousands

(1985 = 100)

Imports

(US$ millions)

1994

2003

US$

millions

2003

(.)
..
118
(.)
..

(.)
40
(.)
376
27

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
1
25
..

..
225
39
173
..

661
991
(.)
(.)
13

4
310
71
(.)
121

..
..
1,250
(.)
5

25
32
..
142
..

53
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
..
43
(.)
..

2
(.)
(.)
242
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)
1

(.)
(.)
(.)
46
..

..
87
48
14
..

163
487
62
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
8
(.)
(.)

..
..
504
4
258

(.)
(.)
..
2,548
..

8
(.)
76
(.)
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

18
6,980
23
(.)
..

..
60
..
..
..

(.)
..
..
22
234

..
(.)
..
(.)
..

5
(.)
(.)
..
(.)

..
..
..
..
(.)

..
..
61
..
(.)

..
..
..
404
..

..
(.)
..
..
..

1999-2003

2002

2002

..
..
..
..
..

(.)
30
(.)
(.)
..

..
1
..
..
..

(.)
..
..
(.)
2

..
(.)
..
0
..

(.)
0
(.)
..
(.)

..
..
..
..
(.)

..
..
(.)
..
0

..
..
..
2
..

..
(.)
..
..
..

1
46
193
3
(.)

68
..
76
100
12

..
80
..
..
27

20
2
82
99
302

..
288
158
42
..

306
200
60
3
72

4
45
106
...
110

18
..
515
19
100

72
35
..
2,270
..

158
18
25
1
60

180
28
149
129
200

46
..
104
91
..

..
..
..
..
67

..
100
168
52
..

..
104
239
143
..

130
319
..
133
413

130
..
92
..
86

..
..
82
129
143

..
100
..
58
..

731
..
110
183
140

212

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

22 Refugees and

armaments

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Internally
displaced
people

(thousands)

2003 a, c

0
0
0
..
..

0
0
0
..
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0 f
0
0
0

0
0
0
..
0

0
0
0
..
0

0
0 f
0
..
0 f

0 f
0
0
0 f
0
0

0
0
0
0 f
0

0
0
0
0 f
0

Refugees a

By country
of asylum
(thousands)

By country
of origin d
(thousands)

2003

985

0 g
(.)
..
..

4
45
169
..
6

(.)
15
(.)
1
(.)

3
0 f
(.)
27
89

1
14
0
..
2

20
165
3
..
(.)

44
0 f
7
..
0 f

0 f
1
20
328 f
134
59

1,124
12
91
0 f
231

13
239
62
0 f
9

2003

57
326 g

4
(.)
(.)

16
4
4
(.)
2

8
331
6
(.)
(.)

59
(.)
4
(.)
1

4
(.)
(.)
..
1

1
3
(.)
..
17

13
141
(.)
114
2

(.)
(.)
1
567
1
2

10
8
24
(.)
24

(.)
(.)
1
(.)
19

Conventional arms transfers b

(1990 prices)

Exports

Share e

(%)

Total armed forces
Index

Thousands

(1985 = 100)

Imports

(US$ millions)

1994

2003

US$

millions

2003

376
5
(.)
(.)
(.)

44
(.)
156
(.)
(.)

559
(.)
2
7
..

24
..
..
19
1,976

3
..
..
..
131

3
561
(.)
..
71

10
3
1
..
(.)

..
(.)
51
(.)
(.)
(.)

687
3
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
12
4
..
75

323
(.)
(.)
(.)
(.)

15
(.)
513
(.)
9

333
7
(.)
(.)
..

(.)
..
..
13
504

(.)
..
..
..
(.)

5
3,621
(.)
..
(.)

(.)
31
(.)
..
(.)

..
(.)
(.)
(.)
5
(.)

611
(.)
(.)
(.)
19

23
(.)
30
..
51

(.)
..
..
..
..

(.)
510
..
..
76

20
..
(.)
..
..

..
..
(.)
23
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

..
(.)
..
..
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

(.)
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

1999-2003

2002

2002

0
..
..
..
..

0
1
..
..
(.)

(.)
..
(.)
..
..

..
..
0
(.)
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

..
(.)
..
..
0

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

(.)
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

520
..
17
2
1

319
52
137
2
11

297
484
7
32
8

6
9
14
60
443

31
5
..
..
196

9
1,298
9
..
125

7
444
3
..
29

..
..
137
117
51
23

620
10
10
2
55

36
24
67
14
79

85
..
40
24
16

79
..
80
105
..

107
47
..
114
50

..
28
22
56
100

99
196
..
..
132

..
103
225
..
357

46
239
97
..
54

..
..
150
207
204
316

128
264
115
100
275

88
178
104
64
84

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

213

22 Refugees and

armaments

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & the CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

Internally
displaced
people

(thousands)

2003 a, c

Refugees a

By country
of asylum
(thousands)

2003

By country
of origin d
(thousands)

2003

0
..
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
38
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
100
0
0
0
0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

5,081 h

(.)
..
27
7
4

21
(.)
37
184
5

650
76
227
3
13

146
234
45
130
(.)

8
41
10
(.)
(.)
61

6,726 T
2,717 T
1,074 T
444 T
38 T
2,428 T
2,740 T
678 T
2,580 T
2,561 T

2,610 T
3,147 T
3,712 T

2,571 T
2,807 T
4,591 T

9,970 T

26
(.)
(.)
(.)
11

8
..
66
1
(.)

(.)
47
(.)
(.)
313

46
428
35
26
(.)

(.)
525
(.)
1
(.)
78

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

Conventional arms transfers b

(1990 prices)

Exports

Share e

(%)

Total armed forces
Index

Thousands

(1985 = 100)

Imports

(US$ millions)

1994

2003

US$

millions

2003

27
..
(.)
..
14

1
..
(.)
(.)
(.)

2
(.)
(.)
1
96

8
(.)
..
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
..
(.)
1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

(.)
..
(.)
..
180

(.)
..
(.)
(.)
6

(.)
22
(.)
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
..
(.)
(.)

(.)
(.)
(.)
..
(.)
(.)

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..
..
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
(.)
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

19,253 T i

18,679 T i

18,680 T i

1999-2003

2002

2002

..
..
..
..
0

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
(.)
(.)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

16
..
10
1
172

9
..
70
10
5

27
17
22
5
100

30
81
3
253
11

9
46
7
10
5
13

14,203 T
2,033 T
2,282 T
6,012 T
1,268 T
2,834 T
1,283 T
1,253 T
5,092 T
4,112 T

5,208 T
10,455 T
1,847 T

4,444 T
8,411 T
6,191 T

19,045 T

185
..
327
160
..

93
..
1,346
98
102

67
129
133
100
202

249
170
111
116
70

108
875
151
255
241
419

91
174
84
80
94
112
152
19
70
70

71
62
148

72
52
116

69

a. Data refer to the end of 2003 unless otherwise specified. Provisional data subject to change. b. Data are as of 25 February 2004. Figures are trend indicator values, which are an indicator only of the volume of inter-
national arm transfers, not of the actual financial value of such transfers. Published reports of arms transfers provide partial information, as not all transfers are fully reported. The estimates presented are conservative and
may understate actual transfers of conventional weapons. c. Persons who are displaced within their country and to whom the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) extends protection or assistance,
generally pursuant to a special request by a competent organ of the United Nations. A zero indicates that the indicator has a value of zero, is not available or is not applicable. d. The country of origin for many refugees
is unavailable or unreported. These data may therefore be underestimates. e. Calculated using the 1999-2003 totals for all countries and non-state actors with exports of major conventional weapons as defined in SIPRI
2004b. f. Refers to the end of 2002. g. Palestinian refugees under the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in Jordan, Occupied Palestinian Territo-
ries, the Syrian Arab Republic or Lebanon are not included. Data refer to the Gaza Strip. h. Data refer to the world aggregate from UNHCR 2004. i. Data refer to the world aggregate from SIPRI 2004b. It includes all coun-
tries and non-state actors with transfers of major conventional weapons as defined in SIPRI 2004b.
Source: Columns 1-3: UNHCR 2004; columns 4-6: SIPRI 2004b; column 7: calculated on the basis of data on weapons transfers from SIPRI 2004b; column 8: IISS 2003; column 9: calculated on the basis of data on
armed forces from IISS 2003.

214

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

23 Victims of

crime

. . . PROTECTING PERSONAL SECURITY . . .

Year b

Total crime c

Property crime d

Robbery

Sexual assault e

Assault

Bribery (corruption) f

People victimized by crime a

(% of total population)

National

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark

England and Wales
Finland
France
Italy
Japan

Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Northern Ireland
Poland

Portugal
Scotland
Slovenia
Sweden
Switzerland
United States

Major city

Asunción (Paraguay)
Baku (Azerbaijan)
Beijing (China)
Bishkek (Kyrgyzstan)
Bogotá (Colombia)

Bratislava (Slovakia)
Bucharest (Romania)
Budapest (Hungary)
Buenos Aires (Argentina)
Cairo (Egypt)

Dar es Salaam (Tanzania, U. Rep. of)
Gaborone (Botswana)
Jakarta (Indonesia)
Johannesburg (South Africa)
Kampala (Uganda)

Kiev (Ukraine)
La Paz (Bolivia)
Manila (Philippines)
Maputo (Mozambique)
Minsk (Belarus)

Moscow (Russian Federation)
Mumbai (India)
New Delhi (India)
Prague (Czech Republic)
Rïga (Latvia)

1999
1995
1999
1999
1999

1999
1999
1999
1991
1999

1996
1999
1991
1999
1999

1999
1999
2000
1999
1999
1999

1995
1999
1991
1995
1996

1996
1999
1999
1995
1991

1991
1996
1995
1995
1995

1999
1995
1995
2001
1999

1999
1995
1995
1999
1999

30.1
18.8
21.4
23.8
23.0

26.4
19.1
21.4
24.6
15.2

23.1
25.2
29.4
15.0
22.7

15.5
23.2
21.2
24.7
18.2
21.1

34.4
8.3
19.0
27.8
54.6

36.0
25.4
32.1
61.1
28.7

..
31.7
20.9
38.0
40.9

29.1
39.8
10.6
40.6
23.6

26.3
31.8
30.5
34.1
26.5

13.9
3.1
7.7
10.4
7.6

12.2
4.4
8.7
12.7
3.4

10.9
7.4
14.8
6.2
9.0

7.5
7.6
7.7
8.4
4.5
10.0

16.7
2.4
2.2
11.3
27.0

20.8
10.8
15.6
30.8
12.1

23.1
19.7
9.4
18.3
20.6

8.9
18.1
3.3
29.3
11.1

10.9
6.7
6.1
21.6
9.4

1.2
0.2
1.0
0.9
0.7

1.2
0.6
1.1
1.3
0.1

0.4
0.8
0.7
0.1
1.8

1.1
0.7
1.1
0.9
0.7
0.6

6.3
1.6
0.5
1.6
11.5

1.2
1.8
1.8
6.4
2.2

8.2
2.0
0.7
4.7
2.3

2.5
5.8
1.5
7.6
1.4

2.4
1.3
1.0
0.5
2.8

1.0
1.2
0.3
0.8
0.4

0.9
1.1
0.7
0.6
0.1

0.1
0.8
1.3
0.1
0.2

0.2
0.3
0.8
1.1
0.6
0.4

1.7
0.0
0.6
2.2
4.8

0.4
0.4
0.9
6.4
1.8

6.1
0.7
1.3
2.7
5.1

1.2
1.5
0.1
2.2
1.4

1.2
3.5
1.7
0.9
0.5

2.4
0.8
1.2
2.3
1.4

2.8
2.1
1.4
0.2
0.1

1.1
1.0
2.4
2.1
1.1

0.4
3.0
1.1
1.2
1.0
1.2

0.9
0.4
0.6
2.1
2.5

0.5
0.6
0.8
2.3
1.1

1.7
3.2
0.5
4.6
1.7

1.5
2.0
0.1
3.2
1.3

1.1
0.8
0.8
1.1
1.9

0.3
0.7
0.3
0.4
0.3

0.1
0.2
1.3
..
(.)

4.0
0.4
..
0.2
5.1

1.4
..
2.1
0.1
0.2 g
0.2

13.3
20.8
..
19.3
19.5

13.5
19.2
9.8
30.2
..

..
2.8
29.9
6.9
19.5

16.2
24.4
4.3
30.5
20.6

16.6
22.9
21.0
5.7
14.3

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

215

23 Victims of

crime

Rio de Janeiro (Brazil)
San José (Costa Rica)
Skopje (Macedonia, TFYR)
Sofia (Bulgaria)
Tallinn (Estonia)

Tbjlisi (Georgia)
Tirana (Albania)
Tunis (Tunisia)
Ulaanbaatar (Mongolia)
Vilnius (Lithuania)
Zagreb (Croatia)

Year b

Total crime c

Property crime d

Robbery

Sexual assault e

Assault

Bribery (corruption) f

People victimized by crime a

(% of total population)

1995
1995
1995
1999
1999

1999
1999
1991
1999
1999
1999

44.0
40.4
21.1
27.2
41.2

23.6
31.7
37.5
41.8
31.0
14.3

14.7
21.7
9.4
16.1
22.5

11.1
11.2
20.1
20.0
17.8
4.4

12.2
8.9
1.1
1.5
6.3

1.8
2.9
5.4
4.5
3.2
0.5

7.5
3.5
0.3
0.1
3.3

0.4
1.2
1.5
1.4
2.0
0.8

3.4
1.7
0.7
0.6
3.7

0.9
0.7
0.4
2.1
1.4
0.5

17.1
9.2
7.4
16.4
9.3

16.6
59.1
..
21.3
22.9
9.5

a. Data refer to victimization as reported in the International Crime Victims Survey. b. Surveys were conducted in 1992, 1995, 1996-97 and 2000-01. Data refer to the year preceding the survey. c. Data refer to people
victimized by 1 or more of 11 crimes recorded in the survey: robbery, burglary, attempted burglary, car theft, car vandalism, bicycle theft, sexual assault, theft from car, theft of personal property, assault and threats and
theft of motorcycle or moped. d. Includes car theft, theft from car, burglary with entry and attempted burglary. e. Data refer to women only. f. Data refer to people who have been asked or expected to pay a bribe by a
government official. g. Data refer to 1995.
Source: Columns 1-7: UNODC 2004.

216

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

24 Gender-related

development
index

. . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN

Gender-related
development

index
(GDI)

Life expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

Adult

literacy rate
(% ages 15
and above)

2002 a

Combined gross

enrolment ratio for

primary, secondary and
tertiary level schools

Estimated

earned income

(%)

2001/02 b

(PPP US$)

2002 c

HDI rank

Rank

Value

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

HDI rank
minus
GDI rank d

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

1
2
3
4
5

7
6
8
12
14

11
9
10
17
16

15
13
18
19
20

21
22
23
25
28

24
26
29
27
30

31
32
..
36
..

33
34
35
..
39

37
38
40
42
44

41
..
43
..
45

0.955
0.946
0.945
0.941
0.938

0.938
0.938
0.936
0.932
0.929

0.932
0.934
0.933
0.924
0.926

0.929
0.931
0.924
0.921
0.916

0.914
0.906
0.898
0.894
0.884

0.894
0.892
0.882
0.884
0.875

0.866
0.865
..
0.841
..

0.852
0.848
0.847
..
0.832

0.841
0.840
0.830
0.827
0.823

0.829
..
0.827
..
0.823

81.8
82.5
82.0
81.9
81.0

81.8
81.9
79.8
85.0
79.5

82.3
80.6
81.4
81.4
81.3

82.7
79.0
80.7
81.1
82.7

81.9
80.9
82.7
80.9
80.2

79.5
79.7
79.2
79.4
80.5

80.6
78.6
78.8
77.6
..

76.7
77.9
75.9
..
75.8

77.5
77.5
78.9
78.9
80.5

78.8
75.3
78.0
77.3
76.1

75.9
77.5
76.4
76.6
75.6

75.6
77.6
74.2
77.8
74.3

75.9
75.6
74.3
75.3
75.0

75.1
74.1
75.7
75.1
75.8

75.5
77.0
77.2
75.7
75.8

72.5
72.5
71.7
74.4
75.9

75.8
72.0
74.1
70.5
..

66.3
69.7
67.6
..
72.4

67.4
69.6
72.9
74.8
75.7

71.5
70.4
70.2
73.2
65.4

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
96.9 e

98.1 e
93.4
89.6 l
96.1 e
88.6 m

90.3 e
99.6 e
96.6 e, l
99.7 e
95.1 m

93.4

.. e
91.4 m
97.0
92.3 m

99.8 e, m
99.7 e, l
99.2 e

..
84.2

99.6 e, m
99.7 e, m
95.6 m
81.0
95.9

98.1
82.3 m, p
97.1 m
80.7
99.7 e, m

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e

.. e
.. e
.. e
.. e
98.7 e

98.9 e
97.3
96.9 l
98.6 e
96.6 m

95.2 e
99.7 e
99.2 e, l
99.7 e
98.6 m

91.8

.. e
96.3 m
97.0
91.4 m

99.8 e, m
99.8 e, l
99.5 e

..
91.5

99.6 e, m
99.7 e, m
95.8 m
84.7
95.7

97.3
84.9 m, p
99.3 e, m
75.6
99.8 e, m

102 f, g
124 f, h
114 f, h
96 g
99 g

115 f, g
95 g
96 h
83 h
94 g

86 g
119 f, g
111 f, g
92 g
75 g, i

93 g
99 k
107 f, h
88 h
95 h

84 g
94
70
88 g
75 k, n

97 g
94 g
85 h
93 g
75 g

77 g
79 h
75
98 h
86

101 f, g
93 h
89 h
111 f, g
82

93 g
75 h
79 g
81 k
70

90 h
84
74
72
92 g

94 g
104 f, h
111 f, h
93 g
100 f, g

107 f, g
86 g
89 h
85 h
87 g

90 g
107 f, g
102 f, g
91 g
74 g, i

90 g
92 k
96 h
89 h
89 h

81 g
89
73
84 g
76 k, n

90 g
86 g
98 h
84 g
74 g

77 g
78 h
72
90 h
85

92 g
87 h
84 h
85 g
77

87 g
73 h
80 g
71 k
69

81 h
79
72
65
83 g

31,356
23,781
23,643
22,964
20,358

18,528
22,716
27,338
16,977
21,056

20,459
19,807
21,645
15,410
33,517

19,923
26,074
18,168
18,763
13,209

16,702
14,201
18,805
10,892
15,822

42,340
28,700
33,259
36,299
38,266

37,180
36,043
43,797
37,208
52,008

40,769
32,984
30,970
43,169
88,803 j

33,950
36,161
26,481
35,885
29,971

36,959
26,636
33,776
25,601
31,927

13,084
14,084
10,747
11,634
11,223 o

24,373
22,832
23,226
19,116
23,916 o

9,654
11,322
..
5,662
..

9,777
8,120
10,307
..
7,961

8,419
10,127
5,442
7,116
4,698

5,367
..
7,453
..
7,685

26,160
20,370
..
15,431
..

15,571
13,149
17,465
..
23,505

12,518
15,617
14,256
20,979
12,197

10,304
..
13,374
..
11,085

0
0
0
0
0

-1
1
0
-3
-4

0
3
3
-3
-1

1
4
0
0
0

0
0
0
-1
-3

2
1
-1
2
0

0
0
..
-3
..

1
1
1
..
-2

1
1
0
-1
-2

2
..
1
..
0

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

217

24 Gender-related

development
index

Gender-related
development

index
(GDI)

Life expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

Adult

literacy rate
(% ages 15
and above)

2002 a

Combined gross

enrolment ratio for

primary, secondary and
tertiary level schools

Estimated

earned income

(%)

2001/02 b

(PPP US$)

2002 c

HDI rank

Rank

Value

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

72 k, n
77
73 h
63
..

13,375
..
4,915
5,916
..

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

46
..
50
47
..

48
49
..
52
..

53
51
..
55
54

..
..
58
56
57

..
60
59
68
..

61
72
63
62
64

69
65
66
..
74

67
..
70
75
76

..
77
..
71
..

73
..
78
80
79

0.813
..
0.792
0.795
..

0.795
0.794
..
0.786
..

0.785
0.789
..
0.775
0.778

..
..
0.770
0.775
0.773

..
0.768
0.770
0.747
..

0.766
0.739
0.761
0.762
0.755

0.747
0.752
0.751
..
0.736

0.748
..
0.746
0.736
0.734

..
0.734
..
0.741
..

0.738
..
0.728
0.718
0.721

70.4
78.6
76.3
74.5
..

74.6
73.0
75.3
75.6
75.7

77.3
75.2
69.0
75.7
76.6

76.6
73.6
76.6
74.2
74.6

74.0
72.5
75.2
74.3
73.3

73.4
73.6
71.8
77.7
75.0

71.4
75.5
71.9
66.8
72.3

70.3
75.5
73.1
73.0
72.4

75.4
74.8
..
73.2
..

75.8
77.5
69.2
73.1
73.4

63.9
74.7
70.3
68.5
..

67.4
60.7
70.7
70.7
71.3

72.2
64.7
67.9
68.3
70.8

71.2
68.4
70.8
67.0
64.5

70.7
63.9
69.0
70.9
66.8

65.2
71.0
60.7
73.6
71.8

68.0
68.9
67.9
67.7
67.2

63.7
72.5
67.9
68.5
69.6

68.6
70.7
..
68.8
..

69.8
69.4
64.4
70.0
68.2

96.3 l
96.8
88.7 m
97.9
..

98.1
99.5 e
70.7
85.4 m

..

91.7
99.6 e
98.9 m
80.5 m
98.3 m

91.1
..
92.7
96.3 m
99.5 e

..

86.5 m
92.2
65.4
98.4

90.5 m
69.5
99.2 e
91.4
81.0 l

94.6 l
97.0
92.6 m
99.0 e

..

99.1 e
99.7 e
91.8
92.0 m

..

92.9
99.8 e
98.8 m
88.2 m
99.2 e, m

98.4
..
93.5
98.4 m
99.8 e

..

86.2 m
92.1
82.0
98.9

94.9 m
84.1
99.7 e
83.8
92.4 l

91.4 m, p
99.2 e, m
92.7 m
97.2
80.3 q

94.5 m, p
99.7 e, m
92.5 m
97.3
91.3 q

98.3 m, p

99.3 e, m, p

..

78.5 m
90.2 q
85.9

..
63.1
..

..

94.4 m
93.1 q
95.5

..
83.1
..

86.5 m

95.1 m

..

89.6
..
84.4
77.1 m
89.7 m

..

94.7
..
84.3
76.7 m
92.3 m

77 k, n
78
74 h
65
..

77 g
92 h
100 f, h
72 h
70 g

75 k
90
83
68
70 g

..
79 h
74
70 g
86

77
94 h
70
63
71

72 g
57
82
78 h
79

73 h
75
82 h
78
88 h

81 k, n
66
62 h
72 h
77 h

67
75 h
57 g
64 k
75 g

66 r
70
81 h
72 g
71 g, s

75 g
85 h
93 h
69 h
70 g

71 k
86
82
70
67 g

..
69 h
69
67 g
83

70
90 h
67
62
68

74 g
58
80
72 h
77

73 h
69
81 h
78
88 h

81 k, n
63
74 h
72 h
76 h

70
74 h
73 g
69 k
72 g

64 r
68
73 h
71 g
73 g, s

20,700
..
12,967
13,095
..

8,627
10,189
..
13,157
8,293

7,847
6,765
..
15,897
6,185

..
..
7,550
8,311
6,493

..
10,879
8,420
18,239
..

8,664
18,616
7,156
4,783
8,336

7,855
3,700
5,326
..
7,875

5,719
6,508
..
5,219
4,599

3,958
4,405
..
5,827
3,442

..
..
3,125
4,837
3,429

..
4,594
4,429
4,056
..

5,284
3,825
4,247
3,169
2,552

2,838
2,564
3,144
..
2,105

3,274 o

5,212 o

..
4,757
2,175
1,896

2,322
3,615
..
3,571
..

2,570
1,325
3,491
2,376
1,656

..
7,873
6,641
6,118

4,044
9,933
..
5,435
..

4,523
3,283
9,694
9,799
5,491

HDI rank
minus
GDI rank d

0
..
-3
1
..

1
1
..
-1
..

-1
2
..
-1
1

..
..
-2
1
1

..
-1
1
-7
..

1
-9
1
3
2

-2
3
3
..
-4

4
..
2
-2
-2

..
-2
..
5
..

4
..
0
-1
1

218

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

24 Gender-related

development
index

Gender-related
development

index
(GDI)

Life expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

Adult

literacy rate
(% ages 15
and above)

2002 a

Combined gross

enrolment ratio for

primary, secondary and
tertiary level schools

Estimated

earned income

(%)

2001/02 b

(PPP US$)

2002 c

HDI rank

Rank

Value

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

HDI rank
minus
GDI rank d

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

82
..
84
81
83

88
85
89
86
..

90
87
91
92
95

93
94
97
96
99

98
..
..
..
100

101
103
102
..
105

104
..
106
..
107

108
109
110
115
116
111

120
119
112
117
113

118
114
126
121
122

0.713
..
0.709
0.715
0.709

0.689
0.705
0.688
0.691
..

0.685
0.689
0.678
0.674
0.662

0.668
0.664
0.660
0.661
0.634

0.635
..
..
..
0.604

0.602
0.572
0.581
..
0.557

0.564
..
0.536
..
0.528

0.510
0.505
0.499
0.485
0.484
0.491

0.471
0.477
0.488
0.483
0.487

0.482
0.486
0.436
0.462
0.458

71.7
73.9
73.6
66.4
72.7

73.0
72.4
71.1
50.5
72.2

68.6
71.4
72.1
65.8
71.4

71.3
65.7
71.8
51.9
70.8

68.7
57.6
72.7
70.5
70.3

46.8
64.4
42.3
70.4
59.5

59.3
60.1
58.5
64.3
55.6

62.0
36.9
61.5
57.0
59.4
48.1

60.7
51.4
49.9
39.0
46.4

33.5
46.4
60.9
54.6
52.0

68.8
70.7
67.6
60.1
66.9

70.5
66.7
68.0
47.7
64.6

64.6
66.7
65.3
61.6
66.5

66.0
61.7
67.1
46.0
66.6

62.8
55.7
66.9
67.8
66.6

43.8
63.1
40.4
67.4
55.2

56.4
54.5
56.6
61.8
53.1

59.2
34.4
60.7
54.1
59.9
45.6

61.0
48.3
46.6
33.3
44.9

34.3
44.0
58.7
52.3
51.2

70.4 l, p, q

83.5 l, p, q

..
77.1
98.2 l
68.0

74.2
98.9
59.6
76.0 l
..

83.4
86.9 m, p
98.6
80.7 m
80.2 m

99.3 e, m
97.5 m
76.6 q
85.3
43.6 m, p

62.5
..
..
..
38.3

82.8
46.4 m
81.5
..
59.3

65.9
81.4
57.7 l
..
55.5

49.1
80.0
31.4
49.1
26.4
59.8 q

..
82.4
99.0 l
85.4

91.0
99.6 e
78.0
92.8 l
..

92.5
93.9 m, p
99.6 e
93.1 m
79.8 m

99.7 e, m
98.0 m
76.8 q
86.7
67.2 m, p

77.3
..
..
..
63.3

83.8
69.0 m
76.1
..
80.8

81.9
89.2
71.1 l
..
77.4

63.5
82.0
50.3
70.8
61.6
77.0 q

28.5 m, p
45.4
77.1
90.3 q
59.2

86.3
78.5
28.5
60.6 l
59.4

53.4 m, p
74.3
88.9
73.7 q
78.8

93.8
90.0
69.5
74.2 l
74.4

65
81
65
75 k
72 h

57
75
69 h
52
81

64 h
61
63
82 h
61 g, s

67
76
66 h
77
72 k, n

52 h
70 k
59
..
52

72
48 g
71
58
53

43
48 g
40
..
53

41
59
54
34 g
55
51 h

31 g
55
44 h
66
68

72
78
66
75 k
73 h

62
78
72 h
64
80

66 h
67
60
89 h
64 g, s

80
64
63 h
78
80 k, n

59 h
74 k
64
..
61

70
62 g
70
59
64

50
47 g
42
..
65

50
62
53
39 g
67
61 h

43 g
78
52 h
64
73

2,835
..
2,602
2,439
3,229

1,549
1,305
2,684
16,852 o
1,269

9,946
..
7,269
6,217
7,034

5,496
1,983
8,794
42,304 o
1,944

2,138
1,888
1,168
1,559
1,402

759
1,316
1,520
6,371
1,963

2,007
4,937
..
1,239
2,153

4,262
1,442
5,353
..
1,622

1,802
..
1,586
..
1,358

950
2,259
1,150
867
891
1,235

915
941
707
1,357
1,088

4,161
2,723
1,788
3,463
3,792

1,225
1,955
3,436
14,202
5,216

6,092
8,351
..
1,786
5,354

8,402
3,820
10,550
..
2,117

2,419
..
2,748
..
2,082

1,699
7,227
2,035
2,752
1,776
2,787

2,789
2,004
1,273
3,578
1,651

57 h
52
37 g
44
41 k, n

60 h
54
66 g
46
49 k, n

1,757 o

962
387
534
562

3,059 o
1,067
1,274
906
1,322

-1
..
-2
2
1

-3
1
-2
2
..

-1
3
0
0
-2

1
1
-1
1
-1

1
..
..
..
0

0
-1
1
..
-1

1
..
0
..
0

0
0
0
-4
-4
2

-6
-4
4
0
5

1
6
-5
1
1

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

219

24 Gender-related

development
index

Gender-related
development

index
(GDI)

Life expectancy

at birth
(years)
2002

Adult

literacy rate
(% ages 15
and above)

2002 a

HDI rank

Rank

Value

Female

Male

Female

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

124
123
..
125
127

128
..
129
..
130

131
132
133
134
..

135
136
138
137
139

141
140
142
143
144
..

0.456
0.458
..
0.446
0.431

0.429
..
0.423
..
0.406

0.401
0.379
0.375
0.374
..

0.368
0.355
0.345
0.346
0.339

0.329
0.337
0.309
0.291
0.278
..

53.9
49.9
47.0
55.4
54.2

54.9
50.2
39.4
49.3
53.1

44.4
41.5
32.5
38.2
41.5

45.7
42.4
41.0
46.4
40.0

46.8
41.3
49.0
46.3
46.3
35.6

50.7
48.8
44.8
52.5
51.1

50.6
48.5
38.4
48.6
48.5

42.7
40.9
32.9
37.5
38.8

43.6
40.4
38.7
44.6
36.9

43.7
40.2
47.9
45.1
45.7
33.1

Male

51.5
53.8
76.1 l
45.0 l
68.2 l

49.0
..
75.3
..
54.8

85.2
60.3 l
86.3
75.5
..

54.5
74.2 l
64.7 q
49.2
62.3

31.3
50.0
55.5 l
30.9 l
45.6 l

29.7
..
63.4
..
25.5

69.2
38.4 l
73.8
48.7
..

37.5
51.8 l
33.5 q
33.8
31.4

24.7 l
43.6
11.9 m, p
8.1 m, p
9.3
..

55.2 l
57.7
26.7 m, p
18.5 m, p
25.1
..

Combined gross

enrolment ratio for

primary, secondary and
tertiary level schools

Estimated

earned income

(%)

2001/02 b

(PPP US$)

2002 c

Female

Male

Female

Male

HDI rank
minus
GDI rank d

42
51 k, n
20
41 h
28

35 h
..
50
21 r
41 h

31 g
34
43
71 h
27 k

25 g
24 r, s
24
28
35

29 k
29
21 r
18 h
16
38 g

46
53 k, n
28
49 h
39

41 h
..
56
37 r
64 h

32 g
50
47
77 h
32 k

44 g
30 r, s
38
41
46

45 k
38
31 r
26 h
23
52 g

1,581
1,170
..
1,263
654

1,140
..
968
1,569
876

467
818
571
427
1,627

760
467
889
516
840

465
561
635
855
575
337

2,840
2,089
..
2,127
1,266

2,074
..
1,570
2,317
1,268

660
2,222
1,041
626
2,626

1,284
846
1,469
1,008
1,265

959
794
1,044
1,215
1,005
815

0
2
..
1
0

0
..
0
..
0

0
0
0
0
..

0
0
-1
1
0

-1
1
0
0
0
..

a. Data refer to estimates produced by UNESCO Institute for Statistics in July 2002, unless otherwise specified. Due to differences in methodology and timeliness of underlying data, comparisons across countries and over
time should be made with caution. b. Data refer to the 2001/02 school year. Data for some countries may refer to national or UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates. For details, see http://www.uis.unesco.org/. Because
data are from different sources, comparisons across countries should be made with caution. c. Because of the lack of gender-disaggregated income data, female and male earned income are crudely estimated on the basis
of data on the ratio of the female non-agricultural wage to the male non-agricultural wage, the female and male shares of the economically active population, the total female and male population and GDP per capita
(PPP US$) (see technical note 1). Estimates are based on data for the most recent year available during 1991-2000, unless otherwise specified. d. The HDI ranks used in this column are those recalculated for the 144 coun-
tries with a GDI value. A positive figure indicates that the GDI rank is higher than the HDI rank, a negative the opposite. e. For purposes of calculating the GDI, a value of 99.0% was applied. f. For purposes of calculat-
ing the GDI, a value of 100% was applied. g. Data refer to the 2000/01 school year. h. Preliminary UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimate, subject to further revision. i. The ratio is an underestimate, as many secondary
and tertiary students pursue their studies in nearby countries (see box to table 1). j. For purposes of calculating the GDI, a value of $40,000 (PPP US$) was applied. k. Data refer to the 1999/2000 school year. l. UNESCO
Institute for Statistics 2003a. m. Census data. n. Data provided by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics for Human Development Report 2001 (see UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2001). o. Calculated on the basis of GDP
per capita (PPP US$) for 2000. p. Data refer to a year between 1995 and 1999. q. Survey data. r. Data refer to the 1998/99 school year. s. UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2003b.
Source: Column 1: determined on the basis of the GDI values in column 2; column 2: calculated on the basis of data in columns 3-10; see technical note 1 for details; columns 3 and 4: UN 2003; columns 5 and 6:
UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004a, unless otherwise noted; columns 7 and 8: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c, unless otherwise noted; columns 9 and 10: calculated on the basis of data on GDP per capita
(PPP US$) from World Bank 2004f; data on wages from ILO 2004b; data on the economically active population from ILO 2002; and data on population from UN 2003, unless otherwise noted; column 11: calcu-
lated on the basis of the recalculated HDI ranks and GDI ranks in column 1.

GDI ranks for 
144 countries

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands
6 Iceland
7 Belgium
8 United States
9 United Kingdom
10 Finland
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Denmark
14 Ireland
15 France
16 Luxembourg
17 Austria
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain
21 Italy
22 Israel

220

23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Portugal
25 Greece
26 Slovenia
27 Barbados
28 Singapore
29 Korea, Rep. of
30 Cyprus
31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Estonia
34 Poland
35 Hungary
36 Argentina
37 Lithuania
38 Slovakia
39 Bahrain
40 Chile
41 Uruguay
42 Kuwait
43 Croatia
44 Costa Rica
45 Latvia
46 Bahamas
47 Trinidad and Tobago

48 Bulgaria
49 Russian Federation
50 Mexico
51 Belarus
52 Malaysia
53 Panama
54 Albania
55 Mauritius
56 Romania
57 Ukraine
58 Venezuela
59 Colombia
60 Brazil
61 Thailand
62 Jamaica
63 Kazakhstan
64 Lebanon
65 Armenia
66 Philippines
67 Turkmenistan
68 Oman
69 Fiji
70 Turkey
71 China
72 Saudi Arabia

73 Sri Lanka
74 Peru
75 Paraguay
76 Jordan
77 Tunisia
78 Dominican Republic
79 Ecuador
80 Belize
81 Guyana
82 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
83 Cape Verde
84 El Salvador
85 Uzbekistan
86 Equatorial Guinea
87 Viet Nam
88 Syrian Arab Republic
89 Algeria
90 Indonesia
91 Moldova, Rep. of
92 Bolivia
93 Tajikistan
94 Mongolia
95 Honduras
96 South Africa
97 Nicaragua

98 Guatemala
99 Egypt
100 Morocco
101 Namibia
102 Botswana
103 India
104 Ghana
105 Cambodia
106 Papua New Guinea
107 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.
108 Comoros
109 Swaziland
110 Bangladesh
111 Cameroon
112 Congo
113 Uganda
114 Kenya
115 Sudan
116 Nepal
117 Lesotho
118 Zimbabwe
119 Togo
120 Pakistan
121 Madagascar
122 Nigeria

123 Haiti
124 Mauritania
125 Gambia
126 Yemen
127 Eritrea
128 Senegal
129 Rwanda
130 Benin
131 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
132 Côte d’Ivoire
133 Zambia
134 Malawi
135 Chad
136 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
137 Ethiopia
138 Central African Republic
139 Mozambique
140 Burundi
141 Guinea-Bissau
142 Mali
143 Burkina Faso
144 Niger

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

. . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN

25 Gender

empowerment
measure

HDI rank

Rank

Value

Gender empowerment 

measure
(GEM)

MDG

Seats in parliament
held by women a

(% of total)

Female

legislators,

senior officials
and managers b

(% of total)

Female

professional and
technical workers b

(% of total)

Ratio of
estimated 
female to
male earned

income c

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

1
2
8
10
5

7
6
14
38
16

12
18
4
13
..

..
3
11
9
15

32
25
..
43
20

23
31
68
24
49

53
30
..
21
..

28
27
39
..
66

47
26
58
..
19

46
..
36
..
29

0.908
0.854
0.806
0.787
0.817

0.808
0.816
0.769
0.531
0.710

0.771
0.698
0.820
0.770
..

..
0.847
0.772
0.804
0.716

0.583
0.614
..
0.523
0.648

0.644
0.584
0.377
0.634
0.497

0.480
0.586
..
0.645
..

0.592
0.606
0.529
..
0.395

0.508
0.607
0.460
..
0.664

0.511
..
0.560
..
0.591

36.4
45.3
26.5
23.6
35.1

33.9
30.2
14.0
9.9
14.2

24.8
17.3
37.5
30.6
16.7

11.7
38.0
28.3
31.4
26.6

10.3
15.0
..
8.7
16.0

19.1
12.2
5.9
17.6
10.7

9.2
15.7

– d

31.3
29.4

18.8
20.7
9.8
13.3
7.5 e

10.6
19.3
10.1
0.0
35.1

11.5

– d

17.8
0.0
21.0

28
31
35
34
26

30
29
46
10
28

28
31
28
29
..

..
22
38
34
31

21
26
26
26
26

29
29
5
40
14

17
26
..
26
..

37
34
35
..
10

44
31
21
..
53

37
..
26
8
37

49
50
55
54
48

48
55
55
46
52

45
44
52
48
..

..
51
52
49
46

45
54
40
48
43

51
55
34
55
46

40
52
..
53
..

68
60
62
..
19

70
61
52
..
28

52
..
51
25
66

0.74
0.83
0.71
0.63
0.53

0.50
0.63
0.62
0.46
0.40

0.50
0.60
0.70
0.36
0.38

0.59
0.72
0.69
0.52
0.44

0.45
0.53
0.56
0.43
0.50

0.54
0.62
0.46
0.61
0.47

0.37
0.56
..
0.37
..

0.63
0.62
0.59
..
0.34

0.67
0.65
0.38
0.34
0.39

0.52
..
0.56
..
0.69

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

221

25 Gender

empowerment
measure

Gender empowerment 

measure
(GEM)

HDI rank

Rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

17
..
34
22
..

..
55
..
44
45

52
..
..
..
..

..
..
61
56
65

..
..
48
..
..

57
77
..
..
..

71
..
37
..
42

..
..
73
63
..

..
..
..
..
..

74
67
40
59
50

Value

0.699
..
0.563
0.644
..

..
0.467
..
0.519
0.517

0.486
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.444
0.465
0.411

..
..
0.498
..
..

0.461
0.207
..
..
..

0.335
..
0.542
..
0.524

..
..
0.290
0.417
..

..
..
..
..
..

0.276
0.387
0.527
0.455
0.490

MDG

Seats in parliament
held by women a

(% of total)

Female

legislators,

senior officials
and managers b

(% of total)

Female

professional and
technical workers b

(% of total)

Ratio of
estimated 
female to
male earned

income c

26.8
36.0
21.2
25.4
8.3

26.3
8.0
..
16.3
18.3

9.9
18.4
0.0
5.7
5.7

12.3
17.6
9.7
9.3
5.3

20.7
9.1
10.8

– d

6.1

9.6
0.0
8.6
13.6
2.3

6.0
4.6
17.2
6.0
18.3

26.0
22.7
4.4
8.8
7.9

10.5
11.5
28.6
20.2
18.8

4.4
7.2 f
15.4
9.3
16.0

31
..
25
40
..

..
37
..
20
19

38
..
..
..
..

..
28
27
31
38

..
..
38
..
..

27
1
..
..
..

51
..
58
15
27

..
..
7
23
..

..
..
..
..
..

4
28
31
31
25

58
..
40
51
..

..
64
..
45
51

49
..
..
..
..

..
51
61
56
64

..
62
50
..
..

55
31
..
..
..

9
..
62
40
44

..
..
31
54
..

..
..
..
..
..

49
64
49
52
44

0.65
..
0.38
0.45
..

0.66
0.64
..
0.40
0.55

0.50
0.65
..
0.37
0.56

..
..
0.41
0.58
0.53

..
0.42
0.53
0.22
..

0.61
0.21
0.59
0.66
0.31

0.36
0.69
0.59
..
0.27

0.63
..
0.60
0.33
0.31

0.57
0.36
..
0.66
..

0.57
0.40
0.36
0.24
0.30

222

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

25 Gender

empowerment
measure

Gender empowerment 

measure
(GEM)

HDI rank

Rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

72
..
60
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
54
41
70

..
62
..
..
75

..
..
..
..
..

33
..
35
..
69

..
..
..
..
..

..
51
76
..
..
..

64
..
..
..
..

..
..
78
..
..

Value

0.313
..
0.448
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.469
0.524
0.355

..
0.429
..
..
0.266

..
..
..
..
..

0.572
..
0.562
..
0.364

..
..
..
..
..

..
0.487
0.218
..
..
..

0.416
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.123
..
..

MDG

Seats in parliament
held by women a

(% of total)

Female

legislators,

senior officials
and managers b

(% of total)

Female

professional and
technical workers b

(% of total)

Ratio of
estimated 
female to
male earned

income c

4.1
..
10.7
20.0
11.1

12.0
7.2
..
5.0
6.7

8.0
27.3
12.9
17.8
5.5

12.4
10.5
20.7
27.9 g
3.6

8.2
11.0
9.1
0.0
..

21.4
9.3
17.0
1.9
10.9

9.0

.. h

0.9
9.3
22.9

– i
16.8
2.0
9.7
..
8.9

20.8
7.4
10.6
17.0
24.7

10.0
7.1
0.3
6.4
5.8

13
10
26
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
40
36
22

..
30
..
..
9

..
..
..
..
..

30
..
35
..
14

..
..
..
..
..

..
24
8
..
..
..

9
..
..
..
..

..
..
4
..
..

33
33
46
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
64
40
36

..
66
..
..
30

..
..
..
..
..

55
..
52
..
33

..
..
..
..
..

..
61
25
..
..
..

26
..
..
..
..

..
..
15
..
..

0.29
..
0.36
0.39
0.46

0.28
0.66
0.31
0.40
0.65

0.51
0.69
0.65
0.45
0.37

0.62
0.67
0.44
0.45
0.38

0.33
0.59
..
0.69
0.40

0.51
0.38
0.51
..
0.77

0.75
..
0.58
..
0.65

0.56
0.31
0.56
0.32
0.50
0.44

0.33
0.47
0.56
0.38
0.66

0.57
0.90
0.30
0.59
0.43

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

223

25 Gender

empowerment
measure

HDI rank

Rank

Value

Gender empowerment 

measure
(GEM)

MDG

Seats in parliament
held by women a

(% of total)

Female

legislators,

senior officials
and managers b

(% of total)

Female

professional and
technical workers b

(% of total)

Ratio of
estimated 
female to
male earned

income c

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

4.4
9.1
10.8
13.2
22.0

19.2
26.1
45.0
19.3
7.2

21.4
8.5
12.0
9.3
15.5

5.8
7.4
– i
7.8
30.0

– i
18.5
10.2
11.7
1.2
14.5

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

0.56
0.56
..
0.59
0.52

0.55
..
0.62
0.68
0.69

0.71
0.37
0.55
0.68
0.62

0.59
0.55
0.60
0.51
0.66

0.49
0.71
0.61
0.70
0.57
0.41

a. Data are as of 1 March 2004. Where there are lower and upper houses, data refer to the weighted average of women’s shares of seats in both houses. b. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period
1992-2001. Estimates for countries that have implemented the recent International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88) are not strictly comparable with those for countries using the previous classification
(ISCO-68). c. Calculated on the basis of data in columns 9 and 10 in table 24. Estimates are based on data for the most recent year available during the period 1991-2001. d. Brunei Darussalam, Oman and Qatar have
never had a parliament. e. Women were allowed to vote in the referendum of 14-15 February 2001, which approved the National Action Charter. Subsequently, women exercised their full political rights as both voters
and candidates in the 2002 national elections. f. Elections were held in November 2003. However, on 25 November 2003, the election results were annuled by the Supreme Court of Georgia. New elections will be held
in March 2004. g. The figures on the distribution of seats do not include the 36 upper house special rotation delegates appointed on an ad hoc basis, and the percentages given are therefore calculated on the basis of
lower house seats and the 54 permanent seats in the upper house. h. The parliament elected in 1990 has never been convened nor authorized to sit, and many of its members were detained or forced into exile. i. Par-
liament has been dissolved or suspended for an indefinite period.
Source: Column 1: determined on the basis of GEM values in column 2; column 2: calculated on the basis of data in columns 3-6; see technical note 1 for details; column 3: calculated on the basis of data on parlia-
mentary seats from IPU 2004b; columns 4 and 5: calculated on the basis of occupational data from ILO 2004b; column 6: calculated on the basis of data in columns 9 and 10 of table 24.

GEM ranks for 
78 countries

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Denmark
4 Finland
5 Netherlands
6 Iceland
7 Belgium
8 Australia
9 Germany
10 Canada
11 New Zealand
12 Switzerland
13 Austria
14 United States
15 Spain
16 Ireland
17 Bahamas
18 United Kingdom

19 Costa Rica
20 Singapore
21 Argentina
22 Trinidad and Tobago
23 Portugal
24 Barbados
25 Israel
26 Slovakia
27 Poland
28 Estonia
29 Latvia
30 Czech Republic
31 Slovenia
32 Italy
33 Namibia
34 Mexico
35 Botswana
36 Croatia
37 Philippines
38 Japan
39 Hungary

40 Dominican Republic
41 Bolivia
42 Peru
43 Greece
44 Malaysia
45 Macedonia, TFYR
46 Uruguay
47 Lithuania
48 Colombia
49 Cyprus
50 Ecuador
51 Swaziland
52 Panama
53 Malta
54 Moldova, Rep. of
55 Russian Federation
56 Romania
57 Thailand
58 Chile
59 Belize
60 El Salvador

61 Venezuela
62 Mongolia
63 Paraguay
64 Pakistan
65 Ukraine
66 Bahrain
67 Georgia
68 Korea, Rep. of
69 Cambodia
70 Honduras
71 Fiji
72 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
73 Turkey
74 Sri Lanka
75 Egypt
76 Bangladesh
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Yemen

224

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

. . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN

26 Gender

inequality in
education

Adult literacy a

Female

rate

Female
rate as
% of

(% ages 15
and above) male rate

HDI rank

2002

2002

High human development

MDG
Youth literacy a

Female

rate

(% ages
15-24)
2002

Female
rate as
% of

male rate

2002

MDG

Net primary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Net secondary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Gross tertiary
enrolment c, d

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
93.4
..
..

88.6 k

..
99.6
..
99.7
95.1 k

93.4
..

91.4 k
97.0
92.3 k

99.8 k

..
..
..
84.2

99.6 k
99.7 k
95.6 k
81.0
95.9

98.1
82.3 k, l
97.1 k
80.7
99.7 k

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
96
..
..
92 k

..
100
..
100
96 k

102
..
95 k
100
101 k

100 k

..
..
..
92

100 k
100 k
100 k
96
100

101
97 k, l
98 k
107
100 k

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
99.4
..
..

99.6 k

..
99.8
..
99.8
99.8 k

99.8
..

99.3 k
98.9
99.4 k

99.8 k

..
..
..
98.9

99.7 k
99.7 k
99.2 k
93.9
98.7

99.4
95.8 k, l
99.7 k
95.0
99.8 k

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
100
..
..
100

..
100
..
100
100

102
..
100
100
101

100
..
..
..
100

100
100
100
102
101

101
102
100
108
100

102 f
102
96
100 f, g
100 f

1.00 f
1.00
1.01
1.00 f, g
0.99 f

101 f
101 f
93
101
95 f

99 f
101 f
100 f
91 f
96 f

100 f
99 h
98
84
104

100 f
101
98 g
95 f
..

..
93 f
101
103
95 f

98 f
88
..
108
106

97 f
98
90
107 f
91 g

97 f
88
88 f
84
91

90
94
88
80
90 f

1.00 f
1.00 f
1.01
1.00
1.01 f

0.99 f
1.00 f
1.00 f
1.01 f
1.00 f

1.00 f
1.00 h
0.99
1.02
0.99

1.00 f
1.00
1.00 g
1.00 f
..

..
0.99 f
1.00
1.00
1.01 f

1.01 f
1.00
..
1.00
0.99

0.98 f
1.00
0.99
1.09 f
1.01 g

0.99 f
1.02
0.99 f
0.99
1.02

1.01
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.99 f

95 f
99
90 g
98 f, g
90 f, g

..
85 f
85
101 g, h
85 f

85 f
95 f
95 f, g
88 f, g
83 f

93 f, g
91 h
93 f, g
88
96

85 g, j
89
72 g
86 f
..

89 f, g
97 f, g
89
86
89 f

80 f, g
90
..
83
101

95 f
93
92
116 f
86 g

92 f, g
87
76 f
79 g
53

76 g
80 g
87
74
89 f, g

1.01 f
1.01
1.03 g
1.00 f, g
1.00 f, g

..
1.05 f
1.00
1.01 g, h
1.07 f

0.95 f
1.02 f
1.02 f, g
0.99 f, g
1.09 f

1.02 f, g
1.03 h
1.02 f, g
1.00
1.04

1.01 g, j
1.01
1.02 g
1.03 f
..

1.08 f, g
1.02 f, g
1.00
0.99
1.02 f

1.01 f, g
1.01
..
1.06
1.05

1.06 f
1.03
1.00
1.21 f
1.12 g

1.01 f, g
1.01
1.03 f
1.05 g
1.11

1.11 g
1.06 g
1.03
1.05
1.01 f, g

85 f
93
72
68 f
57 f

63 f
61 f
94
45
53 f

37 f
64 f
94 f
61 f
10 f, i

59 f
68 f, g
87
48
64

57 f
67
26
64 f
..

58 f
70 f
61
52 f
25 f

28 f
35
17
67
..

74 f
69
50
..
28 g, j

72 f
34
36 f
32 g, j
22

48
34
39
..
80 f

1.52 f
1.54
1.24
1.34 f
1.07 f

1.16 f
1.73 f
1.35
0.86
1.27 f

0.78 f
1.20 f
1.22 f
1.15 f
1.14 f

1.23 f
1.35 f
1.52
1.00
1.19

1.32 f
1.38
0.99
1.10 f
..

1.37 f
1.35 f
0.60
2.55 f
1.35 f

1.29 f
1.09
1.77
1.48
..

1.57 f
1.43
1.29
..
1.86 j

1.53 f
1.13
0.92 f
2.58 j
1.17

1.82
2.69
1.15
..
1.66 f

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

225

26 Gender

inequality in
education

Adult literacy a

Female

rate

Female
rate as
% of

(% ages 15
and above) male rate

HDI rank

2002

2002

MDG
Youth literacy a

Female

rate

(% ages
15-24)
2002

Female
rate as
% of

male rate

2002

MDG

Net primary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Net secondary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Gross tertiary
enrolment c, d

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

..
96.8
88.7 k
97.9
..

98.1
99.5
70.7
85.4 k

..

91.7
99.6
98.9 k
80.5 k
98.3 k

91.1
..
92.7
96.3 k
99.5

..

86.5 k
92.2
65.4
98.4

90.5 k
69.5
99.2
91.4
..

91.4 k, l
99.2 k
92.7 k
97.2
80.3 m

98.3 k, l

..

78.5 k
90.2 m
85.9

..
63.1
..

86.5 k

..

89.6
..
84.4
77.1 k
89.7 k

..
100
96 k
99
..

99
100
77
93 k
..

99
100
100 k
91 k
99 k

93
..
99
98 k
100

..

100 k
100
80
99

95 k
83
100
109
..

97 k, l
99 k
100 k
100
88 m

99 k, l
..
83 k
97 m
90

..
76
..
91 k
..

95
..
100
101 k
97 k

..
99.8
96.5 k
99.8
..

99.6
99.8
94.0
97.3 k

..

96.6
99.8
99.1 k
95.4 k
99.5 k

99.7
..
98.9
97.8 k
99.9

..

95.7 k
97.9
97.3
99.5

97.8 k
91.6
99.8
97.8
..

99.4 k, l
99.9 k
95.7 k
99.2
95.6 m

99.8 k, l

..

93.2 k
96.5 m
99.5

..
90.6
..

98.5 k

..

96.9
..
92.5
84.6 k
96.5 k

..
100
100
100
..

100
100
94
100
..

99
100
100
102
100

100
..
101
100
100

..
103
101
98
100

100
96
100
107
..

100
100
101
100
98

100
..
95
100
100

..
93
..
99
..

100
..
102
101
100

88 g
95
102
94 g
..

92 f
..
..
95
93 f

99
93 g
105
93
97 f

..
98 g
93
92 f
81 g

102 g
97
86 g
75
94

85 g
57
89
95
89 g

100 g
84
94
96
101

..
92 g
85 g
92 g
92

79
97
80 f, g
93 f, g
90 f, g

105
91
95
96 f, g
102

1.03 g
0.99
1.01
1.00 g

..

0.98 f
..
..
1.00
1.00 f

1.00
0.98 g
1.00
1.00
1.00 f

..

1.01 g
1.01
0.99 f
1.00 g

0.98 g
1.02
0.99 g
1.01
0.99

0.97 g
0.92
0.99
1.00
0.99 g

1.00 g
0.99
1.02
1.01
1.00

..

0.99 g
0.93 g
1.01 g
1.01

0.98
0.99
0.90 f, g
1.01 f, g
0.98 f, g

1.00
1.00
0.96
1.00 f, g
1.01

79 g
84
61 g
69 g
..

85 f, g
..
..
73
81 f, g

65 g
79 g
77 f, g
64
75 f

..
75 g
62 g
81 f
91 g

79 g
74
56 g
68
65

..
51 g
83
76
..

79 g
86
62
33 h
65 f, g

..
57
..
51 g
81

75 g
69 g
..
..
87 f

..
72 g, j
47
63 f
50

1.01 g
1.01
1.03 g
1.03 g

..

0.98 f, g

..
..
1.10
0.96 f, g

1.10 g
1.04 g
1.13 f, g
1.08
1.03 f

..

1.43 g
1.17 g
1.02 f
1.00 g

1.29 g
1.08
1.10 g
1.00
1.12

..

0.93 g
0.97
1.04
..

1.07 g
1.04
1.20
1.13 h
0.97 f, g

..
1.21
..

1.05 g
1.03

0.99 g
1.04 g

..
..
1.06 f

..

1.03 g, j
1.34
1.07 f
1.02

..
30
21
9
..

46 f
80
61
28 f
28 f

42 g, h
72
4 g
13
19 f

..
15
31 g
30 f
63

24 g, j
21
25
10 g
6 g

38
26 g
43
24
48

73 g
29
35
..
31 g

..
..
21
22
31

24
21 f, g
..
..
..

..
37
..
..
..

..
1.25
0.95
1.53
..

1.35 f
1.33
1.09
1.09 f
1.32 f

1.67 h
1.37
1.40
1.29
1.69 f

..
1.69
1.37
1.20 f
1.17

0.87 j
1.29
1.10
1.67
0.90

1.09
1.49
1.23
2.24
1.14

1.00 g
1.17
1.29
..
0.98

..
..
0.73
1.37
1.02

1.02
0.97 f
..
..
..

..
1.02
..
..
..

226

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

26 Gender

inequality in
education

Adult literacy a

Female

rate

Female
rate as
% of

(% ages 15
and above) male rate

HDI rank

2002

2002

MDG
Youth literacy a

Female

rate

(% ages
15-24)
2002

Female
rate as
% of

male rate

2002

MDG

Net primary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Net secondary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Gross tertiary
enrolment c, d

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

70.4 l, m

..
77.1
..
68.0

74.2
98.9
59.6
..
..

83.4
86.9 k, l
98.6
80.7 k
80.2 k

99.3 k
97.5 k
76.6 m
85.3
43.6 k, l

62.5
..
..
..
38.3

82.8
..
81.5
..
59.3

65.9
81.4
..
..
55.5

49.1
80.0
31.4
49.1
26.4
59.8 m

28.5 k, l
45.4
77.1
90.3 m
59.2

86.3
78.5
28.5
..
59.4

84 l, m
..
94
..
80

82
99
76
..
..

90
93 k, l
99
87 k
101 k

100 k
99 k
100 m
98
65 k, l

81
..
..
..
61

99
..
107
..
73

80
91
..
..
72

77
98
62
69
43
78 m

53 k, l
61
87
123 m
75

92
87
41
..
80

..
..
88.1
..
86.3

93.0
99.6
85.6
..
..

97.6
..
99.8
96.1 k
90.9 k

99.8 k
98.4 k
88.8 m
91.7
66.9 k, l

73.8
..
..
..
61.3

94.0
..
92.8
..
75.9

90.1
91.1
..
..
72.7

52.2
92.1
41.1
74.2
46.0
..

42.0 k, l
66.6
97.3
..
74.0

96.2
95.1
50.9
..
86.5

..
..
98
..
94

96
100
91
..
..

99
..
100
98
105

100
101
106
100
85

86
..
..
..
79

104
..
109
..
90

96
100
..
..
85

79
102
71
88
59
..

64
75
99
..
86

97
99
60
..
95

78 f, g
95
89
97 h
100

96
..
94
78
88

92
92 f, g
78
94
88 g

102
88
82
90
88 g

83
78 f, g
96 g
..
85

81
76 f
83
94
83 g

59
82
73 g
..
79

50 g, h
77
88
42 g, h
66 f, g
..

..
86
..
88
..

83
71 g
47 g, h
69
..

0.98 f, g
1.01
1.00
0.97 h
0.99

0.95
..
0.97
0.85
0.96

0.99
0.94 f, g
0.99
1.00
1.02 g

0.95
1.03
1.01
1.01
0.96 g

0.95
0.99 f, g
0.94 g

..
0.93

1.06
0.83 f
1.04
1.02
0.93 g

0.96
1.00
0.89 g

..
0.92

0.84 g, h
1.01
1.02
0.83 g, h
0.88 f, g

..

..
0.84
..
1.08
..

1.01
1.02 g
0.66 g, h
1.01
..

..
83 g
47
79 g, h
54

37
..
64 g
19 g, h
..

46 g, h
..
70
67 f, g
..

72 g
78
40
65 f, g
79 g

27 g
..
..
..
28 g, h

44
..
59 f, g
28
15 g

30 g
34
20 g
..
28

..
35
46
..
..
..

..
17 g, h
..
27
13 f

38
24 g
21 g, h
12 g, j
..

..

1.06 g
1.02
1.10 g, h
1.04

0.91
..

1.06 g
0.58 g, h

..

0.95 g, h

..
1.03
0.98 f, g

..

0.84 g
1.19
1.18
1.11 f, g
0.95 g

0.95 g

..
..
..

0.83 g, h

1.36
..

1.15 f, g
1.01
0.60 g

0.87 g
0.94
0.80 g

..
0.81

..
1.21
1.10
..
..
..

..

0.48 g, h

..
1.56
0.86 f

0.91
0.97 g
0.46 g, h
1.03 g, j

..

20
30
18
..
3

..
..
..
2 h
48

14
9
33
22 g, j
16 g

7
44
..
16
..

..
5 j
1 g
..
9 g

7
9 f
4
..
2

2
15 f, g
1 j
..
3

1 g, h
5
4
6 j
2
4 g

..
1 h
1
3
2 g

3 g
2 g
5 g, h
2
..

1.01
0.98
1.19
..
0.84

..
..
..

0.43 h
1.14

0.86
0.76
1.34
0.55 j
1.32

0.33
1.74
..
1.14
..

..
0.54 j
0.56
..
0.80

0.84
0.68 f
0.82
..
0.40

0.39
1.75 f
0.54 j
..
0.57

0.73 h
1.16
0.50
0.92 j
0.28
0.63

..

0.20 h
0.19
1.28
0.52

0.58
0.53
0.28 h
0.83
..

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

227

26 Gender

inequality in
education

Adult literacy a

Female

rate

Female
rate as
% of

(% ages 15
and above) male rate

HDI rank

2002

2002

MDG
Youth literacy a

Female

rate

(% ages
15-24)
2002

Female
rate as
% of

male rate

2002

MDG

Net primary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Net secondary
enrolment b, c

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

MDG
Gross tertiary
enrolment c, d

Female
ratio
(%)

2000/01

Ratio of
female
to male e
2000/01

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

31.3
50.0
..
..
..

29.7
..
63.4
..
25.5

69.2
..
73.8
48.7
..

37.5
..

33.5 m
33.8
31.4

..
43.6
11.9 k, l
8.1 k, l
9.3
..

75.9
43.3
51.8
86.2
87.7
40.8
55.9
99.1
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

61
93
..
..
..

61
..
84
..
47

81
..
85
64
..

69
..
52 m
69
50

..
76
44 k, l
44 k, l
37
..

88
70
70
91
98
67
79
100
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

41.8
66.5
..
..
..

44.5
..
83.6
..
38.5

89.4
51.5
86.9
62.8
..

64.0
..

46.9 m
51.8
49.2

..
65.1
16.9 k, l
14.0 k, l
15.1
..

85.7
57.4
75.6
97.6
95.3
45.0
72.6
99.6
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

73
101
..
..
..

72
..
97
..
53

95
74
95
77
..

84
..
67
82
64

..
97
52
55
44
..

95
81
87
99
101
70
90
100
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

65 g
..
30 g
70 g
39

54
..
85
54
58 g, h

54
53
66 g
81 g
28 g, h

47 g
34 j
..
41
56

38 h
48 g
32 g, j
29 g
28
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

0.96 g

..

0.77 g
0.92 g
0.86

0.89
..
1.03
0.78
0.69 g, h

1.00
0.74
0.99 g
1.00 g
0.86 g, h

0.67 g
0.95 j
..
0.79
0.88

0.71 h
0.82 g
0.72 g, j
0.71 g
0.68
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

13 g
..
13 g
24 g
18 g

..
..
..
7 g, j
13 f, g

..
..
18 g
26
..

4 f, g
9 g, j
..
11 g
9

..
7 g
..
6 f, g
4
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

0.83 g

..

0.63 g
0.75 g
0.74 g

..
..
..

0.38 g, j
0.48 f, g

..
..

0.85 g
0.81
..

0.31 f, g
0.58 g, j

..

0.61 g
0.69

..

0.75 g

..

0.65 f, g
0.66
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

1
..
1
..
(.)

..
15
1 g
..
1 h

(.) f
4 j
2 f, g
(.) j
1 h

(.) h
..
1 h
1
(.) g, h

(.) h
1
..
1
1 g
1 g

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

0.27
..
0.80
..
0.15

..
1.58
0.40
..

0.24 h

0.31 f
0.36 j
0.46 f
0.37 j
0.63 h

0.17 h

..

0.19 h
0.36
0.73 h

0.18 h
0.42
..
0.33
0.34
0.40

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

a. Data refer to estimates produced by UNESCO Institute for Statistics in July 2002, unless otherwise specified. Due to differences in methodology and timeliness of underlying data, comparisons across countries and over
time should be made with caution. b. The net enrolment ratio is the ratio of enrolled children of the official age for the education level indicated to the total population at that age. Net enrolment ratios exceeding 100%
reflect discrepancies between these two data sets. c. Data refer to the 2001/02 school year. Data for some countries may refer to national or UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates. For details, see http://www.uis.unesco.org/.
Because data are from different sources, comparisons across countries should be made with caution. d. Tertiary enrolment is generally calculated as a gross ratio. e. Calculated as the ratio of the female enrolment ratio
to the male enrolment ratio. f. Data refer to the 2000/01 school year. g. Preliminary UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates, subject to further revision. h. Data refer to the 1999/2000 school year. i. The ratio is an under-
estimate, as many students pursue their studies in nearby countries. j. Data refer to the 1998/99 school year. k. Census data. l. Data refer to a year between 1995 and 1999. m. Survey data.
Source: Columns 1 and 3: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004a; columns 2 and 4: calculated on the basis of data on adult and youth literacy rates from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004a; columns 5, 7 and 9:
UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c; columns 6, 8 and 10: calculated on the basis of data on net enrolment rates from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c. 

228

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

27 Gender

inequality in
economic
activity

HDI rank

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia

. . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN

Female employment by economic activity

Female economic activity rate

(ages 15 and above)

Rate
(%)
2002

Index

As % of
(1990 = 100) male rate

2002

2002

Agriculture

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

(%)

Industry

Services

Contributing 
family workers 

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

Total
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

(%)

As % of
male rate Women Men
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

59.9
62.7
56.4
60.5
45.8

40.1
66.7
59.3
51.1
37.9

51.0
53.2
56.9
44.1
38.2

49.1
61.8
58.0
47.9
38.1

38.8
49.2
51.1
38.4
50.0

51.6
54.4
54.1
62.3
49.2

26.3
61.3
50.7
36.7
..

60.4
57.1
48.6
..
34.2

57.5
62.7
38.5
36.4
37.6

48.6
42.1
48.9
32.0
59.3

110
102
108
105
106

106
101
107
104
118

104
106
98
103
104

108
100
110
100
113

107
115
105
109
99

105
98
112
107
103

113
100
112
126
..

95
100
102
..
120

97
99
121
96
113

110
127
102
110
94

85
89
78
83
67

67
83
82
68
53

66
75
87
66
58

77
84
80
70
57

59
69
65
59
64

72
81
71
79
62

38
83
63
48
..

82
80
72
..
40

80
84
50
48
47

67
47
73
37
80

2
1
3
2
2

1
3
1
5
2

3
1
4
6
..

1
2
6
2
5

5
..
(.)
18
(.)

14
10
12
4
4

1
3
..
(.)
..

4
19
4
..
..

12
4
..
..
4

2
..
15
(.)
12

37
32
56
40
60

52
24
42
113
17

67
35
50
113
..

36
34
50
70
59

78
..
33
118
50

123
95
125
77
80

18
55
..
33
..

39
99
41
..
..

60
45
..
..
19

28
..
97
1
63

9
11
10
11
9

10
10
12
21
14

13
11
14
14
..

13
14
12
18
15

20
..
10
12
18

23
29
19
10
13

21
28
..
12
..

23
18
26
..
..

21
26
..
..
15

14
..
21
14
16

27
31
33
35
29

28
29
36
55
36

37
32
35
32
..

38
38
37
40
35

52
..
37
40
60

51
62
55
35
41

58
57
..
40
..

55
46
60
..
..

61
53
..
..
57

43
..
58
38
48

88
88
87
87
86

82
85
87
73
83

84
88
82
80
..

86
85
82
80
81

75
..
90
70
81

63
61
70
63
83

78
68
..
87
..

73
63
71
..
..

67
71
..
..
80

85
..
63
86
72

152
144
135
137
135

141
157
134
128
167

141
142
156
154
..

136
143
146
153
160

136
..
123
127
119

143
143
122
129
142

129
155
..
127
..

153
155
144
..
..

148
161
..
..
158

136
..
133
157
153

63
50
58
65
80

85
50
63
81
53

59
68
42
67
..

..
..
61
78
63

54
76
87
69
76

70
62
88
..
84

..
86
..
59
..

50
58
70
..
..

59
75
..
..
43

74
..
73
..
50

38
50
42
35
20

15
50
37
19
47

41
32
58
33
..

..
..
39
22
37

46
24
13
31
24

30
38
12
..
16

..
14
..
41
..

50
43
30
..
..

41
25
..
..
57

25
..
27
..
50

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

229

27 Gender

inequality in
economic
activity

HDI rank

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Female employment by economic activity

Female economic activity rate

(ages 15 and above)

Rate
(%)
2002

67.0
50.8
40.2
44.9
..

56.1
59.1
25.6
48.9
50.0

44.0
59.1
..
38.4
60.0

43.1
37.1
43.9
50.5
55.4

..
43.7
48.9
20.0
..

73.0
22.0
61.2
67.3
30.3

38.7
62.4
49.9
65.4
35.3

62.5
..
50.8
37.3
27.6

55.0
37.5
..
72.5
..

43.3
55.7
40.8
27.5
33.4

Index

As % of
(1990 = 100) male rate

2002

2002

104
120
118
115
..

94
98
125
110
104

114
97
..
111
103

99
124
116
97
98

..
98
115
157
..

97
147
101
101
125

146
99
106
100
120

105
..
116
110
163

106
114
..
98
..

108
100
120
115
120

84
66
48
60
..

86
82
34
62
72

56
82
..
48
74

60
50
54
76
80

..
52
61
26
..

85
29
82
86
39

48
88
61
80
44

82
..
62
44
36

76
48
..
86
..

56
78
48
32
40

Agriculture

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

1
..
6
3
..

..
8
..
14
..

6
..
..
13
..

..
2
2
45
17

16
16
7
..
..

48
..
..
10
..

..
..
25
5
6

..
..
56
20
..

43
..
10
..
14

49
53
2
6
4

22
..
26
25
..

..
53
..
68
..

19
..
..
82
..

..
21
12
113
79

59
68
20
..
..

95
..
..
34
..

..
..
55
31
56

..
..
232
52
..

114
..
59
..
44

129
100
9
17
38

(%)

Industry

Services

Contributing 
family workers 

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

Total
1995-
2002 a

As % of
male rate Women Men
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

(%)

1995-
2002 a

5
..
22
13
..

..
23
..
29
..

10
..
..
43
..

..
1
12
22
22

14
10
17
..
..

17
..
..
9
..

..
..
12
24
10

..
..
15
10
..

7
..
12
..
10

22
6
17
12
16

22
..
79
36
..

..
64
..
85
..

50
..
..
110
..

..
2
42
72
57

56
37
90
..
..

85
..
..
34
..

..
..
67
149
42

..
..
56
50
..

51
..
38
..
42

98
47
64
62
55

93
..
72
84
..

..
69
..
57
..

85
..
..
45
..

..
97
86
33
55

71
74
76
..
..

35
..
..
81
..

..
..
63
39
84

..
..
29
69
..

50
..
77
..
72

27
41
81
81
79

134
..
150
160
..

..
140
..
126
..

165
..
..
97
..

..
150
151
111
168

144
150
158
..
..

119
..
..
181
..

..
..
172
70
129

..
..
60
173
..

103
..
165
..
180

74
118
154
187
132

..
..
49
75
..

..
41
..
..
61

36
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
71
60

..
..
58
..
..

66
..
..
66
..

..
..
..
57
66

..
..
68
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

56
57
23
32
64

..
..
51
25
..

..
58
..
..
39

64
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
29
40

..
..
42
..
..

34
..
..
34
..

..
..
..
43
34

..
..
32
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

44
43
77
68
36

230

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

27 Gender

inequality in
economic
activity

HDI rank

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Female employment by economic activity

Female economic activity rate

(ages 15 and above)

Rate
(%)
2002

Index

As % of
(1990 = 100) male rate

2002

2002

Agriculture

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

(%)

Industry

Services

Contributing 
family workers 

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

Total
1995-
2002 a

As % of
male rate Women Men
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

(%)

1995-
2002 a

30.0
9.5
47.1
41.5
46.6

29.2
62.8
30.9
45.7
61.2

56.0
73.5
60.3
48.4
41.2

58.5
73.8
48.1
47.3
35.7

37.1
63.2
..
80.9
41.8

53.7
42.4
62.6
..
80.2

79.9
65.8
67.6
57.1
74.5

62.4
41.9
66.4
35.4
56.8
49.6

36.3
53.5
58.4
47.6
79.3

65.0
74.7
30.8
69.0
47.8

139
151
126
116
109

124
106
162
101
104

111
96
98
106
122

112
103
119
102
118

132
101
..
97
107

101
105
95
..
98

98
99
100
100
101

99
107
101
115
101
105

127
101
100
103
98

98
100
109
99
102

38
14
56
50
53

38
85
41
52
85

68
91
84
58
48

81
88
57
59
45

43
77
..
92
53

67
50
77
..
97

98
75
79
65
85

73
52
76
41
67
59

44
62
71
56
88

78
85
37
78
56

..
26
4
..
..

..
..
..
..
53

..
..
50
3
..

..
..
..
9
39

18
..
..
..
6

29
..
17
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
77
..
..
..

73
..
..
..
..

..
16
88
..
2

..
281
12
..
..

..
..
..
..
103

..
..
97
54
..

..
..
..
72
144

36
..
..
..
107

89
..
78
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
144
..
..
..

164
..
..
..
..

..
79
204
..
51

..
11
22
..
..

..
..
..
..
8

..
..
10
14
..

..
..
..
14
7

23
..
..
..
40

7
..
14
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
9
..
..
..

9
..
..
..
..

..
10
3
..
11

..
34
90
..
..

..
..
..
..
60

..
..
58
36
..

..
..
..
41
28

127
..
..
..
125

39
..
54
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
82
..
..
..

46
..
..
..
..

..
41
21
..
37

..
62
74
..
..

..
..
..
..
38

..
..
40
82
..

..
..
..
75
54

56
..
..
..
54

63
..
67
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
12
..
..
..

18
..
..
..
..

..
75
9
..
87

..
107
178
..
..

..
..
..
..
112

..
..
130
151
..

..
..
..
150
112

203
..
..
..
86

128
..
133
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
40
..
..
..

50
..
..
..
..

..
131
21
..
131

46
46
39
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
70
63
40

..
70
..
..
33

..
..
..
..
19

..
..
45
..
64

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
81
..
..
..

33
..
..
..
..

..
..
26
..
..

54
54
61
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
30
37
60

..
30
..
..
67

..
..
..
..
81

..
..
55
..
36

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
19
..
..
..

67
..
..
..
..

..
..
74
..
..

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

231

27 Gender

inequality in
economic
activity

HDI rank

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

Developing countries
Least developed countries
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Central & Eastern Europe & the CIS
OECD
High-income OECD

High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

High income
Middle income
Low income

World

Female employment by economic activity

Female economic activity rate

(ages 15 and above)

Rate
(%)
2002

Index

As % of
(1990 = 100) male rate

2002

2002

Agriculture

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

(%)

Industry

Services

Contributing 
family workers 

As % of
Total male rate
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

Total
1995-
2002 a

As % of
male rate Women Men
1995-
2002 a

1995-
2002 a

(%)

1995-
2002 a

63.2
55.7
..
69.7
74.6

61.7
73.3
82.4
77.1
73.2

81.5
44.0
64.0
77.7
72.6

67.3
60.4
67.3
57.2
82.6

57.0
81.8
69.8
74.7
69.3
45.0

55.8
64.2
33.0
68.8
42.5
43.7
62.1
57.4
51.5
52.2

50.9
56.7
56.9

52.1
59.1
51.9

55.3

97
97
..
101
98

101
96
98
98
96

98
102
98
97
98

102
97
96
98
99

100
99
97
97
99
106

101
99
118
99
110
107
99
99
106
106

106
101
102

106
100
104

102

74
70
..
78
87

72
86
88
89
90

93
51
74
90
82

77
72
78
67
92

63
89
79
85
75
54

67
74
42
82
52
52
73
81
71
74

70
69
66

73
73
62

69

..
37
..
..
..

..
60
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
6
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
41
..
..
..

..
57
..
..
..

..
252
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..

Note: As a result of limitations in the data, comparisons of labour statistics over time and across countries should be made with caution. For detailed notes on the data, see  ILO (2002), ILO (2003) and ILO (2004b). The
percentage shares of employment by economic activity may not sum to 100 because of rounding or the omission of activities not classified. 
a. Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
Source: Columns 1-3: calculated on the basis of data on the economically active population and total population from ILO 2002; columns 4-9: ILO 2003; columns 10 and 11: calculated on the basis of data on con-
tributing family workers from ILO 2004b.

232

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

28 Gender, 

work burden
and time
allocation 

Selected developing countries
Urban areas
Colombia
Indonesia
Kenya
Nepal
Venezuela
Average a
Rural areas
Bangladesh
Guatemala
Kenya

Nepal
Highlands
Mountains
Rural hills
Philippines
Average a
National b
India
Mongolia
South Africa
Average a

Selected OECD countries c
Australia 
Austria d
Canada 
Denmark d
Finland d

France 
Germany d
Hungary 
Israel d
Italy d

Japan 
Korea, Rep. of 
Latvia 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 

Norway d
United Kingdom d
United States d
Average e

. . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN

Burden of work

Total work time
(minutes per day)
Men

Women

Female

work time
(% of male)

399
398
590
579
440

481

545
678
676

641
692
649
583
546

617

457
545
332

445

435
438
420
449
430

391
440
432
375
470

393
431
535
308
420

445
413
453

423

356
366
572
554
416

453

496
579
500

547
586
534
520
452

515

391
501
273

388

418
393
429
458
410

363
441
445
377
367

363
373
481
315
417

412
411
428

403

112
109
103
105
106

107

110
117
135

117
118
122
112
121

120

117
109
122

116

104
111
98
98
105

108
100
97
99
128

108
116
111
98
101

108
100
106

105

Year

1983
1992
1986
1978
1983

1990
1977
1988

1978
1978
1978
1978
1975-77

2000
2000
2000

1997
1992
1998
1987
1987-88

1999
1991-92
1999
1991-92
1988-89

1996
1999
1996
1995
1999

1990-91
1985
1985

Time allocation

(%)

Total work time

Time spent by women

Time spent by men

Market Non-market Market Non-market Market
activities
activities

activities

activities

activities

Non-market

activities

49
60
46
58
59

54

52
59
56

56
59
56
52
73

59

61
61
51

58

46
49
53
68
51

46
44
51
51
45

66
64
46
48
46

50
51
50

52

51
40
54
42
41

46

48
41
44

44
41
44
48
27

41

39
39
49

42

54
51
47
32
49

54
56
49
49
55

34
36
54
52
54

50
49
50

48

24
35
41
25
30

31

35
37
42

46
52
48
37
29

38

35
49
35

40

30
31
41
58
39

33
30
41
29
22

43
45
35
27
32

38
37
37

37

76
65
59
75
70

69

65
63
58

54
48
52
63
71

62

65
51
65

60

70
69
59
42
61

67
70
59
71
78

57
55
65
73
68

62
63
63

64

77
86
79
67
87

79

70
84
76

67
66
65
70
84

76

92
75
70

79

62
71
65
79
64

60
61
60
74
77

93
88
58
69
60

64
68
63

69

23
14
21
33
13

21

30
16
24

33
34
35
30
16

24

8
25
30

21

38
29
35
21
36

40
39
40
26
23

7
12
42
31
40

36
32
37

31

Note: Data are estimates based on time use surveys available in time for publication. Time use data are also being collected in other countries, including Benin, Chad, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, the Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam. Market activities refer to market-oriented production activities as defined by the
1993 revised UN System of National Accounts; surveys before 1993 are not strictly comparable with those for later years.
a. Refers to the unweighted average for countries or areas shown above. b. Classifications of market and non-market activities are not strictly based on the 1993 revised UN System of National Accounts, so comparisons
between countries and areas must be made with caution. c. Includes Israel and Latvia although they are not OECD countries. d. Harvey 1995. e. Refers to the unweighted average for the selected OECD countries above
(excluding Israel and Latvia).
Source: Columns 1-10: For urban and rural areas in selected developing countries, Goldshmidt-Clermont and Pagnossin Aligisakis 1995 and Harvey 1995; for national estimates in selected developing countries, UN 2002;
for selected OECD countries and Latvia, unless otherwise noted, Harvey 2001.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

233

29 Women’s
political
participation

HDI rank 

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
24 Greece
25 Singapore

26 Portugal
27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus

31 Malta
32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam f
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles

36 Estonia
37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain

41 Lithuania
42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait f
45 Costa Rica

46 Uruguay
47 Qatar f
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates f
50 Latvia

. . . AND ACHIEVING EQUALITY FOR ALL WOMEN AND MEN

Year women received right a

To vote

1907, 1913
1861, 1921
1902, 1962
1917, 1950
1919

1919, 1948
1915, 1920
1920, 1960
1945, 1947
1918, 1928

1971
1918, 1928
1906
1918
1919

1944
1915
1893
1918
1931

1945
1948
..
1927, 1952
1947

1931, 1976
1945
1948
1950
1960

1947
1920
–
1947
1948

1918
1918
1918
1951
1973 h

1921
1920
1931, 1949
–
1949

1932
–
1945
–
1918

To stand for

election

1907, 1913
1907, 1921
1902, 1962
1920, 1960
1917

1921, 1948
1915, 1920

1788 d

1945, 1947
1918, 1928

1971
1918, 1928
1906
1918
1919

1944
1915
1919
1918
1931

1945
1948
..
1927, 1952
1947

1931, 1976
1945
1948
1950
1960

1947
1920
–
1947
1948

1918
1918
1918
1951
1973 h

1921
1920
1931, 1949
–
1949

1932
–
1945
–
1918

Year first woman

elected (E) or
appointed (A)
to parliament

1911 A
1921 E
1943 E
1921 E
1918 E

1921 A
1922 E
1917 E
1946 E
1918 E

1971 E
1918 E
1907 E
1919 E
1919 E

1945 E
1918 E
1933 E
1919 E
1931 E

1946 E
1949 E
.. 
1952 E
1963 E

1934 E
1992 E e
1948 E
1966 A
1963 E

1966 E
1992 E e

–
1951 E
1976 E+A

1919 E
1919 E
1920 E
1984 E
–

1920 A
1992 E e
1951 E
–
1953 E

1942 E
–

1992 E e

–
..

Women in 

government at
ministerial level

(% of total) b

MDG

Seats in parliament held by women

(% of total) c

Lower or

single house

2001

1990

2004

42.1
55.0
19.5
24.3
31.0

18.5
33.3
31.8
5.7
18.8

28.6
33.3
44.4
31.3
28.6

37.9
45.0
44.0
35.7
17.6

17.6
6.1
..
7.1
5.7

9.7
15.0
6.5
14.3
..

5.3
..
0.0
7.3
23.1

14.3
18.7
35.9
0.0
..

18.9
19.0
25.6
0.0
28.6

..
0.0
16.2
..
6.7

36
38
6
13
21

9
21
7
1
8

14
6
32
12
13

7
31
14
..
15

13
7
..
7
5

8
..
2
4
2

3
..
– g
6
16

..
14
21
7
..

..
..
..
..
11

6
– g
..
..
..

36.4
45.3
25.3
20.6
36.7

35.3
30.2
14.3
7.1
13.3

25.0
17.9
37.5
33.9
16.7

12.2
38.0
28.3
32.2
28.3

11.5
15.0
..
8.7
16.0

19.1
12.2
5.9
13.3
10.7

9.2
17.0

– g

30.7
29.4

18.8
20.2
9.8
13.3
0.0 i

10.6
19.3
12.5
0.0
35.1

12.1

– g

17.8
0.0
21.0

Upper house

or senate

2004

–
–
28.9
32.4
32.0

31.0
–
13.0
15.4
16.7

23.9
16.7
–
21.0
–

10.9
–
–
24.6
24.3

8.1
–
..
–
–

–
–
–
23.8
–

–
12.3

– g

33.3
–

–
23.0
–
–
15.0 i

–
–
4.1
–
–

9.7

– g
–
–
–

234

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

29 Women’s
political
participation

HDI rank 

51 Bahamas
52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman f
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia f
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Year women received right a

To vote

1961, 1964
1934
1947
1946
1951

1937
1918
1964
1957
1946

1941, 1946
1919
..
1956
1920

..
1948
1946
1929, 1946
1919

1924
1934
1954
–
1990

1932
–
1924, 1993
1944
1952

1963
1921
1937
1932
1955

1927
1951
1930
1961
1974

1921
1957, 1959
1951
1949
1951

1931
1918, 1921
1942
1954
1929, 1967

To stand for

election

1961, 1964
1934
1953
1946
1951

1944
1918
1964
1957
1946

1941, 1946
1919
..
1956
1920

..
1948
1946
1929, 1946
1919

1924
1934
1954
–
1990

1932
–
1924, 1993
1944
1952

1963
1921
1937
1932
1955

1927
1951
1934
1961
1974

1921
1957, 1959
1951
1949
1951

1931
1918, 1921
1942
1954
1929, 1967

Year first woman

elected (E) or
appointed (A)
to parliament

1977 A
1940 E
1952 A
1962 E+A
1984 A

1945 E
1993 E e

..
1959 E
1990 E e

1946 E
1990 E e

..
1976 E
1945 E

..
1975 E
1948 E
1946 E
1990 E e

1979 A
1933 E
1954 A
–
1976 A

1948 A
–

1990 E e
1944 E
1991 A

1970A
1990 E e
1941 E
1979 E
1956 E

1990 E
1979 E e
1935 A
1963 E
1989 A

1990 E e
1959 E
1976 E+A
1954 E
1980 E

1947 E
1992 E e
1942 E
1984 E+A
1956 E

Women in 

government at
ministerial level

(% of total) b

MDG

Seats in parliament held by women

(% of total) c

Lower or

single house

Upper house

or senate

2001

16.7
10.7
11.1
8.7
0.0

18.8
..
12.5
..
10.9

20.0
25.7
..
9.1
15.0

..
..
0.0
20.0
..

18.2
0.0
47.4
..
7.7

5.7
..
17.5
12.5
0.0

20.7
..
..
..
16.2

..
0.0
0.0
..
0.0

2.6
10.0
25.0
5.1
0.0

..
9.7
..
11.1
20.0

1990

4
34
12
17
..

21
..
..
5
..

8
..
..
7
29

..
8
10
34
..

..
5
5
– g
..

3
..
..
5
..

..
36
9
6
6

26
10
1
6
..

..
4
..
21
10

5
..
8
..
5

2004

20.0
36.0
22.6
19.4
5.3

26.2
9.8
..
10.5
18.3

9.9
10.3
0.0
5.7
5.7

16.7
17.6
9.7
10.7
5.3

11.1
8.6
12.0

– g

6.1

9.2
0.0
10.4
11.7
2.3

5.7
4.6
17.8
6.0
17.5

26.0
22.7
4.4
8.8
5.5

10.5
11.5
26.7
20.2
18.8

4.4
7.2 j
17.3
3.3
16.0

2004

43.8
–
15.6
32.3
11.8

–
3.4
–
37.0
–

–
31.1
–
–
–

0.0
–
–
5.7
–

36.4
12.3
8.8

– g
–

10.5
–
5.1
19.0
–

6.7
–
12.5
–
–

–
–
–
8.9
12.7

–
–
30.8
–
–

–
– j
6.3
23.1
–

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

235

29 Women’s
political
participation

Year women received right a

HDI rank 

To vote

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde

1963
..
1939
1953
1975

To stand for

election

1963
..
1961
1945
1975

1953
1938
1962
1963
1918

1945
1946
1978, 1993
1938, 1952
1955

1924
1924
1955
1930, 1994
1956

1946
1956
1975
1974
1963

1989
1950
1965
1975, 1980
1955

1954
1946
1963
1953
1958

1956
1968
1972
1964
1951
1946

1947
1945
1963
1965
1962

Year first woman

elected (E) or
appointed (A)
to parliament

1963 E+A
..
1961 E
1968 E
1975 E

1973 E
1990 E e
1962 A
1968 E
1990 E e

1950 A
1976 E
1990 E
1966 E
1957 l

1990 E e
1951 E
1972 E
1933 E
1957 E

1956 E
1961 E
1975 E
1993 E
1993 E

1989 E
1952 E
1979 E
1987 E
1958 E

1960 A l
1947 E
1977 E
1975 E
1958 E

1993 E
1972 E+A
1973 E
1964 E
1952 A
1960 E

1973 E
1961 E
1963 E
1965 A
1962 A

1980 E+A
1969 E+A
1990 E l
1965 E
..

Women in 

government at
ministerial level

(% of total) b

MDG

Seats in parliament held by women

(% of total) c

Lower or

single house

2001

1990

2004

9.4
..
15.4
..
35.0

11.1
4.4
0.0
..
..

5.9
..
..
..
33.3

..
10.0
23.1
38.1
6.1

7.1
12.1
..
..
4.9

16.3
10.1
26.7
..
7.1

8.6
..
0.0
..
10.2

..
12.5
9.5
5.1
14.8
5.8

.. p

7.4
..
..
27.1

36.0
1.4
..
12.5
22.6

2
..
12
37
12

9
..
2.
13
..

12
18
..
9
10

..
25
15
3
4

7
13
12
..
..

7
5
5
4
..

..
..
..
2
6

..
4
10
..
6
14

10
5
14
..
12

11
1
4
7
..

4.1
..
10.7
20.0
11.1

12.0
7.2
6.2
5.0
10.0

8.0
27.3
12.9
18.5
5.5

12.7
10.5
20.7
29.8
2.4

8.2
9.2
9.1
0.0
10.8

26.4
8.8
17.0
1.9
9.8

9.0

.. n

0.9
9.3
22.9

– o

10.8
2.0
9.7
5.9
8.9

21.6
7.4
8.5
11.7
24.7

10.0
7.1
0.3
3.8
6.7

Upper house

or senate

2004

– k
..
–
–
–

–
–
..
–
2.2

–
–
–
14.8
–

11.8
–
–

31.5 m
5.7

–
13.2
–
–
..

7.7
10.3
–
–
13.1

–
.. n
–
–
–

– o

30.0
–
–
..
–

18.0
–
15.0
36.4
–

–
–
–
11.1
2.8

1949, 1953
1938
1962
1963
1918

1945
1946
1978, 1993
1938, 1952
1955

1924
1924
1955
1930, 1994
1956

1946
1956
1975
1974
1963

1989
1950
1965
1975, 1980
1955

1954
1935
1964
1953
1958

1956
1968
1972
1964
1951
1946

1947
1945
1963
1965
1962

106 Syrian Arab Republic
107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan

111 Indonesia
112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras

116 Tajikistan
117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt

121 Guatemala
122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco

126 Namibia
127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia

131 Ghana
132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.

136 Comoros
137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

1957
1919, 1963
1967
1959
1958

1978
1919, 1963
1967
1959
1958

236

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

29 Women’s
political
participation

HDI rank 

To vote

To stand for

election

Year women received right a

Year first woman

elected (E) or
appointed (A)
to parliament

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone

1961
1950
1946
1960
1955

1945
..
1961
1958
1956

1959
1952
1962
1961
1975

1958
1967
1986
1955
1975

1977
1961
1956
1958
1948
1961

1961
1950
1986
1960
1955

1945
..
1961
1958
1956

1959
1952
1962
1961
1975

1958
1970
1986
1955
1975

1977
1961
1956
1958
1948
1961

1975 E
1961 E
2003 E
1982 E
1994 E

1963 E
..
1965 l
1963 E
1979 E

..
1965 E
1964 E+A
1964 E
1980 E

1962 E
1970 E
1987 E
1957 E
1977 E

1972 A
1982 E
1964 E
1978 E
1989 E
..

Women in 

government at
ministerial level

(% of total) b

MDG

Seats in parliament held by women

(% of total) c

Lower or

single house

2001

1990

13.6
18.2
5.0
30.8
11.8

15.6
..
13.0
11.1
10.5

..
9.1
6.2
11.8
14.7

..
..
..
22.2
..

8.3
4.5
33.3
8.6
10.0
8.1

..
..
..
8
..

13
..
17
..
3

..
6
7
10
15

..
5
4
..
16

20
..
..
..
5
..

2004

3.7
3.6
10.8
13.2
22.0

19.2
26.1 q
48.8
19.3
7.2

21.4
8.5
12.0
9.3
15.5

5.8
8.3

– o

7.7
30.0

– o

18.4
10.2
11.7
1.2
14.5

Upper house

or senate

2004

5.4
25.9
–
–
–

–
–
30.0
–
–

–
–
–
–
–

–
–
– o

8.3
–

– o

18.9
–
–
–
–

a. Data refer to the year in which right to vote or stand for election on a universal and equal basis was recognized.  Where two years are shown, the first refers to the first partial recognition of the right to vote or stand
for election. b. Data were provided by states based on their definition of national executive and may therefore include women serving as ministers and vice ministers and those holding other ministerial positions, includ-
ing parliamentary secretaries. c. Data are as of 1 March 2004. The percentage was calculated using as a reference the number of total seats currently filled in parliament. d. No information is available on the year all
women received the right to stand for election.  However, the constitution does not mention gender with regard to this right. e. Refers to the year women were elected to the current parliamentary system. f. Women’s
right to vote and to stand for election has not been recognized. g. Brunei Darussalam, Oman and Qatar have never had a parliament. h. According to the constitution in force (1973), all citizens are equal before the law;
however, women were not able to exercise electoral rights in the first legislative elections held in 1973. The first legislature was dissolved by decree of the Emir on 26 August 1975. i. Women were allowed to vote in the
referendum of 14-15 February 2001, which approved the National Action Charter. Subsequently, women exercised their full political rights as both voters and candidates in the 2002 national elections. j. Elections were
held in November 2003. However, on 25 November 2003, the election results were annuled by the Supreme Court of Georgia. New elections will be held in March 2004. k. As of 1 March 2004, elections were continu-
ing and the number of women in parliament was subsequently unavailable. l. No information or confirmation available. m. The figures on the distribution of seats do not include the 36 special rotating delegates appointed
on an ad hoc basis, and the percentages given are therefore calculated on the basis of the 54 permanent seats. n. The parliament elected in 1990 has never been convened nor authorized to sit, and many of its members
were detained or forced into exile. o. Parliament has been dissolved or suspended for an indefinite period. p. Pakistan had 7 women in government at ministerial levels in 2000 and 11 in 2004 (UNDP 2004). This is not
reflected in the international data series currently available. Updates to this series are expected soon. q. The purpose of elections held on 30 August 2001 was to elect members of the Constituent Assembly of Timor-Leste.
This body became the National Parliament on 20 May 2002, the date on which the country became independent, without any new elections.
Source: Columns 1-3: IPU 1995 and IPU 2004a; column 4: IPU 2001; column 5: UN 2004e; columns 6 and 7: IPU 2004b.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

237

30 Status of major

international
human rights
instruments

HDI rank 

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
24 Greece
25 Singapore
26 Portugal

27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus
31 Malta

32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles
36 Estonia

37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain
41 Lithuania

42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica
46 Uruguay

47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia
51 Bahamas

HUMAN AND LABOUR RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS

International
Convention on
the Prevention
and Punishment

of the Crime
of Genocide

1948

International
Convention on
the Elimination

of All Forms

of Racial

International

Covenant
on Civil and

International

Covenant

on Economic,

Social and

Discrimination

Political Rights

Cultural Rights

1965

1966

1966

Convention on
the Elimination
of All Forms of
Discrimination
against Women

1979

Convention

against Torture

and Other

Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading
Treatment or
Punishment

1984

Convention

on the
Rights of
the Child

1989

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

238

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

30 Status of major

international
human rights
instruments

HDI rank 

52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

International
Convention on
the Prevention
and Punishment

of the Crime
of Genocide

1948

International
Convention on
the Elimination

of All Forms

of Racial

International

Covenant
on Civil and

International

Covenant

on Economic,

Social and

Discrimination

Political Rights

Cultural Rights

1965

1966

1966

Convention on
the Elimination
of All Forms of
Discrimination
against Women

1979

Convention

against Torture

and Other

Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading
Treatment or
Punishment

1984

Convention

on the
Rights of
the Child

1989

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

239

30 Status of major

international
human rights
instruments

HDI rank 

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde
106 Syrian Arab Republic

107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan
111 Indonesia

112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras
116 Tajikistan

117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt
121 Guatemala

122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco
126 Namibia

127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia
131 Ghana

132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.
136 Comoros

137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

International
Convention on
the Prevention
and Punishment

of the Crime
of Genocide

1948

International
Convention on
the Elimination

of All Forms

of Racial

International

Covenant
on Civil and

International

Covenant

on Economic,

Social and

Discrimination

Political Rights

Cultural Rights

1965

1966

1966

Convention on
the Elimination
of All Forms of
Discrimination
against Women

1979

Convention

against Torture

and Other

Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading
Treatment or
Punishment

1984

Convention

on the
Rights of
the Child

1989

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●●
●
●●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●
●

●
●●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●●
●
●
●

●
●●

●
●

●●
●

●
●

●●

●
●●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

240

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

International
Convention on
the Prevention
and Punishment

of the Crime
of Genocide

1948

International
Convention on
the Elimination

of All Forms

of Racial

International

Covenant
on Civil and

International

Covenant

on Economic,

Social and

Discrimination

Political Rights

Cultural Rights

1965

1966

1966

Convention on
the Elimination
of All Forms of
Discrimination
against Women

1979

Convention

against Torture

and Other

Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading
Treatment or
Punishment

1984

Convention

on the
Rights of
the Child

1989

30 Status of major

international
human rights
instruments

HDI rank 

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone
Others a

Afghanistan
Andorra
Cook Islands
Holy See
Iraq

Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Liberia
Liechtenstein
Marshall Islands

Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Monaco
Nauru
Niue
Palau

San Marino
Serbia and Montenegro
Somalia
Tuvalu

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●●

●
●

●
●

●
●●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●●

●

●
●●
●

●
●●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

175
1

●
●●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●●

●

●

●
●●

●●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●●
●

134
12

192
2

Total states parties b
Signatures not yet followed by ratification

135
2

169
7

151
8

148
7

● Ratification, accession or succession. ●● Signature not yet followed by ratification.
Note: The table includes states that have signed or ratified at least one of the seven human rights instruments. Information is as of March 2004.
a. These are the countries or areas, in addition to the 177 countries or areas included in the main indicator tables, that have signed or ratified at least one of the seven human rights instruments. b. Refers to ratification,
accession or succession.
Source: Columns 1-7: UN 2004f.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

241

31 Status of

fundamental
labour rights
conventions

HDI rank 

High human development

1 Norway
2 Sweden
3 Australia
4 Canada
5 Netherlands

6 Belgium
7 Iceland
8 United States
9 Japan
10 Ireland

11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
13 Finland
14 Austria
15 Luxembourg

16 France
17 Denmark
18 New Zealand
19 Germany
20 Spain

21 Italy
22 Israel
24 Greece
25 Singapore
26 Portugal

27 Slovenia
28 Korea, Rep. of
29 Barbados
30 Cyprus
31 Malta

32 Czech Republic
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Argentina
35 Seychelles
36 Estonia

37 Poland
38 Hungary
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
40 Bahrain
41 Lithuania

42 Slovakia
43 Chile
44 Kuwait
45 Costa Rica
46 Uruguay

47 Qatar
48 Croatia
49 United Arab Emirates
50 Latvia
51 Bahamas

HUMAN AND LABOUR RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS

Freedom of association
and collective bargaining
Convention
Convention

87 a

98 b

Elimination of forced
and compulsory labour

Convention

Convention

discrimination in respect of
employment and occupation
Convention
Convention

29 c

105 d

100 e

111 f

Abolition of child labour
Convention
Convention

138 g

182 h

Elimination of

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
▼▼
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

242

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

31 Status of

fundamental
labour rights
conventions

HDI rank 

52 Cuba
53 Mexico
54 Trinidad and Tobago
55 Antigua and Barbuda

Medium human development

56 Bulgaria
57 Russian Federation
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
59 Malaysia
60 Macedonia, TFYR

61 Panama
62 Belarus
63 Tonga
64 Mauritius
65 Albania

66 Bosnia and Herzegovina
67 Suriname
68 Venezuela
69 Romania
70 Ukraine

71 Saint Lucia
72 Brazil
73 Colombia
74 Oman
75 Samoa (Western)

76 Thailand
77 Saudi Arabia
78 Kazakhstan
79 Jamaica
80 Lebanon

81 Fiji
82 Armenia
83 Philippines
84 Maldives
85 Peru

86 Turkmenistan
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
88 Turkey
89 Paraguay
90 Jordan

91 Azerbaijan
92 Tunisia
93 Grenada
94 China
95 Dominica

96 Sri Lanka
97 Georgia
98 Dominican Republic
99 Belize
100 Ecuador

Freedom of association
and collective bargaining
Convention
Convention

87 a

98 b

Elimination of forced
and compulsory labour

Convention

Convention

discrimination in respect of
employment and occupation
Convention
Convention

29 c

105 d

100 e

111 f

Abolition of child labour
Convention
Convention

138 g

182 h

Elimination of

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
▼▼
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

243

31 Status of

fundamental
labour rights
conventions

HDI rank 

101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
103 El Salvador
104 Guyana
105 Cape Verde
106 Syrian Arab Republic

107 Uzbekistan
108 Algeria
109 Equatorial Guinea
110 Kyrgyzstan
111 Indonesia

112 Viet Nam
113 Moldova, Rep. of
114 Bolivia
115 Honduras
116 Tajikistan

117 Mongolia
118 Nicaragua
119 South Africa
120 Egypt
121 Guatemala

122 Gabon
123 São Tomé and Principe
124 Solomon Islands
125 Morocco
126 Namibia

127 India
128 Botswana
129 Vanuatu
130 Cambodia
131 Ghana

132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
134 Bhutan
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.
136 Comoros

137 Swaziland
138 Bangladesh
139 Sudan
140 Nepal
141 Cameroon

Low human development
142 Pakistan
143 Togo
144 Congo
145 Lesotho
146 Uganda

147 Zimbabwe
148 Kenya
149 Yemen
150 Madagascar
151 Nigeria

Freedom of association
and collective bargaining
Convention
Convention

87 a

98 b

Elimination of forced
and compulsory labour

Convention

Convention

discrimination in respect of
employment and occupation
Convention
Convention

29 c

105 d

100 e

111 f

Abolition of child labour
Convention
Convention

138 g

182 h

Elimination of

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

244

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

31 Status of

fundamental
labour rights
conventions

HDI rank 

152 Mauritania
153 Haiti
154 Djibouti
155 Gambia
156 Eritrea

157 Senegal
158 Timor-Leste
159 Rwanda
160 Guinea
161 Benin

162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of
163 Côte d’Ivoire
164 Zambia
165 Malawi
166 Angola

167 Chad
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
169 Central African Republic
170 Ethiopia
171 Mozambique

172 Guinea-Bissau
173 Burundi
174 Mali
175 Burkina Faso
176 Niger
177 Sierra Leone
Others i

Afghanistan
Iraq
Kiribati
Liberia
San Marino

Serbia and Montenegro
Somalia

Freedom of association
and collective bargaining
Convention
Convention

87 a

98 b

Elimination of forced
and compulsory labour

Convention

Convention

discrimination in respect of
employment and occupation
Convention
Convention

29 c

105 d

100 e

111 f

Abolition of child labour
Convention
Convention

138 g

182 h

Elimination of

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●

Total ratifications

142

154

163

159

161

159

132

147

● Convention ratified. ▼▼ Convention denounced. 
Note: Table includes UN member states.
a. Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize Convention (1948). b. Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining Convention (1949). c. Forced Labour Convention (1930). d. Abolition of Forced Labour
Convention (1957). e. Equal Remuneration Convention (1951). f. Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention (1958). g. Minimum Age Convention (1973). h. Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (1999).
i. States not included in the human development index that have ratified at least one labour rights convention.
Source: Columns 1-8: ILO 2004a.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

245

32 Human develop-

ment indices:
a regional
perspective

Arab States
108 Algeria
40 Bahrain
154 Djibouti
120 Egypt
90 Jordan

44 Kuwait
80 Lebanon
58 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
125 Morocco
102 Occupied Palestinian Territories

74 Oman
47 Qatar
77 Saudi Arabia
139 Sudan
106 Syrian Arab Republic

92 Tunisia
49 United Arab Emirates
149 Yemen

East Asia and the Pacific

33 Brunei Darussalam
130 Cambodia
94 China
81 Fiji
23 Hong Kong, China (SAR)

111 Indonesia
28 Korea, Rep. of
135 Lao People’s Dem. Rep.
59 Malaysia
117 Mongolia

132 Myanmar
133 Papua New Guinea
83 Philippines
75 Samoa (Western)
25 Singapore

124 Solomon Islands
76 Thailand
158 Timor-Leste
63 Tonga
129 Vanuatu
112 Viet Nam

Latin America and the Caribbean

55 Antigua and Barbuda
34 Argentina
51 Bahamas
29 Barbados
99 Belize

114 Bolivia
72 Brazil
43 Chile
73 Colombia
45 Costa Rica

Human development index (HDI)
1975
2002

1990

Human poverty

index for

developing countries

(HPI-1)

Human poverty
index for selected

high-income

OECD countries

(HPI-2)

Gender

Gender-related

empowerment

development index

(GDI)

measure
(GEM)

0.504
..
..
0.438
..

0.761
..
..
0.429
..

0.493
..
0.602
0.344
0.534

0.516
0.744
..

..
..
0.523
0.659
0.760

0.467
0.705
..
0.614
..

..
0.423
0.653
..
0.724

..
0.613
..
..
..
..

..
0.784
..
0.804
..

0.512
0.644
0.703
0.661
0.745

0.642
0.808
..
0.577
0.682

..
0.673
..
0.542
..

0.696
..
0.707
0.427
0.635

0.656
0.805
0.392

..
..
0.627
0.722
0.862

0.623
0.817
0.449
0.720
0.656

..
0.482
0.719
..
0.821

..
0.707
..
..
..
0.610

..
0.810
0.825
0.851
0.747

0.603
0.714
0.784
0.727
0.791

0.704
0.843
0.454
0.653
0.750

0.838
0.758
0.794
0.620
0.726

0.770
0.833
0.768
0.505
0.710

0.745
0.824
0.482

0.867
0.568
0.745
0.758
0.903

0.692
0.888
0.534
0.793
0.668

0.551
0.542
0.753
0.769
0.902

0.624
0.768
0.436
0.787
0.570
0.691

0.800
0.853
0.815
0.888
0.737

0.681
0.775
0.839
0.773
0.834

21.9
..
34.3
30.9
7.2

..
9.5
15.3
34.5
..

31.5
..
15.8
31.6
13.7

19.2
..
40.3

..
42.6
13.2
21.3
..

17.8
..
40.3
..
19.1

25.4
37.0
15.0
..
6.3

..
13.1
..
..
..
20.0

..
..
..
2.5
16.7

14.4
11.8
4.1
8.1
4.4

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

0.688
0.832
..
0.634
0.734

0.827
0.755
..
0.604
..

0.747
..
0.739
0.485
0.689

0.734
..
0.436

..
0.557
0.741
0.747
0.898

0.685
0.882
0.528
0.786
0.664

..
0.536
0.751
..
0.884

..
0.766
..
..
..
0.689

..
0.841
0.813
0.884
0.718

0.674
0.768
0.830
0.770
0.823

..
0.395
..
0.266
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.207
..
..

..
..
0.123

..
0.364
..
0.335
..

..
0.377
..
0.519
0.429

..
..
0.542
..
0.648

..
0.461
..
..
..
..

..
0.645
0.699
0.634
0.455

0.524
..
0.460
0.498
0.664

246

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

32 Human develop-

ment indices:
a regional
perspective

52 Cuba
95 Dominica
98 Dominican Republic
100 Ecuador
103 El Salvador

93 Grenada
121 Guatemala
104 Guyana
153 Haiti
115 Honduras

79 Jamaica
53 Mexico
118 Nicaragua
61 Panama
89 Paraguay

85 Peru
39 Saint Kitts and Nevis
71 Saint Lucia
87 St. Vincent & the Grenadines
67 Suriname

54 Trinidad and Tobago
46 Uruguay
68 Venezuela

South Asia
138 Bangladesh
134 Bhutan
127 India
101 Iran, Islamic Rep. of
84 Maldives

140 Nepal
142 Pakistan
96 Sri Lanka

Southern Europe

30 Cyprus
88 Turkey

Sub-Saharan Africa
166 Angola
161 Benin
128 Botswana
175 Burkina Faso
173 Burundi

141 Cameroon
105 Cape Verde
169 Central African Republic
167 Chad
136 Comoros

144 Congo
168 Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
163 Côte d’Ivoire
109 Equatorial Guinea
156 Eritrea

Human development index (HDI)
1975
2002

1990

Human poverty

index for

developing countries

(HPI-1)

Human poverty
index for selected

high-income

OECD countries

(HPI-2)

Gender

Gender-related

empowerment

development index

(GDI)

measure
(GEM)

..
..
0.617
0.630
0.590

..
0.510
0.677
..
0.517

0.687
0.688
0.565
0.708
0.667

0.642
..
..
..
..

0.735
0.759
0.716

0.345
..
0.411
0.565
..

0.291
0.346
0.613

..
0.590

..
0.288
0.503
0.239
0.282

0.415
..
0.334
0.260
..

0.451
0.410
0.382
..
..

..
..
0.678
0.710
0.648

..
0.583
0.697
0.455
0.624

0.726
0.761
0.589
0.748
0.719

0.706
..
..
..
..

0.791
0.803
0.759

0.417
..
0.514
0.649
..

0.418
0.444
0.698

0.835
0.683

..
0.356
0.675
0.302
0.338

0.519
0.623
0.375
0.326
0.501

0.532
0.414
0.429
0.504
..

0.809
0.743
0.738
0.735
0.720

0.745
0.649
0.719
0.463
0.672

0.764
0.802
0.667
0.791
0.751

0.752
0.844
0.777
0.751
0.780

0.801
0.833
0.778

0.509
0.536
0.595
0.732
0.752

0.504
0.497
0.740

0.883
0.751

0.381
0.421
0.589
0.302
0.339

0.501
0.717
0.361
0.379
0.530

0.494
0.365
0.399
0.703
0.439

5.0
..
13.7
12.0
17.0

..
22.5
12.9
41.1
16.6

9.2
9.1
18.3
7.7
10.6

13.2
..
..
..
..

7.7
3.6
8.5

42.2
..
31.4
16.4
11.4

41.2
41.9
18.2

..
12.0

..
45.7
43.5
65.5
45.8

36.9
19.7
47.7
49.6
31.4

31.9
42.9
45.0
32.7
41.8

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.728
0.721
0.709

..
0.635
0.715
0.458
0.662

0.762
0.792
0.660
0.785
0.736

0.736
..
..
..
..

0.795
0.829
0.770

0.499
..
0.572
0.713
..

0.484
0.471
0.738

0.875
0.746

..
0.406
0.581
0.291
0.337

0.491
0.709
0.345
0.368
0.510

0.488
0.355
0.379
0.691
0.431

..
..
0.527
0.490
0.448

..
..
..
..
0.355

..
0.563
..
0.486
0.417

0.524
..
..
..
..

0.644
0.511
0.444

0.218
..
..
0.313
..

..
0.416
0.276

0.497
0.290

..
..
0.562
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

247

32 Human develop-

ment indices:
a regional
perspective

170 Ethiopia
122 Gabon
155 Gambia
131 Ghana
160 Guinea

172 Guinea-Bissau
148 Kenya
145 Lesotho
150 Madagascar
165 Malawi

174 Mali
152 Mauritania
64 Mauritius
171 Mozambique
126 Namibia

176 Niger
151 Nigeria
159 Rwanda
123 São Tomé and Principe
157 Senegal

35 Seychelles
177 Sierra Leone
119 South Africa
137 Swaziland
162 Tanzania, U. Rep. of

143 Togo
146 Uganda
164 Zambia
147 Zimbabwe

Central & Eastern Europe & CIS

65 Albania
82 Armenia
91 Azerbaijan
62 Belarus
66 Bosnia and Herzegovina

56 Bulgaria
48 Croatia
32 Czech Republic
36 Estonia
97 Georgia

38 Hungary
78 Kazakhstan
110 Kyrgyzstan
50 Latvia
41 Lithuania

Human development index (HDI)
1975
2002

1990

Human poverty

index for

developing countries

(HPI-1)

Human poverty
index for selected

high-income

OECD countries

(HPI-2)

..
..
0.283
0.439
..

0.254
0.445
0.457
0.400
0.315

0.232
0.339
..
..
..

0.237
0.324
0.341
..
0.315

..
..
0.655
0.516
..

0.396
..
0.466
0.547

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

0.777
..
..
..
..

0.305
..
..
0.511
..

0.311
0.540
0.544
0.436
0.368

0.288
0.387
0.723
0.310
..

0.259
0.430
0.351
..
0.382

..
..
0.729
0.611
0.413

0.474
0.395
0.466
0.617

0.702
0.751
..
0.785
..

0.795
0.806
..
0.817
..

0.807
0.767
..
0.807
0.823

0.359
0.648
0.452
0.568
0.425

0.350
0.488
0.493
0.469
0.388

0.326
0.465
0.785
0.354
0.607

0.292
0.466
0.431
0.645
0.437

0.853
0.273
0.666
0.519
0.407

0.495
0.493
0.389
0.491

0.781
0.754
0.746
0.790
0.781

0.796
0.830
0.868
0.853
0.739

0.848
0.766
0.701
0.823
0.842

55.5
..
45.8
26.0
..

48.0
37.5
47.9
35.9
46.8

58.9
48.3
11.3
49.8
37.7

61.4
35.1
44.7
..
44.1

..
..
31.7
..
36.0

38.0
36.4
50.4
52.0

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

Gender-related

empowerment

Gender

development index

(GDI)

0.346
..
0.446
0.564
..

0.329
0.486
0.483
0.462
0.374

0.309
0.456
0.775
0.339
0.602

0.278
0.458
0.423
..
0.429

..
..
0.661
0.505
0.401

0.477
0.487
0.375
0.482

0.778
0.752
..
0.789
..

0.795
0.827
0.865
0.852
..

0.847
0.761
..
0.823
0.841

measure
(GEM)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
0.572

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.487
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
0.560
0.586
0.592
0.387

0.529
..
..
0.591
0.508

248

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

32 Human develop-

ment indices:
a regional
perspective

60 Macedonia, TFYR
113 Moldova, Rep. of
37 Poland
69 Romania
57 Russian Federation

42 Slovakia
27 Slovenia
116 Tajikistan
86 Turkmenistan
70 Ukraine
107 Uzbekistan
High-income OECD a

3 Australia
14 Austria
6 Belgium
4 Canada
17 Denmark

13 Finland
15 Luxembourg
19 Germany
24 Greece
7 Iceland

10 Ireland
22 Israel
21 Italy
9 Japan
16 France

31 Malta
5 Netherlands
18 New Zealand
1 Norway
26 Portugal

20 Spain
2 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 United Kingdom
8 United States

Human development index (HDI)
1975
2002

1990

Human poverty

index for

developing countries

(HPI-1)

Human poverty
index for selected

high-income

OECD countries

(HPI-2)

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

0.847
0.842
0.845
0.869
0.872

0.839
0.838
..
0.832
0.862

0.810
0.794
0.841
0.854
0.852

0.726
0.865
0.847
0.866
0.785

0.836
0.863
0.878
0.845
0.866

..
0.736
0.802
0.771
0.813

..
..
0.719
..
0.798
..

0.892
0.893
0.897
0.928
0.897

0.899
0.882
0.887
0.870
0.913

0.869
0.857
0.887
0.910
0.902

0.824
0.907
0.874
0.911
0.847

0.885
0.895
0.909
0.883
0.914

0.793
0.681
0.850
0.778
0.795

0.842
0.895
0.671
0.752
0.777
0.709

0.946
0.934
0.942
0.943
0.932

0.935
0.933
0.925
0.902
0.941

0.936
0.908
0.920
0.938
0.932

0.875
0.942
0.926
0.956
0.897

0.922
0.946
0.936
0.936
0.939

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

12.9
..
12.4
12.2
9.1

8.4
10.5
10.3
..
..

15.3
..
11.6
11.1
10.8

..
8.2
..
7.1
..

11.0
6.5
..
14.8
15.8

Gender-related

empowerment

Gender

development index

(GDI)

..
0.678
0.848
0.775
0.794

0.840
0.892
0.668
0.748
0.773
0.705

0.945
0.924
0.938
0.941
0.931

0.933
0.926
0.921
0.894
0.938

0.929
0.906
0.914
0.932
0.929

0.866
0.938
0.924
0.955
0.894

0.916
0.946
0.932
0.934
0.936

measure
(GEM)

0.517
0.469
0.606
0.465
0.467

0.607
0.584
..
..
0.411
..

0.806
0.770
0.808
0.787
0.847

0.820
..
0.804
0.523
0.816

0.710
0.614
0.583
0.531
..

0.480
0.817
0.772
0.908
0.644

0.716
0.854
0.771
0.698
0.769

Note: The best value in each index and region is presented in bold.
a. Excludes the Republic of Korea; see East Asia and the Pacific. Includes Israel and Malta, although they are not OECD countries.
Source: Column 1: column 1 of table 2; column 2: column 4 of table 2; column 3: column 8 of table 1; column 4: column 2 of table 3; column 5: column 2 of table 4; column 6: column 2 of table 24; column 7: column
2 of table 25.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATORS

249

33 Basic indicators

for other UN
member
countries

Afghanistan
Andorra
Iraq
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.

Liberia
Liechtenstein
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Monaco

Nauru
Palau
San Marino
Serbia and Montenegro
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human development index components

Combined gross 
enrolment ratio

Life

expectancy

Adult
literacy

rate

at birth
(years)
2000-05 c

(% ages 15
and above)

2002

for primary,
secondary
and tertiary

schools

(%)

2001/02 d

43.1
..
60.7
..
63.1

41.4
..
..
68.6
..

..
..
..
73.2
47.9
..

..
..
..
..
..

55.9
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

14
..
57
..
..

61
..
..
..
..

55
..
..
74
..
67

MDG

Total
Under-five
fertility mortality

GDP

Total

rate

per capita population (births per
(thousands) woman)
(PPP US$)
2000-05 c

2002

2002

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

22,930
69
24,510
87
22,541

3,239
33
52
108
34

13
20
27
10,535
9,480
10

6.8
..
4.8
..
2.0

6.8
..
..
3.8
..

..
..
..
1.7
7.3
..

rate

(per 1,000
live births)

2002

257
7
125
69
55

235
11
66
24
5

30
29
6
19
225
52

MDG
Net

MDG
Under-

HIV

nourished

primary
enrolment prevalence b people
(% of total
population)
1999/2001 e

(% ages
15-49)
2003

ratio a
(%)

2001/02 d

..
..
91
..
..

70
..
100
..
..

81
97
..
75
..
..

..
..
<0.1 [0.2]
..
..

5.9 [2.7-12.4]
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.2 [0.1-0.4]
..
..

70
..
27
..
34

42
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
9
71
..

MDG

Population

with

sustainable
access to an
improved

water
source

(%)
2000

13
100
85
48
100

..
..
..
..
100

..
79
..
98
..
100

Note: This table presents data for UN member countries not included in the main indicator tables.
a. The net enrolment ratio is the ratio of enrolled children of the official age for the education level indicated to the total population of that age. b. Data refer to point and range estimates based on new estimation mod-
els developed by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Range estimates are presented in square brackets. c. Data refer to estimates for the period specified. d. Data refer to the school year 2001/02.
Data for some countries may refer to national or UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates. For details, see http://uis.unesco.org/. e. Data refer to average for the years specified.
Source: Columns 1, 5 and 6: UN 2003; column 2: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004a; column 3: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004c; column 4: World Bank 2004f; column 7: UNICEF 2003b; column 8: UNESCO
Institute for Statistics 2004c; column 9: UNAIDS 2004; column 10: FAO 2003; column 11: UNICEF 2003b, based on a joint effort by the United Nation Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization.

250

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Note on statistics in the 
Human Development Report

This Report usually presents two types of sta-
tistical information: statistics in the human devel-
opment indicator tables, which provide a global
assessment of country achievements in different
areas of human development, and statistical evi-
dence on the thematic analysis in the chapters.
This year’s Report incorporates many of the
Millennium Development Goal indicators in
the human development indicator tables (see
index to Millennium Development Goal indi-
cators). Data for these indicators provide a sta-
tistical reference for assessing the progress in
each country towards the Millennium Devel-
opment Goals and their targets. 

DATA SOURCES

The Human Development Report Office is pri-
marily a user, not a producer, of statistics. It
therefore relies on international data agencies
with the resources and expertise to collect and
compile international data on specific statistical
indicators.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICATOR TABLES

To allow comparisons across countries and over
time, the Human Development Report Office,
to the extent possible, uses internationally com-
parable data produced by relevant international
data agencies or other specialized institutions in
preparing the human development indicator
tables (for information on the major agencies
providing data used in the Report, see box 1).
But many gaps still exist in the data, even in some
very basic areas of human development. While
advocating for improvements in human devel-
opment data, as a principle and for practical rea-
sons, the Human Development Report Office
does not collect data directly from countries or
make estimates to fill these data gaps. 

The one exception is the human develop-
ment index (HDI). The Human Development
Report Office strives to include as many UN
member countries as possible in the HDI. For
a country to be included, data ideally should be
available from the relevant international data
agencies for all four components of the index (see
Statistical feature 2, Note  to  table  1: About
this  year’s  human  development  index). But
for a significant number of countries data are
missing for one or more of these components. In
response to the desire of countries to be included
in the HDI, the Human Development Report
Office makes every effort in these cases to iden-
tify other reasonable estimates, working with
international data agencies, the UN Regional
Commissions, national statistical offices and
UNDP country offices. In a few cases the Human
Development Report Office has attempted to
make an estimate in consultation with regional
and national statistical offices or other experts. 

MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOAL INDICATORS

The United Nations Statistics Division main-
tains the global Millennium Indicators Data-
base  (http://millenniumindicators.un.org),
compiled from international data series pro-
vided  by  the  responsible  international  data
agencies.  The  database  forms  the  statistical
basis for the UN Secretary-General’s annual
report to the UN General Assembly on global
and regional progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals and their targets. It also
feeds into other international reports provid-
ing data on the Millennium Development Goal
indicators across countries, such as this Report
and the World Bank’s annual World Develop-
ment Indicators. 

At the time this Report was being prepared,
the  United  Nations  Statistics  Division  was

NOTE ON STATISTICS IN THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT

251

BOX 1

Major sources of data used in the Human Development Report

By generously sharing data, the following organizations made it possible
for the Human Development Report to publish the important human devel-
opment statistics appearing in the indicator tables.

Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center (CDIAC) The CDIAC,
a data and analysis centre of the US Department of Energy, focuses on
the greenhouse effect and global climate change. It is the source of data
on carbon dioxide emissions. 

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) The FAO collects, analy-
ses and disseminates data and information on food and agriculture. It is
the source of data on food insecurity indicators. 

International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) An independent cen-
tre for research, information and debate on the problems of conflict, the
IISS maintains an extensive military database. The data on armed forces
are from its publication The Military Balance. 

International Labour Organization (ILO) The ILO maintains an exten-
sive statistical publication programme, with the Yearbook of Labour Sta-
tistics and the Key Indicators of the Labour Market its most comprehensive
collection of labour market data. The ILO is the source of data on wages,
employment and occupations and information on the ratification status of
labour rights conventions. 

International Monetary Fund (IMF) The IMF has an extensive pro-
gramme for developing and compiling statistics on international financial
transactions and balance of payments. Much of the financial data provided
to the Human Development Report Office by other agencies originates
from the IMF. 

International Telecommunication Union (ITU) This specialized UN
agency maintains an extensive collection of statistics on information and
communications. The data on trends in telecommunications come from
its World Telecommunication Indicators database. 

Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) This organization provides data on
trends in political participation and structures of democracy. The Human
Development Report Office relies on the IPU for data relating to elec-
tions and information on women’s political representation. 

Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) This
joint UN programme monitors the spread of HIV/AIDS and provides reg-
ular updates. The Report on the Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic, a joint
publication of UNAIDS and the World Health Organization, is the pri-
mary source of data on HIV/AIDS. 

Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) A cooperative research project with
25 member countries, the LIS focuses on poverty and policy issues. It is
the source of income poverty estimates for many OECD countries. 

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
The OECD publishes data on a variety of social and economic trends in
its member countries as well as on flows of aid. This year’s Report pre-
sents data from the OECD on aid, energy, employment and education. 

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) SIPRI con-
ducts research on international peace and security. The SIPRI Yearbook:

Armaments, Disarmament and International Security is the published
source of data on military expenditure and arms transfers. 

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) UNICEF monitors the well-
being of children and provides a wide array of data. Its State  of  the
World’s Children is an important source of data for the Report. 

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
UNCTAD provides trade and economic statistics through a number of
publications, including the World Investment Report. It is the original
source of data on investment flows that the Human Development Report
Office receives from other agencies. 

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) The Institute for Statistics of this specialized UN agency is
the source of data relating to education. The Human Development Report
Office relies on data in UNESCO’s statistical publications as well as data
received directly from its Institute for Statistics. 

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) This UN
organization provides data on refugees through its Statistical Yearbook
or other on-line statistical publications. 

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) This UN orga-
nization carries out international comparative research to support the fight
against illicit drugs and international crime. It provides data on crime vic-
tims from the International Crime Victims Surveys. 

United Nations Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary Gen-
eral (UN Treaty Section) The Human Development Report Office com-
piles information on the status of major international human rights instruments
and environmental treaties based on the database maintained by this UN office. 

United Nations Population Division (UNPOP) This specialized UN
office produces international data on population trends. The Human Devel-
opment Report Office relies on World Population Prospects and World
Urbanization Prospects, two of the main publications of UNPOP, and its
other publications and databases, for demographic estimates and projections. 

United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) The UNSD provides a wide range
of statistical outputs and services. Much of the national accounts data provided
to the Human Development Report Office by other agencies originates from
the UNSD. This year’s Report also presents UNSD data on trade and energy
and draws on the global Millennium Indicators Database, maintained by the
UNSD, as the source of data for the Millennium Development Goal indicators. 

World Bank The World Bank produces and compiles data on economic
trends as well as a broad array of other indicators. Its World Develop-
ment Indicators is the primary source for many indicators in the Report. 

World Health Organization (WHO) This specialized agency main-
tains a large array of data series on health issues, the source for the health-
related indicators in the Report. 

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) As a specialized UN
agency, WIPO promotes the protection of intellectual property rights
throughout the world through different kinds of cooperative efforts. It is
the source of data relating to patents.

252

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

updating the Millennium Indicators Database
and the World Bank was completing its World
Development  Indicators  2004 for  publica-
tion.  By  generously  sharing  data,  the  World
Bank and other international agencies—such as
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural  Organization  Institute  for  Statistics
(UIS),  the  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund
(UNICEF) and the World Health Organization
(WHO)—enabled the Report to include not
only the existing data in the Millennium Indi-
cators Database but also more recent estimates
for some of the Millennium Development Goal
indicators, estimates that were later to be incor-
porated into the database. 

DATA FOR THEMATIC ANALYSIS

The statistical evidence used in the thematic
analysis in the Report is often drawn from the
indicator tables. But a wide range of other sources
are also used, including commissioned papers,
government documents, national human devel-
opment reports, reports of non-governmental
organizations, journal articles and other schol-
arly publications. Official statistics usually receive
priority. But because of the cutting-edge nature
of the issues discussed, relevant official statistics
may not exist, so that non-official sources of
information must be used. Nevertheless, the
Human Development Report Office is commit-
ted to relying on data compiled through schol-
arly and scientific research and to ensuring
impartiality in the sources of information and in
its use in the analysis.

Where information from sources other than
the Report’s indicator tables is used in boxes or
tables in the text, the source is shown and the
full citation is given in the bibliography. In addi-
tion, a summary note for each chapter outlines
the major sources for the chapter, and endnotes
specify the sources of statistical information not
drawn from the indicator tables. 

THE NEED FOR BETTER HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
STATISTICS

While the indicator tables in this year’s Report
present the best data currently available for
measuring human development, many gaps and
problems remain.

DATA GAPS

Gaps throughout the indicator tables demon-
strate the pressing need for improvements in the
availability of relevant, reliable and timely human
development statistics. A stark example of data
gaps is the large number of countries excluded
from the HDI. The intent is to include all UN
member countries, along with Hong Kong,
China (SAR) and the Occupied Palestinian Ter-
ritories. But because of a lack of reliable data,
16 UN member countries are excluded from the
HDI and therefore from the main indicator
tables (what key indicators are available for
these countries are presented in table 33). Sim-
ilarly, the human poverty index covers only 95
developing  countries  and  17  high-income
OECD countries, the gender-related develop-
ment  index  144  countries  and  the  gender
empowerment measure 78 countries. For a sig-
nificant number of countries data for the com-
ponents of these indices are unreliable and out
of date and in some cases need to be estimated
(for the definition and methodology of the
indices, see technical note 1). 

DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN NATIONAL AND
INTERNATIONAL ESTIMATES

When compiling international data series, inter-
national data agencies often need to apply inter-
nationally adopted standards and harmonization
procedures to improve comparability across
countries. Where the international data are
based on national statistics, as they usually are,
the national data may need to be adjusted.
Where data for a country are missing, an inter-
national agency may produce an estimate if
other relevant information can be used. And
because  of  the  difficulties  in  coordination
between national and international data agen-
cies, international data series may not incorpo-
rate the most recent national data. All these
factors can lead to significant discrepancies
between national and international estimates. 
This  Report  has  often  brought  such
discrepancies to light. While the Human Devel-
opment Report Office advocates for improve-
ments in international data, it also recognizes that
it can play an active role in such efforts. When
discrepancies in data have arisen, it has helped

NOTE ON STATISTICS IN THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT

253

to link national and international data authori-
ties to address those discrepancies. In many
cases this has led to better statistics in the Report.
The Human Development Report Office is striv-
ing to continuously improve data consistency
through more systematic efforts. 

TOWARDS STRONGER STATISTICAL CAPACITY

A vital part of the solution to the enormous
gaps and deficiencies in statistical information
is building sustainable statistical capacity in
countries, an effort requiring financial and
political commitment at both national and inter-
national levels. The momentum generated by the
Millennium Development Goal process has
mobilized the entire international statistical
community, and many initiatives are under way,
including the Marrakech Action Plan for Sta-
tistics (box 2) and the Health Metrics Network
launched by the WHO (box 3). 

International  statistical  agencies  should
continue  to  play  an  active  part  in  statistical

development  by  improving,  promoting  and
implementing internationally agreed standards,
methods and frameworks for statistical activi-
ties. This year’s Report highlights the need for
conceptual and methodological breakthroughs
in the development of cultural indicators (box 4
and box 2.3 in chapter 2). It also calls for greater
efforts  to  improve  other  basic  human  devel-
opment statistics. Recognizing the weakness of
the  existing  literacy  statistics,  the  UNESCO
Institute for Statistics is developing new tools
for measuring literacy (box 5). And the Mil-
lennium Round of the International Compari-
son  Program  promises  to  provide  a  sounder
basis  for  assessing  standards  of  living  across
countries (box 6).  

METHODOLOGY AND PRESENTATION OF THE
INDICATORS

This year’s Report presents data for most key
indicators  with  only  a  two-year  lag  between
the reference date for the indicators and the date

BOX 2

The Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics

The emphasis on quantitative targets in the Mil-
lennium Development Goals and the growing
attention to measuring results have increased the
demand for statistics. They have also increased our
awareness of the poor state of statistical systems
in many parts of the developing world. Good sta-
tistics are not a technical issue. As Trevor Manuel
has said, “If you can’t measure it, you can’t man-
age it”. Data and statistics are needed by govern-
ments, politicians, and managers. Crucially, they
are  needed  by  citizens  to  hold  governments
accountable for their actions and results. Improv-
ing statistical systems is a development issue, which
requires concerted action by the entire global
community and not just professional statisticians. 
At the Second International Roundtable
Conference  on  Managing  for  Development
Results, representatives of the multilateral devel-
opment banks, the OECD Development Assis-
tance Committee, and UN programs and agencies
proposed an action plan for improving devel-
opment statistics. The plan has three objectives:
1. To strengthen national capacity to produce,

analyze and use reliable statistics.

2. To improve the quality and availability of
development statistics for global monitoring.
3. To support countries that are expanding their

statistical capacity.

Source: World Bank 2004e.

Six broad sets of actions
The  Marrakech  Action  Plan  for  Statistics
(MAPS) builds on existing initiatives and coun-
try experience to set out six broad sets of actions
needed to improve statistics at both national
and international levels. 
1. Mainstream strategic planning of statisti-
cal  systems  and  help  all  low-income
countries prepare national statistical devel-
opment  strategies  by  2006.  Statistical
requirements must be derived from wider
development  strategies,  such  as  Poverty
Reduction Strategy Papers, not treated as a
separate issue. 

2. Strengthen preparations for 2010 census.
Censuses are a core source of development
statistics and underpin the ability to moni-
tor progress towards the Millennium Devel-
opment  Goals.  We  must  begin  now  if
adequate information is to be in place to
assess progress in 2015. 

3. Increase  financial  support  for  statistical
capacity building. In many cases countries
will need to increase their own financing for
statistics, but they will also require external
assistance. In the spirit of the Monterrey
Conference on Financing for Development,
countries that adopt good policies for their

statistical systems should receive needed
financial support for statistics.

4. Set up an international household survey
network. Surveys have become increasingly
important for measuring social outcomes,
but need better coordination.

5. Undertake urgent improvements needed for
Millennium Development Goal monitor-
ing for 2005. The world expects a candid and
complete report on progress next year.

6. Increase accountability of the international
statistical system. The international agencies
must further improve their own practices.

Costs
The incremental cost of these activities is around
US$120 million a year for improving national sta-
tistical  systems  and  around  US$25  million  a
year for improving international systems. These
are  not  exhaustive  costs.  For  example,  they
exclude the costs of the 2010 census. Nor do
they include the costs for improvements in other
statistical  sources  such  as  establishment  sur-
veys or administrative reporting. These are first
estimates, which will be refined as the propos-
als are developed and fine tuned. Also note that
these costs are for financing from all possible
sources, national as well as donors.

254

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

of  the  Report’s  release.  The  main  human
development indicator tables include 175 UN
member  countries  along  with  Hong  Kong,
China  (SAR)  and  the  Occupied  Palestinian
Territories—all those for which the HDI can be
calculated. Owing to a lack of comparable data,
16 UN member countries cannot be included
in the HDI or, therefore, in the main indicator
tables. For these countries basic human devel-
opment indicators are presented in a separate
table (table 33). 

COUNTRY CLASSIFICATIONS

Countries are classified in four ways: by human
development level, by income, in major world
aggregates and by region (see Classification of
countries). These designations do not necessar-
ily express a judgement about the development
stage of a particular country or area. The term
country as used in the text and tables refers, as
appropriate, to territories or areas. 

Human development classifications. All
countries included in the HDI are classified
into three clusters by achievement in human
development: high human development (with an
HDI of 0.800 or above), medium human devel-
opment (0.500–0.799) and low human devel-
opment (less than 0.500). 

Income  classifications. All countries are
grouped by income using World Bank classifi-
cations: high income (gross national income per
capita of US$9,076 or more in 2002), middle
income  (US$736–$9,075)  and  low  income
(US$735 or less).

Major  world  classifications.  The three
global groups are developing countries, Cen-
tral  and  Eastern  Europe  and  the  CIS and
OECD. These groups are not mutually exclu-
sive. Unless otherwise specified, the classifica-
tion  world represents  the  universe  of  193
countries and areas covered—191 UN mem-
ber countries, plus Hong Kong, China (SAR)
and the Occupied Palestinian Territories. 

Regional classifications. Developing coun-
tries are further classified into the following
regions: Arab States, East Asia and the Pacific,
Latin America and the Caribbean (including
Mexico), South Asia, Southern Europe and
Sub-Saharan Africa. These regional classifica-
tions are consistent with the Regional Bureaux

BOX 3

Health Metrics Network: An emerging global 

partnership for health information

The Millennium Development Goals have
stimulated awareness of the importance of
data. They have also highlighted the weakness
of existing information systems in many coun-
tries. Nowhere is this more apparent than in
health. Sound information is essential for
achieving the health-related goals, yet rarely
available. Everywhere there are too many
uncoordinated demands for information, too
much useless data and too few solid facts. 
The Health Metrics Network, an emerg-
ing global partnership funded largely by the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, seeks to
remedy this situation. It will convene the
health and statistical constituencies at global,
regional and country levels, including inter-
national agencies, bilateral and multilateral
donors, foundations and technical experts, to
advance the proposition that meeting the
health challenges of the 21st century requires
building stronger health information systems.
Its aim is to use the growing demand by
countries and development partners for good

information to accelerate the building of
national level health information systems that
serve global, national and subnational needs.
Countries themselves will lead this effort,
forging consensus among stakeholders around
plans for strengthening or reforming health
information systems. Implementing the plans
will help countries respond to the challenge
of monitoring progress towards national and
international goals and targets, including the
Millennium Development Goals. 

The Health Metrics Network will be
made  up  of  a  board,  a  small  secretariat
initially  hosted  by  the  World  Health
Organziation,  and  technical  task  forces
that will provide the impetus for address-
ing key health metrics challenges. Board
members  will  include  representatives  of
developing countries, multilateral and bilat-
eral  agencies,  foundations  and  technical
experts. The network’s launch is planned
for  the  first  half  of  2004,  following  the
first meeting of the board.

Source: WHO 2004f.

BOX 4

The Culture Statistics Programme 

of the UNESCO Institute for Statistics

Before 2001, the United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) Institute for Statistics (UIS)
Culture Statistics Programme collected data
based on survey vehicles in six areas: book
production, films and cinemas, libraries,
museums, print media and broadcasting. In
2002 the UIS began a reevaluation of its
Culture Statistics Programme and suspended
data collection pending the review. The UIS
is currently developing a new programme of
work that will better meet the policy needs
of member states. 

The  review  began  with  a  three-day
international  symposium  in  Montreal  in
October 2002, jointly sponsored by l’Obser-
vatoire de la culture et des communications
du  Québec,  to  solicit  opinions  from
researchers around the world on what data
the UIS should collect on culture. Sugges-
tions included work in culture participation,

Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004d.

culture employment and the finance of cul-
ture. Those suggestions, along the lines of
recent work by the Working Group on Cul-
ture Statistics of the European Union, are
being investigated for feasibility and rele-
vance to other regions of the world.

Also under consideration is the updat-
ing of data on trade flows of cultural goods
for recent years in support of the Convention
on the Protection of Cultural Goods and
Artistic Expression, currently being drafted
by UNESCO. In addition, the UIS is partic-
ipating in UNESCO’s cross-cutting project
“Initiative B@bel” by sponsoring a report
on the status of multilingualism on the Inter-
net. Finally,  the new programme of work for
culture statistics will likely involve the retool-
ing of one or more of the suspended UIS
surveys,  probably  broadcasting  or  print
media, the two for which external demand for
data is greatest.

of UNDP. An additional classification is least
developed countries, as defined by the United
Nations (UNCTAD 2001). 

NOTE ON STATISTICS IN THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT

255

BOX 5

Measuring literacy

Literacy is the foundation for social, eco-
nomic and environmental progress in devel-
oping countries. Yet little attention has been
paid to measuring literacy, or the underly-
ing factors contributing to the development
of reading, writing and numeracy skills in
developing countries or obtaining the nec-
essary information to monitor change or to
formulate appropriate interventions.

Some developing countries, although a
minority, have attempted to follow interna-
tional guidelines on determining the size of
their illiterate population using a census or
survey question asking whether an individ-
ual is literate. This methodology, referred to
as self-declaration, has major limitations.
First, it divides the population into two
groups—those who are literate and those
who are not—and how many are in each
group, a vast oversimplification. Second, it
underestimates the number of illiterate peo-
ple because respondents are reluctant to
admit their illiteracy. These rates are widely
used to indicate the number of illiterate peo-

Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2004e.

ple in countries and regions, but they provide
no insight into the literacy levels of these
populations, what aspects of reading and
writing development require improvement or
the relative impact of non-formal education
and literacy programmes. Needed instead
are measures of each individual’s skill level
in reading, writing and numeracy, and a
means of measuring progress. The United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) Institute for Sta-
tistics is developing a sample survey method-
ology  to  do  this  through  the  Literacy
Assessment and Monitoring Programme (see
http://www.uis.unesco.org/). 

The time has come to replace simple lit-
eracy rates with literacy profiles of popula-
tions to show the wide range of skills and to
monitor changes to these profiles at all lev-
els of literacy. The international community
can help by asking the right questions, by for-
mulating associated international goals and
by supporting national efforts to obtain
more detailed information on literacy.

AGGREGATES AND GROWTH RATES

Aggregates. Aggregates for the classifications
described above are presented at the end of
tables where it is analytically meaningful to do
so and data are sufficient. Aggregates that are
the total for the classification (such as for pop-
ulation) are indicated by a T. As a result of
rounding, world totals may not always equal
the sum of the totals for subgroups. All other
aggregates are weighted averages. 

In general, an aggregate is shown for a clas-
sification only when data are available for half
the countries and represent at least two-thirds
of the available weight in that classification.
The Human Development Report Office does
not fill in missing data for the purpose of aggre-
gation. Therefore, unless otherwise specified,
aggregates for each classification represent only
the countries for which data are available, refer
to the year or period specified and refer only to
data from the primary sources listed. Aggre-
gates are not shown where appropriate weight-
ing procedures were unavailable.

Aggregates for indices, for growth rates and
for indicators covering more than one point in

time are based only on countries for which data
exist for all necessary points in time. For the
world classification, which refers only to the
universe of 193 countries and areas (unless oth-
erwise specified), aggregates are not always
shown where no aggregate is available for one
or more regions. 

Aggregates in this Report will not always
conform to those in other publications because
of differences in country classifications and
methodology. Where indicated, aggregates are
calculated by the statistical agency providing
the data for the indicator.

Growth rates. Multiyear growth rates are
expressed as average annual rates of change. In
calculations of rates by the Human Development
Report Office only the beginning and end points
are used. Year-to-year growth rates are expressed
as annual percentage changes. 

PRESENTATION

In the human development indicator tables
countries and areas are ranked in descending
order by their HDI value. To locate a country
in these tables, refer to the key to countries on
the back cover flap, which lists countries alpha-
betically with their HDI rank. 

Sources for all data used in the indicator
tables are given in short citations at the end of each
table. These correspond to full references in the
statistical references. When an agency provides
data it has collected from another source, both
sources are credited in the table notes. But when
an agency has built on the work of many other
contributors, only the ultimate source is given.
The source notes also show the original data
components used in any calculations by the
Human Development Report Office to ensure
that all calculations can be easily replicated. 

Indicators for which short, meaningful def-
initions can be given are included in the defin-
itions of statistical terms. All other relevant
information appears in the notes at the end of
each table. 

In the absence of the words annual, annual
rate or growth  rate, a hyphen between two
years, such as in 1995-2000, indicates that the
data were collected during one of the years
shown. A slash between two years, such as in
1998/2001, indicates an average for the years

256

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

BOX 6

The International Comparison Program

The International Comparison Program is a
global statistical initiative begun in the early
1970s. It aims to facilitate cross-country com-
parisons of economic aggregates by producing
internationally comparable price levels, expen-
diture values and purchasing power parity (PPP)
estimates. Through purchasing power parity
exchange rates, which are the number of units
of a country’s money required to buy the same
quantity of goods and services as $1 buys in the
United States, countries can be compared in
real terms, free of price and exchange rate dis-
tortions. This is particularly important when
studying differences in income, poverty, inequal-
ity and expenditure patterns among countries.  
Over the past 30 years, the International
Comparison Program has grown from a pilot
study to a global project. The programme has
become an integral part of national statistical
work in Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) countries, and much
progress has been made in many developing
countries.  By  the  time  of  the  last  round  of
Source: World Bank 2004d.

international comparisons during 1993 and 1996,
118 countries from all regions of the world were
participating in the programme. Yet, the current
set of PPP data is still lacking in universal cov-
erage, timeliness and uniformity of quality across
regions and countries. Gaps in country coverage
of benchmark surveys have been filled with
econometric estimates, which are then extrap-
olated over time. These results are becoming
increasingly weak as the distance grows between
the reference survey year and the current year.
The importance of purchasing power par-
ities in economic analysis underlines the need for
improvement in PPP data. A new International
Comparison Program strategic framework has
been developed through a global consultative
process for improving the methodology and
implementation of the exercise and the quality
of its outputs. The framework sets out remedial
actions for international and regional agencies as
well as national partners. The immediate objec-
tive is to organize the collection of economic sta-
tistics for the new Millennium Round (2003–06),

to meet the urgent demand for reliable and
timely data to support tracking progress on the
Millennium Development Goals. The ultimate
objectives are to strengthen national statistical
capacity in price and national accounts and make
the programme an integral part of national sta-
tistical systems, to bring purchasing power par-
ities for the poor into the mainstream of the
programme and to promote the use of Interna-
tional Comparison Program data for economic
analysis at national, regional and international lev-
els. More than 160 countries (including OECD
members) intend to take part in the new round.
Promising research is under way to integrate
poverty-specific PPPs within the mainstream of
the International Comparison Program work.
The results of two pilot studies conducted in Asia
and Africa show that poverty-specific PPPs can
be generated using data from household expen-
diture surveys and International Comparison Pro-
gram  sources.  The  findings  of  these  studies
provide a promising approach that can be used
for poverty analysis within and across countries.

shown unless otherwise specified. The follow-
ing symbols are used: 

.. Data not available.
(.) Less than half the unit shown.
< Less than.
– Not applicable.
T Total.
Unless otherwise indicated, data for China
do not include Hong Kong, China (SAR), Macau,
China (SAR) or Taiwan (province of China). In
most cases data for Eritrea before 1992 are
included in the data for Ethiopia. Data for
Indonesia include Timor-Leste through 1999.
Data for Jordan refer to the East Bank only.
Data for Sudan are often based on information
collected from the Northern part of the country.
Economic data for Tanzania cover the main-
land only. And data for the Republic of Yemen
refer to that country from 1990 onward, while
data for earlier years refer to aggregated data for
the former People’s Democratic Republic of
Yemen and the former Yemen Arab Republic. 

As a result of periodic revisions of data by
international agencies, statistics presented in
different editions of the Report may not be
comparable. For this reason the Human Devel-
opment Report Office strongly advises against
constructing trend analyses based on data from
different editions. 

HDI  values  and  ranks  similarly  are  not
comparable across editions of the Report. For
trend analysis based on consistent data and
methodology,  refer  to  indicator  table  2
(Human  development  index  trends).    The
HDI values and ranks recalculated for 2001
(the  reference  year  for  the  HDI  in  Human
Development Report 2003) based on data and
country  coverage  comparable  to  this  year’s
Report  are  available  on  the  HDRO  website
[http://hdr.undp.org/].

The data presented in the human develop-
ment indicator tables are those available to the
Human Development Report Office as of 1 April
2004, unless otherwise specified.

NOTE ON STATISTICS IN THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT

257

TECHNICAL NOTE 1
CALCULATING THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDICES
 
The diagrams here offer a clear overview of how the five human development indices 
used in the Human Development Report are constructed, highlighting both their similarities 
and their differences. The text on the following pages provides a detailed explanation.

HDI

HPI-1

HPI-2

GDI

GEM

258

DIMENSION

INDICATOR

DIMENSION
INDEX

A long and
healthy life
Life expectancy

at birth

Knowledge

Adult literacy rate

Adult literacy index

Gross enrolment ratio

(GER)
GER index

A decent standard

of living

GDP per capita

(PPP US$)

Life expectancy index

Education index

GDP index

Human development index (HDI)

DIMENSION

INDICATOR

A long and 
healthy life
Probability at birth
of not surviving

 to age 40

Knowledge
Adult illiteracy rate

A decent standard of living

Percentage of population

without sustainable access to

an improved water source

Percentage of children
under weight for age

Deprivation in 

a decent standard of living

DIMENSION

INDICATOR

A long and
healthy life
Probability at birth
of not surviving

 to age 60

DIMENSION

INDICATOR

DIMENSION
INDEX

EQUALLY
DISTRIBUTED
INDEX

DIMENSION

INDICATOR

EQUALLY 
DISTRIBUTED
EQUIVALENT
PERCENTAGE
(EDEP)

Human poverty index 

for developing countries (HPI-1)

Knowledge

A decent standard 

of living

Percentage of adults 

lacking functional

literacy skills

Percentage of people 

living below the

poverty line

Human poverty index 

for selected OECD countries (HPI-2)

Knowledge

Female

adult literacy

rate

Female
GER

adult literacy

Male

rate

Male
GER

Social

exclusion
Long-term

unemployment rate

A decent standard

of living

Female
estimated
earned
income

Male

estimated
earned
income

Female
income
index

Male
income
index

A long and
healthy life

Female life
expectancy

at birth

Male life
expectancy

at birth

Equally distributed

life expectancy

index

Female

life expectancy

index

life expectancy

Male

index

Female
education

index

Male

education

index

Equally distributed
education index

Equally distributed

income index

Gender-related development index (GDI)

Economic participation
and decision-making 

Power over

economic resources

Female and male shares

of professional and
technical positions

Female and male
estimated earned

income

EDEP for
income

Political participation
and decision-making
Female and male shares
of parliamentary seats

Female and male shares
of positions as legislators,

senior officials and managers

EDEP for

parliamentary 
representation

EDEP for

economic participation

Gender empowerment measure (GEM)

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Goalpost
85 yrs.
78.0

This illustration of the calculation of the HDI uses data for 
Costa Rica.

1. Calculating the life expectancy index
The life expectancy index measures the relative achievement 
of a country in life expectancy at birth. For Costa Rica, with 
a life expectancy of 78.0 years in 2002, the life expectancy 
index is 0.884.

  Life expectancy index =
 

   78.0 – 25   
 

85 – 25

=  0.884

Goalpost
25 yrs.

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

0.884

1.00

.800

.600

.400

.200

0
Life 

expectancy

index

Life

expectancy

(years)

2. Calculating the education index
The  education  index  measures  a  country’s  relative 
achievement  in  both  adult  literacy  and  combined 
primary,  secondary  and  tertiary  gross  enrolment. 
First,  an  index  for  adult  literacy  and  one  for 
combined gross enrolment are calculated. Then these 
two  indices  are  combined  to  create  the  education 
index,  with  two-thirds  weight  given  to  adult  literacy 
and  one-third  weight  to  combined  gross  enrolment. 
For Costa Rica, with an adult literacy rate of 95.8% in 
2002 and a combined gross enrolment ratio of 69% in 
the school year 2001/02, the education index is 0.870.

 
                

Adult literacy index = 
 

  Gross enrolment index = 
                
 

95.8 – 0   
100 – 0

 69 – 0   
100 – 0

=  0.958

=  0.690

95.8

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Adult
literacy

rate
(%)

0.870

69

1.00

.800

.600

.400

.200

0

Gross

enrolment

ratio
(%)

Education

index

Education index = 2/3 (adult literacy index) + 1/3 (gross enrolment index)

 

= 2/3 (0.958) + 1/3 (0.690) = 0.870  

3. Calculating the GDP index
The GDP index is calculated using adjusted GDP per capita 
(PPP US$). In the HDI income serves as a surrogate for all 
the  dimensions  of  human  development  not  reflected  in  a 
long and healthy life and in knowledge. Income is adjusted 
because achieving a respectable level of human development 
does  not  require  unlimited  income.  Accordingly,  the 
logarithm  of  income  is  used.  For  Costa  Rica,  with  a  GDP 
per capita of $8,840 (PPP US$) in 2002, the GDP index is 
0.748.

 
         

  
GDP index =
 

log (8,840) – log (100)  
log (40,000) – log (100)

=  0.748

100,000

Goalpost
$40,000

10,000

8,840

0.748

1,000

1.00

.800

.600

.400

.200

Goalpost
$100

0
GDP
index

GDP

per capita

(PPP US$)
Log scale

The  HDI  is  a  summary  measure  of  human 
development. It measures the average achieve-
ments in a country in three basic dimensions of 
human development:

•  A  long  and  healthy  life,  as  measured  by  life 
expectancy at birth.
• Knowledge, as measured by the adult literacy 
rate (with two-thirds weight) and the combined 
primary, 
tertiary 
gross 
enrolment ratio (with one-third weight).
• A decent standard of living, as measured by 
GDP per capita (PPP US$).

secondary 

and 

Before  the  HDI  itself  is  calculated,  an  index 
needs  to  be  created  for  each  of  these  dimen-
sions.  To  calculate  these  dimension  indices
—the  life  expectancy,  education  and  GDP 
indices—minimum  and  maximum  values 
(goalposts)  are  chosen  for  each  underlying 
indicator.

Goalpost for
maximum
value

Indicator
value

Goalpost for
minimum
value

Index
value

1.00

.900

.800

.700

.600

.500

.400

.300

.200

.100

0

Indicator

Dimension

index

Performance in each dimension is expressed as 
a  value  between  0  and  1  by  applying  the 
following general formula:

 
Dimension index =    actual value  –  minimum value  
maximum value  –  minimum value
 

The HDI is then calculated as a simple average 
of  the  dimension  indices.  The  box  at  right 
illustrates  the  calculation  of  the  HDI  for  a 
sample country.

Goalposts for calculating the HDI
 
Indicator 

value 

Maximum Minimum

value

The human development index (HDI)

Calculating the HDI

 4. Calculating the HDI
indices  have  been 
Once  the  dimension 
is 
calculated, 
straightforward.  It  is  a  simple  average  of  the 
three dimension indices.

determining 

the  HDI 

Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Adult literacy rate (%) 
Combined gross enrolment ratio (%) 
GDP per capita (PPP US$) 

85 
100 
100 
40,000 

25
0
0
100

HDI = 1/3 (life expectancy index) + 1/3 (education index)
 
 

+ 1/3 (GDP index)
= 1/3 (0.884) + 1/3 (0.870) + 1/3 (0.748) = 0.834

TECHNICAL NOTES

Dimension indices

HDI

0.884

0.870

0.834

0.748

Life

expectancy

Education

GDP

1.00

.800

.600

.400

.200

0

259

The human poverty index
for developing countries (HPI-1)

While the HDI measures average achievement, 
the  HPI-1  measures  deprivations  in  the  three 
basic  dimension s  of  human  developmen t 
captured in the HDI:

• A long and healthy life—vulnerability to death 
at  a  relatively  early  age,  as  measured  by  the 
probability at birth of not surviving to age 40.
•  Knowledge—exclusio n  from  the  world  of 
reading  and  communications,  as  measured  by 
the adult illiteracy rate.
• A decent standard of living—lack of access to 
overall economic provisioning, as measured by 
the  unweighted  average  of  two  indicators,  the 
percentag e  of 
the  populatio n  without 
sustainable access to an improved water source 
and  the  percentage  of  children  under  weight 
for age.

Calculating  the  HPI-1  is  more  straightforward 
than calculating the HDI. The indicators used to 
measure the deprivations are already normalized 
between 0 and 100 (because they are expressed 
as  percentages),  so  there  is  no  need  to  create 
dimension indices as for the HDI.

Originally ,  the  measure  of  deprivatio n  in  a 
decent  standard  of  living  also  included  an 
indicator  of  access  to  health  services.  But 
because  reliable  data  on  access  to  health 
services  are  lacking  for  recent  years,  in  this 
year’s Report deprivation in a decent standard 
of living is measured by two rather than three 
indicators—the  percentage  of  the  population 
without  sustainabl e  access  to  an  improved 
water  source  and  the  percentage  of  children 
under weight for age. 

The human poverty index for selected 
OECD countries (HPI-2)

The  HPI-2  measures  deprivations  in  the  same 
dimensions  as  the  HPI-1  and  also  captures 
social exclusion. Thus it reflects deprivations in 
four dimensions:

•  A  long  and  healthy  life—vulnerabilit y  to 
death  at  a  relatively  early  age,  as  measured  by 
the  probabilit y  at  birth  of  not  surviving  to     
age 60.
•  Knowledge—exclusio n  from  the  world  of 
reading  and  communications,  as  measured  by 
the  percentage  of  adults  (aged  16–65)  lacking 
functional literacy skills.
• A decent standard of living—as measured by 
the  percentage  of  people  living  below  the 
income  poverty  line  (50%  of  the  median 
adjusted household disposable income).
• Social exclusion—as measured by the rate of 
long-term unemployment (12 months or more).

260

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

The gender-related development 
index (GDI) 

While the HDI measures average achievement, 
the  GDI  adjusts  the  average  achievement  to 
reflect  the  inequalities  between  men  and 
women in the following dimensions:

•  A  long  and  healthy  life,  as  measured  by  life 
expectancy at birth.
• Knowledge, as measured by the adult literacy 
rate and the combined primary, secondary and 
tertiary gross enrolment ratio.
• A decent standard of living, as measured by 
estimated earned income (PPP US$).

female  and  male 

The calculation of the GDI involves three steps. 
First, 
in  each 
dimension  are  calculated  according  to  this 
general formula:

indices 

  Dimension index = 
 

actual value – minimum value
maximum value – minimum value

Second,  the  female  and  male  indices  in  each 
dimension are combined in a way that penalizes 
differences  in  achievement  between  men  and 
women. The resulting index, referred to as the 
equally  distributed 
is  calculated 
according to this general formula:

index, 

Equally distributed index

= {[female population share (female index1–∈)] 
+ [male population share (male index1–∈)]}1/1–∈

 
∈  measures  the  aversion  to  inequality.  In  the 
GDI ∈= 2. Thus the general equation becomes: 

Equally distributed index

= {[female population share (female index–1)] 
+ [male population share (male index–1)]}–1

 

which  gives  the  harmonic  mean  of  the  female 
and male indices.

Third, the GDI is calculated by combining the 
three  equally  distributed 
in  an 
unweighted average.

indices 

Goalposts for calculating the GDI
 
Indicator 

value 

Maximum  Minimum

value

Female life expectancy 
 at birth (years) 

Male life expectancy 
 at birth (years) 

Adult literacy rate (%) 

Combined gross enrolment 
 ratio (%) 

Estimated earned income
 (PPP US$) 

87.5 

82.5 

100 

100 

27.5

22.5

0

0

40,000 

100

Note: The maximum and minimum values (goalposts) for life 
expectancy are five years higher for women to take into account 
their longer life expectancy.

Calculating the GDI

This illustration of the calculation of the GDI uses data for Turkey.
1. Calculating the equally distributed life expectancy index
The  first  step  is  to  calculate  separate  indices  for  female  and  male  achievements  in  life 
expectancy, using the general formula for dimension indices.

 
 
 
 

FEMALE 
Life expectancy: 73.1 years     

MALE
Life expectancy: 67.9 years

Life expectancy index  =  

  =  0.760 

Life expectancy index  =  

73.1 – 27.5
87.5 – 27.5 

67.9 – 22.5
82.5 – 22.5

  =  0.757

Next,  the  female  and  male  indices  are  combined  to  create  the  equally  distributed  life 
expectancy index, using the general formula for equally distributed indices.

 
 
 

FEMALE 
Population share: 0.496 
Life expectancy index: 0.760 

MALE
Population share: 0.504
Life expectancy index: 0.757

Equally distributed life expectancy index = {[0.496 (0.760–1)] + [0.504 (0.757–1)]}–1 = 0.758

2. Calculating the equally distributed education index
First, indices for the adult literacy rate and the combined primary, secondary and tertiary gross 
enrolment  ratio  are  calculated  separately  for  females  and  males.  Calculating  these  indices  is 
straightforward, since the indicators used are already normalized between 0 and 100.

 
 
 
 
 

FEMALE 
Adult literacy rate: 78.5% 
Adult literacy index: 0.785 
Gross enrolment ratio: 61.8% 
Gross enrolment index: 0.618 

MALE
Adult literacy rate: 94.4%
Adult literacy index: 0.944
Gross enrolment ratio: 73.5%
Gross enrolment index: 0.735

Second,  the  education  index,  which  gives  two-thirds  weight  to  the  adult  literacy  index  and 
one-third weight to the gross enrolment index, is computed separately for females and males.

Education index = 2/3 (adult literacy index) + 1/3 (gross enrolment index)

Female education index = 2/3 (0.785) + 1/3 (0.618) = 0.729

Male education index = 2/3 (0.944) + 1/3 (0.735) = 0.874

Finally, the female and male education indices are combined to create the equally distributed 
education index.

 
 
 

FEMALE 
Population share: 0.496 
Education index: 0.729 

MALE
Population share: 0.504
Education index: 0.874

Equally distributed education index = {[0.496 (0.729–1)] + [0.504 (0.874–1)]}–1 = 0.796

3. Calculating the equally distributed income index
First,  female  and  male  earned  income  (PPP  US$)  are  estimated  (for  details  on  this 
calculation, see the addendum to this technical note). Then the income index is calculated for 
each gender. As for the HDI, income is adjusted by taking the logarithm of estimated earned 
income (PPP US$):

Income index = 

log (actual value) – log (minimum value)
log (maximum value) – log (minimum value)

FEMALE 
Estimated earned income (PPP US$): 4,757 

MALE
Estimated earned income (PPP US$): 7,873

Income index = 

log (4,757) – log (100)
log (40,000) – log (100) 

   = 0.645 

Income index = 
 

log (7,873) – log (100)
log (40,000) – log (100)

   = 0.729

 
 

 
 

 
 

Calculating the GDI continues on next page

TECHNICAL NOTES

261

Calculating the GDI (continued)

Second,  the  female  and  male  income  indices  are  combined  to  create  the  equally  distributed 
income index:

 
 
 

FEMALE 
Population share: 0.496 
Income index: 0.645 

MALE
Population share: 0.504
Income index: 0.729

Equally distributed income index = {[0.496 (0.645–1)] + [0.504 (0.729–1)]}–1 = 0.685

4. Calculating the GDI
Calculating  the  GDI  is  straightforward.  It  is  simply  the  unweighted  average  of  the  three 
component  indices—the  equally  distributed  life  expectancy  index,  the  equally  distributed 
education index and the equally distributed income index.

 
 

GDI = 1/3 (life expectancy index) + 1/3 (education index) + 1/3 (income index)
 

= 1/3 (0.758) + 1/3 (0.796) + 1/3 (0.685) = 0.746

Why    = 2 in calculating the GDI
The value of ∈ is the size of the penalty for gender inequality. The larger the value, the more 
heavily a society is penalized for having inequalities.
If ∈ = 0, gender inequality is not penalized (in this case the GDI would have the same value as 
the  HDI).  As ∈ increases  towards  infinity,  more  and  more  weight  is  given  to  the  lesser 
achieving group.

The value 2 is used in calculating the GDI (as well as the GEM). This value places a moderate 
penalty on gender inequality in achievement.

For a detailed analysis of the GDI’s mathematical formulation, see Sudhir Anand and Amartya 
Sen’s  “Gender  Inequality  in  Human  Development:  Theories  and  Measurement,”  Kalpana 
Bardhan and Stephan Klasen’s “UNDP’s Gender-Related Indices: A Critical Review” and the 
technical  notes  in  Human  Development  Report  1995  and  Human  Development  Report 
1999 (see the list of selected readings at the end of this technical note).

262

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

The  gender  empowerment  measure 
(GEM) 

Focusing on women’s opportunities rather than 
their  capabilities,  the  GEM  captures  gender 
inequality in three key areas:

• Political  participation  and  decision-making 
power,  as  measured  by  women’s  and  men’s 
percentage shares of parliamentary seats.
• Economic participation and decision-making 
power,  as  measured  by  two  indicators— 
women’s  and  men’s  percentage  shares  of 
positions  as  legislators,  senior  officials  and 
managers  and  women’s  and  men’s  percentage 
shares of professional and technical positions.
• Power over economic resources, as measured 
by women’s and men’s estimated earned income 
(PPP US$).

For each of these three dimensions, an equally 
distributed  equivalent  percentage  (EDEP)  is 
calculated,  as  a  population-weighted  average, 
according to the following general formula:
   EDEP = {[female population share (female index1–∈)]   
            + [malepopulation share (male index1–∈)]}1/1–∈
∈measures  the  aversion  to  inequality.  In  the 
GEM  (as  in  the  GDI)  ∈ =  2,  which  places  a 
moderate penalty on inequality. The formula is 
thus:

   EDEP = {[female population share (female index–1)] 
            +[male population share (male index–1)]}–1

For  political  and  economic  participation  and 
decision-making, the EDEP is then indexed by 
dividing  it  by  50.  The  rationale  for  this 
indexation:  in  an  ideal  society,  with  equal 
empowerment of the sexes, the GEM variables 
would  equal  50%—that  is,  women’s  share 
would equal men’s share for each variable.

Where a male or female index value is zero, the 
EDEP  according  to  the  above  formula  is  not 
defined. However, the limit of EDEP, when the 
index tends towards zero, is zero. Accordingly, 
in these cases the value of the EDEP is set to 
zero.

Finally,  the  GEM  is  calculated  as  a  simple 
average of the three indexed EDEPs.

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

Calculating the GEM

This illustration of the calculation of the GEM uses data for Greece.

1. Calculating the EDEP for parliamentary representation
The EDEP for parliamentary representation measures the relative empowerment of women in 
terms of their political participation. The EDEP is calculated using the female and male shares 
of the population and female and male percentage shares of parliamentary seats according to 
the general formula. 

 
 
 

FEMALE 
Population share: 0.507 
Parliamentary share: 8.7% 

MALE
Population share: 0.492
Parliamentary share: 91.3%

EDEP for parliamentary representation = {[0.507 (8.7–1)] + [0.492 (91.3–1)]}–1 = 15.70

Then this initial EDEP is indexed to an ideal value of 50%.

Indexed EDEP for parliamentary representation =  

  = 0.314

 
2. Calculating the EDEP for economic participation
Using the general formula, an EDEP is calculated for women’s and men’s percentage shares of 
positions  as  legislators,  senior  officials  and  managers,  and  another  for  women’s  and  men’s 
percentage  shares  of  professional  and  technical  positions.  The  simple  average  of  the  two 
measures gives the EDEP for economic participation.

15.70
50

FEMALE 
Population share: 0.507 
Percentage share of positions as legislators, 
 senior officials and managers: 25.6% 
Percentage share of professional and 
 technical positions: 47.9% 

MALE
Population share: 0.492
Percentage share of positions as legislators,
 senior officials and managers: 74.4%
Percentage share of professional and
 technical positions: 52.1%

EDEP for positions as legislators, senior officials and managers = {[0.507 (25.6–1)] + [0.492 (74.4–1)]}–1 = 37.82

Indexed EDEP for positions as legislators, senior officials and managers =

= 0.756

  37.82  

50

EDEP for professional and technical positions = {[0.507 (47.9–1)] + [0.492 (52.1–1)]}–1 = 49.88

Indexed EDEP for professional and technical positions =  

= 0.998

 49.88  

50

The two indexed EDEPs are averaged to create the EDEP for economic participation:

EDEP for economic participation =

  0.756 + 0.998  

= 0.877

2

3. Calculating the EDEP for income
Earned income (PPP US$) is estimated for women and men separately and then indexed to 
goalposts as for the HDI and the GDI. For the GEM, however, the income index is based on 
unadjusted  values,  not  the  logarithm  of  estimated  earned  income.  (For  details  on  the 
estimation of earned income for men and women, see the addendum to this technical note.)

FEMALE 
Population share: 0.507 
Estimated earned income (PPP US$): 10,892 

MALE
Population share: 0.492
Estimated earned income (PPP US$): 25,601

Income index =  

10,892 – 100
40,000 – 100 

   = 0.270 

Income index =  

25,601 – 100
40,000 – 100

   = 0.639

The female and male indices are then combined to create the equally distributed index:

EDEP for income = {[0.507 (0.270–1)] + [0.492 (0.639–1)]}–1 = 0.377

4. Calculating the GEM
Once the EDEP has been calculated for the three dimensions of the GEM, determining the 
GEM is straightforward. It is a simple average of the three EDEP indices.

0.314 + 0.877 + 0.377

GEM =   

   = 0.523 

3

TECHNICAL NOTES

263

TECHNICAL NOTE 1 ADDENDUM
Female and male earned income

Estimating female and male earned income

of 

the 

importance 

Despite 
having 
gender-disaggregated  data  on  income,  direct 
measures are unavailable. For this Report crude 
estimates  of  female  and  male  earned  income 
have therefore been derived. 

Income can be seen in two ways: as a resource 
for consumption and as earnings by individuals. 
The  use  measure  is  difﬁcult  to  disaggregate 
between  men  and  women  because  they  share 
resources  within  a  family  unit.  By  contrast, 
earnings  are  separable  because  different 
members  of  a  family  tend  to  have  separate 
earned incomes. 

The income measure used in the GDI and the 
GEM  indicates  a  person’s  capacity  to  earn 
income.  It  is  used  in  the  GDI  to  capture  the 
disparities  between  men  and  women 
in 
command  over  resources  and  in  the  GEM  to 
capture women’s economic independence. (For 
conceptual and methodological issues relating 
to  this  approach,  see  Sudhir  Anand  and 
Amartya Sen’s “Gender Inequality in Human 
Development” and, in Human  Development 
Report  1995, chapter 3 and technical notes 1 
and 2; see the list of selected readings at the end 
of this technical note.) 

Female and male earned income (PPP US$) are 
estimated using the following data: 

• Ratio of the female non-agricultural wage to 
the male non-agricultural wage.
•  Male  and  female  shares  of  the  economically 
active population.
• Total female and male population.
• GDP per capita (PPP US$).

Key
Wf / Wm = ratio of female non-agricultural wage to
 male non-agricultural wage
EAf = female share of economically active population
EAm = male share of economically active population
Sf = female share of wage bill
Y = total GDP (PPP US$)
Nf = total female population
Nm = total male population
Yf = estimated female earned income (PPP US$)
Ym = estimated male earned income (PPP US$)

Note

Calculations  based  on  data  in  the  technical 
note may yield results that differ from those in 
the indicator tables because of rounding.

This  illustration  of  the  estimation  of  female  and  male  earned  income  uses  2002  data  for 
Philippines.

1. Calculating total GDP (PPP US$)
Total GDP (PPP US$) is calculated by multiplying the total population by GDP per capita 
(PPP US$).

Total population: 79,944 (thousand)
GDP per capita (PPP US$): 4,170
Total GDP (PPP US$) = 4,170 (79,944) = 333,366,480 (thousand)

2. Calculating the female share of the wage bill
Because data on wages in rural areas and in the informal sector are rare, the Report has used 
non-agricultural  wages  and  assumed  that  the  ratio  of  female  wages  to  male  wages  in  the 
non-agricultural sector applies to the rest of the economy. The female share of the wage bill is 
calculated  using  the  ratio  of  the  female  non-agricultural  wage  to  the  male  non-agricultural 
wage and the female and male percentage shares of the economically active population. Where 
data on the wage ratio are not available, a value of 75% is used.

Ratio of female to male non-agricultural wage (Wf /Wm ) = 0.94
Female percentage share of economically active population (EAf ) = 38.2%
Male percentage share of economically active population (EAm ) = 61.8%

Female share of wage bill (Sf ) =  

 

        Wf /Wm (EAf )        
[Wf /Wm (EAf )] + EAm 

  =  

        0.94 (38.2)        
[0.94 (61.8)] + 61.8

  = 0.368

3. Calculating female and male earned income (PPP US$)
An assumption has to be made that the female share of the wage bill is equal to the female 
share of GDP.

Female share of wage bill (Sf ) = 0.368
Total GDP (PPP US$) (Y ) = 333,366,480 (thousand)
Female population (Nf ) = 39,014 (thousand)

   Estimated female earned income (PPP US$) (Yf )  =   

Sf  (Y )

     Nf 

 

0.368 (333,366,480)

  = 3,144

  =   

   39,014

Male population (Nm ) = 39,566 (thousand)

  Estimated male earned income (PPP US$) (Ym ) =  

Y – Sf  (Y )

 

Selected readings

Development 

Anand,  Sudhir,  and  Amartya  Sen.  1994. 
Index: 
“Human 
Methodology 
and  Measurement.” 
Occasional  Paper  12.  United  Nations 
Development 
Programme,  Human 
Development  Report  Ofﬁce,  New  York. 
(HDI)

———.  1995.  “Gender  Inequality  in  Human 
Development: Theories and Measurement.” 
Occasional  Paper  19.  United  Nations 
Development 
Programme,  Human 
Development  Report  Ofﬁce,  New  York. 
(GDI, GEM)
1997. 

of  Human 
Development 
A 
Multi-dimensional Perspective.” In United 
Nations Development Programme, Human 

“Concepts 

Poverty: 

———. 

and 

333,366,480 – [0.368 (333,366,480)]

  = 5,326

  =  
   Nm 

39,586

Development  Report  1997  Papers: 
Poverty  and  Human  Development.  New 
York. (HPI-1, HPI-2)

Bardhan, Kalpana, and Stephan Klasen. 1999. 
“UNDP’s  Gender-Related  Indices:  A 
Critical Review.” World  Development 27 
(6): 985–1010. (GDI, GEM)

United  Nations  Development  Programme. 
1995. Human Development Report 1995. 
New  York:  Oxford  University  Press. 
Technical  notes  1  and  2  and  chapter  3. 
(GDI, GEM)

———.  1997.  Human  Development  Report 
1997. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Technical  note  1  and  chapter  1.  (HPI-1, 
HPI-2)

———.  1999.  Human  Development  Report 
1999. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Technical note. (HDI, GDI)

264

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

TECHNICAL NOTE 2
IDENTIFYING TOP PRIORITY AND HIGH 
PRIORITY COUNTRIES FOR THE 
MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

This  year’s  Human  Developmen t  Report 
identifies countries that are top priority and high 
priority for each Millennium Development Goal 
for  which  there  are  sufficient  data,  based  on 
human  poverty  in  each  goal  and  trends  in  the 
1990s.  Based  on  the  goal-by-goa l  analysis,  the 
Report  then  identifies  countries  that  are  top 
priority and high priority overall.

Assessing countries as top priority and 
high priority for each Goal

For  each  Millennium  Developmen t  Goal  the 
assessmen t  of  a  country  is  based  both  on  its 
progress  towards  the  goal—slow  or  reversing, 
moderate, fast—and on its level of human poverty 
in  the  goal—extreme ,  medium,  low  (technical 
note  tables  2.1  and  2.2).  Progress  is  measured 
against  the  targets  and  using  the  indicator s 
defined for the Millennium Development Goals. 

Top priority countries for each goal
A country is designated top priority for a goal if it 
has both extreme human poverty in that goal and 
slow or reversing progress towards it (technical 
note figure 2.1).

High priority countries for each goal
A country is designated high priority for a goal if:
• It has extreme human poverty in that goal and 
moderate progress towards it.

• Or it has medium human poverty in that goal 
and slow or reversing progress towards it.

Technical note table 2.1 
Defining progress towards the Millennium 
Development Goals

Rate of progress
Slow or reversing

Moderate

Fast

Definition
Actual progress towards the goal 
is less than half  the approximate 
progress required to meet the 
target if current trends prevail 
until 2015.
Actual progress towards the goal 
is more than half but less than 
the approximate progress 
required to meet the target if 
current trends prevail until 2015.
Actual progress towards the goal 
is equal to or greater than the 
approximate progress required 
to meet the target if current 
trends prevail until 2015.

Note: The year in which the target is to be met is 2015 for all 
except gender equality in education, for which it is 2005.

Assessing countries as top priority and 
high priority across all the Goals

The  assessmen t  of  whether  a  country  is  top 
priority or high priority for all the goals is based 
on the number of goals for which the country is 
top priority or high priority. (This overall assess-       
ment  includes  data  for  the  HIV/AIDS  target, 
though it is not assessed separately).

Top priority countries across all the goals
A country is designated top priority across all the 
goals if:
• It is top priority for at least three goals.
• Or it is top priority for half or more of the 
goals  for  which  at  least  three  data  points  are 
available for that country.
• Or,  where  data  are  available  for  only  two 
goals, it is top priority for both.

High priority countries across all the goals
A country is designated high priority across all 
the goals if it does not fall into the top priority 
category but:
• It is top or high priority for at least three goals.
• Or it is top priority for two goals.
• Or it is top or high priority for half or more of 
the goals for which at least three data points are 
available for that country.
• Or, where data are available for only two goals, 
it is top or high priority for both.

Technical note table 2.2
Defining the level of human poverty in the Millennium Development Goals

 
Target  
Halve the proportion of people 
whose income is less than $1 a day 

Indicator  
GDP per capita  
(PPP US$)a

Halve the proportion of people who  
suffer from hunger 

Undernourished  
people (%) 

Ensure that children everywhere  
will be able to complete a full course  
of primary schooling 

Net primary enrolment  
ratio (%) 
 

Achieve gender equality in  
education  
 

Ratio of girls to boys  
in primary and secondary 
education (%)

Reduce under-five mortality by 
two-thirds  

Under-five mortality rate  
(per 1,000 live births) 

Halve the proportion of people 
without sustainable access to safe 
drinking water 

Population with sustainable 
access to an improved  
water source (%) 

Halve the proportion of people 
without access to improved sanitation 
 

Population with sustainable 
access to improved
sanitation (%)

a. The average annual GDP per capita growth rate is used as a trend measure.

TECHNICAL NOTES

Level of human poverty (x = value of indicator) 

Extreme  
x < 3,500 

Medium  

3,500 ≤ x < 7,000 

Low  

x ≥ 7,000 

Source
World Bank

x > 25 

 

x < 75 

 
 

x < 80 

x > 100 

 

x < 75 

 

x < 75 

 

 
 

 

 

10 < x ≤ 25 

75 ≤ x < 90 

80 ≤ x < 90 

30 < x ≤ 100 

75 ≤ x < 90 

75 ≤ x < 90 

x ≤ 10 

 

x ≥ 90 

 
 

x ≥ 90 

x ≤ 30 

 

x ≥ 90 

 

x ≥ 90 

Food and Agriculture 
Organization

United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO)

UNESCO

United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF)

UNICEF and World Health
Organization (WHO)

UNICEF and WHO

265

Technical note figure 2.1
Identifying top priority and high priority countries

l

a
o
g

 

n

i
 
y
t
r
e
v
o
p

 

n
a
m
u
h

 
f
o

 
l
e
v
e
L

Low

Medium

High priority

Extreme

Top priority

High priority

Slow or
reversing

Moderate

Fast

Progress towards goal

Calculating progress towards each goal

Progress towards each goal is assessed by comparing actual annual progress if current trends were to 
prevail until 2015 with the annual progress needed to meet the target, under the assumption of linear 
progress.

Assessing actual progress 
The actual annual rate of progress is calculated using the general formula:

Actual annual rate of progress    =

( xt1 – xt0 ) / xt0

t1 – t0

where t0 is 1990 or the year closest to 1990 for which data are available; t1 is the most recent year for 
which data are available, generally 2001; and xt0
 are the values of the indicator for those years. For 
rates of hunger, poverty and under-five mortality, for which the most desirable value is 0, the formula is 
applied without modification.

 and xt1

For  the  net  primary  enrolment  ratio,  gender  equality  in  education  (ratio  of  girls  to  boys)  and  the 
proportion of the population with access to safe water and sanitation, for which the most desirable value 
is 100%, progress is expressed as “shortfall reduction” according to the following formula:

Actual annual rate of progress    =

( xt1 – xt0 ) / ( 100 – xt0 )

t1 – t0

Assessing required progress 
The rate of progress required to meet a target by 2015 (by 2005 for gender equality in education) is 
dictated by the target: α is –1/2 for poverty and hunger, 1/2 for safe water and sanitation, –2/3 for 
under-five mortality and 1 for primary enrolment and gender equality in education. The annual rate of 
progress required is then calculated by simply dividing α by the number of years between tMDG, the year 
by which the target is to be met, and t0, the year closest to 1990 for which data are available:

Required annual rate of progress   = 

α

tMDG – t0

266

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Determining priority status: an example

This illustration of determining priority status uses data on the under-five mortality rate for Chad.

Calculating progress 
Data for the under-five mortality rate are available for 1990 and 2002:
t0 = 1990
t1 = 2002

The under-five mortality rate is 203 per 1,000 live births for 1990 and 200 for 2002:
xt0
xt1

 = 203
 = 200

The required reduction is two-thirds:
α = –2/3

Therefore:

Actual annual rate of progress     =                                       =    –0.12 percentage points

(200 – 203) ÷ 203

2002 – 1990

Required annual rate of progress   =                                   =    –2.67 percentage points

–2/3

2015 – 1990

The actual progress towards the goal is less than half the approximate progress required to meet the 
target.
   Therefore, Chad is making slow or reversing progress towards the goal of reducing under-five
   mortality. 

Determining the level of human poverty
The under-five mortality rate for Chad in 2002 is 200 per 1,000 live births.
   Therefore, Chad has an extreme level of human poverty in under-five mortality (see technical 
   note table 2.2).

Determining the priority status for under-five mortality
Chad has an extreme level of human poverty in under-five mortality and slow or reversing progress. 
   Therefore, Chad is categorized as top priority for the goal of reducing under-five mortality.

Determining the priority status across all goals
Of the eight indicators for which Chad has data, it is identified as top priority for two and high priority 
for another six. 
   Therefore, Chad is categorized as a high priority country overall.

Note

To measure progress in income poverty, the GDP per capita growth rate in 1990–2002 is used. It is 
estimated that average annual growth of 1.4% is required in 1990–2015 to meet the income poverty 
target. Accordingly, the threshold for slow or reversing progress is annual per capita income growth of 
less than 0.7%; for moderate progress, 0.7% to 1.4%; and for fast progress, 1.4% or more. 
Trend data for the prevalence of HIV/AIDS among adults (age 15 and above) in 1990 and 2000 are also 
used in the overall assessment of countries as top priority and high priority (UNAIDS and WHO 2003). 
For  determining  the  level  of  human  poverty  in  HIV/AIDS,  a  prevalence  rate  of  more  than  3%  is 
considered extreme; 3% or less but greater than 1%, medium; and 1% or less, low. Since the target is to 
halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, an increase in the prevalence rate of less than 1 
percentage point is considered fast progress; an increase of 1 percentage point or more but less than 3, 
moderate progress; and an increase of 3 percentage points or more, slow or reversing progress.

TECHNICAL NOTES

267

Definitions of statistical terms

Armed forces, total Strategic, land, naval, air, com-
mand,  administrative  and  support  forces.  Also
included are paramilitary forces such as the gen-
darmerie, customs service and border guard, if these
are trained in military tactics.

Arms transfers, conventional Refers to the volun-
tary transfer by the supplier (and thus excludes cap-
tured  weapons  and  weapons  obtained  through
defectors) of weapons with a military purpose des-
tined for the armed forces, paramilitary forces or
intelligence  agencies  of  another  country.  These
include major conventional weapons or systems in six
categories: ships, aircraft, missiles, artillery, armoured
vehicles and guidance and radar systems (excluded
are trucks, services, ammunition, small arms, support
items, components and component technology and
towed or naval artillery under 100-millimetre calibre).

Births attended by skilled health personnel The
percentage  of  deliveries  attended  by  personnel
(including doctors, nurses and midwives) trained to
give the necessary care, supervision and advice to
women during pregnancy, labour and the postpar-
tum period, to conduct deliveries on their own and
to care for newborns.

Birthweight, infants with low The percentage of
infants with a birthweight of less than 2,500 grams.

Carbon dioxide emissions Anthropogenic (human-
originated) carbon dioxide emissions stemming from
the burning of fossil fuels, gas flaring and the pro-
duction of cement. Emissions are calculated from data
on the consumption of solid, liquid and gaseous
fuels, gas flaring and the production of cement.

Cellular subscribers (also referred to as cellular
mobile subscribers) Subscribers to an automatic
public mobile telephone service that provides access
to the public switched telephone network using cel-
lular technology. Systems can be analogue or digital.

Children reaching grade 5 The percentage of chil-
dren starting primary school who eventually attain
grade 5 (grade 4 if the duration of primary school is

four years). The estimates are based on the recon-
structed cohort method, which uses data on enrol-
ment and repeaters for two consecutive years.

Consumer price index, average annual change in
Reflects changes in the cost to the average consumer
of acquiring a basket of goods and services that may
be fixed or may change at specified intervals.

Condom use at last high-risk sex Men and women
who say they used a condom the last time they had sex
with a non-marital, non-cohabiting partner, of those who
have had sex with such a partner in the last 12 months.

Contraceptive prevalence rate The percentage of
married women (including women in union) ages
15–49 who are using, or whose partners are using, any
form of contraception, whether modern or traditional.

Contributing family worker Defined according to
the 1993 International Classification by Status in
Employment (ICSE) as a person who works without
pay in an economic enterprise operated by a related
person living in the same household.

Crime, people victimized by The percentage of the
population who perceive that they have been vic-
timized by certain types of crime in the preceding year,
based on responses to the International Crime Vic-
tims Survey.

Debt forgiveness, gross bilateral  Forgiveness of
bilateral debts of developing countries with the sup-
port of official funds of donor countries, whether
owed to public or private creditors. Offsetting entries
for official development assistance (ODA) princi-
pal are not subtracted. See offficial development
assistance (ODA), net.

Debt relief committed under HIPC initiative For-
giveness of loans as a component of official develop-
ment assistance under the Debt Initiative for Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs). The initiative is
the first comprehensive approach to reducing the
external debt of the world’s poorest, most heavily
indebted countries, which total 42 in number.

268

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Debt service, total The sum of principal repayments
and interest actually paid in foreign currency, goods
or services on long-term debt (having a maturity of
more than one year), interest paid on short-term debt
and repayments to the International Monetary Fund.

Drugs, affordable essential, population with sus-
tainable access to The estimated percentage of the
population for whom a minimum of 20 of the most
essential drugs—those that satisfy the health care
needs of the majority of the population—are con-
tinuously and affordably available at public or pri-
vate health facilities or drug outlets within one hour’s
travel from home.

Earned income (PPP US$), estimated Roughly
derived on the basis of the ratio of the female non-
agricultural wage to the male non-agricultural wage,
the female and male shares of the economically active
population, total female and male population and
GDP per capita (PPP US$). For details on this esti-
mation, see Technical note 1.

Earned income, ratio of estimated female to male
The ratio of estimated female earned income to esti-
mated male earned income. See earned income (PPP
US$), estimated (female and male).

Economic activity rate, female The share of the
female population ages 15 and above who supply, or
are available to supply, labour for the production of
goods and services.

Education expenditure, public Includes both cap-
ital expenditures (spending on construction, reno-
vation, major repairs and purchase of heavy equipment
or vehicles) and current expenditures (spending on
goods and services that are consumed within the cur-
rent year and would need to be renewed the follow-
ing year). It covers such expenditures as staff salaries
and benefits, contracted or purchased services, books
and teaching materials, welfare services, furniture
and equipment, minor repairs, fuel, insurance, rents,
telecommunications and travel. See education levels.

Education index One of the three indices on which
the human development index is built. It is based on
the adult literacy rate and the combined gross enrol-
ment ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary schools.
For details on how the index is calculated, see Tech-
nical note 1.

Education levels Categorized as pre-primary, pri-
mary, secondary or tertiary in accordance with the
International Standard Classification of Education
(ISCED). Pre-primary education (ISCED level 0) is

provided at such schools as kindergartens and nurs-
ery and infant schools and is intended for children
not old enough to enter school at the primary level.
Primary  education (ISCED level 1) provides the
basic elements of education at such establishments
as primary and elementary schools. Secondary edu-
cation (ISCED levels 2 and 3) is based on at least four
years of previous instruction at the first level and pro-
vides general or specialized instruction, or both, at
such institutions as middle schools, secondary schools,
high schools, teacher training schools at this level and
vocational or technical schools. Tertiary education
(ISCED levels 5–7) refers to education at such insti-
tutions as universities, teachers colleges and higher
level professional schools—requiring as a minimum
condition of admission the successful completion of
education at the second level or evidence of the
attainment of an equivalent level of knowledge.

Electricity consumption per capita Refers to gross
production, in per capita terms, which includes con-
sumption by station auxiliaries and any losses in the
transformers that are considered integral parts of
the station. Also included is total electric energy pro-
duced by pumping installations without deduction
of electric energy absorbed by pumping.

Employment by economic activity, female Female
employment in industry, agriculture or services as
defined according to the International Standard
Industrial Classification (ISIC) system (revisions 2 and
3). Industry refers to mining and quarrying, manu-
facturing, construction and public utilities (gas, water
and electricity). Agriculture refers to activities in
agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing. Services
refer to wholesale and retail trade; restaurants and
hotels;  transport,  storage  and  communications;
finance, insurance, real estate and business services;
and community, social and personal services.

Energy requirements, total Energy consumption
plus the traditional fuels which include fuelwood,
charcoal, bagasse (sugar cane waste), animal, vege-
tal and other wastes.

Energy use, GDP per unit of The ratio of GDP (in
1995 PPP US$) to commercial energy use, measured
in kilograms of oil equivalent. This ratio provides a
measure of energy efficiency by showing compara-
ble and consistent estimates of real GDP across
countries relative to physical inputs (units of energy
use). See GDP (gross domestic product) and PPP
(purchasing power parity).

Enrolment ratio, gross The number of students
enrolled in a level of education, regardless of age, as

DEFINITIONS OF STATISTICAL TERMS

269

a percentage of the population of official school age
for that level. The gross enrolment ratio can be
greater than 100% as a result of grade repetition and
entry at ages younger or older than the typical age at
that grade level. See education levels.

Enrolment ratio, gross, combined for primary, sec-
ondary and tertiary schools The number of students
enrolled in primary, secondary and tertiary levels of
education, regardless of age, as a percentage of the pop-
ulation of official school age for the three levels. See
education levels and enrolment ratio, gross.

Enrolment ratio, net The number of students enrolled
in a level of education who are of official school age
for that level, as a percentage of the population of offi-
cial school age for that level. See education levels.

Environmental treaties, ratification of After sign-
ing a treaty, a country must ratify it, often with the
approval of its legislature. Such process implies not
only an expression of interest as indicated by the
signature, but also the transformation of the treaty’s
principles and obligations into national law.

Exports, high technology Exports of products with
a high intensity of research and development. They
include high-technology products such as in aero-
space, computers, pharmaceuticals, scientific instru-
ments and electrical machinery.

Exports, manufactured Defined according to the
Standard International Trade Classification to include
exports of chemicals, basic manufactures, machinery
and transport equipment and other miscellaneous
manufactured goods.

Exports of goods and services The value of all
goods and other market services provided to the rest
of the world. Included is the value of merchandise,
freight, insurance, transport, travel, royalties, licence
fees and other services, such as communication, con-
struction, financial, information, business, personal
and government services. Excluded are labour and
property income and transfer payments.

Exports, primary Defined according to the Stan-
dard International Trade Classification to include
exports of food, agricultural raw materials, fuels and
ores and metals.

Fertility rate, total The number of children that
would be born to each woman if she were to live to
the end of her child-bearing years and bear children
at each age in accordance with prevailing age-specific
fertility rates.

Foreign direct investment, net inflows of Net inflows
of investment to acquire a lasting management inter-
est (10% or more of voting stock) in an enterprise oper-
ating in an economy other than that of the investor.
It is the sum of equity capital, reinvestment of earn-
ings, other long-term capital and short-term capital.

Fuel consumption, traditional Estimated  con-
sumption of fuel wood, charcoal, bagasse (sugar cane
waste) and animal and vegetable wastes. See energy
requirement, total.

GDP (gross domestic product) The sum of value
added by all resident producers in the economy plus
any product taxes (less subsidies) not included in the
valuation of output. It is calculated without making
deductions for depreciation of fabricated capital
assets or for depletion and degradation of natural
resources. Value added is the net output of an indus-
try after adding up all outputs and subtracting inter-
mediate inputs.

GDP (US$) GDP converted to US dollars using the
average official exchange rate reported by the Inter-
national Monetary Fund. An alternative conversion
factor is applied if the official exchange rate is judged
to diverge by an exceptionally large margin from the
rate effectively applied to transactions in foreign cur-
rencies and traded products. See GDP (gross domes-
tic product).

GDP index One of the three indices on which the
human development index is built. It is based on
GDP per capita (PPP US$). For details on how the
index is calculated, see Technical note 1.

GDP per capita (PPP US$) See GDP (gross domes-
tic product) and PPP (purchasing power parity).

GDP per capita (US$) GDP (US$) divided by
midyear population. See GDP (US$).

GDP per capita annual growth rate Least squares
annual growth rate, calculated from constant price
GDP per capita in local currency units.

Gender empowerment measure (GEM) A com-
posite index measuring gender inequality in three
basic dimensions of empowerment—economic par-
ticipation and decision-making, political participation
and decision-making and power over economic
resources. For details on how the index is calcu-
lated, see Technical note 1.

Gender-related development index (GDI) A com-
posite index measuring average achievement in the

270

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

three basic dimensions captured in the human devel-
opment index—a long and healthy life, knowledge and
a decent standard of living—adjusted to account for
inequalities between men and women. For details on
how the index is calculated, see Technical note 1.

Gini index Measures the extent to which the distri-
bution of income (or consumption) among individ-
uals or households within a country deviates from a
perfectly equal distribution. A Lorenz curve plots the
cumulative percentages of total income received
against the cumulative number of recipients, starting
with the poorest individual or household. The Gini
index measures the area between the Lorenz curve
and a hypothetical line of absolute equality, expressed
as a percentage of the maximum area under the line.
A value of 0 represents perfect equality, a value of 100
perfect inequality.

GNI (gross national income) The sum of value
added by all resident producers in the economy plus
any product taxes (less subsidies) not included in the
valuation of output plus net receipts of primary
income (compensation of employees and property
income) from abroad. Value added is the net output
of an industry after adding up all outputs and sub-
tracting intermediate inputs. Data are in current US
dollars converted using the World  Bank  Atlas
method.

Health expenditure per capita (PPP US$) The
sum of public and private expenditure (in PPP US$),
divided  by  the  population.  Health  expenditure
includes the provision of health services (preventive
and curative), family planning activities, nutrition
activities and emergency aid designated for health,
but excludes the provision of water and sanitation.
See health expenditure, private; health expenditure,
public; and PPP (purchasing power parity).

Health expenditure, private Direct household (out
of  pocket)  spending,  private  insurance,  spending
by non-profit institutions serving households and
direct  service  payments  by  private  corporations.
Together with public health expenditure, it makes
up total health expenditure. See health expenditure
per  capita  (PPP  US$) and  health  expenditure,
public.

Health expenditure, public Current and capital
spending  from  government  (central  and  local)
budgets, external borrowings and grants (including
donations from international agencies and non-
governmental organizations) and social (or compul-
sory) health insurance funds. Together with private
health expenditure, it makes up total health expen-

diture. See health  expenditure  per  capita  (PPP
US$) and health expenditure, private.

HIPC completion point The date at which a coun-
try included in the Debt Initiative for Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPCs) successfully completes the
key structural reforms agreed on at the HIPC deci-
sion point, including developing and implementing
a poverty reduction strategy. The country then receives
the bulk of its debt relief under the HIPC Initiative
without further policy conditions.

HIPC decision point The date at which a heavily
indebted poor country with an established track
record of good performance under adjustment pro-
grammes supported by the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank commits, under the Debt
Initiative  for  Heavily  Indebted  Poor  Countries
(HIPCs), to undertake additional reforms and to
develop and implement a poverty reduction strategy.

HIPC trust fund, bilateral pledges to the A firm
obligation undertaken by an official donor to provide
specified assistance to the HIPC trust fund. Bilateral
commitments are recorded in the full amount of
expected transfer, irrespective of the time required
for the completion of disbursements.

HIV prevalence The percentage of people ages
15–49 who are infected with HIV.

Human development index (HDI) A composite
index measuring average achievement in three basic
dimensions of human development—a long and
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of liv-
ing. For details on how the index is calculated, see
Technical note 1.

Human poverty index (HPI-1) for developing
countries A composite index measuring depriva-
tions in the three basic dimensions captured in the
human development index—a long and healthy life,
knowledge and a decent standard of living. For
details on how the index is calculated, see Techni-
cal note 1.

Human poverty index (HPI-2) for selected high-
income OECD countries A composite index mea-
suring deprivations in the three basic dimensions
captured in the human development index— a long
and healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard
of living—and also capturing social exclusion. For
details on how the index is calculated, see Techni-
cal note 1.

Illiteracy rate, adult Calculated as 100 minus the

DEFINITIONS OF STATISTICAL TERMS

271

adult literacy rate. See literacy rate, adult.

Immunization, one-year-olds fully immunized
against measles or tuberculosis One-year-olds
injected with an antigen or a serum containing spe-
cific antibodies against measles or tuberculosis.

Imports of goods and services The value of all
goods and other market services received from the
rest of the world. Included is the value of merchan-
dise, freight, insurance, transport, travel, royalties,
licence fees and other services, such as communica-
tion, construction, financial, information, business,
personal and government services. Excluded are
labour and property income and transfer payments.

Income poverty line, population below The per-
centage of the population living below the specified
poverty line:
• $1 a day—at 1985 international prices (equivalent
to $1.08 at 1993 international prices), adjusted for
purchasing power parity.

• $2 a day—at 1985 international prices (equivalent
to $2.15 at 1993 international prices), adjusted for
purchasing power parity.

• $4 a day—at 1990 international prices, adjusted

for purchasing power parity.

• $11 a day (per person for a family of three)—at
1994 international prices, adjusted for purchas-
ing power parity.

• National poverty line—the poverty line deemed
appropriate  for  a  country  by  its  authorities.
National estimates are based on population-
weighted subgroup estimates from household
surveys.

• 50% of median income—50% of the median

adjusted disposable household income.

See PPP (purchasing power parity).

Income or consumption, shares of The shares of
income or consumption accruing to subgroups of
population indicated by deciles or quintiles, based on
national household surveys covering various years.
Consumption surveys produce results showing lower
levels of inequality between poor and rich than do
income surveys, as poor people generally consume a
greater share of their income. Because data come
from surveys covering different years and using
different methodologies, comparisons between coun-
tries must be made with caution.

Infant  mortality  rate The  probability  of  dying
between birth and exactly one year of age, expressed
per 1,000 live births.

Internally displaced people People who are dis-
placed within their own country and to whom the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) extends protection or assistance, or both,
generally pursuant to a special request by a compe-
tent organ of the United Nations.

Internet users People with access to the worldwide
network.

Labour force All those employed (including people
above a specified age who, during the reference
period, were in paid employment, at work, self-
employed or with a job but not at work) and unem-
ployed (including people above a specified age who,
during the reference period, were without work,
currently available for work and seeking work).

Legislators, senior officials and managers, female
Women’s share of positions defined according to the
International Standard Classification of Occupations
(ISCO-88) to include legislators, senior government
officials, traditional chiefs and heads of villages, senior
officials of special interest organizations, corporate
managers, directors and chief executives, produc-
tion and operations department managers and other
department and general managers.

Life expectancy at birth The number of years a
newborn infant would live if prevailing patterns of
age-specific mortality rates at the time of birth were
to stay the same throughout the child’s life.

Life expectancy index One of the three indices on
which the human development index is built. For
details on how the index is calculated, see Techni-
cal note 1.

Literacy rate, adult The percentage of people ages
15 and above who can, with understanding, both read
and write a short, simple statement related to their
everyday life.

Literacy rate, youth The percentage of people ages
15–24 who can, with understanding, both read and
write  a  short,  simple  statement  related  to  their
everyday life.

Literacy skills, functional, people lacking The
share of the population ages 16–65 scoring at level 1
on the prose literacy scale of the International Adult
Literacy Survey. Most tasks at this level require the
reader to locate a piece of information in the text that
is identical to or synonymous with the information
given in the directive.

272

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Malaria cases The total number of malaria cases
reported  to  the  World  Health  Organization  by
countries in which malaria is endemic. Many coun-
tries  report  only  laboratory-confirmed  cases,  but
many in Sub-Saharan Africa report clinically diag-
nosed cases as well.

Malaria prevention, children under age five The
percentage of children under age five sleeping under
insecticide-treated bed nets.

Malaria treatment, children under five with fever
The percentage of children under five who were ill
with fever in the two weeks before the survey and
received anti-malarial drugs.

Market activities Defined according to the 1993
revised UN System of National Accounts to include
employment in establishments, primary production
not in establishments, services for income and other
production of goods not in establishments. See non-
market activities and work time, total.

Maternal mortality ratio The annual number of
deaths of women from pregnancy-related causes per
100,000 live births.

Maternal mortality ratio, adjusted Maternal mor-
tality ratio adjusted to account for well documented
problems of underreporting and misclassification of
maternal deaths, as well as estimates for countries with
no data. See maternal mortality ratio.

Maternal mortality ratio, reported Maternal mor-
tality ratio as reported by national authorities. See
maternal mortality ratio.

Medium-variant projection Population projections
by the United Nations Population Division assum-
ing medium-fertility path, normal mortality and nor-
mal international migration. Each assumption implies
projected trends in fertility, mortality and net migra-
tion levels, depending on the specific demographic
characteristics and relevant policies of each country
or group of countries. In addition, for the countries
highly affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the
impact of HIV/AIDS is included in the projection.
The UN Population Division also publishes low and
high variant projections. For more information, see
http://esa.un.org/unpp/assumptions.html.

Military expenditure All expenditures of the defence
ministry and other ministries on recruiting and train-
ing military personnel as well as on construction and
purchase of military supplies and equipment. Military

assistance is included in the expenditures of the
donor country.

Non-market activities Defined according to the
1993 revised UN System of National Accounts to
include household maintenance (cleaning, laundry
and meal preparation and cleanup), management
and shopping for own household; care for children,
the sick, the elderly and the disabled in own house-
hold; and community services. See market activities
and work time, total.

Official aid Grants  or  loans  that  meet  the  same
standards  as  for  official  development  assistance
(ODA) except that recipient countries do not qual-
ify as recipients of ODA. These countries are iden-
tified  in  part  II  of  the  Development  Assistance
Committee (DAC) list of recipient countries, which
includes more advanced countries of Central and
Eastern Europe, the countries of the former Soviet
Union and certain advanced developing countries
and territories.

Official  development  assistance  (ODA),  net
Disbursements of loans made on concessional terms
(net of repayments of principal) and grants by offi-
cial agencies of the members of the Development
Assistance Committee (DAC), by multilateral insti-
tutions and by non-DAC countries to promote eco-
nomic development and welfare in countries and
territories in part I of the DAC list of aid recipients.
It includes loans with a grant element of at least 25%
(calculated at a rate of discount of 10%).

Official development assistance (ODA), per capita
of donor country Official development assistance
granted by a specific country divided by this coun-
try’s total population. See official development assis-
tance, net.

Official development assistance (ODA) to basic
social services ODA directed to basic social ser-
vices, which include basic education (primary edu-
cation, early childhood education and basic life skills
for youth and adults), basic health (including basic
health care, basic health infrastructure, basic nutri-
tion, infectious disease control, health education and
health personnel development) and population poli-
cies  and  programmes  and  reproductive  health
(population policy and administrative management,
reproductive health care, family planning, control of
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS,
and personnel development for population and repro-
ductive health). Aid to water supply and sanitation
is included only if it has a poverty focus.

DEFINITIONS OF STATISTICAL TERMS

273

Official development assistance (ODA) to least
developed countries See official development assis-
tance  (ODA),  net and country classifications for
least developed countries.

Official development assistance (ODA), untied
bilateral ODA for which the associated goods and
services may be fully and freely procured in sub-
stantially all countries and that is given by one coun-
try to another.

Oral rehydration therapy use rate The percentage
of all cases of diarrhoea in children under age five in
which the child received increased fluids and con-
tinued feeding.

Patents granted to residents Refers to documents
issued by a government office that describe an inven-
tion and create a legal situation in which the patented
invention can normally be exploited (made, used,
sold, imported) only by or with the authorization of
the patentee. The protection of inventions is gener-
ally limited to 20 years from the filing date of the appli-
cation for the grant of a patent.

Physicians Includes graduates of a faculty or school
of medicine who are working in any medical field
(including teaching, research and practice).

Population growth rate, annual Refers to the aver-
age annual exponential growth rate for the period
indicated. See population, total.

Population, total Refers to the de facto population,
which includes all people actually present in a given
area at a given time.

Population, urban The midyear population of areas
classified as urban according to the criteria used by
each country, as reported to the United Nations.
See population, total.

PPP (purchasing power parity) A rate of exchange
that accounts for price differences across countries,
allowing international comparisons of real output and
incomes.  At  the  PPP  US$  rate  (as  used  in  this
Report), PPP US$1 has the same purchasing power
in the domestic economy as $1 has in the United
States.

Private flows, other A category combining non-
debt-creating portfolio equity investment flows (the
sum of country funds, depository receipts and direct
purchases of shares by foreign investors), portfolio
debt  flows  (bond  issues  purchased  by  foreign

investors) and bank and trade-related lending (com-
mercial bank lending and other commercial credits).

Probability at birth of not surviving to a specified
age Calculated as 1 minus the probability of surviv-
ing to a specified age for a given cohort. See proba-
bility at birth of surviving to a specified age.

Probability at birth of surviving to a specified age
The probability of a newborn infant surviving to a
specified age if subject to prevailing patterns of age-
specific mortality rates.

Professional  and  technical  workers,  female
Women’s share of positions defined according to
the International Standard Classification of Occu-
pations (ISCO-88) to include physical, mathemati-
cal  and  engineering  science  professionals  (and
associate professionals), life science and health pro-
fessionals (and associate professionals), teaching pro-
fessionals (and associate professionals) and other
professionals and associate professionals.

Refugees People who have fled their country because
of a well founded fear of persecution for reasons of
their race, religion, nationality, political opinion or
membership in a particular social group and who can-
not or do not want to return. Country of asylum is
the country in which a refugee has filed a claim of asy-
lum but has not yet received a decision or is other-
wise registered as an asylum seeker. Country  of
origin refers to the claimant’s nationality or country
of citizenship.

Research and development expenditures Current
and capital expenditures (including overhead) on
creative, systematic activity intended to increase the
stock of knowledge. Included are fundamental and
applied research and experimental development
work leading to new devices, products or processes.

Researchers in R&D People trained to work in
any field of science who are engaged in professional
research and development (R&D) activity. Most such
jobs require the completion of tertiary education.

Royalties and licence fees, receipts of Receipts by
residents from non-residents for the authorized use
of intangible, non-produced, non-financial assets and
proprietary  rights  (such  as  patents,  trademarks,
copyrights, franchises and industrial processes) and
for  the  use,  through  licensing  agreements,  of
produced originals of prototypes (such as films and
manuscripts).  Data  are  based  on  the  balance  of
payments.

274

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Sanitation facilities, improved, population with sus-
tainable access to The percentage of the population
with access to adequate excreta disposal facilities, such
as a connection to a sewer or septic tank system, a
pour-flush latrine, a simple pit latrine or a ventilated
improved pit latrine. An excreta disposal system is
considered adequate if it is private or shared (but not
public) and if it can effectively prevent human, ani-
mal and insect contact with excreta.

Science, math and engineering, tertiary students
in The share of tertiary students enrolled in natural
sciences; engineering; mathematics and computer
sciences; architecture and town planning; transport
and communications; trade, craft and industrial pro-
grammes; and agriculture, forestry and fisheries. See
education levels.

Seats in parliament held by women Refers to seats
held by women in a lower or single house or an
upper house or senate, where relevant.

Smoking, prevalence among adults of The per-
centage of men and women who smoke cigarettes.

Tariff and non-tariff barriers, average Aggregate
measure of trade barriers facing developing coun-
tries. It measures monetary barriers (tariffs) as well as
quotas and subsidies in manufactures, textiles, agri-
cultural products and fuels, weighted by endogeneity-
corrected import volume.

Telephone mainlines Telephone lines connecting a
customer’s equipment to the public switched tele-
phone network.

Tenure, households with access to secure House-
holds that own or are purchasing their homes, are rent-
ing privately or are in social housing or subtenancy.

Terms of trade The ratio of the export price index
to the import price index measured relative to a base
year. A value of more than 100 means that the price
of exports has risen relative to the price of imports.

Tuberculosis cases The total number of tuberculosis
cases reported to the World Health Organization. A
tuberculosis case is defined as a patient in whom
tuberculosis has been bacteriologically confirmed
or diagnosed by a clinician.

Tuberculosis cases cured under DOTS The per-
centage of estimated new infectious tuberculosis cases
cured under the directly observed treatment, short
course (DOTS) case detection and treatment strategy.

Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS The
percentage of estimated new infectious tuberculosis
cases detected (diagnosed in a given period) under
the directly observed treatment, short course (DOTS)
case detection and treatment strategy.

Under-five mortality rate The probability of dying
between birth and exactly five years of age, expressed
per 1,000 live births.

Under height for age, children under age five
Includes moderate and severe stunting, defined as
more than two standard deviations below the median
height for age of the reference population.

Under weight for age, children under age five
Includes moderate underweight, defined as more
than two standard deviations below the median
weight for age of the reference population, and severe
underweight, defined as more than three standard
deviations below the median weight.

Undernourished people People whose food intake
is chronically insufficient to meet their minimum
energy requirements.

Unemployment Refers to all people above a specified
age who are not in paid employment or self-employed,
but are available for work and have taken specific
steps to seek paid employment or self-employment.

Unemployment, long-term Unemployment lasting
12 months or longer. See unemployment.

Unemployment rate The unemployed divided by the
labour force (those employed plus the unemployed).

Unemployment rate, youth Refers to unemploy-
ment between the ages of 15 or 16 and 24, depend-
ing on the national definition. See unemployment.

Water source, improved, population without
sustainable access to Calculated as 100 minus the
percentage of the population with sustainable access
to an improved water source. Unimproved sources
include vendors, bottled water, tanker trucks and
unprotected wells and springs. See water  source,
improved, population with sustainable access to.

Water source, improved, population with sus-
tainable access to The share of the population with
reasonable access to any of the following types of
water supply for drinking: household connections,
public standpipes, boreholes, protected dug wells, pro-
tected springs and rainwater collection. Reasonable

DEFINITIONS OF STATISTICAL TERMS

275

access is defined as the availability of at least 20 litres
a person per day from a source within 1 kilometre of
the user’s dwelling.

Women in government at ministerial level Defined
according to each state’s definition of a national
executive and may include women serving as ministers
and vice ministers and those holding other ministe-
rial positions, including parliamentary secretaries.

Work time, total Time spent on market and non-
market activities as defined according to the 1993
revised UN System of National Accounts. See mar-
ket activities and non-market activities.

276

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Statistical references

Aten, Bettina, Alan Heston, and Robert Summers. 2001. Corre-
spondence on data from the Penn World Tables 6.0. Philadel-
phia. March.

———. 2002. “Penn World Tables 6.1.” University of Pennsylva-
nia, Center for International Comparisons, Philadelphia.
[http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/]. Accessed March 2004.

Birzeit University. 2002. Palestine Human Development Report

2002. Ramallah, Occupied Palestinian Territories.

CDIAC (Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center). 2004.
Trends:  A  Compendium  of  Data  on  Global  Change.
[http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/trends/trends.htm]. Accessed
March 2004.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations).
2003. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2003. Rome.
Goldschmidt-Clermont,  Luisella,  and  Elisabetta  Pagnossin
Aligisakis. 1995. “Measures of Unrecorded Economic Activ-
ities in Fourteen Countries.” Background paper for Human
Development Report 1995. United Nations Development
Programme, Human Development Report Office, New York.
Harvey, Andrew S. 1995. “Market and Non-Market Productive
Activity in Less Developed and Developing Countries: Lessons
from Time Use.” Background paper for Human Development
Report  1995. United Nations Development Programme,
Human Development Report Office, New York.

———. 2001. “National Time Use Data on Market and Non-Mar-
ket Work by Both Women and Men.” Background paper for
Human Development Report 2001. United Nations Devel-
opment Programme, Human Development Report Office,
New York.

IISS (International Institute for Strategic Studies). 2003. The Mil-
itary Balance 2003-2004. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2002. Estimates and Pro-
jections  of  the  Economically  Active  Population,  1950-
2010, 4th ed., rev. 2. Database. Geneva.

———. 2003. Key Indicators of the Labour Market, Third Edi-

tion. [http://kilm.ilo.org/kilm/]. Accessed March 2004.

———. 2004a. Database  on  International  Labour  Standards
(ILOLEX) [http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/english/docs/
declworld.htm]. Accessed February 2004.

———. 2004b. Laboursta  Database. [http://laborsta.ilo.org].

Accessed March 2004.

IMF (International Monetary Fund) and IDA (International Devel-
opment Association). 2004. “Heavily Indebted Poor Coun-
tries (HIPC) Initiative—Status of Implementation.” 31 March.
Washington, DC.

IMF (International Monetary Fund) and World Bank. 2003. “Sta-
tus of Bilateral Donor Pledges to the HIPC Trust Fund.”
[http://www.worldbank.org/hipc/progress-to-date/
TrustFundSep03.pdf]. Accessed March 2004.

IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union). 1995. Women in Parliaments

1945-1995: A World Statistical Survey. Geneva.

———. 2001. Correspondence on women in government at the min-

isterial level. March. Geneva.

———. 2004a. Correspondence on year women received the right
to vote and to stand for election and year first woman was
elected or appointed to parliament. March. Geneva.

———. 2004b. Parline  Database  and  World  Classification  of
Women in National Parliaments. [www.ipu.org]. Accessed
March 2004.

ITU (International Telecommunication Union). World Telecom-
munication Indicators Database, 7th edition. [http://www.
itu.int/ITU-D/ict/publications/world/world.html]. March
2004.

LIS (Luxembourg Income Study). 2004. “Relative Poverty Rates
for  the  Total  Population,  Children  and  the  Elderly.”
[http://www.lisproject.org/keyfigures/povertytable.htm].
Accessed February 2004.

Milanovic, Branko. 2002. Correspondence on income, inequality
and poverty during the transition from planned to market econ-
omy. World Bank. March. Washington, D.C.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment), Development Assistance Committee. 2004a. Corre-
spondence on agricultural support estimates. February 2004.
Paris.

———. 2004b. Correspondence on official development assistance

disbursed. February. Paris.

———. 2004c. Correspondence on the employment rates. March.

Geneva.

———. 2004d. Correspondence on long-term unemployment rates.

March. Geneva.

———. 2004e. DAC Journal: Development Cooperation 2003

Report (5)1. Paris.

———. 2004f. DAC Online. Database. Paris.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment), and Statistics Canada. 2000. Literacy in the Infor-
mation  Age:  Final  Report  on  the  International  Adult
Literacy Survey. Paris.

Polity IV. 2002. “Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions,
1800–2000.” [http://www.bsos.umd.edu/cidcm/inscr/polity/
index.htm]. Accessed April 2002.

Roodman, David. 2004. “The Commitment to Development Index:
2004 Edition.” Center for Global Development, Washington,
DC.

SIPRI (Stockholm International Peace Research Institute). 2003.
SIPRI Yearbook: Armaments, Disarmaments and Inter-
national Security. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———. 2004a. Correspondence on military expenditure data.

March. Stockholm.

———.  2004b.  SIPRI  Arms  Transfers. Database.  February.

Stockholm.

Smeeding, Timothy M. 1997. “Financial Poverty in Developed
Countries: The Evidence from the Luxembourg Income
Study.” In Sheldon H. Danziger and Robert H. Haveman, eds.,
Understanding Poverty. New York: Russell Sage Foundation;
and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Smeeding, Timothy M., Lee Rainwater, and Gary Burtless. 2000.
“United States Poverty in a Cross-National Context.” In Shel-
don H. Danziger and Robert H. Haveman, eds., Under-
standing Poverty. New York: Russell Sage Foundation; and
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Statec. 2004. Correspondence on gross enrolment ratio for Lux-

embourg. April. Luxembourg.

STATISTICAL REFERENCES

277

UN (United Nations). 2001. World Population Prospects 1950-
2050: The 2000 Revision. Database. Department of Eco-
nomic and Social Affairs, Population Division. New York.
———. 2002. Correspondence on time use surveys. Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division. February. New
York.

———. 2003. World Population Prospects 1950-2050: The 2002
Revision. Database. Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, Population Division. New York.

———. 2004a. Correspondence on adult and youth literacy rates.

March. Montreal.

———. 2004b. Correspondence on education expenditure. March.

Montreal.

———. 2004c. Correspondence on gross, net enrolment ratios and

children reaching grade 5. March. Montreal.

———. 2004d. “Cultural Statistics Programme of the UNESCO
Institute for Statistics.” Background note prepared for Human
Development Report 2004. Montreal.

———. 2004a. Comtrade. Database. Department of Social and

———. 2004e. “Measuring Literacy.” Background note prepared

Economic Affairs, Statistics Division. New York.

for Human Development Report 2004. Montreal.

———. 2004b. Correspondence on energy consumption. Depart-
ment of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division.
March. New York.

———. 2004c. Correspondence on traditional fuel use. Depart-
ment of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division.
March. New York.

———. 2004d. Correspondence on 2002 urban population inter-
polation. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Pop-
ulation Division. March. New York.

———. 2004e. Millennium Indicators Database. Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division. [http://
millenniumindicators.un.org]. Accessed March 2004.

———. 2004f. “Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-
General.” [http://untreaty.un.org]. Accessed March 2004.
———. 2004g. United Nations Population Division Database on
Contraceptive Use. Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, Population Division. March. New York.

———. 2004h. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2003 Revi-
sion. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population
Division. New York.

UNAIDS (Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS). 2004.

UNHCR  (United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees).
2004.  Correspondence  on  internally  displaced  people,
refugees  by  country  of  asylum  and  by  country  of  origin.
April. Geneva.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2000. State of the
World’s  Children  2001. New York: Oxford University
Press.

———. 2003a. Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2002. Dili.
———. 2003b. The State of the World’s Children 2004. New York:

Oxford University Press.

———. 2004. Correspondence on infant and under-five mortality

rates. March. New York.

UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). 2004.
Correspondence on data on crime victims. March. Vienna.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2003. Global Tuberculosis
Control:  WHO  Report  2003. [http://www.who.int/gtb/
publications/globrep/]. Accessed March 2003.

———. 2004a. Correspondence on access to essential drugs. March.

Geneva.

———. 2004b. Correspondence on health expenditure. March.

Geneva.

Correspondence on HIV prevalence rate. May. Geneva.

———. 2004c. Correspondence on HIV prevalence rate. March.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop-
ment). 2001. “Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries.” [http://www.unctad.org/conference/].
Accessed April 2002.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2000. Human
Development Report 2000. Oxford University Press. New
York.

———. 2002a. Bosnia and Herzegovina Human Development

Report 2002. Sarajevo.

Geneva.

———. 2004d. Correspondence on human resources for health.

March. Geneva.

———. 2004e. Correspondence on tuberculosis cases. March.

Geneva.

———. 2004f. “Health Metrics Network: An Emerging Global
Partnership for Health Information.” Background note pre-
pared for Human Development Report 2004. Geneva.

WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization). 2004. Intellec-

———. 2002b. East Timor Human Development Report 2002.

tual Property Statistics. Publication B. Geneva.

Dili.

———. 2004. Correspondence with UNDP Country Office in Pak-
istan on data on women in government at ministerial level.
April. Islamabad.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orga-
nization). 1997. International Standard Classification of Education
1997.  Available  at  [http://www.uis.unesco.org/ev_en.php
?ID=3813_201&ID2=DO_TOPIC]. Accessed March 2004.

———. 1999. Statistical Yearbook 1999. Paris.
———. 2003. Education  for  All  Global  Monitoring  Report

2003/4. Paris.

UNESCO Institute for Statistics (United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization). 2001. Correspondence
on combined gross enrolment ratio. March. Paris.

———. 2003a. Correspondence on adult and youth literacy rates.

March. Montreal.

———. 2003b. Correspondence on combined gross enrolment

ratios. March. Montreal.

World Bank. 2003a. Global Economic Prospects and the Devel-

oping Countries. Washington, DC.

———. 2003b. World Development Indicators 2003. CD-ROM.

Washington, DC.

———. 2004a. Correspondence on data on income distribution.

March. Washington, DC.

———. 2004b. Correspondence on GDP per capita annual growth

rates. March. Washington, DC.

———. 2004c. “HIPC Initiative: Status of Country Cases Consid-
ered Under the Initiative, September 2003.” [http://www.
worldbank.org/hipc/progress-to-date/status_table_Sep03.pdf].
Accessed March 2004.

———. 2004d. “International Comparison Programme (ICP).”
Background note prepared for Human Development Report
2004. Washington, DC.

———. 2004e. “The Marrakech Action Plans for Statistics.” Back-
ground note prepared for Human  Development  Report
2004. Washington, DC.

———. 2003c. Correspondence on education expenditure. Febru-

———. 2004f. World Development Indicators 2004. CD-ROM.

ary. Montreal.

Washington, DC.

278

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Classification of countries

Countries in the human development aggregates a

Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Trinidad and Tobago
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
(55 countries or areas)

High human 
development 
(HDI 0.800 and above)

Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belgium
Brunei Darussalam
Canada
Chile
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Seychelles

Medium human 
development
(HDI 0.500–0.799)

Albania
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belize
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Cameroon
Cape Verde
China
Colombia
Comoros
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Fiji
Gabon
Georgia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.
Lebanon
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Macedonia, TFYR

Low human
development
(HDI below 0.500)

Angola
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo
Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
Côte d’Ivoire
Djibouti
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Kenya
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mozambique
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Tanzania, U. Rep. of
Timor-Leste
Togo
Uganda
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
(36 countries or areas)

Malaysia
Maldives
Mauritius
Moldova, Rep. of
Mongolia
Morocco
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Nicaragua
Occupied Palestinian Territories
Oman
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Romania
Russian Federation
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent & the Grenadines
Samoa (Western)
São Tomé and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Thailand
Tonga
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
(86 countries or areas)

a. Excludes the following UN member countries for which the HDI cannot be computed: Afghanistan, Andorra, Iraq, Kiribati, the Democratic Republic of Korea, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Nauru, Palau, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Somalia and Tuvalu.

CLASSIFICATION OF COUNTRIES

279

Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands
Somalia
Sudan
Tajikistan
Tanzania, U. Rep. of
Timor-Leste
Togo
Uganda
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
(64 countries or areas)

Countries in the income aggregates a

High income
(GNI per capita of
$9,076 or more in 2002)

Middle income
(GNI per capita of
$736–9,075 in 2002)

Andorra
Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belgium
Brunei Darussalam
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Qatar
San Marino
Singapore
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
(41 countries or areas)

Albania
Algeria
Argentina
Armenia
Belarus
Belize
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cape Verde
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Czech Republic
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Estonia
Fiji
Gabon
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Hungary
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kiribati
Latvia
Lebanon
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Lithuania
Macedonia, TFYR
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.

Morocco
Namibia
Northern Mariana Islands
Occupied Palestinian 

Territories

Oman
Palau
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Russian Federation
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent & the 

Grenadines

Samoa (Western)
Saudi Arabia
Serbia and Montenegro
Seychelles
Slovakia
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
(86 countries or areas)

Low income
(GNI per capita of
$735 or less in 2002)

Afghanistan
Angola
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Benin
Bhutan
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Moldova, Rep. of
Mongolia
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Rwanda
São Tomé and Principe
Senegal

a. World Bank classification (effective 1 July 2003) based on gross national income (GNI) per capita. Excludes Nauru and Tuvalu because of lack of data.

280

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

Countries in the major world aggregates

Developing countries
Afghanistan
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Cuba
Cyprus
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti

Honduras
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Iraq
Jamaica
Jordan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Korea, Rep. of
Kuwait
Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Occupied Palestinian 

Territories

Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Qatar
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia

Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
(30 countries or areas)

High-income 
OECD countries a
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
(24 countries or areas)

St. Vincent & the 

Grenadines

Samoa (Western)
São Tomé and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tanzania, U. Rep. of
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
(137 countries or areas)

Least developed
countries
Afghanistan
Angola
Bangladesh
Benin
Bhutan
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep. of the

Djibouti
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Kiribati
Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Niger
Rwanda
Samoa (Western)
São Tomé and Principe
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands
Somalia
Sudan
Tanzania, U. Rep. of
Togo
Tuvalu
Uganda
Vanuatu
Yemen
Zambia
(49 countries or areas)

Central and
Eastern Europe
and the
Commonwealth 
of Independent
States (CIS)

Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria

Croatia
Czech Republic
Estonia
Georgia
Hungary
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia, TFYR
Moldova, Rep. of
Poland
Romania
Russian Federation
Serbia and Montenegro
Slovakia
Slovenia
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
(27 countries or areas)

OECD

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovakia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

a. Excludes the Czech Republic, Hungary, Mexico, Poland, Slovakia and Turkey.

CLASSIFICATION OF COUNTRIES

281

Developing countries in the regional aggregates

Arab States

Asia and the Pacific

Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Morocco
Occupied Palestinian Territories
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Syrian Arab Republic
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
(20 countries or areas)

East Asia and the Pacific
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Indonesia
Kiribati
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Korea, Rep. of
Lao People’s Dem.  Rep.
Malaysia
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa (Western)
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Viet Nam
(28 countries or areas)

South Asia
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Iran, Islamic Rep. of
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
(9 countries or areas)

Latin America and
the Caribbean 

Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent & the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
(33 countries or areas)

Southern Europe

Sub-Saharan Africa

Cyprus 
Turkey
(2 countries or areas)

Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Dem. Rep. of the
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Swaziland
Tanzania, U. Rep. of
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
(45 countries or areas)

282

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

INDEX TO INDICATORS

Indicator
A
Agriculture, OECD country support to domestic
Armed forces
index
total
Arms transfers, conventional
exports
share
total
imports, total

B
Births attended by skilled health personnel
Birthweight, infants with low

C
Carbon dioxide emissions
per capita
share of world total
Cellular subscribers
Children reaching grade 5
Condom use rate, at last high-risk sex
Consumer price index, average annual change in
Contraceptive prevalence
Contributing family workers
men
women
Crime, people victimized by
assault
bribery (corruption)
property crime
robbery
sexual assault
total crime

D
Debt relief
bilateral pledges to the HIPC trust fund
debt forgiveness, gross bilateral
Debt service, total
as % of exports of goods and services
as % of GDP
Drugs, affordable essential, population with 

sustainable access to

E
Earned income, estimated
female
male
ratio of female to male
Economic activity rate, female

INDEX TO INDICATORS

Indicator 

tables

Indicator

Indicator 

tables

17

22
22

22
22
22

6
7

21
21
12
11
8
13
6

27
27

23
23
23
23
23
23

17
17

18
18, 19

6

24
24
25
27

as % of male rate
index
Education expenditure, public
% of GDP
% of total government expenditure
pre-primary and primary
secondary
tertiary
Education index
Electricity consumption per capita
Employment by economic activity, female
agriculture
total
as % of male rate
industry
total
as % of male rate
services
total
as % of male rate

Energy use, GDP per unit of
Enrolment ratio, gross
combined primary, secondary and tertiary
female
male
tertiary
female ratio
ratio of female to male

Enrolment ratio, net
primary
female ratio
ratio of female to male
secondary
female ratio
ratio of female to male

Environmental treaties, ratification of
Exports
high-technology
of goods and services
manufactured
primary

F
Fertility rate, total
Foreign direct investment, net inflows of
Fuel consumption, traditional

G
GDP index
GDP per capita
annual growth rate
in US$
in PPP US$
highest value during 1975-2002
year of highest value

27
27

10, 19
10
10
10
10
1
21

27
27

27
27

27
27
21

1, 33
24
24

26
26

11, 33
26
26
11
26
26
21

15
15
15
15

5, 33
18
21

1

13
13
1, 13, 33
13
13

283

INDEX TO INDICATORS

Indicator

GDP, total
in PPP US$ billions
in US$ billions
Gender empowerment measure (GEM)
Gender-related development index (GDI)

H
Health expenditure
per capita
private
public
HIV prevalence
Human development index (HDI)
trends in
Human poverty index (HPI-1) for developing countries
Human poverty index (HPI-2) for selected OECD countries
Human rights instruments, status of major international

I
Illiteracy rate, adult
Immunization of one-year-olds
against measles
against tuberculosis
Imports of goods and services
Income inequality measures
Gini index
income ratio, richest 10% to poorest 10%
income ratio, richest 20% to poorest 20%
Income or consumption, share of
poorest 10%
poorest 20%
richest 10%
richest 20%
Infant mortality rate
Internally displaced people
Internet users

L
Labour rights conventions, status of fundamental
Life expectancy at birth
female
male
Life expectancy index
Literacy rate, adult
female
female as % of male
male
Literacy rate, youth
female
female as % of male
Literacy skills, functional, people lacking

Indicator 

tables

13
13
25, 32
24, 32

6
6
6, 19
8, 33
1
2, 32
3, 32
4, 32
30

3

6
6
15

14
14
14

14
14
14
14
9
22
12

31
1, 9, 33
24
24
1
1, 11, 33
24, 26
26
24
11
26
26
4

Indicator
M
Malaria
cases
prevention, children under five with 

insecticide-treated bed nets

treatment, children under five with fever 

treated with anti-malarial drugs

Maternal mortality ratio
adjusted
reported
Military expenditure

O
Official development assistance (ODA) disbursed, net
as % of GNI
per capita of donor country
to basic social services
to least developed countries
total
untied bilateral
Official development assistance (ODA) received 

(net disbursements)
as % of GDP
per capita
total
Oral rehydration therapy use rate

P
Patents granted to residents
Physicians
Population
ages 65 and above
annual growth rate
total
under age 15
urban
Poverty, income
population living below $1 a day
population living below $2 a day
population living below $4 a day
population living below $11 a day
population living below 50% of median income
population living below national poverty line
Private flows, other

R
Refugees
by country of asylum
by country of origin
Research and development (R&D)
expenditures
researchers in
Royalties and licence fees, receipts of

Indicator 

tables

8

8

8

9
9
19

16
16
16
16
16
16

18
18
18
6

12
6

5
5
5, 33
5
5

3
3
4
4
4
3
18

22
22

12
12
12

284

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2004

INDEX TO INDICATORS

Indicator
S
Sanitation facilities, population with access to improved
Science, math and engineering, tertiary students in
Smoking, prevalence of
men
women
Survival
probability at birth of not surviving to age 40
probability at birth of not surviving to age 60
probability at birth of surviving to age 65
female
male

T
Telephone mainlines
Trade
goods imported by developed countries
from developing countries
share of total imports
total
from least developed countries
share of total imports
total

tariff barriers, average and non-tariff equivalents
terms of
Tuberculosis cases
cured under DOTS
detected under DOTS
per 100,000 people

U
Under-five mortality rate
Under height for age, children under age five
Undernourished people
Under weight for age, children under age five
Unemployment

Indicator 

tables

Indicator

Indicator 

tables

Unemployment, long-term
men
women
Unemployment rate
average annual
female % of male
youth
female % of male

W
Water source, improved
population without sustainable access to
population with sustainable access to
Women’s economic participation
female legislators, senior officials and managers
female professional and technical workers
Women’s political participation
female legislators, senior officials and managers
seats in parliament held by women
lower or single house
upper house or senate
women in government at ministerial level
year first woman elected or appointed to parliament
year women received right to stand for election
year women received right to vote
Work time
men
market activities
non-market activities
total
total
market activities
non-market activities
women
as % of male
market activities
non-market activities
total

7
11

8
8

3
4

9
9

12

17
17

17
17
17
15

8
8
8

9, 33
7
7, 33
3, 7
20

4
20
20
20
20
20
20
20

3
7, 33

25
25

25
25
29
29
29
29
29
29

28
28
28

28
28

28
28
28
28

INDEX TO INDICATORS

285

