Human Development  
Report 2014
Sustaining Human Progress:
Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building Resilience

Empowered lives. 
Resilient nations. 

The  2014  Human  Development  Report  is 
the  latest  in  the  series  of  global  Human 
Development  Reports  published  by  UNDP 
since  1990  as  independent,  empirically 
grounded  analyses  of  major  development 
issues, trends and policies.

Additional  resources  related  to  the  2014 
Human Development Report can be found 
online  at  http://hdr.undp.org,  including 
complete  editions  or  summaries  of  the 
Report  in  more  than  20  languages,  a 
collection  of  papers  commissioned  for 
the  2014  Report,  interactive  maps  and 
databases of national human development 
indicators, full explanations of the sources 
and methodologies employed in the Report’s 
human  development  indices,  country 
profiles  and  other  background  materials 
as  well  as  previous  global,  regional  and 
national Human Development Reports.

Human Development Report 2014

Sustaining Human Progress:
Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building Resilience

Published for the
United Nations
Development
Programme
(UNDP)

Empowered lives. 
Resilient nations. 

1990  Concept and Measurement of Human Development
1991  Financing Human Development
1992  Global Dimensions of Human Development
1993  People’s Participation
1994  New Dimensions of Human Security
1995  Gender and Human Development
1996  Economic Growth and Human Development
1997  Human Development to Eradicate Poverty
1998  Consumption for Human Development
1999  Globalization with a Human Face
2000  Human Rights and Human Development
2001  Making New Technologies Work for Human Development
2002  Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented World
2003  Millennium Development Goals: A Compact among Nations to End Human Poverty
2004  Cultural Liberty in Today’s Diverse World
2005 
2006  Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global Water Crisis

Human Development Reports 1990–2014
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2007/2008  Fighting Climate Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World
 
 
 
 
 

Sustaining Human Progress: Reducing Vulnerability and Building Resilience

International Cooperation at a Crossroads: Aid, Trade and Security in an Unequal World

2009  Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development
2010  The Real Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development
2011 
2013  The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World
2014 

Sustainability and Equity: A Better Future for All

Regional Human Development Reports: Over the past two decades, regionally focused HDRs have also been 
produced in all major areas of the developing world, with support from UNDP’s regional bureaus. With provoc-
ative analyses and clear policy recommendations, regional HDRs have examined such critical issues as political 
empowerment in the Arab states, food security in Africa, climate change in Asia, treatment of ethnic minorities 
in Central Europe and challenges of inequality and citizens’ security in Latin America and the Caribbean.

National Human Development Reports: Since the release of the first national HDR in 1992, national HDRs 
have been produced in 140 countries by local editorial teams with UNDP support. These reports—some 700 to 
date—bring a human development perspective to national policy concerns through local consultations and re-
search. National HDRs have covered many key development issues, from climate change to youth employment 
to inequalities driven by gender or ethnicity.

Copyright © 2014 
by the United Nations Development Programme 
1 UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission.

ISBN 978-92-1-126368-8 
eISBN 978-92-1-056659-9

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library and the Library of Congress.

Printed in the United States by PBM Graphics, an RR Donnelley Company, on Forest Stewardship Council certified and elemental 
chlorine-free papers. Printed using vegetable-based inks.

Editing and production: Communications Development Incorporated, Washington DC, USA 
Information design and data visualisation: Accurat s.r.l., Milan, Italy

For a list of any errors or omissions found subsequent to printing, please visit our website at http://hdr.undp.org

Human Development Report 2014 Team

Director and lead author
Khalid Malik

Deputy director
Eva Jespersen

Research and statistics
Maurice  Kugler  (Head  of  Research),  Milorad  Kovacevic  (Chief  Statistician),  Subhra  Bhattacharjee,  Astra  Bonini,  Cecilia 
Calderon, Alan Fuchs, Amie Gaye, Sasa Lucic, Arthur Minsat, Shivani Nayyar, Pedro Martins, Tanni Mukhopadhyay and 
José Pineda

Communications and publishing
William Orme (Chief of Communications), Botagoz Abreyeva, Eleonore Fournier-Tombs, Anna Ortubia, Admir Jahic, Brigitte 
Stark-Merklein, Samantha Wauchope and Grace Sales

National Human Development Reports
Jon Hall (Head of Team), Christina Hackmann and Mary Ann Mwangi

Operations and administration
Sarantuya Mend (Operations Manager), Mamaye Gebretsadik and Fe Juarez-Shanahan

     |    iii

Foreword

The  2014  Human  Development  Report—
Sustaining  Progress:  Reducing  Vulnerabilities 
and Building Resilience—looks at two concepts 
which are both interconnected and immensely 
important  to  securing  human  development 
progress.

Since  the  United  Nations  Development 
Programme’s  (UNDP)  first  global  Human 
Development  Report  (HDR)  in  1990,  most 
countries  have  registered  significant  human 
development.  This  year’s  Report  shows  that 
overall global trends are positive and that pro-
gress is continuing. Yet, lives are being lost, and 
livelihoods and development undermined, by 
natural or human-induced disasters and crises.
However, these setbacks are not inevitable. 
While every society is vulnerable to risk, some 
suffer far less harm and recover more quickly 
than others when adversity strikes. This Report 
asks why that is and, for the first time in a glob-
al HDR, considers vulnerability and resilience 
through a human development lens.

Much  of  the  existing  research  on  vulner-
ability  has  considered  people’s  exposure  to 
particular  risks  and  is  often  sector-specific. 
This Report takes a different and more holis-
tic  approach.  It  considers  the  factors  which 
contribute  to  risks  to  human  development 
and then discusses the ways in which resilience 
to  a  broad  group  of  evolving  risks  could  be 
strengthened.

This  approach  is  particularly  important  in 
our interconnected world. While globalization 
has brought benefits to many, it has also given 
rise to new concerns, manifest at times as local 
reactions to the spillover effects of events far 
away.  Preparing  citizens  for  a  less  vulnerable 
future  means  strengthening  the  intrinsic  re-
silience  of  communities  and  countries.  This 
Report lays the groundwork for doing that.

In  line  with  the  human  development  par-
adigm,  this  Report  takes  a  people-centred 
approach. It pays particular attention to dispar-
ities between and within countries. It identifies 
the ‘structurally vulnerable’ groups of people 
who are more vulnerable than others by virtue 
of their history or of their unequal treatment 
by the rest of society. These vulnerabilities have 

often evolved and persisted over long periods 
of  time  and  may  be  associated  with  gender, 
ethnicity, indigeneity or geographic location—
to name just a few factors. Many of the most 
vulnerable people and groups face numerous 
and overlapping constraints on their ability to 
cope with setbacks. For example, those who are 
poor and also from a minority group, or are fe-
male and have disabilities, face multiple barriers 
which can negatively reinforce each other.

The  Report  considers  the  way  in  which 
vulnerabilities  change  during  our  lives—by 
taking a ‘life cycle approach’. Unlike more static 
models,  this  analysis  suggests  that  children, 
adolescents and the elderly each face different 
sets of risks which require targeted responses. 
Some periods of life are identified as particular-
ly important: for example, the first 1,000 days 
of a child’s life or the transition from school 
to work or from work to retirement. Setbacks 
at these points can be particularly difficult to 
overcome and may have prolonged impacts.

Based on analysis of the available evidence, 
this  Report  makes  a  number  of  important 
recommendations for achieving a world which 
addresses vulnerabilities and builds resilience 
to future shocks. It calls for universal access to 
basic social services, especially health and ed-
ucation; stronger social protection, including 
unemployment insurance and pensions; and a 
commitment to full employment, recognizing 
that the value of employment extends far be-
yond the income it generates. It examines the 
importance of responsive and fair institutions 
and  increased  social  cohesion  for  building 
community-level  resilience  and  for  reducing 
the potential for conflict to break out.

The Report recognizes that no matter how 
effective policies are in reducing inherent vul-
nerabilities, crises will continue to occur with 
potentially destructive consequences. Building 
capacities  for  disaster  preparedness  and  re-
covery,  which  enable  communities  to  better 
 weather—and recover from—shocks, is vital. 
At the global level, recognizing that risks which 
are transborder in nature require collective ac-
tion, the Report calls for global commitments 
and better international governance.

iv    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

These recommendations are both important 
and timely. As UN Member States prepare to 
conclude negotiations on the post-2015 devel-
opment agenda and launch a set of sustainable 
development goals, the evidence collected and 
analysed in this Report, and the human devel-
opment perspective on which it is based, are 
particularly valuable. Eradicating poverty, for 
example, will be a central objective of the new 
agenda. But, as this Report argues, if people 
remain  at  risk  of  slipping  back  into  poverty 
because  of  structural  factors  and  persistent 
vulnerabilities, development progress will re-
main precarious. The eradication of poverty is 
not just about ‘getting to zero’—it is also about 
staying there.

Achieving UNDP’s vision to help countries 
achieve the simultaneous eradication of pover-
ty and significant reduction of inequalities and 
exclusion and to promote human and sustaina-
ble development, requires a deep appreciation 

of the concepts of vulnerability and resilience. 
Unless and until vulnerabilities are addressed 
effectively, and all people enjoy the opportu-
nity to share in human development progress, 
development advances will be neither equitable 
nor sustainable.

This Report aims to help decisionmakers and 
other development actors lock in development 
gains through policies which reduce vulnerabil-
ity and build resilience. I recommend it to all 
who wish to see sustained development pro-
gress, especially for the most vulnerable people 
in our world.

Helen Clark
Administrator
United Nations Development Programme

Foreword    |    v

Acknowledgements

The 2014 Human Development Report is the 
product  of  a  collective  effort  by  the  United 
Nations  Development  Programme  (UNDP) 
Human Development Report Office (HDRO) 
and many valued external advisors and contrib-
utors. However, the findings, analysis and pol-
icy recommendations of this Report, as with 
previous Reports, are those of the authors alone 
and do not represent the official viewpoint of 
UNDP, nor that of its Executive Board. The 
UN General Assembly has officially recognized 
the Human Development Report as “an inde-
pendent intellectual exercise” that has become 
“an important tool for raising awareness about 
human development around the world.”1

We are pleased that H.E. Ms. Ellen Johnson 
Sirleaf, President of Liberia, Bill Gates, Stephen 
Hawking, James Heckman, Rajendra Pachauri, 
Juan  Somavia,  Joseph  Stiglitz  and  M.S. 
Swaminathan have made special contributions 
to  the  Report.  We  are  also  most  grateful  to 
the  authors  of  papers  commissioned  for  this 
2014  Report:  Connie  Bayudan;  Des  Gasper 
and Oscar Gomez; Andrew Fischer; Thomas 
Hale;  Khalil  Hamdani;  Abby  Hardgrove, 
Kirrilly  Pells,  Jo  Boyden  and  Paul  Dornan; 
Naila  Kabeer;  Inge  Kaul;  William  Kinsey; 
Samir  KC,  Wolfgang  Lutz,  Elke  Loichinger, 
Raya Muttarak and Erich Striessnig; Rehman 
Sobhan; Adam Rose; Till von Wachter; Mary 
E. Young; and Ashgar Zaidi. 

During  the  preparation  of  the  Report, 
HDRO received invaluable insights and guid-
ance from our distinguished Advisory Panel, 
including  Hanan  Ashrawi,  Edward  Ayensu, 
Cristovam  Ricardo  Cavalcanti  Buarque, 
Michael Elliott, Patrick Guillaumont, Ricardo 
Hausmann, Nanna Hvidt, Rima Khalaf, Nora 
Lustig, Sir James Alexander Mirrlees, Thandika 
Mkandawire, José Antonio Ocampo, Rajendra 
Pachauri, Samir Radwan, Rizal Ramli, Gustav 
Ranis,  Frances  Stewart,  Akihiko  Tanaka  and 
Ruan Zongze. 

We would also like to thank HDRO’s sta-
tistical  panel,  which  provided  expert  advice 
on methodologies and data choices related to 
the calculation of the Report’s human develop-
ment indices: Jose Ramon Albert, Sir Anthony 

Atkinson, Birol Aydemir, Rachid Benmokhtar 
Benabdellah, Wasmalia Bivar, Grant Cameron, 
Nailin  Feng,  Enrico  Giovannini,  D.C.A. 
Gunawardena,  Peter  Harper,  Yemi  Kale, 
Hendrik  van  der  Pol  and  Eduardo  Sojo 
Garza-Aldape. 

The  Report’s  composite  indices  and  other 
statistical resources rely on the expertise of the 
leading  international  data  providers  in  their 
specialized fields, and we express our gratitude 
for  their  continued  collegial  collaboration 
with  HDRO.  James  Foster,  Stephan  Klasen 
and Conchita D’Ambrosio contributed critical 
reviews of the Report’s composite indices. To 
ensure accuracy and clarity, the Report’s sta-
tistical analysis have also benefitted from the 
external review of statistical findings by Sabina 
Alkire, Adriana Conconi, Maria Emma Santos, 
Kenneth Harttgen, Hiroaki Matsuura, Claudio 
Montenegro, Atika Pasha and Jackie Yiptong.

The  consultations  held  around  the  world 
during  preparation  of  the  Report  relied  on 
the generous support of many institutions and 
individuals who are too numerous to mention 
here.  Events  were  held  between  April  2012 
and February 2014 in Addis Ababa, Almaty, 
Brussels,  Geneva,  Islamabad,  Managua,  New 
York  and  Tokyo.2  Support  from  partnering 
institutions,  including  UNDP  country  and 
regional offices, listed at http://hdr.undp.org/
en/2014-report/consultations,  is  acknowl-
edged with much gratitude. Equally, the annual 
HDRO  Conference  on  Measuring  Human 
Progress has allowed us to pursue a systematic 
dialogue with key partners from government, 
academia and civil society on our indices and 
their improvements. 

Many of our UNDP colleagues around the 
world—as  members  of  the  HDRO  Readers 
Group  and  the  Executive  Group—provided 
invaluable  insights  into  the  preparation  and 
final  drafting  of  the  report.  We  would  espe-
cially  like  to  thank  Adel  Abdellatif,  Pedro 
Conceição,  Samuel  Doe,  George  Ronald 
Gray  Molina,  Heraldo  Muñoz,  Selim  Jehan, 
Natalia Linou, Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Magdy 
Martinez-Soliman,  Stan  Nkwain,  Thangaval 
Palanivel,  Jordan  Ryan,  Turhan  Saleh,  Ben 

vi    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Slay,  Mounir  Tabet,  Antonio  Vigilante  and 
Mourad Wahba.

Colleagues at Helpage, the United Nations 
Children’s Fund and the International Labour 
Organization  also  offered  much  valued  in-
sights and commentary. Laurent Thomas and 
Neil Marsland from the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations also gener-
ously shared their expertise.

Special thanks to the Governments of France 
(AFD) and Germany (BMZ) for their finan-
cial  contributions  to  the  Report,  and  to  the 
Government of Japan (JICA) for their support 
to the East Asia Regional Consultation. 

We  are  much  indebted  to  our  team  of 
fact-checkers and consultants, which included 
Akmal Abdurazakov, Melissa Mahoney, Agnes 
Zabsonre and Simona Zampino.

Our  interns  Caterina  Alacevich,  Ruijie 
Cheng, Bouba Housseini, Yoo Rim Lee, Élisée 
Miningou, Ji Yun Sul, Petros Tesfazion and Lin 
Yang also deserve recognition for their dedi-
cation and contribution. The Report has been 
blessed  with  many  ‘friends  of  HDRO’  who 
have gone out of their way to help strengthen it. 
We benefited much from the critical readings 

of the draft report and related textual contri-
butions by James Heintz, Shiva Kumar, Peter 
Stalker and Frances Stewart. We are very grate-
ful to Amartya Sen and Joseph Stiglitz for their 
review and feedback on the report. 

In particular we would like to acknowledge 
the highly professional work of our editors at 
Communications Development Incorporated, 
led by Bruce Ross-Larson, with Joe Caponio, 
Christopher Trott and Elaine Wilson, and of 
designers Federica Fragapane, Michele Graffieti 
and Gabriele Rossi of Accurat Design. 

Most of all, I am as always profoundly grate-
ful  to  Helen  Clark,  UNDP’s  Administrator, 
for her leadership and vision, and to the entire 
HDRO team for their dedication and commit-
ment in producing a report that strives to fur-
ther the advancement of human development.

Khalid Malik
Director
Human Development Report Office

Notes
1  UN Resolution 57/264, 30 January 2003.
2 

Participants are listed and acknowledged at http://hdr.undp.org/en/2014-report/consultations.

Acknowledgments    |    vii

Contents

Foreword 
Acknowledgements 

Overview 

CHAPTER 1

Vulnerability and human development 
A human development perspective 
Vulnerable people, vulnerable world 
Choices and capabilities 
Policies and collective action 

CHAPTER 2

State of human development 
Progress of people 
Global threats to human development 

CHAPTER 3

Vulnerable people, vulnerable world 
Life capabilities and life cycle vulnerabilities—interdependent 
and cumulative 
Structural vulnerabilities 
Group violence and insecure lives 

CHAPTER 4

Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices 
Universal provision of basic social services 
Addressing life cycle vulnerabilities—timing matters 
Promoting full employment 
Strengthening social protection 
Addressing societal inclusion 
Upgrading capacities to prepare for and recover from crises 

CHAPTER 5

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action 
Transnational vulnerabilities and common threads 
Putting people first in a globalized world 
Collective action for a more secure world 

Notes 
References 

viii    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

iv
vi

1

15
16
18
23
24

33
33
45

55

56
70
77

83
85
90
92
97
101
107

111
111
117
128

133
139

STATISTICAL ANNEX

Human Development Index and its components 
Human Development Index trends, 1980–2013 
Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index 
Gender Inequality Index 
Gender Development Index 

Readers guide 
Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2013 
Statistical tables
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6.  Multidimensional Poverty Index 
6A.  Multidimensional Poverty Index: Changes over time (select countries) 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.  Command over and allocation of resources 
11.  Social competencies 
12.  Personal insecurity 
13. 
14.  Environment 
15.  Population trends 
16.  Supplementary indicators: perceptions of well-being 
Regions 
Statistical references 

Health: children and youth 
Adult health and health expenditures 
Education 

International integration 

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTIONS
Measuring human progress— Bill Gates 
Meeting the Zero Hunger Challenge— Professor M.S. Swaminathan 
Dealing with climate change— Rajendra Pachauri 
Human development and early childhood development— James Heckman 
Valuing the dignity of work— Dr. Juan Somavia 
Disability and vulnerability— Stephen Hawking 
Broadening our thinking on vulnerability— Joseph Stiglitz 

BOXES
1.1  Towards human resilience: concepts and definitions 
1.2  Shocks and threats to human development 
1.3  Measuring vulnerability 
Looking at disposable income 
2.1 
2.2  Macroeconomics and austerity 
3.1  Meaningful differences: 30 million more words 
3.2  Somalia: conflict and youth exclusion 
3.3  Violence against women 
3.4  Disaster resilience—Japan’s experience 
4.1  Macroeconomic policies for full employment 
4.2  Policy successes in East Asia 

155
159

160
164
168
172
176
180
182
184
188
192
196
200
204
208
212
216
220
224
225

47
49
52
58
67
77
84

16
21
28
42
44
61
65
75
78
95
96

International migration 

4.3  Reducing vulnerability through responsive institutions 
5.1  Global value chains—pros and cons 
5.2 
5.3  Systemic barriers to collective action 
5.4  Gridlock in the global governance of security 
5.5  Can the Responsibility to Protect doctrine be broadened? 
5.6  Who is vulnerable to climate change? 
5.7 

Four essential global agendas 

FIGURES
1.1  Who is vulnerable to what and why? 
1.2  Policies for reducing vulnerability and building resilience 
2.1  While all regions are registering improvement on the Human Development 

Index, signs of a slowdown are emerging 

2.2  All four human development groups have experienced a slowdown in growth 

on the Human Development Index 

2.3  Progress to higher human development groups since 1990 
2.4  The average loss in the Human Development Index due to inequality has 

declined in most regions 

2.5  A country’s economic status and performance can look much less impressive 

2.6 

when adjusted for income distribution 
In countries where inequality has been high or rising, growth in consumption 
for the poorest 40 percent of the population has been slower than for the 
population as a whole 

2.7  While in many countries both multidimensional and income poverty 

decreased over 2005–2012, the rate of progress varies widely 

2.8  The world’s ecological footprint of consumption is currently larger than its 

total biocapacity 

2.9  Since the liberalization of capital flows and greater financial integration in 

the 1980s, the incidence of banking crises has soared 

2.10  Food prices have fluctuated considerably and unexpectedly since 2007 
2.11  Between 1901 and 1910 there were 82 recorded natural disasters, but 

between 2003 and 2012 there were more than 4,000 

102
113
114
116
117
120
127
128

19
26

34

35
36

38

40

41

43

46

47
48

50

2.12  Internal and nonstate armed conflicts account for the vast majority of 

conflicts worldwide 

51
3.1  When investments in life capabilities occur earlier, future prospects are better  57
3.2  The regions with the highest shares of children under age 5 in the total 

population are Sub- Saharan Africa, the Arab States and South Asia 

3.3  Cognitive, social, emotional and language competences are interdependent, 
since all are shaped by early experiences and all contribute to the formation 
of lifelong capabilities 

3.4  Poor children are already at a vocabulary disadvantage by age 6, as shown 

3.5 

in the case of Ecuador 
Fast track education policies and accelerated economic growth would 
eliminate the gap in supply and demand for young workers in South Asia and 
narrow it in Sub- Saharan Africa between 2010 and 2050 

58

59

60

64

3.6 

3.7 

In Latin America and the Caribbean homicide rates for men, highest for men 
ages 15–29, tend to decline with age, whereas the much lower rates for 
woman remain largely unchanged 
For most countries with data nonstandard employment increased between 
2007 and 2010, while overall employment fell 

3.8  By 2050 the share of people ages 60 and older in the world’s population is 
expected to double to 15.5 percent, with the largest increase in East Asia 
and the Pacific 
In Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries the 
poverty rate tends to be higher for older people than for the population 
as a whole and higher for older women than for older men 

3.9 

3.10  Some 1.2 billion people live on less than $1.25 a day, and 1.5 billion people 

live in multidimensional poverty 

3.11  Several countries have laws that discriminate against women in family, 

economic activities, violence and other matters 

3.12  In 2011 poverty rates among Roma households were much higher than among 

non-Roma households 

66

68

69

71

72

74

76

4.1  Several countries started putting in place measures of social insurance when 

their GDP per capita was lower than that of most countries in South Asia today  88

4.2  Evolution of health protection coverage as a percentage of total population 

in selected countries 

4.3  Spending on health, education and welfare that increases over the life cycle does 

not nurture and support capability development during the crucial early years 

4.4  Early childhood investment: the Swedish example 
4.5  The degree and quality of interactions with parents and caregivers correlate 
with a child’s later behaviour, cognitive abilities and emotional development 
Following the 2008 global economic crisis unemployment rates were lower in 
Nordic countries than elsewhere in Europe 

4.6 

4.7  Cohesive societies tend do better than less cohesive societies 
5.1  There is a mismatch between global challenges and global governance 

5.2 

5.3 

mechanisms 
Increases in net private capital flows into developing countries over 
1980–2012 have left many economies and people vulnerable 
In recent years countries in all regions have become more reliant on imports 
and exports 

MAP
3.1  The share of young people in the total population is expected to fall in most 

regions between 2010 and 2050 

TABLES
2.1  Human Development Index and components, 2010 and 2013 
2.2  Highest positive differences between gross national income per capita rank 

and Human Development Index rank, by human development group, 2013 

2.3  Countries with rising or falling income inequality by region, 1990–2012 
2.4  Vulnerable employment and working poverty, 2010 and 2012 
3.1 

Income and multidimensional poverty, by region 

89

91
92

93

98
103

121

122

124

62

34

37
38
43
73

Contents    |    ix

“Human progress is neither 
automatic nor inevitable . . .”

Martin Luther King, Jr.

Overview

Charles Dickens’s classic Tale of Two Cities explored the many contrasting realities—“the best of times, the worst of 
times”—of  18th  century  Paris  and  London.  While  the  contemporary  world  is  a  very  different  place,  it  displays  similar 
contrasts—some acute and some arguably more complex.

As successive Human Development Reports have 
shown,  most  people  in  most  countries  have 
been doing steadily better in human develop-
ment. Advances in technology, education and 
incomes hold ever-greater promise for longer, 
healthier,  more  secure  lives.1  Globalization 
has on balance produced major human devel-
opment gains, especially in many countries of 
the South. But there is also a widespread sense 
of precariousness in the world today—in liveli-
hoods, in personal security, in the environment 
and in global politics.2 High achievements on 
critical  aspects  of  human  development,  such 
as health and nutrition, can quickly be under-
mined by a natural disaster or economic slump. 
Theft and assault can leave people physically 
and psychologically impoverished. Corruption 
and  unresponsive  state  institutions  can  leave 
those in need of assistance without recourse. 
Political threats, community tensions, violent 
conflict, neglect of public health, environmen-
tal damages, crime and discrimination all add 
to individual and community vulnerability.

Real progress on human development, then, 
is not only a matter of enlarging people’s criti-
cal choices and their ability to be educated, be 
healthy, have a reasonable standard of living and 
feel safe. It is also a matter of how secure these 
achievements are and whether conditions are 
sufficient  for  sustained  human  development. 
An account of progress in human development 
is incomplete without exploring and assessing 
vulnerability.

Traditionally, the concept of vulnerability is 
used to describe exposure to risk and risk man-
agement, including insuring against shocks and 
diversifying  assets  and  income.3  This  Report 
takes  a  broader  approach,  emphasizing  the 
close links between reducing vulnerability and 
advancing human development. We introduce 
the concept of human vulnerability to describe 
the prospects of eroding people’s capabilities 
and choices. Looking at vulnerability through 

a human development lens, we draw attention 
to the risk of future deterioration in individual, 
community  and  national  circumstances  and 
achievements,  and  we  put  forward  policies 
and other measures to prepare against threats 
and make human development progress more 
robust going forward.

We  particularly  emphasize  systemic  and 
perennial sources of vulnerability. We ask why 
some people do better than others in overcom-
ing adversity. For example, almost everywhere, 
women are more vulnerable to personal insecu-
rity than men are. We also ask what structural 
causes leave some people more vulnerable than 
others. People experience varying degrees of in-
security and different types of vulnerability at 
different points along the life cycle. Children, 
adolescents  and  older  people  are  inherently 
vulnerable, so we ask what types of investments 
and  interventions  can  reduce  vulnerability 
during sensitive transitional periods of the life 
cycle.

This Report makes the case that the sustained 
enhancement of individuals’ and societies’ ca-
pabilities is necessary to reduce these persistent 
vulnerabilities—many of them structural and 
many of them tied to the life cycle. Progress has 
to be about fostering resilient human develop-
ment. There is much debate about the meaning 
of  resilience,  but  our  emphasis  is  on human 
resilience—ensuring  that  people’s  choices  are 
robust,  now  and  in  the  future,  and  enabling 
people  to  cope  and  adjust  to  adverse  events 
(chapter 1).

Institutions, structures and norms can either 
enhance  or  diminish  human  resilience.  State 
policies and community support networks can 
empower  people  to  overcome  threats  when 
and where they may arise, whereas horizontal 
inequality may diminish the coping capabilities 
of particular groups.

This Report explores the types of policies and 
institutional reforms that can build resilience 

Overview    |    1

into  the  fabrics  of  societies,  particularly  for 
excluded groups and at sensitive times during 
the life cycle. It examines universal measures 
that can redress discrimination and focuses on 
the need for collective action to resolve vulner-
ability that stems from unresponsive national 
institutions  and  the  shortcomings  of  global 
governance.

Why discuss vulnerability now?

Human  vulnerability  is  not  new,  but  it  is 
increasing  due  to  financial  instability  and 
mounting  environmental  pressures  such  as 
climate change, which have a growing potential 
to undermine progress in human development. 
Indeed, since 2008 there has been a decelera-
tion  in  the  growth  of  all  three  components 
of  the  Human  Development  Index  in  most 
regions of the world (chapter 2). It is critical to 
deal with vulnerability now to secure gains and 
prevent disruptions to continuing progress.

The world is changing rapidly. The scope and 
scale  of  connectivity  and  related  insecurities 
are accelerating, as are the threats of contagion 
and exposure to natural disasters and violent 
conflict.  National  policy  space  to  enhance 
coping capabilities is becoming more and more 
constrained as globalization deepens. In an in-
creasingly interconnected world what was once 
local is often now global as well, due to inter-
national trade, travel and telecommunications. 
Globally integrated supply chains, for instance, 
have brought efficiency gains. But disruptions 
at one point of the chain can trigger serious 
local problems elsewhere. The types of public 
goods, both national and global, that are need-
ed to build long-term coping capabilities and 
resilient  societies  are  underprovided.  Across 
the world people feel insecure.

With the lead-up to the post-2015 agenda 
and the development of a set of sustainable de-
velopment goals, this is also a time of reflection 
for the international community and an op-
portunity for change and new forms of global 
cooperation.  As  UN  Secretary-General  Ban 
Ki-moon underlined in his July 2013 address 
to the United Nations General Assembly, the 
world has “to pay particular attention to the 
needs and rights of the most vulnerable and 
excluded.”4 He called for a new vision that can 

National policy space 
to enhance coping 
capabilities is increasingly 
constrained as 
globalization deepens

2    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

bring together the full range of human aspira-
tions and ensure “a life of dignity for all”. This 
Report about vulnerability informs the global 
debate  and  offers  recommendations  for  how 
to achieve new goals and build more-resilient 
societies.

Reducing both poverty and people’s vulner-
ability to falling into poverty must be a central 
objective of the post-2015 agenda. Eliminating 
extreme poverty is not just about ‘getting to 
zero’; it is also about staying there. This can be 
achieved only with a renewed focus on vulner-
ability  and  human  development.  It  requires 
ensuring that those lifted from extreme depri-
vation benefit from sustained public support 
that  strengthens  their  social  and  economic 
resilience  and  greatly  reduces  the  systemic 
sources of their vulnerability.

There is positive news as well. As the Report 
acknowledges  (in  chapter  2),  average  loss 
of  human  development  due  to  inequality 
has declined in most regions in recent years, 
driven mainly by widespread gains in health. 
But  disparities  in  income  have  risen  in  sev-
eral regions, and inequality in education has 
remained broadly constant. Declines in ine-
quality  should  be  celebrated,  but  offsetting 
growing income disparities with progress in 
health is not enough. To tackle vulnerability, 
particularly among marginalized groups, and 
sustain  recent  achievements,  reducing  ine-
quality in all dimensions of human develop-
ment is crucial.

Unless more-vulnerable groups and individ-
uals receive specific policy attention and dedi-
cated resources across all dimensions of human 
development, they are in danger of being left 
behind,  despite  continuing  human  progress 
in most countries and communities. Without 
national and global policies and institutions to 
reduce  persistent  and  systemic  vulnerability, 
the post-2015 development agenda will remain 
inadequate in addressing the complexity and 
scale of future challenges.

Who is vulnerable—and why?

Most  people  everywhere  are  vulnerable  to 
shocks  to  some  degree—natural  disasters, 
financial crises, armed conflicts—as well as to 
long-term social, economic and environmental 

changes. Economic weaknesses are undermin-
ing the social contract even in advanced indus-
trialized  societies,  and  no  country  anywhere 
will  be  immune  to  the  long-term  effects  of 
climate change.

Yet some people are much more vulnerable 
than others. And in many cases discriminatory 
social  norms  and  institutional  shortcomings 
exacerbate  this  vulnerability,  leaving  certain 
groups  without  the  household,  community 
and state support needed to boost their coping 
capacities.  These  groups  and  the  institutions 
and norms that weaken their capabilities and 
restrict their choices are the main focus of this 
Report.

Those living in extreme poverty and depri-
vation are among the most vulnerable. Despite 
recent  progress  in  poverty  reduction,  more 
than 2.2 billion people are either near or living 
in multidimensional poverty. That means more 
than 15 percent of the world’s people remain 
vulnerable  to  multidimensional  poverty.  At 
the same time, nearly 80 percent of the global 
population lack comprehensive social protec-
tion.5 About 12 percent (842 million) suffer 
from  chronic  hunger,6  and  nearly  half  of  all 
 workers—more than 1.5 billion—are in infor-
mal or precarious employment.7

In many cases the poor—along with, for ex-
ample, women, immigrants, indigenous groups 
and older people—are structurally vulnerable. 
Their insecurity has evolved and persisted over 
long  periods  to  create  divisions—in  gender, 
ethnicity,  race,  job  type  and  social  status—
that are not easily overcome. People who are 
structurally  vulnerable  may  be  as  capable  as 
others but may still face additional barriers to 
overcoming adverse conditions. For example, 
people with disabilities often lack easy access 
to  public  transportation,  government  offices 
and  other  public  spaces  such  as  hospitals, 
which  makes  it  more  difficult  to  participate 
in  economic,  social  and  political  life—or  to 
seek assistance when faced with threats to their 
physical well-being.

Many face overlapping structural constraints 
on their ability to cope—for example, people 
who are poor and from a minority group, or 
women with disabilities. Three-quarters of the 
world’s poor live in rural areas, where agricul-
tural workers suffer the highest prevalence of 
poverty. They are caught in intractable cycles 

of  low  productivity,  seasonal  unemployment 
and low wages and are particularly vulnerable 
to changing weather patterns. Disenfranchised 
ethnic and religious minorities are vulnerable 
to discriminatory practices, have limited access 
to formal justice systems and suffer from the 
legacy of past repression and prejudice. And 
while indigenous peoples make up about 5 per-
cent of the world’s population, they account 
for some 15 percent of the world’s poor, with 
as  many  as  a  third  of  them  in  extreme  rural 
poverty.8 Worldwide, more than 46 percent of 
people ages 60 and older live with a disability, 
facing severe challenges to full participation in 
society, further heightened by discriminatory 
social attitudes.9

Climate  change  poses  grave  risks  to  all 
people and all countries, but again, some are 
subject to more-grievous losses than others are. 
Between 2000 and 2012 more than 200 mil-
lion people, most of them in developing coun-
tries, were hit by natural disasters every year, 
especially by floods and droughts.10 The 2011 
Human  Development  Report  showed  how 
continuing failure to slow the pace of global 
warming could jeopardize poverty eradication, 
because the world’s poorest communities are 
the  most  vulnerable  to  rising  temperatures 
and seas and to other consequences of climate 
change.11

Life cycle vulnerability receives particular 
attention in this Report. Capabilities accu-
mulate over an individual’s lifetime and have 
to  be  nurtured  and  maintained;  otherwise 
they can stagnate and even decline. Life ca-
pabilities  are  affected  by  investments  made 
in preceding stages of life, and there can be 
long-term consequences of exposure to short-
term  shocks.  A  setback  in  early  childhood, 
for  instance,  can  have  serious  ramifications 
throughout the rest of a person’s life, includ-
ing  the  chances  of  holding  onto  a  job,  the 
uncertainties associated with growing older 
and the transmission of vulnerability to the 
next generation. This Report notes the cumu-
lative nature of vulnerability and the need for 
timely and continuous policy interventions. 
Particular  attention  is  needed  at  sensitive 
periods—investments  in  early  childhood 
education, a focus on employment opportu-
nities for youth and support for older people 
enhance life capabilities.

Despite recent progress 
in poverty reduction, more 
than 2.2 billion people are 
either near or living in 
multidimensional poverty

Overview    |    3

The challenge is not 
just to keep vulnerable 
populations from falling 
back into extreme 
difficulty and deprivation. 
It is to create an 
enabling environment 
for their continuing 
human development 
advancement in the 
decades to come

The challenge is not just to keep vulnerable 
populations  from  falling  back  into  extreme 
difficulty and deprivation. It is to create an ena-
bling environment for their continuing human 
development advancement in the decades to 
come. This calls for understanding poverty and 
deprivation as multidimensional phenomena 
requiring universal policies for extending rights 
and  services  to  all,  with  special  attention  to 
equal opportunities, life cycle capabilities and 
access for those who are excluded. Such mutu-
ally reinforcing interventions can build societal 
resilience and strengthen human agency. The 
most successful antipoverty and human devel-
opment initiatives to date have taken a multi-
dimensional  approach,  combining  income 
support and job creation with expanded health 
care  and  education  opportunities  and  other 
interventions for community development.

There  are  policy  steps  to  close  the  gaps 
between people and among countries and to 
build  greater  resilience  and  capabilities  for 
those who would otherwise remain persistently 
vulnerable.  Policies  that  prevent  devastation 
caused  by  hazards,  promote  the  extension 
of the benefits of prosperity to all and build 
broader  societal  resilience  can  collectively 
protect and sustain human progress. Yet none 
of  them  falls  automatically  into  place.  They 
are the outcomes of vigorous collective action, 
equitable and effective institutional responses, 
and  far-sighted  leadership—local,  national 
and global. All society ultimately benefits from 
greater  equality  of  opportunity.  And  unless 
these multidimensional and intersecting vul-
nerabilities are recognized and systematically 
reduced, continuing progress in human devel-
opment could be interrupted or even reversed.

Human security and 
human development

Twenty  years  ago  the  Human  Development 
Report introduced the notion of human securi-
ty as an integral aspect of human development. 
This Report is closely aligned with the human 
security  approach,  but  with  a  focus  on  vul-
nerability and how it threatens to undermine 
achievements in human development. In this 
context,  there  is  an  emphasis  on  the  imper-
atives  for  reducing  disparities  and  building 

4    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

social  cohesion,  particularly  through  actions 
that address social violence and discrimination.
Conflict and a sense of personal insecurity 
have pervasive adverse impacts on human de-
velopment and leave billions of people living in 
precarious conditions. Many countries in the 
bottom tier of the Human Development Index 
are  emerging  from  long  periods  of  conflict 
or  still  confront  armed  violence.  More  than 
1.5 billion people live in countries affected by 
conflict—about a fifth of the world’s popula-
tion.12 And recent political instability has had 
an enormous human cost: About 45 million 
people were forcibly displaced due to conflict 
or persecution by the end of 2012—the highest 
in  18  years—more  than  15  million  of  them 
refugees.13 In some areas of West and Central 
Africa lawlessness and armed conflict continue 
to threaten human development advances, with 
long-term repercussions for national progress. 
And in a number of countries in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, despite high human devel-
opment achievements, many people feel threat-
ened  by  rising  rates  of  homicide  and  other 
violent crimes.

Women everywhere experience vulnerability 
in personal insecurity. Violence violates their 
rights, and feelings of personal insecurity re-
strict their agency in both public and private 
life.  Expanding  freedoms  and  human  secu-
rity,  then,  is  also  about  supporting  measures 
that  bring  about  changes  in  institutions  and 
norms that reduce interpersonal violence and 
discrimination.  Improvements  in  personal 
security can have a profound impact on actual 
and perceived vulnerability of individuals and 
communities  and  on  their  sense  of  security, 
empowerment and agency.

Higher  incomes  alone  are  not  enough  to 
reduce vulnerability to conflict and personal 
insecurity. Persistent vulnerability, which gen-
erally can be allayed only over longer periods, 
requires  multiple  policy  interventions  and 
norm  shifts  that  build  tolerance  and  deepen 
social cohesion.

Building resilience

People’s  well-being  is  influenced  greatly  by 
the  larger  freedoms  within  which  they  live 
and by their ability to respond to and recover 

from adverse events—natural or human-made. 
Resilience underpins any approach to securing 
and sustaining human development. At its core, 
resilience is about ensuring that state, commu-
nity and global institutions work to empower 
and protect people. Human development in-
volves removing the barriers that hold people 
back in their freedom to act. It is about ena-
bling the disadvantaged and excluded to realize 
their rights, to express their concerns openly, to 
be heard and to become active agents in shap-
ing their destiny. It is about having the freedom 
to live a life that one values and to manage one’s 
affairs adequately. This Report highlights some 
of the key policies, principles and measures that 
are  needed  to  build   resilience—to  reinforce 
choices, expand human agency and promote 
social  competences.  It  also  indicates  that 
achieving and sustaining human development 
progress  can  depend  on  the  effectiveness  of 
preparedness and response when shocks occur.

Committing to universalism

A  common  commitment—national  and 
global—towards universal provision of social 
services,  strengthening  social  protection  and 
assuring full employment would constitute a 
profound societal and political decision that 
would  lay  the  foundation  for  building  long-
term resilience, for countries and for their citi-
zens as individuals. Such a commitment would 
boost the ability of individuals, societies and 
countries to resist and recover from setbacks, 
while recognizing that some are more exposed 
to risks and threats than others and need addi-
tional support.

Universal provision of social services. Universal 
access  to  basic  social  services—education, 
health care, water supply and sanitation, and 
public  safety—enhances  resilience.  It  is  not 
only desirable—it is also possible at early stages 
of development. And recent experience—for 
example, in China, Rwanda and Viet Nam—
shows that it can be achieved fairly fast (in less 
than a decade).

Universal provision of basic social services 
can raise social competences and reduce struc-
tural vulnerability. It can be a powerful force 
for  equalizing  opportunities  and  outcomes. 
For  instance,  universal  high-quality  public 

education can mitigate the gaps in education 
of  children  from  rich  and  poor  households. 
Intergenerational transmission of capabilities 
such as education within families can perpetu-
ate the benefits in the long run. Universal pol-
icies also promote social solidarity by avoiding 
the disadvantages of targeting—social stigma 
for recipients and segmentation in the quality 
of services, as well as failure to reach many of 
the vulnerable.14

One commonly held misconception is that 
only wealthy countries can afford social protec-
tion or universal basic services. As this Report 
documents,  the  evidence  is  to  the  contrary. 
Except for societies undergoing violent strife and 
turmoil, most societies can—and many have—
put in place basic services and social protection. 
And they have found that an initial investment, 
of just a small percentage of GDP, brings bene-
fits that far outweigh the initial outlay.

Take  South  Africa’s  Child  Support  Grant, 
which cost 0.7 percent of GDP in 2008–2009 
and reduced the child poverty rate from 43 per-
cent to 34 percent. Or Brazil’s Bolsa Família 
programme, which cost 0.3 percent of GDP in 
2008–2009 and accounted for 20–25 percent 
of the reduction in inequality.15 Countries en-
joying rapid economic progress, such as those in 
East Asia, have benefited from greater coverage 
and better health, education and employment 
investments. And they did so even with limited 
revenues and resources at their disposal.

The  case  for  universal  provision  of  basic 
social services rests first and foremost on the 
premise that all humans should be empowered 
to live lives they value and that access to certain 
basic elements of a dignified life ought to be 
delinked  from  people’s  ability  to  pay.  While 
ways of delivering such services may vary with 
circumstances and country context, common 
to all successful experiences is a single idea: The 
state has the primary responsibility to extend 
social  services  to  the  entire  population,  in  a 
basic social contract between citizens and state.

Resilience underpins 
any approach to 
securing and sustaining 
human development. 
At its core, resilience 
is about ensuring that 
state, community and 
global institutions 
work to empower 
and protect people

Strengthening  social  protection.  Social  pro-
tection,  including  unemployment  insurance, 
pension programmes and labour market regu-
lations, can offer coverage against risk and ad-
versity throughout people’s lives and especially 
during sensitive phases. By providing an addi-
tional and predictable layer of support, social 

Overview    |    5

For developing countries 
faced with the challenges 
of underemployment, 
active labour market 
policies are not enough, 
considering that 
most jobs are in the 
informal economy

protection programmes help households avoid 
selling off assets, taking children out of school 
or postponing necessary medical care, all detri-
mental to their long term well-being. Further, 
the distribution networks and mechanisms for 
administering  social  protection  programmes 
can also be used to provide short-term emer-
gency  responses  and  assistance  during  crises 
such as natural disasters and droughts.

Many social protections have positive spinoff 
effects.  Unemployment  insurance  improves 
the working of labour markets by allowing the 
unemployed to choose jobs that better match 
their skills and experience rather than forcing 
them to simply take the first job that comes 
along. Income support to households has been 
shown to encourage labour market participa-
tion by providing resources to enable people 
to  search  for  better  opportunities,  including 
allowing members of the household to migrate 
to find jobs. Some contend such support may 
reduce  the  incentive  to  get  back  to  work. 
Much  depends  on  the  design  of  the  policy. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  considerable  evidence 
that labour market regulations have a net bene-
fit and are able to reduce inequality.

Social  protection  is  feasible  at  early  stages 
of  development  and  can  even  bring  about 
other  benefits  such  as  stimulating  spending 
and reducing poverty. Social protection offsets 
output  volatility  by  reducing  fluctuations  in 
disposable income. Strong universal social pro-
tection  policies  not  only  improve  individual 
resilience, they also bolster the resilience of the 
economy as a whole.

economic goal. Expanding jobs should guide 
public policy. Labour market policies are need-
ed that help workers regain employment—for 
example,  through  temporary  employment 
schemes  or  by  acquiring  employable  skills. 
Employment  generation  programmes  can  be 
fully integrated into broader policy objectives, 
such as building infrastructure and connectivi-
ty, using expanded public works programmes, 
including providing cash for work for the poor 
and unemployed.

For  developing  countries  faced  with  the 
challenges of underemployment, active labour 
market  policies  are  not  enough,  considering 
that most jobs are in the informal economy—
more  than  40  percent  in  two-thirds  of  the 
46  emerging  and  developing  countries  with 
available data.16 Pursuing full employment and 
reducing employment-related vulnerability in 
these countries require policies that promote 
job-creating growth and that extend a social 
protection framework for all in both the for-
mal and informal sectors.

In  some  ways  a  structural  transformation 
of  the  economy  is  in  order  to  provide  more 
jobs—using targeted policies that support the 
development of strategic sectors and activities. 
This may entail macroeconomic policies that 
go beyond an exclusive focus on price stability 
and  debt  management.  Global  cooperation 
can  also  help  ensure  that  intensifying  global 
competition does not result in a ‘race to the 
bottom’ in terms of labour standards, but rath-
er in an agreement to push for full and decent 
employment for all.

Assuring full employment. As this Report shows, 
the social value of employment goes far beyond 
a salary. Universal access to decent jobs is a key 
part of building resilience across a society. Work 
is a means of livelihoods, in strengthening hu-
man agency, in providing social connections 
and in the larger value for providing security 
for families and communities. Unemployment 
tends  to  be  associated  with  an  increase  in 
crime, suicide, violence, drug abuse and other 
social problems that can increase personal in-
security. Jobs foster social stability and social 
cohesion, and decent jobs strengthen people’s 
abilities to manage shocks and uncertainty. Yet 
few countries, developed or developing, pursue 
full employment as an overarching societal or 

Responsive institutions and 
cohesive societies

Building human resilience requires responsive 
institutions. Adequate policies and resources 
are needed for providing adequate jobs, health 
care  and  education  opportunities,  especially 
for  the  poor  and  vulnerable.  In  particular, 
states that recognize and take actions to reduce 
inequality among groups (so called horizontal 
inequality) are better able to uphold the prin-
ciple of universalism, build social cohesion and 
prevent and recover from crises.

Persistent vulnerability is rooted in historic 
exclusions—women  in  patriarchal  societies, 
Black people in South Africa and the United 

6    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

States, and Dalits in India encounter discrim-
ination  and  exclusion  due  to  longstanding 
cultural practices and social norms. Responsive 
and accountable institutions of governance are 
critical  to  overcoming  the  sense  of  injustice, 
vulnerability and exclusion that can fuel social 
discontent.  Civic  engagement  and  collective 
mobilization, in turn, are also indispensable for 
ensuring that states recognize the interests and 
rights of vulnerable people.

States  can  intervene  to  reduce  horizontal 
inequality with a mix of policy interventions. 
Direct interventions such as affirmative action 
may  work  to  immediately  address  historic 
injustices, but its long-term impact is ambig-
uous. And it cannot always fix the structural 
drivers behind persistent inequality. Policies 
are  needed  that  respond  in  the  short  term 
and  promote  long-term  and  sustainable  ac-
cess to social services, employment and social 
protections for vulnerable groups. These may 
include formal incentives and sanctions such 
as preventative laws. For example, rights-based 
laws  can  lead  to  considerable  improvements 
for  vulnerable  groups,  who  are  empowered 
with legal recourse and public scrutiny when 
institutions fail them.

Changing  norms  to  build  tolerance  and 
deepen social cohesion is also a necessary and 
often  overlooked  aspect  of  building  resilient 
societies. More-cohesive societies are better at 
protecting people from adversity and may be 
more accepting of policies based on the prin-
ciple of universalism. Lack of social cohesion is 
correlated with conflict and violence, especially 
in  situations  of  unequal  access  to  resources 
or benefits from natural wealth, and with the 
inability to deal effectively with rapid social or 
economic change or the impact of economic 
or climate-related shocks. Indeed, pursuing the 
broad goals of equity, inclusion and justice re-
inforces social institutions and in turn deepens 
social cohesion.

Campaigns and messages that seek to alter 
people’s perceptions are indispensable in ensur-
ing social change. Laws, policies and education-
al and normative measures are most meaningful 
when people are engaged and have mechanisms 
to hold institutions accountable. In this sense, 
state responsiveness requires openness, trans-
parency  and  accountability  to  the  poor  and 
excluded, as well as the promotion of a positive 

dynamic between governance institutions and 
civic participation.

Crisis prevention and response

Natural and human-made disasters are inevita-
ble, but efforts can be made to mitigate their ef-
fects and to accelerate recovery. Opportunities 
can be taken to ‘build back better’. Indeed, the 
2004 tsunami led directly to the Indian Ocean 
Tsunami Warning System. But for disaster pre-
paredness and response frameworks to enhance 
resilience, they need to be designed from a sys-
tems approach that extends beyond immediate 
threats and shocks to address underlying causes 
and longer term impacts.

In the case of natural disasters, prevention 
and response frameworks can include, as laid 
out in the Hyogo Framework for Action, im-
proving  risk  information,  strengthening  and 
establishing early warning systems, integrating 
disaster risk reduction into development plan-
ning and policies, and strengthening institu-
tions and mechanisms for response. Planning 
for preparedness and recovery can be pursued 
at  all  levels—global,  regional,  national  and 
community—and can be enhanced by infor-
mation sharing and solidarity in action. This 
is easier when governments and communities 
are prepared. When policies are oriented to-
wards emergency response, mitigation can be 
overlooked, and shocks can re-emerge with po-
tentially larger impacts and greater subsequent 
costs of protection. Emergency response efforts 
are  important  and  necessary,  but  resilience 
requires comprehensive efforts to build prepar-
edness and response capacities.

Intrastate  conflict  as  well  as  internal  civil 
unrest  continues  to  impose  enormous  costs 
on  development  in  affected  countries.  A 
combination  of  causes  can  be  identified  for 
these  types  of  conflict.  However,  one  com-
mon characteristic is that these causes, from 
exclusionary policies and elite rent-seeking to 
unaddressed social grievances, all contribute 
to social discord or, at the very least, imped-
ing  the  minimum  of  social  harmony  and 
cohesion that would be conducive to resilient 
development outcomes, something discussed 
more extensively in chapters 3 and 4. In com-
munities and countries vulnerable to conflict 
and violence, programmes that enhance social 

Responsive and 
accountable institutions 
of governance are critical 
to overcoming the sense 
of injustice, vulnerability 
and exclusion that can 
fuel social discontent

Overview    |    7

cohesion can underpin prevention and recov-
ery efforts.

Policies and institutions that fight exclusion 
and marginalization, create a sense of belong-
ing, promote trust and offer the opportunity of 
upward mobility can reduce the potential for 
conflict. Increasing public awareness and access 
to information can generate public support for 
peace and less contentious politics. Involving 
credible and objective intermediaries and me-
diators can build trust and confidence among 
conflicted and polarized groups and consensus 
on issues of national import, ranging from the 
conduct of elections to the elements of a new 
constitution.  Local  committees  and  citizen 
groups can build trust at the community level 
and lay the foundation for ‘infrastructures for 
peace’.  Investing  in  jobs  and  livelihoods  can 
help communities and individuals recover from 
crises in the short term and increase resilience 
to the challenges of future crises.

Global action for the 
‘world we want’

Globalization has brought countries together 
and provided new opportunities. But it has also 
increased the risk that adverse events will be 
transmitted more rapidly. Recent events have 
exposed huge gaps in how globalization is man-
aged on issues ranging from food security to en-
ergy access, from financial regulation to climate 
change. These cross-border challenges are likely 
to  continue  in  coming  decades,  with  global 
governance architectures short on capacity to 
prevent or minimize shocks. Policymakers and 
leaders may find themselves unprepared for the 
sheer speed and scale of these changes.

New and emerging threats call for national, 
global  and  cross-border  responses,  resources 
and leadership. Collective action is needed that 
can prioritize issues, extend cooperation across 
silos  organized  around  particular  problems, 
and bring together states, international organ-
izations, civil society and the private sector in 
common  support  of  building  more-resilient 
global systems. In particular, collective action 
is needed, in the form of a global commitment 
to universalism, to better facilitate the provi-
sion of global public goods and to reduce the 
likelihood and scope of transnational shocks 

Collective action is 
needed, in the form of 
a global commitment to 
universalism, to better 
facilitate the provision 
of global public goods

8    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

by  fixing  shortcomings  in  global  governance 
architectures.

Global commitment to universalism

National measures—for the universal provision 
of social services, for universal social protection 
and for full employment—are more easily en-
acted when global commitments are in place 
and global support is available. Such a commit-
ment should be part of the post-2015 agenda. 
Including elements of a global social contract 
in the agenda could open up policy space at 
the national level for states to determine the 
approaches  for  building  employment  and 
providing social services and protections that 
work best in their particular contexts, but glob-
al  agreements  are  essential  because  they  can 
instigate action and commitment and generate 
financial and other support.

Policy norms that depict public provision of 
social protections as positive instruments can 
enable states to adopt and implement policies 
and  programmes  that  protect  people  inside 
their territories. A set of norms that emphasize 
universalism could embolden states to make a 
commitment  to  universal  protections  for  la-
bour that reduce the likelihood of exploitative 
work conditions while encouraging minimum 
social  protections  for  workers  as  well  as  for 
those who are unable to work.

Today, only 20 percent of people worldwide 
have adequate social security coverage, and over 
50  percent  lack  any  type  of  social  security.17 
The sustainable development goals present an 
opportunity for the international community 
and individual states to advance a positive view 
of  the  public  domain  and  push  forward  the 
principle of universalism—in public provision 
of social services, including at a minimum uni-
versal access to health care and education, and 
for  full  employment  and  social  protections. 
These are all essential elements of more-sustain-
able and -resilient human development.

Better facilitation of the provision 
of global public goods

Many  global  public  goods  have  social  value 
and  can  reduce  vulnerability  but  are  under-
valued  by  markets.  Their  underprovision, 
ranging  from  communicable  disease  control 

to adequate global market regulation, fosters 
shocks that have regional and global reach. As 
the world’s interdependence expands and deep-
ens, the manifestation of vulnerability from the 
underprovision of global public goods grows.

Multilateral efforts to facilitate cooperation 
and provide some of these goods seem weak in 
the face of the challenges and vulnerabilities. 
And they are weak in the face of the momen-
tum of markets, the pace of commodification 
and the power of private interests. International 
rules and norms often reflect private interests 
rather than providing public goods and prior-
itizing social interests.18 Global public goods 
and universal social goods that would correct 
or  complement  markets  for  more-inclusive 
and -sustainable growth remain, in large part, 
underprovided.

Minimum  levels  of  social  protection  and 
commitments to the provision of social services 
are important public goods that can be included 
in the sustainable development goals to enhance 
the capabilities people have to cope with adverse 
shocks. But there are also public goods that are 
needed to reduce the likelihood of crises, such as 
fostering climate stability or reducing the likeli-
hood of yet another financial crisis. Progress has 
been made in the past—for example, the eradica-
tion of smallpox. The task now is to extend this 
kind of collective effort to the provision of other 
types of vulnerability- reducing public goods.

Fixing shortcomings in global 
governance architectures

There  is  a  mismatch  between  governance 
mechanisms  and  the  vulnerability  and  com-
plexity of global processes. Many international 
institutions and structures were designed for 
a post–Second World War order, and reforms 
have  not  reflected  changing  power  relations. 
Meanwhile,  new  regimes,  such  as  those  for 
global intellectual property rights, often ben-
efit elites disproportionately. Governance sys-
tems are not only short on offering protections 
and enhancing capabilities; in some cases they 
are  producing  new  vulnerabilities.  In  many 
respects the shortcomings of global governance 
architectures  in  reducing  vulnerability  stem 
from  deep  asymmetries  of  power,  voice  and 
influence. Agendas and policies underrepresent 
the interests and needs of the least developed 

countries and the people most vulnerable—for 
example,  unskilled  workers,  immigrants  and 
older people. Those with the least capacity to 
cope with shocks and adjust to the speed of 
change are the least involved in creating the reg-
ulations, norms and goals of global governance.
The list of global challenges is long, and at 
times  responses  may  seem  out  of  reach,  but 
we know that markets can be better regulat-
ed, financial and trade systems adjusted, and 
environmental threats reduced. Certain adjust-
ments can be made across global issue areas to 
increase the likelihood that states will act col-
lectively and to ensure cohesiveness in global 
governance. These are first-order changes that 
make  policy  and  institutional  progress  more 
likely on specific problems.

First,  is  the  imperative  to  ensure  equitable 
participation of developing countries in global 
governance so that the needs of more-vulnerable 
countries, including in particular the least devel-
oped countries and small island developing states, 
are not marginalized. Second, participation can 
be  extended  to  include  perspectives  from  the 
private sector and civil society to ensure support 
for global collective action among states. Third, 
collective action is most effective if it is inclusive, 
with decisions being made in representative insti-
tutions, not in ad hoc groupings of countries like 
the Group of 20 or in selective meetings where 
decisionmaking lacks transparency. Finally, great-
er coordination and cooperation among global 
governance institutions in different issue areas 
can reduce spillovers and better align goals.

This  Report  emphasizes  the  potential  of 
collective action to restructure global systems 
in a way that instils new capabilities in people 
rather  than  generating  new  vulnerabilities 
and adding to existing insecurity. Widespread 
cooperation  among  states,  international  in-
stitutions, the private sector and civil society 
is  possible.  Global  governance  systems  have 
to  break  the  link  between  globalization  and 
vulnerability—and this is more likely to occur 
when global policies and decisionmaking are 
inclusive, accountable and coordinated.

Key messages

This  Report  seeks  to  improve  understand-
ing  and  raise  awareness  about  how  reducing 

Governance systems are 
not only short on offering 
protections and enhancing 
capabilities; in some 
cases they are producing 
new vulnerabilities

Overview    |    9

The intersecting or 
overlapping vulnerabilities 
arising from economic, 
environmental, physical, 
health and other 
insecurities magnify 
the adverse impact on 
freedoms and functions

vulnerability and building resilience are essen-
tial  for  sustainable  human  development.  In 
doing so, it makes the following central points:

•  Vulnerability threatens human development—
and  unless  it  is  systematically  addressed,  by 
changing  policies  and  social  norms,  progress 
will be neither equitable nor sustainable.

While almost all countries have improved 
their levels of human development over the 
past few decades, recent gains have not been 
smooth. Progress has taken place in a context 
of  growing  uncertainty  due  to  deeper  and 
more-frequent shocks. From greater financial 
instability to high and volatile commodity 
prices,  from  recurrent  natural  disasters  to 
widespread social and political discontent, 
human development achievements are more 
exposed to adverse events.

Hundreds  of  millions  of  poor,  margin-
alized  or  otherwise  disadvantaged  people 
remain  unusually  vulnerable  to  economic 
shocks,  rights  violations,  natural  disasters, 
disease, conflict and environmental hazards. 
If not systematically identified and reduced, 
these chronic vulnerabilities could jeopard-
ize the sustainability of human development 
progress for decades to come. Shocks from 
multiple causes are inevitable and often un-
predictable, but human vulnerability can be 
reduced with more-responsive states, better 
public policies and changes in social norms.

•  Life cycle vulnerability, structural vulnerabili-
ty and insecure lives are fundamental sources of 
persistent deprivation—and must be addressed 
for human development to be secured and for 
progress to be sustained.

Different aspects of vulnerability can over-
lap and reinforce persistent deprivations. Life 
cycle vulnerability—from infancy through 
youth,  adulthood  and  old  age—can  affect 
the formation of life capabilities. Inadequate 
investments in sensitive phases of life create 
long-term  vulnerability.  Similarly,  vulner-
ability embedded in social contexts gener-
ates  discriminatory  behaviours  and  creates 
structural barriers for people and groups to 
exercise their rights and choices, perpetuat-
ing their deprivations. And fear for physical 
security in daily life has deeper ramifications 
for securing or sustaining progress.

10    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

The intersecting or overlapping vulnerabil-
ities arising from economic, environmental, 
physical, health and other insecurities mag-
nify  the  adverse  impact  on  freedoms  and 
functions. This makes it much more difficult 
for individuals and societies to recover from 
shocks. Recovery pathways and public pol-
icies must incorporate measures that build 
resilience and stabilizers to respond to and 
cope with future challenges.

•  Policy responses to vulnerability should prevent 
threats, promote capabilities and protect peo-
ple, especially the most vulnerable.

Most vulnerabilities remain persistent—a 
consequence  of  social  marginalization,  in-
sufficient  public  services  and  other  policy 
failures. Persistent vulnerability reflects deep 
deficiencies  in  public  policies  and  institu-
tions,  societal  norms  and  the  provision  of 
public services, including past and present 
discrimination against groups based on eth-
nicity, religion, gender and other identities. 
It also reveals state and societal inability or 
unwillingness to anticipate and protect vul-
nerable people against severe external shocks, 
many of them predictable in kind, if not in 
precise timing or impact.

Building resilience thus requires boosting 
the  capacity  of  individuals,  societies  and 
countries to respond to setbacks. People with 
insufficient core capabilities, as in education 
and  health,  are  less  able  to  exercise  their 
agency to live lives they value. Further, their 
choices may be restricted or held back by so-
cial barriers and other exclusionary practices, 
which can further embed social prejudice in 
public institutions and policies. Responsive 
institutions and effective policy interventions 
can create a sustainable dynamic to bolster 
individual capabilities and social conditions 
that strengthen human agency—making in-
dividuals and societies more resilient.

•  Everyone should have the right to education, 
health care and other basic services. Putting 
this  principle  of  universalism  into  practice 
will require dedicated attention and resources, 
particularly for the poor and other vulnerable 
groups.

Universalism should guide all aspects of 
national policies—to ensure that all groups 

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 

H.E. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia

The Post-2015 Agenda: Addressing vulnerabilities and building resilience

Two  years  from  the  2015  deadline,  Africa’s  progress  on  the  Millennium 
Development Goals remains uneven. Remarkable advances have been made 
in some areas, such as net primary school enrollment, gender parity in pri-
mary  education,  the  representation  of  women  in  decision-making,  some 
reduction in poverty, immunization coverage, and stemming the spread of 
HIV/AIDS.

Notwithstanding  this  progress,  there  is  ample  room  for  more  good 
news. Some areas have been neglected when they should have been put up-
front, for example malaria, the number one killer of children in sub-Saharan 
Africa and many other places in the world. Additionally, the goal for school 
enrollment did not take into account the need for quality education.

Over the past decade, Africa has made great strides in instituting po-
litical and economic reforms that are starting to bear fruits. These future 
successes  are,  however,  vulnerable  to  many  factors  that  are  not  within 
Africa’s  control  but  can  be  redressed  through  collective  engagement  and 
a new international development partnership. Although some parts of the 
continent still grapple with political instability, this is now a rarity, no longer 
the rule. The new global development agenda that will be agreed upon in 
2015 presents an opportunity for Africa to take stock of these challenges 
and our position in the world.

Economic transformation is a particular priority on my continent. It will 
help us to reduce our vulnerability to social, economic and environmental 
shocks, but it is not a priority for Africa alone. The recent economic melt-
down that plunged the world into recession, the widening gap between rich 
and poor with its attending inequalities that fuel social unrest, and the rising 

scourge of youth unemployment, as well as global environmental threats 
created by negative economic policies, clearly show that transformation is 
needed everywhere, not just in Africa.

When the UN High-Level Panel on Post-2015 met in Liberia in January 
2013, under the general theme of “economic transformation,” we identified 
six key areas which we believed must form part of a transformative agenda: 
the pursuit of inclusive growth that reduces inequalities; the promotion of 
economic  diversification  and  value  addition;  the  creation  of  a  stable,  en-
abling environment for the private sector and free enterprise to flourish; the 
necessity to change our production and consumption patterns to protect our 
ecosystems; the creation and strengthening of fair and transparent institu-
tions; and, finally, the necessity to create equal opportunities for all.

There are opportunities today that can make the transformation not only 
plausible but very affordable. We live in an era where rapid technological 
change, especially empowered by the information revolution, is deepening 
the integration of the world economy, changing the structure of jobs, offer-
ing new economic opportunities for all countries, facilitating green growth 
and  enabling  many  low-income  countries  to  leapfrog  through  economic 
transformation.

We have the means and capacities to effect changes. The current global 
consultations on a Post-2015 Development Agenda bode well for a world 
with a common vision, with opportunities and shared responsibilities. Africa 
will contribute to develop a world where no one is left behind, where all 
have equal opportunity to prosper, and a world where we show respect for 
our environment.

and  sections  in  society  have  equality  of 
opportunity.  This  entails  differential  and 
targeted treatment for unequal or historically 
disadvantaged sections by providing greater 
proportional  resources  and  services  to  the 
poor,  the  excluded  and  the  marginalized 
to  enhance  everyone’s  capabilities  and  life 
choices.

Universalism is a powerful way of directly 
addressing the uncertain nature of vulnera-
bility. If social policies have a universal aim, 
not only do they protect those who currently 
experience poverty, poor health or a bout of 
unemployment, but they also protect indi-
viduals and households who are doing well 
but may find themselves struggling if things 
go wrong. Further, they secure certain basic 
core capabilities of future generations.

•  Strong universal social protection not only im-
proves individual resilience—it can also bolster 
the resilience of the economy as a whole.

Nearly all countries at any stage of devel-
opment can provide a basic floor of social 

protection.  They  can  progressively  expand 
to higher levels of social protection as fiscal 
space allows. A lower income country might 
start  with  basic  education  and  health  care 
and  later  expand  to  offer  cash  transfers  or 
basic  labour  protection.  A  higher  income 
country with already well established basic 
education, health care and conditional cash 
transfer programmes might expand eligibility 
for unemployment insurance to traditionally 
excluded  populations,  such  as  agricultural 
or domestic workers, or expand family leave 
policies for new parents to include fathers.

•  Full employment should be a policy goal for 

societies at all levels of development.

When employment is either unattainable 
or with very low rewards, it is a major source 
of  vulnerability  with  lasting  repercussions 
for  individuals  and  for  their  families  and 
communities.  It  is  time  to  recognize  that 
the  opportunity  to  have  a  decent  job  is  a 
fundamental aspect of building human capa-
bilities—and, equally, to see full employment 

Overview    |    11

Providing meaningful 
employment opportunities 
to all adult job-seekers 
should be embraced as 
a universal goal, just as 
education or health care

as  smart,  effective  social  policy.  Providing 
meaningful  employment  opportunities  to 
all adult job-seekers should be embraced as 
a universal goal, just as education or health 
care. Full employment should be an agreed 
societal goal, not simply as a matter of social 
justice and economic productivity, but as an 
essential element of social cohesion and basic 
human dignity.

Decent work that pays reasonable wages, 
involves formal contracts preventing abrupt 
dismissals and provides entitlements to social 
security  can  enormously  reduce  employee 
vulnerability, although less so in recessions. 
Reducing employment vulnerability is then 
hugely  important  from  the  perspective  of 
reducing human vulnerability in general. Yet 
this is clearly difficult to do. The importance 
of realizing decent and full employment has 
long  been  recognized,  but  large-scale  un-
employment and underemployment contin-
ue in most countries.

•  The effects of crises, when they occur, can be less-
ened through preparedness and recovery efforts 
that can also leave societies more resilient.

Sudden onset of hazards and crises, from 
natural  disasters  to  violent  conflicts,  often 
occur with destructive consequences for hu-
man development progress. Building capaci-
ties in preparedness and recovery can enable 
communities to withstand these shocks with 
less loss of life and resources and can support 
faster recoveries. Efforts to build social cohe-
sion in conflict areas can lead to long-term 
reductions in the risk of conflict, while early 
warning systems and responsive institutions 
lessen the impacts of natural disasters.

•  Vulnerabilities are increasingly global in their 
origin and impact, requiring collective action 
and better international governance.

Pollution,  natural  disasters,  conflicts, 
climate change and economic crises do not 
respect political boundaries and cannot be 
managed  by  national  governments  alone. 
Today’s  fragmented  global  institutions  are 
neither accountable enough nor fast enough 
to address pressing global challenges. Better 
coordination and perhaps better institutions 
are needed to limit transnational shocks and 
urgently  respond  to  our  changing  climate 
as an integral part of the post-2015 agenda. 
Stronger, responsive and more-representative 
global  governance  is  essential  for  more- 
effective  global  action.  Much  can  be  done 
to improve global and national responses to 
crises, to prevent such crises from occurring 
and to reduce their magnitude.

•  A global effort is needed to ensure that globali-
zation  advances  and  protects  human  devel-
opment—national  measures  are  more  easily 
enacted when global commitments are in place 
and global support is available.

An  international  consensus  on  universal 
social protection would open national policy 
space for better services for all people, reduc-
ing the risk of a global ‘race to the bottom’. 
Elements of a global social contract would 
recognize the rights of all people to educa-
tion, health care, decent jobs and a voice in 
their  own  future.  The  global  agenda  must 
seek to address vulnerability and strengthen 
resilience  comprehensively.  Whether  they 
are pursued in defining new sustainable de-
velopment goals or in the broader post-2015 
discussions, a formal international commit-
ment would help ensure universal action.

12    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

“Human rights are violated not 
only by terrorism, repression 
or assassination, but also by 
unfair economic structures that 
create huge inequalities.”

Pope Francis I

1.
Vulnerability and human development

“Human development is a process of enlarging people’s choices. The most critical ones are to lead a long and healthy life, 
—Human Development Report 19901
to be educated and to enjoy a decent standard of living.” 

“Vulnerability is not the same as poverty. It means not lack or want but defencelessness, insecurity and exposure to risks, 
—Robert Chambers2
shocks and stress.” 

On Sunday, 26 December 2004, an earthquake 
off Sumatra triggered one of the worst disasters 
in recorded history. Some 230,000 people in 
14 countries died, with incalculable damage to 
livelihoods and communities. Almost a decade 
later many people continue to struggle to re-
gain their lives.

Adverse  shocks  can  come  from  many  di-
rections.  Environmental  changes  can  lead  to 
natural disasters such as floods and droughts. 
Economic shocks can lead to lost jobs through 
recession or worsening terms of trade. Health 
shocks can lead to reduced incomes—as well as 
rising medical expenses—for households. Wars 
and civil conflict can have pervasive negative 
impacts on human development.

One way to reduce vulnerability is to prevent 
disasters.  The  way  the  world  tackles  climate 
change or organizes global financial systems can 
be critically important for reducing the frequen-
cy and magnitude of shocks. When prevention 
is not possible, the effects can be mitigated by 
building preparedness and response capabili-
ties. Natural disasters cannot be prevented, but 
environmental systems and seismic activity can 
be monitored, and early warning systems can 
save  lives.  When  the  Eyjafjallajökull  volcano 
erupted in Iceland in 2010, there was no loss 
of life: Ongoing monitoring of seismic activity 
provided advance warning, rescue services and 
emergency plans were put into effect to evac-
uate  the  local  population  overnight  and  the 
airspace in some 20 countries was closed. And 
when cyclone Phailin struck India in October 
2013, the death toll was less than 50, thanks to 
global storm tracking systems and the advance 
evacuation  of  a  million  people;  by  contrast, 
there were 10,000 deaths the last time a similar 
super cyclone struck the area in 1999.3

Vulnerability  can  also  be  reduced  by 
building  resilience  among  both  people  and 

communities.  Some  resilience  building  is 
threat-specific, such as changing land use laws 
to prevent people from living in flood-prone 
areas.  Other  resilience  building  is  more  sys-
temic and longer term, endowing people and 
societies with the skills to weather and recover 
from  many  different  shocks.  Social  cohesion 
can profoundly affect many aspects of life, from 
disaster recovery to the quality of government. 
Education and investment, especially for the 
very young, can equip people to adapt when 
a financial crisis or natural disaster takes away 
their livelihood. And social protection and re-
sponsive institutions can ensure that those who 
need help receive it fairly, thus lessening the 
adverse impacts that might flow on to future 
generations.

Human vulnerability is about the prospect of 
eroding human development achievements and 
their sustainability. A person (or community 
or country) is vulnerable when there is a high 
risk  of  future  deterioration  in  circumstances 
and achievements. Of course, we all live in an 
uncertain world, and it may never be possible 
to reduce such risks to zero. Everyone, rich or 
poor,  is  vulnerable  to  some  extent.  But  this 
Report  focuses  on  the  possibility  of  major 
deterioration  in  conditions,  which  may  take 
people down to unacceptably bad conditions—
poverty and destitution—or worsen the con-
ditions of those already suffering low human 
development.

How far shocks translate into reduced hu-
man development depends on people’s ability 
to cope with shocks as well as on the assistance 
that they may receive. People’s ability to cope 
and adjust is referred to here as human resilience 
(box  1.1).  Most  people  are  resilient  to  some 
degree—they can adjust to minor shocks, for 
example. But how far they can adjust to large or 
persistent shocks without a major sacrifice and 

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    15

BOX 1.1

Towards human resilience: concepts and definitions

Resilience is used in different ways by different disciplines. In ecology and 
the natural sciences resilience was traditionally understood as a property 
that allows a system to recover its prior state after suffering a shock.1 The 
term has now come to be seen, not without some controversy, in more dy-
namic terms. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change defines re-
silience as the “ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, 
absorb, accommodate, or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a 
timely and efficient manner.”2 A related concept, social resilience, is defined 
as the capacity of individuals or groups to secure favourable outcomes under 
new circumstances and, if need be, by new means.3

Given its origin in the study of natural systems and engineering, resil-
ience,  as  traditionally  defined,  does  not  adequately  address  empowerment 
and human agency or the power-related connotations of vulnerability.4 A group 
or community may be resilient at the expense of another group.5 Assessments 
of the resilience of systems must take into account possible tradeoffs and 
asymmetries among different groups and individuals within the system.

A human development approach to resilience focuses on people and 
their interactions, where power and social position are important factors. 
Resilience  is  to  be  built  at  the  level  of  both  individuals  and  society—in 
terms of their individual capabilities and social competences.

Resilience also encourages a better understanding of systems, the in-
teraction of components and the feedback loops involved. It is important 
to consider the architecture and internal logic of systems, especially since 
some systems may themselves be sources of vulnerability.6 It can be also 
be useful to understand what happens when different system components 
interact and how their interaction can lead to unintended or unpredictable 
consequences.7 For example, a study of climate-related disasters would do 
well to include rural-urban and migration dynamics.

While most people are vulnerable to some extent, this Report focuses on 
those who are particularly vulnerable to severe deterioration in well-being 
and human development. How far shocks translate into reduced human de-
velopment depends on people’s ability to adjust and cope with shocks, and 
this ability of people to cope and adjust may be termed human resilience.

Vulnerability can be reduced by preventing shocks or by building re-
silience at the individual and community levels. Due to the constructs of 
society, some people face restricted choices and capabilities. Human resil-
ience is about removing the barriers that hold people back in their freedom 
to act. It is also about enabling the disadvantaged and excluded groups to 
express their concerns, to be heard and to be active agents in shaping their 
destinies.

Notes
1. Holling 1973; Miller and others 2010. 2. IPCC 2012, p. 2. 3. Hall and Lamont 2013. 4. Cannon and Muller-Mahn 2010. 5. Households and communities may sometimes strengthen their resilience only at the expense of their own 
well-being or self-esteem; see Béné and others (2012). 6. Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a. 7. Gallopín 2006.

loss of human development varies according to 
their circumstances. The required adjustment 
depends  on  the  nature  of  the  shock  and  the 
circumstances  of  those  affected.  Those  who 
are better placed and find it easier to adjust are 
more resilient.

This Report develops two basic propositions. 
One is that people’s vulnerability is influenced 
considerably  by  their  capabilities  and  social 
context.  The  other  is  that  failures  to  protect 
people against vulnerability are mostly a con-
sequence  of  inadequate  policies  and  poor  or 
dysfunctional  social  institutions.  And  while 
almost  anyone  can  be  vulnerable  to  some 
event or shock, this Report focuses on those 
particularly vulnerable to changes in personal 
circumstances and external shocks, especially 
from persistent or systematic threats to human 
development, such as climate change, violence 
and societal barriers that prevent people from 
exercising their full ability to act.

Two  central  theses  of  this  Report  are  that 
sustainably  enhancing  and  protecting  indi-
vidual  choices  and  capabilities  and  societal 
competences  are  essential  and  that  human 
development  strategies  and  policies  must 

16    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

consciously  aim  to  reduce  vulnerability  and 
build  resilience.  A  better  understanding  of 
vulnerability  and  resilience  from  a  multi-
dimensional human development perspective 
allows for a deeper analysis of the key factors 
and policies that explain why some individuals, 
communities or countries are more resilient to 
adverse events and respond better to them.

In this vein, this Report seeks to answer some 

critical questions:
•  Who are the most vulnerable? Which groups 

are inherently or structurally vulnerable?

•  How can vulnerability be reduced and hu-

man resilience increased?

•  Are there architectural or systemic issues to 
address,  particularly  at  the  global  level,  so 
that  human  development  progress  can  be 
more secure?

A human development perspective

This Report takes a human development per-
spective to vulnerability and goes beyond a nar-
row interpretation of vulnerability as exposure 
to risk. This viewpoint underlines the role of 

people’s capabilities in minimizing adverse con-
sequences from shocks and persistent threats. It 
also unearths important factors underlying vul-
nerability, such as exclusion and discrimination 
that  would  not  be  evident  from  a  risk-based 
approach alone. The structural causes under-
lying  vulnerability  are  key  to  understanding 
why some groups and people are systematically 
worse off when disaster strikes or even in lead-
ing secure lives, free from violent threats.

A  risk-based  approach  would  recommend 
policies  such  as  insurance  to  manage  risk. 
While these policies are important, a human 
development  approach  points  to  a  broader 
canvas  of  policies  that  build  the  strength  of 
individuals  and  societies—and  suggests  fun-
damental principles that can be followed and 
built into specific polices for reducing vulner-
ability and building resilience.

People  with  higher  human  development, 
notably with good health and education, are 
more resilient than those who are malnour-
ished, without education and thus in a weaker 
position to change their activity or location 
in reaction to adverse shocks. Owning assets 
enables people to protect their core capabili-
ties by using these assets when circumstances 
deteriorate. But the social context and power 
relations  have  a  large  bearing  on  people’s 
vulnerability. Minorities or people with dis-
abilities, for instance, even those healthy and 
educated, may feel vulnerable if they cannot 
express their concerns openly, if the political 
system does not take their voices seriously or if 
institutions do not serve them well. Similarly, 
the  nature  of  the  risks—especially  when 
persistent  or   systemic—matter  in  shaping 
specific vulnerabilities. Rising sea levels, for 
example, present a long-term risk to coastal 
communities.

To  protect  well-being  or  minimize  loss-
es  when  circumstances  change,  people  or 
households may make a range of adjustments, 
including changing their location, activity or 
spending, using their assets or borrowing. The 
set of choices available depends on a person’s 
capabilities, position in society and age as well 
as several other factors. Some groups, such as 
the poor and the near poor, may not have much 
savings or many assets to fall back on. When 
adversity strikes, they have to resort to harmful 
coping strategies such as cutting back on food 

or reducing spending on health or children’s 
education.4

Human resilience means that people can ex-
ercise their choices safely and freely—including 
being  confident  that  the  opportunities  they 
have today will not be lost tomorrow. While 
being less vulnerable often goes hand in hand 
with  being  more  resilient,  resilience  is  more 
than just a mirror of vulnerability. It may be 
possible to reduce vulnerability by lowering the 
incidence of shocks and threats. But society’s 
resilience may remain unaffected unless other 
measures  are  also  applied.  Active  policies  to 
build  community,  to  remove  barriers  to  in-
dividual expression and to strengthen norms 
to  help  others  in  need  all  might  be  needed 
to build resilience. A useful way to view this 
relationship is as going ‘from vulnerability to 
resilience’.

People’s vulnerability to particular shocks de-
pends not only on their own resilience but also 
on others’ treatment of those who suffer from 
adverse  events.  Institutions  that  can  provide 
support to those in adversity include a range of 
social and government institutions that may be 
local, national or international. Social institu-
tions are those in which people act collectively; 
they exclude profit-making market institutions 
and  the  state.5  Important  social  institutions 
include family networks (including global fam-
ily  networks),  community  organizations  and 
nongovernmental organizations. The strength 
of support from social institutions depends on 
prevalent norms—for instance, how far provid-
ing aid during adversity is regarded as a social 
obligation—and on their social competences 
or ability to provide support.6

A human development approach is incom-
plete unless it incorporates vulnerability and 
resilience in the analysis. Sustained progress in 
human development is a matter of expanding 
people’s  choices  and  keeping  those  choices 
secure.  The  world  has  experienced  progress 
in  human  development  for  some  time.  But 
increasingly this progress seems threatened by 
uncertainty  and  by  persistent  inequality  and 
climate  change.  Understanding  vulnerability 
and  resilience  in  their  fuller  sense  becomes 
necessary to define the policies and actions that 
can sustain progress.

This  was  recognized  in  the  1994  Human 
Development Report (HDR) on human security. 

A human development 
approach is incomplete 
unless it incorporates 
vulnerability and 
resilience in the analysis

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    17

The concepts of 
vulnerability and resilience 
add much to the human 
development approach 
by looking not just at 
achievements but also 
at risk and uncertainty

Human security was defined then as having two 
main aspects: “It means safety from the con-
stant threats of hunger, disease, crime and re-
pression. It also means protection from sudden 
and hurtful disruptions in the patterns of our 
daily lives—whether in our homes, in our jobs, 
in our communities or in our environment.”7

In  the  1994 HDR  and  in  the  later  Ogata 
and  Sen  Commission  on  Human  Security, 
doing  well  in  human  security  is  interpreted 
as implying both that a good level of human 
development  has  been  achieved  and  that 
people  are  relatively  secure  against  hazards 
arising from the economy, ill health, violence 
and environmental deterioration.8 This year’s 
Report, while closely aligned with the human 
security  approach,  puts  the  major  focus  on 
vulnerability—on the threats to achievement 
in human development and the ways to reduce 
them. This is a more direct way of handling 
such a complex issue, especially since the hu-
man security approach has been interpreted in 
a variety of ways since 1994. Some have con-
fined human security to security from physical 
assault for individuals,9 while others have used 
the term to embrace almost any aspect of de-
velopment.10  The  approach  to  vulnerability 
here  is  broader  than  the  first  interpretation 
but not as wide-ranging as the second. It en-
compasses vulnerability to any type of adverse 
event that could threaten people’s capabilities 
and choices.

A major motivation for this focus is the view 
that despite progress on human development 
in many countries and in many respects (chap-
ter  2),  vulnerability  for  many  people  is  high 
and perhaps rising. There has been an increase 
in  natural  hazards  associated  with  climate 
change and in economic fluctuations associated 
with globalization and the recession of the late 
2000s.  Employment  insecurity  in  particular 
seems to have been rising in both rich and poor 
countries,11  while  threats  from  global  health 
pandemics remain high. In some parts of the 
world—especially in the Middle East and parts 
of Africa—political violence is a major threat, 
while terrorist incidents have led to a global 
nervousness. Finding policies that will reduce 
such  threats,  increase  human  resilience  and 
protect people when they confront hazards is 
an urgent priority from a human development 
perspective.

The concepts of vulnerability and resilience 
add much to the human development approach 
by looking not just at achievements but also at 
risk  and  uncertainty.  Through  them,  we  can 
explore the potential downsides of any given 
level of human development and design poli-
cies to protect it and make progress more resil-
ient. Through a different lens, they emphasize 
sustainable  and  secure  human  development. 
When individuals face vulnerability and when 
their lives are persistently restricted in the wake 
of a shock, their capabilities may be harmed 
over the long term. And these worsened condi-
tions, particularly for children and women, can 
have intergenerational consequences.

Vulnerable people, 
vulnerable world

Vulnerability,  as  a  concept,  can  seem  overly 
broad and abstract. After all, most people and 
most  societies  at  different  levels  of  develop-
ment are vulnerable in many ways to adverse 
events  and  circumstances,  not  all  of  which 
can  be  anticipated  or  prevented.  Economic 
weaknesses undermine the social contract even 
in advanced industrialized societies today, and 
no country or community anywhere is immune 
to  the  long-term  effects  of  climate  change. 
But vulnerability as a concept can become less 
abstract when broken down into who is vul-
nerable, what are they vulnerable to and why 
(figure 1.1).

Who is vulnerable?

In  principle,  everyone  is  vulnerable  to  some 
adverse  event  or  circumstance,  but  some 
people are more vulnerable than others. One 
way  of  identifying  groups  who  are  vulnera-
ble to adverse shocks or events is to think of 
thresholds;  this  also  allows  for  some  degree 
of  measurement.  People  are  vulnerable  to 
poverty if they are “below or at risk of falling 
below a certain minimally acceptable threshold 
of  critical  choices  across  several  dimensions, 
such as health, education, material resources, 
security.”12 These thresholds are likely to vary 
according to the level of development.

Poverty  and  vulnerability  are  linked, 
multidimensional  and,  at  times,  mutually 

18    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 1.1

Who is vulnerable to what and why?

The poor, informal workers
socially excluded

Economic shocks,
health shocks

Limited
capabilities

Vulnerability

Women, people with
disabilities, migrants, 
minorities, children, 
the elderly, youth

Natural disasters, climate
change, industrial hazards

Whole communities,
regions

Conﬂict,
civil unrest

Location, position
in society, sensitive
periods in the life cycle

Low social cohesion, 
unresponsive institutions,
poor governance

Source: Human Development Report Office.

reinforcing.  But  they  are  not  synonymous. 
While vulnerability is generally an important 
aspect of being poor, being rich is not the same 
as  not  being  vulnerable.  Both  poverty  and 
vulnerability are dynamic. The rich may not be 
vulnerable all the time or throughout their lives 
just as some of the poor may not remain poor 
all the time.

But  the  poor  are  inherently  vulnerable 
because  they  lack  sufficient  core  capabilities 
to exercise their full agency. They suffer from 
many  deprivations.  They  not  only  lack  ade-
quate material assets, they tend to have poor 
education and health and to suffer deficiencies 
in other areas. Equally, their access to justice 
systems may be constrained.13 They tend to be 
intrinsically vulnerable.

The poor already fall below the critical pover-
ty threshold. If people are vulnerable when they 
face a high risk of falling below the threshold, 
the poor—already below it—are all vulnerable. 
This is true by definition, but it is more than a 
question of definition alone. Anyone lacking 
the essentials for a minimally acceptable life is 
truly vulnerable.

More than 2.2 billion people are vulnerable 
to  multidimensional  poverty,  including  al-
most 1.5 billion who are multidimensionally 
poor.14  Three-quarters  of  the  world’s  poor 
live in rural areas, where agricultural workers 
suffer the highest incidence of poverty, caught 
in  a  cauldron  of  low  productivity,  seasonal 

unemployment  and  low  wages.15  Globally, 
1.2 billion people (22 percent) live on less than 
$1.25  a  day.  Increasing  the  income  poverty 
line  to  $2.50  a  day  raises  the  global  income 
poverty rate to about 50 percent, or 2.7 billion 
people.16 Moving the poverty line in this way 
draws  in  a  large  number  of  people  who  are 
potentially vulnerable to poverty and reduced 
circumstances. In South Asia 44.4 percent of 
the  population,  around  730  million  people, 
live  on  $1.25−$2.50  a  day.17  Many  who  re-
cently joined the middle class could easily fall 
back  into  poverty  with  a  sudden  change  in 
circumstances.

Worldwide  the  proportion  of  the  income 
poor  and  the  multidimensionally  poor  has 
been declining, but this does not necessarily 
mean that their vulnerability has been reduced 
(chapter 3). Sizeable portions of the popula-
tion  are  close  to  the  poverty  threshold  (the 
“near  poor”),  and  such  a  clustering  implies 
that idiosyncratic or generalized shocks could 
easily push a large number of people back into 
poverty.

But vulnerability extends further. Ill health, 
job losses, limited access to material resources, 
economic downturns and unstable climate all 
add  to  people’s  vulnerability  and  economic 
insecurity,  especially  when  risk  mitigation 
arrangements  are  not  well  established  and 
social protection measures and health systems 
are not sufficiently robust or comprehensive. 

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    19

To what?Who?WhyWhy?With limited social 
protection, financial 
crises can quickly lead to 
profound social crises

According  to  the  International  Labour 
Organization (ILO), only a third of countries 
worldwide—with about 28 percent of the glob-
al population—provide comprehensive social 
protection for their citizens.18

With  limited  social  protection,  financial 
crises  can  quickly  lead  to  profound  social 
crises.  Indonesia’s  poverty  rate  shot  up  from 
11 percent to 37 percent during the Asian fi-
nancial crisis in the late 1990s.19 Similarly, the 
2007–2008 world financial crisis led to a sharp 
jump in the number of working poor. The ILO 
estimates  that  there  were  50  million  more 
working poor in 2011. Only 24 million of them 
climbed above the $1.25 income poverty line 
over 2007–2011, compared with 134 million 
between 2000 and 2007.20

Work is one of people’s main sources of se-
curity. Jobs provide and sustain livelihoods, but 
even more important to reducing vulnerability 
is access to decent jobs, with the requisite social 
protections. Several forces have come together 
to make finding decent jobs more difficult in 
the current environment. One is globalization, 
which  has  put  pressure  on  social  compacts, 
reducing some of the built-in national ‘shock 
absorbers’.21 Added to this is the strong belief 
in self-correcting markets, particularly flexible 
labour markets, and in macroeconomic poli-
cies that focus more on price stability than on 
full employment. When crises hit, rising un-
employment and limited or even absent social 
protections heighten economic insecurity and 
vulnerability.

Enhancing capabilities—in health, education 
and the command over resources—addresses 
vulnerability by empowering people to over-
come threats when and where they arise. But 
a higher level of capabilities alone may not be 
enough—women may feel insecure regardless 
of  their  education.  Nor  do  people  function 
alone—how  individuals  relate  to  each  other 
or in groups can determine how they protect 
people during crises. Whether restrictive norms 
and values hold back certain groups (such as 
women and minorities) or a lack of cohesion in 
society constrains collective action, both influ-
ence how people and communities respond to 
risk and threats.

There  is  an  intrinsic  issue  of  equity  here 
as  well—risks  are  generally  greater  for  the 
poor than for the rich. Poor people and poor 

countries  are  particularly  subject  to  vulner-
ability.  They  face  larger  shocks,  they  are  less 
adaptable and they receive less compensation 
(or none) when crises occur.

Vulnerability to what? 

What risks do people and societies face, and 
what  has  changed  in  recent  years  to  make 
people  feel  more  vulnerable  (box  1.2)? 
Analysts argue that some risks appear to be 
intensifying, especially those connected to the 
environment and climate change and to the 
growing connectivity among countries, which 
challenges  the  remit  of  national  policy.22 
With global warming, vulnerability becomes 
more acute as a result of climate instability, 
reflected  in  changing  weather  patterns  and 
the greater frequency and intensity of natural 
disasters. As the 2011 HDR highlights, these 
growing threats most affect poor people and 
poor communities: 98 percent of those killed 
and affected by natural disasters are from de-
veloping countries.23 By 2025 more than half 
the  people  in  developing  countries  may  be 
vulnerable to floods and storms.24 Moreover, 
the threats of environmental changes are be-
coming chronic—as with decades of drought 
in the Sahel.25 And environmental systems are 
becoming less resilient, as with the reduced 
regenerative value of forest fires in the United 
States.

Growing vulnerability and threats cut across 
borders.26 Natural, financial and other shocks 
in one country can have global reach, jeopard-
izing  development  progress  in  communities 
and countries around the world. International 
financial  instability,  regional  pandemics,  cli-
mate-related  disasters,  armed  conflicts  and 
failures  to  enforce  international  norms  and 
standards frequently have a direct bearing on 
individual capabilities and social competences 
across the world.

Transborder  vulnerabilities  are  not  new. 
Communities  and  individuals,  organizations 
and  firms  have  always  been  threatened  by 
disruptive external events such as natural and 
human-made disasters, economic booms and 
busts,  and  communicable  diseases.  But  most 
would  agree  that  the  connectivity  networks 
that  link  disparate  communities  have  never 
been greater than they are today. The result is 

20    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

BOX 1.2

Shocks and threats to human development

The threats to human development come from many different directions.1

Economic risks
Millions of households live uncertain and insecure lives, facing a constant 
threat of shocks to their income and well-being. Lacking private savings, 
financial  assets  and  sufficient  protection  through  national  policy,  these 
households are exposed to financial crises and natural disasters. Economic 
insecurity can be high in developing countries, where a large proportion of 
employment  is  in  the  informal  economy,  lacking  coverage  from  social  in-
surance. The informal sector accounts for 25−40 percent of annual output 
in developing countries in Africa and Asia.2 But economic vulnerability is 
not a problem in developing countries only. Due to the slow recovery from 
the global economic crisis, many people in rich countries continue to face 
tremendous insecurity. In 2014 unemployment is expected to be more than 
11 percent in France, around 12.5 percent in Italy and close to 28 percent 
in Greece and Spain, with even higher rates among young people—almost 
60 percent in Spain.3

Inequality
The 85 richest people in the world have the same wealth as the 3.5 billion 
poorest people.4 Between 1990 and 2010 income inequality in developing 
countries rose 11 percent.5 Inequality in health and education has been de-
clining  but  remains  high,  particularly  in  some  regions.  Sub-Sahara  Africa 
has the highest inequality in health outcomes, and South Asia has the high-
est inequality in education.6 Inequality is a considerable threat to human 
development, particularly because it reflects inequality of opportunity.7 And 
beyond a certain threshold, it harms growth, poverty reduction and the qual-
ity of social and political engagement.8 High inequality also diminishes a 
shared sense of purpose and facilitates rent-seeking by influential groups.9 
Rent-seeking, directed towards getting a larger share of the pie rather than 
increasing its size, distorts resource allocation and weakens the economy.10 
Inequality  impedes  future  human  development  by  reducing  investment  in 
basic services and public goods, lowering the progressivity of the tax system 
and raising the prospect of political instability.11 High inequality between 
groups is not only unjust but can also affect well-being and threaten politi-
cal stability. When specific groups are discriminated against, resources and 
power are not distributed based on merit, and talented people are held back. 
Such group inequality fuels dissatisfaction and grievances.12

Health risks
Health shocks can be some of the most destabilizing to households and so-
ciety, and hunger and malnutrition add to the high risks of poverty-related 
health threats. In India paying for health care has become a major source 
of impoverishment for the poor and even the middle class. Ill health of the 
main wage earner can push households into poverty and keep them there.13 

Recent data suggest that more than 40 percent of hospital patients either 
borrow money or sell assets and that close to 35 percent fall into poverty 
because of having to pay for their care.14 And making the lives of everyone 
vulnerable, not just the poor, are the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the accelerating 
spread of malaria and tuberculosis, the rapid spreads of dengue and swine 
flu, and the increasing threats of bioterrorism.

Environment and natural disasters
Global risks connected to the environment and climate change appear to be 
intensifying. Climate change will produce more droughts in arid regions and 
more-frequent  and  more-intense  hurricanes,  typhoons  and  other  extreme 
weather phenomena. It will also lead to rising sea levels, flooding, water 
scarcity in key regions, the migration or extinction of plant and animal spe-
cies,  and  the  acidification  of  oceans.15  Other  environmental  threats  arise 
from  extensive  industrialization  and  rapid  urbanization.  In  every  country 
there are growing problems of scarce water, poor sanitation, degraded land, 
eroded soil, polluted air and threats to biodiversity. Climate change is adding 
to the variability in farm incomes and insecurity in livelihoods that depend 
on ecosystems.16 For example, pastoral communities in Western Niger have 
experienced the effects of prolonged drought combined with overgrazing, 
leading  to  the  conversion  of  open  woodland  with  perennial  grasses  to  a 
mosaic of bare ground and unpalatable shrubs.17

Food insecurity
High volatility in the prices and availability of food are of particular concern, 
given  the  large  impact  on  poor  people  and  poor  countries.  Following  the 
2008  global  economic  crisis,  food  price  spikes  and  recession  slowed  the 
decline in the number of people worldwide suffering from hunger, which 
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimated at 
842 million people in 2012.18 This serves as powerful commentary on the 
inadequacy of global efforts to eliminate hunger and reduce deprivations 
more broadly.

Physical insecurity
Conflict and war inflict shocks on society and human security. Greatly threat-
ening lives and livelihoods are outbreaks of communal violence, attacks by 
terrorist groups, fights between street gangs and protests that turn violent. 
And criminal and domestic violence adds to personal insecurity. The World 
Health Organization estimates that about 4,400 people die every day be-
cause of intentional acts of violence.19 Of the estimated 1.6 million who died 
from violence in 2000, almost half were suicides, nearly a third homicides 
and a fifth war-related (most of them men). In some conflicts civilians are 
targeted and mutilated as a deliberate strategy to demoralize communities 
and destroy their social structures. Rape is often an expression of power and 
brutality against communities.20

Notes
1. For a comprehensive list and full coverage, see World Economic Forum (2014). 2. World Bank n.d. 3. OECD 2013d,f. 4. Fuentes-Nieva and Galasso 2014. 5. UNDP 2014. 6. HDRO data (see table 3 in Statistical annex). 7. This is 
inequality stemming from factors and circumstances beyond the scope of individual responsibility, such as race and socioeconomic background. See Roemer (1993) and Van de Gaer (1993). 8. UNDP 2014. 9. It is arguably also a 
result of that behaviour since rent-seeking redistributes resources from those at the bottom to those at the top. 10. Stiglitz 2012b. 11. Pineda and Rodríguez 2006b; Bénabou 2000; Alesina and others 1996. 12. Stewart, Brown 
and Mancini 2005. 13. Narayan and Petesch 2007. 14. Raman and Björkman 2000. 15. IPCC 2013. 16. UNDP 2011a, 2012a. 17. Sinclair and Fryxell 1985; Tshimpanga 2011. 18. FAO, IFAD and WFP 2013. 19. Krug and others 2002b. 
20. Krug and others 2002a.

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    21

A highly integrated 
global system has fuelled 
investment, trade and 
economic growth, but 
when global supply chains 
get disrupted, it affects far 
more people than those 
in the country where 
the shock originated

a deep and entirely new form of interdepend-
ence, with the actions of every human being 
having the potential to affect the life chances 
of others around the globe as well as those of 
future generations.

A highly integrated global system has fuelled 
investment, trade and economic growth, but 
shocks can be contagious. When global sup-
ply  chains  get  disrupted,  it  affects  far  more 
people  than  those  in  the  country  where  the 
shock originated, as the 2011 Tohoku earth-
quake  and  tsunami  show.  The  1997  Asian 
financial crisis had devastating consequences 
in the region and beyond. And the 2008 bank 
failures in New York shook financial capitals 
everywhere and led to a still lingering global 
recession  with  long-term  effects.  Countries 
and individuals are ill-equipped to respond to 
global shocks, and some of the policy respons-
es adopted so far appear to be generating new 
vulnerabilities.27

A  connected  world  also  creates  global  de-
mands for workers with different skills. Such 
job creation is positive and generally improves 
people’s  lives.  Today  there  are  more  than 
200  million  migrants  around  the  world,  a 
generally vulnerable community with limited 
formal  protections.  Many  migrants—if  not 
most—have precarious rights and face uncer-
tain  futures.  They  have  to  reconcile  the  loss 
of dignity, the disruption of families and even 
the potential for violence with the prospect of 
earning more.

People  around  the  world  are  getting  more 
connected, facilitated by social media. Thanks 
to  Facebook  and  Twitter,  newly  connected 
communities  trade  ideas  and  knowledge  in 
a way that could not have been imagined just 
a few years ago. But as the 2013 HDR noted, 
many people—especially the young, who are 
more  educated  and  social  media  savvy—are 
pressing for better, more-secure jobs and to be 
treated with dignity. They are challenging gov-
ernments everywhere to do better. A force for 
change clearly, but as the recent years testify, so-
cial and political change can produce unsettled 
conditions, even conflicts, if not well managed.

The why of vulnerability

This Report analyses systemic and overarching 
vulnerability that reduces individuals’ ability to 

22    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

manage their affairs and that weakens the foun-
dations of society. It looks at groups of people 
who are structurally the most vulnerable and 
tries to understand why that is so. It also devel-
ops the concept of life capabilities, examining 
how vulnerability changes over a life cycle. This 
life cycle approach points to sensitive transition 
periods of life when support is necessary and 
assesses how vulnerabilities may interact and 
compound as people age.

Structural vulnerability is rooted in people’s 
position  in  society—their  gender,  ethnicity, 
race, job type or social status—and evolves and 
persists over long periods. A fuller understand-
ing of such vulnerability implies that people 
who are otherwise endowed with equal capa-
bilities may still face differing barriers based on 
who they are, where they live or what they do.
The poor are one such structurally vulner-
able group. But poor people are not the only 
group  that  can  be  categorized  in  this  way. 
Political and economic discrimination exists in 
countries across different levels of the Human 
Development  Index.  Minority  and  socially 
excluded  groups  experience  high  horizontal 
inequality  and  often  suffer  discrimination 
in  access  to  jobs,  justice  and  services.28  The 
Minorities at Risk Project identifies more than 
283 minority groups in more than 90 countries 
who  suffer  varying  degrees  of  political  and 
economic exclusion, ranging from neglect to 
repression.29 Indigenous peoples in particular 
experience weak protection of their property 
rights,30 exposing them to risk of expropriation 
and exploitation.

People experience many vulnerabilities from 
economic, environmental, physical, health and 
other insecurities. Overlapping structural vul-
nerabilities can magnify the adverse impact on 
freedoms and functioning quite substantially. 
Take older people. With ageing comes a higher 
probability of being disabled. Worldwide, more 
than 46 percent of people ages 60 and older 
live  with  a  disability.31  When  vulnerabilities 
overlap, individuals find it much more difficult 
to  recover  from  shocks  to  their  lives—or  to 
convert  new  opportunities  into  capabilities. 
Poor  households  in  particular  express  fears 
about losing or not finding a job, about their 
children’s falling sick, about not being able to 
send their children to school and about facing 
a loss of dignity.

Such  vulnerability  results  in  widespread 
and persistent disparities in the capabilities of 
excluded groups and in the indicators of their 
well-being.  For  instance,  while  indigenous 
peoples make up about 5 percent of the world’s 
population, they account for 15 percent of the 
world’s poor and 33 percent of the world’s ex-
treme rural poor.32 And in most regions politi-
cal exclusion restricts women’s voice and ability 
to shape the laws and policies that affect their 
lives. Only in Cuba and Rwanda does the share 
of women in parliament match their share in 
the population.33

These  vulnerabilities  are  not  evenly  dis-
tributed across the life cycle. They are espe-
cially acute from infancy to early childhood, 
when susceptibility to disease, social disrup-
tion and lapses in learning and nurturing is 
greatest. Quality health care and intellectual 
stimulation  early  on  can  set  a  child  on  a 
higher  life  path  to  advancing  human  capa-
bilities. Adolescence presents opportunities 
and vulnerability in the social and education 
spheres  and  in  physical  and  psychological 
health.  The  elderly  depend  on  caregivers, 
accessible public services and often econom-
ic assistance. The concept of life cycle or life 
capabilities  captures  these  key  transitions 
and what they imply for policies to reduce 
vulnerabilities.

Choices and capabilities

Vulnerability  reflects  threats  to  choices  and 
capabilities.  If  human  development  is  about 
widening choices, human vulnerability stems 
quintessentially from a restriction of the choic-
es  critical  to  human  development—choices 
for health, education, command over material 
resources and personal security.

Individuals  tend  to  feel  more  vulnerable 
when they have few and less certain options. 
Women  who  are  economically  independent 
tend  to  be  less  vulnerable  than  those  who 
depend  on  others  for  sustenance.  Similarly, 
illiterate and unskilled workers are more vul-
nerable  than  well  educated  people  because 
they have fewer work options. Deeply indebted 
households are likely to be more vulnerable to 
exploitation and less able to protect themselves 
in adversity.

Choices depend on capabilities. An individ-
ual’s capabilities—all the things a person can 
do or be—determine the choices a person can 
make.  People  are  vulnerable  when  they  lack 
sufficient core capabilities, since this severely 
restricts their agency and prevents them from 
doing things they value or coping with threats.
Vulnerability is multifaceted and dynamic. 
An exclusive focus on economic vulnerability, 
defined narrowly as low and irregular earnings, 
is not enough. Viewing human vulnerability in 
the space of capabilities, choices and freedoms 
makes it possible to analyse the full range of 
vulnerabilities.  Income  deprivation  is  clearly 
not the only source of vulnerability. A person 
with  high  income  but  no  opportunity  to 
participate politically is not poor in the usual 
sense but may be highly vulnerable to discrim-
ination and neglect. Equally, a well-off person 
can be vulnerable to violent attack, but having 
resources can reduce that person’s vulnerability, 
since  richer  people  can  better  protect  them-
selves against many adversities.

Unemployed people entitled to receive social 
security  or  unemployment  benefits  may  be 
less vulnerable to the loss of income, but un-
employment has other serious effects on their 
lives. There is plenty of evidence that the value 
of a job far exceeds the wages received,34 so un-
employment reaches beyond the loss of income. 
Its effects include psychological harm (such as a 
loss of work motivation and self-confidence), 
the attrition of skills, increases in ailments and 
illnesses (and even death), disruptions in family 
relations and social life, and social exclusion.35

Viewing  vulnerability  in  the  context  of 
capabilities and choices focuses attention on 
the  important  relationship  among  human 
vulnerability,  personal  differences,  environ-
mental diversities, social variations, relational 
perspectives and resource distributions within 
households.  Vulnerability  may  depend  on  a 
person’s age, gender, social roles, location, epi-
demiological atmosphere and other variations 
over which there is little or no control.36

Age and disability in particular are impor-
tant facets of vulnerability. Children tend to 
be  intrinsically  more  vulnerable  than  others. 
During  a  stampede,  flood  or  hurricane  they 
are more vulnerable to injury and death than 
adults  are.  Similarly,  older  people  and  those 
with disabilities living in high-rise apartments 

If human development is 
about widening choices, 
human vulnerability 
stems quintessentially 
from a restriction of 
the choices critical to 
human development

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    23

are more vulnerable in the event of a building 
fire than adults and young people who can run 
down the stairs. Young people are more vul-
nerable to high-risk behaviours—for example, 
by falling prey to enticing advertisements that 
promote cigarettes and alcohol.

Even if individuals have a similar income or 
education, their vulnerability will depend on 
whether they can participate in society equal-
ly, mediated by race, religion or ethnicity. The 
quality  of  institutions  therefore  influences 
vulnerability  and  the  ability  to  cope  with 
crises.

Both  real  and  perceived  threats  affect  be-
haviour. Fear of violent assault is of particular 
concern to women everywhere. The term bodily 
integrity gives concrete meaning to this vulner-
ability.37 Witness the brutal rape in Delhi that 
grabbed  headlines  worldwide  in  2012  and 
highlighted what women in many societies fear 
in their daily lives. Being educated or having a 
high income is not enough to overcome such a 
threat to bodily integrity.

Perhaps no other aspect of human security 
is  so  vital  to  people  as  their  security  from 
physical  violence,  which  can  derail  the  per-
ceived value of human progress. Even in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, with high human 
development, many people fear that progress 
is being threatened by rising levels of homi-
cides and other violent crime. In large parts of 
West and Central Africa armed conflict and 
lawlessness threaten to reverse human devel-
opment gains, with long-term repercussions 
for national progress.

The presence and threat of violence are more 
likely to exist in the lives of the poor and the 
socially  excluded,  more  likely  to  affect  the 
choices  and  freedoms  of  women  and  more 
likely to touch those who have fewer resources 
and capabilities to settle disputes through ne-
gotiations. Violence is an exercise of power to 
restrict choices and freedoms through physical 
harm and threats. It is also a means to enforce 
social and cultural norms.38

Another  key  security  is  economic.  In 
today’s world large numbers of people face 
economic  insecurity  and  fear  not  making 
ends  meet.  In  developing  countries  half  to 
three-quarters  of  nonagricultural  employ-
ment  is  in  the  informal  economy.39  In  the 
absence of job security and social protection 

informal  workers  lead  unpredictable  and 
precarious  lives,  vulnerable  to  abuse  and 
corruption,  often  by  the  very  law  enforce-
ment  and  civic  authorities  who  should  be 
protecting them In developed countries the 
impacts of the global financial crisis linger. 
Greece, Ireland and Italy have yet to recover 
from their 2008 economic downturns.40 The 
United States may have recovered much of 
its GDP growth, but many people remain in 
long-term  unemployment.41  And  an  entire 
generation of young people face a future of 
high job and financial insecurity.42

Economic  security  and  personal  security 
are linked. People feel secure when they have 
jobs  with  sufficient  social  protections—and 
when  they  are  confident  about  the  future. 
Full employment reduces crime and increases 
well-being  generally.43  By  contrast,  high  un-
employment  fuels  uncertainty  and  inflicts  a 
sense  of  hopelessness.  Equally,  long-standing 
unequal treatment and denials of rights feed 
into deep discrimination, and at times groups 
or  communities  seek  to  redress  long-estab-
lished  inequities  through  violent  means.  In 
India estimates range from a tenth to a third 
of districts having insurrection movements or 
armed struggles in one form or the other by 
such dissident groups as the Naxalites and oth-
er Maoist groups.44 Horizontal inequality and 
unmet basic rights are often the causes of group 
violence.45

Policies and collective action

A core aspect of human development is having 
the freedom to live a life that one values, to 
manage one’s affairs adequately. Higher capabil-
ities, particularly in education, advance human 
agency—people’s capacity to make choices. It 
is a type of freedom—the freedom to act. But 
higher capabilities may not be enough. To have 
full agency, people also need to be free of social, 
institutional and other constraints that inhibit 
their  ability  to  act.  While  empowerment  is 
quintessentially individual, a useful analogy can 
also be drawn for societies. If social cohesion is 
not strong and there is ethnic and other frag-
mentation, a society’s capacity for collective ac-
tion is much reduced in responding to adverse 
events.

Perhaps no other aspect 
of human security is so 
vital to people as their 
security from physical 
violence, which can 
derail the perceived value 
of human progress

24    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

As highlighted earlier, this Report is about 
tackling  deep,  systemic  vulnerability  and  ex-
amining  policies  and  social  institutions  that 
empower  people  and  build  stronger  founda-
tions for more-resilient people and societies. It 
does not attempt to identify policy fixes that 
respond to specific risks or to overcome inad-
equacies of specific systems in managing risks, 
such as those dealing with natural disasters.

National governments have a central respon-
sibility  to  help  the  vulnerable,  especially  if 
other institutions fail to do so, but the extent to 
which they meet this responsibility varies con-
siderably. In socially cohesive societies, govern-
ments as well as social institutions tend to play 
a bigger role.46 Social institutions support vul-
nerable people where social cohesion is strong. 
In divided societies social institutions may be 
very supportive within a particular group but 
less so across groups. International support (of-
ficial and nonofficial) also helps, with finance 
and resources generally in response to major 
disasters, say, after tsunamis, hurricanes or wars.
National  policies  and  international  action 
are  interdependent.  Global  rules,  norms  and 
collective  action  at  times  influence  and  may 
determine the scope and efficacy of national re-
sponses to major crises. They may even produce 
new  vulnerabilities.  Although  an  integrated 
global system has brought many benefits—fuel-
ling investment, trade and economic growth—
it has also heightened vulnerability. Shocks in 
one  part  of  the  world—financial,  natural  or 
otherwise—can be readily transmitted to other 
parts of the world. There is, as yet, no analogy at 
the global level to the implicit social contracts 
in many developed and some developing coun-
tries that commit states to protecting people’s 
well-being, through social insurance and un-
employment benefits, when people’s economic 
and social circumstances are hurt.

Not  only  individuals  are  vulnerable. 
Communities, regions and countries can also 
be vulnerable. Some countries suffer more and 
have larger shocks (economic, environmental, 
political)  than  others,  and  some  countries 
are  more  resilient  than  others—better  able 
to  sustain  their  human  development  in  the 
face of such shocks. As with individuals, poor 
countries are generally more vulnerable than 
rich ones, suffer from larger shocks and are less 
resilient.  Compared  with  individuals  in  rich 

Public goods can 
make markets function 
better and deliver more 
sustainable outcomes, 
nationally and globally. 
So governments and 
social institutions have 
to regulate, monitor and 
complement the market

countries, individuals in poor countries tend to 
be more vulnerable, to have lower social com-
petences and to have governments with fewer 
resources to protect them from adversity.

Governments may be aware of these issues, 
but markets are blind to them. The operation 
of  markets  may  reduce  vulnerability—by 
increasing  production,  economic  growth 
and incomes—but they also clearly heighten 
vulnerability, by neglecting public goods and 
human  insecurity  in  the  quest  for  efficiency 
and profit. Markets must thus be regulated and 
supplemented if vulnerability is to be reduced. 
Public goods can make markets function better 
and deliver more sustainable outcomes, nation-
ally  and  globally.  So  governments  and  social 
institutions have to regulate, monitor and com-
plement the market.

Prevention, promotion and protection

Policies and related measures can help in ad-
dressing  the  big  issues  that  leave  people  and 
communities vulnerable in three broad areas: 
prevention, promotion and protection (figure 
1.2). The interest here is in policies that help 
across the three areas and make both individu-
als and societies more resilient. A commitment 
to universal education may help in two or all 
three areas by enhancing individual capabilities, 
contributing to social cohesion and reducing 
deprivations. In turn, expanding the space for 
diverse  voices  to  be  heard—and  reflected  in 
policies—enables individuals and societies to 
address their particular concerns and promote 
equal life chances, laying the base for secure and 
sustained development.

Preventing  shocks.  Policies  to  prevent  conflict, 
improve economic stability, reduce the impact 
of environmental shocks and halt the spread of 
disease can help reduce the incidence and size 
of shocks. Such national actions as having stable 
macro-policies, reducing disease through immu-
nizations and reducing the likelihood of floods 
can help prevent shocks. By contrast, reducing 
global volatility in capital flows or food prices and 
preventing large increases in carbon dioxide emis-
sions require collective global action. Without it, 
national polices may have limited value.

Prevention can anticipate future trends. Take 
the  rise  in  obesity.  On  current  trends  there 

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    25

FIGURE 1.2

Policies for reducing vulnerability and building resilience

Preventing shocks

Promoting capabilities

Protecting choices

Financial
regulation

Climate change
agreement

Early childhood
development

Macroeconomic
policies

Natural disaster
risk reduction

Social cohesion

Universal provision
of education and health 

Full
employment 

Promoting gender
and group equality

Responsive
institutions

Disaster
preparedness

Social
protection

Job
creation

Building social cohesion
and competencies

Tackling discrimination
by changing laws and norms

Crisis and conﬂict
recovery

Policies for

reducing vulnerability
and building resilience

Source: Human Development Report Office.

will be more than twice as many obese people 
worldwide  in  2030  as  in  2008—1.12  billion 
compared with 0.5 billion—greatly increasing 
vulnerability to ill health.47 Determined policy 
is needed now to prevent these numbers from 
rising sharply. Or take the life cycle approach 
to capability formation. The right investments 
at the right time, especially during the sensitive 
periods  of  early  childhood  and  adolescence, 
can reduce future vulnerability. In most cases 
prevention is also cost-effective. 

Another broad concern in preventing adverse 
shocks is high and rising inequality. If certain 
thresholds  are  crossed,  high  inequality  can 
lead to alienation, social unrest and vulnera-
bility across large sections of the population.48 
High inequality can lead to erosion of social 
competencies,  and  ‘tipping’  points’  may  be 
reached beyond which societal degeneration is 
inevitable.49

Promoting capabilities. Better social and eco-
nomic policies can advance core capabilities, 
which directly improve human resilience. So 
can reducing societal or other barriers to the 
ability of individuals and communities to act 
in the face of adversities (through better norms 
and laws and the protection of rights). The sec-
ond may require policies to reduce or overcome 

restrictions on opportunities and the exercise 
of choices, say, by eliminating discrimination, 
improving  gender  equality  and  giving  rights 
to immigrants (chapter 4). Of course, specific 
policies to address different vulnerabilities will 
always be important, but the greater interest 
here  is  in  foundational  policies  that  reduce 
vulnerabilities across society.

Protecting choices. Policies may seek to prevent 
shocks and make individuals and societies more 
resilient.  But  adverse  events—human-made 
or  otherwise—will  still  occur.  Some  people, 
unable  to  cope  with  shocks,  will  need  help. 
Economic  downturns  and  the  pressures  of 
globalization, even if well managed, will still 
create unemployment. The sudden death of the 
main breadwinner makes even well endowed 
households  immediately  vulnerable.  Policy 
responses may involve health insurance, social 
protection and active labour and job creation 
programmes.  Being  supported  by  the  house-
hold or community also protects choices and 
overall well-being.

Principles underlying policies

Drawing on ideas governing human develop-
ment and the promotion of equal life chances, 

26    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Equal consideration for 
all could demand unequal 
treatment in favour of 
the disadvantaged

we advance four guiding principles for design-
ing and implementing policies to reduce vul-
nerability and enhance resilience: embracing 
universalism, putting people first, committing 
to collective action and coordinating states and 
social  institutions.  Taking  into  account  that 
a  variety  of  approaches  and  perspectives  are 
needed to reduce vulnerability, depending on 
the types of adverse events people face, these 
principles  can  move  development  in  a  more 
sustainable and resilient direction.

Embracing  universalism.  All  individuals  are 
equally valuable and entitled to protection and 
support. So there has to be a greater recognition 
that those most exposed to risks and threats, 
children or people living with disabilities, may 
require additional support to ensure that their 
life chances are equal to others’. Universalism 
may thus require unequal entitlements and at-
tention. Equal consideration for all could thus 
demand  unequal  treatment  in  favour  of  the 
disadvantaged.50

The basic idea of human development is pro-
moting equal life chances for all, based on the 
Kantian principle that all people are of equal 
worth,51 as enshrined in the UN Charter. All 
humans  need  to  be  empowered  to  live  lives 
they value. Both economic and social policies 
influence  people’s  life  chances  and  capabili-
ties. Pursuing the broader goals of equity and 
justice  reinforces  social  competences  and 
deepens social cohesion. How far policies and 
responsive systems of governance succeed in 
advancing the prospects of most members of 
society will determine whether social solidar-
ity is enhanced and fragmentation and stigma 
can be avoided.

Putting  people  first.  Reducing  vulnerabilities 
calls for renewing the core message of human 
development as ‘putting people first’—a mes-
sage promoted consistently in all HDRs since 
the first in 1990. All public policies, especially 
macroeconomic ones, must be seen as means to 
an end, not as ends in themselves. Policymakers 
must  ask  some  basic  questions.  Is  economic 
growth improving the lives of people in areas 
that really matter—from health, education and 
income to basic human security and personal 
freedoms? Are people feeling more vulnerable? 
Are some people being left behind? And, if so, 

who are they, and how can such vulnerabilities 
and inequities be best addressed?

The  notion  of  putting  people  first  is  not 
just  about  people-centred  policies.  It  is  also 
about  policies  that  people  influence,  so  all 
members of society have full rights as citizens 
and  have  a  voice  that  is  heard  in  developing 
policies. Reducing vulnerability requires that 
the voice of the disadvantaged be heard clear-
ly. Empowering all citizens is a powerful tool 
for reducing risks. As Amartya Sen observed, 
“Famines are easy to prevent if there is a serious 
effort to do so, and a democratic government, 
facing elections and criticisms from opposition 
parties  and  independent  newspapers,  cannot 
help but make such an effort. Not surprisingly, 
while India continued to have famines under 
British  rule  up  to  independence,  .  .  .[with  a 
democratic  government  after  independence] 
they disappeared.”52

Putting  people  first  has  implications  for 
policies and measures: The two are inextricably 
linked because “what we measure affects what 
we  do;  and  if  our  measurements  are  flawed, 
decisions  may  be  distorted.”53  As  all  HDRs 
have argued, focusing narrowly on GDP and 
its growth is misleading. Economic growth is 
important, not for itself but for what it enables 
a country and people to do with the resources 
generated. Growth that does not generate suffi-
cient jobs—jobless growth—cannot be treated 
on  a  par  with  growth  that  does.54  Jobs  are  a 
source of dignity and self-worth. Higher quali-
ty or decent jobs contribute to social cohesion 
and political stability.55 For example, austerity 
in Europe is severely straining social structures, 
with larger burdens borne by the young and the 
old,56 even after conceding the need to reduce 
fiscal deficits.

The  Human  Development  Index—a  com-
posite  measure  of  income,  education  and 
health—was presented in 1990 as an alterna-
tive to GDP. Its widespread adoption reflects 
countries’ desire to understand whether, how 
and why people are doing better. Since its in-
troduction, human development measures of 
inequality, gender and poverty have been added 
to the arsenal.

All  these  measures  assess  achievement  in 
human development, but they do not incor-
porate measures of vulnerability. This requires 
looking beyond achievements to hazards and 

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    27

fluctuations, especially those affecting the more 
deprived groups such as the poor and the near 
poor (box 1.3). This Report does not propose 
a new measure of human vulnerability. Policies 
to reduce vulnerability require going beyond 

averages  to  gauge  how  secure  the  benefits 
are and how well they are distributed and to 
measure how poverty and deprivation are de-
clining, whether there are enough decent jobs 
and whether social protections are adequate to 

BOX 1.3

Measuring vulnerability

The past 40 years have seen considerable work on measuring vulnerability. 
Researchers have proposed measuring several types of vulnerability, many 
covered in this Report. Some work has focused on specific vulnerabilities: to 
natural disasters, to income poverty or to food price volatility. Others take 
a broader systemic approach to assess the vulnerability of an economy or 
environment to shocks. But little has been done to assess the vulnerability 
and sustainability of human development achievements.

Much of the early work on vulnerability focused on natural disasters in 
the 1970s. A landmark study showed that the incidence of natural disasters 
and fatalities was increasing and that the burden of death fell disproportion-
ately on developing countries.1 One of the authors developed the concept 
of vulnerability as both external (exposure to risks) and internal (people’s 
capacity to cope).2 More recent frameworks, such as the World Risk Report, 
have added a third component, adaptation (capacities for long-term societal 
change).3

Whereas poverty can be directly observed, vulnerability cannot: it is es-
sentially a measure of what might happen in the future. Measuring vulner-
ability to poverty is generally aimed at the likely sources of vulnerability and 
who is vulnerable. A study in Ethiopia, for example, examined the impact 
and potential interactions of health, education and consumption among the 
poor, finding that those with both chronic undernutrition and illiteracy are 
more vulnerable to poverty and more like to stay longer in deep poverty.4

The  United  Nations  Development  Programme’s  Macroeconomic 
Vulnerability Assessment Framework assesses a country’s capacity to cope 
with a crisis in the short term and to identify policy areas that need to be 
strengthened to build longer term resilience.5 It considers the sources and 
transmission channels of vulnerability as well as coping mechanisms.

The  Economist  Intelligence  Unit’s  Global  Food  Security  Index,  which 
measures vulnerability to hunger, comprises measures of affordability, avail-
ability, quality and safety. Some 870 million people globally have no secure 
source of food: That number is not changing rapidly, with an average of just 
2.5 million people a year emerging from food insecurity.6 The Institute for 
Economics and Peace’s Global Peace Index assesses states’ vulnerability to 
conflict and aggregates 22 indicators of violence or the absence of violence 
in a society. A sibling measure, the Positive Peace Index, measures national 
attitudes, institutions and structures to determine their capacity to create 
and maintain a peaceful society.7

Broader approaches include work that seeks to assess environmental 
and  economic  vulnerability.  The  Secretariat  of  the  Pacific  Community,  for 
example, developed the Environmental Vulnerability Index, which comprises 
three pillars: hazard (such as extreme climatic events), resistance (such as 
land area) and damage (such as endangered species).8

The United Nations uses economic vulnerability in defining the least 
developed  countries:  low-income  countries  “suffering  from  structural 
impediments to sustainable development . . . manifested in a low level 
of human resource development and a high level of structural economic 
vulnerability.” It uses a structural economic vulnerability index to reflect 
the risk posed by shocks along with gross national income per capita and 
a human assets index. The economic vulnerability index includes indica-
tors of shocks (natural and external), such as the instability of exports 
and  agricultural  production  and  victims  of  natural  disasters,  alongside 
measures of exposure to shocks, such as the share of population in low 
coastal zones. It highlights the high vulnerability of the least developed 
countries and small island developing states and shows that vulnerabil-
ity is decreasing more slowly in least developed countries than in other 
developing countries.9

Considering  a  society’s  overall  vulnerability  to  loss  of  human  devel-
opment or well-being is more challenging still. Experimental work by the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development defined vulnera-
bility to future loss of well-being when people lack “assets which are crucial 
for resilience to risks.” It proposed a set of indicators to assess a society’s 
vulnerability based on access to different types of capital: economic (pov-
erty), human (education) and social capital (support networks) as well as 
collective assets, such as essential services.10

These approaches, though different, have some ideas in common. First, 
overall risk is defined by the interaction of the chance of something hap-
pening (exposure) and its likely impact if it does (vulnerability). Second, the 
analysis and measurement of vulnerability are more tractable when looking 
separately at exposure to risk and ability to cope or adapt. Third, vulnerabili-
ty is itself a multidimensional concept that can include measures of people’s 
capacity both to cope (in terms of skills, assets or capabilities) and to adapt 
over the longer term.

These approaches all take a narrower perspective on vulnerability than 
is used in this Report and generally measure vulnerability to a particular 
type of threat (economic shocks, hunger, natural disasters). So they may be 
useful in providing partial measures of vulnerability, but they do not assess 
the broad systemic vulnerability that is the focus of this Report. Nor do they 
shed very much light on the ways the very systems themselves can generate 
vulnerability.

There is clearly a lot more thinking to be done and much to be learned 
from existing work. This Report does not propose new measures, preferring 
instead to focus on embedding vulnerability firmly within the human devel-
opment approach, which might then pave the way for new measurement 
work.

Notes
1. O’Keefe, Westgate Wisner 1976. 2. Wisner and others 2004. 3. Alliance Development Works 2012. 4. Kwak and Smith 2011. 5. UNDP 2011d. 6. See http://foodsecurityindex.eiu.com. 7. See http://economicsandpeace.org/
research/iep-indices-data/global-peace-index. 8. See www.sopac.org/index.php/environmental-vulnerability-index. 9. UNDESA 2013a. 10. Morrone and others 2011.

28    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

help individuals and societies cope with adverse 
events  (chapter  2).  Together,  they  provide  a 
checklist to judge whether public policies are 
people-driven  and  whether  broader  human 
development goals are being adequately met.

Committing to collective action. Meeting today’s 
challenges requires collective action (chapters 4 
and 5). When people act collectively, they mar-
shal  their  individual  capabilities  and  choices 
to overcome threats, and their combined resil-
ience deepens development progress and makes 
it more sustainable. The same can be said of 
states acting collectively to reduce vulnerabili-
ties to transborder threats by provisioning glob-
al public goods. Despite the many uncertainties 
that surround us, one thing seems clear: A pos-
itive vision of the public domain will depend in 
large measure on the successful provisioning of 
public goods, both national and global.

All this is feasible. Financial systems can be 
better regulated. Trade talks can be unblocked, 
as the recent World Trade Organization agree-
ment  at  Bali  testifies.57  Corporate  conduct 
around the world can be subject to common 
codes  and  standards.  Climate  change  can 
be  mitigated.  But  only  if  citizens  and  states 
everywhere recognize the value of cross-border 
collaboration  and  global  public  goods—and 
accept that people’s well-being cannot be left 
to  the  vagaries  of  the  market  or  to  national 
responses alone.

A shared planet where individual decisions 
have  the  ability  to  influence  others  and  the 
future of all humankind requires accepting and 
promoting social norms that embody mutual 
responsibility  for  each  other.  It  also  requires 
global, national and local obligations to pre-
vent vulnerability and assist those who suffer 
from adverse events. The historic Millennium 
Declaration signed by 189 countries in 2000 
and the Millennium Development Compact a 
little later are probably the clearest expressions 
of  such  global  solidarity.  Whether  expressed 
in  global  conversations  among  governments 
on the sustainable development goals or in a 
growing sense of ecological citizenship at the 
Rio  +  20  Global  Conference  in  June  2012, 
this  solidarity  needs  to  be  further  nurtured 
and interpreted in the context of vulnerability, 
as a collective responsibility to help others in 
need.58

When people act 
collectively, they 
marshal their individual 
capabilities and choices 
to overcome threats, and 
their combined resilience 
deepens development 
progress and makes 
it more sustainable

Coordinating between states and social institu-
tions. It is also time to look at broader architec-
tural questions and revisit the dynamic between 
states and markets, and between countries and 
global forces, to examine the scope of private and 
public spaces. Today’s vulnerability is deep-seat-
ed  and  systemic.  Global  connections  across 
multiple fronts have melted large parts of the 
formerly more separate national policy domains 
into one large and still expanding global public 
domain. Yet this domain has been dominated by 
excessive belief in the value and adequacy of un-
fettered markets. Polanyi’s caution—about the 
social destruction that unregulated markets can 
cause—is as relevant today as when he wrote The 
Great Transformation in 1944.59 Required now 
is his anticipated response of state intervention 
to protect people and societies from the perils of 
believing in self-regulating markets.

Individuals  cannot  flourish  alone.  Indeed, 
they  cannot  function  alone.  When  they  are 
born, family provides their life support. In turn, 
families cannot function independent of their 
societies. Policies to improve social norms, social 
cohesion and social competences become impor-
tant so that governments and social institutions 
can act in concert to reduce vulnerabilities. And 
when markets and systems themselves produce 
vulnerabilities, governments and social institu-
tions must guide markets to limit vulnerability 
and help people where markets fail to do so.

Policies are only as good as their results. No 
matter  how  elegant  policies  appear  on  paper, 
they are effective only if they work in practice. 
Many factors can affect a political economy, and 
some,  such  as  social  cohesion  or  citizen  trust 
in government, are touched on in this Report. 
Beyond  these  specific  concerns,  however,  the 
quality of governance is important for the ef-
fectiveness of policies. People everywhere want 
government to work better—to deliver quality 
services, to have less corruption and to increase 
commitment to the rule of law. This Report does 
not attempt to discuss such major ideas in depth 
other than to highlight that they are extremely 
important for human development outcomes.

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

Over  the  last  decades  most  countries  have 
made  considerable  progress  in  human  devel-
opment. But rising or high vulnerability raises 

Chapter 1  Vulnerability and human development    |    29

the  prospect  of  those  human  development 
achievements being eroded, the need to consid-
er whether those achievements are secure and 
sustainable  and  the  need  to  identify  policies 
to  reduce  vulnerability  and  build  resilience. 
Chapter 2 documents how large numbers of 
people are doing much better, particularly over 
the  last  decade,  in  terms  of  different  aspects 
of  well-being.  It  also  points  to  the  growing 

evidence of recent slowdown in this progress 
and  the  context  of  growing  uncertainty  and 
risks. When looking at progress, we emphasize 
the need to look closely at whose well-being 
is  being  assessed  and  to  put  people  first  in 
policymaking.  Expanding  people’s  choices 
now and securing them for the future require 
understanding the threats that people face and 
the underlying factors that shape vulnerability.

30    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

“Human beings the world over 
need freedom and security 
that they may be able to 
realize their full potential.”

Aung San Suu Kyi

“Any fool can make things bigger, 
more complex, and more violent. 
It takes a touch of genius—and 
a lot of courage—to move 
in the opposite direction.”

Albert Einstein

State of human development

Almost all countries have improved human development over the past few decades, and billions of people are now doing 
substantially better. The 2013 Human Development Report (HDR) revealed that more than 40 developing countries—with 
the majority of the world’s population—had greater HDI gains than would have been predicted given their situation in 1990.1 
Life expectancy at birth has increased due to lower infant and child mortality, fewer deaths due to HIV/AIDS and better 
nutrition. Education levels have risen on stronger investments and political commitment. Multidimensional poverty has been 
considerably reduced, though wide variation across countries and regions remains.

We cannot take these achievements for granted, 
however. There is evidence that the overall rate of 
progress is slowing—and this is worrying. We also 
have to ask a basic question: Whose prosperity are 
we observing? We need to look beyond averages 
and income thresholds to gather a more compre-
hensive view of how improvements in well-being 
are distributed among individuals, communities 
and countries. We also need to assess whether the 
gains are secure and the progress is sustainable. 
In short, we need a deeper understanding of the 
dynamics of vulnerability and inequality.

The recent gains have not followed a smooth 
path. From greater financial instability to high 
and volatile commodity prices, from recurrent 
natural disasters to widespread social and political 
discontent, uncertainty is an increasingly com-
mon feature of our world. And interdependence 
among  countries  has  widened  and  deepened. 
Decisions and events in one part of the world 
trigger shocks elsewhere, especially as markets in-
tegrate and people communicate instantaneously. 
The international transmission of shocks—such 
as food price hikes, financial crises, natural dis-
asters  and  armed  conflicts—creates  a  sense  of 
precariousness, even helplessness. Countries and 
individuals are not firmly in charge of their own 
destinies and thus are vulnerable to decisions or 
events elsewhere. That is why it is so vital to re-
duce the vulnerability to systemic and persistent 
threats  that  can  endanger  present  and  future 
human development. Sustaining and accelerating 
human development will clearly require greater 
domestic and international policy ambition.

Progress of people

Human development is about equal life chances 
for all. It involves not only expanding capabilities 

to  broaden  people’s  present   choices—to  live 
healthy,  productive  and  safe  lives—but  also 
ensuring that these choices do not compromise 
or restrict those available to future generations. 
The  focus  on  people  has  implications  for 
measuring  progress  and  formulating  policies. 
It  calls  for  a  broader  frame  of  analysis  and  a 
re-examination  of  the  policy  tools  available. 
Measurement and policy are inextricably linked 
since “what we measure affects what we do; and 
if our measurements are flawed, decisions may 
be distorted”.2

Uneven and slowing progress 
in human development

Since  1990  the  Human  Development  Index 
(HDI)  has  been  an  important  measure  of 
progress—a composite index of life expectan-
cy, years of schooling and income. This year’s 
Report presents HDI values for 187 countries. 
The global HDI is now 0.702, and most de-
veloping countries are continuing to advance, 
though  the  pace  of  progress  remains  highly 
uneven (table 2.1).

The  lowest  regional  HDI  values  are  for 
Sub- Saharan  Africa  (0.502)  and  South  Asia 
(0.588), and the highest is for Latin America 
and  the  Caribbean  (0.740),  followed  closely 
by Europe and Central Asia (0.738). The very 
high human development group—as measured 
by the HDI—has a value of 0.890, consider-
ably higher than that of the medium and low 
human development groups. But lower human 
development groups continue to converge with 
the higher levels.3

While  all  regions  are  registering  improve-
ment, signs of a slowdown are emerging—as 
measured  by  the  growth  rate  of  HDI  values 
(figure 2.1).4 Although four of the six regions 

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    33

2.TABLE 2.1

Human Development Index and components, 2010 and 2013

Human development 
group or region

Very high human development

High human development

Medium human development

Low human development

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

South Asia

Sub- Saharan Africa

World

Human 

Development 
Index value

2010

0.885

0.723

0.601

0.479

0.675

0.688

0.726

0.734

0.573

0.468

0.693

2013

0.890

0.735

0.614

0.493

0.682

0.703

0.738

0.740

0.588

0.502

0.702

PPP is purchasing power parity.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

Life 

expectancy 

at birth  
(years)

2010

2013

79.7

73.9

67.1

58.2

69.7

73.5

70.7

74.2

66.4

55.2

70.3

80.2

74.5

67.9

59.4

70.2

74.0

71.3

74.9

67.2

56.8

70.8

Mean years 
of schooling 

(years)

2010

11.7

2013

11.7

8.1

5.5

4.1

6.2

7.4

9.6

7.9

4.7

4.8

7.7

8.1

5.5

4.2

6.3

7.4

9.7

7.9

4.7

4.8

7.7

Expected years 

of schooling 

(years)

Gross national 

income 
per capita 
(2011 PPP $)

2010

2013

2010

2013

16.2

13.1

11.3

8.7

11.7

12.3

13.3

13.8

10.6

9.4

11.9

16.3

13.4

11.7

9.0

11.8

12.5

13.6

13.7

11.2

9.7

12.2

38,548

40,046

11,584

13,231

5,368

2,631

5,960

2,904

15,281

15,817

8,628

10,499

11,280

12,415

12,926

13,767

4,732

2,935

5,195

3,152

12,808

13,723

FIGURE 2.1

While all regions are registering improvement on the Human Development Index, signs of a slowdown are emerging

Average annual
growth in Human
Development
Index value
 (%)

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

1990–2000
2000–2008
2008–2013

 Arab States

East Asia

and the Paciﬁc

Europe

and Central Asia

Latin America

and the
Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan

Africa

Note: Population-weighted panel for 99 developing countries.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

34    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

registered faster gains in 2000–2008 than in 
the  1990s,  progress  in  all  regions  slowed  in 
2008–2013. This was particularly noticeable 
in the Arab States and in Latin America and 
the Caribbean—where average annual growth 
dropped by about half—as well as in Asia. The 
global financial and economic crisis appears to 
have had a widespread impact.

The  deceleration  is  evident  in  all  three 
components of the HDI. Growth in gross na-
tional income (GNI) per capita has declined, 
particularly in the Arab States and in Europe 
and Central Asia. Growth rates of life expec-
tancy at birth have recently declined in most 
regions—especially in Asia—though they in-
creased in Sub- Saharan Africa. And since 2008 
the growth of expected years of schooling has 
also declined.

All four human development groups have ex-
perienced a slowdown in HDI growth (figure 
2.2). In fact, the very high human development 

group  had  been  progressing  more  slowly 
even before the global crisis. The low human 
development  group,  by  contrast,  accelerated 
in 2000–2008, but progress subsequently de-
clined, due largely to a decline in the growth 
of  years  of  schooling.  Despite  achievement 
in primary education—with gross enrolment 
ratios averaging 100 percent—it may be harder 
to move more pupils to the secondary level and 
beyond. In this group of countries 43 percent 
of children enrolled in primary education do 
not complete it, while gross enrolment ratios in 
secondary education average only 39 percent. 
The implication: The transition from primary 
to secondary and higher education is unaccept-
ably low. Stronger investments are needed to 
prevent future vulnerabilities.

Movements  between  human  development 
groups can be tracked for 141 countries (figure 
2.3).5 Of the 47 countries in the low human 
development  group  in  1990,  16  are  now  in 

FIGURE 2.2

All four human development groups have experienced a slowdown in growth on the Human Development Index

Average annual
growth in Human
Development
Index value
 (%)

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

1990–2000
2000–2008
2008–2013

Very high

human development

High

human development

Medium

human development

Low

human development

Note: Population-weighted panel for 141 developed and developing countries.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    35

FIGURE 2.3

Progress to higher human development groups since 1990

Number
of countries

12
Very high
human development

37
High
human development

45
Medium
human development

47
Low
human development

1990

47
Very high
human development

35
High
human development

29
Medium
human development

30
Low
human development

2013

Note: Human development groups are defined using 2013 cutoff values. Data are for 141 developed and developing countries.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

the medium group and 1 is in the high group 
(China), and of the 45 countries in the medi-
um human development group in 1990, 29 are 
now  in  the  high  human  development  group 
and 3 (Argentina, Croatia and Saudi Arabia) 
are in the very high human development group. 
Impressively, 32 countries that were in the high 
human  development  group  in  1990  (nearly 
90 percent of them) are now in the very high 
human development group.

Some  countries  perform  far  better  in  hu-
man development than in income alone—as 
seen in the large differences in GNI per capita 
and HDI rankings (table 2.2). High positive 
differences  in  rank  are  mainly  in  East  Asia 
and  the  Pacific  and  in  Europe  and  Central 
Asia, while negative differences predominate 
in  the  Arab  States  and  Sub- Saharan  Africa. 
Countries  with  positive  differences  tend  to 
have  a  higher  HDI  value,  and  the  majority 
have moved to a higher human development 
group.  They  also  have  lower  inequality  and 
a  lower  proportion  of  poor  and  near  poor 
people.  Generally,  they  started  with  fairly 

low inequality and reduced it further, partly 
through strong investments in people’s health 
and education as well as through spending on 
social protection.

Better access to health services has reduced 
maternal and child mortality and, more gen-
erally,  improved  quality  of  life.  Increasing 
literacy rates and skills development has been 
crucial to boosting people’s capabilities as well 
as their employability and productivity. Social 
protection measures, such as cash transfer pro-
grammes and other forms of income support, 
have been protecting the most vulnerable from 
shocks. All these aspects are fundamental to 
advancing human development.6

Continuing inequality in 
human development

One of the main drags on development is deep 
and chronic inequality, which restricts choices 
and erodes the social fabric. Large disparities 
in income, wealth, education, health and other 
dimensions  of  human  development  persist 

36    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

across the world, heightening the vulnerabil-
ity of marginalized groups and undermining 
their  ability  to  recover  from  shocks.  People 
clustered at the bottom of the socioeconomic 
distribution are not there randomly. They lack 
a sufficient range of capabilities to enable them 
to live a fulfilling life, and they typically are the 
most vulnerable to health risks, environmental 
calamities and economic shocks.

The 2010 Human Development Report intro-
duced the Inequality-adjusted HDI, a measure 
of inequality that takes into account how each 
country’s progress is distributed in the three 
HDI  dimensions—life  expectancy,  years  of 
schooling and income.7 It goes beyond tradi-
tional income-based measures of inequality to 
consider disparities in education and health.

Reported here is the loss in HDI value due 
to inequality, which measures the difference 
between  HDI  and  the  Inequality-adjusted 
HDI in percentage terms. Based on data for 
94 developing countries, the average loss due 
to inequality has declined in most regions—
except East Asia and the Pacific (figure 2.4). 
The  highest  loss  is  in  Sub- Saharan  Africa 
(34 percent), followed by South Asia (29 per-
cent), the Arab States (26 percent) and Latin 
America  and  the  Caribbean  (25  percent). 
The lowest loss is in Europe and Central Asia 
(13 percent).

Among the HDI components, the average 
inequality  was  19  percent  for  health  (down 
from  23  percent  in  2010),  27  percent  for 
education  (about  the  same  as  in  2010)  and 
23 percent for income (up from 21 percent in 
2010). For health the highest inequality was 
in Sub- Saharan Africa (37 percent), followed 
by South Asia (25 percent). However, both re-
gions have made substantial progress, possibly 
due to vaccination campaigns and better nutri-
tion that greatly reduced under-five mortality. 
For education the highest levels of inequality 
were  in  South  Asia  (42  percent),  the  Arab 
States  (41  percent)  and  Sub- Saharan  Africa 
(37 percent). There has been limited progress 
in reducing disparities in education, except in 
Europe and Central Asia.8

For income the greatest inequality is in Latin 
America  and  the  Caribbean  (36  percent), 
followed by Sub- Saharan Africa (28 percent). 
Income inequality declined in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, although it seems to have 

TABLE 2.2

Highest positive differences between gross national income per capita rank and 
Human Development Index rank, by human development group, 2013

Gross national 

income per 
capita rank

Human 

Development 
Index rank

Difference

Very high human development

New Zealand

Australia

Korea, Republic of

Ireland

Poland

High human development

Georgia

Sri Lanka

Tonga

Fiji

Ukraine

Medium human development

Samoa

Tajikistan

Palestine, State of

Vanuatu

Kiribatia

Low human development

Rwanda

Madagascar

Zimbabwe

Solomon Islands

Nepalb

30

20

33

28

51

116

103

127

114

109

134

157

129

153

154

171

174

175

172

158

7

2

15

11

35

79

73

100

88

83

106

133

107

131

133

151

155

156

157

145

23

18

18

17

16

37

30

27

26

26

28

24

22

22

21

20

19

19

15

13

a. Kyrgyzstan is also a medium human development country with a rank difference of 21.
b. Kenya and Togo are also low human development countries with a rank difference of 13.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations (based on table 1 in Statistical annex).

increased  in  South  Asia  and  Sub- Saharan 
Africa.  Overall,  the  declining  inequality  in 
HDI has been driven mainly by health, since 
inequality in income appears to have risen in 
several regions and inequality in education has 
remained broadly constant.

The 2013 HDR found a negative relation-
ship between inequality and human develop-
ment.9 Inequality reduces the pace of human 
development and can even bring it to a halt. 
Although  overall  inequality  in  HDI  has  re-
cently  declined,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  offset 

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    37

FIGURE 2.4

The average loss in the Human Development Index due to inequality has declined in most regions

2010 HDR
2014 HDR

Arab States

East Asia
and the Paciﬁc
Europe
and Central Asia
Latin America
and the Caribbean
South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Arab States

East Asia
and the Paciﬁc
Europe
and Central Asia
Latin America
and the Caribbean
South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Arab States

East Asia
and the Paciﬁc
Europe
and Central Asia
Latin America
and the Caribbean
South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

0

10

20

30

40

50
Loss due to inequality (%)

0

10

20

30

40

50
Inequality in education (%)

Arab States

East Asia
and the Paciﬁc
Europe
and Central Asia
Latin America
and the Caribbean
South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

0

10

20

30

40

50
Inequality in health (%)

0

10

20

30

40

50
Inequality in income (%)

Note: The 2010 HDR reflects inequality in 2000–10, and the 2014 HDR reflects inequality in 2003–13. Population-weighted panel for 94 developing countries.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

TABLE 2.3

Countries with rising or falling income inequality by region, 1990–2012

Region

Africa

Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

Europe, North America, Oceania and Japan

Total

Percentage of countries

Percentage of total population

Rising 
inequality

Falling 
inequality

No  
trenda

Total

13

18

4

30

65

50.0

70.6

19

10

14

8

51

39.2

25.3

3

3

2

6

14

10.8

4.1

35

31

20

44

130

100.0

100.0

a. Inequality remained relatively constant or fluctuated without a clear upward or downward trend during the period.
Source: UNDESA 2013b.

38    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

growing  income  disparities  with  progress  in 
health and education. To tackle vulnerability 
and sustain recent achievements, it is crucial to 
reduce inequality in all dimensions of human 
development.

Although  income  disparities  among  coun-
tries have been declining over the past 20 years 
as emerging economies have narrowed the gap 
with  developed  countries,  inequality  within 
many countries has increased worldwide (table 
2.3).10 This is particularly noticeable in the most 
developed regions, such as Eastern Europe, and 
in Asia. Where inequality declined, notably in 
Latin America and the Caribbean, it has been 
due mainly to the expansion of education and 
public transfers to the poor.11

These  two  trends—declining  income  ine-
quality among countries and rising inequality 

within countries—virtually cancel each other 
out, suggesting that global income inequality 
(among  the  world’s  citizens)  remains  stub-
bornly high.12 The poorest two-thirds of the 
world’s people are estimated to receive less than 
13 percent of world income, while the richest 
1 percent amass nearly 15 percent.13

Beyond  income,  about  half  the  world’s 
wealth is owned by the richest 1 percent of the 
population, with the richest 85 people collec-
tively holding the same wealth as the poorest 
half of the world’s population.14 Globalization, 
technological progress, deregulation of labour 
markets and misguided macroeconomic poli-
cies are likely to create and sustain these large 
gaps in income and wealth.

Tackling  inequality  is  important  to  re-
duce  vulnerability  and  sustain  progress. 
Rising income inequality in developed and 
developing  countries  has  been  associated 
with higher economic volatility and slower 
progress in human development.15 High and 
persistent  inequality  also  makes  it  harder 
to reduce poverty. Evidence suggests that a 
1 percent increase in national income reduc-
es  income  poverty  4.3  percent  in  the  most 
equal  societies  but  just  0.6  percent  in  the 
least equal.16 Inequality matters not only for 
those at the poorest end of the distribution, 
but  for  society  as  a  whole—as  it  threatens 
social cohesion and hampers social mobility, 
fuelling social tensions that can lead to civil 
unrest and political instability. Large income 
disparities can even undermine democratic 
values, if wealthy individuals influence polit-
ical agendas (say, by securing tax breaks for 
top  income  earners  and  cutbacks  in  social 
services)  or  try  to  shape  social  perceptions 
(through the media).

Revisiting economic progress

A country’s economic status and performance 
can look much less impressive when adjusted 
for  income  distribution.  GNI  per  capita  is 
higher in the United States than in Canada, 
but the reverse is true for inequality-adjusted 
GNI  per  capita.  Botswana,  Brazil  and  Chile 
also have large adjustments to GNI per capita 
due to high inequality (figure 2.5).

The United Kingdom’s performance is also 
less impressive after adjusting for inequality. 

Inequality matters not only 
for those at the poorest 
end of the distribution, but 
for society as a whole—as 
it threatens social 
cohesion and hampers 
social mobility, fuelling 
social tensions that can 
lead to civil unrest and 
political instability

In the 1980s mean household income grew 
3.2  percent  a  year,  but  adjusting  growth 
with the Gini coefficient reduced it to only 
2.1 percent.17 This is similar to the adjusted 
growth of 2 percent in the 1990s, a lacklustre 
decade.  Over  1961–2010  the  adjustment 
reduces the average annual growth in mean 
household income from 1.9 percent to about 
1.5 percent.

Another  way  to  evaluate  progress  is  to 
track  the  growth  in  consumption  for  the 
poorest  40  percent  of  the  population.  By 
this measure, some countries have done well. 
In Bolivia, Brazil and Cambodia consump-
tion growth for the poorest 40 percent has 
been  faster  than  that  for  the  population  as 
a whole (figure 2.6). But in countries where 
inequality  has  been  high  or  rising—as  in 
China,  Malaysia  and  Uganda—growth  in 
consumption for those at the poorest end of 
the distribution has been slower than for the 
population as a whole.

Gender inequality

Women experience many kinds of disadvantage 
and  discrimination  in  health,  education  and 
employment.  To  highlight  these  disparities, 
this Report presents HDI values separately for 
women and men for 148 countries. Worldwide 
the  female  HDI  value  averages  about  8  per-
cent lower than the male HDI value. Among 
regions, the largest gap is in South Asia (17 per-
cent). The gap is small (3 percent) in the very 
high  human  development  group  but  about 
17  percent  in  the  low  human  development 
group.  Slovakia  has  achieved  gender  parity, 
while  female  HDI  values  are  slightly  higher 
than male values in 15 countries (see table 3 in 
Statistical annex).

The  Gender  Inequality  Index  for  149 
countries reveals the extent to which national 
achievements in reproductive health, empow-
erment  and  labour  market  participation  are 
eroded by gender inequality. Unlike the HDI, 
a higher Gender Inequality Index value indi-
cates poor performance. Values range from an 
average of 0.317 for Europe and Central Asia 
to 0.575 for Sub- Saharan Africa and from an 
average of 0.197 for the very high human de-
velopment group to 0.586 for the low human 
development group. Slovenia outperforms all 

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    39

FIGURE 2.5

A country’s economic status and performance can look much less impressive when adjusted for income 
distribution

Inequality-adjusted GNI per capita
GNI per capita

Paraguay

Ukraine

Thailand

Brazil

Botswana

Uruguay

Turkey

Chile

Portugal

Canada

United States

0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

50,000

60,000
US dollars

Note: The inequality-adjusted GNI per capita uses the Atkinson index. Data are for 2013.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

other countries (0.021), while Yemen has the 
highest value (0.733).

Globally,  women  are  disadvantaged  in  na-
tional  political  representation.  On  average, 
they occupy 21 percent of seats in national par-
liaments. In Latin America and the Caribbean 
they do better, with around 25 percent of seats. 
In Arab States parliaments they hold less than 
14 percent of seats.

Poor reproductive health services are a major 
contributor to gender inequality, especially in 
developing countries. For example, the maternal 
mortality ratio is 474 deaths per 100,000 live 
births in Sub- Saharan Africa. Maternal deaths 
naturally have serious implications for babies 
and their older siblings left without maternal 
care, who could be trapped in low human devel-
opment throughout their life cycle. Adolescent 
births  could  also  lead  to  debilitating  human 
development outcomes for young mothers and 
their babies. In Sub- Saharan Africa there are 
110 births per 1,000 women ages 15–19.

The  deficits  in  education  are  wide  as  well. 
On average, 60 percent of women ages 25 and 
older have at least some secondary education, 
compared with 67 percent of men. This dis-
crepancy is particularly large for the low human 
development group (15 percent versus 29 per-
cent). And South Asia has the largest gender 
gap in education (15 percentage points). The 
very high human development group has near 
gender parity at this level (about 86 percent 
versus 88 percent).

Women also lag behind men in labour mar-
ket participation (51 percent compared with 
77 percent). The situation is less promising for 
women in the Arab States, where 25 percent 
of women of working age participate in the 
labour market, compared with 73 percent of 
men.  Labour  force  participation  rates  tend 
to be higher among women in Sub- Saharan 
Africa  because  women  are  more  often  than 
not  forced  to  eke  a  living  in  the  informal 
sector.

40    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 2.6

In countries where inequality has been high or rising, growth in consumption for the poorest 40 percent of the population has been slower 
than for the population as a whole

Growth in consumption
for the poorest 40 
percent, 2005–2010
(%)

12

Growth in consumption is positive
and faster for the poorest 40%
than for the population as a whole

8

4

0

-4

-4

Cambodia

Brazil

Bolivia

China

Uganda

Malaysia

Philippines

Egypt

Growth in consumption
is positive but slower for the poorest 40%
than for the population as a whole

0

4

8

12

Growth in consumption for the population as a whole, 2005–2010 (%)

Source: Narayan, Saavedra-Chanduvi and Tiwari 2013.

Poverty

Typical  measures  of  poverty  are  based  on 
income  or  consumption,  which  register  im-
portant dimensions of deprivation but provide 
only a partial picture. People can be deprived 
of  many  things  beyond  income.  They  may 
have poor health and nutrition, low education 
and  skills,  inadequate  livelihoods  and  poor 
household conditions, and they may be socially 
excluded.

Some of these broader aspects of poverty are 
captured in the concept of multidimensional 
poverty. In 104 developing countries 1.2 bil-
lion  people  had  an  income  of  $1.25  or  less 
a  day.18  But  the  multidimensional  poverty 
headcount for 91 developing countries was an 
estimated 1.5 billion people—as measured by 
the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI).19 

According to the MPI, which was introduced 
in the 2010 HDR to measure deprivations in 
the three HDI dimensions—health, education 
and living standards—2.2 billion people live in 
multidimensional poverty or near-poverty (out 
of 10). The MPI measures not only the propor-
tion of people deprived but also the intensity of 
deprivation for each poor household, providing 
a more comprehensive picture (see chapter 3).
The proportion of multidimensionally poor 
people is usually higher than the proportion 
living on less than $1.25 a day. In Cambodia 
47  percent  of  the  population  were  in  multi-
dimensional poverty in 2010, but only 19 per-
cent  lived  on  less  than  $1.25  a  day.  But  in 
Brazil and Indonesia income poverty is higher. 
Moreover, while in many countries both multi-
dimensional poverty and income poverty have 
decreased,  the  rate  of  progress  varies  widely 

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    41

BOX 2.1

Looking at disposable income

Material living standards can be better monitored, particularly during eco-
nomic  downturns,  through  measures  of  household  income  and  consump-
tion rather than GDP (see figure). For example, while GDP fell sharply (by 
5.7 percent) in the euro area in 2008 and 2009, household disposable income 
stayed at precrisis levels. This can be attributed at least partly to automatic 
social  protection  stabilizers  and  discretionary  measures  that  protected 

household  income  in  the  first  few  years  of  the  crisis.  Equally,  household 
disposable income rose less quickly than GDP in the precrisis period up to 
2007. So moving away from standard income measures can change the per-
spective on economic and social progress. But disposable income also has 
disadvantages, because it assumes that tax regimes and social benefits are 
comparable across countries.

While GDP fell sharply in the euro area in 2008 and 2009, household disposable income stayed at precrisis levels

Index:
1999 Q1 = 100

125

GDP
Household disposable income

120

115

110

105

100

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Note: Household disposable income is measured in real terms using the deflator for the seasonally adjusted household final consumption expenditure. GDP is measured in real terms using the GDP deflator.
Source: Atkinson 2013.

(figure  2.7).  The  multidimensional  poverty 
headcount declined faster than income poverty 
in Indonesia, while the opposite was true in 
Peru.

Vulnerable employment 
and stagnant wages

Economic growth that does not generate suf-
ficient decent employment is unlikely to foster 
human  development.  The  1993 HDR  called 
attention to jobless growth, where output in-
creases but employment lags far behind.20 The 
issue seems to have resurfaced. Unemployment 

rose considerably after the 2008 crisis. An anal-
ysis of 65 countries showed that in more than 
two-thirds of them the employment rate had 
not returned to the precrisis level by the end 
of 2012. In some, such as Ireland and Spain, 
the  long-term  unemployment  rate  rose  at 
least 20 percentage points over 2007–2012.21 
Globally,  about  200  million  people  are  now 
unemployed.

Despite  strong  productivity  growth,  real 
wages have been fairly stagnant. Between 2000 
and 2011 real wages increased only 5 percent in 
developed economies and 15 percent in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, and they declined 

42    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

in the Middle East. In Asia, however, they grew 
a  remarkable  94  percent.  As  a  consequence, 
labour’s  share  of  GNI  has  declined  in  many 
parts of the world. For 16 developed countries 
with data, labour’s average share fell from about 
75 percent of GNI in the mid-1970s to about 
65 percent in the years preceding the global 
economic and financial crisis.22

Decent  and  well  paid  jobs  are  essential  to 
improve living standards. Even with recent im-
provements, the share of workers in vulnerable 
employment remains very high in Sub- Saharan 
Africa and South Asia—at about 77 percent 
of  total  employment  (table  2.4).  Nearly  half 
the world’s working population continues to 
be in vulnerable employment, trapped in inse-
cure and low-paid jobs. High working poverty 
rates suggest that income from labour remains 
below what is required to secure decent living 
standards. Progress may have been impressive 
in several regions, but 40 percent of workers in 
Sub- Saharan Africa and 24 percent of workers 
in South Asia still live in households earning 
less than $1.25 a day per person.

Employment  has  also  become  more  pre-
carious  in  several  developed  countries,  with 
many more workers on temporary and part-
time contracts. And stagnant real wages have 

FIGURE 2.7

While in many countries both multidimensional and income poverty decreased over 
2005–2012, the rate of progress varies widely

Multidimensional poverty headcount (MPI)
Income poverty headcount ($1.25 a day)

Brazil

Cambodia

Indonesia

Mexico

Niger

Peru

0

10

20

30

40

50
Reduction in poverty (%)

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

hindered  improvements  in  living  standards. 
In  most  developing  countries  vulnerable 
employment continues to be the norm. Wage 
employment in the formal sector is available 

TABLE 2.4

Vulnerable employment and working poverty, 2010 and 2012

World

Developed economies and European Union

Other Europec and Commonwealth of Independent States

East Asia

South-East Asia and the Pacific

South Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

Middle East

North Africa

Sub- Saharan Africa

Vulnerable employmenta 
(% of total employment)

Working poorb  

(% of total employment)

2010

53.1

11.2

23.8

58.4

65.2

81.3

35.8

33.5

42.1

81.8

2012

49.2

10.1

19.7

48.9

61.1

76.9

31.5

27.0

41.4

77.2

2010

26.6

..

5.0

31.2

33.7

43.9

7.8

1.4

9.5

56.7

2012

12.3

..

1.7

5.6

11.7

24.4

3.5

1.8

6.4

40.1

a. Sum of own-account workers and contributing family workers.
b. Employed people living in a household that earns less than $1.25 a day per person.
c. Refers to non-EU countries in Central and South-Eastern Europe.
Source: ILO 2013d.

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    43

to only a few, while the majority of the pop-
ulation  engages  in  unpaid  or  own-account 
work—such as subsistence farming and street 
trade—which is often associated with greater 
vulnerability  to  shocks  (chapters  3  and  4). 
Poor employment outcomes generate adverse 
economic effects, but they can also lead to a 
loss of acquired capabilities (such as skills and 
health status), restrict choices and freedoms, 
affect the psychological well-being of individ-
uals and fuel social discontent.

A people-centred policy framework needs to 
be aligned with macroeconomic and structural 
policies, labour market interventions and social 
protection. These policies should be geared to-
wards stimulating inclusive economic growth, 
creating  decent  and  productive  employment 
and providing basic social services and social 
protection—while paying particular attention 
to equity and sustainability. The complex prob-
lems  facing  modern  societies  require  a  fresh 
look  at  the  types  of  policies  that  can  create 
synergies to foster and sustain human develop-
ment (box 2.2).

Securing and sustaining 
human development

Over  the  years  there  has  been  much  debate 
about  what  sustainability  means  and  about 
what measures can track sustainable progress—
or the lack of it. In 2012 the United Nations 
Conference  on  Sustainable  Development  in 
Rio took a broad view that sustainable progress 
must  cover  all  three  dimensions  that  affect 
people’s  life  chances—social,  economic  and 
environmental.

Protecting the environment can be viewed 
as a good in itself, but Amartya Sen and oth-
ers have argued that a more fruitful approach 
is to focus on the sustainability of people and 
their  choices.23  Human  beings  have  always 
depended on the bounty and resilience of the 
natural world. But it is clear that the future is 
precarious, thus increasing people’s vulnerabil-
ities. Environmental degradation and climate 
change  threaten  the  long-term  survival  of 
humanity. The challenge of sustaining progress 
is thus about ensuring that present choices and 

BOX 2.2

Macroeconomics and austerity

In the years preceding the global financial crisis, the public finances of most 
developed countries were in fairly good shape. Government deficits were 
falling, and debt was either stable or declining. Then the economic reces-
sion triggered automatic stabilizers, such as unemployment benefits, and 
required fiscal stimulus packages that contributed to higher public spend-
ing.  Some  governments  took  responsibility  for  huge  private  sector  debts, 
especially  from  troubled  banks.  Tax  revenues  dwindled  in  the  slowdown. 
The combined trends of rising debt and falling GDP sharply increased fiscal 
deficits and public debt−to-GDP ratios.

Despite early signs of an economic recovery, thanks in part to counter-
cyclical  fiscal  policies,  many  governments—especially  those  in  Europe—
quickly shifted their policy focus to austerity measures. Austerity programmes 
have, among other things, contributed to a drastic drop in public investment 
in Europe. Between 2008 and 2012 public gross fixed capital formation fell 
65 percent in Ireland, 60 percent in Greece and Spain, 40 percent in Portugal 
and 24 percent in Italy. Overall, public investment in the euro area (17 coun-
tries) declined from €251 billion in 2009 to €201 billion in 2012—a 20 percent 
nominal decline. This, after a steady declining trend in investment as a share 
of GDP since the 1970s. Budget cuts are also affecting the delivery of pub-
lic services. Between 2009 and 2011 health spending declined in a third of 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)  countries—
including Greece, Ireland, Portugal and the United Kingdom. The outcomes? 
Lower spending on prevention programmes, reductions in the supply of health 

services, increases in direct out-of-pocket payments and wage cuts in hospi-
tals. The crisis also inverted the long-term trend of rising investment in educa-
tion. In 2011–2012, 15 OECD countries cut their education budgets.

This disproportionate focus on public spending and debt diverts atten-
tion from a deeper and more fundamental question: how to achieve inclu-
sive and sustainable long-term growth? Austerity creates a vicious cycle. 
Cuts to growth-enhancing public expenditures—such as capital investment 
and social spending—weaken the tax base and increase the need for social 
assistance, aggravate fiscal deficits and debt and lead to further austerity 
measures. The cuts also undermine future human development and risk re-
versing hard-won gains. And they are likely to amplify inequality, which in 
itself is an obstacle to sustained growth and increases the risk of economic 
and financial crises.

Macroeconomic  policy  matters  for  human  development.  It  influences 
the quantity and quality of employment, the level of social protection and 
the  provision  of  public  services.  There  is  growing  evidence  that  current 
macroeconomic  policies—especially  in  developed  countries—encourage 
volatility in output and exchange rates, increase inequality and thus under-
mine human development. This is due largely to an excessive focus on price 
stability and the poor timing of austerity policies that exacerbate problems 
of public and private debt and do little to lay the basis for economic recovery. 
It is time to reassess the rationale for austerity measures and refocus policy 
efforts on boosting investments for sustained long-term growth.

Source: EC 2013a,b; Berg and Ostry 2011a; Kumhof and Rancière 2010; Karanikolos and others 2013; Nayyar 2012; OECD 2013c,e; Välilä and Mehrotra 2005.

44    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

capabilities  do  not  compromise  the  choices 
and freedoms available to future generations.24 
While  sustainability  can  be  tracked  through 
adjusted net savings and ecological footprints, 
these measures do not adequately reflect the 
dynamic  nature  of  the  choices  available  to 
people. An important aspect of this framing is 
that, in addition to requiring greater attention 
to the tensions that exist between present and 
future choices, it also highlights the need to 
protect human development gains from nega-
tive shocks and adverse events.

The  2011  and  2013  HDRs  argued  that 
environmental  disasters  could  not  only  slow 
human  development  but  even  throw  it  into 
reverse. Climate change could become the sin-
gle biggest hindrance to the ambitions of the 
sustainable  development  goals  and  the  post-
2015 development agendas.25 Environmental 
threats highlight potential tradeoffs between 
the  well-being  of  current  and  future  genera-
tions.  If  current  consumption  surpasses  the 
limits  imposed  by  our  planetary  boundaries, 
the choices of future and current generations 
will be seriously compromised.26

Whether a country or a community is on a 
sustainable development path depends on its 
position  relative  to  local  and  global  thresh-
olds. A local threshold relates to the resources 
available within the boundaries of a country, 
while a global threshold takes a broader per-
spective by considering planetary boundaries. 
For  instance,  a  country’s  consumption  of  a 
natural resource might be well within its local 
threshold—due to resource abundance within 
its  borders—but  its  per  capita  consumption 
might exceed the global threshold. Crossing 
these  thresholds  can  have  damaging  conse-
quences within and across borders, so it is im-
portant to explore how to balance these local 
and global boundaries.

The  universalist  principle  provides  a  good 
starting point for combining equity in the use 
of environmental and other resources within 
and across generations. Science provides an idea 
of the global thresholds for specific resources, 
while social justice requires that everyone have 
an equal claim to the resource available for use 
by the current generation. This enables us to 
identify  countries  on  unsustainable  develop-
ment pathways, particularly on certain environ-
mental indicators.

Although the environment is a key dimen-
sion affecting the choices of current and future 
generations, it is not the only one. Economic, 
social  and  political  factors  also  expand  or 
restrict  choices.  Nonetheless,  fairly  well  es-
tablished thresholds of global environmental 
sustainability enable more formal assessments.
Many countries, especially those in the high 
human development groups, now follow unsus-
tainable development paths.27 Of 140 countries 
with data, 82 have ecological footprints above 
global carrying capacity. As a result, the world 
per capita footprint is substantially higher than 
the global sustainability threshold. Carbon di-
oxide emissions by 90 of 185 countries exceed 
the global threshold, and their emissions are 
large enough to push global per capita emis-
sions above global sustainability. Fresh water 
withdrawals by 49 of 172 countries with data 
also exceed the global threshold. Overall, corre-
lation is positive between higher HDI achieve-
ments and unsustainable ecological footprints 
and  emissions,  while  water  consumption  is 
unsustainable across developing and developed 
countries.28

The world’s ecological footprint of consump-
tion is currently larger than its total biocapaci-
ty, that is, the biosphere’s ability to meet human 
demand for material consumption and waste 
disposal (figure 2.8). The very high human de-
velopment group, in particular, has a very large 
ecological deficit—as its ecological footprint is 
significantly larger than available biocapacity.

While  human  development  requires  the 
expansion  of  choices  currently  available  to 
people, it is also important to consider the im-
pact on the choices of future  generations—for 
intergenerational  equity.  Human  develop-
ment  should  not  come  at  the  cost  of  future 
generations.  To  secure  and  sustain  human 
development  and  avert  dramatic  local  and 
global repercussions, bold and urgent action on 
environmental sustainability is crucial.

Global threats to human 
development

Economic,  social  and  environmental  shocks 
have a major impact on people’s lives and are 
a  key  challenge  to  sustaining  and  advancing 
human development. Unpredictable changes in 

Economic, social and 
environmental shocks 
have a major impact 
on people’s lives and 
are a key challenge to 
sustaining and advancing 
human development

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    45

FIGURE 2.8

Financial instability

The world’s ecological footprint of consumption is currently larger than its total 
biocapacity

Global hectares per capita

Low human
development

Average
6

3

Biocapacity
Ecological footprint

Very high human
development

Medium human
development

High human
development

Note: Data are for 2010.
Source: Global Footprint Network 2014 and Human Development Report Office calculations.

market conditions, the environment and social 
perceptions  can  have  dramatic  destabilizing 
effects—restricting current and future choices 
of individuals and households and hampering 
the progress of entire societies. For instance, 
sharp swings in prices and economic activity—
as seen in the global economic and financial 
crisis of 2007–2008 and the growing volatility 
of  commodity  prices  since  2007—threaten 
people’s livelihoods and social cohesion, while 
creating  a  climate  of  uncertainty  that  affects 
decisionmaking and risk-taking.

In  recent  years  financial  asset  prices,  com-
modity  prices  and  capital  flows  have  been 
particularly volatile.29 In addition, social and 
political instability erupted from North Africa 
to Latin America, even in countries that had 
good or rapidly improving standards of living. 
While not attempting to be comprehensive or 
exhaustive, the rest of this chapter analyses four 
interconnected global threats that can increase 
vulnerability and undermine progress in hu-
man  development:  financial  instability,  food 
price  volatility,  natural  disasters  and  violent 
conflict.

46    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Over the past few decades the world has suf-
fered deeper and more frequent financial crises 
that have spread rapidly to other economic sec-
tors, creating uncertainty, affecting livelihoods 
and  threatening  social  stability.  In  the  most 
recent  crisis  global  unemployment  increased 
by nearly 30 million between 2007 and 2009, 
while current unemployment estimates remain 
far  above  precrisis  levels.30  Economic  shocks 
can  have  long-term  negative  consequences, 
especially if they trigger a vicious cycle of low 
human  development  and  conflict.31  Natural 
disasters  and  political  shocks—such  as 
droughts and coups d’état—usually have strong 
negative impacts on human development. But 
financial shocks—such as banking crises—are 
the most probable trigger of HDI downturns.32 
The number of countries affected by banking 
crises appears to be higher in periods of high 
international capital mobility. Between 1950 
and 1980, when capital controls were common, 
few countries had banking crises. But after cap-
ital flows were liberalized and financial markets 
further  integrated,  the  incidence  of  banking 
crises soared (figure 2.9).33 The Nordic banking 
crisis in the early 1990s, the Asian financial cri-
sis in 1997 and the recent global financial crisis 
exemplify this growing instability.

Although the poorest countries were more 
insulated from the initial financial shock—due 
to  their  limited  integration  in  global  capital 
markets—they  were  extremely  vulnerable 
to  secondary  transmission  channels,  such  as 
declining  external  demand  for  their  exports 
and  lower  foreign  investment.  Developing 
countries  traditionally  are  less  able  to  cope 
with large economic shocks and usually take 
longer to recover from crises. For instance, the 
volatility of GDP growth is often higher in the 
poorest  countries—except  in  recent  years—
and the proportion of years spent in deep reces-
sion is also higher for them, due partly to their 
undiversified economic structures and limited 
policy space.34

Economic  crises  often  generate  unemploy-
ment and hardship, but economic booms can 
enhance inequality—which may contribute to 
the next crisis.35 Indeed, inequality can be both 
a cause and a consequence of macroeconomic 
instability.36 A more equitable distribution of 

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 
Measuring human progress

Bill Gates

The accomplishments of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) era have 
been stunning: To take just one example, the number of children who die 
each year has gone down by almost half, from more than 12.4 million to 
6.6 million. That doesn’t quite hit the two-thirds target included in MDG 4, 
but it’s a great thing for humanity.

With the MDGs set to expire in 2015, the development community is 
starting to consider the next set of global goals and how to build on the cur-
rent progress. The Secretary-General of the United Nations convened a High 
Level Panel on the subject, and one of the priorities it highlighted is a ‘data 
revolution’. According to the panel, to accelerate the pace of improvements, 
development organizations and developing-country governments need ac-
cess to more and better data.

Few  people  believe  in  the  power  of  data  as  much  as  I  do.  In  fact,  I 
wrote the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s annual letter in 2012 about 
the importance of measurement. In my experience, the management slogan 
“What gets measured gets done” holds true. The mere act of tracking key 
indicators makes it much more likely that changes in those indicators will 
be  positive.  Second,  analysing  development  statistics  yields  lessons  that 
improve outcomes over time. For example, the recent proliferation of excel-
lent community-based health systems in developing countries has a lot to do 
with the clear evidence that frontline workers get results.

Once there’s consensus on the importance of data and the need for a 
data revolution, the next step is more debate on the specific contents of 
that revolution.

One  priority  is  to  rationalize  the  ongoing  data  collection  processes. 
Currently, the supply of data is extremely fragmented, so different players often 
count the same things multiple times in slightly different ways while neglecting 

to gather other useful statistics altogether. The answer is not to collect every 
conceivable piece of data on economic and human development, which would 
increase costs and lead to gridlock. We need a coordinating mechanism where-
by the development community and the developing countries themselves agree 
on a limited list of indicators that are worth tracking carefully.

A second priority is investing in developing countries’ ability to collect data 
over the long term: in the end, development data is only valuable if used in-
country by policymakers. We should not launch a data revolution based on a 
huge infusion of money to gather a trove of data at a single point in time, as 
the next set of global goals takes effect. Instead, for a truly lasting revolution, 
we need to help countries hire and train more experts and invest in their own 
systems for tracking data that matter to them for years to come. Part of this will 
involve giving serious consideration to how digital technology can improve data 
collection in countries where current techniques are decades old. For example, 
using a global positioning system instead of a tape measure and a compass to 
estimate agricultural yields can speed up the work by more than a factor of 10.
A  third  priority  is  making  sure  that  data  on  human  development  is 
widely available, informs public policy, and increases accountability. This 
means giving citizens, civil society, donors, entrepreneurs, and parliamen-
tarians full access to government data, no matter what the data suggest. It 
also means making sure experts use the data that’s available to make better 
policy decisions.

The benefit of a data revolution is that it will have an impact on every 
single priority in global development and health. With better data, countries 
will get better at every single goal they set, whether it’s saving children’s 
lives, increasing agricultural yields, or empowering women. Ultimately, bet-
ter data can mean a better life for billions of people.

FIGURE 2.9

Since the liberalization of capital flows and greater financial integration in the 1980s, the incidence of banking crises has soared

1914

1825

1860

1980

1918

1945

1800

1820

1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2010

Share of countries
in banking crisis,
three-year sum
(%)

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

1

0.9

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

High

Capital mobility
(index)

Low

Source: Reinhart 2012.

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    47

income can boost economic growth and pro-
mote greater social and political stability. Low 
income  inequality  has  been  associated  with 
longer growth spells and thus greater economic 
sustainability.37

Food price volatility

Food  price  volatility  has  become  a  growing 
threat  to  food  security  and  thus  to  human 
development.  Agricultural  prices  are  inher-
ently variable, but food prices have fluctuated 
considerably and unexpectedly since 2007 (fig-
ure 2.10).38 High and volatile food prices can 
have long-term consequences on the physical 
and mental well-being of individuals, as poor 
households are forced to switch to cheaper but 
less nutritious food, cut portion sizes and even 
forgo meals. They may also need to work longer 
hours or give up other spending on health or 
education. Although high prices benefit food 
producers and food-exporting countries, they 
hurt  poor  consumers.  In  addition,  greater 
price uncertainty also affects smallholders and 
traders.

Between 1960 and 1990 food prices broadly 
declined—as technological advances enabled 
agricultural yields to grow faster than demand. 
In  the  near  future,  however,  they  are  likely 
to  remain  high  and  volatile.  Why?  Because 

FIGURE 2.10

population  growth  and  rising  incomes  in 
emerging and developing economies are push-
ing demand to record levels. Growing demand 
for biofuels also plays a role. Meanwhile, sup-
ply is constrained by soil degradation, climate 
change  and  low  investment  in  agriculture, 
especially the neglect of research and extension 
services.  Prices  are  likely  to  be  more  volatile 
as  a  consequence  of  the  higher  frequency of 
extreme  weather  events,  the  financialization 
of  commodity  markets  and  the  volatility  in 
exchange rates.

Natural disasters

More frequent and intense environmental dis-
asters are destroying lives, livelihoods, physi-
cal infrastructure and fragile ecosystems. They 
can impair human capabilities and threaten 
human  development  in  all  countries— 
especially  in  the  poorest  and  most  vulner-
able.39  Higher  income  and  socioeconomic 
status  are  associated  with  greater  ability  to 
absorb losses and higher resilience. Women, 
people with disabilities and racial and ethnic 
minorities may face greater barriers to recov-
ering from disasters, partly because they have 
fewer  personal  assets  and  unequal  access  to 
support.40 Children, women and the elderly 
are particularly vulnerable.41

Food prices have fluctuated considerably and unexpectedly since 2007

Food price index,
three-year
moving average:
2002–2004 = 100

200

150

100

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Source: FAO 2013.

48    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 

Meeting the Zero Hunger Challenge

Professor M.S. Swaminathan

The Zero Hunger Challenge, launched in 2012 by the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations, integrates a zero food loss and waste challenge and a 
100 percent sustainable food system challenge. How can this be accom-
plished? Let me cite the case of India. 

Over 70 years ago, the Indian sub-continent witnessed a serious famine 
in the Bengal region that led to the death of more than 3 million children, 
women and men. India’s population was then 300 million; it is now over 
1.2 billion. In 2013, India witnessed a historic transition from the famine 
conditions of 1943 to a legal commitment to provide, at a very low cost, the 
minimum essential calories to over 75 percent of the population from home 
grown food. The challenge now is to sustain the right to food commitment 
in an era of climate change, which can be characterized by unfavourable 
alterations in temperature, precipitation and sea level.

The Indian experience shows that the challenge can be met through a 

six-pronged strategy consisting of:
•  Attention to soil health enhancement, and conservation of prime farm land 

for agriculture. 

•  Rain  water  harvesting,  aquifer  recharge  and  conjunctive  use  of  ground 
water, surface water, treated waste water and sea water. Sea water con-
stitutes 97 percent of the global water resource, and it is now possible to 
promote sea water farming systems involving halophytes and aquaculture.

•  Spreading appropriate technologies and the needed inputs.
•  Credit at low interest and effective group and individual insurance.
•  Assured and remunerative marketing.
•  Providing  farmers  with  small  holdings  the  economy  and  power  of  scale 
through cooperatives, self-help groups, producer companies and contract 
farming.
Through a science-based marriage of nutrition and agriculture, agri-
cultural remedies can be provided for nutritional maladies. For achieving 

nutrition security, there is a need for concurrent attention to under-nu-
trition or calorie deprivation, protein hunger, and hidden hunger caused 
by the deficiency in the diet of micronutrients like iron, iodine, zinc, vi-
tamin A and vitamin B12. Protein deficiency can be alleviated through 
enhanced  production  and  consumption  of  pulses  (grain  legumes),  milk 
and  eggs.  Micro-nutrient  deficiencies  can  be  addressed  through  the 
popularization of biofortified crops. Micronutrient-enriched varieties are 
becoming available in several crops, such as rice, beans and wheat. The 
United Nations has designated 2014 as the International Year of Family 
Farming, and efforts should be made by developing countries to make 
every family farm a biofortified farm. We also should aim to train one 
woman  and  one  man  in  every  village  in  nutrition  literacy  to  serve  as 
Community Hunger Fighters.

Factors like clean drinking water, sanitation, primary healthcare and 
nutritional literacy have to be addressed for achieving nutrition security 
for all. Above all, priority to assisting small farm families to produce and 
earn more is the best way of overcoming poverty and malnutrition. The 
Indian Food Security Act has several interesting features worthy of emula-
tion. Some of these include adopting a life cycle approach with special 
attention to the first 1,000 days in a child’s life and designating the eldest 
woman in the household as the recipient of the subsidized food. Thus, the 
critical role women play in household food security is recognized under 
this Act.

In most developing countries the livelihood security of more than 50 per-
cent of the population depends on crop and animal husbandry, inland and 
marine fisheries, forestry and agro-forestry, and agro-processing and agri-
business. Under such conditions, if agriculture goes wrong, nothing else will 
have a chance to go right. Recent trends in food prices indicate that the 
future belongs to countries with grains and not guns.

Natural disasters are increasing in frequency 
and intensity. Between 1901 and 1910 there 
were 82 recorded disasters, but between 2003 
and 2012 there were more than 4,000. Even 
allowing for better recording, the increase is 
substantial. Particularly worrying is the much 
greater  incidence  of  hydrological  and  mete-
orological  disasters  (figure  2.11).  Although 
fatalities  from  natural  disasters  appear  to  be 
declining,  the  number  of  people  affected  is 
increasing.

The  frequency  and  severity  of  heat  waves, 
floods, droughts and heavy precipitation have 
been linked to climate change. These extremes 
inflict exceptionally high economic and social 
costs.  Moreover,  there  is  growing  scientific 
evidence that human action is responsible for 
warming  the  atmosphere  and  oceans,  rising 
sea levels and some climate extremes.42 Global 
warming  increases  the  likelihood  of  severe, 

pervasive and irreversible impacts.43 So, some 
of these weather extremes could be potentially 
prevented, or at least lessened. Climate change 
and  environmental  degradation  are  major 
threats to human development. Action to re-
duce these vulnerabilities, including a global 
agreement  on  climate  change  negotiations, 
will be fundamental to securing and sustaining 
human development.

Violent conflict

Armed  conflicts  impose  enormous  costs  on 
individuals,  communities  and  countries.  In 
addition to the loss of lives, they destroy live-
lihoods, generate insecurity and disrupt social 
services,  institutions  and  markets.  Conflicts 
can also cause large population displacements. 
By the end of 2012 around 45 million people 
were  forcibly  displaced  due  to  conflict  or 

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    49

FIGURE 2.11

Between 1901 and 1910 there were 82 recorded natural disasters, but between 2003 and 2012 there were more than 4,000

Climatological

Metereological

Hydrological

Geophysical

Biological

Year

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

0
100

0
150

0
250

0
50

0
150

Number of natural disasters

Note: The main types of disasters include extreme temperatures and droughts (climatological), storms (meteorological), floods (hydrological), earthquakes (geophysical) and epidemics (biological).
Source: CRED 2013.

persecution—the  highest  in  18  years—with 
15.4  million  of  them  refugees.44  Displaced 
populations separated from their jobs, assets 
and social networks are highly vulnerable to 
further violence, disease, poverty and natural 
disasters and have impaired ability to cope with 
adversity.

Internal  and  nonstate  armed  conflicts 
account  for  the  vast  majority  of  conflicts 
worldwide  (figure  2.12).45  The  number  of 
nonstate conflicts has risen recently, and al-
though the total number of internal conflicts 
is declining, the number of internationalized 
internal conflicts is on the rise. Interstate con-
flicts have declined due partly to the end of 
the colonial wars and the Cold War. Armed 
conflicts  occur  for  different  reasons  and  in 
very different contexts. But deficits in devel-
opment,  unaddressed  grievances  (including 
past conflicts) and natural resource rents are 
common  threads  in  the  majority  of  armed 
conflicts.

Civil  unrest  has  been  fuelled  by  a  grow-
ing  perception  that  policymaking  has  not 

prioritized  people’s  needs  or  listened  to 
their  voices,  which  should  be  taken  as  an 
important  call  for  better  governance.  This 
requires  greater  accountability  and  respon-
siveness  of  governments  to  the  concerns  of 
their  citizens.  Profound  transformations  are 
needed— beyond  changes  in  government, 
as  the  Arab  Spring  illustrated—to  open  the 
political  space  and  enable  agency.  Growing 
economic and social tensions—emerging from 
increasing inequality and a lack of economic 
 opportunities—are likely to continue to fuel 
social unrest.46

Several global factors can fuel conflicts and 
enhance fragility, such as transnational organ-
ized crime, international markets in military 
goods and security services, and the spread of 
radical extremism. Addressing these sources of 
vulnerability will be crucial to promote peace 
and advance human development.47

The  world  has  always  been  subject  to 
uncertainty  and  unpredictability.  But  the 
growing frequency and severity of economic 
and  environmental  shocks  threaten  human 

50    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 2.12

Internal and nonstate armed conflicts account for the vast majority of conflicts worldwide

Number of 
armed
conﬂicts

60

40

30

20

10

10

0

Nonstate
Internala
Interstateb

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

a. Includes internationalized internal conflicts.
b. Includes extrasystemic conflicts.
Source: UCDP and PRIO 2013; UCDP 2013.

development. That makes it vital to adopt bold 
national and international policies to reduce 
the vulnerability of individuals, communities 
and countries and to increase their resilience 
(chapters 4 and 5).

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

Despite continuing progress in human devel-
opment,  many  people  remain  vulnerable  to 
shocks that undermine their ability to live a 
healthy  and  fulfilling  life.  The  next  chapter 
identifies specific population groups that are 
particularly vulnerable to systemic threats and 
the mechanisms through which these vulnera-
bilities affect human development.

Chapter 2  State of human development    |    51

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 

Dealing with climate change

Rajendra Pachauri, Chair, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Addressing vulnerabilities and building resilience would need to deal with 
the impacts of climate change, which could become progressively serious 
if mitigating emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) is either delayed or in-
adequate in magnitude. The recently completed Working Group I report by 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) as part of the Fifth 
Assessment Report clearly establishes that each of the last three decades 
has  been  successively  warmer  at  the  Earth’s  surface  than  any  preceding 
decade since 1850. In the Northern Hemisphere, 1983−2012 was likely the 
warmest 30-year period of the last 1,400 years.

The rate of sea level rise since the mid-19th century has been larger 
than  the  mean  rate  in  the  previous  two  millennia.  Over  1901–2010  the 
global  mean  sea  level  rose by  0.19  meters.  Projections  indicate that  for 
the highest GHG concentration scenario, sea level rise would lie between 
0.52 to 0.98 meters by 2100 and between 0.58 and 2.03 meters by 2200. 
This clearly would severely test the resilience and adaptive capacities of 
societies in low-lying coastal areas and small island states. It is also likely 
that mean sea level rise will contribute to upward trends in extreme coastal 
high water.

The length, frequency and intensity of warm spells or heat waves will 
increase over most land areas. Based on emission scenarios, a 1-in-20 year 
hottest day is likely to become a 1-in-2 year event by the end of the 21st 
century  in  most  regions.  And  the  frequency  of  heavy  precipitation  or  the 
proportion of total rainfall from heavy falls will increase in the 21st century 
over many areas of the globe. A nearly ice-free Arctic Ocean in September 
is  likely  before  mid-century  in  the  highest  GHG  concentration  scenario. 
Correspondingly, temperature increases relative to 1986–2005 are projected 
to be in the range of 2.6°C to 4.8°C for 2081–2100.

Some  of  the  expected  changes  from  climate  change  will  be  abrupt, 
leaving less time for adaptation. A large fraction of anthropogenic climate 
change from CO2 emissions is irreversible on a multicentury to millennial 
time scale. For example, depending on the scenario, about 15 to 40 percent 

of emitted CO2 will remain in the atmosphere longer than 1,000 years. It is 
also virtually certain that global mean sea level rise will continue beyond 
2100, with sea level rise due to thermal expansion to continue for many 
centuries. Sustained mass loss by ice sheets would cause larger sea level 
rise, and some part of the mass loss might be irreversible. There is high 
confidence that sustained warming greater than some threshold would lead 
to the near-complete loss of the Greenland ice sheet over a millennium or 
more, causing a global mean sea level rise of up to 7 metres. Current esti-
mates indicate that the threshold is greater than about 1°C but less than 
about 4°C. The Fourth Assessment Report stated that under the SRES sce-
narios, the coastal population could grow from 1.2 billion people in 1990 to 
1.8–5.2 billion people by the 2080s, depending on assumptions about migra-
tion. With increases in global population, the number of people vulnerable 
to sea level rise will also likely increase.

Actions that range from incremental steps to transformational changes 
are essential for reducing risks from climate extremes. Social, economic and 
environmental sustainability can be enhanced by disaster risk management 
and adaptation approaches. A prerequisite for sustainability in the context 
of climate change is addressing the underlying causes of vulnerability, in-
cluding the structural inequalities that create and sustain poverty and con-
strain access to resources.

The most effective adaptation and disaster risk reduction actions are 
those that offer development benefits in the relative near term as well as 
reductions in vulnerability over the longer term. There are many approaches 
and pathways to a sustainable and resilient future. However, limits to re-
silience are faced when thresholds or tipping points associated with social 
and  natural  systems  are  exceeded,  posing  severe  challenges  for  adapta-
tion. Consequently, global society has to be aware that neither mitigation 
nor adaptation alone can avoid all climate change impacts. Adaptation and 
mitigation can complement each other, and together can significantly reduce 
the risks of climate change.

52    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

“There can be no keener revelation 
of a society’s soul than the way 
in which it treats its children.”

Nelson Mandela

“A stone thrown at the right 
time is better than gold 
given at the wrong time.”

Persian proverb

Vulnerable people, vulnerable world

Almost everyone feels vulnerable at some point in life. But some individuals and some groups are more vulnerable than 
others due to varying exposure to social and economic conditions and at different stages of their life cycles, starting at 
birth. This Report is concerned with people facing the possibility of major deterioration in their circumstances as a result of 
adverse events. The interest is in examining how individual and social characteristics condition the impacts that people feel 
in response to persistent shocks and risks more generally. By focusing on enduring and systemic vulnerability, we then ask 
who is vulnerable and why. This leads us to examine some of the critical underlying factors that generate these impacts.

People with limited core capabilities, such as 
in education and health, are less able to easily 
live lives they value. And their choices may be 
restricted or held back by social barriers and 
other exclusionary practices. Together, limited 
capabilities  and  restricted  choices1  prevent 
them from coping with threats. At certain stag-
es of the life cycle, capabilities may be restricted 
due to inadequate investments and attention at 
the appropriate times, yielding vulnerabilities 
that may accumulate and intensify. Consider 
how the lack of development of cognitive and 
noncognitive skills in early childhood affects 
labour outcomes and even drug and alcohol use 
later in life.2 Among the factors that condition 
how shocks and setbacks are felt and tackled 
are circumstances of birth, age, identity and so-
cioeconomic status—circumstances over which 
individuals have little or no control.

This chapter highlights life cycle vulnerabil-
ities and structural vulnerabilities (as well as 
their intersections). It also looks at how secu-
rity influences choices and affects some groups 
more  than  others,  with  a  focus  on  personal 
insecurity.
•  Life cycle vulnerabilities refer to threats that 
individuals  face  across  different  stages  of 
their  life—from  infancy  through  youth, 
adulthood  and  old  age.  Focusing  on  life 
cycle  vulnerabilities  and  the  formation  of 
life capabilities draws attention to sensitive 
phases  when  a  person  may  be  particularly 
susceptible.  Inadequate  attention  during 
such  periods  can  limit  capabilities  and 
heighten vulnerability. Earlier and continual 
investments make the formation of life capa-
bilities more robust. This approach helps in 
identifying interventions and policies that 
build human resilience, a subject for the next 
chapter.

•  Structural vulnerabilities are embedded in so-
cial contexts. Such a focus draws attention to 
individual and group characteristics, includ-
ing group identity, that are associated with a 
higher vulnerability to adverse circumstances. 
The reduced ability to bounce back can be 
traced to inadequate investments in building 
capabilities not only today, but throughout 
the  entire  life  cycle,  to  disability,  to  geo-
graphical  remoteness  or  other  isolation,  or 
to societal barriers that prevent people from 
realizing their potential even if they otherwise 
have similar capabilities (such as discrimina-
tion and the exclusion of women). 

Social institutions including norms shape 
the capabilities and choices that are afforded 
to individuals. Norms such as discrimination 
against certain groups, weak rule of law and 
systems of recourse, and settling of disputes 
through violence can severely curtail the free-
doms that individuals enjoy. Structural factors 
can also subject people or groups to multiple 
disadvantages.  Group-based  discrimination 
and  exclusion  exist  across  multiple  dimen-
sions—political  participation,  health  care, 
personal security and education, to name a 
few—and generate chronic and overlapping 
vulnerabilities  for  minorities  and  other  ex-
cluded groups by limiting their capabilities 
and their potential role in the larger society.

•  Group  violence  and 

insecure 

lives. 
Vulnerability adds an important dimension 
to  any  assessment  of  human  development 
and  its  progress.  Human  development  is 
about not only expanding choices, but also 
whether those choices are secure and likely 
to exist in the future. Making choices freely 
can be impaired by personal insecurity and 
fear  of  violence.  Violence  restricts  choices 
and  freedoms  through  physical  harm  and 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    55

3.When investments in life 
capabilities occur earlier, 
future prospects are better

threats and flourishes in countries with weak 
states,  limited  governance  and  poor  social 
institutions. Violence is also associated with 
high  poverty  and  inequality.  Women  and 
sexual,  ethnic  and  religious  minorities—as 
well as other groups and communities that 
face social discrimination—are more likely 
to experience personal insecurity and threats 
of violence, perceived or actual.
Whether societies are cohesive can influence 
how  individuals  and  communities  respond 
to persistent and pervasive shocks. A lack of 
social cohesion coupled with high inequality 
threatens  human  development  achievements 
by skewing institutions and eroding the social 
contract.3 Beyond a certain threshold, inequal-
ity  exacerbates  rent-seeking,  which  impedes 
growth,  slows  poverty  reduction  and  limits 
the quality of social and political engagement. 
Of course, the relationship also goes the other 
way, since rent-seeking activities may lead to 
increased inequality.4 Inequality also impedes 
human  development  by  reducing  investment 
in basic social services and public goods and by 
increasing political instability.5 Cohesive and 
more-equal societies do better in most aspects 
of human development, including responding 
to  threats  and  challenges.6  People  are  more 
secure  when  states  function  well  and  when 
social cohesion is strengthened by protecting 
all rights and advancing norms that boost tol-
erance and inclusiveness. Such states also tend 
to  have  strong  social  institutions  that  create 
space for individuals and groups to feel secure 
in expressing their concerns, in claiming their 
rights to support and protection and in build-
ing alliances for collective action.

Life capabilities and life 
cycle vulnerabilities—
interdependent and cumulative

Capabilities are built over a lifetime and have 
to be nurtured and maintained; otherwise they 
can stagnate. Many of people’s vulnerabilities 
(and strengths) are the result of their life his-
tories, with past outcomes influencing present 
exposure and ways of coping.7 The formation of 
life capabilities has two features.
•  First, life capabilities at any stage of life are 
path-dependent—that  is,  they  are  affected 

56    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

by investments in the preceding stages of life. 
They are also subject to an ecological rela-
tionship and affected by the interplay among 
the immediate environment, the community 
and society.

•  Second, short-term shocks frequently have 
long-run  consequences.  Individuals  may 
not  automatically  bounce  back  from  what 
appears to be a transitory shock (hysteresis). 
For instance, a setback in early childhood can 
have  serious  ramifications  throughout  the 
rest of a person’s life, including the chances 
of  holding  onto  a  job,  the  uncertainties 
associated with growing older and the trans-
mission of vulnerabilities to the next gener-
ation. Some effects can be reversed, but not 
always8;reversal  is  context-specific  and  not 
necessarily cost-effective.9
When investments in life capabilities occur 
earlier,  future  prospects  are  better  (see  the 
solid blue line in figure 3.1). The opposite is 
also true—the lack of timely and continuing 
investments  in  life  capabilities  can  heavily 
compromise an individual’s ability to achieve 
full  human  development  potential  (see  the 
solid red line in figure 3.1). Later interventions 
can  help  individuals  recover—but  usually 
only partially—and move to a higher human 
development path (see the dashed blue lines in 
figure 3.1).

Structural  vulnerabilities—arising  from 
such  factors  as  gender,  ethnicity  and  inter-
group inequality (see next section)—interact 
with  life  cycle  dynamics  to  place  certain 
groups  of  children,  youth,  working  people 
and older adults at greater risk. An example 
is the intergenerational transmission of vul-
nerability from disadvantaged parents to their 
children.  This  interaction  is  influenced  by 
the social context and the degree of human 
agency. Since people do not suffer crises pas-
sively, they have a major role in shaping their 
destinies. This active role, or agency, of the in-
dividual and collective is most easily realized 
in  societies  that  create  space  for  citizens  to 
express their views, voice their concerns and 
make reasoned decisions about the types of 
lives they want to live.

The extent to which the public can engage 
with states or take direct action to reduce vul-
nerability goes beyond democratization in the 
institutional sense. Even in democracies elite 

FIGURE 3.1

When investments in life capabilities occur earlier, future prospects are better

Capabilities

- Poor job quality
- Lack of social protection

- Lack of social protection
- Lack of care
- Higher incidence of disabilities

- Lack of employment opportunities
- Low school availability and quality
- Violence, conﬂicts

- Early neglect
- Poor nutrition and 
lack of pre-  and 
post-natal care
- Poor child 
stimulation

Prenatal and early

childhood

Youth

Adulthood

Old age

Represents life capability at its full potential for individuals; this is the path of life capabilities that individuals could achieve if they were able to successfully manage the vulnerabilities
they are likely to face during sensitive periods along their life cycle.
Shows that when individuals fail to overcome vulnerabilities at any sensitive period, their life capabilities are likely to end up on a lower path.
Later interventions could help individuals recover—but usually only partially—and move to a higher path.

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations.

capture  of  political  systems  can  narrow  the 
scope of public discussion and reduce oppor-
tunities for critical examination of a society’s 
values and priorities.

Early childhood—building 
strong foundations to break the 
intergenerational cycle of deprivation

The foundational period is early childhood—a 
window of opportunity for resolving early in-
equity and achieving inclusive and sustainable 
social and economic development (box 3.1). 
The global population of children under age 
5 is 659 million (9.1 percent of the total). The 
regions with the highest shares of children in 
the  total  population  are  Sub- Saharan  Africa 
(16.2  percent),  the  Arab  States  (12  percent) 
and South Asia (10.5 percent; figure 3.2). By 
2050 the global share is expected to drop to 
7.9  percent,  with  the  largest  drop  in  South 
Asia (to 6.9 percent). By 2050 only the Arab 

States and Sub- Saharan Africa will have above- 
average shares of children under age 5.10

By  providing  basic  health  care,  adequate 
nutrition,  and  nurturing  and  stimulation  in 
a  caring  environment,  interventions  in  early 
childhood development help ensure children’s 
progress  in  primary  school,  continuation 
through  secondary  school  and  successful 
entry into adulthood and engagement in the 
workforce.11

Events in early life affect the development of 
the  brain’s  circuitry,  the  dynamic  gene–envi-
ronment interactions and the programming of 
the body’s immune, neurological and endocrine 
systems. This has implications for subsequent 
trajectories of human development.12 Both the 
architecture of skills (coping abilities and cog-
nitive and noncognitive competences) and the 
process of skill formation are strongly influenced 
by neural circuits that develop as a result of dy-
namic interactions between genes and early-life 
environments and experiences. In other words, 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    57

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 

James Heckman, Nobel Laureate and Economics Professor at the University of Chicago

Human development and early childhood development

Recent research on the economics, psychology and neuroscience of human 
development is converging to a deeper understanding of how we become 
who we are. This Report offers guidelines on how this knowledge should 
guide policy.

Multiple  abilities  shape  flourishing  lives.  Policymakers  need  to  move 
beyond  a  one  dimensional  focus  of  measuring  human  development  by 
scores on achievement tests, like the Programme for International Student 
Assessment, and consider a much broader array of essential life skills.

The early years are important in creating human capacities. Policymakers 
need to act on the knowledge that skills beget skills, that flourishing lives 
have strong early foundations and that substantial gaps in skills emerge be-
fore children start school. This Report offers guidance on effective strategies 
of human development starting in the womb and continuing through old age.

Investments in early childhood development can play an important role 
in reducing the role of the accident of birth in determining life outcomes. The 
most productive investments foster parenting, attachment and interactions 
between parents and children. Good parenting is far more important than 
cash. An economically advantaged child subject to low-quality parenting is 
more disadvantaged than an economically disadvantaged child with a par-
ent who cares and guides the child wisely.

The new science of early childhood shows that what is socially fair can 
be economically efficient. High-quality supplements to family life that foster 
beneficial parent–child interactions and stimulate children have high eco-
nomic returns that more than pay for themselves. Quality early childhood 
development can be an important contributor to a successful national eco-
nomic development strategy.

FIGURE 3.2

The regions with the highest shares of children under age 5 in the total population are Sub- Saharan Africa, the Arab States and South Asia

1970
2010
2050

Share of children
under age 5
in the total
population (%)

20

15

10

5

0

 Arab States

East Asia

and the Paciﬁc

Europe

and Central Asia

Latin America

and the
Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan

Africa

Developed
countries

World

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013).

the environment can affect individuals different-
ly depending on their genetic endowments, and 
the same genetic endowment produces different 
outcomes  depending  on  the  environment.13 
This interaction follows hierarchical rules in a 
sequence of events, such that later attainment is 
built on foundations laid earlier.

Cognitive,  social,  emotional  and  language 
competences are interdependent, since all are 

shaped by early experiences and all contribute 
to the formation of lifelong capabilities (figure 
3.3).14 As a result, stresses in early life—such 
as socioeconomic deprivation, disruptive care 
giving and harsh parenting—tend to be asso-
ciated with difficulties in adult life, including 
the incidence of chronic diseases. Studies from 
New  Zealand  and  the  United  States  have 
linked childhood abuse and other adversities 

58    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 3.3

Cognitive, social, emotional and language competences are interdependent, since all are shaped by early 
experiences and all contribute to the formation of lifelong capabilities

Social and cognitive skills

Social/emotional skills

Cognitive skills

(Sit still; pay attention; engage in learning; open to experience)

Health

Cognitive skills

(Fewer lost school days: ability to concentrate)

Cognitive skills

Produce better health practices;
produce more motivation;
greater perception of rewards

(Child better understands and controls its environment)

Outcomes
Increased productivity, higher income, better health, more family investment,
upward mobility, reduced social costs

Source: Heckman 2013.

with  a  range  of  health  problems,  including 
coronary artery disease, high blood pressure, 
type  2  diabetes,  obesity  and  cancer—as  well 
as with such mental and behavioural problems 
as depression, alcoholism, smoking and other 
substance abuse.15

Infants and young children across the world, 
exposed  to  innumerable  risks,  are  extremely 
vulnerable to the effects of inadequate access to 
health care or education, clean drinking water 
or proper sanitation and food.16 The longer the 
exposure to harsh conditions or deprivations, 
the greater the burden on the body’s stress re-
sponse system.17

But  it  is  a  mistake  to  assume  that  abilities 
are  fixed.  Multiple  abilities,  both  cognitive 
and noncognitive, develop continuously from 
the early years onwards in a variety of learning 
situations to foster further learning and per-
formance. Many of these processes interact.18 
For  example,  academic  motivation  not  only 
boosts education outcomes, but is also likely to 
reduce drug and alcohol use, both of which are 
associated  with  crime.  Enhanced  personality 

traits such as academic motivation can promote 
learning,  which  in  turn  boosts  achievement. 
But in the other direction, aggressive, antisocial 
or rule-breaking behaviours can lead to crime 
and poor labour market outcomes.19

Too  often,  poverty  disrupts  the  normal 
course of early childhood development—more 
than one in five children in developing coun-
tries  lives  in  absolute  income  poverty  and  is 
vulnerable  to  malnutrition.20  In  developing 
countries (where 92 percent of children live) 
7  in  100  will  not  survive  beyond  age  5,  50 
will  not  have  their  birth  registered,  68  will 
not receive early childhood education, 17 will 
never enrol in primary school, 30 will be stunt-
ed  and  25  will  live  in  poverty.21  Inadequate 
food, sanitation facilities and hygiene increase 
the  risk  of  infections  and  stunting:  close  to 
156  million  children  are  stunted,  a  result  of 
undernutrition and infection.22 Undernutrition 
contributes to 35 percent of deaths due to mea-
sles, malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea.23 The 
impact is greatest if the deprivation is in early 
childhood.24 Children are also affected if their 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    59

mothers are poor, have low levels of education 
or suffer from depression or high levels of stress, 
perhaps as a result of violence, poor housing or 
a lack of services.

Lacking  basic  nutrition,  health  care  and 
stimulation to promote healthy growth, many 
poor children enter school unready to learn, 
and they do poorly in class, repeat grades and 
are likely to drop out. For children who survive, 
poverty and undernutrition during preschool 
years  account  for  a  subsequent  loss  of  more 
than two school grades. Even at age 6, or by the 
time of school entry, a poor child may already 
be at a disadvantage (figure 3.4).25 Gaps in skills 
open  early.  For  example,  word  accumulation 
begins very early in life. In the United States at 
age 36 months the verbal skills of children from 
different  socioeconomic  backgrounds  differ 
markedly, and the differences, or trajectories, 
for verbal skills, are still present at age 9 (box 
3.1).26  Those  from  poor  backgrounds  learn 
more  slowly  if  their  parents  have  had  little 
education. In Colombia and Mexico semantic 
verbal fluency is strongly associated with paren-
tal education.27

Good adult–child interactions in the early 
years  are  essential  stimulation  for  brain  de-
velopment and do not necessarily depend on 

money.28 In fact, parents’ communication with 
their children and their sensitivity to children’s 
emotional needs can limit the effects of low so-
cioeconomic status on children’s cognitive and 
socioemotional development.29

Economic  downturns  can  also  disrupt 
children’s  education  development—espe-
cially when their parents lose their jobs. The 
Indonesian crisis in 1998 led to a 5–8 percent-
age point decline in enrolment among children 
ages 13 and 14,30 and the crises in post-Soviet 
and  Central  Asian  countries  reduced  enrol-
ment 3–12 percentage points.31

When  educational  attainment  is  reduced, 
vulnerabilities  are  transmitted  across  gener-
ations  by  limiting  children’s  future  learning 
and  employment  opportunities.32  Poverty 
and undernutrition during preschool years are 
associated with a more than 30 percent loss 
in income.33 Conditions experienced before 
age  18,  including  structural  vulnerabilities 
such  as  poverty  and  group  inequality,  con-
tribute to about half the inequality in lifetime 
earnings.34

Violence, neglect and conflict also damage 
early childhood development. Children in the 
Gaza Strip have three times the emotional and 
behavioural problems of middle-class Canadian 

FIGURE 3.4

Poor children are already at a vocabulary disadvantage by age 6, as shown in the case of Ecuador

Language skills
(median
Peabody Picture
Vocabulary
Test score)

110

100

90

80

70

60

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

Source: Paxson and Schady 2007.

60    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Richest 25%

50–75%

25–50%
Poorest 25%

6
Child’s age
(years)

BOX 3.1

Meaningful differences: 30 million more words

Children’s early exposure to language in relation to family status and 
income makes a difference. Evidence from the United States highlights the 
importance of good parent–child interaction and stimulation, especially for 
children in poorer socioeconomic settings, and the critical roles of families 
and communities (see table and figure). Children’s success depends on the 
quality of early home environments.

Cumulative vocabulary experiences for children in the United States

Family  
socioeconomic status

Words heard 

per hour

Words heard 

by age 4

Welfare

Working class

Professional

616

1,251

2,153

13 million

26 million

45 million

Gaps open early before entering school—vocabulary

College educated parents
Working class parents
Welfare parents

16

24

36
Child’s age (months)

Cumulative
vocabulary
(words)

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200

0

Source: Hart and Risley 1995.

children.35  And  children  who  witness  their 
mothers being beaten by intimate partners are 
more likely than others to grow up to become 
victims or perpetrators of violence.36

At particular risk of sexual abuse are children 
with disabilities and those who are psychologi-
cal or cognitively vulnerable37—those who live 
in communities where unemployment and sub-
stance abuse are rampant—or are abandoned, 
trafficked or forced to work outside the home.38 
Children raised in institutions may also suffer 
profound deprivation that damages brain de-
velopment.39 Even schools may be sources of 
insecurity. Indeed, when parents fear for the 
physical and sexual safety of daughters, they are 
likely to keep them out of school.40

Alleviating the worst effects of poverty and 
deprivation, and breaking the intergenerational 
cycle of poverty, gives children a better chance.

Navigating vulnerabilities during youth

Youth—ages 15–24—is a key period of transi-
tion when children learn to engage with society 
and the world of work.41 In many countries the 
number of young people is rising. The global 
youth population is 1.2 billion (17.6 percent of 
the total population), and the regions with the 
highest shares of young people in their popu-
lation are Sub- Saharan Africa (20.2 percent), 
the Arab States (19.6 percent) and South Asia 
(19.6  percent).  By  2050  the  share  of  young 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    61

people in the total population is expected to 
drop to 13.8 percent, with the largest drop in 
East Asia and the Pacific (from 17.3 percent in 
2010 to 10.7 percent in 2050).42 Country data 
also  show  that  the  share  of  young  people  in 
the total population is expected to fall in most 
regions by 2050 (map 3.1).

Governments will need to ensure sufficient 
employment  opportunities  for  young  people 
or face social and political unrest. Recent so-
cial upheavals show that a mismatch between 
increasingly  educated  young  people  and 
employment  opportunities  can  yield  aliena-
tion  and  despair.  The  International  Labour 

MAP 3.1

The share of young people in the total population is expected to fall in most regions between 2010 and 2050

2010

Share of young people (ages 15–24) in total population (%)

20.2–25
18.5–20.2
14.5–18.5
0–14.5
No data

2050

*

*

**

**

Note: These maps are stylized and not to scale. They do not reflect a position by the United Nations Development Programme on the legal status of any country or territory 
or the delimitation of any frontiers.
Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013).

62    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Recent social upheavals 
show that a mismatch 
between increasingly 
educated young people 
and employment 
opportunities can yield 
alienation and despair

Organization’s projection for job creation in 
the Middle East is flat, which could lead to a 
continuing  mismatch  between  opportunities 
and aspirations.43

Young people around the world are especially 
vulnerable  to  marginalization  in  the  labour 
market  because  they  lack  work  experience, 
social  networks,  job  search  abilities  and  the 
financial  resources  to  find  employment.  So 
they  are  more  likely  to  be  unemployed,  un-
deremployed or employed on more precarious 
contracts. Youth unemployment rates, almost 
always  higher  than  those  for  adults,  are  also 
more  sensitive  to  macroeconomic  shocks.44 
In 2012 the global youth unemployment rate 
was an estimated 12.7 percent—almost three 
times the adult rate.45 When a crisis hits, young 
people are more likely to experience joblessness 
than adults are, and the gap between youth and 
adult unemployment rates remains wide, even 
after the economy has begun to recover.46

Many social and economic challenges facing 
young people today, including unemployment, 
must be understood in the interaction between 
unique demographic trends and specific eco-
nomic contexts.47 As a consequence of the large 
decline in fertility rates,48 in many developing 
countries the share of young people in the to-
tal population has increased over the past 40 
years, creating a ‘youth bulge’. This presents an 
opportunity to foster human development, as 
the labour force grows49 with better educated 
and potentially more-productive workers. But 
the growing youth labour force has not been 
matched by increasing productive employment 
opportunities. Today’s high youth unemploy-
ment  rate  is  a  considerable  loss  of  human 
development potential that not only threatens 
economic progress,50 but also raises the risk of 
social unrest, violence and crime.51

Ambitious  policies  are  critical  for  meeting 
young people’s expectations in the labour mar-
ket. Under an ‘ambitious policy’ scenario, global 
youth unemployment would be less than 5 per-
cent by 205052 due to the dual effect of fewer 
young people entering the labour market and 
higher economic growth. However, there are im-
portant regional heterogeneities. Under a ‘busi-
ness as usual’ scenario the gap would continue to 
grow, particularly in Sub- Saharan Africa.53 But 
ambitious policies (fast track education policies 
and accelerated economic growth) would close 

the gap in supply and demand for young workers 
for South Asia and reduce it for Sub- Saharan 
Africa (figure 3.5). In South Asia the gap would 
be closed by 2050 due to the dual effect of edu-
cation policies on population dynamics (which 
will  reduce  the  number  of  young  people  that 
enter the labour market) and higher economic 
growth. For Sub- Saharan Africa additional poli-
cies to raise the employment intensity of growth 
would be needed to close the gap.

Young  people  are  also  vulnerable  as  they 
face changes in their physical, cognitive, social, 
gendered  and  emotional  lives.  For  example, 
adolescents could risk being out of school and 
out of work, limiting their engagement in so-
ciety. Some are forced to work, are trafficked 
for  sex  or  become  undocumented  migrants. 
These experiences are shaped by the socioeco-
nomic environment. In many countries young 
people  are  seeing  their  choices  limited  by 
economic insecurity, technological change, po-
litical uprisings, conflict (box 3.2) and climate 
change—which can transform enthusiasm and 
entrepreneurship into frustration and despair.

Young  people’s  social  transitions  are  also 
shaped by broader structural factors, such as 
poverty, gender and inequality, as well as local 
practices.  In  some  regions  social  change  and 
the expansion of formal education are altering 
the opportunities for and constraints on young 
people’s  social  transitions  to  adulthood.  For 
example, young people are marrying later and 
delaying having children.

Investing earlier in the life cycle has proven 
effective  in  improving  outcomes  for  adoles-
cents later in life. But if substantial deprivation 
occurs in childhood, there is potential for long-
term losses.54 A recent study looked at 15-year-
olds who experienced a food shortage at age 12. 
In  Peru  they  were  60  percent  less  likely  to 
have a healthy body mass index; in Ethiopia 
and Andhra Pradesh, India, they scored lower 
in  cognitive  achievement;  in  Viet  Nam  and 
Andhra Pradesh they reported lower self-rated 
health; and in Ethiopia and Peru they reported 
lower subjective well-being.55

Typically,  the  opportunities  are  better  in 
urban areas.56 In Andhra Pradesh 25 percent 
of  young  people  are  no  longer  in  school  in 
rural areas, compared with 15 percent in urban 
areas. Girls were needed for work at home or 
on  family  land,  while  boys  had  left  school, 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    63

FIGURE 3.5

Fast track education policies and accelerated economic growth would eliminate the gap in supply and demand for young workers in South 
Asia and narrow it in Sub- Saharan Africa between 2010 and 2050

South Asia

200

Youth labour supply, base
Youth labour supply, fast track scenario
Labour demand, base
Labour demand, accelerated progress scenario

160

120

Sub-Saharan Africa

Labour supply, base
Labour supply, fast track scenario
Labour  demand, base
Labour demand, accelerated progress scenario

300

200

100

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013) and Pardee Center for International Futures (2013).

either to work for pay or because of schooling’s 
perceived  irrelevance  or  poor  quality.  Young 
people from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes were twice as likely to have left school. 
Urban families also have more variety in educa-
tion institutions.57

Gender  inequality  shapes  the  school  ex-
perience  of  young  people.  In  rural  Ethiopia 
15-year-old girls in the lowest wealth quintile 
scored  on  average  2.1  of  20  on  a  math  test, 
whereas  15-year-old  boys  averaged  7.4.  In 
rural Viet Nam 15-year-old girls averaged 9.4, 
whereas 15-year-old boys averaged 18.1.58

The onset of puberty opens other vulnerabil-
ities, with different ramifications for boys and 
girls.59 A major concern is teenage  pregnancy—
which  brings  medical  risks  to  mother  and 
child, increases the rate of maternal depression 
and lowers the mother’s education and employ-
ment  status.60  Premature  pregnancy  also  has 
implications for young men, imposing financial 
and social obligations they are not yet ready 
to handle.61 There are similar concerns about 
early  marriage—often  arranged  for  young 
people who have limited social and economic 

64    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

options.62 But in most parts of the world, mar-
riage of young girls is arranged as part of taking 
care of their material needs and those of their 
families. The practice of early marriage tends 
to continue when the social and economic op-
tions of young women are limited.

These and other local customs and sociocul-
tural practices shape young people’s social tran-
sitions to adulthood. For example, young men 
may  have  intergenerational  obligations  that 
shape their social transitions, such as caring for 
ageing parents.

Young adults are also particularly vulnerable 
to violence,63 which can lead to exclusion, hope-
lessness, a lack of purpose in life and, particu-
larly among girls, increased anxiety, depression 
and post-traumatic stress.64 Based on homicide 
rates, the problem is greatest in Latin America, 
where the rate is higher than 70 per 100,000.65 
For each young person killed, 20–40 more are 
believed to sustain injuries requiring hospital 
treatment.  Homicide  rates,  highest  for  men 
ages 15–29, tend to decline with age, whereas 
the much lower rates for woman remain largely 
unchanged during the life cycle (figure 3.6).66

BOX 3.2

Somalia: conflict and youth exclusion

Deprivation,  exclusion  and  grievances  are  particularly  widespread  during 
conflicts.  They  are  fuelled  by  underdevelopment  and  poverty  and  uneven 
power distributions and inequality between groups that result in multiple ex-
clusions and competition for resources. In Somalia young people experience 
exclusion in three dimensions—sociocultural, economic and political—and 
a lack of opportunities. As a result, they become both victims and sources of 
conflict. Caught between conflict and poverty, they are jobless and voiceless. 
To capture their deprivations and frustrations, and highlight the potential 
of energy and enthusiasm for change, the 2012 Somalia National Human 
Development  Report:  Empowering  Youth  for  Peace  and  Development  en-
gaged youth to hear their opinion of their situation.

In all Somali regions young people experience a disconnect between 
education  and  employment  opportunities  that  prevents  social  and  eco-
nomic empowerment (see figure). They also perceive few opportunities to 

participate in society or express their needs and aspirations. This feeling 
is particularly strong in South Central Somalia, the most conflict-affected 
region. The lack of voice, choice and options forces young people to engage 
in violence and conflict. Motives are financial as well as nonfinancial, out of 
a need for personal security or related to identity, status and revenge.

Combining  these  results  in  a  new  youth  frustration  index,  Somalia 
scores 3.96 out of 5 points (where 5 is the most frustrated). With the lack 
of employable skills, the lack of employment opportunities, the lack of voice 
and the lack of recreational activities as the most relevant causes for frus-
tration, it is clear that young people feel undervalued and excluded from 
various parts of society.

Despite their challenges, young people in Somalia still have hopes and 
aspirations for the future, indicating the importance of giving them voice in 
their society and according them a role in peace building.

Youth perceptions of exclusion and coping strategies

Youth frustration and underlying causes

Youth exclusion

5
4
3
2
1
0

Youth are lured
to leave the country

Youth are
forced to
engage in
violence

Youth as victims
and perpetrators
of conﬂict

South Central
Puntland
Somaliland

Young women face more
exclusion than young men

Mismatch
between skills 
and job demand

No outlet for youth 
to express needs
and aspirations

Lack of family support

5
4
3
2
1
0

Lack of self-esteem

Feelings of
humiliation

Drug abuse

South Central
Puntland
Somaliland

Poor governance
and justice

Lack of
employable skills

Lack of employment
opportunities

Greed motive for youth
engagement in violence

Much grievance
among youth

Inadequate
recreational facilities

No outlet to express
aspirations and needs

Source: UNDP 2012e.

Young people are at particular risk of being 
coerced  or  manipulated  into  criminal  activ-
ity by gangs and criminal groups managed by 
adults. In environments with high youth un-
employment, gangs offer an occupation, a sense 
of  identity  and  belonging  and  a  platform  to 
protest against society.

Adulthood and work—more 
than just money

Adults are expected to provide for themselves 
and  their  families  through  paid  and  unpaid 

labour. Those with jobs are often considered less 
vulnerable. Yet many are exposed to precarious 
employment or unemployment. In 2012 more 
than 200 million adults worldwide were unem-
ployed. Vulnerable employment accounts for 
more than half of total employment and is par-
ticularly high in South-East Asia (61 percent), 
South  Asia  (77  percent)  and  Sub- Saharan 
Africa  (77  percent).67  Even  those  employed 
may be earning very little. In 2011, 397 million 
people ages 15 and older were estimated to be 
employed  but  living  in  households  with  less 
than $1.25 per person a day. The regions with 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    65

FIGURE 3.6

In Latin America and the Caribbean homicide rates for men, highest for men ages 15–29, tend to decline with age, whereas the much lower 
rates for woman remain largely unchanged

Share of deaths
due to homicide,
1996–2009 (%)

20

15

10

5

0

Source: UNDP 2013b.

Men
Women

0

1–4

5–9

10–14

15–19

20–24

25–29

30–34

35–39

40–44

45–49

50–54

55–59

60–64

65–69

70–74

75–79

80–84

85 or
older
Age

Work  provides  more 

the highest rate of these working poor as share 
of total employment are South Asia (25.7 per-
cent) and Sub- Saharan Africa (41.7 percent).68
than  wages. 
Employment,  especially  decent  employment, 
is  associated  with  dignity  and  status—and 
with  stable  and  cohesive  communities  and 
societies.  Stable  employment  brings  benefits 
for society—enabling the workforce to retain 
experience, knowledge and productivity, thus 
enhancing economic performance.69 Full em-
ployment also contributes to social cohesion, 
particularly  by  improving  the  well-being  of 
girls. Increased employment of women helps 
change perceptions of the ‘value’ of girls and 
encourages investment in their education and 
health. It also helps reduce poverty.

The recent economic crisis led to relatively 
long unemployment spells for many workers. 
Since the last quarter of 2007 in a majority of 
42 countries with data, a high proportion of 
unemployed were out of work for 12 months 

or  more.70  Even  if  economic  downturns  are 
short, individuals can be subject to ‘scarring’, 
with lasting negative consequences. In devel-
oped countries a loss of employment results in 
a 10–25 percent reduction in earnings, and this 
decline can last 5–20 years.71 Large losses of 
earnings from an unexpected job displacement 
have also been found in developing countries,72 
where economic crises have large negative ef-
fects on earnings, household consumption and 
poverty.73

The  lack  of  a  decent  job  can  have  serious 
consequences beyond the loss in income. The 
stresses of layoffs and episodes of unemploy-
ment  can  reduce  life  expectancy  as  a  result 
of  health  problems  such  as  strokes  or  heart 
attacks.74  Bouts  of  unemployment  are  also 
associated  with  high  rates  of  depression  and 
alcoholism.75 And there is a gender bias. In the 
United Kingdom women ages 60 and older are 
more likely than men of the same age to have a 
low income, and women who have had lower 

66    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 
Valuing the dignity of work

Dr. Juan Somavia, former Director General of the International Labour Organization

In today’s world defending the dignity of work is a constant uphill struggle. 
Prevailing economic thinking sees work as a cost of production, which in a 
global economy has to be as low as possible in order to be competitive. It 
sees workers as consumers who because of their relative low wages need 
to be given easy access to credit to stimulate consumption and wind up with 
incredible debts. Nowhere in sight is the societal significance of work as a 
foundation of personal dignity, as a source of stability and development of 
families or as a contribution to communities at peace. This is the meaning 
of ‘decent work’. It is an effort at reminding ourselves that we are talking 
about policies that deal with the life of human beings not just bottom line 
issues. It is the reason why the International Labour Organization constitu-
tion tells us “Labour is not a commodity.”1 And we know that the quality of 
work defines in so many ways the quality of a society. So we must begin 
by helping the working poor step out of poverty and informality into quality 
livelihoods, self-employment or a formal job. And that’s what our policies 
should be about: keeping people moving into progressively better jobs with 
living wages, respect for worker rights, nondiscrimination and gender equal-
ity, facilitating workers organization and collective bargaining, universal so-
cial protection, adequate pensions and access to health care. This is what 
millions of human beings are telling us worldwide: “Give me a fair chance 
at  a  decent  job  and  I’ll  do  the  rest;  I  don’t  want  charity  or  handouts.”  It 
will take longer and require different emphasis in developing and developed 
countries, but all societies face decent work challenges, particularly in the 
midst of the global crisis that still haunts us.

Why is this so difficult? There are many converging historical and policy 
explanations, but there is a solid underlying fact: in the values of today’s 
world, capital is more important than labour. The signs have been all over the 
place—from the unacceptable growth of inequality to the shrinking share of 
wages in GDP. We must all reflect on the implications for social peace and 
political stability, including those benefitting from their present advantage. 
Pope John Paul II reminded us “All must work so that the economic system 
in which we live does not upset the fundamental order of the priority of work 
over capital, of the common good over the private interest.” As Gandhi said, 
“There is enough for everybody’s needs, not for everybody’s greed.”

But things are changing. Many emerging and developing countries have 
shown great policy autonomy in defining their crisis responses, guided by a 
keen eye on employment and social protection, as this Report advocates. 
Policies  leading  to  the  crisis  overvalued  the  capacity  of  markets  to  self-
regulate; undervalued the role of the State, public policy and regulations 
and devalued respect for the environment, the dignity of work and the social 

services and welfare functions in society. They led into a pattern of unsus-
tainable, inefficient and unfair growth. We have slowly begun to close this 
policy cycle, but we don’t have a ready-made alternative prepared to take its 
place. We are moving into a rather lengthy period of uncertainty with no ob-
vious source of global policy leadership: A period more of muddling through 
than forceful global decision making. This is an extraordinary political op-
portunity and intellectual challenge for the United Nations System. Coming 
together around a creative post-2015 global vision with clear Sustainable 
Development Goals can be a first step into a new policy cycle looking at 
what a post-crisis world should look like. And beyond the United Nations, 
we need to listen. There is great disquiet and insecurity in too many societ-
ies. From polls and elections to people in the streets and increasingly vocal 
social movements a clear message to governmental and business leaders is 
coming through: “Your policies are not working for a great majority of us.”

And that’s why the insistence of this Report on reclaiming the role of 
full employment, universal social protection and the road to decent work 
is so important. It builds on the existing consensus of the largest meeting 
of Heads of State and Government in the history of the United Nations. In 
their 2005 Summit they stated that “We strongly support fair globalization 
and resolve to make the goals of full and productive employment and decent 
work for all, including for women and young people, a central objective of 
our relevant national and international policies as well as our national de-
velopment strategies.”2 So, at least on paper, the commitment is there in no 
uncertain terms.

Let me finish with one example of the changes necessary for which I 
believe there is widespread consensus. Strong real economy investments, 
large and small, with their important job-creating capacity must displace 
financial operations from the driver’s seat of the global economy. The ex-
pansion of short-term profits in financial markets, with little employment to 
show for it, has channelled away resources from the longer term horizon of 
sustainable real economy enterprises. The world is awash in liquidity that 
needs to become productive investments through a regulatory framework 
ensuring  that  financial  institutions  fulfil  their  original  role  of  channelling 
savings into the real economy. Also, expanding wage participation in GDP 
within reasonable inflation rates will increase real demand and serve as a 
source of sustainable development growth. Moving from committed mini-
mum wage policies to a much fairer distribution of productivity gains and 
profits should be a point of departure.

Dreams or potential reality? We shall see, but no doubt this is what 

politics and social struggles will be all about in the years to come.

Notes
1. ILO 2010a. 2. UN 2005.

status or part-time work generally get a lower 
occupational pension.76

Many  of  the  working  poor  are  in  non-
standard employment—involuntary part-time 
and temporary work in advanced countries and 
informal employment in developing countries. 
Ideally,  employment  rates  rise,  and  the  inci-
dence of nonstandard employment falls over 

time (see the category 1 countries in figure 3.7). 
However, the majority of countries with data 
saw unemployment and nonstandard employ-
ment both increase between 2007 and 201077 
(see the category 4 countries in figure 3.7).78

Informal  employment,  a  particular  chal-
lenge  for  developing  countries,  accounts  for 
more than 40 percent of total employment in 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    67

FIGURE 3.7

For most countries with data nonstandard employment increased between 2007 and 2010, while overall employment fell

Category 1:
higher employment and lower incidence
of nonstandard work

Category 2: 
higher employment and higher
incidence of nonstandard work

Poland

Brazil

Germany

Belgium

Austria

Thailand

Category 3:
lower employment and lower
incidence of nonstandard work

Source: ILO 2012c.

Change in nonstandard
employment share (%)

Change in 
employment
 rate (%)

United
Kingdom

Category 4:
lower employment and higher
incidence of nonstandard work

two-thirds of the 41 emerging and developing 
countries with data.79 Definitions vary widely, 
but informal employment generally lacks so-
cial, legal or regulatory protection.80 Those in 
informal employment earn less on average than 
those in formal jobs do.81

The vulnerabilities of those in informal em-
ployment go beyond low and volatile earnings. 
The ability to cope with adverse shocks is com-
promised by the lack of formal social protec-
tion, and vulnerabilities are compounded when 
individuals working informally face harassment 
by  public  authorities.  Many  in  part-time  or 
temporary  jobs  face  similar  problems:  They 
may not have the same protections or benefits, 
such  as  health  insurance,  as  permanent  full-
time employees.

Nearly half the world’s workers are in vul-
nerable employment, trapped in insecure jobs 
usually outside the jurisdiction of labour legis-
lation and social protection. Over the years, in 
response to economic volatility and repeated 

crises, employers are increasing their reliance 
on  part-time  or  temporary  employment.82 
Among developing regions the share of vulner-
able employment is highest in South Asia and 
Sub- Saharan Africa (77.5 percent in 2011).83

When one household member loses a job, the 
others may try to compensate.84 In some cases, 
if a male worker loses his job, more women may 
seek work to make up for this. But during an 
economic  downturn  women  may  withdraw 
from  the  labour  force.  And  when  a  crisis 
squeezes household resources, women are likely 
to increase their time spent in unpaid work.85 
Increases in women’s labour force participation 
may intensify conflicts within the household: 
Women who enter paid work can experience 
more domestic violence.86

When  adults  lose  their  jobs,  children  are 
also affected.87 In developing countries adverse 
economic conditions can reduce school enrol-
ment rates by up to 12 percentage points.88 In 
addition, children may leave school in order to 

68    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.20.20.40.61.00.8-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.200.20.40.6ColombiaLuxembourgMaltaTurkeyUkraineChileIndonesiaParaguayPeruUruguayArgentinaBulgariaCanadaCyprusCzech RepublicEstoniaFinlandFranceGreeceHungaryIndiaIrelandItalyLatviaLithuaniaMexicoPortugalRomaniaSlovakiaSwedenVenezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)DenmarkEcuadorJapanRepublic of KoreaMoldovaNetherlandsNorwayRussian FederationSloveniaSouth AfricaSpainSri LankaBetter employment 
outcomes generate social 
benefits that extend 
beyond the individual

work—eroding their chances of escaping pov-
erty in the future.

Better employment outcomes generate social 
benefits  that  extend  beyond  the  individual.89 
Societies in which everyone has access to employ-
ment opportunities that meet a basic standard 
of decency tend to have fewer conflicts, stronger 
social networks and a greater sense of fairness 
and justice.90 These outcomes affect the degree 
of  social  cohesion  within  a  country  and  tend 
to make institutions function better—c reating 
an  environment  that  supports  human  devel-
opment. There are also implications for social 
expenditure, as public health expenditures may 
increase following large episodes of job loss.91

Ageing with dignity—an 
elusive reality for many

The  global  population  of  people  ages  60 
and older is more than 500 million (close to 

8  percent  of  the  total).  Europe  and  Central 
Asia has the highest share of older people in the 
total  population  among  developing  country 
regions (11.4 percent; figure 3.8). By 2050 the 
share of older people in the total population is 
expected to double to 15.5 percent, with the 
largest  increase  in  East  Asia  and  the  Pacific 
(from 7.4 percent in 2010 to 22.2 percent in 
2050).  By  2050  only  Sub- Saharan  Africa  is 
expected to have a share of older people below 
5 percent.92

Poverty  and  social  exclusion  are  problems 
for  those  who  are  ageing,  especially  because 
roughly 80 percent of the world’s older pop-
ulation does not have a pension and relies on 
labour and family for income.93 And as people 
age, they generally become physically, mentally 
and economically more vulnerable.94 Poverty 
in old age is more often chronic, since the lack 
of economic opportunities and security during 
earlier  life  accumulates  into  vulnerability  in 

FIGURE 3.8

By 2050 the share of people ages 60 and older in the world’s population is expected to double to 
15.5 percent, with the largest increase in East Asia and the Pacific

1970
2010
2050

Share of
population
ages 60
and older
in total
population
(%)

25

20

15

10

5

0

 Arab States

East Asia

and the Paciﬁc

Europe

and Central Asia

Latin America

and the
Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan

Africa

World

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on Lutz and KC (2013).

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    69

old age. The cumulative disadvantages during 
younger life also imply the transfer of poverty 
from one generation to another. For example, 
in  Bangladesh  nearly  a  third  of  the  general 
population lives in a household with an older 
person,  while  many  more  people  in  other 
households are part of a network of support to, 
and from, older people.95

Low  income  is  not  the  only  thing  that 
increases  vulnerability  among  older  people; 
additional disadvantages can compound their 
inability to cope, as when a loss of income is 
accompanied by illness and disability that de-
plete financial resources. Reduced capacity to 
earn a personal income and contribute to the 
household income—even indirectly—has clear 
implications for the dignity and empowerment 
of older people within the family. Even when 
older  people  are  supported  by  their  families 
with food and shelter, the fact that they do not 
have their own resources may affect their auton-
omy and capacity to exercise choice and lead to 
them to be seen potentially as a burden.96

Untimely  death  of  a  partner,  inadequate 
access to affordable physical and health care, 
exclusion from participation in society, home-
lessness, loss of autonomy, institutionalization, 
lack of social contacts and loneliness—all add 
to the vulnerabilities of older people. They may 
also face a restricted social and physical envi-
ronment, which when combined with dimin-
ished personal capabilities can hold back older 
people from taking advantage of opportunities 
available to them and from being resilient to 
threats that affect them.

Poverty in old age has a strong gender dimen-
sion. Women’s life expectancy is longer than 
men’s, so women may spend more time in pov-
erty than men. Women are more likely to lose 
their partner and less likely to remarry. Lower 
education and the need to combine work with 
childcare  means  that  women  are  more  likely 
to work in the informal sector. Older women, 
especially widows and those without children, 
are  particularly  vulnerable,  both  economi-
cally  and  socially.97  They  may  be  subject  to 
vilification and abuse and live in conditions of 
abandonment.98

Most  older  people  and  people  living  in 
households with an older person face higher 
poverty rates. In Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development countries the 

old-age poverty rate is higher than the average 
for the whole population (13.5 percent versus 
10.6  percent),99  and  older  women  are  more 
likely than older men to be poor (figure 3.9). 
The  situation  is  similar  in  many  developing 
countries.  In  the  Dominican  Republic,  El 
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Paraguay 
more than 40 percent of the population ages 60 
and older is poor.100

With ageing comes a higher probability of 
living with a disability. Worldwide, more than 
46 percent of people ages 60 and older live with 
a disability,101 and whether living with a disabil-
ity or not, 15–30 percent of older people live 
alone or with no adult of working age.102 Abuse 
of older people is quite extensive. A 2011–2012 
survey of 36 countries found that 43 percent of 
older people fear violence and mistreatment.103
Older people are also major caregivers to their 
partners and grandchildren, and increasingly to 
their parents too. Particularly in countries with 
a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, grandparents 
are usually the ones caring for AIDS orphans.104 
The  situation  is  similar  for  migrants.  Some 
69 percent of Bolivian migrants who moved to 
Spain left their children at home, usually with 
grandparents. In rural China grandparents care 
for 38 percent of children under age 5 whose 
parents have gone to work in cities.105

Structural vulnerabilities

Where  social  and  legal  institutions,  power 
structures,  political  spaces,  or  traditions  and 
sociocultural norms do not serve members of 
society equally—and where they create struc-
tural barriers for some people and groups to 
exercise  their  rights  and  choices—they  give 
rise  to  structural  vulnerabilities.  Structural 
vulnerabilities  are  often  manifested  through 
deep  inequalities  and  widespread  poverty, 
which are associated with horizontal or group 
inequalities based on socially recognized and 
constructed group membership.106 Structural 
vulnerabilities  are  perpetuated  by  exclusion, 
low human development and people’s position 
in society, reducing their ability to cope with 
downside risks and shocks.

The  poor,  women,  minorities  (ethnic,  lin-
guistic,  religious,  migrant  or  sexual),  indige-
nous peoples, people in rural or remote areas 

Poverty in old age 
has a strong gender 
dimension

70    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

or living with disabilities, and countries land-
locked or with limited natural resources tend 
to  face  higher  barriers,  sometimes  of  a  legal 
nature,  to  build  capabilities,  exercise  choices 
and claim their rights to support and protec-
tion in the event of shocks. And even if laws 
do not explicitly discriminate, the absence of 
effective policies can leave people excluded and 
vulnerable. Group (or horizontal) inequalities 
and exclusion limit the political influence of 
some groups, even if they are the majority of 
the population, as with the poor. Horizontal 
inequalities can lead to elite capture of policies 
that favour certain groups and not society as a 
whole.107 This magnifies vulnerabilities for the 
excluded by limiting the quantity and quality 
of public services they receive.

Some groups may also be more exposed to 
certain risks and have less capability and intrin-
sic ability to cope with shocks. The exposure 
of some groups and the way society treats their 
inherent characteristics produce adverse out-
comes.108 Shocks also create new vulnerabilities 
or new groups of vulnerable people. For exam-
ple, about 200,000 people are expected to live 
with a long-term disability as a result of injuries 
sustained during the January 2010 earthquake 
in  Haiti.109  It  can  be  argued  that  it  was  not 
the earthquake itself that affected such a huge 
amount of people; it was its interaction with 
the country’s vulnerability.110

Poverty and vulnerability

Although linked and often mutually reinforc-
ing, poverty and vulnerability are not synony-
mous. People who are poor are more vulnerable 
than others in society because for the most part 
the risk of adverse shocks is greater for the poor 
than for others, as is well documented for envi-
ronmental shocks.111

Some  1.2  billion  people  live  on  less  than 
$1.25 a day, and 2.7 billion live on less than 
$2.50 a day (figure 3.10).112 Moreover, 1.5 bil-
lion people live in multidimensional poverty, 
and almost 0.8 billion live in near-poverty,113 so 
some 2.2 billion live with two or more critical 
deprivations. These numbers are declining, but 
many people live just above the poverty thresh-
old.  So,  idiosyncratic  or  generalized  shocks 
could easily push them back into poverty. The 
share of people just above the poverty threshold 

FIGURE 3.9

In Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries the poverty 
rate tends to be higher for older people than for the population as a whole and higher 
for older women than for older men

Old more likely
to be poor

Old less likely
to be poor

Republic of Korea

Women more likely
to be poor

Men more likely
to be poor

Mexico

Australia

Ireland

Greece

Spain

Portugal

Switzerland

Japan

United
States

Turkey

Belgium

Denmark

Italy

France

United Kingdom

Sweden

Germany

Austria
Slovak Republic

Finland

Norway

Czech Republic

Canada

Poland
Netherlands

Hungary

Note: Data are for 2008.
Source: OECD 2011b.

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    71

Old agepoverty rate(%)01020304001020304050Poverty rate of women (%)HungaryIcelandAustraliaAustriaBelgiumCanadaCzech RepublicDenmarkFinlandFranceGermanyIrelandItalyJapanRepublic of KoreaLuxembourgMexicoNetherlandsNew ZealandNorwayPolandPortugalSlovak RepublicSpainSwedenSwitzerlandTurkeyUnited KingdomUnited StatesGreece01020304050010203040IcelandPovertyrate of men(%)Poverty rate of women (%)LuxembourgNew ZealandFIGURE 3.10

Some 1.2 billion people live on less than $1.25 a day, and 1.5 billion people live in multidimensional poverty

Income poverty

49.7%

Multidimensional poverty

55.4%

Near
poverty
cutoﬀ
2

Poverty
cutoﬀ
3.33

28.4%

21.9%

29.2%

15.5%

Population
(billions)

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

$2.50 
and more

a day

$1.25 - $2.50

a day

Less than $1.25

a day

Not  multi-
dimesionally

poor

Near  multi-
dimesionally

poor

Multi-

dimesionally

poor

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

9

8

10
7
Multidimensional
Poverty Index

Source: Multidimensional poverty, Human Development Report Office calculations based on various household surveys, including ICF Macro Demographic and Health 
Surveys, United Nations Children’s Fund Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys and several national household surveys; income poverty, Human Development Report Office 
calculations based on data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database.

(either income or multidimensional) is largest 
in South Asia, Sub- Saharan Africa, and East 
Asia and the Pacific (table 3.1).

Multidimensional  poverty  has  a  strong 
geographical  component,  since  it  tends  to 
be highest in rural areas. In Somalia it affects 
60 percent of the population in urban house-
holds and over 95 percent of the population 
in rural households. In Burkina Faso 43 per-
cent and 94 percent, in Niger 56 percent and 
96  percent  and  in  Ethiopia  54  percent  and 
96 percent.

In many countries multidimensional poverty 
is also more likely among female-headed house-
holds and those that include a person age 60 or 
older. Another important factor is the presence 
of  young  children.  In  Bolivia,  for  example, 
the  overall  proportion  of  the  population  in 
multidimensional  poverty  is  12  percent,  but 
in households with at least one child under age 
5 it is 34 percent. The corresponding propor-
tions are 21 percent and 42 percent in Ghana, 

7 percent and 19 percent in Peru and 4 percent 
and 11 percent in the Syrian Arab Republic.

Vulnerability increases when poverty inter-
acts with other household conditions.114 Poor 
people are more likely to live in areas vulnera-
ble to the impacts of climate change, whether 
in low-lying coastal regions at greatest risk of 
inundation from rising sea levels or on marginal 
land subject to increasing dryness and drought 
from climate change.115

Poor people are vulnerable since they general-
ly lack access to savings, borrowed funds or oth-
er assets they can draw on to meet unforeseen 
contingencies. Faced with a job loss or other 
income  shock,  they  resort  to  more  harmful 
coping strategies such as cutting back on food or 
reducing spending on health or children’s educa-
tion.116 Even with a higher income, households 
may not be or even feel much less vulnerable, 
and despite progress over recent decades in both 
developed and developing countries, individuals 
feel economically less secure.117

72    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE 3.1

Income and multidimensional poverty, by region

Region

Arab States

East Asia and the Pacific

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the 
Caribbean

South Asia

Sub- Saharan Africa

Number of 
countries 
in sample

10

11

15

20

8

40

Income 
poverty 

headcount 

(%)

Near 
income 
poverty 

(%)

Number of 
countries 
in sample

Multidimensional 

poverty 

headcount  

(%)

6.5

12.7

1.4

5.7

30.6

50.9

36.4

25.1

6.0

7.0

44.4

27.8

9

10

15

14

7

36

15.5

6.4

1.8

6.7

53.4

59.6

Intensity of 
deprivation 

(%)

48.4

44.7

37.3

42.8

50.8

55.0

Near multi-
dimensional 

poverty  

(%)

8.7

16.2

4.5

9.5

17.9

16.2

Source: Multidimensional poverty, Human Development Report Office calculations based on various household surveys, including ICF Macro Demographic and Health 
Surveys, United Nations Children’s Fund Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys and several national household surveys; income poverty, Human Development Report Office 
calculations based on data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database.

Recent  austerity  measures  have  increased 
poverty in more than half of European coun-
tries, and the groups most at risk are children, 
immigrants and people from a migrant back-
ground,  ethnic  minorities  and  people  with 
disabilities.118

The impacts of natural disasters are dispro-
portionately high among lower income groups, 
older  people  and  people  with  disabilities. 
During the 2005 Mumbai floods the poorest 
households were the most vulnerable. Though 
the  losses  may  not  appear  large  in  absolute 
terms, the average loss incurred by households 
roughly equalled the average household’s sav-
ings. The ability to recover and reconstruct in 
the  aftermath  of  the  floods  was  impaired  by 
the depletion of household savings and loss of 
household assets.119 The 2001 earthquakes in 
El Salvador reduced the income per capita of 
the most affected households by a third.120 In 
Bangladesh, in major flooding events in certain 
years, up to 7.5 million hectares of crops were 
damaged, hurting mostly the poor.121

During  and  after  disasters  children  from 
poor households are particularly vulnerable to 
malnutrition and other long-term consequenc-
es.  The  1982–1984  drought  in  Zimbabwe 
increased the probability of child stunting and 
delayed the school enrolment of children by an 
average of 3.7 months, which worsened their 
performance at school up to 16 years after the 
disaster. In Ethiopia between 2002 and 2006, 
90  percent  of  the  households  in  the  poorest 

income quintile experienced at least one risk of 
shocks to adverse events, while many reported 
multiple  risks,  with  an  average  of  4.2  risks 
per household.122 Family responses to shocks 
include eating less, reducing household assets 
and accumulating debt, all likely to have long-
term consequences for children’s development. 
Income  shocks  have  major  impacts  on  the 
school attendance and performance of children 
from poor households.123

The effect of disasters on people and com-
munities  is  conditioned  not  only  by  their 
capabilities and competences, but also by their 
asset base—their financial and natural capital. 
For example, considerable degradation of the 
ecosystem  could  threaten  the  livelihoods  of 
the rural communities that depend directly on 
natural resources: access to marine biodiversity, 
nontimber forest products and small-scale or 
subsistence crop and stock farming. How vul-
nerable these communities are is determined 
by the condition of the natural resource base 
for current and alternative economic activities, 
the regimes for managing those resources and 
how  close  natural  ecosystems  are  to  tipping 
points past which productivity can no longer 
be  restored.  Environmental  degradation  and 
natural  resource  impoverishment  are  major 
threats. In 2011 agricultural workers account-
ed for 40 percent of the world’s economically 
active population, 60 percent of them in low 
Human Development Index countries. Two-
thirds of the extreme poor are in rural areas, 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    73

their livelihoods heavily dependent on agricul-
ture and natural resources. Land degradation 
and water scarcity are major concerns. By 2025 
water scarcity is expected to affect more than 
1.8 billion people—hurting agricultural work-
ers and poor farmers the most.124

Gender

Globally,  women  suffer  the  most  pervasive 
discrimination.  Legal  systems  emerge  from 
rich and diverse cultural traditions, but in some 
countries customary and religious laws prevail 
over  civil  laws  that  might  protect  women’s 
human rights. Laws can explicitly discriminate 
against women in matters of family, marriage, 
economic  rights  and  violence  (figure  3.11). 
They  may  also  limit  women’s  rights  to  land 
ownership  and  require  spousal  consent  for 
women’s  access  to  contraception  and  family 
planning.

Women may also face discrimination from 
social  institutions—such  as  early  marriage, 
discriminatory  inheritance  practices,  higher 
burdens of unpaid care work, violence against 
women (box 3.3), son preference and restric-
tions  on  access  to  public  space  and  produc-
tive  resources.  Infringing  on  women’s  rights, 

discrimination  from  social  institutions  also 
leads to poorer human development outcomes. 
Primary school completion averaged more than 
15  percent  lower  in  the  21  countries  where 
social institutions were deemed the most dis-
criminatory against women than in other de-
veloping countries, and child malnutrition rates 
and  maternal  mortality  ratios  were  twice  as 
high.125 The number of malnourished children 
averages 60 percent higher in countries where 
women do not have the right to own land and 
85 percent higher in countries where women 
lack any access to credit. Maternal mortality ra-
tios are also generally higher in countries where 
women  have  less  control  over  their  physical 
integrity.

Economic downturns are associated with a 
nearly fivefold increase in female infant mortal-
ity compared with male infant mortality.126 The 
recent global economic crisis has resulted in 
an estimated 30,000–50,000 additional infant 
deaths in Sub- Saharan Africa, mostly among 
the poor and overwhelmingly female.127

In most countries women are free to engage 
in political activity, but in only two, Cuba and 
Rwanda, does the share of women in parliament 
match or exceed their share in the population. 
In Rwanda’s 2013 parliamentary election 51 of 

FIGURE 3.11

Several countries have laws that discriminate against women in family, economic activities, violence and other matters

Family/marriage

Economic/employment

Subject
Child custody
Divorce/separation
Marriage and family
Marriage age
Polygamy
Others

Subject
Marital property
Land/property rights
Employment/labour
Government employment
Inheritance
Others

Other areas

Subject
 
Nationality
Citizenship
Burial
Personal status
Others

Violence

Subject
Rape
Marital rape
Violence against women
Others

0

5

10

15

20

30

25
35
Number of countries

0

5

10

15

20

30

25
35
Number of countries

Source: Equality Now 2011.

74    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

BOX 3.3

Violence against women

Events in 2012 and 2013 drew global media attention to the epidemic propor-
tions of violence against women. Malala Yousafzai was shot by the Taliban in 
Pakistan, a young student was fatally gang-raped in India and there were re-
ports of rape and other sexual harassment of women at Tahrir Square in Cairo. 
These events are reminders that structural violence against women remains 
endemic across the world and poses huge challenges to women’s participation 
in societal life and to community safety and security more broadly.

About  a  third  of  women  worldwide  will  experience  sexual  or  other 
physical violence in their lifetime, primarily by an intimate partner (who will 
also be responsible for nearly 40 percent of all femicides—this may extend 
to  honour  and  dowry-related  killings),1  described  as  structural  ‘relational 
vulnerabilities’ embedded within specific categories of social relations.2 A 
recent World Health Organization analysis suggests that 7.2 percent of the 
world’s women—or 1 in 14—is subjected to nonpartner sexual violence.3

Gallup  data  from  surveys  in  143  countries  in  2011  suggest  a  gender-
based fear of violence. Women not only felt less safe than men in every coun-
try, but the gender gap in perception of threats did not correspond to income: 
Double-digit gaps were found in many middle- and high-income countries.4

Correlation between intimate partner violence and poverty is strong and 
positive, and there are regional patterns in prevalence. Women in Africa are 
almost twice as likely to experience violence as women in low- and middle-
income Europe. In South-East Asia women are almost eight times more likely 
to experience violence by a current or former partner than by someone else.
Public campaigns and mobilization have led to changes in civil and crimi-
nal justice, with legislation and judicial rulings that assert women’s protection. 
Many countries have legal and other resources to support victims and their 
children and have passed civil remedies including restraining order legislation 

to protect partners against their abusers. But changes to social norms and the 
law are often incremental and hard fought. The amendments to the Criminal 
Law  in  India  following  recent  rape  cases5  do  not  criminalize  marital  rape,6 
highlighting both the scope and limits of law as an agent of social change.

Violence affects women’s ability to participate in economic activity out-
side the home. In Mexico the primary reason women dropped out of the labour 
force was threats and violence by disapproving husbands.7 In India actual or 
threatened violence by husbands prevents many women from participating in 
meetings of self-help groups.8 Interventions that emphasize social norms (ac-
ceptance of gender violence) and reduction of psychosocial barriers (shame, 
guilt, resentment and prejudice) can reduce violence against women and more 
broadly increase women’s empowerment. An example is Yo quiero, Yo puedo 
(I want to, I can) in Mexico, Focusing on individuals as the starting point, the 
programme increases its ownership and sustainability by conceiving personal 
agency and intrinsic empowerment as both a process and a state.

Less attention has been devoted to the intangible impacts on women’s 
freedom of movement, emotional well-being and capacity for imagination 
and thought, all key dimensions of human capability.9 Along with the assault 
on the personhood, dignity and sense of worth that all violence inflicts on 
its victims, the consequences of violence against women also reflect its sys-
temic character—that it is not randomly distributed across the population 
but directed at a particular group by virtue of their identity as a subordinate 
group. As Iris Marion Young puts it, “The oppression of violence consists not 
only in direct victimization but in the daily knowledge shared by all members 
of the oppressed group that they are liable to violation, solely on account of 
their group identity. Just living under the threat of attack . . . deprives the 
oppressed of freedom and dignity, and needlessly expends their energy.”10

Notes
1. WHO 2013. 2. Kabeer, Mumtaz and Sayeed 2010. 3. WHO 2013. 4. Gallup 2013. 5. Parliament of India Rajya Sabha 2013. 6. Harvard Law and Policy Review 2013. 7. Funk, Lang and Osterhaus 2005. 8. Sen 1998; Kabeer and 
others 2012. 9. Nussbaum 2005. 10. Young 1990, p. 62.
Source: Chalabi and Holder 2013; Kabeer 2014; Pick and Sirkin 2010.

80 seats (64 percent) were filled by women.128 
But in about 60 percent of countries with data, 
women  account  for  less  than  20  percent  of 
parliamentary  seats.  Better  representation  of 
women in political life can greatly improve the 
position of women generally. Rwanda now has 
some of the most progressive laws in Africa to 
empower women and protect them from vio-
lence. Laws and policies alone are insufficient 
to  eradicate  discrimination,  but  they  can  be 
important first steps.

Natural disasters and climate change often 
heighten  inequality  and  discrimination,  in-
cluding  those  that  are  gender-based.129  But 
women’s empowerment and agency can reduce 
such vulnerabilities. For example, three weeks 
after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, a group 
of poor female villagers who survived the 1993 
and 2001 earthquakes in Latur (Maharashtra) 

and  Kutch  (Gujarat)  actively  supported  the 
recovery efforts by travelling to Tamil Nadu to 
show their solidarity with women like them-
selves and sustain the rehabilitation process.130

Ethnic groups and minorities

Indigenous  peoples  constitute  around  5  per-
cent of the world’s population but account for 
15 percent of the world’s income poor and for 
more than 30 percent of the world’s extremely 
poor in rural areas.131 They tend to have poor 
educational attainment, unequal opportunities 
and unequal access to land and other produc-
tive assets.132 In Latin America the average in-
come of indigenous workers is about half that 
of nonindigenous workers.133

In Europe one of the most vulnerable groups 
is  the  Roma.  In  2011  around  30  percent  of 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    75

People with disabilities 
are particularly exposed at 
times of natural disasters 
and violent conflict

Roma lived on less than $4.30 a day, compared 
with 9 percent of the non-Roma population 
(figure 3.12). Despite numerous national and 
regional initiatives to improve their conditions, 
they continue to suffer the effects of social ex-
clusion and the limited access to basic services 
associated with it.134

Disabilities

People  living  with  disabilities  face  physical 
barriers  to  claiming  rights  and  exercising 
choices. They often lack easy access to public 
transportation, government offices and other 
public spaces such as hospitals, making it more 
difficult  to  participate  in  economic,  social 
and political life—or to seek assistance when 
faced with threats to their physical well-being. 
Particularly  vulnerable  among  people  with 
disabilities are those in poverty. People with 
disabilities are also more likely than the gener-
al population to be victims of violence.135 And 
they may be less able to work and so are gen-
erally poorer than the rest of the population. 
Further,  people  with  disabilities  that  impair 
their  ability  to  communicate  are  also  more 
likely to be victims of abuse, including that by 
caregivers.

People with disabilities are particularly ex-
posed at times of natural disasters and violent 
conflict.  Cognitive,  intellectual  or  physical 
impairments can reduce their capacity to access 
information or act on it.136 They can be left be-
hind during evacuations or be turned away by 
shelters and refugee camps on the grounds that 
they might need complex medical care. The dis-
aster risk reduction community needs to widen 
the participation of people with  disabilities—
and  address  the  environmental  barriers  and 
constraints they face.137

The vulnerabilities that disabilities generate 
depend on other social, economic and demo-
graphic factors. For instance, people with dis-
abilities are also more likely to have less ability 
to work and thus are poorer than their counter-
parts without disabilities. Indeed, people with 
disabilities  have  lower  employment  rates.138 
Evidence from the World Health Survey for 51 
countries shows employment rates of 52.8 per-
cent for men with disabilities and 19.6 percent 
for  women  with  disabilities,  compared  with 
64.9 percent for men without disabilities and 

FIGURE 3.12

In 2011 poverty rates among Roma households were 
much higher than among non-Roma households

Roma
Non-Roma

30%

9%

Share of population with

income below PPP $4.30 a day (%)

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on UNDP, World 
Bank and EC (2011).

29.9 percent for women without disabilities.139 
But addressing the barriers and vulnerabilities 
of people with disabilities can unlock their po-
tential and benefit society as a whole.

Migrants

Most international migrants, who account for 
over 3 percent of the world’s population, have 
fewer  rights  and  less  protection,  even  when 
they are documented, than citizens and have 
less access to social protection.140 Typically they 
are excluded from social and public life and, 
lacking voting rights, have little influence over 
policies  that  affect  them—even  though  they 
might  be  contributing  to  the  host  country’s 
economic  progress.  Their  vulnerability  over-
laps with other structural vulnerabilities. For 
example, the number of women migrating is 
increasing. Today women account for half the 
international  migrant  population,  reaching 
70–80 percent in some countries, and they suf-
fer from a higher exposure to exploitation and 
abuse in human trafficking.141

Forced migration due to conflict is another 
source  of  vulnerability,  as  the  Syrian  crisis 
dramatically shows. Even though refugees are a 
small part of the migrant population—around 
10.5  million  people  in  2011—the  armed 

76    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 
Disability and vulnerability

Stephen Hawking, Director of Research at the Centre for Theoretical Cosmology, University of Cambridge

As a theoretical physicist I understand very well the concept of vulnerability: 
there is little in the cosmos that is not susceptible to harm. Even the very 
universe itself may someday come to an end.

Humanity has always been vulnerable to different challenges. And there 
can be no doubt that great scientific discoveries—from penicillin to the pe-
riodic table, from evolution to electricity—have helped us to understand our 
world, reduce our vulnerability, and build more resilient societies.

But, despite great and varied progress, vulnerable people and vulner-
able groups of people remain—none more so than the disabled. The United 
Nations estimates that over a billion people live with some form of disability 
and they are disproportionately represented among the world’s poorest and 
at greater risk of suffering from violence, disaster, catastrophic health ex-
penses, and many other hardships.

The vast majority of people with disabilities have a hard time simply 
surviving, let alone living lives they have reason to value, to use the lexicon 
of human development. However, disability need not be an obstacle to suc-
cess. I have had motor neurone disease for nearly all my adult life, but it has 
not prevented me from having a prominent career in theoretical physics and 
a happy family life.

I realize of course that in many ways I have been fortunate. My success 
in theoretical physics has ensured that I’ve been able to live a life I value. 

I have benefited from first-class medical care. I can rely on a team of as-
sistants who enable me to live and work in comfort and dignity. My house 
and workplace have been made accessible to me. Computer experts have 
supported me with an assisted communication system and a speech synthe-
sizer, which allow me to compose lectures and papers and to communicate 
with different audiences.

People with disabilities are vulnerable because of the many barriers we 
face: attitudinal, physical, and financial. Addressing these barriers is within 
our reach and we have a moral duty to do so. Beyond that moral duty we 
would do well to remember the many other reasons to act. Legislation in-
troduced to assist the disabled today will benefit nearly everyone at some 
point: almost all of us will be impaired at some time in life or care for some-
one  who  is.  Inventions,  such  as  optical  character  recognition  and  brain-
controlled technology, have many other benefits beyond helping people with 
disabilities.

But  most  important,  addressing  these  barriers  will  unlock  the  po-
tential  of  so  many  people  with  so  much  to  contribute  to  the  world. 
Governments everywhere can no longer overlook the hundreds of millions 
of people with disabilities who are denied access to health, rehabilita-
tion, support, education, and employment—and never get the chance to 
shine.

conflict  displaced  around  5  million  people 
from  the  area  (more  than  255,000  of  them 
between  December  2012  and  January  2013 
alone).142

(box  3.4)—or  on  external  economic  events, 
such as slumps in external demand and terms 
of trade shocks.

Vulnerable countries and geography

Group violence and insecure lives

Efforts to tackle the vulnerability of individu-
als and communities must bear in mind their 
country’s vulnerability. A major rationale for 
special treatment of countries is their structural 
vulnerability, which depends on outside factors 
not  easily  managed  by  domestic  policy.  For 
example,  the  least  developed  countries  have 
been defined as poor countries suffering from 
structural weaknesses to growth. They are more 
likely than others to remain poor. Landlocked 
developing  countries  and  small  island  devel-
oping states are two other groups of countries 
facing major structural challenges.

This Report discusses many of the structural 
vulnerabilities  countries  face,  including  how 
greater interconnectedness brings new vulner-
abilities. Most of the analysis and evidence on 
country vulnerability concentrates on environ-
mental or natural disasters, such as earthquakes 
or  volcanic  eruptions,  and  climatic  shocks 

The 1994 Human Development Report (HDR) 
introduced  the  concept  of  human  security, 
opening  with  the  statement  “The  world  can 
never be at peace unless people have security 
in their daily lives.”143 Conceptions of security 
require  a  view  of  the  human  person  that  in-
cludes physical and psychological vulnerability, 
strengths and limitations, including limitations 
in the perception of risk.144

In 2000 about 4,400 people died every day 
because  of  intentional  acts  of  self-directed, 
interpersonal  or  collective  violence.145  And 
many  thousands  more  are  affected  in  some 
way by acts of violence. In addition, huge costs 
are  incurred  in  treating  victims,  supporting 
shattered families, repairing infrastructure and 
prosecuting perpetrators and as a result of lost 
productivity and investment.146

People’s  perceptions  of  threats  offer  feed-
back on policy efforts and shed light on the 

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    77

BOX 3.4

Disaster resilience—Japan’s experience

In the past five years alone the world has witnessed an earthquake in Haiti 
(2010), a heat wave in the Northern Hemisphere (2010), a tsunami in Japan 
(2011), a drought in East Africa (2011–2012) and a typhoon in the Philippines 
(2013). These adverse natural events have caused large human casualties 
and  had  considerable  economic  costs.  Human  development  progress  has 
been weakened by these impacts and, in some cases, hard-won gains have 
been reversed.

Japan is a disaster-prone country that can provide important insights 
on disaster resilience. In 2011 a powerful earthquake off the east coast of 
Japan triggered large tsunami waves that killed more than 15,000 people 
and caused extensive damage to economic and social infrastructure. It also 
led to a nuclear disaster in Fukushima. But despite the large loss of human 
life and record financial costs—estimated at $210 billion—the impact could 
have been dramatically worse. The Tohoku earthquake, estimated at magni-
tude 9.0, was the world’s fourth strongest since records began in 1900, and 
the ensuing tsunami waves reached heights of up to 40 metres and travelled 
up to 10 kilometres inland.

Japan’s early warning system prevented a much larger death toll. As 
soon as seismic activity was detected, alerts were broadcast by television, 
radio and mobile phone networks. This enabled many people to prepare and 
mitigate the impact, such as moving to higher ground, while the country’s 
rail  network  and  factories  quickly  came  to  a  halt—thus  avoiding  greater 
damage. Emergency sirens, clearly marked evacuation routes and public ed-
ucation programmes were also critical in saving lives. Strict building codes 
ensured that tall buildings withstood the earthquake, while forested green 
belts and concrete barriers provided some protection against the tsunami. 

State  institutions  have  traditionally  engaged  with  local  communities  to 
improve disaster preparedness and devise evacuation plans. Japan’s long-
standing investments in technology and public awareness were essential to 
averting an even bigger disaster.

Even if debates in Japan about preparedness and recovery have been 
critical, the case of Japan highlights that risk is inherently a development 
concern and that comprehensive risk reduction and recovery must be inte-
gral components of overall governance. Early warning systems, evacuation 
routes,  strict  building  codes  and  engagement  with  local  communities  all 
need to stem from institutional, legal and governance systems that prioritize 
disaster risk reduction and recovery.

In  March  2015  the  third  UN  World  Conference  on  Disaster  Risk 
Reduction will take place in Sendai, one of the cities affected by the 2011 
Tohoku earthquake and tsunami. The conference will allow member states 
to review the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action and adopt 
a post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction. The framework, a 10-year 
plan to build the resilience of countries and communities to disasters agreed 
at the 2005 World Conference on Disaster Reduction, has five key priorities 
for action: make disaster risk reduction a priority, know the risks and take 
action, build understanding and awareness, reduce risk, and be prepared 
and ready to act.

Nonetheless, building disaster preparedness takes time, requiring sig-
nificant long-term investments in education, technology and infrastructure, 
as well as adequate institutions and regulatory frameworks. Learning from 
recent experiences with disasters will be crucial to build a forward-looking 
global agenda that enables resilient and sustainable human development.

Source: UNISDR 2012a; Fraser and others 2012.

burden of fear in their lives.147 The 2005 Costa 
Rica  HDR  and  2013  Latin  America  HDR 
show how people’s lives are restricted as they 
avoid going out at night or travelling due to 
fear of violence.148 The existence of gangs has 
been  found  to  correlate  with  lower  support 
for formal mechanisms of social control and 
regulation,  which  further  opens  the  way  for 
criminal groups to be the sole sources of pro-
tection.149  Persistent  horizontal  inequality 
experienced  along  political,  economic  and 
social dimensions can create conditions that 
promote acts of physical violence that threaten 
human development for large numbers of peo-
ple, including some specific groups. Homicide 
and armed violence occur most frequently in 
poverty-stricken urban areas characterized by 
lack of employment, poor standards of hous-
ing, overcrowding and low standards of educa-
tion and social amenities. Homicides are more 
common in the poorer areas of cities with high 
inequalities,  ranging  from  New  York  City 

to  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  in  the  more  unequal 
American states and cities and Canadian prov-
inces. Research corroborates these connections 
between violence and inequality.150 However, 
violence  and  crime  are  associated  not  only 
with increases in inequality, but also with the 
presence of firearms and drugs, seen to explain 
some of the very high levels of violence in some 
middle-income countries of South and Central 
America, where inequality has been falling in 
recent years.

As chapter 2 points out, violent conflict—
and mostly intrastate conflict as well as internal 
civil  unrest—continues  to  impose  enormous 
costs  on  development  in  affected  countries. 
A combination of causes can be identified for 
these  types  of  conflict.  One  common  char-
acteristic  is  the  fact  that  the  causes—from 
exclusionary policies and elite rent-seeking to 
unaddressed social grievances—all contribute 
to social discord or, at the very least, impede 
the  social  harmony  and  cohesion  conducive 

78    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

to resilient development outcomes, something 
discussed more extensively in chapter 4.

A ‘socially cohesive’ society is one that works 
towards the well-being of all its members, fights 
exclusion and marginalization, creates a sense of 
belonging, promotes trust and offers its mem-
bers  the  opportunity  of  upward  mobility.151 
Lack of these attributes is often correlated with 
conflict and violence, especially in situations 
of unequal access to resources or benefits from 
natural wealth, or with the inability to deal ef-
fectively with rapid social or economic change 
or the impact of economic or climate-related 
shocks.

Inequality  in  access  to  resources  and  out-
comes that coincides with cultural differences 
can  become  mobilizing  agents  that  end  in  a 
range of political upheavals and disturbances. 
This is not only because of the resentments of 
the excluded and deprived. Unrest and conflict 
can  also  erupt  if  the  privileged  take  actions 
to  ensure  that  the  underprivileged  do  not 
make demands for more resources or political 
power.152

Almost all countries have groups that suffer 
from  social  exclusion,153  which  occurs  when 
institutions  systematically  deny  some  groups 
the resources and recognition that would en-
able them to fully participate in social life.154 
Horizontal inequality and social exclusion can 
endure over long periods and may be associated 
with denial of rights and unequal access to so-
cial services by some groups. In some cases the 
persistent inequalities and prolonged depriva-
tions last centuries.155

There  is  evidence  of  some  correlation  be-
tween group inequalities and violent conflict, 
which becomes more likely when political and 
socioeconomic  and  political  inequalities  are 
reinforcing.156 For example, the probability of 
conflict rises significantly in countries with se-
vere economic and social horizontal inequality. 
Similarly, violent conflict is more likely to oc-
cur when development is weaker and religious 
polarization is greater.157 While there are many 
examples  of  peaceful  multicultural  societies, 
cultural ties can be a powerful source of mo-
bilization  and  potential  conflict  when  they 
interact  with  strong  economic  and  political 
deprivations.158 In addition, sharp increases in 
group inequality raise the likelihood of tension 
and conflict.159

How  governments  respond  to  protests  ex-
plains how social exclusion can induce some 
groups to take to violence, even if they start as 
peaceful  protests.  Peaceful  protests  in  which 
the state limits protesters’ space and protection 
can either generate little change and more frus-
tration or face violent and exclusionary actions 
by the state, unifying protesters and transform-
ing  what  were  mainly  peaceful  protests  into 
violence.

Institutions, especially well functioning state 
institutions,  have  an  important  function  in 
creating a cultural space where various groups 
can exchange ideas peacefully and where people 
can start to incorporate the views of others into 
their  own  understanding  of  the  world.  This 
could be very important for peaceful conflict 
resolution,  indicating  a  large  role  in  violent 
conflict prevention.160

Inclusive and representative institutions can 
reduce  the  potential  for  conflict,  since  they 
can take action to counter exclusion, changing 
practices in the way public goods and services 
are delivered. Examples of policies to reduce 
horizontal  inequality  include  improving  the 
group ownership of land via redistribution of 
government-owned  land,  forcible  purchases 
and restriction on ownership in Fiji, Namibia, 
Malaysia and Zimbabwe. Other examples refer 
to  public  sector  employment  quotas  (India, 
Malaysia and Sri Lanka and the requirement 
for balanced employment in the private sector 
in South Africa).161

Armed conflict is an important vulnerability 
for human development, for its aggregate ef-
fects not only on society but on some specific 
groups.  In  Kashmir  exposure  to  violence  in 
utero and in infancy was shown to have reduced 
children’s height. Children in areas affected by 
insurgency  were  0.9–1.4  standard  deviations 
shorter than children less affected by insurgen-
cy. The effect was stronger for children born 
during peaks in violence.162

Conflicts  also  force  people  to  flee  their 
homes and livelihoods. Women and children 
account for 80 percent of the world’s refugees 
and  displaced  persons.163  Between  2012  and 
2013  more  than  1  million  people  fled  their 
countries  of  origin  due  to  conflict  and  per-
secution,  mainly  from  eastern  Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Mali, Sudan and the 
Syrian Arab Republic.164 Altogether, the Office 

Inequality in access to 
resources and outcomes 
that coincides with 
cultural differences 
can become mobilizing 
agents that end in a range 
of political upheavals 
and disturbances

Chapter 3  Vulnerable people, vulnerable world    |    79

of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees records nearly 36 million people of 
concern.165

Deaths  from  cross-border  wars  have  come 
down markedly since a peak in 1995, to some 
320,000 a year. Yet armed conflicts continue 
to be a major impediment to human develop-
ment, especially for low Human Development 
Index countries.166 In 2012 there were 37,941 
conflict-related  deaths  worldwide  from 
41  conflicts.167  Conflicts  disrupt  essential 
public services such as basic health care168 and 
education, doing permanent harm to people 
throughout  their  lives,  with  lasting  health 
problems for entire generations of children in 
conflict zones often held back from completing 

primary school. In addition, violent conflict 
can  cause  immense  psychological  distress.169 
Loss of family and community, loss of homes 
and livelihoods, displacement and disruption 
can have severe mental health consequences, 
which  affect  many  household  decisions,  in-
cluding migration.170

In some conflicts civilians are targeted and 
mutilated as a deliberate strategy to demoralize 
communities  and  destroy  their  social  struc-
tures; rape has been used as a deliberate weapon 
as an act of humiliation and revenge against the 
enemy as a whole.171 For example, estimates of 
the number of women raped during the conflict 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina ranged from 10,000 to 
60,000.172

80    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

“In a country well governed, 
poverty is something to be 
ashamed of. In a country 
badly governed, wealth is 
something to be ashamed of.”

Confucius principle

“It took me quite a long time to 
develop a voice, and now that I 
have it, I am not going to be silent.”

Madeleine Albright

Building resilience: expanded freedoms, 
protected choices

This Report has discussed persistent threats to human development and the nature of vulnerability. It has also discussed 
how  individuals  are  more  vulnerable  during  certain  critical  junctures  in  their  lives  than  at  other  times  and  how  social 
contexts can render some individuals more vulnerable than others. Crises in the form of natural disasters and violent conflict 
deplete the capacities and material assets of entire communities, rendering them even more vulnerable. Policies to reduce 
vulnerability must account for these factors.

Enhancing resilience requires more than reduc-
ing  vulnerability—it  calls  for  empowerment 
and  for  fewer  restrictions  on  the  exercise  of 
agency—the  freedom  to  act.  It  also  requires 
strong  social  and  state  institutions  that  can 
support people’s efforts to cope with adverse 
events. Well-being is influenced greatly by the 
context of the larger freedoms within which 
people live. Societal norms and practices can be 
prejudicial or discriminatory. So enhancing the 
freedom to act requires addressing such norms 
and transforming them.

Chapter 1 presented fundamental principles 
that need to inform policy choices. Based on 
these  principles,  this  chapter  highlights  key 
national policies that can reduce vulnerability 
and enhance resilience—at both the individual 
and society levels. By no means comprehensive, 
these  policies  include  universal  provision  of 
basic services, addressing life cycle vulnerabili-
ties, promoting full employment, strengthening 
social protection, addressing societal inclusion 
and building capacity to prepare for and recov-
er from crises.

Several  considerations  underlie  the  focus 
on these policies. First, each addresses vulner-
ability  in  multiple  dimensions.  For  instance, 
universal provision of basic social services can 
promote  opportunities  across  the  board  by 
delinking basic entitlements from the ability to 
pay for them. Similarly, high employment has 
a large, positive impact on people’s well-being 
while  reducing  violence  and  boosting  social 
cohesion.

Second,  these  policies  are  interconnect-
ed,  with  strong  synergies  among  them. 
Development pathways that are not informed 
by voices of all stakeholders are neither desir-
able nor sustainable. But when societies create 

space for all voices to be heard, policymakers 
are more likely to be attentive to the concerns 
and needs of minorities and other vulnerable 
groups. And people can be both the agents and 
the beneficiaries of progress. Such societies are 
also more likely to attach a high priority to job 
creation and universal social policy. Indeed, if 
full employment expands the tax base, it also 
creates greater fiscal space for providing quality 
social services.

Third, these policies address vulnerability at 
different points in an individual’s life cycle and 
at different points in a country’s development 
pathway. Well designed social services can en-
sure that children receive care and education 
in the most critical phase of life and that older 
people receive appropriate care when they need 
it. Full employment policies smooth the critical 
transition for young people from education to 
employment. These policies also set up virtu-
ous cycles that sustain national development 
pathways. Countries as diverse as the Republic 
of Korea and Sweden have reaped the benefits 
of  an  educated  workforce  on  their  path  to 
industrialization.

The types of policies discussed here are likely 
to take time in building the resilience of people 
and societies. Can specific actions in the short 
run accelerate that resilience and protect future 
choices and capabilities? Chapter 3 took the 
position  that  a  broad  perspective  is  needed 
in  examining  the  drivers  of  vulnerability. 
Inevitably,  the  response  has  to  be  across  the 
board and long in term. But short-term actions 
can be better aligned with longer term needs.

Persistent  shocks  need  determined  public 
policies over the long haul, but response systems 
can facilitate better short-run adjustments to 
adverse events in ways that protect choices and 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    83

4.SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 

Broadening our thinking on vulnerability

Joseph Stiglitz, Nobel Laureate in Economics

The United Nations has long emphasized human security, in all of its dimen-
sions.1 When I was chief economist of the World Bank, we surveyed thou-
sands of poor people throughout the world to ascertain what was of most 
concern to them, and at the top of the list (along with the obvious concerns 
about a lack of income and insufficient voice in the matters that affected 
their lives) was insecurity—vulnerability.2

At its basic level, vulnerability is defined as an exposure to a marked 
decrease in standard of living. It is of special concern when it is prolonged, 
and  when  standards  of  living  fall  below  critical  thresholds,  to  a  point  of 
deprivation.

Economists’  traditional  single-minded  focus  on  GDP  has  led  them  to 
lose sight of vulnerability. Individuals are risk-averse. The realization that 
they are vulnerable thus leads to large welfare losses—even before they 
face the consequences of a shock itself. The failure of our systems of met-
rics to adequately capture the importance of security to individual and soci-
etal well-being was a key criticism of GDP by the International Commission 
on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress.3

If we are to formulate policies to reduce vulnerability, it is essential to 
take  a  broad  view  about  what  creates  such  vulnerability.  Individuals  and 
societies are inevitably exposed to what economists call ‘shocks’, adverse 
events that have the potential to lead to marked decreases in living stan-
dards. The larger the shocks, the greater their depth and duration, and the 
greater vulnerability, other things equal. But individuals and societies devel-
op mechanisms for coping with shocks. Some societies and economies have 
done a better job of enhancing the capacity to cope with shocks than others. 
The greatest vulnerabilities arise in societies that have allowed themselves 
to be exposed to large shocks, but have left large fractions of their popula-
tions without adequate mechanisms for coping.

Vicious spirals
When we think of vulnerability, we inevitability think of vicious downward 
spirals. Robust systems have good shock absorbers: an individual experienc-
ing an adverse shock quickly recuperates. One of the functions of bankruptcy 
laws is to give those with excessive debts a fresh start. It may not fully 
solve a debtor’s problems, but at least it prevents the individual from be-
ing dragged down in a mountain of debt. Unfortunately, in many societies 
around the world, large fractions of the population are still highly vulnerable, 
highly exposed to these downward vicious spirals—and in some cases, mat-
ters are getting worse.

There  are  many  channels  for  these  downward  spirals  to  operate. 
Individuals  with  inadequate  income  are  less  likely  to  eat  well,  and  that 
means they are more likely to suffer from illness. But once sick, they cannot 
afford adequate health care; and that means, in societies without adequate 
public provision of medical services, an accident or illness can be the begin-
ning of the end. Without adequate health care, they are at risk of significant 
diminution in earning power; reduced earnings lowers further their ability to 
afford health care.

Recent research has shown how the mental energies of the poor are 
disproportionately addressed to the here and now—the exigencies of sur-
vival. They can’t think strategically; they can’t plan for the long term. So, it 

is no surprise that they fail to make decisions (including investments) that 
might raise them out of poverty.

Economic vulnerabilities
Global attention is inevitably focused on those who suffer from a natural 
disaster—from a tsunami, a flood or an earthquake. But economic disasters 
are just as devastating as natural disasters.

Changes in the global economy in recent decades have created many 
more vulnerabilities. The interlinks of banks and countries have increased 
the  probability  of  financial  contagion,  of  the  kind  that  occurred  in  the 
 financial crisis of 2008. These events showed how important regulations are 
in finance—including circuit breakers and capital controls. The devastation 
that the crisis wreaked on the global economy—shrinking economies and 
plunging millions into poverty—underlines that these are not just questions 
for the banking industry. They are important priorities for human develop-
ment more generally.

Not only have changes increased the exposure to risk, they have also re-
duced the mechanisms that societies use to help the most vulnerable cope. 
This is especially true in developing countries, where strong social bonds 
and family ties have traditionally been at the center of social protection. But 
in many countries, these bonds have weakened faster than national public 
systems of social protection have been put into place.

How policies have increased vulnerability
One of the central criticisms of Washington consensus policies is that they 
systematically  led  to  increases  in  vulnerability—both  by  increasing  the 
shocks to which individuals and economies were exposed and by reducing 
the coping mechanisms. Policies such as capital market liberalization (as-
sociated with large fluctuations in flows of money in and out of countries) 
exposed developing countries increasingly to shocks from abroad. Financial 
market liberalization and deregulation led to greater domestic shocks—to 
credit  and  asset  bubbles  that  inevitably  broke.  Weakening  of  systems  of 
social protection simultaneously weakened automatic stabilizers, and some 
financial policies led to automatic destabilizers—so that the effects of any 
shock were amplified. At the same time, the policies weakened the capacity 
of large fractions of the population to cope with the shocks that these econ-
omies were experiencing. The Washington Consensus policies were often 
accompanied by a weakening of systems of social protection; the adverse 
effect on vulnerability should be obvious.

Thus, these ‘reforms’ increased the vulnerability both of individuals and 
of the economic system as a whole. For example, the often lauded switch 
from defined benefits to defined contributions increased individual and sys-
temic vulnerability.

Even in developed countries, however, many argued that to compete in 
a world of globalization, there had to be cutbacks in the welfare state and 
in the systems of social protection, leaving those at the bottom and middle 
more vulnerable.

The Washington Consensus policies often also resulted in greater in-
equality, and those at the bottom will inevitably be more vulnerable, unless 
the government undertakes active protective measures.

(continued)

84    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION 

Broadening our thinking on vulnerability (continued)

Joseph Stiglitz, Nobel Laureate in Economics

Inequality and vulnerability
One  of  the  biggest  contributors  to  vulnerability—something  that  has  ad-
verse effects on many of the other factors mentioned—is inequality, and it 
is a contributor in many ways. Inequality causes instability, increasing the 
frequency of big swings in the economy.4 Extremes of inequality mean that 
larger fractions of the population are in poverty—with a lower ability to 
cope with shocks when they occur. Extremes of economic inequality inevi-
tably lead to political  inequality—with the result that governments are less 
likely to provide the systems of social protection that can protect those at 
the bottom from the consequences of large shocks.5 We need to begin think-
ing of inequality not just as a moral issue—which it is—but also as a fun-
damental economic concern, integral to thinking about human development 
and especially relevant to any analysis of vulnerability.

Limiting vulnerability
Some interventions to limit vulnerabilities are well known and have long 
fallen within the ambit of human development. These include improvements 
to education and social protection. In this perspective, education is impor-
tant not just because it enables individuals to live up to their potential, not 

just because it leads to increases in productivity: it also enhances the ability 
of individuals to cope with shocks. More educated individuals can more eas-
ily move, for instance, from one job to another. While the beneficial effects 
of such policies may be obvious, they continue to be crucial.

But there are others that are not as obvious. Many aspects of our eco-
nomic system are implicitly part of risk absorption—in other words, they 
help mitigate vulnerability. Having a bankruptcy law that protects ordinary 
citizens (debtors)—rather than trying to extract as much as possible from 
the most disadvantaged to the advantage of creditors, as the American sys-
tem does—is extremely important. Good bankruptcy laws enable individu-
als to get a fresh start.

Income-contingent education loans can help families break out of a pov-
erty trap, to begin a climb upward. And good systems of social protection 
affect, as noted, not just the well-being of those facing stress but the overall 
performance of the economic system.

Vulnerability has multiple causes and consequences. Reducing vulner-
ability is a key ingredient in any agenda for improving human development. 
But if we are to succeed in reducing vulnerability, we need to approach it 
from a broad systemic perspective.

Notes
1. Ogata and Sen 2003. 2. Narayan and others 2000. 3. Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi 2010. 4. The International Monetary Fund has called attention to this; see Berg and Ostry (2011b). 5. There are, of course, many other pernicious 
effects of inequality, emphasized in Stiglitz (2012b). Inequality is linked to lower growth, undermines democracy, increases social friction and erodes trust.

minimize longer term impacts. Take the Bolsa 
Família initiative in Brazil, a cash transfer pro-
gramme that aims to minimize adverse longer 
term impacts by keeping children in school and 
protecting their health.1 The impact of a sharp 
rise in food prices in 2008 following the global 
financial crisis was mitigated by higher transfer 
payments.  Beyond  that,  not  much  else  can 
be done other than ad hoc emergency relief, 
which however well designed is not best over 
the  long  term.  Pending  more- comprehensive 
social protection arrangements, cash transfer 
programmes can be started relatively easily, and 
their budget impact can be limited if there is 
an infrastructure to draw on, as in Brazil. Such 
programmes need to be designed to ensure that 
capabilities—especially those of the next gener-
ation—are protected.

Universal provision of 
basic social services

Universalism implies equal access and oppor-
tunities to build core capabilities. Universal ac-
cess to basic social services—education, health 
care, water supply and sanitation, and public 

safety—enhances  resilience.  Universalism  is 
a powerful way of directly addressing the un-
certain nature of vulnerability. Social policies 
that have a universal aim not only protect those 
who currently experience poverty, poor health 
or a bout of unemployment; they also protect 
individuals and households that are doing well 
but may find themselves struggling if things go 
wrong. And they secure certain basic core capa-
bilities of future generations.

Universal coverage of basic social services is 
not only imperative—it is also possible at early 
stages  of  development.  And  recent  evidence 
shows  that  it  can  be  achieved  in  less  than  a 
decade.  Furthermore,  universal  provision  of 
basic  social  services  is  better  than  targeting, 
which leads to social stigma for recipients and 
segmentation in the quality of services, as those 
who can afford to opt out of receiving public 
services do so.

Universal provision of basic social services 
can raise social competences through several 
channels. It can be a powerful force to equalize 
opportunities and outcomes—and a powerful 
enabler  of  societal  empowerment.  Universal 
public education can mitigate the gap in the 
quality  of  education  that  children  from  rich 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    85

The case for universal 
provision of basic social 
services rests, first and 
foremost, on the premises 
that all humans should 
be empowered to live 
lives they value and that 
access to certain basic 
elements of a dignified life 
ought to be delinked from 
people’s ability to pay.

and poor households receive. Intergenerational 
transmission of capabilities such as education 
within families can perpetuate the benefits in 
the long run. Universal policies also promote 
social solidarity.2

The  case  for  universal  provision  of  basic 
social  services  then  rests,  first  and  foremost, 
on  the  premises  that  all  humans  should  be 
empowered  to  live  lives  they  value  and  that 
access to certain basic elements of a dignified 
life ought to be delinked from people’s ability 
to  pay.  The  UN  Secretary-General’s  2013 
report, “A Life of Dignity for All”, states that 
one  of  the  prerequisites  for  the  post-2015 
sustainable development agenda is a “vision of 
the future firmly anchored in human rights and 
universally accepted values and principles, in-
cluding those encapsulated in the Charter, the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 
the Millennium Declaration.”3 The September 
2010 Millennium Development Goal Summit 
outcome  document  states,  “promoting  uni-
versal  access  to  social  services  and  providing 
social protection floors can make an important 
contribution  to  consolidating  and  achieving 
further development gains.”4

A  commitment  to  universal  provision  of 
social services requires a profound societal and 
political decision. It reflects on the nature of 
society that people want. While ways of deliv-
ering such services may vary with circumstances 
and country context, common to all successful 
experiences is a single idea: The state has the 
primary responsibility to extend social services 
to the entire population, in a basic social con-
tract between people and their state.

At a more policy-oriented level, looking at 
budgets  alone  is  insufficient;  how  and  when 
they  are  deployed  are  equally  critical.  More 
resources may well be required to extend basic 
social services to all, but modest investments 
at the right time can go a considerable way in 
reducing  vulnerability.  Budgets  need  to  join 
legal and other measures to equalize access to 
services and opportunities.

Universal or targeted coverage

Recent  decades  have  seen  a  global  shift  in 
the  politics  of  social  spending,  changing  the 
emphasis from development to poverty allevi-
ation.5 As a result, there has been greater stress 

86    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

on targeting social spending for the poor rather 
than for all. Targeted services were considered 
more efficient, less costly and more effective in 
ensuring redistribution. But historical evidence 
presents  a  more  nuanced  picture.  Universal 
provision has in many instances been associated 
with greater poverty reduction, greater redistri-
bution  and  lower  inequality,  something  of  a 
paradox since targeted benefits are theoretically 
more redistributive.6 A key factor is that when 
benefits are narrowly targeted, the middle class 
and elites are less willing to fund them through 
taxes. If provision is universal, however, elites 
are more willing to fund services, and some of 
the inefficiencies in redistribution are offset by 
the larger pool of available funds.7

In the European welfare states, universal cov-
erage of social insurance has been driven by the 
expectations and demands of the middle class.8 
Similarly, universal provision of education and 
health care in the Nordic countries was sustain-
able because of the high quality of education 
and health care from which all could benefit. 
This ensured that the middle class was willing 
to  fund  their  provision  with  taxes.  Because 
of this, there have been calls for a politics of 
solidarity—engaging  universalist  principles 
to create a stake for the middle class in social 
provision and thus to build a coalition between 
the poor and the nonpoor.9 Targeting can un-
dermine such solidarity, giving rise to two-track 
systems: underfunded low-quality services for 
the poor and better quality commercial services 
for the middle classes and the rich.

Universalist principles in social policy have 
been known and practised in several countries 
for years. Aspirationally, they have been includ-
ed in country constitutions and recognized in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
But  many  countries,  in  different  geographic 
areas and at all stages of development, have yet 
to commit to universal provision of basic social 
services. An enduring concern has been finding 
adequate resources to fund universal provision. 
For example, there is a tacit assumption that 
economic  growth  producing  higher  incomes 
is  a  prerequisite  for  universal  health  care. 
Worries about reduced fiscal space have height-
ened  since  the  2008  financial  crises—even 
in  developed  countries—leading  to  austerity 
measures.10  Yet  income  alone  need  not  con-
strain universal social policies. While resource 

constraints  are  a  valid  concern,  mobilizing 
resources, restructuring the fiscal space, repri-
oritizing spending and improving the efficiency 
of service delivery through better institutional 
design can create more options.

Universal provision is feasible, even 
at early stages of development

Three stylized facts emerge from a study of the 
conditions in selected countries that adopted 
principles of universalism. First, the principles 
were  generally  adopted  before  the  countries 
industrialized  and  became  affluent.  Second, 
they were adopted under a range of political 
systems—from autocracies to highly functional 
democracies.  Third,  universal  coverage  took 
many  years,  in  some  cases  decades,  for  the 
early  adopters  to  achieve,  not  so  for  several 
recent adopters. But the gains from expanded 
coverage start to accrue long before coverage is 
universal.

In  Costa  Rica,  Denmark,  the  Republic  of 
Korea, Norway and Sweden the first step to-
wards universal provision of basic social servic-
es was taken at relatively low income per capita. 
Costa Rica adopted comprehensive measures 
on education investments, public health and 
social  security  in  the  constitutional  amend-
ment of 1949, in the immediate aftermath of 
a violent political struggle after which democ-
racy  emerged,  when  its  GDP  per  capita  was 
$2,123 in 1990 international dollars. Sweden 
(in  1891)  and  Denmark  (in  1892)  enacted 
sickness insurance laws at a GDP per capita of 
$1,724 and $2,598 respectively. Norway enact-
ed a mandatory workers compensation law in 
1894 when its GDP per capita was $1,764. The 
Republic of Korea had already made large gains 
in education by the early 1960s, when its GDP 
per capita was less than $1,500.11 Ghana initiat-
ed universal health coverage in 2004 when its 
income per capita was $1,504—the coverage 
is not complete yet, but reductions in out-of-
pocket expenditures have been large.12 These 
countries started putting in place measures of 
social  insurance  when  their  GDP  per  capita 
was lower than India’s and Pakistan’s now (fig-
ure 4.1).

When Sweden made schooling compulsory 
for  all  children  in  1842,  its  GDP  per  capita 
($926) was lower than the current GDP per 

capita  of  all  the  countries  in  South  Asia.  So 
high  national  income  is  not  a  prerequisite 
for taking the first steps towards broad-based 
investment in providing basic social services. 
Investment in public services preceded growth 
takeoffs in all the countries just discussed.

While resource 
constraints are a valid 
concern, mobilizing 
resources, restructuring 
the fiscal space, 
reprioritizing spending and 
improving the efficiency of 
service delivery through 
better institutional design 
can create more options

The earliest measures towards widespread—
if  not  universal—education,  health  care  and 
social protection were adopted under a range 
of  different  political  conditions  (figure  4.2). 
In France and the Nordic countries a spirit of 
egalitarianism and a solidarity view of welfare 
as a right of citizenship preceded the adoption 
of  welfare  measures.  Germany  initiated  edu-
cation for the masses under Prussian rule. The 
Republic of Korea invested heavily in educa-
tion even as a newly independent country in 
the late 1940s and continued to expand access 
to education during political turmoil and war.13 
Sri Lanka, which shares a colonial history sim-
ilar to that of India and the rest of the subcon-
tinent, achieved nearly universal education and 
health care despite years of militancy and war.

While  the  transition  to  universal  coverage 
took  time  for  the  early  adopters,  the  more 
recent adopters have made faster gains. Even 
though compulsory education and social pro-
tection were mandated in Denmark, Norway 
and  Sweden  in  the  late  19th  century,  the 
various schemes became truly universal more 
than  10  years  after  the  Second  World  War, 
between  1955  and  1963.  The  Republic  of 
Korea’s near-universal primary education and 
high  secondary  and  tertiary  education  took 
some five decades to achieve.14 In comparison, 
China, Rwanda and Viet Nam went from very 
low  health  care  coverage  to  nearly  universal 
coverage within a decade.15

Sometimes severe shocks can set back pro-
gress in human development, including efforts 
to achieve universal coverage of basic social ser-
vices, but the right short-term response can pre-
vent long-term damage. In the aftermath of the 
East Asian crises in the late 1990s, Indonesia, 
the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Thailand and 
other  economies  were  reeling  from  market 
failures and the shock of capital flight. The re-
sultant job losses and decline in growth output 
meant that large sections of the working pop-
ulation lost earnings, with immediate impacts 
on household spending and consumption and 
direct repercussions for health and education.

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    87

FIGURE 4.1

Several countries started putting in place measures of social insurance when their GDP per capita was 
lower than that of most countries in South Asia today

GDP per capita
(Geary-Khamis
dollars)

8,000

7,000

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

h
s
e
d
a
l
g
n
a
B

i

a
d
n

I

l
a
p
e
N

n
a
t
s
i
k
a
P

a
k
n
a
L

 
i
r
S

Source: Calculations based on Maddison (2010).

Denmark enacted sickness
insurance law (1892)

Costa Rica made comprehensive investments
in education, health and social security (1949)

Norway enacted mandatory workers 
compensation law (1894)

Sweden enacted sickness
insurance law (1891)

Ghana initiated universal health
coverage (2004)
Republic of Korea made gains
in education coverage (1960s)

On  closer  examination,  the  countries  re-
sponded differently to the crises.16 Indonesia’s 
leadership  was  constrained  by  political  un-
certainty,  and  there  was  a  decline  in  public 
spending  on  the  social  sectors.  Ongoing 
social unrest meant that informal community 
networks were not as resilient or resourceful. 
Household spending on health and education 
also  declined,  leading  to  higher  illness  and 
school dropout rates.17 The Thai government 
implemented assistance measures for employ-
ment,  health  and  education.18  But  executing 
such a response in Indonesia was more difficult. 
The difference in these two experiences is often 
pinned to the different levels of proactive poli-
cies by the government.19

Macro and other benefits

Expanded  provision  of  basic  public  services 
can reduce poverty and inequality even before 

coverage is universal. The design and reach of 
social policies will affect inequality in people’s 
lifetime  earning  power.  In  Mexico  between 
1997 and 1998 the Oportunidades programme 
reduced the poverty rate 17 percent. In Brazil 
the Bolsa Família programme has been linked 
to a 16 percent decline in extreme poverty.20 
In Europe consolidation of universal provision 
coincided with a decline in income inequality, 
giving rise to associations between the size of 
social  expenditure  and  the  reduction  in  ine-
quality, termed the ‘size-redistribution thesis’.21
Several studies have since shown that institu-
tional design rather than amount of spending 
may have driven outcomes.22 Indeed, countries 
can achieve better coverage and quality for the 
resources they spend on providing basic social 
services.  And  innovative  sources  of  finance 
can be tapped to fund universal provision. For 
instance, Bolivia introduced a universal old age 
pension in 1997 and funded it partially through 

88    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 4.2

Evolution of health protection coverage as a percentage of total population in selected countries

100

Share of
population
covered (%)

60

20

Spain,  Greece,
Portugal

Austria, France,
Germany 

Rep. of Korea,
Thailand

Austria
France
Germany
Greece
Portugal
Spain
United States
Chile
Mexico
China
Rep. of Korea
Thailand
Viet Nam
Ghana
Rwanda

China,
Viet Nam

Rwanda,
Ghanaa

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

a. Estimated.
Source: ILO 2011b.

resources from privatizing public enterprises. In 
2007 the qualifying age was reduced from 65 to 
60, and taxes on hydrocarbon sales became the 
main source of funding.23

Social  spending  has  been  associated  with 
poverty reduction in the population as a whole 
and among subgroups.24 With a poverty line at 
50 percent of median equivalent income, the 
Nordic countries reduced poverty 80–90 per-
cent  among  families  with  children  through 
redistribution  in  the  mid-1990s.25  Other 
European countries—notably Belgium, France, 
Germany,  the  Netherlands  and  Spain—also 
reduced poverty more than 50 percent among 
families  with  children.  Non–means  tested 
entitlements  in  Sweden  reduced  poverty  by 
close to 72 percent, independent of the level 
of means-tested benefits.26 In Argentina a uni-
versal child allowance, introduced in 2009 and 
covering 85 percent of children, reduced pover-
ty 22 percent and extreme poverty 42 percent.27
Universalism  in  social  policy  can  also 
contribute  to  economic  growth,  thus  setting 
up  a  virtuous  cycle  of  growth  and  human 

development. In East Asia in particular, rapid 
gains in education and training enabled coun-
tries  to  leverage  the  new  knowledge-driven 
global  economy.  Universal  provision  affects 
development  outcomes  through  a  range  of 
channels,  including  improvements  in  human 
resources  that  might  contribute  to  growth, 
thus setting up a virtuous cycle. For instance, 
countries that reaped demographic dividends 
have  usually  had  better  education  outcomes 
prior to takeoff. While there is no one-to-one 
correspondence between human development 
and  economic  growth,  the  latter  increases  a 
country’s command over resources and is thus 
important for development.

Expanded  education  and  health  care  have 
enabled several countries to reap demographic 
dividends.28  In  the  Republic  of  Korea,  for 
example,  the  child  dependency  ratio  ranged 
between 74  percent and  81 percent  through 
the  1960s,  increasing  until  1966  but  then 
falling  consistently  to  22  percent  by  2011. 
The country’s economic takeoff starting in the 
mid-1960s  was  also  preceded  by  large-scale 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    89

achievements  in  education.  In  1945  most  of 
the population had no schooling, and less than 
5 percent had secondary or higher education, 
but by 1960 primary enrolment had increased 
3-fold (with 96 percent of school-age children 
in  grades  1–6),  secondary  enrolment  more 
than 8-fold and higher education 10-fold. By 
the  early  1990s  the  high  school  graduation 
rate was 90 percent. This education revolution 
continued through political instability, poverty 
and war, and the country had universal educa-
tion before its economic takeoff.

China  presents  a  more  complex  picture. 
Through the 1960s the child dependency ratio 
was above 70 percent. It started declining in the 
mid-1970s, just before the reforms of 1978, and 
by 2011 had fallen to 26 percent. In 1982, the 
earliest year with data, adult female literacy was 
51 percent.29 By 2000 it was 87 percent and by 
2010 more than 91 percent. In 1997, the most 
recent year with data, primary completion was 
94 percent and for women, 92 percent. Primary 
enrolment became universal around 2007. As a 
result, the growth of the manufacturing sector 
over the last two decades was fuelled not just by 
a growing labour force, but also by an educated 
and productive labour force.

But  in  recent  decades  China  has  seen  an 
erosion in health care coverage and social pro-
tection. From 1950 through the 1970s health 
care was nearly universal—thanks to the public 
health  network  and  urban  and  rural  health 
insurance  schemes.  But  after  1978  a  shift  to 
market- oriented  mechanisms  and  increasing 
costs  of  medical  care,  combined  with  the 
collapse  of  the  rural  cooperative  health  care 
system,  left  large  sections  of  the  population 
(including  urban  groups)  without  affordable 
care.  In  2009  a  blueprint  for  health  system 
reform was announced, with the goal of estab-
lishing universal coverage of all urban and rural 
residents.30 By the end of 2013, 99 percent of 
China’s rural population was said to have access 
to health care through the new rural coopera-
tive medical insurance scheme.31

Universal  social  policy  is  not  uniform  in 
its implementation. Providing access to mar-
ginalized and excluded groups, including the 
poor  and  the  vulnerable,  requires  additional 
efforts  and  resources.  Implementing  policies 
with universal intent often starts by gathering 
the ‘low-hanging fruit’, as evident in policies 

to move the poor closest to the poverty line 
over it. Avoiding this false choice will require 
starting at the ‘last mile’—aiming to provide 
access to basic services that meet the needs of 
the poorest and the most vulnerable first.

A  second  issue  is  quality.  Although  most 
countries are close to universal primary school 
enrolment, school completion at that level is far 
from universal. Moreover, children in public 
schools often receive very poor quality educa-
tion: Where public and private schooling sys-
tems coexist, a systematic difference in quality 
may emerge if public schooling is underfunded. 
The quality of health care that people can access 
(by paying) and what is included in universal 
health coverage can also make a large differ-
ence in outcomes. When public education has 
adequate funding, it competes favourably with 
privately  provided  education.32  Expanding 
coverage thus requires a clear assessment of the 
appropriate  balance  between  public  and  pri-
vate spaces in delivering these basic services. A 
‘mixed’ system tends to segment the provision 
of services—the rich and the middle class tend 
to opt out of publicly provided education, lead-
ing to a weaker commitment to providing qual-
ity education in the publicly organized system.

Addressing life cycle 
vulnerabilities—timing matters

Covering all individuals implies that social ser-
vices are needed at different points in the life 
cycle, particularly at sensitive junctures in a per-
son’s life, including early childhood and the tran-
sitions from youth to young adulthood and from 
adulthood to old age, to build lifetime resilience. 
Timing the interventions is  critical—since fail-
ing to support the development of capabilities 
at the right time is costly to fix later. Early child-
hood development provides a good example of 
how universalism helps support investments in 
human capabilities across the life cycle.

The focus here is on early childhood devel-
opment. Another key transition is from youth 
to  young  adulthood.  Most  salient  for  young 
people are school-to-work transitions and pre-
carious employment. (Employment policies are 
treated in the following section, and pensions 
and disability insurance, in the section on so-
cial protection.)

Early childhood 
development provides 
a good example of how 
universalism helps 
support investments 
in human capabilities 
across the life cycle

90    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Ideally,  governments  should  integrate 
health, education, family and social protection 
services for children and families throughout 
their lives. However, it is common for fewer 
resources to be available for early childhood 
development and for social spending per cap-
ita to increase with age.33 Spending on health, 
education and welfare that increases over the 
life cycle does not nurture and support capa-
bility  development  during  the  crucial  early 
years (figure 4.3).

Sweden is a rare model where the government 
allocates expenditures towards earlier years,34 
thus reflecting the crucial investments during 
the prenatal and postnatal sensitive period of 
brain development (figure 4.4). In launching 
or scaling up large national programmes, four 
ingredients  deserve  special  consideration: 
pre- and post-natal care; parent education and 
training; income; and nutrition. As chapter 3 
highlighted,  brain  growth  is  extremely  rapid 
during the earliest years and tends to flatten 
after them. But the budget allocations in public 
social services are lowest in the earliest years 
and increase later (see figure 4.3).35

The  advantages  gained  from  effective 
early  interventions  are  best  sustained  when 

followed  by  continued  investments  in 
high-quality  education.  Early  childhood 
development  interventions  alone  are  not 
sufficient. Later complementary investments 
in lifetime learning during adolescence, adult-
hood and old age are necessary to ensure that 
individual capabilities can develop to their full 
potential.  But  current  policies  of  education 
and job training are often not appropriately 
focused and tend to emphasize cognitive skills 
over  social  skills,  self-discipline,  motivation 
and other ‘soft skills’ that determine success 
in life.

Education  performance  stabilizes  at  a 
young age (around 7–8), and family environ-
ments  can  shape  inequalities  (figure  4.5).36 
Particularly important are interactions with 
parents  and  caregivers.37  The  degree  and 
quality of these interactions—including play, 
vocal exchanges, facial expressions and phys-
ical  contact—correlate  with  a  child’s  later 
behaviour, cognitive abilities and emotional 
development.38  Much  of  this  care  is  unpaid 
and nonmarket work.

Infancy  and  early  childhood  are  among 
the most formative periods in a person’s life. 
Investments in children—of time, money and 

FIGURE 4.3

Spending on health, education and welfare that increases over the life cycle does not nurture and support 
capability development during the crucial early years

Brain size

Budget 
share

Brain size by age

Budget share by age 

Source: Karoly and others 1997.

Age

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    91

FIGURE 4.4

Early childhood investment: the Swedish example

Government
expenditure
(Swedish krona)

200,000

160,000

120,000

80,000

40,000

0

0

Health care
School
Preschool
Transfers

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Age (years)

Source: Dalman and Bremberg 1999.

other  resources—expand  their  choices  fur-
ther down the road, enhance capabilities and 
lead  to  sustainable  improvements  in  human 
development. But children who are born into 
poverty, go hungry and receive inadequate care 
tend to perform worse in school, have poorer 
health and are less likely to get a decent job. 
And  as  adults  they  invest  too  little  in  their 
own children, perpetuating vulnerability across 
generations. When households are subject to 
persistent shocks, programmes such as Bolsa 
Família  and  Oportunidades  can  reduce  the 
probability that children will be pulled out of 
school or suffer malnourishment.

Parents  and  caregivers  in  low-income  and 
impoverished households may have to spend 
more  time  in  paid  work  to  make  ends  meet 
and thus have less time to invest in children. 
Adults  in  better  resourced  households  have 
more money—and often more time. This helps 
explain  correlations  between  socioeconomic 
status  and  early  childhood  development.39  It 
also points to the benefits of universal access 
to  early  childhood  development  measures  in 
equalizing opportunities.

Promoting full employment

Full employment as an objective was central 
to macroeconomic policies in the 1950s and 
1960s. It disappeared from the global agenda 
during the era of stabilization that followed 
the  oil  shocks  of  1973  and  1979.  It  is  now 
time  to  return  to  that  commitment  so  that 
progress can be robust and easily sustained. 
Universalism  is  frequently  discussed  with 
regard to social  policies—such as health, ed-
ucation,  childcare  and  income  support.  But 
it  also  applies  to  labour  markets—ensuring 
that everyone has access to decent opportuni-
ties for paid employment. Not everyone will 
choose  to  engage  in  paid  employment,  but 
universalism  implies  that  they  should  have 
the option to do so. Universal access to decent 
employment opportunities is often articulated 
in  terms  of  full-employment  policies.  Not 
only  does  full  employment  extend  univer-
salism to the labour market, it also supports 
the provision of social services. Indeed, full 
employment was important for sustaining the 
Nordic model, since high employment helped 

92    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 4.5

The degree and quality of interactions with parents and caregivers correlate with a child’s later 
behaviour, cognitive abilities and emotional development

Appropriate
discipline

Family
discord

Reading to child

Lack of support
service

Preschool

School readiness: 
socioemotional, physical, 
cognitive and language
function

Lower trajectory
lower function

Readiness
to learn

Parental
education and
emotional
awareness

Poverty

6 mo

12 mo

18 mo

24 mo

3y

4y

5y

h
t
r
i
B

y
c
n
a
f
n

i
 
y
l
r
a
E

y
c
n
a
f
n

i
 

e
t
a
L

r
e
l
d
d
o
t
 
y
l
r
a
E

l

o
o
h
c
s
e
r
P

r
e
l
d
d
o
t
 
e
t
a
L

Age

Source: Young 2014.

ensure adequate tax revenues to finance uni-
versal provision.

Full  employment  is  also  desirable  for  its 
social  benefits.  Unemployment  entails  high 
economic  and  social  costs,  leading  to  a  per-
manent loss in output and a decline in labour 
skills and productivity. The loss of production 
and associated tax revenue can require higher 
public  spending  to  support  unemployment 
insurance. Long-term unemployment is also a 
serious threat to health (physical and mental) 
and to the quality of life (including children’s 
education).  And  unemployment  tends  to  be 
associated with an increase in crime, suicide, 
violence, drug abuse and other social problems. 
Therefore, the social benefits of a job far exceed 
the private benefit—the wage.

Jobs  foster  social  stability  and  social  co-
hesion,  and  decent  jobs  strengthen  people’s 
ability to manage shocks and uncertainty. Jobs, 
as  a  means  of  livelihood,  strengthen  human 
agency and have larger value for families and 
communities. Secure employment has a high 
psychological value as well.

Yet few countries, developed or developing, 
pursue  full  employment  as  an  overarching 

societal  or  economic  goal.  Macroeconomic 
policies almost everywhere now focus on price 
stability and debt management. Globally con-
nected financial markets are quick to penalize 
countries  if  they  believe  these  objectives  are 
not being adequately pursued. Even in theory, 
markets cannot deliver on full employment due 
to informational barriers and other labour mar-
ket frictions. And unregulated markets make 
it  particularly  difficult  to  produce  desirable 
labour outcomes.

A stronger national commitment to full em-
ployment and active public policies should be 
geared towards creating and protecting jobs. It 
is worth recalling that the 1995 Copenhagen 
commitment to full employment was added 
to  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  as 
target 1.B in 2008. Expanding and conserving 
jobs rather than destroying them should now 
guide creative and active labour market poli-
cies. Unemployment benefits and work injury 
compensation, however useful, are reactive, 
dealing mainly with the effects of economic 
vulnerabilities.  Active  labour  market  poli-
cies  seek  to  overcome  these  vulnerabilities 
by  helping  workers  regain  employment 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    93

Expanding and conserving 
jobs rather than destroying 
them should now guide 
creative and active 
labour market policies

through temporary employment schemes or 
by imparting employable skills. For instance, 
Singapore places a high premium on job sta-
bility in economic downturns by providing 
wage subsidies to employers (rather than pro-
viding  unemployment  benefits  to  workers) 
that  increase  wages  at  the  lower  end  of  the 
distribution.

But  for  developing  countries  faced  with 
underemployment, active labour market poli-
cies are not enough. Pursuing full employment 
requires policies that promote pro-poor growth 
and create a social security framework. It also 
requires  macroeconomic  policies  that  go  be-
yond an exclusive focus on price stability and 
debt management. Typically, developing coun-
tries have little formal unemployment—in fact, 
unemployment is generally a status that only 
better-off  people  can  afford.  These  countries 
also face pressing challenges of creating many 
new  jobs  in  the  next  years  to  accommodate 
youth spikes in their populations.

There are promising employment initiatives 
around the world—from China’s strong com-
mitment to high growth in order to absorb new 
entrants to the labour force to India’s National 
Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Scheme  to 
secure work as a basic right of all citizens. The 
examples highlight the opportunities in vigor-
ously pursuing full employment as a strategic 
objective, at different stages of development, to 
reduce vulnerability and build the resilience of 
people and societies.

In the past decades, however, macroeconomic 
frameworks in most developing countries have 
had a one-dimensional focus on price stability 
rather  than  on  full  employment,  leading  to 
low  growth  and  high  unemployment.40  The 
shortcomings  are  also  evident  in  developed 
countries. By further depressing aggregate de-
mand when it needs to be boosted, fiscal auster-
ity may be inappropriate as a macroeconomic 
policy  because  it  exacerbates  the  impact  of 
economic  downturns  on  unemployment 
(box 4.1). Decent work that pays reasonable 
wages, involves formal contracts that prevent 
abrupt  dismissals  and  brings  entitlements  to 
social  security  can  do  much  to  reduce  em-
ployee vulnerability, but less so in recessions. 
Reducing  vulnerable  employment  is  thus 
hugely important for reducing human vulner-
ability in general. The importance of realizing 

decent  and  full  employment  has  long  been 
recognized, yet widespread unemployment and 
underemployment continue in most countries 
due  to  the  prolonged  deployment  of  macro-
economic policies that have been insufficiently 
countercyclical.

All these policy areas are interrelated, and a 
comprehensive approach to addressing labour 
market deficiencies will require a coordinated 
effort.  This  will  require  structural  transfor-
mation of the economy, with movement into 
higher  productivity  and  higher  value-added 
activities—using  targeted  policies  that  sup-
port the development of strategic sectors and 
activities.41

Developing countries require 
particular policies

Pursuing full employment in developing coun-
tries requires different approaches. Traditional 
policies, such as those highlighted above, are 
more  appropriate  to  developed  countries. 
Such policies make only a small contribution 
to reducing the vulnerability of employment, 
helping  the  minority  in  the  modern  formal 
sector.  The  long-run  objective  then  is  to  se-
cure structural change so that modern formal 
employment  gradually  incorporates  most  of 
the workforce, as has happened in developed 
countries and many emerging countries, such 
as China and the Republic of Korea. Such a 
transformation involves movement out of ag-
riculture into industry and services, supported 
by  investments  in  infrastructure,  education 
and  training,  as  the  successful  economies 
show.42

Policies  supporting  structural  transfor-
mation,  increasing  formal  employment  and 
regulating conditions of work are thus needed 
to reduce employment vulnerability in the me-
dium to long run, but they will be insufficient 
to tackle the vulnerabilities of the majority of 
the workforce in the short run. So policies are 
also essential to address the vulnerabilities—
and secure the livelihoods—of the mass of the 
workforce that will remain in traditional and 
informal activities in the short run.

First,  a  host  of  interventions  can  contrib-
ute over the medium to long term, including 
micro-credit  schemes,  support  for  new  and 
improved  small-scale  technologies,  assisting 

94    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

BOX 4.1

Macroeconomic policies for full employment

Full employment was pursued and mostly attained in the mid-20th century 
in Europe and North America. The East Asian economies achieved similar 
results during their high growth era in the 1970s and 1980s. High savings 
and high aggregate investment (both above 30 percent of GDP) produced 
inclusive growth that transformed the structure of their economies and led 
to full employment.1

In many other developing countries, however, most jobs remain vulnerable 
and precarious. The poor, with little or no social security, cannot afford to be 
unemployed but must accept whatever work and wages are available, often in 
the informal sector. The objective is full decent employment—moving towards 
higher productivity, higher value added, higher quality and better remunerated 
forms  of  employment.  Generally  this  means  moving  out  of  agriculture  into 
other sectors of the economy. So policies need to address land reform and 
the insecurity of labour transitioning out of agriculture. Full employment also 
has implications for fiscal policy. For example, since the mid-1990s increases 
in urban formal employment and rising wages in China have been financed by 
rising provincial government fiscal deficits.2 Similarly, India uses tax revenues 
to finance the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme.

During economic downturns a countercyclical fiscal stimulus can raise 
aggregate  demand.  Macroeconomic  policy  should  thus  embrace  multiple 
targets (not just the inflation rate) and multiple instruments (not just mon-
etary policy) complemented with universal social protection that not only 
mitigates  vulnerabilities  among  the  population,  but  also  stabilizes  the 
economy  in  the  face  of  shocks.  In  some  developing  countries,  however, 

countercyclical policies may not be the first step if there are structural im-
pediments to job creation.

In  developed  economies  three  policy  approaches  have  traditionally 
aimed at restoring full employment—which needs to be explicitly acknowl-
edged as an important objective of economic policy and incorporated into 
macro policy, both fiscal and monetary. First, a Keynesian approach to macro 
policy allowed budget deficits to rise during recessions, and monetary policy 
was guided by the employment objective as well as price stability. In the 
recent recession some developed countries (the United States and initially 
the United Kingdom) and several middle-income developing countries did 
adopt Keynesian deficit policies.3

Second, to facilitate structural change and reduce the employment vul-
nerability it brings, research and development policies can promote technol-
ogy innovation to develop new sources of employment, increase workforce 
education and provide more training and retraining, as well as unemploy-
ment benefits as people change sectors.

Third, emphasis on upgrading to new activities diminishes the need for 
labour market reforms, which generally involve less employment security 
and lower wages. Indeed, minimum wages should be raised to encourage 
the move into higher productivity activities.4 In general, the labour market 
reforms of the neoliberal model need to be carefully re-evaluated from the 
perspective of reducing employment vulnerability. Together, these three ap-
proaches to policy will contribute to reducing the vulnerability of employ-
ment in high- and middle-income countries.

Notes
1. Muqtada 2010. 2. Fang, Yang and Meiyan 2010. 3. Jolly and others 2012. 4. Raising minimum wages was a response to the crisis in Brazil and has contributed to improving wages and income distribution (Berg 2009).

small farmers with technology, credit and mar-
kets, and so on. And social and institutional 
innovations can support improved conditions. 
Farmer cooperatives, women’s forestry groups 
and  many  others  can  improve  productivity 
and increase the bargaining strength and thus 
the terms of trade and incomes of very poor 
producers.43

Second, responses to short-term shocks can 
improve the support that people in very low- 
income activities receive in general and during 
adversity in particular. They include cash trans-
fers (conditional or unconditional), pensions 
for older people (which contribute to the well- 
being of the family), nutrition support through 
food  subsidies  and  school  needs,  communal 
cooking and feeding programmes and low-cost 
insurance schemes. Locally administered cash 
transfers  can  support  households  when  the 
main earners are ill, as can free medical services.
Third, direct job creation programmes can 
help those facing vulnerable employment. Some 
provide permanent employment at low wages 

for  poor  households.  Others  are  temporary, 
introduced during recessions or in post-conflict 
situations as a short-term response to periods of 
particularly precarious employment outcomes. 
Both types of scheme, if on a sufficient scale, 
reduce  employment  vulnerability.  Examples 
include44:
•  The  Indian  National  Rural  Employment 
Guarantee  Scheme  guarantees  every  rural 
household 100 days of work a year at a rea-
sonable wage.45

•  Argentina’s  Jefes  y  Jefas  de  Hogar 
Desocupados,  introduced  in  2001  in  re-
sponse to an economic crisis, included 2 mil-
lion beneficiaries by the end of 2003.46

•  Food-for-work schemes in Bangladesh have 
provided extensive poverty alleviation since 
1975, particularly for rural workers during 
the slack seasons. Each year they have pro-
vided  100  million  workdays  for  4  million 
people.47

•  The Indonesian Padat Karya, introduced in 
1998–1999 in response to the financial crisis, 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    95

provided  employment  for  those  who  lost 
their jobs.48

•  Nepal’s Emergency Employment Programme, 
targeted at marginal communities, extended 
to  roughly  5  percent  of  the  population  to 
meet the post-conflict need for employment 
and a peace dividend.49
Some groups face larger labour market risks 
and uncertainties, and it will be important to 
invest in their skills development and educa-
tion.50 Addressing residential segregation, im-
proving transportation and lowering the cost of 
getting to better jobs will integrate labour mar-
kets and increase accessibility of employment 
opportunities.51 Providing information about 
available opportunities and connecting those 
searching for better employment with new op-
portunities make labour markets work better. 
Those in informal employment, many of whom 
are  self-employed,  will  need  better  access  to 
credit and markets. All this will require public 
investment.

As  development  proceeds,  workers  move 
from low-productivity but stable and diversi-
fied rural livelihoods to less predictable forms 
of  income,  including  wages  and  salaries.52 
Rather  than  exacerbating  insecurity  through 
flexible labour market policies, public policy 
needs  to  first  focus  on  making  it  easier  for 
people to transition into decent jobs with some 
autonomy. This will allow them to adopt a live-
lihood in response to socioeconomic structural 
change that is more in line with their skill sets 
and employment expectations, as seen in China 
and the Republic of Korea.

More  universal  social  security  and  social 
provisioning  help  populations  shifting  out 
of  agriculture  and  rural  subsistence  prepare 
for  negative  economic  events  and  deal  with 

the employment precariousness in the devel-
opment  process.  Social  security  regimes  are 
 integral  to—not  optional  for—enhancing 
people’s capabilities and societies’ competences 
during transition.53

Encouraging  this  shift  and  creating  wide-
spread productive employment require more- 
effective strategies of economic development, 
including greater public investment in infra-
structure, development of human capabilities, 
active promotion of innovation and strategic 
policies for trade, particularly exports.

Some  countries  in  East  Asia  have  facili-
tated  a  rapid  transition  out  of  agriculture 
(box 4.2). In the Republic of Korea the share 
of the labour employed in the primary sector 
(mostly agriculture) fell from 30 percent in 
1980 to 9 percent in 2006. In Malaysia it fell 
from 55 percent in the 1960s to 16 percent 
in  2000.  And  in  China  it  fell  from  almost 
84  percent  in  1952  to  81  percent  in  1970 
to 69 percent in 1980 to 60 percent in 1990 
to  50  percent  in  2000  and  to  37  percent 
in  2010.54  The  pace  of  these  transitions  is 
remarkable.

Transitions have been slower in, say, Brazil, 
where  the  primary  sector’s  labour  share  fell 
from about 29 percent to 20 percent between 
1980  and  2006,  and  much  slower  in  India, 
where it barely fell between 1960 and 2005, 
stuck  around  70  percent.55  India’s  failure  to 
transition into industry has to be remedied—
jobs in business process outsourcing are a boon 
for the balance of payments but hardly for mass 
employment.

Success  might  be  deemed  as  avoiding  a 
situation in which the bulk of transitioning 
labour ends up in insecure informal employ-
ment,  as  in  much  of  Latin  America,  where 

BOX 4.2

Policy successes in East Asia

The varied policy measures in East Asia have generally not fallen into the 
mould of flexible labour market reforms and purely market-based approaches 
to solving employment problems. They are better characterized as industrial 
development through state interventions coupled with measures to enhance 
livelihood or employment security and avoid excessive social dislocation and 
unrest (among other aims).

State-led industrial policy created the conditions for labour to transition 
to more productive, higher value added and fairly formalized employment 

outside  agriculture.  Monetary  policies  to  sustain  aggregate  demand  for 
maximum  employment  included  tolerance  for  moderate  inflation.  State 
ownership of the banking sector in the Republic of Korea and later in China 
allowed  for  the  financing  of  industrial  policy  and  employment-generating 
activities such as infrastructure construction, neither of which is necessarily 
profitable in the short term. Trade, macroeconomic, financial and industrial 
policies all increased the quality and quantity of jobs. Fiscal policies were 
similarly directed towards employment creation.

96    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

workers are highly urban and informal. For 
about  1  billion  of  the  world’s  people,56  the 
precarious  livelihoods  of  those  operating 
outside  the  labour  market  and  engaged  in 
self-subsistence  cannot  be  enhanced  in  the 
long run without expanded decent employ-
ment. In the short run social protection that 
covers  the  whole  population  is  essential  to 
protect those whose livelihoods are in peril 
during the transition (see below).

Preserving employment

Various  countries  have  boosted  employment 
security for more- vulnerable workers through 
targeted labour market interventions. Since the 
1980s Singapore has temporarily reduced man-
dated employer social security contributions to 
minimize  job  losses  during  economic  down-
turns.57  In  2009  the  government  introduced 
a  one-year  jobs  credit  scheme  that  helped 
businesses preserve jobs during the recession. 
Its 2013 budget included a wage credit scheme 
to  raise  the  wages  of  lower  income  workers. 
Employers thus have an incentive to share pro-
ductivity gains with all employees.

China has practised a degree of wage equal-
ization  across  state  employment  in  urban 
areas, increasing real wages nationwide since 
the 1990s. This presumably also raised wages 
in the nonstate sector, in both corporate and 
informal  employment.  European  countries 
have  also  offered  subsidies  to  employers  to 
hire unemployed workers. In 2003 Germany 
subsidized roughly 6 percent of transitions out 
of unemployment for middle-age people.58 The 
pay of the subsidized workers was not much 
different from that of their unsubsidized coun-
terparts, but because subsidized workers tended 
to keep their jobs, their cumulative wages were 
substantially higher.59 Subsidized employment 
also generated more tax and social security in-
come and reduced the cost of unemployment 
benefits.

Yet some groups can be difficult to employ 
even  in  a  healthy  economy—particularly 
young  people  or  the  long-term  unemployed. 
To address this, the United States offers work-
ers an earned income tax credit that provides 
extended  benefits  if  they  have  families  with 
children. Combining wage support and social 
transfers, the system has a strong antipoverty 

impact.  Chile  introduced  an  employer-side 
and training- linked wage subsidy programme 
in  1991.  Under  its  Chile  Joven  programme, 
employers  that  hire  and  train  unemployed 
young people received a subsidy to cover the 
training costs.60 Some evidence indicates that 
three months after receiving training half the 
participants retained employment—usually in 
positions related to their training.

At  least  10  Organisation  for  Economic 
Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD) 
countries have policies for workers with disabil-
ities. In 1998 Denmark, as an extension of its 
active social policy, introduced Flexjob, which 
offers  wage  subsidies  to  enable  employers  to 
retain the long-term sick or disabled on the job. 
Although there is little research into Flexjob’s 
effectiveness, one study found that the scheme 
had  substantial,  positive  employment  effects 
over 1994–2001.61

Strengthening social protection

Social protection62 can offer cover against risk 
and  adversity  throughout  people’s  lives  and 
especially  during  critical  phases  and  transi-
tions. By providing an additional and predict-
able layer of support, it can help households 
avoid coping strategies that take children out 
of  school,  postpone  necessary  medical  care 
or  require  selling  assets,  all  detrimental  to 
long-term  well-being.  And  the  distribution 
networks and mechanisms for administering 
social protection programmes can convey so-
cial safety net benefits in the event of a natural 
disaster.

Social protection not only is a doable propo-
sition at early stages of development, but it also 
brings about other benefits such as stimulating 
aggregate demand when needed and reducing 
poverty.  Social  protection  dampens  fluctua-
tions  by  offsetting  output  volatility  through 
disposable income compensation (chapter 2).

Strong  universal  social  protection  policies 
improve individual resilience and bolster the 
resilience  of  the  economy,  as  in  Europe  fol-
lowing the 2008 global economic crisis, when 
GDP  per  capita  declined  more  than  5  per-
cent.63 The Nordic countries, with more-com-
prehensive  social  policies,  did  better,  with 
higher  productivity  than  the  rest  of  Europe 

Social protection can 
offer cover against risk 
and adversity throughout 
people’s lives and 
especially during critical 
phases and transitions

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    97

in  2010  and  an  employment  rate  of  51  per-
cent of the population. In comparison, in the 
United Kingdom and Ireland productivity was 
down 12 percent and employment 9 percent. 
Employment rates were lower in all parts of 
Europe,  though  labour  productivity  in  con-
tinental Europe matched that of the Nordic 
countries.  On  unemployment,  the  Nordic 
countries also did much better on average than 
other OECD countries in Europe (figure 4.6). 
Only Austria, Luxembourg, the Netherlands 
and  Switzerland  had  lower  unemployment 
rates  than  the  Nordic  countries  before  and 
after the crisis.

Short-run actions can bolster 
resilience within the long-run human 
development policy framework

Most  of  this  chapter  focuses  on  reducing 
vulnerability and building resilience over the 
long term—that is, human development pol-
icies that bring about systemic improvement. 
However,  when  crises  happen,  governments 
also need to react immediately. How can they 

best do so without harming longer term human 
development?

A useful taxonomy, in a 2011 review,64 di-
vides post-crisis policies into two groups: those 
that mitigate the impact of a crisis (such as re-
ducing working hours to maintain employment 
or facilitating emergency credit) and those that 
promote recovery over the longer term (such as 
investment in education or changing agricul-
tural practices to adapt to climate change). For 
some policies there might be a tradeoff: Some 
mitigation policies might slow recovery over 
the longer term. A rarely heard criticism of the 
Indian National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Programme  is  that  the  easy  availability  of 
work  may  discourage  workers  from  moving 
to  more-productive  sectors  of  the  economy, 
thus harming longer term growth prospects.65 
Particular thought should be given to win-win 
policies that both mitigate the impact and pro-
mote recovery.

Of  course  finding  win-win  policies  is  not 
always so easy, nor is having a plan in place nec-
essarily enough. The capabilities to implement 
a plan may not exist. What actions can actually 

FIGURE 4.6

Following the 2008 global economic crisis unemployment rates were lower in Nordic countries than elsewhere in Europe

22

Unemployment
rate (%)

14

6

2007
2011

a
i
r
t
s
u
A

i

m
u
g
l
e
B

c
i
l

b
u
p
e
R
h
c
e
z
C

 

k
r
a
m
n
e
D

i

a
n
o
t
s
E

d
n
a
l
n
i
F

e
c
n
a
r
F

y
n
a
m
r
e
G

e
c
e
e
r
G

d
n
a
l
e
c
I

d
n
a
l
e
r
I

y
l
a
t
I

g
r
u
o
b
m
e
x
u
L

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

y
a
w
r
o
N

d
n
a
l
o
P

l
a
g
u
t
r
o
P

c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
R
k
a
v
o
l
S

i

a
n
e
v
o
l
S

i

n
a
p
S

n
e
d
e
w
S

d
n
a
l
r
e
z
t
i

w
S

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on OECD (n.d.).

98    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

i

m
o
d
g
n
K
d
e
t
i
n
U

 

be implemented will depend on their cost and 
the  capacity  of  institutions.  As  the  review 
notes, “When government budgets decline, as 
often happens during crises, the more relevant 
question  is  what  policies  to  preserve,  rather 
than what additional policies to undertake”,66 
and so interventions must be both feasible and 
flexible.  Preparedness,  it  notes,  is  key—and 
takes longer. Setting up institutions or new pol-
icies, such as safety nets, during a crisis is both 
difficult and time-consuming.

Health care, including reproductive health 
care, needs priority in a crisis because of its 
long-term and intergenerational consequenc-
es, and this often requires difficult decisions 
when both resources and capacity are lacking. 
And so several minimum thresholds exist to 
guide  decisionmakers,  such  as  the  Minimal 
Initial  Service  Package  for  Reproductive 
Health,  though  research  shows  mixed  suc-
cess  because  of  such  issues  as  inadequate 
training.67

Brazil’s  Bolsa  Família  and  Mexico’s 
Oportunidades  are  other  examples  of  win-
win  policies.  Three  lessons  could  be  high-
lighted  in  strengthening  the  link  between 
short-run actions and longer term policies in 
bolstering resilience. First, a social infrastruc-
ture should be in place so that distribution 
networks can be readily accessed when a crisis 
hits. Second, conditional transfer payments 
might be helpful in protecting education and 
health status, especially for young people, and 
in reducing intergenerational consequences. 
Third, social support that starts with coverage 
of key vulnerable groups could become a basis 
for a more comprehensive social floor in the 
future.

A  social  infrastructure  serves  as  an  opera-
tional framework that public institutions can 
use  to  transfer  payments  to  people  in  need. 
And since formal social protection systems take 
time to develop, the basic infrastructure of such 
programmes as Bolsa Família allows resources 
to be transferred quickly and effectively. When 
fluctuations and adverse events happen, these 
resource transfers protect poor people and oth-
er vulnerable groups.

While  persistent  shocks  and  hazards  call 
for comprehensive policies over the long haul, 
emergency response systems can be designed 
to facilitate short-run adjustments to adverse 

While persistent shocks 
and hazards call for 
comprehensive policies 
over the long haul, 
emergency response 
systems can be designed 
to facilitate short-run 
adjustments to adverse 
events in ways that 
protect long-term choices

events in ways that protect long-term choic-
es.  For  instance,  Bolsa  Família  was  adapted 
to  cover  short-term  emergency  situations  as 
well.  Increased  conditional  transfers  follow-
ing the 2008 global financial crisis protected 
basic consumption levels, and the conditional 
nature of the transfers in turn protected the 
formation of long-term capabilities by keeping 
children in school and protecting their health 
status.

As  more-comprehensive  social  protection 
arrangements emerge (see below), cash transfer 
programmes can be feasible in terms of both 
budget and social infrastructure. Part of these 
programmes’ success is that they are designed 
to protect capabilities. In addition, they can be 
rapidly scaled up to mitigate the adverse conse-
quences of a short-run shock such as a sudden 
recession or food price spike, as in Brazil fol-
lowing the 2008 crisis.

Similar  examples  exist  elsewhere.  In  2009, 
struck by the great global recession, Thailand’s 
GDP fell 2.3 percent. Despite this, 2007–2010 
socioeconomic  surveys  reveal  that  real  con-
sumption per capita rose relative to 2008 for 
most groups, including poor people, urban and 
rural households, men, women and children. 
The  losers  were  residents  of  Bangkok  who 
worked in exporting sectors, especially those 
ages 20–29 and those working in sales and ser-
vices. During the recession school enrolment 
rates did not fall, and durable goods purchases 
actually rose.

In  2008  the  Thai  government  cut  taxes 
by 40 billion baht, offered emergency loans 
(totalling 400 billion baht), reduced energy 
prices  and  introduced  transportation  sub-
sidies (at a cost of 50 billion baht). Then, in 
2009  it  introduced  a  first  stimulus  package 
that extended the earlier policies and put in 
place a supplementary budget worth 117 bil-
lion  baht:  Checks  for  2,000  baht  were  sent 
to  low-income  households,  allowances  of 
500 baht were sent to pensioners, and public 
education was made free through age 15. Half 
the appropriated money had been disbursed 
by May 2009, and the effect is believed to have 
been pro-poor.68

The displays of societal resilience in Brazil 
and Thailand are rooted in the placement of 
short-run  measures  to  complement  long-run 
policies.

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    99

Built-in stabilizers

Automatic  stabilizers  and  countercyclical 
policies  can  support  living  standards  during 
economic  contractions,  as  in  Europe  since 
the onset of the great recession in 2008. The 
Nordic countries increased the share of GNI 
going to disposable income, even as GNI was 
falling because countercyclical policies main-
tained living standards. But in some European 
countries—primarily  those  with  low  public 
social expenditure as a share of GDP69—living 
standards (as measured by disposable income) 
fell.70

Public  social  spending  can  smooth  output 
fluctuations.  As  OECD  research  has  shown, 
several European countries were shielded from 
the full impact of the 2008 global economic 
crisis  due  to  the  mitigating  effects  of  social 
transfers, tax-benefit systems and fiscal stimulus 
policies.71 For example, Norway and Sweden 
were  cushioned  from  many  of  the  effects  of 
falling disposable incomes, and their faster re-
covery was thanks to cost-efficient delivery of 
social services, expansionary monetary policy, 
good  management  of  resource  revenues  (in 
Norway)  and  automatic  stabilizers  in  fiscal 
policy (in Sweden). Because Finland is in the 
euro  area,  it  could  not  use  interest  rate  cuts 
(as Sweden did) and thus suffered higher un-
employment. Norway, faced with tepid growth, 
expanded its government budget in 2013. The 
pressure  towards  lower  and  more- unequal 
incomes  was  alleviated  by  tax  benefits  and 
social transfers as automatic stabilizers (rise in 
social transfers and falls in income taxes during 
recessions). The detrimental effects of crisis on 
poverty is conditional on the levels of social 
spending. Social protection can have a mitigat-
ing effect, as countries with high spending on 
health and education were more resilient in the 
face of financial crises.72 It is safe to conclude 
that the human cost of recession was lower in 
countries with universal social protection.

Social protection policies include unemploy-
ment  insurance,  pension  programmes  and 
labour market regulations—such as minimum 
wage laws or health and safety standards. One 
argument against them is that they may gener-
ate unintended consequences. Some contend 
that minimum wage laws may reduce the incen-
tive to create new jobs and that unemployment 

Social protection can 
have a mitigating effect, 
as countries with high 
spending on health and 
education were more 
resilient in the face 
of financial crises

100    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

insurance  may  reduce  the  incentive  to  get 
back to work.73 Much depends on the design 
of  the  policy.  But  there  is  considerable  evi-
dence  that  labour  market  regulations  have 
a  net  benefit  and  reduce  inequality.74  Many 
social protections have positive spinoff effects. 
Unemployment insurance makes labour mar-
kets work better by allowing the unemployed 
to choose jobs that better match their skills and 
experience rather than forcing them to take the 
first job that comes along.75 Income support to 
households encourages labour market partici-
pation by providing resources that enable peo-
ple to search for better opportunities, including 
allowing members of the household to migrate 
to find jobs.76

In developed countries social insurance pro-
vides short-term and in some cases medium- or 
even longer term income replacement. On the 
benefit  side  this  income  replacement  covers 
short-term employment losses. But given the 
increasing likelihood that the duration of such 
losses might extend longer than expected and 
the  fact  that  unemployment  (and  not  wage 
loss) is typically insured, the benefits may be 
too short and too small.

The principle of combining economic devel-
opment with social insurance programmes was 
demonstrated by the successful East Asian late 
industrializers. They were hugely successful at 
both rapidly reducing fertility and generating 
employment—allowing them to benefit from 
the  demographic  dividend.  How?  Through 
a  combination  of  proactive  industrial  policy 
and universal social policies in education and 
health (although not in social welfare, which 
remained  minimal  until  the  1990s,  distinct 
from European welfare states). A key element 
of  the  state-led  industrial  policy  was  that  it 
was  rooted  in  nationally  owned  firms,  regu-
lated capital accounts and a dual objective of 
promoting  competitiveness  and  generating 
employment.

The rapid universalization of health and ed-
ucation helped generate employment and sup-
port industrialization. Extensive land reform 
and the rapid expansion of the education sys-
tem above the primary level were also pursued 
as part of the development strategy.

Following  the  2008  global  economic 
crisis,  some  countries  adopted  measures  to 
increase  employment  and  social  protection, 

thus  stabilizing  aggregate  domestic  demand 
and  protecting  vulnerable  populations.  The 
International  Labour  Organization  suggests 
that such social protection measures created or 
saved 7–11 million jobs in Group of 20 coun-
tries in 2009.77

Social protection floors

In 2009 the Social Protection Floor Initiative 
set forth a global framework for universal access 
to essential social transfers and services, such as 
health care, primary education, pensions, un-
employment  protection  and  childcare.78  The 
initiative takes the view that nearly all countries 
at any stage of development can provide a ba-
sic floor of social transfers, including through 
better cross-sectoral coordination. It also en-
courages countries to progressively expand to 
higher levels of social protection as fiscal space 
allows.79 A lower income country might start 
with basic education and health care and later 
expand to offer cash transfers or basic labour 
protection.  A  higher  income  country  with 
well  established  basic  education,  health  care 
and conditional cash transfers might expand 
eligibility  for  unemployment  insurance  to 
traditionally excluded populations, such as ag-
ricultural or domestic workers, or expand leave 
policies for new parents to include fathers.

Social protection floor policies reduce pover-
ty. The International Labour Organization has 
estimated that in Tanzania universal old age pen-
sions and child benefits for school-age children 
would reduce poverty rates 35 percent among 
the  entire  population  and  46  percent  among 
households with children and the elderly.80

The approach to social protection depends 
on  country  circumstances  and  resources  and 
varies  according  to  level  of  development. 
Additional levels of social protection, such as 
conditional cash transfers aimed at disadvan-
taged households, add an additional, if relative-
ly small, cost to a social protection programme. 
The Indian Employment Guarantee Fund cost 
about 0.3 percent of GDP in 2008.81

Providing  basic  social  security  benefits  to 
the world’s poor would cost less than 2 percent 
of  global  GDP.82  The  International  Labour 
Organization’s  2010  estimates  of  the  cost  of 
providing a basic social floor—universal basic 
old age and disability pensions, basic childcare 

benefits,  universal  access  to  essential  health 
care, social assistance and a 100-day employ-
ment  scheme  in  12  low-income  African  and 
Asian  countries—ranged  from  more  than 
10 percent of GDP in Burkina Faso to less than 
4 percent of GDP in India.83 Current domestic 
resources covered less than 5 percent (Pakistan) 
of estimated total expenditures on basic social 
protection. But if basic social protection grew 
to account for 20 percent of government spend-
ing, domestic resources would cover 30 percent 
(Burkina  Faso)  to  100  percent  of  the  total 
cost (India, Pakistan and Viet Nam). A basic 
social protection package is affordable so long 
as low-income countries reallocate funds and 
raise domestic resources, coupled with support 
by the international donor community.84

Addressing societal inclusion

In the presence of horizontal inequality spe-
cific measures are required to reach the whole 
population. A mix of policy interventions has 
been tried to address horizontal inequality: di-
rect interventions (such as affirmative action), 
indirect measures (such as preventive laws and 
sanctions) and broader inclusion (through nor-
mative and education shifts). Social institutions 
reinforce government policy through greater 
coordination  and  stronger  accountability. 
When civil society mobilizes to articulate the 
interests of the citizenry, there is a better con-
nection between the needs of the population 
and the policies of government.

Persistent vulnerability is rooted in histor-
ic  exclusions.  For  example,  Black  people  in 
South Africa and the United States and Dalits 
in  India  have  suffered  grievous  wrongs,  and 
women  across  patriarchal  societies  continue 
to  encounter  discrimination  and  exclusion 
due to longstanding social norms and cultural 
practices. Many countries have tried affirmative 
action  policies  or  special  measures.85  Norms 
and laws that favour members of these groups 
to improve their chances for equal opportunity 
can make society fairer and more inclusive.

Cohesive societies tend do better than less co-
hesive societies in most aspects of human devel-
opment (figure 4.7).86 How do societies redress 
deep divisions and historically rooted exclusions? 
By  improving  the  availability  of  basic  social 

In 2009 the Social 
Protection Floor Initiative 
set forth a global 
framework for universal 
access to essential 
social transfers and 
services, such as health 
care, primary education, 
pensions, unemployment 
protection and childcare

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    101

BOX 4.3

Reducing vulnerability through responsive institutions

A key facet of vulnerability is often an inability to influence decisions that 
affect one’s life: decisions are instead made by more-powerful actors, who 
may neither understand the situation of the vulnerable nor necessarily have 
their interests at heart.1 To address this, states require the capacity to rec-
ognize the concerns of the vulnerable and react to them through appropriate 
interventions. This requires, among other things, giving the poor and mar-
ginalized a greater voice in decisionmaking2 and opportunities for recourse 
when  rights  are  violated  or  discrimination  is  encountered.  Research  sug-
gests that women are more likely than men to suffer from negligence, petty 
corruption and harassment when they engage with state institutions.3

Simply  understanding  the  technical  cause  of  a  vulnerability  is  not 
enough to design policies to reduce it. Rather, the processes that created 
the risk in the first place must be identified, and the political incentives and 
will to tackle them must be present. Political freedoms are a key part of this, 
as Jean Drèze and Amartya Sen underlined when discussing the role of the 
media in holding governments to account during famines.4 Direct represen-
tation, social movements, and union and civil society pressures also shape 
policy and political processes in the broader political economy and are im-
portant for representing the interests of vulnerable groups.

There is some evidence to suggest that state institutions can become 

more responsive to the needs of the poor5 and vulnerable when:
•  Public administrations implement policies efficiently and are transparent, 
accountable  and  responsive  to  users.  This  curbs  corruption  and  harass-
ment, and the power of the state is used proactively to allocate resources 
for public actions benefiting poor people. Some encouraging examples in-
clude civil service reforms in Botswana and South Africa, where reforms in 
ministries and rationalized departments strengthened service delivery and 
effectiveness.6

•  Legal systems are pro-poor when they assign and defend rights and are 
accessible to poor people. Promising interventions in this context have oc-
curred in Cambodia, with the establishment of the Arbitration Council, a 
national statutory alternative dispute resolution body, and in Mozambique, 
with the implementation of the progressive land law, which has helped 
improve poor people’s access to land.7

•  Central and local governments are aligned to ensure the delivery of public 
services to all and to minimize the scope for capture by elites or dominant 
groups. Various forms of decentralization are under way across countries, 
which have tried to respond to the needs and interests of excluded commu-
nities. For example, the Philippines has long tried to address the rights of 
indigenous people in Palawan and their claim on the forest resources, and 
the Local Government Code of 1991 provided an opportunity for them to in-
teract with government institutions and participate in forest management.8

•  Governments generate political support for public action against poverty 
by creating a climate favourable to pro-poor action, facilitating the growth 
of poor people’s associations and increasing poor people’s political capac-
ity. Such social movements and political activism propelled Brazil’s ruling 
party to undertake pro-poor policies and helped set the agenda for political 
leadership in post-apartheid South Africa.9

•  Political regimes honour the rule of law, allow the expression of political 
voice  and  enable  the  participation  of  vulnerable  people  in  political  pro-
cesses.10 A case in point is the peaceful democratic transition in Bolivia 
that brought into power the country’s indigenous majority after a long his-
tory of exclusion.
Nonetheless, the challenges in building responsive institutions are mani-
fold: from weak political will to inadequate capacities and funding of public 
institutions, including the civil service and courts. Improving accountability 
through transparency measures such as India’s Right to Information Act can 
expose corruption and graft and boost efficiency. Increasing opportunities for 
participation, through such processes as participatory budgeting and greater 
representation in government, can give the excluded greater voice.

All too often governments respond to fiscal pressures at times of volatility 
and crises with austerity measures that limit social spending. As discussed 
in chapters 1 and 2, these measures often take the greatest toll on the most 
vulnerable, who are already under pressure. And during the good times the 
extra revenue from an economic boom is often returned as tax cuts rather than 
being used to build up social protection reserves for the next downturn or be-
ing invested in building broader institutional capacity and systemic resilience.
Adequate  provisioning  alone,  however,  may  not  suffice:  Institutions 
themselves have to be designed to respond to the needs of all, not just the 
dominant  in  society.  While  national  institutions  are  a  product  of  a  coun-
try’s  history  and  politics,  those  that  often  work  best  in  different  settings 
enable participation and accountability,11 are more capable of representing 
the  diversity  in  their  populations,12  are  amenable  to  peaceful  transitions 
of  power13 and are able to maintain the independence and integrity of in-
stitutions like the judiciary14 and civilian control of the military15 through a 
separation of powers and a system of checks and balances.16 These features 
are important during times of stability but are particularly important for the 
protection of the rights of the vulnerable during crises.

Yet whatever the form institutions take in different societies, protect-
ing citizen rights remains seen primarily as the responsibility of the nation 
state. But this may not be enough in an increasingly globalized world, where 
people in one part of the world can be threatened by events and actions 
elsewhere. Building responsive institutions at the national level requires a 
parallel effort at the international level to support and reinforce them.

Notes
1. UN 2012a. 2. Mearns and Norton 2010. 3. UNDP 2012d. 4. Drèze and Sen 1989. 5. World Bank 2000. 6. UNECA 2010. 7. UN General Assembly 2009. 8. Seitz 2013. 9. Heller 2014. 10. UNSSC 2010. 11. McGee and Gaventa 2011. 
12. Temin 2008. 13. DFID 2010. 14. UNOHCHR 2003. 15. Sulmasy and Yoo 2007. 16. Waldron 2013.

services, strengthening employment policies and 
extending social protection. Yet these broader 
universal policies may not target specific exclu-
sions and horizontal inequality of marginalized 
groups, particularly when social norms and laws 

do not protect the rights of specific groups that 
face discrimination in public life, including those 
in political institutions and in markets.

Societies respond in different ways to pres-
sures, setbacks and disasters. Some demonstrate 

102    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 4.7

Cohesive societies tend do better than less cohesive societies

Most cohesive societies
Least cohesive societies

Rep. of Korea
Sierra Leone

Reduction
in Human
Development
Index shortfall 
(%)

80

60

40

20

0

–20

1980

1990

2000

2010

Source: Easterly, Ritzen and Woolcock 2006 and Human Development Report Office estimates.

greater resilience and resources to cope with 
and recover from crises. Others find themselves 
in vicious traps that deepen and broaden the 
impacts of such crises. Certain macro variables 
can have a major impact on societies’ ability to 
manage such pressures and shocks, including 
economic inequality, the degree of social frag-
mentation  and  the  adequacy  of  institutions, 
three aspects that interact. Social cohesion can 
therefore shape the quality and competency of 
institutions, which in turn influences how and 
whether  pro-people  policies  are  devised  and 
implemented.87

Direct measures to redress 
group inequality

Direct  measures  are  commonly  thought  of 
as  affirmative  action,  which  includes  targets, 
quotas and preferential treatment to improve 
the discriminated group’s access to jobs, assets, 
services,  government  contracts  and  political 
representation.  Such  policies  are  immediate 
though sometimes controversial ways of deal-
ing with historic injustices, since the long-term 

impact  is  ambiguous—they  can  be  seen  as 
perpetuating social cleavages, increasing stigma 
and risking elite capture and reverse discrimi-
nation. They address some symptoms of dis-
crimination but are not always able to fix the 
structural drivers behind persistent inequality. 
Such measures work best when broader pro-
poor policies and sunset clauses are in place to 
prevent reverse discrimination.

Brazil—the numbers look better

Brazil  is  attempting  to  reduce  racial  dispar-
ities88  for  its  Afro-Brazilian  and  mixed-race 
population, which constitutes more than half 
of  its  200  million  people,  by  implementing 
affirmative  action  policies  in  education.89  In 
August 2012 it passed a law mandating quotas 
for  preferential  entry  for  Afro-Brazilian  and 
mixed-race  students,  proportional  to  their 
weight in the local population (such as 80 per-
cent in Bahia state in the northeast and 16 per-
cent  in  Santa  Catarina  in  the  south),  to  the 
country’s 59 federal universities and 38 federal 
technical schools. In 1997, 2.2 percent of Black 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    103

or  mixed-race  students  ages  18–24  attended 
universities;  in  2012,  11  percent  did.90  The 
number of posts reserved in federal universities 
for underprivileged Brazilians has also doubled 
under the legislation—from 30,000 to 60,000. 
Education  institutions  have  used  goals  and 
quotas for under represented groups, including 
women and people of colour, to increase their 
diversity and create opportunities for under-
represented and vulnerable groups.

South Africa—hard to isolate a direct link

Employment  policies  that  encourage  the  re-
cruitment  of  female  or  minority  candidates 
have  increased  their  participation  in  South 
Africa’s  workforce.  The  end  of  apartheid  left 
behind a labour market that was racially organ-
ized, with skilled jobs reserved for White peo-
ple and unskilled jobs for other groups, with 
systematic discrimination against Black people, 
women and people with disabilities.91

Against  this  backdrop,  democratic  South 
Africa  unveiled  affirmative  action  policies  to 
redress  labour  market  inequality.  The  1998 
Employment Equity Act offered incentives for 
firms to hire people from historically disadvan-
taged groups as skilled workers. A 2009 study 
documented the success in reducing both un-
employment and poverty in skilled and semi-
skilled jobs.92

Attributing these improvements to affirma-
tive action policies remains contested. Critics 
argue that these direct efforts have had only a 
marginal impact on reducing employment or 
wage gaps and that these improvements could 
be linked to overall efforts to improve access 
and quality of education for Africans and to 
the employment effects of accelerated econom-
ic growth.93 Uncontested, however, is that these 
broader  efforts  and  more-specific  initiatives 
have together improved South Africa’s record 
in  redressing  structural  labour  force  imbal-
ances,  reduced  the  sense  of  historic  injustice 
and improved the participation of historically 
excluded and disadvantaged groups.

While there can be no 
single absolute answer on 
whether affirmative action 
reduces group disparities, 
the examples show that 
proactive policies can 
improve conditions for 
vulnerable groups and 
in particular contexts

Malaysia—dealing with some unintended 
consequences?

Some observers have critiqued direct measures 
for  being  misguided  and  mismatched  to  the 

104    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

deeper  structural  problems  that  need  to  be 
addressed.94 For example, the positive discrim-
ination policies favouring the ethnic Malays, 
or Bumiputras, in Malaysia over the dominant 
Chinese  and  minority  Indian  populations 
have improved their access to education and 
jobs and helped them more fully realize their 
economic potential. Yet Malaysia’s Chinese and 
Indian  minority  citizens  chafe  at  70  percent 
quotas  in  university  admissions,  flocking  in-
stead to private and foreign schools and often 
staying away from the country. In 2011 about 
1  million  Malaysians  had  left  the  country, 
which  has  a  total  population  of  29  million, 
most  ethnic  Chinese  and  many  highly  edu-
cated.95 Some 60 percent of skilled Malaysian 
emigrants cited social injustice as an important 
reason for leaving.

Context is crucial

While there can be no single absolute answer 
on  whether  affirmative  action  reduces  group 
disparities, the examples show that proactive 
policies can improve conditions for vulnerable 
groups and in particular contexts. The key is 
that such direct measures are not merely stan-
dalone interventions but are an intrinsic part 
of  a  broader  commitment  to  ameliorate  the 
conditions of the disadvantaged and remedy 
the particularities of specific group exclusions. 
Success is most common in mutually reinforc-
ing  contexts,  where  policy  interventions  are 
embedded in larger pro-poor efforts, bolstered 
by formal incentives and sanctions such as laws 
and supplemented by shifts in public opinions 
and social norms.

Laws and norms: tackling discrimination 
and influencing behaviour

Historically  rooted  discrimination  is  em-
bedded  in  social  interactions  in  the  public 
domain, which can either enable the success of 
affirmative  interventions  or  undermine  their 
implementation.96  The  reason  is  that  private 
decisions  and  public  policies  are  shaped  by 
personal and societal preferences, material and 
other explicit incentives (laws) and social sanc-
tions or rewards (norms).97

Changed laws and norms can also encour-
age  desirable  behaviour.  For  example,  public 

Norm-based messages 
and campaigns seek 
to alter people’s 
perceptions of what 
constitutes ‘acceptable’ 
or ‘desirable’ behaviour

advocacy and legal restrictions were instrumen-
tal  in  the  United  States  in  changing  norms 
and  reducing  the  consumption  of  tobacco. 
Similarly, promoting hygienic practices such as 
hand washing and using bednets to reduce ma-
laria transmission have helped improve public 
health. Social marketing strategies for behav-
ioural change—applying private sector adver-
tising, marketing and communications—have 
increasingly spurred public health victories by 
bringing about changes in individual and group 
behaviour.

Norm-based messages and campaigns seek to 
alter people’s perceptions of what constitutes 
‘acceptable’ or ‘desirable’ behaviour or values 
among their peers.98 They can determine the 
legitimacy and effectiveness of policy interven-
tions, making them broad-based and credible, 
especially when they seek to challenge existing 
hierarchies  and  change  power  relations.99 
Targeting  public  values  and  behaviour  is  in-
dispensable in ensuring the effectiveness and 
sustainability of social change.

Addressing violent conflict by transforming 
norms and extending inclusion efforts

Building on the lessons from conflict countries, 
the international community has tried to inte-
grate security and development interventions—
to  reinforce  community  security  through 
social cohesion. A wide range of state and civil 
society actors collectively develop coordinated 
responses to threats at the community level and 
build an enabling environment at the national 
level.  These  social  cohesion  and  community 
security  approaches  emphasize  increasing 
participatory  engagement,  improving  service 
delivery,  reducing  social  exclusion  through 
enhanced relations between social groups and 
strengthening democratic governance.100

In  Guatemala’s  Santa  Lucia  Municipality, 
a  Citizen  Security  Commission  coordinated 
an  action  plan  that  banned  carrying  guns  in 
bars, controlled alcohol sales, improved street 
lighting,  introduced  community-based  po-
licing, reclaimed public spaces and addressed 
vagrancy. Within two years the homicide rate 
dropped from 80 per 100,000 people to less 
than 50. Given this success, a new national law 
established the National Security Council to 
coordinate the reform of the security sector and 

mandates the development of citizen security 
plans in each municipality. Similarly, the Safer 
Communities  Project  in  Croatia  piloted  an 
approach that identified the lack of recreational 
facilities for young people as contributing to 
insecurity. An old playground was refurbished 
as  a  meeting  place  for  young  people  and  in-
cludes a skateboard park and activity grounds. 
In a highly divided post-conflict community of 
Croatians and Serbs, this has become a meeting 
place for young people from both sides and has 
helped  build  bridges  between  these  clashing 
communities.101

Civil society mediation with states 
and markets

People  mobilize,  even  in  the  face  of  insur-
mountable challenges and embedded inequal-
ity, to improve on situations and make social 
institutions more relevant to their needs. Civil 
society  has  been  effective  in  holding  states 
politically accountable for delivering pro-poor 
development.  But  this  is  possible  only  when 
there are opportunities for participation with 
transparency and accountability. An empirical 
review of 96 countries suggests that participa-
tory political regimes mediate social conflicts 
more  effectively  and  induce  compromise 
among  citizen  groups.  The  review  argues, 
“Democracy  makes  us  less  selfish  and  more 
public spirited.”102 Another econometric study 
of  82  developed  and  developing  countries 
concluded  that  state  capacity  to  undertake 
effective policy action is not an issue of tech-
nocratic competence and political will alone.103 
The political space for decisive public action is 
also greatly influenced by social cleavages and 
conflict. Such social divides can lead to varying 
levels of trust in public institutions and influ-
ence their performance.

Individuals can exert greater pressure by mo-
bilizing  as  groups—producer  groups,  worker 
associations  or  social  movements.  They  can 
take collective action and bargain more effec-
tively either within markets or with their em-
ployers or the state. Economically vulnerable 
groups often organize collectively—whether as 
businesses, smallholder farmers, pastoralists or 
fisher folk. They can promote fair trade prod-
ucts  or  support  cooperative  movements  for 
local producers. New forms of collective action 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    105

and new civic energies now engage politically 
at the local level—for participatory budgeting 
processes in Porto Alegre, Brazil, for the Right 
to Information Act in India and for social au-
dits, which have increased the transparency and 
accountability of local authorities disbursing 
public funds for relief schemes.

A  key  aspect  of  state–civil  society  interac-
tion is how civil society influences pro-people 
policies  and  outcomes.  Brazil  embarked  on 
development  and  democratic  consolidation 
with  the  backdrop  of  inequality,  racial  and 
ethnic divides. The government implemented a 
mix of policy interventions aimed at boosting 
the job market, targeting government spending 
and cash transfers, expanding universal primary 
schooling and redressing gender and racial dis-
parities. Infant mortality was cut almost in half 
between 1996 and 2006, and the proportion 
of girls in primary school rose from 83 percent 
to 95 percent between 1991 and 2004. Brazil’s 
efforts to reduce its longstanding inequality by 
promoting income redistribution and universal 
access to education, health care, water supply 
and  sanitation  services  also  improved  child 
nutrition,  resulting  in  a  large  reduction  in 
child stunting for the poorest 20 percent of the 
population.104

Throughout these efforts, Brazil’s civil society 
remained autonomous of political parties, hav-
ing fostered a range of participatory institutions 
and processes that influence public policy and 
hold the state apparatus accountable for local 
results. In Brazil’s Landless Workers Movement 
(Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem Terra, or 
MST), cooperatives organized settlements on 
expropriated land for roughly a million families, 
with hundreds of MST-built schools enabling 
tens of thousands of people to learn to read and 
write.105 MST’s support was crucial in bringing 
the Workers Party to power in 2002, which led 
to greater expenditure on basic services, cash 
transfers and expanded access to education. In 
2001–2007 the poorest six deciles that previ-
ously accounted for 18 percent of income ac-
counted for 40 percent of total income growth, 
and the Gini coefficient of inequality fell from 
0.59 in 2001 to 0.53 in 2007.106

And in Bangladesh civil society has grown 
over the decades into one of the world’s larg-
est  nongovernmental  organization  sectors, 
driven in response to the country’s numerous 

challenges, including its frequent natural dis-
asters.  Nongovernmental  organizations  have 
found a niche in the gap between society and 
state,  seeking  to  promote  people’s  welfare 
through grassroots initiatives. They also serve 
as  important  service  delivery  mechanisms 
and implementing partners, especially during 
environmental  disasters  and  devastation,  for 
programmes ranging from relief and rehabilita-
tion to microcredit loans to women’s empow-
erment. While the expansion of civil society in 
Bangladesh is reflective of on-the-ground reali-
ties, it also raises questions about the links with 
political  society  and  the  state.  The  resources 
being placed towards building more-effective 
and  -sustainable  state  institutions  remain 
wanting—and civil society has evolved faster 
and with greater capacity and reach than the 
formal institutions responsible for service pro-
vision and delivery. Until those institutions are 
equally revitalized and energized, the nongov-
ernmental organization sector in Bangladesh 
will remain an indispensable capacity resource 
for building social resilience.

Nonetheless,  in  going  beyond  local  and 
community  mobilization,  further  examina-
tion  is  needed  of  the  aggregate  impact  that 
civil society and public activism can have on a 
country’s governance institutions and overall 
development performance. This raises impor-
tant observations about the ways that local and 
micro-level experiences of social mobilization 
can be scaled up in terms of impact and about 
how  they  relate  to  the  macro-level  issues.107 
Reviews  of  social  mobilization  experiences 
highlight the disconnect between such largely 
local initiatives and their wider development 
impact.  This  requires  closely  examining  the 
barriers at the national level to substantial scal-
ing up and devising new and creative models 
of civic engagement and social mobilization, 
such as social enterprises that engage the poor 
as investors and shareholders.108

Civil society and broader social mobilization 
can exercise voice in claiming intrinsic rights 
and  in  promoting  progressive  public  actions 
and policies. Their resilience can be furthered 
by states that create an enabling environment 
and space for a vibrant and engaged civil socie-
ty. Civil society neither can nor should replace 
state  institutions.  However,  a  positive  and 
symbiotic relation between the two goes a long 

A key aspect of state–civil 
society interaction 
is how civil society 
influences pro-people 
policies and outcomes

106    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Vulnerabilities are 
exposed by shocks and 
underlying conditions

way in strengthening both. Civic participation 
therefore is an indispensable and central driver 
in activating formal and informal social institu-
tions to respond to public needs and demands, 
making them equitable and efficient in their 
response to vulnerability.

Upgrading capacities to prepare 
for and recover from crises

The social and physical environments in which 
communities live and seek to thrive are wrought 
with complexity and unpredictability. Despite 
available knowledge on the earth’s physical fault 
lines, the frequency and intensity of geophys-
ical hazards remain largely unpredictable, and 
climate change is exposing parts of the world 
previously  considered  safe  to  the  destructive 
effects of meteorological hazards. No matter 
how  effective  policies  are  at  reducing  inher-
ent vulnerabilities, sudden onset hazards will 
occur, including low-probability high- impact 
disasters  like  the  2010  earthquake  in  Haiti. 
As the Arab Spring has shown, even in-depth 
knowledge of the factors that can trigger social 
unrest and violent conflict in a given society is 
no guarantee that violent conflict will always 
be predicted and prevented. Shocks like these 
can have inevitable and potentially destructive 
consequences for human development progress 
and resilience of countries, communities, fami-
lies and individuals.

Vulnerabilities  are  exposed  by  shocks  and 
underlying conditions. While it is natural to 
respond to a crisis when a shock occurs, there 
is equally a need to follow up by developing a 
more comprehensive response to future crises. 
Policies  to  prevent,  respond  to  and  recover 
from  crises  must  become  an  integral  part  of 
human  development  policies  and  strategies, 
especially  in  noncrisis  settings,  rather  than 
relying on ad hoc emergency relief in affected 
communities. When policies are oriented to-
wards emergency response, mitigation can be 
overlooked, and shocks can re-emerge with po-
tentially larger impact and greater subsequent 
costs of protection. Emergency response efforts 
are important and necessary, but comprehen-
sive  efforts  to  enable  communities  to  better 
prepare for and recover from shocks and crises 
are a fundamental building block of resilience.

Disaster risk reduction and response

Natural  disasters  expose  and  exacerbate  vul-
nerabilities, such as poverty, inequality, envi-
ronmental degradation and weak governance. 
Countries  and  communities  that  are  under-
prepared,  that  are  unaware  of  risks  and  that 
have minimal preventive capacity suffer the im-
pact of disasters far more severely. Poor coun-
tries also tend to suffer disproportionately. In 
the last 20 years at least 1.3 million people have 
been killed and 4.4 billion affected by disasters, 
which  have  cost  the  global  economy  at  least 
$2 trillion.109 However, the loss of lives owing 
to natural disasters has declined due to early 
warning  and  response  systems.  For  example, 
in Bangladesh a severe cyclone in 1991 caused 
nearly 140,000 deaths, while a 2007 cyclone of 
similar magnitude killed 4,234 people. The re-
duction in cyclone-related deaths was achieved 
mainly  by  improving  early  warning  systems, 
developing shelters and evacuation plans, con-
structing  coastal  embankments,  maintaining 
and improving coastal forest cover and raising 
awareness at the community level.110

Greater efforts are needed to strengthen na-
tional and regional early warning systems. The 
key areas for action identified at the Second 
Conference  on  Early  Warning  in  2003  were 
better integration of early warning into devel-
opment processes and public policies; better 
data availability for investigating, forecasting 
and  managing  risks  on  different  time  scales; 
better  capacity  and  stronger  early  warning 
systems, particularly in developing countries; 
development of people-centred early warning 
systems;  and  programmes  for  when  shocks 
occur.111 Regional cooperation on early warn-
ing in particular can be highly effective, since 
natural hazards often affect multiple countries 
simultaneously. Early warning is a major ele-
ment of disaster risk reduction. It saves lives 
and reduces economic and material losses from 
disasters.  The  Hyogo  Framework  for  Action 
highlights the importance of, and makes clear 
commitments to, local, national and regional 
early  warning  mechanisms  that  provide  real- 
time and understandable warnings to risks with 
clear directions for response actions.

No matter how well a country is prepared and 
how good its policy framework is, shocks occur, 
often  with  inevitable  and  highly  destructive 

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    107

consequences.  The  key  objective  is  then  to 
rebuild  while  increasing  social,  material  and 
institutional  resilience.  Responses  to  extreme 
weather events have been complicated by weak 
institutions and conflict. The first response to 
any crisis is inevitably humanitarian. The way 
in which humanitarian assistance is delivered 
matters because it sets the foundation for tran-
sitioning to longer term rehabilitation and res-
toration. An early recovery approach needs to 
draw the main strands of the humanitarian and 
development responses together, ensuring that 
the  response  strategy  can  deliver  early  needs 
without compromising the longer term need for 
state capacity and responsive delivery.

The resilience of a country includes its capac-
ity to recover quickly and well from disasters. 
This  entails  managing  the  immediate  effects 
of the disasters as well as implementing spe-
cific measures to avoid further socioeconomic 
consequences. Societies unprepared to handle 
shocks often incur damages and losses that are 
much more extensive and prolonged. For in-
stance, the Haitian earthquake cost the equiv-
alent  of  120  percent  of  Haiti’s  GDP,  setting 
back  decades  of  development  investments.112 
Yet even this does not capture the full depth of 
impact nor the length of time required to fully 
recover.  When  recovery  processes  are  partial 
and not oriented towards enhancing resilience, 
the impact of the disaster can be long lasting 
and have ongoing effects on entire generations.
Resilience is about transforming the structures 
and systems that perpetuate fragility and under-
mine resilience. External shocks can sometimes 
provide an incentive to initiate this transforma-
tion. This may require integrating measures of 
preparedness and recovery into laws, policies and 
institutional mechanisms that enable a country 
or community to operate. When backed up with 
budgets and resources, this allows for the inclu-
sion of risk reduction concerns at each level of 
the development process, from the community 
to the national government. In this way, disaster 
risk reduction is not an additional expense or 
adjunct but a core component built into devel-
opment from the onset.

Conflict prevention and recovery

An effective strategy for enhancing resilience 
in  conflict-affected  areas  and  for  preventing 

When recovery 
processes are partial 
and not oriented towards 
enhancing resilience, the 
impact of the disaster 
can be long lasting and 
have ongoing effects 
on entire generations

108    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

conflict from occurring is to strengthen social 
cohesion.  But  building  social  cohesion  in 
conflict- prone  countries  or  in  communities 
recovering  from  conflict  is  particularly  chal-
lenging.  Social  fragmentation  may  be  high, 
livelihoods may be threatened and institutions 
are  often  fragile  and  ill-equipped  to  devise 
and implement policies that reduce divisions 
(see  box  4.4).  That  said,  countries  as  diverse 
as  Bolivia,  Kenya,  Nepal,  Peru,  Kyrgyzstan, 
Timor-Leste and Togo have invested in meas-
ures  to  build  trust,  collaborate  and  promote 
dialogue through credible intermediaries and 
‘infrastructures for peace’. These measures have 
led to positive results, including peaceful polls, 
fewer  conflicts  related  to  land  and  natural 
resources,  and  the  mitigation  of  intergroup 
tension.113

While efforts to build social cohesion vary 
according to context and national circumstanc-
es, four common elements can be identified:
•  Increasing public awareness and access to in-
formation. Efforts can be made to increase 
public  advocacy  in  favour  of  peace,  devel-
opment  and  less-contentious  politics.  In 
2006 Guyana experienced its first violence- 
free  national  election  since  independence. 
Instrumental to this outcome was the Social 
Cohesion  Programme  implemented  in 
2002  in  response  to  past  violence.114  The 
programme was based on a national conver-
sation around governance that was led by the 
president, systematic efforts at the communi-
ty level to improve interethnic relations and a 
sustained public campaign aimed at creating 
a stronger and more peaceful sense of nation-
al identity. Subsequently, the 2011 election 
was also peaceful.

•  Credible  internal  intermediaries  and  me-
diators.  Independent,  objective  bodies 
can  build  trust  and  confidence  among 
conflicted  or  polarized  groups  or  sectors 
and facilitate consensus on specific issues 
of  national  importance.  Ghana’s  national 
elections  in  2008  and  2012  both  saw  an 
active role by the National Peace Council, 
a body first established in 2006 as an auton-
omous  platform  for  facilitating  dialogue 
and providing mediation in disputes over 
politics  and  identity  and  for  supporting 
peaceful elections. This role was recognized 
publicly by all leaders in the country and in 

the region by the West Africa Network for 
Peacebuilding.

More  recently,  Tunisia  has  been  seeking 
to manage its post–Arab Spring transition. 
Sporadic political violence has not inflamed 
further tensions; secular and Islamist parties 
have found ways to work together within a 
pluralist  political  framework.  An  impor-
tant  factor  in  this  transition  has  been  the 
Tunisian General Labour Union’s service as 
an intermediary. Founded in 1948 and hav-
ing a deep reach into all segments of Tunisian 
society,  the  union  has  used  its  position  to 
orient political discourse away from conflict 
and towards social and economic challenges.
•  Local  committees  and  citizen  groups. 
Community  groups  can  build  trust  at  the 
local  level  by  helping  prevent  conflict.  In 
both Guyana and Tunisia citizen groups pro-
vided monitors and mediators who helped 
build trust and defuse tensions before larger 
issues arose and vitiated the political process. 
Ghana’s National Peace Council is formally 
associated  through  legislation  with  similar 
bodies at the regional and district levels. In 
Yemen youth organizations have connected 
young people and offered social support in 
searching  for  jobs,  dealing  with  financial 
problems and organizing community activ-
ities.  Participation  has  helped  build  social 
cohesion by instilling habits of cooperation, 
solidarity and public spiritedness.115

•  Rebuilding livelihoods. Experience has shown 
that support to livelihoods and economic re-
covery can build social cohesion. Livelihood 
support  enables  affected  communities  and 
individuals to recover in the short term and 
makes them more resilient to the challenges 
of  future  crises.  Employment  opportuni-
ties can create a sense of trust that is much 
needed  in  conflict  areas.  Cross-country 

Employment opportunities 
and livelihoods can help 
stabilize communities 
and prevent subsequent 
lapses into violence

analysis  from  Europe  and  Latin  America 
suggests that employment can lead to trust 
in others and institutions.110 Communities 
in crisis and post-crisis situations face many 
economic  and  social  challenges,  including 
at times the reintegration in the short term 
of ex- combatants in the aftermath of armed 
conflict and internally displaced persons and 
refugees.  Re-creating  employment  oppor-
tunities  and  livelihoods  can  help  stabilize 
communities and prevent subsequent lapses 
into violence.
Efforts  to  strengthen  social  cohesion  are 
not  reflected  in  any  substantial  manner  in 
post-conflict peace-building, with the bulk of 
investment being in elections or the physical 
requirements for economic recovery. Essential 
as these investments are, the peaceful resolution 
of future disputes and crises will require system-
atic  capacities  for  collaboration—and  a  new 
political culture—among groups that are used 
to  advancing  their  interests  through  conflict 
and deadlock rather than negotiation. A grow-
ing emphasis on national dialogue processes is 
a welcome change in this direction. However, 
considerable  investments  in  social  cohesion, 
with systematic monitoring and assessment of 
impact, are needed to sustain these initial gains.

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

Like most of its analysis and data, this chapter’s 
policy  recommendations,  important  as  they 
are,  are  all  for  national  governments.  But  as 
has been seen many times, many threats and 
hazards go beyond national boundaries. It is 
time to ensure that national and international 
efforts are aligned, by getting governments and 
international  bodies  to  work  together  better 
and  with  mutually  supportive  commitment 
towards reducing vulnerabilities.

Chapter 4  Building resilience: expanded freedoms, protected choices    |    109

“The difference between what 
we do and what we are capable 
of doing would suffice to solve 
most of the world’s problems.”

Mahatma Gandhi

“Stepping onto a brand-new path is 
difficult, but not more difficult than 
remaining in a situation, which is 
not nurturing to the whole woman.”

Maya Angelou

Deepening progress: global goods 
and collective action

This chapter focuses on the global aspects of vulnerability and how they link to national, community and individual vulner-
abilities. It calls attention to the manifestations of vulnerability that accompany wider and deeper interdependence. And it 
takes the position that far more can be done to make globalization work for people.

Globalization  as  practised  is  not  benefiting 
enough people, and in some cases integration 
is producing new vulnerabilities. Consider the 
chronic disparities in human development di-
mensions around the world, the very high share 
of people in vulnerable employment in some 
regions and the unpredictable shocks that can 
have global reach, such as pandemics, natural 
disasters, armed conflicts and financial insta-
bility.  Globalization  may  have  yielded  many 
winners and overall gains. International links 
and multilateral agreements can foster knowl-
edge  sharing  and  mutual  assistance—and  in 
many cases enhance resilience. The dense global 
network of institutions and relationships char-
acteristic of today’s world can be taken advan-
tage of to increase resilience. But not all people 
have had the voice or resources to influence the 
direction of change or benefit from global inte-
gration, and multilateral actions have been slow 
to respond to the world’s growing challenges.

Today, an increasing number of insecurities 
require global and regional collective action. 
Financial systems can be better regulated. Trade 
talks can be unblocked. Markets can be subject 
to  codes  and  standards.  Climate  change  can 
be mitigated. Processes are under way to build 
more-resilient systems, but the provision of im-
portant public goods can be further improved, 
and global governance systems can be refined.
The chapter examines how transnational in-
tegration generates new vulnerabilities just as it 
provides new opportunities for greater human 
development and resilience. It underscores the 
commonalities among emerging vulnerabilities, 
such  as  the  underprovision  of  public  goods 
(including universal social protection and an 
effective climate regime), and the shortcomings 
in the architectures for global governance that 
permit threats like excessive financial volatility. 
It also considers existing global initiatives and 

contributes  to  the  post-2015  agenda  discus-
sions by suggesting the types of public goods 
that can enhance the capacity of countries and 
people to cope with adverse events—and the 
types  of  governance  improvements  that  will 
reduce the likelihood and impact of shocks.

All this is linked to the ways national gov-
ernments can open policy space to make their 
countries and people more resilient. An overar-
ching message is that greater systemic resilience 
needs an international commitment to the pro-
vision of public goods that make people more 
secure, achieved through collective action by 
individuals, communities and states.

Transnational vulnerabilities 
and common threads

Transnational integration of systems of trade, 
finance,  migration  and  communications  has 
supported  progress  in  human  development, 
offering opportunities to enter global markets, 
spur  innovation  through  sharing  knowledge 
and  technology,  and  tap  into  transnational 
networks.  Connecting  people  and  pooling 
global resources and capacities afford tremen-
dous opportunities to reinforce the resilience 
of  individuals,  countries  and  the  world.  But 
transnational risks appear to be intensifying. 
Chapters 1 and 2 warn against global trends 
that  could  undermine  long-term  human 
progress—from  changing  weather  patterns 
and the increasing frequency and intensity of 
natural disasters to the spread of conflict and 
communicable  diseases  and  to  the  volatility 
in  financial  asset  prices,  commodity  prices 
and  capital  flows.  Chapter  2  cautioned  that 
food price volatility and financial volatility are 
threatening people’s livelihoods and weaken-
ing social cohesion.

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    111

5.The scope and scale 
of connectivity and 
related insecurities are 
accelerating, and there 
are threats of global 
contagion. The national 
policy space to enhance 
coping capacities is 
increasingly constrained

Each  of  these  threats  is  unique,  but  they 
share some common aspects, and understand-
ing them can orient collective action towards 
efficient and effective solutions. The scope and 
scale of connectivity and related insecurities are 
accelerating, and there are threats of global con-
tagion. The national policy space to enhance 
coping  capacities  is  increasingly  constrained. 
And global systems are compromising individ-
ual capabilities. The underlying causes of most 
transnational vulnerabilities are the underpro-
vision of public goods and the shortcomings 
of international governance. Public goods, and 
appropriate policies and institutions, can tilt 
the balance towards greater resilience.

Rising threats

Accelerated  connections  and  insecurities. 
Transnational  integration  and  its  related 
threats are not new, but they are accelerating. 
Human beings have always been vulnerable to 
the spread of disease. In the 14th century cara-
vans and merchant ships transported the Black 
Death across continents, inflicting huge losses 
of life across Asia and Europe. But the pace of 
transmission has increased dramatically, with 
jumbo jets transporting avian influenza across 
the world in hours.

The world has also long been characterized 
by  global  and  regional  economic,  political 
and social connections now referred to as glo-
balization.  But  such  global  connectivity  has 
accelerated in recent years. Between 1999 and 
2012 the global trade to GDP ratio increased 
from 37 percent to 51 percent.1 Between 2000 
and  2013  the  number  of  international  mi-
grants rose from 175 million to 232 million.2 
Financial  flows  between  countries  increased 
from 31 percent of all flows in 1970 to over 
180 percent in 2007.3 Foreign exchange mar-
kets operate 24 hours a day, five days a week, 
and trades averaged $5.3 trillion a day in April 
2013.4  The  production  of  many  goods  and 
services spans continents in globally integrated 
value  chains.  Social  networks  like  Facebook 
and Twitter boost the potential to extend social 
spaces across wider geographies.

These trends have brought important benefits 
and opportunities to many. But in areas ranging 
from  finance  to  security  and  to  the  environ-
ment, the pace and scale of connectivity have 

not been matched by measures to reduce emerg-
ing vulnerabilities—to prevent shocks, enhance 
capabilities  and  protect  people’s  choices.  For 
example, the integration of production along 
global value chains has brought much needed 
jobs, but competition to attract investment can 
also risk a race to the bottom for labour and 
environmental regulations (box 5.1).

Risks  of  contagion.  Shocks—even  policy 
 changes —in one country can have global reach, 
with a direct bearing on individual capabilities 
and choices, potentially jeopardizing develop-
ment progress in communities and countries 
far away. In 2008 the collapse of a bank in New 
York triggered a global financial crisis. In 2010 
a  volcano  in  Iceland  disrupted  air  travel  in 
Europe and left fresh produce rotting in Latin 
America and Africa, costing Kenya 5,000 farm-
ing jobs and $1.3 million a day in the flower 
sector alone.5 In 2011 a tsunami off Japan cut 
the supply of car components to US automo-
bile  manufacturers,  compounding  recession-
ary  employment  insecurity  for  thousands  of 
workers.6 In 2012 conflict in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Mali, South Sudan, Sudan 
and the Syrian Arab Republic forced 1.1 mil-
lion refugees into surrounding countries.7 In 
2013 the collapse of a building in Bangladesh 
unleashed  civil  protests  against  department 
stores in Europe and North America.

Constrained  policy  space.  Global  integration 
can shrink national policy space and constrain 
national  capacities  to  address  vulnerability. 
International competitive pressures may restrict 
government choices, making it more difficult to 
create and protect jobs or to provide universal 
education, health care and social protection. In 
the 1950s and 1960s states may have set their 
sights  on  full  employment,  but  today  they 
often limit their ambition to unemployment 
insurance, which, while important, offers much 
less social stability. As part of the post-2015 
agenda, collective agreements on employment, 
social services and social protection could ex-
pand national policy space and empower gov-
ernments to adopt the policies recommended 
in chapter 4 to reduce vulnerability.

Global exposure. People’s livelihoods, personal 
security and well-being are exposed not only 

112    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

BOX 5.1

Global value chains—pros and cons

Production processes have become highly dispersed and fragmented along 
global value chains. For many products the provision of raw materials, the 
production of components, and the assembly, marketing and delivery of fin-
ished goods take place in different countries, often in different regions of 
the  world.  Today,  about  60  percent  of  global  trade,  or  about  $20  trillion, 
consists of trade in intermediate goods and services.1 Participating countries 
can benefit from jobs, exports and foreign direct investment that can bring 
much needed capital and technology. This may enhance resilience, but these 
links are complex, and new vulnerabilities may also emerge. 

Nice profits if you can get them
Global  value  chains  may  present  distributional  issues  linked  to  wages, 
profits and the number of jobs. A study of Apple’s iPod value chain found 
that most jobs were in Asia, while the majority of wages were paid in the 
United States. In 2006 China accounted for 30 percent of iPod-related jobs, 
but  Chinese  workers  took  home  only  3  percent  of  iPod-related  employee 
earnings.2 

The share of profits and input costs for the iPhone follows a similar pat-
tern. Evidence from 2010 shows that Apple is by far the biggest beneficiary 
of iPhone production. Chinese labour, while benefitting from access to jobs, 
gets less than 2 percent of the final sale value (see figure).3 

Hazardous low-paid work
Poor working conditions are a reality for many workers who are not part of 
global supply chains, but competitive pressures in global production systems 
can exacerbate poor conditions, especially for low-skilled workers. While 
some workers may benefit from formal jobs in multinational corporations, 
the economics of value chains has encouraged the formation of third-party 
contractors that provide flexible low-cost workers, sometimes even through 
coercive means. In the worst cases these workers are victims of debt bond-
age and people smuggling.4 

Governments  understandably  want  to  encourage  private  investment 
and job creation, but in the process they have tended to give industry a free 
rein, through deregulation, privatization, financial incentives and lax applica-
tion of public ordinances. States may then be in a difficult position if they 
can attract investment and increase employment only by relaxing labour or 
environmental laws, which risks a global race to the bottom. Indeed, there 
is evidence that during the 1980s and 1990s the enforcement of labour laws 

across countries declined in response to competition for foreign direct in-
vestment.5 Many multinational companies have codes of conduct, but these 
encompass mainly their own branches and affiliates and do not always cover 
second-tier or other suppliers.6 

The lax posture of governments and companies is now being challenged 
by investigative reporting, civil society advocacy and consumer backlash. In 
the apparel industry, civil society groups and trade unions have successfully 
challenged the corporate sector to improve the governance of supply chains: 
For example, more than 150 retailers have signed the legally enforceable 
Accord  on  Fire  and  Building  Safety  in  Bangladesh,  which  was  issued  in 
2013.7

Who profits from iPhones?

Share of iPhone
sales price (%)

Cost of inputs: non-China labour
3.5%

Cost of inputs: China labour
1.8%

Cost of inputs: materiels
21.9%

Unidentiﬁed proﬁts
5.8%

Republic of Korea proﬁts
4.7%
Japan proﬁts
0.5%
European Union proﬁts
1.1%
Non-Apple U.S. proﬁts
2.4%

Apple proﬁts
58.5%

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on Kraemer, Linden and Dedrick (2011). 

Notes
1. UNCTAD 2013. 2. Calculated from tables 2 and 3 in Linden, Kraemer and Dedrick (2011). 3. Human Development Report Office calculations based on Kraemer, Linden and Dedrick (2011). 4. Barrientos 2013. 5. Davies and 
Vadlamannati 2013. 6. UNCTAD 2012a. 7. Bangladesh Accord Foundation 2013.

to  changes  in  local  conditions,  but  also  to 
global  and  regional  structures  and  events. 
Insecurities that transcend borders become rel-
evant—whether the risk of losing a job during 
a global recession, uncertainty about access to 
sufficient sources of daily nutrition when global 
food prices suddenly shift or concerns about 
personal  safety  amid  spreading  social  unrest 
and conflict. People are also moving across na-
tional borders in larger numbers and exposing 

themselves  to  new  insecurity  and  unfamiliar 
social contexts (box 5.2). Many threats that af-
fect life cycle vulnerabilities, structural vulner-
abilities and personal insecurities (chapter 3) 
can  be  linked  to  global  events  and  systems. 
And building resilience requires, in addition to 
the national actions recommended in chapter 
4, global action and coordination to increase 
national policy space and reduce the threat of 
global shocks.

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    113

BOX 5.2

International migration

Migrants are among the most vulnerable to myriad risks and obstacles. In 
2013, 232 million people were living outside their home countries.1 In both 
developed  and  developing  countries  migrants,  particularly  undocumented 
workers,  find  themselves  in  vulnerable  situations.  They  may  be  excluded 
from  normal  worker  protections  and  prohibited  from  joining  local  unions. 
They may lack access to social protection programmes that provide a buffer 
against the vicissitudes of the job market. And they may be subject to racial, 
ethnic and religious discrimination and social exclusion. 

Even the process of migrating is rife with risk. Consider the 300 Eritrean 
migrants  who  perished  when  the  boat  ferrying  them  capsized  near  the 
Italian island of Lampedusa in October 2013—or the asylum seekers held in 
processing centres in Papua New Guinea and Nauru the same year.2 Family 
structures and relationships at home can also be eroded. Of particular con-
cern from a life cycle perspective are the impacts of migration on children: 
a higher likelihood of suffering abuse, more involvement in illegal activities, 
future drug and alcohol abuse and paying reduced attention in school.3 

A special category of migration that leaves people especially vulnerable 
is caused by armed conflicts and populations fleeing harm and persecution. 
The number of people displaced by conflict has increased in recent years and 
is the highest in nearly two decades.4 Additional groups of refugees are flee-
ing natural disasters, and numbers are likely to rise due to climate change. 
There have been discussions about where citizens of small island developing 
states will go if sea level rise makes their home country uninhabitable, and in 
many cases asylum status has been rejected.5 On top of the vulnerability for 
undocumented migrants, refugees face the additional challenge of not being 

allowed to work in most receiving countries, and they are frequently housed 
in temporary settlements with poor services and insecure conditions. 

Managed migration can reduce some of the risks facing migrants. For 
example,  the  Republic  of  Korea’s  Employment  Permit  System  addresses 
home labour shortages while protecting migrant workers’ rights and enhanc-
ing the transparency and security of the migration process.6 But bilateral 
arrangements have limited reach, given the scale and scope of migration. 
And such programmes target mainly documented migrants rather than more-
vulnerable undocumented migrants.

Migration-related  vulnerability  needs  to  be  addressed  collectively 
through an international migration regime. National regulations are insuf-
ficient for handling the multiple categories and risks of immigrants, refugees 
and displaced and stateless persons. Greater efforts are needed to develop 
consensus on treating migration as a global public good, to codify shared 
interests and common goals—particularly for protecting human rights and 
reducing the costs of migration and of sending remittances—and to improve 
public perceptions of immigrants and migration. Lowering the costs of send-
ing remittances can also help receiving countries achieve greater macroeco-
nomic stability.7

Civil society and nongovernmental organizations have engaged govern-
ments in dialogue and cooperation on particular issues (such as trafficking 
in people). A broader approach can build on this progress and include norm-
setting  and  the  elaboration  of  an  international  regime  on  migration.  The 
recent UN dialogue on migration is a welcome initial step, and efforts to 
include migration in the post-2015 development agenda are encouraged.8

Notes
1. United Nations Population Division 2013. 2. UN News Centre 2013a, 2013b. 3. UNICEF 2007. 4. Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre 2013. 5. Welford 2013. 6. ILO 2010b. 7. Bettin, Presbitero and Spatafora 2014. 8. UN 2013a.

Common causes

Transnational vulnerabilities can all be viewed 
as expressions of the same problems: the un-
derprovision of the types of public goods that 
enhance coping capabilities, and the mismatch 
between the extent of global integration and 
global challenges and the capacity of govern-
ance  architectures  to  prevent  or  minimize 
shocks. A single country has limited capacity 
to independently reduce such vulnerability be-
cause global goods, such as climate stability, are 
best provided through global collective action. 
And yet, national policymaking is the primary 
avenue states take to address vulnerability. And 
in some cases the provision of important public 
goods is simply left to the market.8 The national 
orientation of public policymaking is increas-
ingly at odds with the global nature of policy 
challenges.

At  a  time  when  the  international  system 
of  governance  is  called  on  to  foster  climate 

stability  or  reduce  the  likelihood  of  yet  an-
other financial crisis, cooperation is in many 
cases ad hoc, fragmented and dispersed across 
silos of governance organized around particu-
lar issues. The international community faces 
many distractions—economic troubles, armed 
conflicts  and  discord  among  major  powers. 
International  organizations  are  encumbered 
with funding shortfalls and escalating demands 
for humanitarian relief. While responses to nat-
ural disasters and humanitarian crises are often 
swift, there is less momentum towards solving 
longer term global issues. For this, collective 
action  warrants  a  comprehensive  view  that 
extends beyond immediate threats and shocks 
and  addresses  underlying  causes  and  longer 
term impacts.

Underprovision  of  global  goods.  How  can 
the  global  community  ensure  the  provision 
of  goods  that  enhance  resilience?  Many 
goods  have  social  value  and  can  reduce 

114    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

 vulnerability—malaria  research,  pollution 
reduction or agricultural innovations to reach 
poor  farmers—but  are  undervalued  by  mar-
kets.  Managing  and  controlling  food  price 
volatility, global recessions and climate change 
are also essential public goods that markets are 
ill-equipped to provide. The recent trend has 
been to encourage markets to generate private 
goods  that  achieve  desired  global  goals.  But 
private goods cannot sufficiently provide key 
public goods to reduce vulnerability.9 The mar-
ket is particularly unsuited to adjusting global 
governance architectures to reduce shocks and 
build resilience. Universally providing certain 
essential  goods  demands  collective  action 
among states, since no single country or com-
munity can alone resolve global market failures.
The  need  for  global  public  goods  is  well 
documented.10  The  underprovision  of  global 
public  goods—ranging  from  communicable 
disease  control  to  adequate  global  market 
 regulations—permits shocks that have regional 
and  global  reach.  In  addition  to  traditional 
global  public  goods  to  reduce  vulnerability, 
there is a need for ‘global merit goods’ or ‘uni-
versal social goods’, goods essential for social 
stability and continuing progress.11 Minimum 
levels  of  social  protection  and  commitments 
to provide social services can be thought of as 
global  merit  goods—universally  provided  at 
the national or transnational level to improve 
equity  and  reinforce  shared  global  values.12 
These types of goods offer protection to vul-
nerable  groups,  and  when  they  are  provided 
in combination with global public goods that 
reduce the likelihood of shocks, they can build 
resilience at the global level.

Multilateral efforts are facilitating coopera-
tion to provide some of these goods, but they 
are weak in relation to the scope of the chal-
lenges and vulnerabilities. And they are weak in 
relation to the momentum of markets, the pace 
of commodification and the power of private 
interests.  Global  public  goods  and  universal 
social goods that would correct or complement 
markets  for  more-inclusive  and  -sustainable 
growth remain largely underprovided.

Global  collective  action  to  provide  public 
goods is clearly feasible. Take the eradication 
of  smallpox.  Beginning  in  1966  the  World 
Health  Organization  led  a  collective  global 
programme of universal vaccination, vigilant 

surveillance of new cases and containment of 
sporadic outbreaks. The cost was low, but by 
1980 the programme had eradicated the dis-
ease.13 This example spurred similar collective 
action on other diseases and, thanks to medi-
cal advances and a worldwide effort of health 
preparedness,  countries  are  more  resilient  to 
pandemics.  There  are  also  productive  pub-
lic-private  cost-sharing  initiatives  to  advance 
public health, such as those sponsored by the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation14 and the 
mobilization  of  private  sources  by  Médecins 
Sans  Frontières  to  support  medical  humani-
tarian aid and make antiretroviral drugs more 
accessible and available.15

The task now is to extend this kind of col-
lective defence to other transnational risks—
reconfiguring global systems and governance 
architectures so that they continue to provide 
connectivity  and  efficiency  but  also  support 
the provision of essential global and national 
public goods. A global conversation is needed 
about what goods and which people markets 
leave behind and what goods might be brought 
into the public arena to build a more resilient 
global development trajectory.

Architectural  deficits  of  global  governance. 
Despite  efforts  to  act  and  cooperate  at  the 
global level, structural deficits in governance 
architectures  for  handling  global  risks  and 
making  people  more  secure  are  limiting  the 
pace of progress (box 5.3). There is a mismatch 
between governance mechanisms and the vul-
nerability and complexity of global processes. 
Today’s fragmented global institutions are not 
accountable or fast-acting enough to address 
global challenges.16 They typically work in an ad 
hoc manner with neither the mandates nor the 
resources to tackle global threats. Institutions 
and  regulations  also  target  particular  issues, 
sometimes producing spillovers across policy 
domains—for example, trade policies can affect 
health  by  limiting  access  to  certain  types  of 
drugs, and fiscal policies that exacerbate ine-
quality can affect security.

In  many  respects,  the  shortcomings  of 
global  governance  architectures  in  reducing 
vulnerability  stem  from  deep  asymmetries  of 
power, voice and influence. Many international 
governance  institutions  and  structures  were 
designed for a post–Second World War order, 

There is a mismatch 
between governance 
mechanisms and 
the vulnerability 
and complexity of 
global processes

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    115

BOX 5.3

Systemic barriers to collective action

The mismatch between the scale and urgency of global issues and the ca-
pacity  of  existing  governance  architectures  to  address  these  problems  is 
not unique to any particular issue area. Gridlock in global governance is a 
systemic and historically contingent process, not an idiosyncratic phenom-
enon particular to a certain issue. But global issues are often discussed in 
silos, as if the barriers to collective action were unique to each problem. This 
perspective may undermine the search for solutions because it assumes that 
problems can be solved independently. In practice, of course, policies ad-
dress specific issues. But the standstill in global governance across multiple 
issues, from slow progress on climate change to the stalemate in the Doha 
Round of trade negotiations, are systemic problems that can be summed up 
as growing multipolarity, institutional inertia, harder problems and institu-
tional fragmentation.

Growing multipolarity
The number of states has grown over the last half century, as has the number 
whose cooperation is essential for resolving a global problem. The transaction 
costs of global governance have also grown. When the Bretton Woods organi-
zations were formed in 1945, the rules of the world economy were essentially 
written by a small group of world powers. Today, the Group of 20 has become 
an important forum for global economic management, because problems can-
not be solved without commitments from a larger group of countries. The in-
clusion of more countries in global decisionmaking should be celebrated, but 
the transaction costs of global governance are higher.

Institutional inertia
When key pillars of the post–Second World War governance order, including 
the UN Security Council and the Bretton Woods institutions, were designed, 
special privileges were granted to countries that were wealthy and pow-
erful at the time. The objective was to ensure the participation of certain 

countries in global governance. Today, with the rise of the South, power has 
shifted away from the world order of the 1940s, so a broader range of par-
ticipation and a more universally inclusive approach would be appropriate 
to deal with most global issues. But because few governance institutions 
were designed to naturally adjust to geopolitical fluctuations, institutions 
will not easily adapt.

Harder problems
The problems requiring transnational cooperation are more extensive, af-
fecting a broader range of countries and individuals. They are also more in-
tensive, permeating deeper into national policy space and daily interactions. 
For example, environmental problems have gone from chiefly local concerns 
about clean air and water to global and systemic issues such as climate 
change and biodiversity loss, characterized by deep interdependence. Shifts 
of this nature increase the complexity of incentives needed to progress to-
wards global agreements.

Institutional fragmentation
Efforts to address transnational problems occur in a dense system of multi-
lateral and transnational organizations. While this by itself is not a problem, 
it can increase the possibility of conflicting institutional mandates, unco-
ordinated  interventions  and  competition  for  scarce  resources.  With  such 
outcomes, the proliferation of institutions reduces the ability of multilateral 
institutions to provide public goods. Focal points could guide policy and help 
define the nature and form of cooperation.

Solving  any  problem  at  the  global  level  requires  first  recognizing  these 
 challenges—and then acting collectively to overcome them. It is essential 
to think creatively and rigorously about how international cooperation might 
be strengthened under these adverse conditions.

Source: Hale 2014; Hale, Held and Young 2013.

and reforms have not reflected changing power 
relations or the changing nature of challenges 
(box  5.4).  Meanwhile  new  regimes,  such  as 
those for global intellectual property rights, of-
ten disproportionately benefit private interests. 
Agendas and policies often underrepresent the 
interests and needs of less developed countries 
and the most vulnerable people—among them, 
unskilled workers, home-based workers, immi-
grants and the elderly. Those who have the least 
capacity to cope with shocks and to adjust to 
the speed of change are the least involved in cre-
ating the regulations, norms and goals of global 
governance. As a result, international rules and 
norms often reflect private interests rather than 
providing public goods and advancing social in-
terests.17 This is evident in financial governance. 
In the Basel Committee, which sets financial 

standards, private interests have privileged sta-
tus unchecked by any countervailing power.18

Governance  systems  are  not  only  short 
on  offering  protections  and  enhancing 
 capabilities—in some cases they are producing 
new vulnerabilities. In finance, monetary pol-
icies that focus on deregulation and liberaliza-
tion have increased the fragility of the financial 
system.  And  financial  policies  such  as  rigid 
loan to value ratios have encouraged banks to 
fuel property bubbles, whereas adjusting loans 
to reflect the state of the economy could have 
produced more financial stability.19 The archi-
tectural deficits in governance systems leave a 
shortage of global public goods, merit goods 
and universal social goods that would correct 
or  complement  existing  systems  to  build 
more-inclusive and -sustainable resilience.20

116    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

BOX 5.4

Gridlock in the global governance of security

International cooperation to manage violence and conflict is hampered by a 
mismatch between the global system of security agreements, institutions and 
policies and the most pressing security challenges of the day. These constraints 
limit the international community’s capacity to ensure individual security, to re-
duce the emergence and spread of conflict and to assist in crisis recovery—all 
essential for reducing the acute vulnerability of people in such places as South 
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, and the countries of the Sahel and the Great 
Lakes Region of East Africa, as well as surrounding countries and regions.

The origins of the problem can be traced to the institutional arrangements 
for security that emerged following the Second World War, and their mismatch 
with today’s security threats. The United Nations was founded explicitly to 
uphold the collective security of sovereign states. Protection against foreign 
invasion was guaranteed to all member states, and the Security Council was 
given a mandate under Chapter VII of the UN Charter to take measures, includ-
ing the use of force, against countries that threatened peace in this way.

This system helped prevent war between the Great Powers. But today, 
the security challenges have shifted, with internal conflicts and civil wars 
in the South, concentrated in the Arab States, South Asia and Sub- Saharan 
Africa,  where  the  bulk  of  armed  conflicts  occur  in  a  far  greater  number 
than in the 1940s (see figure 2.12 in chapter 2). The dominant structure of 
armed forces—based on a model of state military spending and war be-
tween nation states that has been in decline over the past half century—is 
ill-equipped to deliver in areas where security is most urgently needed to-
day. Conflict resolution and post-crisis reconstruction demand cooperation 
and collaboration among armed forces and the international community, and 
focusing on the causes of internal conflict is essential.

Alongside the shift in security threats, there has been a transformation 
in the traditional concept of sovereignty as state autonomy to a far broader 
notion, including commitments to uphold the rights of citizens under a num-
ber of treaties. In 2005, at the largest ever meeting of UN member states, 
countries agreed unanimously to endorse a national and international ‘re-
sponsibility to protect’ every human being on the planet. But the consensus 
in adopting this principle has been broken by sharp disagreements over how 
to implement it.

The Security Council remains the key organ for upholding human se-
curity. But this institution was designed to uphold state security, and it re-
tains a 1945 governance structure that relies on consensus among the Great 
Powers, so decisions will inevitably be influenced by their national interests. 
When permanent members disagree, no action is likely at the international 
level. Even when the Security Council can make decisions, it falls to national 
militaries, or such regional bodies as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
and the African Union, to implement the council’s mandate, raising new pos-
sibilities to compromise actions.

The turn from interstate conflict to internal conflict has changed the fo-
cus of conflict prevention and recovery. This shift, combined with the emer-
gence of the modern human rights regime, has radically changed the nature 
of sovereignty. At the same time, gridlock in global security  governance—
particularly  multipolarity,  more-challenging  problems  and  institutional 
inertia —block the new institutions or reforms that could meet the goal of 
collective security. The resulting governance gap limits international capac-
ity to address pressing security issues, passing the burden to the popula-
tions in conflict settings.

Source: Hale 2014.

Inaction  risks  social  instability,  whether 
induced  by  financial  crises,  climate-related 
disasters or mass unemployment and poverty. 
Indeed,  recent  numbers  of  local  and  global 
protests  (843  recorded  between  2006  and 
2013) are similar in scale to the waves of rebel-
lion in 1848, 1917 and 1968.21 These protests 
are  usually  local  and  national,  but  they  are 
directed against a common global experience: 
increasing insecurity and inequality. And they 
reflect opposition to the current architecture 
of globalization and its neglect of public goods 
and social welfare.

Collective  action  can  restructure  global 
systems in a way that instils people with new 
capabilities  rather  than  generating  new  vul-
nerability and exacerbating existing insecurity. 
Cooperation is possible among states, interna-
tional institutions, the private sector and civil 
society—including a global remit that would 
recognize the potential spillovers and feedback 

across countries and between different policy 
domains. Global governance systems can break 
the link between globalization and vulnerabili-
ty, but this will be more likely if global policies 
and decisionmaking are inclusive, accountable 
and coordinated.

Putting people first in 
a globalized world

Enhancing capabilities and protecting choic-
es  can  reduce  vulnerability  to  transnational 
threats by enabling people to cope better. So 
can reducing the frequency, severity and scope 
of shocks or preventing them altogether. The 
means to accomplish these goals are twofold. 
First, providing certain types of public goods, 
those that could be considered elements of a 
global social contract, can open national policy 
space and help people cope with adverse events. 

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    117

A global public domain 
that strikes a better 
balance between private 
and public interests can 
open national policy space

Second, enhancing systems of global govern-
ance can facilitate the provision of public goods 
and reduce the likelihood and scope of transna-
tional shocks.

Elements of a global social contract

Capabilities  can  be  enhanced  and  choices 
protected  at  the  national  level  through  the 
universal provision of such services as educa-
tion, health care, water and electricity, as well 
as  through  universal  social  protection  that 
empowers  individuals  with  greater  resources 
to withstand external shocks (chapter 4). Such 
public  goods  reduce  pressure  on  individuals 
to make difficult decisions: People should not 
have to choose which of their children should 
leave  school  when  jobs  are  lost  and  fees  are 
too high or to enter demeaning and dangerous 
trades such as sex work or garbage scavenging 
to pay for food and shelter.

National  measures  are  more  easily  enacted 
when  global  commitments  are  in  place  and 
global support is available. That is why the post-
2015 agenda should include national universal 
public services, national social protection floors 
and full employment as key goals for the global 
community. These elements of a global social 
contract can balance maximizing the benefits 
of global integration and minimizing the costs 
and insecurities. Global commitments to these 
goals  could  open  national  policy  space  for 
states to determine the approaches for creating 
employment and providing social services and 
protections that work best in their particular 
contexts. But global agreements are essential be-
cause they can instigate action and commitment 
and generate financial and institutional support.
Policy norms have been heavily influenced by 
entrenched beliefs in the efficiency of markets 
and the power of privatization. Governments 
across the world have privatized public enter-
prises, reduced controls on the movement of 
capital,  deregulated  labour  markets  and  in-
troduced new intellectual property regimes.22 
Similar ideologies have taken root for individu-
als. People are expected to extol individualism, 
self-reliance  and  entrepreneurship;  equate 
the pursuit of self-interest with freedom; and 
associate  governments  with  inefficiency  and 
corruption.23 These beliefs are prevalent even 
among vulnerable groups that most need the 

118    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

protection  of  public  goods  and  government 
support.

A global public domain that strikes a better 
balance  between  private  and  public  interests 
can open national policy space. Policy norms 
that depict public provision of social protec-
tions as positive instruments can enable states to 
adopt and implement policies and programmes 
that  protect  people  within  their  territories. 
Such norms could embolden states to commit 
to universal protections for labour that reduce 
the likelihood of exploitative work conditions 
while encouraging minimum social protections 
for workers and for people unable to work be-
cause they are between jobs, injured, disabled, 
elderly or pregnant. Today, only 20 percent of 
working-age people worldwide have adequate 
social security coverage, and many are without 
any type of social security.24 A more positive 
view of the public domain would advance calls 
for universal public services and social protec-
tions that enhance people’s capabilities to cope 
when crises hit.

The need for social services and social protec-
tion has already been established in internation-
al conventions and agreements, particularly in 
the Millennium Declaration.25 Articles 22, 25 
and 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (1948)26 recognize the right to social 
security, as does Article 9 of the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights (1966).27 In the 2007 Treaty of Lisbon 
the  European  Union  identified  measures 
for  coordinating  policies  on  social  inclusion 
and  social  protection.28  In  2009  the  Social 
Protection  Floor  initiative  brought  together 
19 UN bodies, several international financial 
institutions  and  14  development  partners  to 
promote the goal of universal access to essential 
services such as health, education, housing, wa-
ter and sanitation as well as social transfers to 
ensure income and food security and adequate 
nutrition.29 Article 26 of the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (1989) recognizes the right 
of every child to benefit from social security, in-
cluding social insurance.30 The Social Security 
(Minimum  Standards)  Convention  (1952) 
of  the  International  Labour  Organization  is 
among  earlier  initiatives  requiring  ratifying 
states to ensure a range of sickness, unemploy-
ment, old age, injury, invalidity and maternity 
benefits to their citizens.31

Most  recently,  the  2012  United  Nations 
Conference  on  Sustainable  Development  in 
Rio called for a set of sustainable development 
goals.32 These goals would produce a more stable 
public domain placing equality and sustainabil-
ity at the centre of global development efforts. 
Together  with  the  lead-up  to  the  post-2015 
agenda, the creation of the sustainable devel-
opment goals presents an opportunity for the 
international community and member states to 
push forward the principle of  universality—in 
public  provision  of  social  services,  universal 
access to health care and education, and full 
employment and social  protections—all essen-
tial elements of more-sustainable and -resilient 
human development.

Fragile  states  and  conflict  settings.  How  to 
protect  people’s  choices  in  fragile  states  and 
conflict settings requires special consideration. 
Ensuring access to social protections, services 
such as health and education, and employment 
in fragile states is particularly important—and 
one of the most difficult development challeng-
es. Inaction in fragile states can have repercus-
sions for national, regional and international 
security, stability and prosperity.33 Social con-
tracts  can  be  built  within  fragile  states,  and 
global commitments to universality and social 
protection  can  encourage  more  support  for 
these efforts from the international community 
and greater commitment from elites in fragile 
states.34

The New Deal for Fragile States, a joint initi-
ative of the 19 fragile countries of the G7+ and 
the donor community, is one platform for sup-
porting elements of social contracts in fragile 
states.35 It promotes solutions based on nation-
al ownership and a comprehensive approach to 
development  and  security.  Recognizing  that 
success is based on combined efforts and effec-
tive leadership, all members have committed 
to undertake collective action and reform to 
implement the New Deal. Since its inception 
in  2011,  Afghanistan,  the  Central  African 
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan 
and Timor-Leste have expressed interest in pi-
loting the New Deal. Sierra Leone is one of the 
first countries to provide a fragility assessment, 
which  reveals  considerable  progress  but  also 
challenges  in  terms  of  limited  resources  and 

human  capital  constraints.36  Additional  sup-
port for building and operationalizing social 
contracts in fragile states will be a critical part 
of universal commitments to social protection, 
services and employment.

Fiscal space. Where will the resources to pro-
vide  universal  social  protection  and  social 
services come from? Some will be provided by 
traditional donors meeting their Millennium 
Development Goal commitments to increase 
official  development  assistance.37  Several 
emerging economies also have vast internation-
al reserves that could finance public goods.38 
Individual  states  can  raise  funds  through 
more-effective taxation of cross-border activi-
ties and reduction of illicit financial outflows. 
Governments  lose  revenue  when  companies 
transfer tax liabilities to low-tax jurisdictions, 
legally  exploiting  differences  in  national 
regulations.  At  2013  public  hearings  in  the 
United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States  leg-
islators  deplored  corporate  tax  avoidance  by 
global companies (such as Apple, Amazon and 
Starbucks)  that  legally  exploit  differences  in 
national regulations to minimize payments to 
host governments.39 Countries could arrive at 
a set of common rules to prevent competition 
for capital from driving down corporate taxes.40 
This  could  help  many  developing  countries 
increase their tax base, leaving more funds for 
public investment.41

International action is also needed to stem 
illicit financial flows. For the least developed 
countries illicit financial flows increased from 
$9.7 billion in 1990 to $26.3 billion in 2008, 
with 79 percent of this due to trade mispricing. 
To put this in context, for every dollar of official 
development assistance that the least developed 
countries received, an average of 60 cents left in 
illicit flows between 1990 and 2008.42 The tax 
revenue loss in developing countries to illicit 
flows  was  $98–$106  billion  a  year  between 
2002  and  2006.43  Between  2008  and  2010 
Africa lost $38 billion a year due to mispricing, 
or false invoicing, and another $25 billion to 
other illicit outflows—more than the region’s 
receipt of official development assistance dur-
ing the period.44 Efforts to increase transparen-
cy have been put forward, but a global initiative 
could encourage and support transparent pric-
ing across countries.

Inaction in fragile states 
can have repercussions 
for national, regional and 
international security, 
stability and prosperity

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    119

BOX 5.5

Can the Responsibility to Protect doctrine be broadened?

A  key  instrument  for  holding  the  international  community  and  individual 
states accountable to vulnerable people is the Responsibility to Protect doc-
trine. This is a critical instrument, but it is narrowly constructed to address a 
specific set of vulnerabilities—holding states accountable for genocide, war 
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

While  there  has  been  much  criticism  and  worry  about  how  the 
Responsibility  to  Protect  doctrine  has  been  interpreted,  there  also  are 
opportunities for adding to its scope in protecting vulnerable groups dur-
ing  crisis.  Its  main  principle—that  sovereignty  is  not  a  privilege,  but  a 
 responsibility—should not be limited to mass atrocities like genocide, given 
the myriad other pervasive vulnerabilities that people face from financial 
crises to climate-related natural disasters. The doctrine could be extended 
to include the responsibility of states to protect vulnerable groups, includ-
ing women, children and young people, the elderly and migrants. Indeed, 

the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights already 
stipulates  that  states  bear  the  responsibility  to  protect  the  rights  to  life, 
security, physical integrity, movement and property.1

The  United  Nations  Population  Fund  has  suggested  that  the 
Responsibility to Protect doctrine, at least in spirit, can promote institutions 
such as health and education services.2 Other work is being done to mandate 
state responsibility to protect migrants—including, but not limited to, those 
who are trying to escape conflict at home.3 The most essential part of broad-
ening the doctrine’s scope would be committing to agreed thresholds for 
intervention and establishing mechanisms for intervention and assistance.
This would be a bold step, not without controversy. But there is an ur-
gent need for a collective and strong commitment towards protecting vulner-
able groups, one that extends narratives and norms of protection beyond 
the scope of violent mass atrocities to include more-pervasive insecurities.

Notes
1. UN 1966. 2. UNFPA 2010. 3. Davies and Glanville 2010.

Among the Group of 20 countries harmoni-
zation is under way to reduce tax avoidance and 
evasion.45 Other proposals deserve similar con-
sideration, such as that of the Africa Progress 
Panel  to  address  tax  evasion  on  corporate 
revenues from oil, gas and mining operations. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development is also encouraging volun-
tary  compliance  and  disclosure  through  the 
Committee on Fiscal Affairs’ Working Party on 
Tax Avoidance and Evasion.46 A broader, more 
coherent effort across states and organizations 
towards  an  overarching  international  invest-
ment regime and harmonized tax regulations 
could be the next step. This could be part of the 
post-2015 agenda, with a focus on generating 
greater state policy space and enabling progress 
towards other goals.

Improving global governance

Social services and social protections will not 
reduce the frequency or scope of transnational 
threats. That requires changing the architecture 
of global systems in ways that reduce shocks and 
maximize positive social outcomes for all rather 
than promote profit or power for a few. Putting 
people first in a globalized world requires col-
lective action to ensure that global and regional 
regulatory systems respond to insecurities and 
that public goods enhance people’s capabilities 
to deal with transnational shocks.

As  globalization  deepens,  multiple  chal-
lenges are coming together to assume greater 
 significance—from climate change to conflict 
to economic crises and social unrest. Past pe-
riods  of  change  and  uncertainty  ushered  in 
broad-based  new  institutions  and  norms  for 
global interactions, including the rise of liberal-
ism and free trade in the 19th century, a turn to 
Keynesian inspired public spending following 
the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s  and  the 
establishment  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system 
after the Second World War. Today there is an 
opportunity  to  reconfigure  market  arrange-
ments and global government structures with 
similarly bold institutional changes so that glo-
balization is balanced between maximizing the 
efficiencies of the market and protecting people 
(figure 5.1).

The  list  of  global  challenges  is  long,  and 
the recommendations here are by no means 
exhaustive, but markets can be better regulat-
ed, financial and trade systems adjusted, and 
environmental  threats  reduced.  These  issues 
receive  focus,  but  the  governance  of  food, 
migration, public health and other global is-
sue areas are equally important. Indeed, these 
areas are not mutually exclusive, and there are 
many overlaps whereby, for example, adjust-
ing  the  financial  architecture  could  reduce 
food price volatility and making changes to 
trade regimes could reduce vulnerability for 
migrants.

120    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

FIGURE 5.1

There is a mismatch between global challenges and global governance mechanisms

Trade disputes

Climate change 

Violent conﬂict

Silos

Uncoordinated 
interventions

Spillovers
and new

vulnerabilities

GLOBAL

GOVERNANCE
MECHANISMS

Insuﬃcient
representation

Financial crises

Inequality

Gridlock in 

collective action

 Fragmented
mandates/
institutions

Food crises

Natural disasters

Source: Human Development Report Office.

Governance  principles.  Adjustments  can  be 
made across global issues to increase the like-
lihood that states will act collectively and to 
ensure cohesiveness in global governance (see 
box 5.3 for an overview of systemic problems 
in  global  governance).  These  principles  are 
first-order changes that need to be made before 
policy  and  institutional  progress  is  likely  on 
specific  problems  such  as  financial  volatility, 
imbalanced trade regimes or climate change.

First  is  the  imperative  to  ensure  equitable 
participation of developing countries in global 
governance  by  reforming  the  post–Second 
World War governance structures so that the 
needs  of  more-vulnerable  countries,  particu-
larly  the  least  developed  countries  and  small 
island developing states, are not marginalized.47 
Second,  participation  can  be  extended  to 
include  perspectives  from  the  private  sector 
and civil society to ensure support for global 
collective  action  among  states.  Third,  since 
collective  action  is  most  effective  when  it  is 

inclusive, decisions should be made in repre-
sentative institutions, not in ad hoc groupings 
of countries like the Group of 20 or in selective 
meetings where decisionmaking lacks transpar-
ency.48 Fourth, efforts can be made to increase 
coordination  and  cooperation  among  global 
governance  institutions  on  various  issues  to 
reduce spillovers and better align goals.

Adhering to these principles would improve 
cooperation among countries that may be hesi-
tant to pool their sovereignty for the collective 
good  and  among  international  institutions 
with overlapping and uncoordinated mandates, 
policies and programmes.

Finance. The international financial system is 
not well suited to minimizing vulnerabilities 
and protecting gains in human development. 
The effects of the 2008 global economic crisis 
on people and countries are a testament to this. 
The crisis was a consequence of insufficient reg-
ulation of complex instruments in the world’s 

The international financial 
system is not well suited to 
minimizing vulnerabilities 
and protecting gains in 
human development

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    121

leading financial centres.49 But the impact was 
felt  worldwide.  Indeed,  countries  with  oth-
erwise  sound  financial  systems  suffered  real 
declines in GDP and employment. Jobs were 
lost, and workers had to work shorter hours at 
lower wages. In the textile and apparel indus-
try alone, upper estimates indicate that China 
lost 10 million jobs, India 1 million, Pakistan 
200,000, Indonesia 100,000, Mexico 80,000, 
Cambodia 75,000 and Viet Nam 30,000.50 In 
Bangladesh, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Thailand and 
Viet  Nam  workers’  earnings  dropped  by  as 
much as 50 percent.51 In many countries young 
people, low-skilled labour and urban workers 
suffered the greatest employment losses.52

While  economic  shocks  affect  people  in 
rich and poor countries alike—take the severe 
effects of the global recession in Greece and 
Spain—individuals  in  developing  countries 
are often the most vulnerable. The recession-
ary downturn in US new car sales led to job 
cutbacks in Liberia, which supplies rubber for 
tyres.53  US  automobile  workers  were  offered 
unemployment protection after the economic 

downturn, but thousands of Liberian rubber 
tappers, most of them hired on contract, were 
laid off without alternative means of support.54 
Economic crises can also have lasting life cycle 
effects on future coping capacity. Many poor 
families  that  lose  their  livelihoods  resort  to 
taking their children out of school or reducing 
their food intake.55 In Kazakhstan families cut 
back on meat, dairy products, and fresh fruits 
and vegetables and put off health care and med-
ical procedures.56

Recent  increases  in  private  capital  flows 
into  developing  countries,  while  important 
for  development,  leave  many  economies  and 
people vulnerable. The vulnerability stems from 
volatile and countercyclical capital flows (figure 
5.2).57  Private  capital  is  attracted  by  returns 
and deterred by risk, and cross-border financial 
flows tend to be pro-cyclical: During periods of 
economic growth capital pours in, and during 
downturns it gushes out. The procyclical flows 
can also be exacerbated by a loss of market con-
fidence, undermining exchange rates and pro-
voking economic contraction, with contagious 
effects across countries. That is what happened 

FIGURE 5.2

Increases in net private capital flows into developing countries over 1980–2012 have left many economies and people vulnerable

$ billions

Private capital
ﬂows, net
Oﬃcial capital
ﬂows, net

500

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

–50

–100

% GDP

Private capital
ﬂows as %
of recipient
countries’ GDP

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5

2008 ﬁnancial

crisis

2010

1980

1990

Asian ﬁnancial

crisis

Latin American

debt crisis

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on UNCTAD (2014).

122    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

A regulatory structure for 
global financial stability 
can reduce the volatility of 
cross-border capital flows

in East Asia in July 1997. Market confidence was 
influenced particularly by the lower than expect-
ed assessments of rating agencies; downgrades 
triggered panic and destabilized markets.58

Instead of having a comprehensive govern-
ance  system  to  manage  exchange  rates  and 
capital  controls,  global  financial  institutions 
are ad hoc and piecemeal. Transgovernmental 
networks—quasi-formal  institutions  that 
bring national officials together to coordinate 
policy—address  certain  aspects  of  the  prob-
lem,  such  as  banking  standards,  insurance 
regulation  and  securities  regulation.  But  as 
fundamentally technocratic institutions, they 
have limited mandates to pursue broad regu-
latory functions, often focusing more on facil-
itating financial flows than on managing their 
dangers. Indeed, they have only rarely pushed 
the  industries  they  govern  to  adopt  major 
behavioural  changes,  with  the  partial  excep-
tion of the Basel Committee.59 Some include 
considerable industry representation in their 
governance structures, as with the International 
Accounting  Standards  Board.  Needed  now 
is a financial system summoning the spirit of 
Bretton  Woods—inclusive  financial  mecha-
nisms  and  institutions  that  ensure  access  to 
liquidity, reduce the volatility of financial flows 
and minimize contagion.
•  Ensure access to liquidity. Access to interna-
tional and regional reserves during economic 
downturns and financial crises, when capital 
flight is most likely, can help countries cope 
with  financial  volatility.  Many  emerging 
economies self-insure and rely on their own 
large reserves of foreign exchange. But this 
approach  has  major  opportunity  costs  in 
losses of development financing.60 Many oth-
er developing countries face strong retrench-
ments of private capital during financial crises 
(when resources are most needed). Support 
from  multilateral  organizations  (including 
regional  institutions)  as  well  as  bilateral 
agencies  is  crucial  to  fund  countercyclical 
spending and to ensure adequate funding for 
social protection programmes, employment 
policies and other national policies of protec-
tion. Regulations can also enable and encour-
age governments and financial institutions to 
avoid excessive financial risks during booms.
For individuals and communities, easing 
the flow of remittances can increase savings 

and  enhance  the  ability  to  cope  with  eco-
nomic  downturns.  In  2013  remittances 
to  developing  countries  were  estimated  at 
$414  billion  and  may  reach  $540  billion 
by  2016.61  These  flows  exceed  the  foreign 
exchange reserves in at least 14 developing 
countries.62 Transaction costs to send money 
back home remain high, though. The aver-
age cost of sending $200 from one country 
to  another  reached  as  much  as  27  percent 
in 2013.63 Reducing this cost could greatly 
increase liquidity and should be a focus of 
financial reforms.

•  Reduce the volatility of financial flows. A reg-
ulatory structure for global financial stability 
can reduce the volatility of cross-border cap-
ital flows. The International Monetary Fund 
has been moderately supportive of such pro-
visions.64 And the Group of 20 has pushed 
for countercyclical capital flow management 
that leaves space for national policymaking, 
noting that there is not a one size fits all set of 
capital flow management measures.65 Policies 
may depend on the size of national financial 
sectors and the extent of regulatory capacity. 
Some countries have greater potential to af-
fect others through national policy decisions, 
and when weighing policy options, potential 
spillovers can be taken into account. Take the 
threats  facing  emerging  economies—high 
dollar interest rates and capital flight—in the 
light of imminent tapering by the US Federal 
Reserve.66 Reserve currency issuers can affect 
capital  flows  with  their  macroeconomic 
policy decisions and can avoid excessive im-
balances and sharp policy reversals.

•  Regional monetary funds. Regional financial 
institutions can reduce the transmission of 
shocks and diminish the potential for global 
contagion.67 They can also help stabilize bi-
lateral exchange rates, provide regional exper-
tise in addressing financial crises and provide 
liquidity during crises with countercyclical 
financing.68 And they can give small coun-
tries a stronger voice. National policy space 
can  be  enlarged  through  macroeconomic 
coordination in regions where initiatives are 
already under way, including currency swap 
and regional pooling institutions such as the 
Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization, the 
nascent East African Community Monetary 
Union,  the  Latin  American  Reserve  Fund, 

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    123

FIGURE 5.3

In recent years countries in all regions have become more reliant on imports and exports

International
trade
(% of GDP)

100

80

60

40

20

0

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
9
9
1

0
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

Arab States

East Asia
and the Paciﬁc

Europe and
Central Asia

Latin America
and the Caribbean

South Asia

Sub-Saharan
Africa

World

Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on World Bank (2014b).

the Eurasian Economic Community’s Anti-
Crisis Fund and the Arab Monetary Fund.69 
The  proposed  BRICS  Bank  is  another 
promising  initiative.70  The  most  ambitious 
project to date is the Chiang Mai Initiative 
Multilateralization  and  its  currency  swap 
arrangements  among  the  central  banks  of 
member  countries.  Responding  to  lessons 
from  the  1997  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  it 
recognizes the value of regional policy dia-
logue in preventing contagion and providing 
liquidity in the face of speculative attacks.71

The time may have come for a full-fledged 
Asian Monetary Fund and Latin American 
Monetary  Fund  to  pool  reserves,  stabilize 
exchange rates, provide countries with short-
term funds and offer surveillance. Building on 
existing structures, other regions might then 
follow  suit.  Where  membership  is  partial 
and the capacity to provide needed financial 
services low, the participation of developed 
or emerging economies can provide a rapidly 
growing pool of savings and reserves and in-
crease creditworthiness.72 Regional monetary 
funds can complement global funds, and a 
more competitive operating environment can 
strengthen the services of both.

Trade. In recent years countries have become 
more  reliant  on  imports  and  exports  (figure 

124    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

5.3). Access to global markets has been an im-
portant  driver  of  development,  especially  in 
countries that have invested heavily in human 
capabilities.73 With a favourable external en-
vironment,  countries  can  trade  their  way  to 
growth. But when the global economy slows, 
export-oriented economies become vulnerable 
to fluctuations in commodity prices, terms of 
trade and external demand. The fallout from 
the 2008 financial crisis included declines in 
trade, employment and wages. In the first three 
quarters of 2009 world merchandise trade fell 
30 percent and exports for all world regions 
more  than  20  percent.74  Employment  rates 
also fell in all regions, and median growth in 
real wages for a sample of 53 countries plunged 
from  4.3  percent  in  2007  to  1.4  percent  in 
2008.75

Adapting to a competitive international envi-
ronment can produce insecurity for some indi-
viduals, enterprises and governments. Workers 
in some countries may gain as employment and 
exports  grow,  but  in  others  people  may  lose 
their  jobs  as  companies  close  and  industries 
relocate. Adjustments are particularly hard for 
the more vulnerable segments of society whose 
bargaining positions are already weak.

Trade-related  vulnerability  is  partly  ad-
dressed  by  international  trading  agreements 
and  rule-setting  institutions  like  the  World 

Despite protocols that 
allow countries to use 
temporary safeguards 
against sudden price 
movements, the global 
trading system still 
leaves countries and 
individuals vulnerable to 
shifts in prices, protection 
and production

Trade Organization. But the global trade ar-
chitecture has shortcomings ranging from how 
decisions  are  made  to  a  move  towards  more 
bilateral trade agreements and to asymmetries 
of negotiating power in setting policies for agri-
culture and intellectual property rights. Market 
access  also  takes  priority  over  development 
concerns. These shortcomings demand atten-
tion if trade integration is to expand without 
generating additional shocks and vulnerability.
•  Flexible trade rules. The main governance in-
stitution managing world trade remains the 
World Trade Organization, and despite some 
flaws, its multilateral rules offer flexibility to 
protect against trade’s volatility. Countries 
can use the most favoured nation, antidump-
ing  and  dispute  settlement  mechanisms  to 
cushion their economies from other coun-
tries’ actions. They can also use the enabling 
clause, which facilitates South–South trade 
agreements  that  are  partial  in  scope,  and 
can  take  temporary  safeguarding  measures 
against  sudden  price  movements—such 
as  spikes  in  the  price  of  food  imports.  In 
addition, there is special protection for the 
least developed countries, which have been 
accorded  differential  and  favourable  treat-
ment, including duty- and quota-free access, 
and  grace  periods  for  implementing  their 
commitments. There have also been measures 
for expanding the least developed countries’ 
trading opportunities such as technical assis-
tance and Aid for Trade.76 These protocols 
emerged over decades as countries realized 
that tariff reduction alone would not always 
promote equitable trade.

The  recent  shift  towards  bilateral  trade 
agreements may reduce developing countries’ 
capacities  to  respond  to  trade’s  risks  and 
volatility  and  may  undermine  multilateral 
progress  towards  equitable  trade.  Many 
agreements include provisions not directly 
related to trade, such as those for patent pro-
tection, investment liberalization and govern-
ment procurement.77 The uneven negotiating 
power  in  forming  bilateral  agreements  has 
even undermined the capacity of developing 
countries to adopt measures to manage cap-
ital flows.78 If countries are to benefit in the 
long run, the trend towards reduced national 
policy space in trade agreements needs to be 
reversed—either by prioritizing multilateral 

agreements over bilateral agreements or by 
reducing the asymmetries in negotiating bi-
lateral agreements.

•  Agricultural  liberalization.  Despite  proto-
cols  that  allow  countries  to  use  temporary 
safeguards against sudden price movements, 
the global trading system still leaves coun-
tries and individuals vulnerable to shifts in 
prices, protection and production. The Doha 
Development  Agenda  acknowledges  “the 
particular  vulnerability  of  the  least-devel-
oped countries and the special structural dif-
ficulties they face in the global economy”.79 
During  the  World  Trade  Organization’s 
Ninth  Ministerial  Conference  in  Bali, 
Indonesia,  an  agreement  was  reached  that 
could allow developing countries more op-
tions for providing food security and boost-
ing  least  developed  countries’  trade.80  But 
after a decade of negotiations the 2013 agree-
ment provided little protection for the least 
developed countries or agricultural workers 
in the South. In the meantime, spikes in the 
prices  of  food  and  other  commodities  are 
adding to hunger and starvation for the poor 
and vulnerable.81

Subsidy  restrictions  in  agriculture  have 
loopholes  allowing  developed  countries 
to  maintain  and  even  increase  subsidies.82 
Developing countries have to compete with 
subsidized  food  in  their  own  markets  and 
lose  access  to  third  markets,  limiting  their 
agricultural growth and leaving them more 
vulnerable to food price shocks.83Agricultur-
al liberalization needs to be selective in tar-
geting goods mainly exported by developing 
countries to avoid increasing prices of food 
staples  of  developing  countries.84A  review 
process  could  help  ensure  that  trade  rules 
and proposed reforms in agriculture enhance 
developing countries’ food security and farm-
ers’ livelihoods.

•  Intellectual property rights. The intellectual 
property rights regime favours the right to 
protect  intellectual  property  rather  than 
encouraging the widest possible dissemina-
tion and use of knowledge and technology.85 
But  poorer  countries  and  poorer  people 
may not be able to afford medical and phar-
maceutical products. This is a problem not 
only  for  trade,  but  also  for  global  public 
health because disease burdens can remain 

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    125

high.86  The  current  regime  also  impedes 
movement towards a low-carbon economy 
by constraining widespread dissemination of 
technological innovations.87 Making things 
worse is the lack of national and internation-
al incentives for research and development 
to address the needs of poor and vulnerable 
groups.88  Reforms  to  intellectual  property 
rights  regulations  could  encourage  invest-
ment and enable wider access to the types 
of technologies and advances that enhance 
resilience.

•  Trade in services. A review of the rules guiding 
trade in services is also in order. The General 
Agreement  on  Trade  in  Services  includes 
opportunities to facilitate the movement of 
people  (Mode  4),  which  could  have  spill-
overs  for  migrants  by  partially  liberalizing 
migration. But its commitments to liberalize 
the movement of people have been minimal, 
limited  largely  to  facilitating  transfers  and 
mobility of executives, managers and special-
ists. Commitments could be broadened to 
reduce  the  vulnerability  of  undocumented 
migrants.89

Climate change. Some of the expected effects 
of climate change will be abrupt, leaving very 
little time for adaptation. These include the dis-
appearance of late-summer Arctic sea ice and 
the extinction of marine and terrestrial species. 
Heat  waves  and  heavy  precipitation  events 
are  very  likely  to  increase  in  frequency  and 
duration.  And  the  incidence  and  magnitude 
of extreme high sea levels are also very likely 
to increase later in the 21st century. Global sea 
levels may rise as high as 80 centimetres above 
modern  levels  by  2100.90  Today,  more  than 
6 percent of the world’s population—close to 
half a billion people—lives at an elevation low-
er than 5 metres.91

Feedback effects from changes in the reflec-
tivity of the earth’s surface and the extent of 
carbon sinks could also speed climate change. 
Reductions in snow cover and vegetation re-
duce the amount of heat that can be reflected 
from  the  earth’s  surface,  leading  to  greater 
warming that is unrelated to greenhouse gases 
in  the  atmosphere.  A  warming  climate  can 
also speed the deterioration of terrestrial and 
marine carbon sinks, releasing large stores of 
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.92

Global efforts are 
essential for guiding 
action and offering 
incentives to subnational 
and nonstate actors

126    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Vulnerability to extreme weather events and 
food  crises  has  been  a  recurring  threat  (box 
5.6). In the first half of 2012 Niger experienced 
a severe food and nutrition crisis. The trigger 
was a drought spanning the latter part of 2011 
and the beginning of 2012. The country had 
been  through  a  similar  food  crisis  between 
February  and  August  of  2010,  with  drought 
again the trigger. And this had been preceded 
by an even more severe food crisis, in 2005, a 
result of a 2004 drought. These droughts also 
affected neighbouring countries and others in 
the Sahel.93 And events in other countries had 
a bearing on the crisis in Niger. For example, 
the 2012 crisis was compounded by instability 
in neighbouring Mali and the inflow of tens of 
thousands of people fleeing from the conflict 
there.94

The role of drought in contributing to the 
Syrian crisis is less well known. From 2006 to 
2010 the Syrian Arab Republic suffered an un-
precedented drought, devastating much of its 
rural society.95 Impoverished farmers flooded 
into the slums of the cities. Observers estimate 
that 2–3 million of the country’s 10 million 
rural inhabitants were reduced to extreme pov-
erty.96 These deprivations, combined with a lack 
of jobs and an inadequate state and internation-
al response, contributed to a rapid buildup of 
resentment  and  an  acute  awareness  of  group 
inequality, fertile ground for the civil war that 
started in 2011.

Humanitarian appeals and food and cash as-
sistance can restore food entitlements, but they 
do  not  address  the  underlying  vulnerability. 
The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the 
Sahel takes a multifaceted approach to human-
itarian, development and security activities.97 
But it does not directly address the underlying 
driver—climate  change.  Urgent  actions  are 
needed on this front to reduce climate-related 
vulnerability. There are promising subnational 
actions, but multilateral action is the key to a 
resilient future for all.
•  Cities  networks.  Subnational  government 
bodies  can  be  supported  and  encouraged. 
Cities, in particular, are increasingly taking 
action  to  mitigate  climate  change  and  be-
come  more  resilient.  Examples  range  from 
the  C40  network  of  58  megacities,  to  the 
ICLEI  network  of  thousands  of  smaller 
municipalities, to sector- or region-specific 

BOX 5.6

Who is vulnerable to climate change?

Beyond any doubt, climate change poses a current and growing disrup-
tion to nearly every person on the planet as well as to future generations.1 
But climate change is a complex phenomenon with differentiated impacts 
across countries, regions, sectors, income groups, age groups, ethnic groups 
and sexes. Even within households, climate change affects individuals dif-
ferently. Those standing to lose most from climate change are those already 
very exposed.
•  Small  island  states.  The  world’s  51  small  island  developing  states  and 
their inhabitants face an existential threat. Most of their people live less 
than a metre or two above sea level, and sea level rise may make parts 
and in some cases all of their territory uninhabitable. These countries are 
already affected by more-frequent extreme weather events. Many small 
island states are exposed to Pacific typhoons or Atlantic hurricanes, which 
damage property and infrastructure and divert public finances from devel-
opment. Weather events have also disrupted the tourism that many islands 
states rely on, while ocean acidification and coral bleaching have undercut 
traditional fishing lifestyles.2

•  Coastal  cities.  Nearly  45  percent  of  the  world’s  people  live  in  coastal 
areas,  mostly  in  large  cities.3  Even  in  the  most  developed  countries, 
storms  are  already  devastating  coastal  cities,  often  affecting  the  most 
vulnerable.  Hurricanes  Katrina  and  Sandy  cost  the  United  States 
$149 billion —50 percent more than the world is committed to spending 
on climate financing in developing countries.4 The impact on coastal cities 
in developing countries will be greater, even as the resources available to 
fix the problems are fewer.

•  Smallholder farmers. Changes in rainfall and temperature will be felt most 
acutely by the people who depend on natural systems for growing crops 
and raising livestock and by those who depend on them for food. In par-
ticular, farmers without access to irrigation will most immediately feel the 
impacts of unpredictable rainfall. Smallholder farmers in South Asia are 
particularly  vulnerable—India  alone  has  93  million  small  farms.5  These 
groups already face water scarcity. Some studies predict crop yields up 
to 30 percent lower over the next decades, even as population pressures 
continue to rise.6

Notes
1. IPCC 2007, 2012, 2013. 2. World Bank 2013b. 3. UN Atlas of the Oceans 2013. 4. NOAA 2013. 5. IFAD 2013. 6. World Bank 2013b.
Source: Hale 2014.

networks such as the Asian Cities Climate 
Change  Resilience  Network.98  These  mu-
nicipalities pool knowledge and share best 
practices  on  how  to  develop  low-carbon 
transportation  systems  or  housing  stocks 
and how to harden themselves against rising 
sea levels and fluctuating weather. Globally, 
cities account for up to 70 percent of total 
emissions,99  so  expanding  these  initiatives 
has extraordinary mitigation potential, even 
in  countries  slow  to  adopt  national  action 
plans. In the United States, national action 
has been blocked by Congress, but city- and 
state-level commitments cover nearly half of 
US emissions.100

•  Voluntary private sector disclosure and reduc-
tion. Nongovernment actors are also taking 
steps to reduce carbon emissions. Firms and 
investors,  often  in  partnership  with  civil 
society, are identifying climate risks in their 
supply  chains  and  ‘carbon  proofing’  their 
business  models.  For  example,  the  World 
Wildlife Fund’s Climate Savers programme 
helps large businesses develop emissions re-
duction strategies.101 The Carbon Disclosure 
Project offers a tool through which compa-
nies can report their emissions footprints to 
investors—in 2013 the programme included 
722  investors  managing  $87  trillion  in 

 assets—who can then pressure companies to 
reduce their climate risk.102 The world’s 500 
largest companies produce 3.6 billion tonnes 
of greenhouse gases, so corporate emissions 
reductions hold great potential.103 More ac-
tions can be taken to encourage and incentiv-
ize these voluntary efforts, and efforts can be 
made to map the extent of existing initiatives 
and assess their potential to increase in scope 
and ambition.

•  Urgent  multilateral  action.  Global  efforts 
are essential for guiding action and offering 
incentives to subnational and nonstate actors 
(box 5.7). Unilateral approaches to climate 
change often focus on subsets of emitters and 
do not offer scope for a ‘grand bargain’. They 
are still worthwhile, because every tonne of 
carbon mitigated means there is less adapta-
tion required. But they are partial and second 
best in nature. They are also limited in their 
attention to adaptation, especially important 
to vulnerable groups and many populations 
in the least developed countries.

Multilateral  bodies  can  engage  such 
smaller initiatives and link them to multi-
lateral  processes  to  strengthen  global  gov-
ernance of the environment more generally. 
Bringing the dynamism of bottom-up action 
into  the  multilateral  process  could  build 

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    127

BOX 5.7

Four essential global agendas

Four essential global agendas are tackling some of the world’s greatest chal-
lenges: natural disasters, humanitarian crises, climate change and sustain-
able development. But they will produce durable change only if they tackle 
the architectural issues of global governance—such as ensuring more-eq-
uitable and -inclusive participation, pushing for coordination among global 
governance institutions and consciously developing norms of international 
cooperation and global citizenship.

Hyogo Framework for Action
The Hyogo Framework for Action, adopted by 168 countries in 2005, aims 
to  reduce  global  disaster  risk  by  2015.1  It  puts  forward  a  comprehensive 
set of tasks and actions that focus on building the capacity of local and na-
tional institutions, supporting early warning systems, supporting a culture of 
safety and resilience, reducing the drivers of vulnerability and strengthening 
disaster preparedness and response.

The framework has spearheaded collective action towards disaster risk 
reduction in national, regional and international agendas. But there is more 
to be done, and progress has not been uniform across countries or action 
areas. Remaining challenges include developing and using indicators and 
setting early warning systems in multihazard environments and enhancing 
the capacity of states to integrate disaster risk reduction into sustainable 
development policies and planning at the national and international levels.

World Humanitarian Summit
The World Humanitarian Summit, scheduled for 2016, aims to make humani-
tarian action more global, effective and inclusive—and more representative 
of the needs of a rapidly changing world.2 It will be an opportunity to coordi-
nate international humanitarian organizations around issues of vulnerability 
reduction and risk management.

Responding to the growing number of complex humanitarian emergen-
cies will start by identifying and implementing approaches to reduce and 
manage humanitarian risks. The summit will be an opportunity to assess 
how  humanitarian  and  development  actors  can  take  a  more  systematic, 
cohesive approach to planning, prioritizing and funding programmes—and 

how action can be coordinated across economic, social and environmental 
domains. It will encourage collaboration among affected countries, donors 
and international organizations to jointly build humanitarian and develop-
ment strategies.

Climate change—2 degree limit
In the 2009 Copenhagen Accord and 2010 Cancun Agreements 195 parties 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change agreed to 
limit the average rise in global temperature to less than 2 degrees Celsius 
from preindustrial levels.3 This commitment is based on the general scien-
tific consensus that a 2 degree increase is the most the world can afford in 
order to limit dangerously disruptive impacts.

The international community’s pledges and commitments are not yet suf-
ficient to meet this goal. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 
projections conclude that global temperatures will likely increase more than 
1.5 degrees by the end of the 21st century and could easily exceed 2 degrees 
if major action is not taken to reduce emissions.4 Achieving the objective is 
still technically and economically feasible, but political ambition is needed 
to close the gap between current emissions and the level that will set the 
world on a below 2 degrees trajectory by 2020.

Post-2015 agenda and sustainable development goals
In  the  run-up  to  the  post-2015  agenda  and  the  sustainable  development 
goals, the international community has an unparalleled opportunity to make 
reducing vulnerability a priority in international development frameworks. 
The Millennium Development Goals helped reduce poverty and improve the 
lives of many. But continuing progress is not guaranteed unless the shocks 
are reduced and the capacities of people to cope are improved. Along these 
lines, the call for getting to zero poverty should be extended to staying at 
zero poverty, and progress needs to be maintained in other areas. Those 
most vulnerable to natural disasters, climate change and financial setbacks 
must be specifically empowered and protected. Making vulnerability reduc-
tion central in future development agendas is the only way to ensure that 
progress is resilient and sustainable.

Notes
1. UNISDR 2005. 2. UNOCHA 2014. 3. UNFCCC 2009, 2011. 4. IPCC 2013.

political coalitions to support a global trea-
ty. In December 2011, under the Ad Hoc 
Working Group on the Durban Platform for 
Enhanced Action, countries agreed to nego-
tiate by 2015 a new, legally binding treaty 
that  would  go  into  effect  in  2020.104  The 
United  Nations  Framework  Convention 
on  Climate  Change  can  coordinate  and 
channel  the  capacities  of  countries,  cities, 
companies  and  civil  society  organizations 
through  cooperative  initiatives.105  The 
Green Climate Fund, established in Cancun, 
Mexico, in 2010, could support these efforts 
financially.106

Collective action for a 
more secure world

The international system suffers from gridlock 
that limits international collective action across 
issue  areas.107  In  the  meantime,  vulnerability 
intensifies  as  global  bodies  fail  to  agree  on 
appropriate  response  mechanisms  and  fall 
short of introducing the right types of regula-
tions to minimize risks and ensure that global 
systems support the common good. Reducing 
vulnerability to transnational threats, whether 
by  fixing  governance  architectures  to  reduce 
shocks or taking steps to enable people to cope, 

128    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

requires  greater  leadership  and  cooperation 
among states and across international organiza-
tions. It also requires a more coherent approach 
that sets priorities and reduces spillovers—and 
more-systematic engagement with civil society 
and the private sector.

Cooperation

The lack of international coordination, coop-
eration and leadership stifles progress towards 
addressing  global  challenges  and  reducing 
vulnerability. This is not new. Over the years 
there have been various proposals for how to 
improve  cooperation  among  states.  In  2006 
a Global Leaders Forum, comprising half the 
United Nations Economic and Social Council 
members, was proposed to upgrade the coun-
cil’s policy coordination towards meeting the 
Millennium  Development  Goals.108  In  2009 
the Stiglitz Commission proposed the Global 
Economic Coordination Council to identify 
gaps  and  spillovers  in  the  current  system  of 
cooperation and propose how they might be 
filled.109 Other proposals have been made to re-
form the United Nations Economic and Social 
Council.110

Emerging  as  a  leading  voice  in  global 
governance,  the  Group  of  20  includes  such 
emerging powers as Brazil, China, India and 
Mexico. But it is distinctly club-like and lacks 
the  structure,  mandate  or  accountability  to 
provide  public  goods  and  restructure  global 
governance  architectures.  The  rise  of  the 
South presents an opportunity to make global 
governance  more  representative—and  more 
effective.111  But  this  will  require  new  resolve 
for international cooperation and leadership. 
One option is to draw on past proposals and 
establish  a  Global  Leaders  Forum.  Such  a 
regular  meeting  of  a  representative  group  of 
heads of state could facilitate cooperation to re-
ducing vulnerability among states and the UN 
system,  including  the  UN  Secretariat,  funds 
and programmes; the International Monetary 
Fund; the International Labour Organization; 
the  World  Bank  Group;  the  World  Health 
Organization; and eventually the International 
Organization  for  Migration  and  the  World 
Trade Organization.112

The  High-level  Political  Forum  on 
Sustainable  Development  created  at  the 

Rio+20 Conference in June 2012 also holds 
promise for political leadership and guidance 
to address critical global challenges. It has the 
legitimacy of being convened annually under 
the auspices of the United Nations Economic 
and Social Council and every four years under 
the  auspices  of  the  United  Nations  General 
Assembly.  Starting  in  2016  the  forum  will 
review  sustainable  development  progress  by 
developed and developing countries to enhance 
accountability and encourage action.113

Coherence

Global governance tends to be organized in si-
los, with separate institutions focusing on such 
issues as trade, climate, finance and migration. 
This makes it very difficult to take a systems 
perspective on global challenges or to identify 
spillovers and contradictions in the actions of 
states and international agencies.

Complete and thorough assessments of the 
multiple and at times overlapping architectur-
al  issues  of  global  governance  are  needed  to 
ensure that global cooperation is efficient and 
targeted towards the most critical areas. These 
could best be made by a nonpolitical body of 
independent experts who can take an objective 
systems perspective on global issues and pro-
vide advice and recommendations to governing 
bodies. An independent group of experts could 
set priorities for cooperation among states and 
international organizations. It could identify 
spillovers across the specialized bodies in the 
UN system—for example, the health effects of 
trade policies or the environmental effects of 
fiscal policies—and propose ways of addressing 
them. And it could assess global trends to deter-
mine whether urgent issues are being addressed 
and identify new challenges that should move 
onto global and national policy agendas.

Such a group could also carry out detailed 
cost-benefit studies showing the impact of pol-
icies across countries and population groups. 
That could encourage collective action, since 
countries often shy away from cooperation if 
they  are  uncertain  about  the  potential  out-
comes.  To  reflect  a  diversity  of  views,  ample 
voice would need to be given to experts from 
developing countries, and especially from vul-
nerable countries, including the least developed 
countries and small island developing states.

Complete and thorough 
assessments of the 
multiple and at times 
overlapping architectural 
issues of global 
governance are needed 
to ensure that global 
cooperation is efficient 
and targeted towards 
the most critical areas

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    129

People are more likely to 
support the provision of 
global public goods when 
they view themselves 
as global citizens—part 
of a global community 
that benefits from capital 
controls, labour rights 
and women’s rights

Independent commissions can succeed. The 
Brundtland  Commission  made  sustainabil-
ity  a  common  goal  of  development,  and  the 
Stiglitz-Sen-Fittousi Commission helped make 
well-being a more prominent topic on devel-
opment agendas. However, these commissions 
were targeted towards particular issues. What 
would be useful now is a type of global steward-
ship council—tasked with the much broader 
challenge of keeping track of global trends to 
see whether the world is ‘in balance’, to con-
firm that issues requiring attention are getting 
resolved and to ensure that emerging concerns 
move onto global policy agendas.114

Engagement

Governance improves when citizens are directly 
involved. In close relationships with the public, 
governments can obtain accurate information 
about people’s vulnerabilities and track the ef-
fects of policy interventions. Such engagement 
can result in efficient state interventions and 
public resources.115 It occurs when people have 
the freedom, security, capability and voice to 
influence decisionmaking. They must also be-
lieve in their power to produce desired effects 
through collective action.116 One example of 
widespread citizen engagement is participatory 
budgeting in Brazil.117

The  International  Labour  Organization’s 
tripartite  structure  indicates  the  possibilities 
for  cooperation  between  state  and  nonstate 
actors.  Governments,  worker  organizations 
and employer representatives freely and openly 
debate issues such as labour standards so that 
policy  outcomes  reflect  the  views  of  all  par-
ties. This structure differs from that of other 
international bodies, which do not give equal 
weight to nonstate actors. They generally limit 
consultative  status  to  a  selection  of  nongov-
ernmental organizations, with access ranging 
from  higher  engagement  within  the  United 
Nations Economic and Social Council to much 
lower  representation  and  engagement  at  the 
International and Monetary Fund.118

Previous  global  conventions  and  confer-
ences  have  raised  the  rights  and  visibility  of 
groups constrained by structural vulnerability 
The  1990  United  Nations  Convention  on 
the Rights of the Child spelled out the need 
for special care and protection of children.119 

The  fourth  World  Conference  on  Women, 
in  Beijing  in  1995,  committed  states  to  spe-
cific actions to ensure women’s rights.120 The 
Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with 
Disabilities called on signatory states to remove 
barriers  that  prevent  the  full  participation 
of  disabled  people  in  society.121  The  World 
Conference on Indigenous Peoples, scheduled 
for September 2014, aims to foster global co-
operation  to  realize  the  rights  of  indigenous 
peoples.122  Once  international  conventions 
are ratified, signatories agree to adopt relevant 
legislation and report periodically to the inter-
national community on progress. Even confer-
ences at the consultative level can encourage 
state action to reduce structural vulnerability.
People are more likely to support the pro-
vision of global public goods when they view 
themselves as global citizens—part of a global 
community that benefits from capital controls, 
labour rights and women’s rights.123 In princi-
ple, this is now much more feasible as people 
connect  across  borders.  For  example,  greater 
flows of migrants have created opportunities 
for new forms of solidarity, bringing together 
people with similar vulnerabilities but different 
citizenships in host countries.124

Collective action is built on personal inter-
actions and trust, but today’s communications 
technologies  and  social  networks  also  hold 
potential for extending the scope of social and 
political communities across borders.125 Mobile 
phone use is almost universal, with 6.8 billion 
subscriptions, and Internet use is on the rise, 
with average annual growth in Africa leading 
the  way  at  27  percent.126  Communications 
technology can also increase the voices of the 
 vulnerable—encouraging the political and so-
cial participation of groups that have historically 
been excluded from, or minimally represented 
in, public discourse, including the poor, women, 
minorities and other vulnerable groups.

* 

 

 

 

* 

 

 

 

*

The  oft-postulated  goal  of  more-inclusive, 
-sustainable and -resilient global growth and 
development requires a positive vision of the 
global public domain and recognition that ‘the 
world we want’ depends on successful provi-
sion of natural and human-made public goods. 
Markets,  while  important,  cannot  provide 

130    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

adequate  social  and  environmental  protec-
tions  on  their  own.  States,  individually  and 
collectively, have to be brought back in with 
a  stronger,  more  forthcoming  willingness  to 
cooperate—through the harmonization of na-
tional policies or through international collec-
tive action. Governments need greater policy 
space to provide protections and employment 
for  their  people.  Civil  society  can  generate 
political will, but only if citizens recognize the 
value to the individual of cross-border collabo-
ration and public goods.

Progress takes work. Many of the Millennium 
Development  Goals  are  likely  to  be  met  at 
the national level by 2015, but success is not 
automatic,  and  the  gains  are  not  necessarily 
permanent. Taking development a step further 
requires protecting achievements against vul-
nerability and shocks, increasing resilience and 
deepening progress. Identifying and targeting 
vulnerable  groups,  reducing  inequality  and 
addressing structural vulnerability are essential 
to sustaining development over an individual’s 
lifetime and across generations.

Chapter 5  Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    131

Notes

Overview
1  UNDP 2013a.
2  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.
3  See, for example, World Bank (2013c).
4  UN General Assembly 2013b, p. 9.
5  UN System Task Team on the Post-

2015 UN Development Agenda 2012b.
FAO, IFAD and WFP 2013.
ILO 2013d.

6 
7 
8  UNDESA 2009.
9  WHO 2011b.
10  CRED 2013.
11  UNDP 2011a.
12  World Bank 2010.
13  UNDP 2013c.
14  Cornia and Stewart 1993.
15  UN System Task Team on the Post-

2015 UN Development Agenda 2012b.
ILO 2012b.
ILO 2010c.

16 
17 
18  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.

Chapter 1
1  UNDP 1990.
2  Chambers 2006.
3  Choudhury 2013.
4  United Nations Global Pulse 2012; 

Conceição, Mukherjee and Nayyar 2011.

5  Stewart 2013.
6  Social competences are defined as 

what social institutions can be or do; 
they are in a sense the capabilities 
of institutions, as against those of 
individuals. See Stewart (2013).

7  UNDP 1994, p. 3.
8  UNDP 1994; Ogata and Sen 2003.
9  Macfarlane and Khong 2006.
10  As per UN General Assembly 2012 res-

olution 66/290 “the notion of human 
security includes the following: (a) The 
right of people to live in freedom and 
dignity, free from poverty and despair. 
All individuals, in particular vulnerable 
people, are entitled to freedom from 
fear and freedom from want, with an 
equal opportunity to enjoy all their 
rights and fully develop their human 
potential; (b) Human security calls 
for people-centred, comprehensive, 
context-specific and prevention-
oriented responses that strengthen the 
protection and empowerment of all 
people and all communities; . . .”.

11  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.
12  Dutta, Foster and Mishra 2011, p. 1.
13  UN 2012a.
14  Based on available data from 91 

countries.

15  Sundaram 2013.
16  Based on available data from 
104 countries for 2000–2012, 
representing 5.4 billion people 
(Human Development Report Office 

calculations based on data from 
the World Bank’s PovcalNet (http://
iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/, 
accessed 15 February 2014).

ILO 2010c.

IPCC 2013.

17  Data are available for eight countries.
18 
19  Sundaram 2013.
20  Sundaram 2013.
21  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.
22 
23  UNDP 2011a.
24  La Trobe 2002.
25  UN General Assembly 2013c.
26  Kaul 2014.
27  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.
28  Horizontal inequality is inequality 

between groups. See Stewart, Brown 
and Mancini (2005).

29  Minorities at Risk Project 2014.
30  Swiderska and others 2009.
31  WHO 2011b.
32  UNDESA 2009.
33 
34  See Liem and Rayman (1982), Darity 
and Goldsmith (1996) and Muqtada 
(2010), among others.

IPU 2013; Munyaneza 2013.

35  See Burgard, Brand and House 2007; 

Sullivan and von Wachter 2009; Cutler 
and others 2002; Brand, Levy and 
Gallo 2008.

36  Zaidi 2014; Hardgrove and others 

2014; Young 2014.

37  Nussbaum 2005.
38  Boudet and others 2012.
39 
40 
41 
42  O’Sullivan, Mugglestone and Allison 

ILO n.d.
IMF 2014.
IMF 2014; ILO 2013e.

2014.

Ismi 2013.

43  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.
44 
45  Østby 2008b; Stewart 2008.
46  Stewart 2008.
47  Stewart 2013.
48  Kelly and others 2008.
49  Fitoussi and Malik 2013.
50  Sen 1992.
51  Kant 1781.
52  Sen 1999, p. 8.
53  Sen, Stiglitz and Fitoussi 2009, p. 4.
54  The 1993 HDR (UNDP 1993) defines job-

less growth as when output rises but 
increases in employment lag behind.

55  World Bank 2012.
56  HelpAge International 2013.
57  Ninth World Trade Organization 

Ministerial Conference (2013) web-
site, https://mc9.wto.org.

58  Revkin 2012.
59  Polanyi 1944.

Chapter 2
1  UNDP 2013a.
2  Sen, Stiglitz and Fitoussi 2009, p. 7.

3  Developed countries are not included 
in regional aggregates, but they are 
included in the human development 
aggregates.

4  Some caveats: Since the HDI is 

bounded to a maximum of 1, it might 
be subject to declining marginal 
improvement; because the income 
component (a flow) is often more 
volatile than the health and education 
components (stocks), short-term 
changes might be driven mainly by in-
come (particularly during an economic 
crisis); and the lack of recent data 
(especially on education and for the 
poorest countries) may hide overall 
progress. Nonetheless, the magnitude 
of the changes and the fact that the 
conclusions are fairly robust to differ-
ent cutoff points (for instance, 2005 
instead of 2008) suggest that more- 
meaningful factors are at play.
The smaller sample (compared with 
the 187 countries that have an HDI 
value for 2013) is due to the lack of 
a sufficiently long time series for 
several countries.
For instance, better access to skilled 
antenatal care and birth attendance 
contributed to sharply reduced mater-
nal mortality in Nepal. Free universal 
access to education enhanced human 
development in Sri Lanka. And cash 
transfer programmes in several 
Latin American countries helped 
reduce poverty. See also the 2013 
HDR (UNDP 2013a) for key drivers of 
progress.

5 

6 

7  UNDP 2010.
8 

In some regions this might be due to 
the difficulty of raising educational 
attainment beyond a certain level—
such as primary education in South 
Asia and Sub- Saharan Africa.

9  UNDP 2013a.
10  These data are not directly compa-
rable with those in figure 2.4 since 
these data refer to the number of 
countries that experienced a specific 
trend in inequality (rather than provid-
ing a measure of inequality at the 
regional level) as well as having a 
longer timeframe.

11  UNDESA 2013b.
12  Lakner and Milanovic 2013. The 

authors adjust previous estimates—
which pointed to a recent decline in 
global inequality—to address the 
likely underreporting of the highest 
incomes in surveys.

13  Milanovic 2012. The share of the 

richest 1 percent might be severely 
underestimated, given the difficulty of 
estimating their incomes.

14  Fuentes-Nieva and Galasso 2014.
15  Stiglitz 2012a.

16  The Economist 2013b.
17  Atkinson 2013.
18  Refers to 2000–2012 and is expressed 
in 2005 purchasing power parity terms 
(based on World Bank 2014a).

19  Refers to 2005–2012 (based on HDRO 

calculations).
20  UNDP 1993.
21  The International Labour Organization 
suggests that if the current trends in 
labour markets persist, employment 
rates will return to precrisis levels in 
2015 in developing countries but only 
after 2017 in developed countries (ILO 
2013e).
ILO 2013c.
22 
23  Sen 2013.
24  UNDP 2011a, 2013. The 2011 

HDR defined sustainable human 
development as “the expansion of the 
substantive freedoms of people today 
while making reasonable efforts to 
avoid seriously compromising those of 
future generations” (p. 18).

25  UN 2013b.
26  See Rockström and others (2009) and 

Fitoussi and Malik (2013).

27  UNDP 2013a.
28  Pineda 2013.
29  UNCTAD 2012b.
30 
31  Kim and Conceição 2010.
32  Molina and others 2014. An HDI 

ILO 2013a.

downturn is defined as a slowdown 
in HDI growth with respect to its long-
run trend. The study also finds that 
the nonincome components of human 
development are more resilient to 
shocks than the income component is 
(perhaps because the income compo-
nent is a flow rather than a stock).
33  There is also evidence that capital 

account liberalization leads to a 
persistent increase in inequality (see 
Furceri and Loungani 2013).

34  World Bank 2013c.
35  This naturally depends on the source 

and type of economic growth.

36  Stiglitz 2012a. For instance, in the 

United States the stagnation of real 
wages for workers at the bottom of 
the distribution scale—when com-
bined with easy credit—contributed 
to the housing bubble of the early 
2000s. At the global level macro-
economic imbalances contributed to 
greater economic instability, which 
also played an important role in the 
global economic crisis.
37  Berg and Ostry 2011b.
38  Naylor and Falcon (2010) argue that 

commodity price variations in the 
2000s were similar to the extreme 
volatility that was observed in the 
1970s—and thus considerably 
larger than in the 1980s and 1990s. 

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    133

Macroeconomic policy, exchange 
rates and petroleum prices were key 
determinants of price variability over 
2005−2010.

39  The 2011 HDR (UNDP 2011a) argued 
that environmental risk can greatly 
increase global inequality.

40  Cutter and others 2009.
41  WHO 2011a.
42 
43 
44  UNDP 2013c.
45  The Uppsala Conflict Data Program/

IPCC 2013.
IPCC 2014.

Peace Research Institute Oslo 
defines four types of armed conflict: 
interstate, which occurs between 
two or more states, internal, which 
occurs between the government of 
a state and one or more internal op-
position groups without intervention 
from other states, internationalized 
internal, which occurs between the 
government of a state and one or 
more internal opposition groups 
with intervention from other states 
(secondary parties) on one or both 
sides, and extra systemic, which oc-
curs between a state and a nonstate 
group outside its own territory. 
Extrasystemic conflicts mainly relate 
to the colonial wars. To reduce the 
number of categories, extrasystemic 
conflicts are included in interstate 
conflicts, and internationalized inter-
nal conflicts are included in internal 
conflicts.

46  For the past three years income 
inequality has topped the World 
Economic Forum’s Global Risks rank-
ing in terms of likelihood (see World 
Economic Forum 2014).

47  OECD 2012.

Chapter 3
1  We are particularly concerned about 

the potential restriction of choices 
that people have reason to value.

Fuentes-Nieva and Galasso 2014.

2  See Young (2014).
3 
4  Stiglitz 2012b.
5 

Pineda and Rodríguez 2006a; Bénabou 
2000; Alesina and others 1996.

6  UNDP 2013a.
7  Schroder-Butterfill and Marianti 2006.
8  Results also depend on the kind of 

indicator used. For example, the 
potential for catchup after early stunt-
ing is found to be positive for height 
z scores, but there is less evidence 
of catchup for height. This implies 
that there are cases in which reversal 
is possible but that the evidence 
is mixed and context specific (see 
Cameron, Preece and Cole 2005).

9  Shonkoff and Richter 2013.
10  Sub- Saharan Africa is the only region 
that has not substantially reduced the 
share of children under age 5 since 
1970 (Human Development Report 

Office calculations based on Lutz and 
KC 2013).

11  See Young (2002).
12  Shonkoff and Phillips 2000; McCain, 

Mustard and McCuaig 2011; Shonkoff 
and others 2012.

13  Hertzman and Boyce 2010.
14  Early human development is an intri-

cate and dynamic interaction between 
nature and nurture—that is, genes 
and the environment. Genes ‘listen’ to 
the environment, and the environment 
‘adapts’ the genetic blueprint. The 
environment modifies expression of 
genes (for example, gene variants, 
phenotype) and can turn genes on and 
off through the epigenetic process. 
In this process, experiences leave 
a chemical signature, or epigenetic 
mark, that alters genetic expression 
without changing the DNA sequence. 
Many of these changes are temporary, 
but others seem to endure (see 
McCain, Mustard and McCuaig 2011 
and Young 2013).

15  These results are not determinis-
tic; they simply reflect that earlier 
adversity is associated with a higher 
likelihood of adverse effects in the 
future (see Anda and others 2006, 
Felitti and others 1998, Hertzman and 
Boyce 2010 and Young 2014).

16  Bhutta 2002; Engle and others 2007, 

2011; Alderman and Engle 2008; 
Armecin and others 2006.

17  McEwen 2008. Exposure to a develop-
ment risk increases the likelihood of 
compromised development, but it is 
not deterministic. It implies only that 
the child is more likely to face de-
velopment challenges. The evidence 
also highlights that this could reduce 
the impact of the child’s exposure to 
protective factors or interventions to 
promote early childhood development 
(see Wachs and Rahman 2013).

18  Heckman 2006.
19  Young 2014.
20  Many of the same risks that are 

commonly encountered by children 
growing up in poverty in low- and 
medium-income countries are also 
encountered by poor children growing 
up in high-income countries, even 
though risks are fewer for the latter 
(see Wachs and Rahman 2013).

21  Lack of birth registration may severely 

limit a child’s right to full citizen-
ship, and it may prevent a child from 
receiving most forms of child protec-
tion, such as health care. The region 
in which birth registration is most 
challenging is South Asia, which ac-
counted for about half the 51 million 
children without birth registration in 
the world in 2007 (see Engle, Rao and 
Petrovic 2013).

22  Nutrition is a critical factor beginning 
at the early development stages. Both 
the quantity and quality of infants’ nu-
trition have important effects on their 

growth. Feeding practices and wean-
ing of infants affect their weight and 
their morbidity and mortality. Studies 
show that suboptimal breastfeeding 
and nonexclusive breastfeeding in 
the first 6 months of life account for 
10 percent of the burden of disease 
in children under age 5 (Black and 
others 2008).
23  Young 2014.
24  Brooks-Gunn and Duncan 1997.
25  Engle and others 2007.
26  Hart and Risley 1995. Carneiro 
and Heckman (2003) also found 
differences in cognitive skills that 
correlated with socioeconomic class 
as early as age 6.

27  Ardila and others 2005. A few studies 

28 

in developing countries are showing 
similar findings of the link between 
socioeconomic status and cognitive 
development (Naudeau and others 
2011). A study in Ecuador (Paxson and 
Schady 2007) shows that household 
wealth (and parent education) is asso-
ciated with higher scores on tests of 
receptive language and that the gaps 
among older children are larger.
Interactions include back-and-forth 
communication with caregivers, 
vocalization, gestures, facial expres-
sions and body movements. The 
interactions may be warm expressions 
by mothers, physical contact and 
play, visual mutuality and vocal 
exchanges, and mothers’ response 
to infants in timely and appropriate 
ways (Bornstein and others 2008). See 
also Bornstein and Putnick (2012) on 
cognitive and socioemotional positive 
caregiving activities.

29  NICHD 2006.
30  However, the effect was negative and 

small but not statistically different 
from zero for children ages 7–12 at 
the time of the crisis (Stevens and 
Schaller 2011; Falkingham 2000; 
Frankenberg, Duncan and Beege 
1999).

31  Falkingham 2000.
32  Child labour is also an outcome of 

income insecurity and labour market 
vulnerability among working adults. 
Child labour is a coping mechanism 
of poor households—precisely those 
most vulnerable to adverse shocks to 
their livelihoods (Basu and Van 1998).

33  Young 2014.
34  Heckman 2013.
35  McCain, Mustard and Shanker 2007; 

Mustard 2006.

36  WHO 2002; Heise 1998; Abramsky 

and others 2011; Abrahams and 
Jewkes 2005.

37  However, some authors highlight that 

underreporting issues could make it 
difficult to have conclusive evidence 
(Berliner and Elliot 1996).

38  Pereda and others (2009), examining 

65 studies from 22 countries.

39  Bos and others 2009.

40  Pinheiro 2006; Plan International 

2012.

41  The International Labour Organization 

defines youth as people ages 15–24 
(ILO 2013b).

42  Human Development Report Office 

ILO 2012a.

calculations based on UN (2014b) and 
Lutz and KC (2013).
ILO 2013a.

43 
44  Verick 2009; Ha and others 2010.
45 
46  Verick 2009.
47  Assaad and Levison 2013.
48  As documented in UNDP (2013a).
49  The ‘youth bulge’ is estimated to 
bring more than 120 million new 
young people a year into the job mar-
ket, mostly in developing countries 
(see World Economic Forum 2014).

50  The World Bank estimates that more 

than 25 percent of young people in 
the world (around 300 million) have no 
productive work (see Newhouse 2013).
51  This is not only because of economic 
considerations, but also because of 
the lack of trust and social ties that 
exclusion from productive opportuni-
ties brings about (see Assaad and 
Levison 2013).

52  Under the base case scenario, youth 
unemployment is expected to be even 
slightly higher by 2050 (14.3 percent).

53  The gap will close in South Asia, 
albeit slowly, as supply begins to 
decrease around 2035.

54  Boyden, Hardgrove and Knowles 2012.
55  Pells 2011.
56  Ames, Rojas and Portugal 2009; 

Woldehanna, Jones and Tefera 2008. 
See also Vennam and others (2009).

57  Morrow 2013.
58  Rolleston and James 2011. These 

results are not driven by differences 
in school attendance, since in these 
countries girls are more likely to be in 
school at age 15 (see Hardgrove and 
others 2014).
Including the risk of social stigma to 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered 
and questioning young people in all 
societies.

59 

60  Another vulnerability that comes with 

sexual experience is the exposure 
to risks of sexually transmitted 
infections.

61  Hardgrove 2012.
62  Bunting and McAuley 2004.
63  Pinheiro 2006.
64  Kelly 2010.
65  UNDP 2013b.
66  Krug and others 2002a.
67  Vulnerable employment is the sum 
of unpaid family workers and own-
account workers.
International Labour Organization 
projections show that by 2017 the 
share of working poor among the total 
employed population is expected to 
decline to 17 percent in South Asia 
and 32 percent in Sub- Saharan Africa 
(ILO 2013a).

68 

134    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

69  World Bank 2012.
70 
71  Von Wachter 2014. See also Stephens 

ILO 2013e.

(1997); Schmieder, von Wachter and 
Bender (2009); Eliason and Storrie 
(2009); and Morissette, Zhang and 
Frenette (2007).

72  See Kaplan, Martinez and Robertson 

(2005) for the case of Mexico.

73  Frankenberg, Duncan and Beege 1999; 
Smith and others 2002; McKenzie 2003.

74  Burgard, Brand and House 2007; 

Sullivan and von Wachter 2009; Cutler 
and others 2002.

75  Brand, Levy and Gallo 2008.
76  For women, income disparity in 
old age depended particularly on 
age (younger cohorts do better), on 
education (having a higher level of 
educational attainment reduces the 
gender gap), and occupation and sec-
tor of employment when working (see 
Bardasi and Jenkins 2002).
ILO 2012c.

77 
78  For category 3 categories the 

number of jobs fell, but the lowest 
quality jobs were lost first, resulting 
in improved overall job quality. For 
category 2 countries employment 
rates rose from 2007 but as a result of 
an increase in low-quality jobs.
ILO 2012b.

79 
80  Heintz 2012.
81  Bargain and Kwenda 2009; von 

Wachter 2014.

82  Ono and Sullivan 2013; Keizer 2008.
83 
84  Arriagada 1994; Cerrutti 2000; Casale 

ILO 2013a.

2003.

85  Bahçe and Memi  2013; Berik and 

Kongar 2013.
86  Heath 2012.
87  Stevens and Schaller 2011; 

Falkingham 2000.

88  Mejia-Mantilla 2012; Falkingham 

2000.

89  World Bank 2012; Fischer 2013.
90  World Bank 2012.
91  Kuhn, Lavile and Zweimuller 2009.
92  Human Development Report Office 
calculations based on Lutz and KC 
(2013).

93  Barrientos 2006.
94  Those who have contributed to a 

pension scheme during their working 
life will have some income and are 
less vulnerable than those who have 
had poorly paid, part-time, insecure or 
informal employment (Zaidi 2013).

95  Kondkher, Knox-Vydmanov and Vilela 

2013.

96  Some studies indicate that regularly 

and by right delivered social pensions, 
even where relatively small, improve 
the socioeconomic conditions of older 
people, supporting their role as family 
members that actively participate 
in taking decisions (see Beales 
2012). The positive effects of social 
pensions could be extended to other 
family members, especially children. 

Children in families that include an 
older person in receipt of a social 
pension have been shown to benefit, 
in terms of nutrition and educa-
tion, from the contribution of these 
relatively small payments to family 
income (see Duflo 2000).

97  Widowhood and the onset of dis-
ability are also important triggers 
that have an adverse impact on the 
financial well-being of older people 
(see Burkhauser, Holden and Feaster 
1988; Burkhauser, Butler and Holden 
1991; Emmerson and Muriel 2008; 
Holden, Burkhauser and Myers 1986; 
and McLaughlin and Jensen 2000).
98  UNFPA and HelpAge International 

2012.

99  OECD 2011b.
100  ECLAC 2011.
101  WHO 2011b.
102  Masset and White 2004.
103  UNFPA and HelpAge International 

2012.

104  Similarly, the World Health 

Organization (WHO 2007) found that 
particular groups of older women 
were more at risk of poverty in all 
countries, including those who are 
widowed, divorced or living with 
disabilities and those caring for 
grandchildren and children orphaned 
by AIDS.

105  The United Nations Children’s Fund 

(UNICEF 2006) estimates that in East 
and Southern Africa 40–60 percent 
of orphaned and vulnerable children 
are cared for by their grandparents. 
Similarly, Beegle and others (2009) 
indicates that older people take care 
of as many as 81 percent of orphaned 
children.

106  Stewart, Brown and Mancini 2005.
107  DFID 2001.
108  Chambers 1989.
109  UN Enable 2013.
110  Around 1.5 million people (out of 
10 million) became homeless and 
moved to camps after the earthquake. 
Because of the limited capacity of the 
state and public services to conduct 
reconstruction and protect the popula-
tion, the vulnerability of the poorest 
households increased even further 
(with epidemics, inundations and 
the like), and their living conditions 
worsened (see Châtaigner 2014 and 
Herrera and others 2014).

111  Rentschler 2013.
112  The World Bank’s PovcalNet database 
provides estimates of income poverty 
based on surveys from 2000–2012 for 
104 countries representing 5.4 billion 
people. The number of people living 
on less than $1.25 a day is 1.2 billion, 
or 22 percent of the population in 
these 104 countries. International 
poverty lines are also expressed in 
2005 purchasing power parity terms.

113  The population considered near 

multidimensional poverty has 

20–33 percent of deprivations. This 
group can be called the ‘near poor’. 
The population considered near poor 
in a monetary sense has an equivalent 
income of more than $1.25 a day but 
less than $2.50 a day.

114  Socially and geographically disadvan-
taged people who are exposed to per-
sistent inequality, including horizontal 
inequality (for example, inequality 
based on gender, age, race, ethnicity 
and disability), have been found to 
be particularly negatively affected by 
climate change and climate-related 
hazards (see IPCC 2014).

115  World Bank 2013b.
116  UN Global Pulse 2012.
117  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.
118  Frazer and Marlier 2012.
119  Hallegatte and others 2010; 

Rentschler 2013.
120  Rentschler 2013.
121  Rentschler 2013.
122  This simply reflects that the poorest 
households are exposed to a larger 
number and a wider range of types 
of shocks or adverse events than 
wealthier households are (see Boyden 
2009; Woodhead, Dornan and Murray 
2013).

123  Krutikova 2010.
124  UNDP 2011a.
125  Countries ranked in the top quintile 
of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development’s Social 
Institutions and Gender Index, which 
measures underlying discrimination 
against women by capturing and 
quantifying discriminatory social 
institutions (see OECD 2010).

126  The study used a large dataset of 59 
countries, covering 1.5 million births 
between 1975 and 2004 (Conceição, 
Mukherjee and Nayyar 2011; Baird, 
Friedman and Schady 2007).
127  Friedman and Schady 2009.
128  European Parliamentary Research 

Service 2013.

129  Ferris, Petz and Stark 2013.
130  Supported by Swayam Shikshan 
Prayog, a Mumbai-based nongov-
ernmental organization, and the 
Covenant Centre for Development, a 
Tamil Nadu–based nongovernmental 
organization, the women visited 
13 villages in Nagapattinam and 
Cuddalore, the two worst affected 
districts. They identified ways to 
promote the villages’ long-term 
housing and livelihood rehabilitation 
programmes and actively supported 
the population by talking with survi-
vors, sharing stories and organizing 
meetings with women’s groups, youth 
groups and fisher cooperatives (see 
Gupta and Leung 2011).

131  UNDESA 2009.
132  In view of the diversity of indigenous 

peoples, the UN system has not ad-
opted an official definition of the term 
‘indigenous’. Instead it has developed 

a modern understanding of the term 
based on such criteria as self-
identification as indigenous peoples; 
historical continuity with precolonial 
or presettler societies; strong links to 
territories and surrounding natural re-
sources; distinct social, economic and 
political systems; distinct language, 
culture and beliefs; and resolve to 
maintain and reproduce ancestral en-
vironments and systems as distinctive 
peoples and communities.
133  Vinding and Kampbel 2007.
134  For example, during an August 2013 
heat wave in the Hungarian town of 
Ozd, water supply was shut off in a 
large number of public water taps 
on which the Roma depend. This left 
thousands of them waiting to collect 
water from the public taps still work-
ing (see Dunai 2013).

135  Hughes and others 2012.
136  For example, wheelchair users may 
have no difficulty relating to general 
disaster risk reduction information. 
However, those same individuals may 
face severe barriers in safely protect-
ing themselves during and evacuating 
after an earthquake.

137  Robinson, Scherrer and Gormally 

2013.

138  Disability is also related to lower 

levels of education. Evidence shows 
a higher likelihood of experiencing a 
disability at lower levels of education. 
This is true for all regions, though to 
a varying degree (see KC and others 
2014).

139  WHO 2011b.
140  Around a third of migration from 
developing countries is irregular 
migration (UNDP 2009b).

141  Female migrants accounted for 

49.6 percent of international migrants 
in 2005 (UNFPA 2008).

142  UNFPA 2008.
143  UNDP 1994, p. 1.
144  Gasper and Gomez 2014.
145  WHO 2002.
146  Quite concretely, the cost to society 
of violence is sizeable. A 1992 study 
on the United States estimated 
the annual direct and indirect cost 
of gunshot wounds at $126 billion 
and of cutting or stab wounds at 
$51 billion (WHO 2002). In addition, 
a joint Inter-American Development 
Bank–United Nations Development 
Programme study found important 
costs of crime and violence as a 
percentage of GDP in five Latin 
American countries in 2010, ranging 
from 3 percent in Chile and Uruguay 
to over 10 percent in Honduras (see 
UNDP 2013b).

147  Gasper and Gomez 2014.
148  UNDP 2005, 2013b.
149  UNDP 2012b.
150  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013a.
151  OECD 2011a.
152  Stewart 2010.

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    135

153  Excluded by mainstream society from 

participating fully in the economic, 
social and political life of their 
society, often because some group 
characteristics (for example, cultural, 
religious or racial). See Stewart and 
others (2006).
154  Zeitlyn 2004.
155  Stewart 2010.
156  Motives of group leaders may be lack 

of political power, while followers 
care more about social and cultural 
inequality (see Stewart 2008). See 
also OECD (2011a) for a discussion of 
some critical socioeconomic drivers of 
inequality in developing countries and 
their interaction.

157  Østby’s (2008a) analysis of 55 coun-
tries over 1986–2003 finds a signifi-
cant rise in the probability of conflict 
in countries with severe economic 
and social horizontal inequality. 
Mancini (2008) indicates that violent 
conflict is more likely to occur in ar-
eas with less economic development 
and greater religious polarization. He 
also finds that measures of (vertical) 
income inequality as well as other 
purely demographic indicators of 
ethnic diversity did not affect the 
likelihood of communal violence (see 
also Stewart 2008, 2010 and Hoeffler 
2012). Other research has suggested 
considering social exclusion as 
vertically occurring processes of dis-
advantage, since this provides a more 
nuanced understanding of how social 
dislocations may lead to conflict in 
a way that avoids the tendency to 
blame inequality-induced conflict 
on the lower social strata without 
incorporating the role often played by 
the elites in many conflict episodes 
(see Fischer 2008).

158  The connection between social exclu-

sion and conflict can be illustrated 
in many examples: the Muslim rebel-
lions in the Philippines and Thailand; 
the separatist movements of Aceh, 
Timor-Leste and Papua in Indonesia; 
and the separatism of East Pakistan 
and Eritrea, among others (see 
Stewart 2010).

159  Evidence links some of these episodes 

to periods of economic policy reform 
(such as changes in trade policy). See 
Kanbur (2007).

160  Marc and others 2012.
161  Stewart and others 2006. See also 
Stewart (2010) for a typology of the 
different approaches to manage 
horizontal inequality.

162  Parlow 2012.
163  EWSCWA 2007.
164  UNHCR 2012.
165  Of this figure, 17.7 million were inter-
nally displaced persons and 10.5 mil-
lion were refugees (2.3 million more 
than in 2011). The refugee figure was 
close to that of 2011 (10.4 million), 
and the number of internally displaced 

persons increased 2.2 million since 
the end of 2011 (UNHCR 2012).

166  Conflict—in particular, civil wars—

was found to be associated with 
underperformance on the Human 
Development Index (progress 
significantly below what could be 
expected given the initial conditions), 
since 60 percent of countries that 
experience this kind of conflict (28 
of 46 countries in the sample) under-
performed (see UNDP 2010).

167  Human Development Report Office 

calculation based on Uppsala Conflict 
Data Program data on battle deaths.

168  Other important services that may 
be severely affected by conflict are 
reproductive health services. For ex-
ample, couples may not have access 
to family planning services, increasing 
unwanted pregnancies and unsafe 
abortions (see WHO 2000).

169  Sudanese children ages 7–12 who 
were living in northern Uganda and 
had been exposed to war were more 
likely to have behavioural prob-
lems, symptoms of depression and 
complaints similar to post-traumatic 
stress disorder than were Ugandan 
children who had not been affected 
by war (Paardekooper, De Jong and 
Hermanns 1999).

170  Using household data for Colombia, 
Engel and Ibanez (2007) show that 
perceptions of safety can have a 
decisive influence on migration.
171  Acts of gender-based and sexual 
violence against women and girls 
(including mass rape) are increasingly 
common features of war and conflict 
(see WHO 2000).

172  Gagro 2010.

Chapter 4
1  Bolsa Família evolved from Bolsa 

Escola as a conditional cash transfer 
programme with incentives for 
parents to keep children in school 
and regularly visit health centres. In 
2006 Bolsa Família was estimated to 
cost 0.5 percent of Brazil’s GDP and 
about 2.5 percent of total government 
expenditure, while covering about 
11.2 million families, or about 44 mil-
lion Brazilians.

2  Mkandawire 2001; Kumlin and 

Rothstein 2005.

3  UN General Assembly 2013b, p. 12.
4  UN General Assembly 2013a, p. 11.
5  Deacon and Cohen 2011.
6  Korpi and Palme (1998, p. 661) define 
the paradox as, “The more we target 
benefits at the poor and the more con-
cerned we are with creating equality 
via equal public transfers to all, the 
less likely we are to reduce poverty 
and inequality.”

7  Mkandawire 2001; Rothstein 2001.
8  Baldwin 1990.

136    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

9  Deacon and Cohen 2011.
10  Heller (2005) defines fiscal space as 
room in a government´s budget that 
allows it to provide resources for a de-
sired purpose without jeopardizing the 
sustainability of its financial position or 
the stability of the economy. The Nordic 
model could be financed precisely 
because it also included provisions to 
support full employment. Full employ-
ment generated the tax revenues 
needed to pay for the Nordic model.

ILO and UNDP 2011.

11  UNICEF 2008.
12 
13  UNICEF 2008.
14  UNICEF 2008.
15 
16  Waters, Saadah and Pradhan 2003.
17  Waters, Saadah and Pradhan 2003.
18  Mok, Lawler and Hinsz 2009.
19  At the same time, the traditional 

ILO 2011b.

familial and community networks and 
other social institutions in Thailand 
remained relatively stable, with the 
rural-urban links providing an informal 
safety net for the dispossessed.

ILO 2011b.

20  UNDP 2011c.
21  Ringen 1988.
22  Esping-Andersen 1999; Palme 2006.
23 
24  Esping-Andersen and Myles 2008.
25  Jäntti and Bradbury 2001.
26  Nelson (2004) traced the high poverty 
reduction in Sweden to high redistri-
bution by non–means tested provi-
sions, such as universal provisions.
ILO and UNDP 2011.

27 
28  UNDP 2013a.
29  Female literacy and education 

indicators for women can be better 
indicators of the coverage education 
since aggregate indicators may 
average out gender differences in 
education achievements. This is par-
ticularly true for patriarchal societies 
where women are likely to have less 
access to education and health care 
resources than men are.

30  Meng and Tang 2010.
31  Xinhua New Service 2013.
32  MacLeod and Urquiola 2012.
33  Young 2014.
34  Dalman and Bremberg 1999.
35  The advantages gained from effective 
early interventions are best sustained 
when they are followed by continued 
investments in high-quality education. 
The returns on school investment are 
higher for people with stronger cogni-
tive skills, where cognitive develop-
ment happens in the early years.

36  Heckman 2005.
37  Bornstein and others 2008.
38  Hackman, Farah and Meaney 2010; 

Nelson, Fox and Zeanah 2014.

39  For an overview of the literature on 

the correlation between socio-
economic status and early childhood 
development, see Young (2014).
ILO 2014.

40 
41  Amsden 2001; Chang 1993.

ILO 2006a.

42 
43  Heyer, Stewart and Thorp 1999; 
Thorp, Stewart and Heyer 2005.
44  For reviews of public works pro-

grammes, see Devereux and Solomon 
(2006) and Lal and others (2010).

45  Zepeda and others 2013.
46  Kostzer 2008.
47  Muqtada 1987; Ahmed and others 

1995.

48  Marshall and Butzbach 2003; 
Devereux and Solomon 2006.

49  Langer and others 2012; Date-Bah 

2003.

50  KC and others 2014.
51  Hausmann 2013.
52  The understanding of diversified 

53 

rural livelihoods is one of the generic 
insights coming out of the literature 
on livelihoods.
In some cases development transi-
tions may lead to new social security 
regimes, or there might be feedback 
effects between economic transitions 
and social protections.

54  China National Bureau of Statistics 

2011.

55  UNRISD 2010.
56  UNDP 2011a.
57  Hoon 2011.
58  Stephan 2009.
59  Moreover, the point is also made that 

Germany’s wage subsidies over the 
period seem to be fiscally benefi-
cial. Estimated fiscal gains amount 
to €1,600–2,000 for men in East 
Germany and to €500–1,000 for men 
in West Germany and women in East 
Germany over the observation period 
of 3.5 years. Careful design and 
implementation are critical to avoid 
windfall gains to employers that do 
not produce net benefits.

60  Burns, Edwards and Pauw 2010.
61  Gupta and Larssen 2010, p. 26. 

Specifically, the researchers found 
“that for the long-term disabled with 
a working capacity reduction in the 
18–49 age group, employment prob-
ability is raised by 33 pct. points after 
the scheme was introduced relative to 
a mean employment rate at a baseline 
of 44 percent.”

62  Bonilla García and Gruat (2003, p. 13) 

define social protection “as the set 
of public measures that a society pro-
vides for its members to protect them 
against economic and social distress 
that would be caused by the absence 
or a substantial reduction of income 
from work as a result of various 
contingencies (sickness, maternity, 
employment injury, unemployment, 
invalidity, old age, and death of the 
breadwinner); the provision of health 
care; and, the provision of benefits for 
families with children.”

63  Roxburgh and Mischke 2011
64  Paci, Revenga and Rijkers 2011.
65  ODI 2008.
66  Paci, Revenga and Rijkers 2011, p. 13.

67  Onyango, Hixson and McNally 2013.
68  Haughton and Khandker 2012.
69  Data on public social expenditures 
are derived from OECD (n.d.). The 
main social policy areas are old age, 
survivors, incapacity-related benefits, 
health, family, active labour market 
programmes, unemployment, housing 
and other social policy areas. Those 
areas can be further divided by 
type of expenditure (cash benefits, 
benefits in-kind), type of programme 
(active labour market programme, 
incapacity-related) and source (volun-
tary private, public).

70  Furceri 2009.
71  OECD 2013b.
72  Assimaidou, Kiendrebeogo and Tall 

2013.

ILO 2009.
ILO 2010c, 2011b.
ILO 2011a.

73  Von Wachter 2014.
74  World Bank 2012.
75  Fischer 2013.
76  Posel, Fairburn and Lund 2006.
77 
78 
79 
80  Gassmann and Behrendt 2006.
81 
82 
83  Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ethiopia, 
Guinea, Kenya, Senegal, the United 
Republic of Tanzania, Bangladesh, 
India, Nepal, Pakistan and Viet Nam.
ILO 2008.

ILO 2010c.
ILO 2006b.

84 
85  Easterly, Ritzen and Woolcock 2006.
86  The classification of less- and more-
cohesive societies is the same as in 
Easterly, Ritzen and Woolcock (2006) 
and is based on measures of ethno-
linguistic fractionalization and income 
share of the middle class (defined as 
the middle 60 percent of the income 
distribution). Easterly, Ritzen and 
Woolcock (2006) define more cohesive 
societies as those in the lower half 
of ethno-linguistic fractionalization 
and in the upper half of income share 
of the middle class and less cohesive 
societies as the reverse. Since 
1980 more-cohesive societies have 
progressed faster than less cohesive 
societies, but the difference became 
much more pronounced after the 
recession in less cohesive societies in 
the 1980s and after the global crisis 
in 2008.

87  The Economist 2013a.
88  Telles 2004.
89  Carneiro 2013.
90  Naidoo and Kongolo 2004.
91  Maisonnave, Decaluwé and Chitiga 

2009.

92  Burger and Jafta 2010.
93  Sander and Taylor 2012.
94  World Bank 2011.
95  To foster desired behaviours, econo-
mists emphasize material incentives 
provided through contracts, markets 
or policy. While these often work 
very effectively, there also many 
puzzling cases where incentives fail 

to have the desired effects (crowding 
out) or where minor incentives have 
a disproportionately large impact 
(crowding in, shift in norms). Societies 
also sometimes persist with what 
seem like inefficiently costly forms 
of incentives (prison rather than fines 
or reparations) or renounce others 
that might be quite cheap or effective 
(public shaming). For a more detailed 
discussion, see Benabou and Tirole 
(2011).

96  Young 2007.
97  Kinzig and others 2013.
98  Benabou and Tirole 2011.
99  UNDP 2009a.
100  UNDP 2009a.
101  Rodrik 2000, p. 3.
102  Easterly and others 2006.
103  Evans and Heller forthcoming.
104  Stewart 2013.
105  International Policy Centre for 

Inclusive Growth 2009.

106  UNDP 2003.
107  Sobhan 2014.
108  UNISDR 2012b.
109  Haque and others 2012.
110  UNISDR n.d.
111  UN System Task Team on the Post-

2015 UN Development Agenda 2012a.

112  UNDP 2013d.
113  Lund and Myers 2007.
114  Marc and others 2012.
115  World Bank 2012.

Chapter 5
1  World Bank 2014b.
2  United Nations Population Division 

2013.

3  Hale 2014.
4  Bank for International Settlements 

2013.

5  Wadhams 2010.
6  Canis 2011.
7  UNHCR 2012.
8  Kaul 2014.
9  Kaul 2014.
10  Kaul and others 2003; Kaul and 

Conceição 2006.

11  Universal social goods are goods and 
services that society decides should 
be guaranteed to all people, indepen-
dent of their capacity to pay, and the 
rules that citizens should respect in 
their interaction with each other (such 
as nondiscrimination and protection 
of weaker members of society). See 
Ocampo (2013).

12  See Musgrave (1959) for the original 

theorization of merit goods. For an 
explanation of merit goods in the 
global context, see Sandler, Arce and 
Daniel (2002).

13  Fenner and others 1988.
14  WHO 2013a.
15  Médecins Sans Frontières 2013.
16  Held and Young 2013.
17  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013b.
18  Held and Young 2011.

19  Stiglitz 2013.
20  See Kaul (2013, 2014) and Kaul and 

others (2003) for more on global 
public goods. See Musgrave (1959) for 
original theorization of merit goods. 
For explanation of merit goods in the 
global context, see Sandler, Arce and 
Daniel (2002). See Ocampo (2013) for 
a discussion of universal social goods 
(goods that aim to promote common 
social norms and standards and pro-
mote equality among individuals).

21  Ortiz and others 2013.
22  Crouch 2011.
23  Evans and Sewell 2013.
ILO 2010c.
24 
25  UN 2000.
26  UN 1948.
27  UN 1966.
28  EU 2007.
29  UN 2009.
30  UN 1989.
ILO 1952.
31 
32  See UNCSD (2012) for details of the 
proposal to develop an inclusive and 
transparent intergovernmental pro-
cess on the sustainable development 
goals that is open to all stakeholders 
with a view to developing global 
sustainable development goals to be 
agreed by the UN General Assembly.

33  Naudé, Santos-Paulino and 

McGillivray 2011.

34  UNDP 2012c.
35 

International Dialogue on 
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding 2011. 
The G7+ members are Afghanistan, 
Burundi, the Central African Republic, 
Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, 
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Liberia, 
Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Sierra 
Leone, the Solomon Islands, Somalia, 
South Sudan, Timor-Leste and Togo.

36  Sierra Leone 2013.
37  Targets 8.B and 8.C of the Millennium 
Development Goals encourage increas-
ing official development assistance 
for developed countries but do not list 
specific targets. However, at the 2005 
Group of Eight Summit in Gleneagles, 
Scotland, donor countries pledged 
to provide official development as-
sistance at the level of 0.7 percent 
of gross national income by 2015. In 
2012 official development assistance 
was less than half this goal, at only 
0.29 percent of (UN 2013c).

38  UNDP 2013a.
39  Hamdani 2014.
40  OECD 2013a.
41  OECD 2013a.
42  UNDP 2011b.
43  Hollingshead 2010.
44  Africa Progress Panel 2013.
45  G20 2013.
46  OECD 2011c.
47  UNDP 2013a.
48  Ocampo 2010.
49  Stiglitz and Kaldor 2013b.
50  Cattaneo, Gereffi and Staritz 2010.

51  UN Global Pulse 2010.
52  Cho and Newhouse 2013.
53  Jansen and von Uexkull 2010.
54  Jansen and von Uexkull 2010.
55  Dureya and Morales 2011.
56  Gavrilovic and others 2009.
57  Bluedorn and others 2013.
58  Ferri, Liu and Stiglitz 1999.
59  The Basel Committee on Banking 

Supervision has introduced stringent 
regulatory standards, including 
increasing capital buffers to draw 
on during periods of financial stress, 
measures to improve the quality of 
bank capital and a global minimum 
debt to equity ratio. Promising though 
it is, the 2010 Basel III Accord is 
based on voluntary commitments and 
has yet to be fully implemented (see 
Held and Young 2011).

60  UNDP 2013a.
61  Ratha and others 2013.
62  Ratha and others 2013.
63  This cost was for transfers from 

Ghana to Nigeria (World Bank 2013a).
IMF 2012.
64 
65  G20 2011.
66  Kynge 2014.
67  Ocampo 2006; Machinea and Titelman 

2007.

68  Ocampo and Griffith-Jones 2007.
69  Grabel 2012.
70  The leaders of Brazil, China, India, 
the Russian Federation and South 
Africa agreed to pool their resources 
to establish a BRICS Bank during the 
March 2013 BRICS Summit in South 
Africa.

71  Park 2006.
72  Culpeper 2006.
73  UNDP 2013a.
74  Hamdani 2014.
75  Jansen and von Uexkull 2010.
76  Hamdani 2014.
77  Thrasher and Gallagher 2008.
78  Gallagher, Griffith-Jones and Ocampo 

2012.

79  WTO 2001 p. 1.
80  WTO 2013.
81  Von Braun and Tadesse 2012; 

Hoekman and Martin 2012.

IPCC 2013.

82  Khor and Ocampo 2011.
83  Ghaenm 2011.
84  Khor and Ocampo 2011.
85  Kennedy and Stiglitz 2013.
86  Odagir and others 2012; Pollock 2006.
87  Abdel-Latif 2012.
88  Hogerzeil and others 2013.
89  Khor and Ocampo 2011.
90 
91  World Bank 2014b.
92 
93  UNDP 2012a.
94  Hirsch 2012.
95  Polk 2013.
96  Polk 2013.
97  UN General Assembly 2013c.
98  Hale 2014.
99  UN-Habitat 2011.
100  Lutsey and Sperling 2008.
101  WWF 2007.

IPCC 2013.

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    137

102  CDP 2013.
103  CDP 2013.
104  UNFCCC 2012.
105  Hale 2014.
106  UNFCCC 2011.
107  Hale, Held and Young 2013.
108  The proposal was forcefully rejected 
on the grounds that it risked further 
weakening the United Nations 
Economic and Social Council, the 
United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development and the United 

Nations General Assembly. In 
response to the Global Leaders Forum 
proposal and a package of other 
recommendations, the developing 
countries suggested that rather than 
limiting the UN system to a secondary 
role and niche issues, the UN system 
should assert its leadership over the 
World Bank and the International 
Monetary Fund, which were consid-
ered to be dominated by developed 
countries (Müller 2010).

109  Ocampo and Stiglitz 2011.
110  See Chaterjee (2009), Weiss (2011), 

Abebe and others (2012) and UN 
(2013e).

111  UNDP 2013a.
112  Such a council would be similar to the 
Global Economic Coordination Council 
recommended in Stiglitz and others 
(2009).

113  UN 2012b, 2013d.
114  Kaul 2013.
115  Evans and Heller forthcoming.

116  Bandura 2000.
117  Evans and Heller forthcoming.
118  Reinalda 2013.
119  UN 1989.
120  UN 1995.
121  UN 2006.
122  UN 2014a.
123  Sassen 2006.
124  Sassen 2006.
125  Tarrow 2013.
126  ITU 2013.

138    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

References

Abdel-Latif, A. 2012. “Intellectual Property Rights and 

Green Technologies from Rio to Rio: An Impossible 
Dialogue?” Policy Brief 14. International Centre for Trade 
and Sustainable Development, Geneva.

Abebe, H., R. Dugan, M. McShane, J. Mellin, T. Patel, 

and L. Patentas. 2012. “The United Nations’ Role in 
Global Economic Governance: A Research and Policy 
Brief for the Use of the NGO Committee on Financing 
for Development.” www.ngosonffd.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2010/11/UN-Role-in-Global-Economic-Governance 
-2012.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

Abrahams, N., and R. Jewkes. 2005. “Effects of South 

African Men’s Having Witnessed Abuse of Their 
Mothers during Childhood on Their Levels of Violence 
in Adulthood.” American Journal of Public Health 
95(10): 1811–16. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1449441/. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Abramsky, T., C.H. Watts, C. Garcia-Moreno, K. Devries, 

L. Kiss, M. Ellsberg, H.A.F.M. Jansen, and L. Heise. 
2011. “What Factors Are Associated with Recent Intimate 
Partner Violence? Findings from the WHO Multi-Country 
Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence.” 
BMC Public Health 11: 109. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/ articles/PMC3049145/pdf/1471-2458-11-109.pdf. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

Africa Progress Panel. 2013. Africa Progress Report 

2013: Equity in Extractives: Stewarding Africa’s Natural 
Resources for All. Geneva. www.africaprogresspanel.
org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/2013_APR_Equity_in_
Extractives_25062013_ENG_HR.pdf. Accessed 24 March 
2014.

Ahmed, A.U., S. Zohir, S.K. Kumar, and O.H. Chowdury. 

1995. “Bangladesh’s Food for Work Programme and 
Alternatives to Food Security.” In J. von Braun, ed., 
Employment for Poverty Reduction and Food Security. 
Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Alderman H., and P. Engle. 2008. “The Synergy of Nutrition 

and ECD Interventions in Africa.” In M. Garcia, A. Pence, 
and J. Evans, eds., Africa’s Future, Africa’s Challenge: 
Early Childhood Care and Development in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Alesina, A., S. Ozler, N. Roubini, and P. Swagel. 1996. 
“Political Instability and Economic Growth.” Journal of 
Economic Growth 1(2): 189−211.

Alliance Development Works. 2012. World Risk Report 

2012. Berlin.

Ames, P., V. Rojas, and T. Portugal. 2009. “Starting 
School: Who is Prepared? Young Lives’ Research on 
Children’s Transition to First Grade in Peru.” Young Lives 
Working Paper 47. University of Oxford, Department of 
International Development, Oxford, UK. www.younglives.
org.uk/files/working-papers/wp47-starting-school-who 
-is-prepared-young-lives2019-research-on-children2019s 
-transition-to-first-grade-in-peru. Accessed 21 March 2014.

Amsden, A.H. 2001. The Rise of the ‘Rest’: Challenges to 

the West from Late Industrializing Economies. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press.

Anand, S., and A. Sen. 2000. “Human Development and 
Economic Sustainability.” World Development 28(12): 

2029–49. www2.econ.iastate.edu/classes/tsc220/hallam/ 
Readings/AnandSenHumanDevelopmentEconomic 
Sustainability.pdf. Accessed 17 March 2014.

Anda R.F., V.J. Felitti, J. Walker, C.L. Whitfield, J.D. 

Bremner, B.D. Perry, S.R. Dube, and W.H. Giles. 2006. 
“The Enduring Effects of Abuse and Related Adverse 
Experiences in Childhood: A Convergence of Evidence from 
Neurobiology and Epidemiology.” European Archives of 
Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 56(3): 174–86.

Ardila, A., M. Rosselli, E. Matute, and S. Guajardo. 

2005. “The Influence of the Parents’ Educational Level on 
the Development of Executive Functions.” Developmental 
Neuropsychology 28(1): 539–60. http://psy2.fau.edu/ 
~rosselli/NeuroLab/pdfs/parents_effect_on_executive_ 
function.pdf. Accessed 19 March 2014.

Armecin, G., J.R. Behrman, P. Duazo, S. Ghuman, S. 

Gultiano, E.M. King, and N. Lee. 2006. “Early Childhood 
Development through an Integrated Program: Evidence 
from the Philippines.” Policy Research Working Paper 
3922. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Arriagada, I. 1994. “Changes in the Urban Female Labour 

Market.” CEPAL Review 53: 92–110.

Assaad, R., and D. Levison. 2013. “Employment for 

Youth—A Growing Challenge for the Global Economy.” 
Background paper for the High Level Panel on the Post-
2015 UN MDG Development Agenda. www.post2015hlp.
org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Assaad-Levison-Global 
-Youth-Employment-Challenge-Edited-June-5.pdf. 
Accessed 21 March 2014.

Assimaidou K., Y. Kiendrebeogo, and A. Tall. 2013. 
“Social Protection for Poverty Reduction in Times of 
Crisis.” Etudes et Documents 11. Centre d’Études et de 
Recherches sur le Développement International, Clermont-
Ferrand, France. http://cerdi.org/uploads/ed/2013/ 
2013.11.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2014.

Bank for International Settlements. 2013. “Triennial 

Central Bank Survey: Foreign Exchange Turnover in 
April 2013: Preliminary Global Results.” Monetary and 
Economic Department, Basel, Switzerland. www.bis.org/
publ/rpfx13fx.pdf. Accessed 20 January 2014.

Bardasi, E., and S.P. Jenkins. 2002. Income in Later Life: 

Work History Matters. Bristol, UK: The Policy Press. 
www.jrf.org.uk/sites/files/jrf/jr111-income-later-life.pdf. 
Accessed 25 March 2014.

Bargain, O., and P. Kwenda. 2009. “The Informal Sector 
Wage Gap: New Evidence Using Quantile Estimations 
on Panel Data.” Discussion Paper 4286. Institute 
for the Study of Labour, Bonn, Germany. http://d-nb.
info/996172467/34. Accessed 25 March 2014.

Barrientos, A. 2006. “Ageing, Poverty and Public Policy 

in Developing Countries: New Survey Evidence.” In 
P.A. Kemp, K. Van den Bosch, and L. Smith, eds., Social 
Protection in an Ageing World. International Studies on 
Social Security Vol. 13. Oxford, UK: Intersentia.

Barrientos, S.W. 2013. “‘Labour Chains’: Analysing 

the Role of Labour Contractors in Global Production 
Networks.” Journal of Development Studies 49(8): 
1058–71.

Basu, K., and P.H. Van. 1998. “The Economics of Child 

Labor.” American Economic Review 88(3): 412–27. http://
qed.econ.queensu.ca/pub/faculty/sumon/basu_childlabor.
pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Beales, S. 2012. “Empowerment and Older People: 

Enhancing Capabilities in an Ageing World.” Paper 
prepared for the Expert Group Meeting on promoting 
people’s empowerment in achieving poverty eradication, 
social integration and productive and decent work for all, 
10–12 September, New York. www.un.org/esa/socdev/
egms/docs/2012/SylviaBeales.pdf. Accessed 26 March 
2014.

Atkinson, A. 2013. “Ensuring Social Inclusion in Changing 

Beegle, K., D. Filmer, A. Stokes, and L. Tiererova. 2009. 

Labour and Capital Markets.” European Economy—
Economic Papers 481. European Commission, Directorate 
General Economic and Monetary Affairs, Brussels.

Bahçe, S.A.K., and E. Memi . 2013. “Estimating the 

Impact of the 2008–09 Economic Crisis on Work Time 
in Turkey.” Feminist Economics 19(3): 181–207. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/13545701.2013.786182. Accessed 
25 March 2014.

Baird, S., J. Friedman, and N. Schady. 2007. “Aggregate 

Income Shocks and Infant Mortality in the Developing 
World.” Policy Research Working Paper 4346. World 
Bank, Washington, DC. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/
pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-4346. Accessed 28 March 2014.
Baldwin, P. 1990. The Politics of Social Solidarity: Class 

Bases of the European Welfare State, 1875–1975. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Bandura, A. 2000. “Exercise of Human Agency through 

Collective Efficacy.” Current Directions in Psychological 
Science 9(3): 75–78.

Bangladesh Accord Foundation. 2013. “Accord on Fire and 

Building Safety in Bangladesh.” http://bangladeshaccord.
org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/the_accord.pdf. 
Accessed 16 November 2013.

“Orphanhood and the Living Arrangements of Children 
in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Policy Research Working Paper 
4889. Washington, DC: World Bank. www-wds.worldbank.
org/servlet/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2009/07/24/ 
000112742_20090724110307/Rendered/PDF/WPS4889.
pdf. Accessed 26 March 2014.

Bénabou, R. 2000. “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution 

and the Social Contract.” American Economic Review 
90(1): 96–129.

Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole. 2011. Laws and Norms. NBER 

Working Paper 17579. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research.

Béné, C., R.G. Wood, A. Newsham, and M. Davies. 

2012. “Resilience: New Utopia or New Tyranny? 
Reflection about the Potentials and Limits of the 
Concept of Resilience in Relation to Vulnerability 
Reduction Programmes.” Working Paper 405. Institute of 
Development Studies, Brighton, UK.

Berg, A., and J. Ostry. 2011a. “Equality and Efficiency.” 

Finance & Development 48(3): 12–15.

———. 2011b. “Inequality and Unsustainable Growth: Two 

Sides of the Same Coin?” Staff Discussion Note 11/08. 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    139

Berg, J. 2009. “Brazil: The Minimum Wage as a Response to 

the Crisis.” ILO Notes on the Crisis. International Labour 
Organization, Geneva.

Berik, G., and E. Kongar. 2013. “Time Allocation of Married 

Mothers and Fathers in Hard Times: The 2007–09 U.S. 
Recession.” Feminist Economics 19(3): 208–37. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/13545701.2013.798425. Accessed 25 
March 2014.

Berliner, L., and D.M. Elliott. 1996. “Sexual Abuse 

of Children.” In J. Briere, L. Berliner, J.A. Bulkley, C. 
Jenny, and T. Reid, eds., The APSAC Handbook on Child 
Maltreatment. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Bettin, G., A.F. Presbitero, and N. Spatafora. 2014. 

“Remittances and Vulnerability in Developing Countries.” 
Working Paper WP/14/13. International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/
wp1413.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

Bhutta, Z.A. 2002. “Children of War: The Real Casualties of 
the Afghan Conflict.” British Medical Journal 324(7333): 
349–52.

Black, R.E., L.H. Allen, Z.A. Bhutta, L.E. Caulfield, M. 
de Onis, M. Ezzati, C. Mathers, and J. Rivera. 2008. 
“Maternal and Child Undernutrition Study Group. Maternal 
and Child Undernutrition: Global and Regional Exposures 
and Health Consequences.” Lancet 371(9608): 243–60.
Bluedorn, M.J.C., R. Duttagupta, J. Guajardo, and P. 
Topalova. 2013. “Capital Flows are Fickle: Anytime, 
Anywhere.” Working Paper WP/13/183. International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. www.imf.org/external/
pubs/ft/wp/2013/wp13183.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Bonilla García, A., and J.V. Gruat. 2003. “Social 

Protection: A Life Cycle Continuum Investment for Social 
Justice, Poverty Reduction and Sustainable Development.” 
International Labour Organization, Social Protection 
Section, Geneva. www.ilo.org/public/english/protection/
download/lifecycl/lifecycle.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2014.
Bornstein, M.H., and D. Putnick. 2012. “Cognitive and 

Socioemotional Caregiving in Developing Countries.” Child 
Development 83(1): 46–61.

Bornstein, M.H., C.S. Tamis-Lemonda, C.S. Hahn, 

and O.M. Haynes. 2008. “Maternal Responsiveness 
to Young Children at Three Ages: Longitudinal Analysis 
of a Multidimensional, Modular, and Specific Parenting 
Construct.” Developmental Psychology 44(3): 867–74.

Bos, K.J., N. Fox, C.H. Zeanah, and C.A. Nelson. 
2009. “Effects of Early Psychosocial Deprivation on 
the Development of Memory and Executive Function.” 
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 3: 16.

Boudet, A.M.M., P. Petesch, C. Turk, and A. Thumala. 

2012. On Norms and Agency: Conversations about 
Gender Equality with Women and Men in 20 Countries. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Boyden, J. 2009. “Risk and Capability in the Context 
of Adversity: Children’s Contributions to Household 
Livelihoods in Ethiopia.” Children, Youth and Environments 
19(2): 111–137. www.colorado.edu/journals/cye/19_2/ 
19_2_07_Ethiopia.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

Boyden, J., A. Hardgrove, and C. Knowles. 2012. 

“Continuity and Change in Poor Children’s Lives: 
Evidence from Young Lives.” In A. Minujin and S. 
Nandy, eds., Global Child Poverty and Well-being: 
Measurement, Concepts, Policy and Action. Bristol, UK: 
Policy Press.

140    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Brand, J.E., B.R. Levy, and W.T. Gallo. 2008. “Effects of 
Layoffs and Plant Closings on Depression among Older 
Workers.” Research on Aging 30(6): 701–21. www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2792935/. Accessed 25 
March 2014.

Brooks-Gunn, J., and G.J. Duncan. 1997. “The Effects of 
Poverty on Children.” The Future of Children 7(2): 55–71.
Bunting, L., and C. McAuley. 2004. “Research Review: 

Teenage Pregnancy and Motherhood: The Contribution of 
Support.” Child and Family Social Work 9(2): 207–15.

Burgard, S.A., J.E. Brand, and J.S. House. 2007. “Toward 

a Better Estimation of the Effect of Job Loss on Health.” 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 48(4): 369–84. 
http://sarahburgard.com/pdf/Burgard%20Brand%20and 
%20House%202007%20JHSB.pdf. Accessed 25 March 
2014.

Burger, R., and R. Jafta. 2010. “Affirmative Action in South 
Africa: An Empirical Assessment of the Impact on Labour 
Market Outcomes.” Working Paper 76. Oxford University, 
Centre for Research on Inequality, Human Security and 
Ethnicity, Oxford, UK.

Burkhauser, R.V., J.S. Butler, and K.C. Holden. 1991. 

“How the Death of a Spouse Affects Economic Well-being 
after Retirement: A Hazard Model Approach.” Social 
Science Quarterly 72: 504–19.

Burkhauser, R.V., K.C. Holden, and D. Feaster. 1988. 

“Incidence, Timing and Events associated with Poverty: 
A Dynamic View of Poverty in Retirement.” Journal of 
Gerontology 43(2): S46–S52.

Burns, J., L. Edwards, and K. Pauw. 2010. “Wage 
Subsidies to Combat Unemployment and Poverty: 
Assessing South Africa’s Options.” Discussion Paper 
00969. International Food Policy Research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Cameron, N., M.A. Preece, and T.J. Cole. 2005. “Catch-

up Growth or Regression to the Mean? Recovery from 
Stunting Revisited.” American Journal of Human Biology 
17(4): 412–17.

Canis, B. 2011. “The Motor Vehicle Supply Chain: Effects of 

the Japanese Earthquake and Tsunami.” Congressional 
Research Service, Washington, DC. www.fas.org/sgp/crs/
misc/R41831.pdf. Accessed 19 March 2014.

Cannon, T., and D. Muller-Mahn. 2010. “Vulnerability, 
Resilience and Development Discourses in Context of 
Climate Change.” Natural Hazards 55(3): 621−35.

Carneiro, J. 2013. “Brazil’s Universities Take Affirmative 
Action.” BBC Brasil, 28 August. www.bbc.co.uk/news/
business-23862676. Accessed 15 May 2014.

Carneiro, P., and J. Heckman. 2003. Human Capital Policy. 

NBER Working Paper 9495. Cambridge, MA: National 
Bureau of Economic Research. www.nber.org/papers/
w9495.pdf. Accessed 19 March 2014.

Casale, D. 2003. “The Rise in Female Labour Force 

Participation in South Africa: An Analysis of Household 
Survey Data, 1995-2001.” Ph.D. dissertation. University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, Division of Economics, South Africa.

Cattaneo, O., G. Gereffi, and C. Staritz, eds. 2010. Global 

Value Chains in a Postcrisis World: A Development 
Perspective. Washington, DC: World Bank.

CDP (Carbon Disclosure Project). 2013. Sector Insights: 

What Is Driving Climate Change Action in the World’s 
Largest Companies? Global 500 Climate Change Report 

2013. London. https://www.cdp.net/cdpresults/cdp-
global-500-climate-change-report-2013.pdf. Accessed 24 
March 2014.

Cerrutti, M. 2000. “Economic Reform, Structural Adjustment 

and Female Labor Force Participation in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.” World Development 28(5): 879–91.

Chalabi, M., and J. Holder. 2013. “WHO Report into 
Violence against Women: Key Data.” The Guardian. 
Datablog, 20 June. www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/ 
2013/jun/20/women-violence-worldwide-statistics-who. 
Accessed 28 March 2014.

Chambers, R. 1989. “Editorial Introduction: Vulnerability, 

Coping and Policy.” IDS Bulletin 20(2): 1–7.

———. 2006. “Vulnerability, Coping and Policy (Editorial 

Introduction).” IDS Bulletin 37(4): 33–40.

Chang, H. 1993. The Political Economy of Industrial Policy. 

New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Châtaigner J.-M. 2014. Fragilités et résilience ; les nou-
velles frontières de la mondialisation. Paris: Karthala.
Chatterjee, A. 2009. “The UN at Sixty Three: Problems 

and Prospects of Reforming a Veteran.” Journal of 
Management and Social Sciences 5(1): 22–29. http://
biztek.edu.pk/downloads/research/jmss_v5_n1/ 
3%20The%20UN%20at%20Sixty%20three.pdf?origin= 
publication_detail. Accessed 27 March 2014.

Chen, S., and M. Ravallion. 2012. “Absolute Poverty 

Measures for the Developing World.” In Measuring the 
Real Size of the World Economy. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.

China National Bureau of Statistics. 2011. China 

Statistical Yearbook 2011. Beijing.

Cho, Y., and D. Newhouse. 2013. “How Did the Great 

Recession Affect Different Types of Workers? Evidence 
from 17 Middle-Income Countries.” World Development 
41: 31–50.

Choudhury, C. 2013. “India Weathers Cyclone Phailin.” 

Bloomberg, 16 October. www.bloomberg.com/news/2013 
-10-16/india-weathers-cyclone-phailin.html. Accessed 
14 May 2014.

Conceição, P., S. Mukherjee, and S. Nayyar. 2011. 

“Impacts of the Economic Crisis on Human Development 
and the MDGs in Africa.” African Development Review 
23(4): 439–60.

Cornia, G.A., and F. Stewart. 1993. “Two Errors of 
Targeting.” Journal of International Development 
5: 459–96.

CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of 
Disasters). 2013. EM-DAT: The International Disaster 
Database: Disaster trends. Catholic University of Louvain, 
Belgium. www.emdat.be/disaster-trends. Accessed 12 
April 2014.

Crouch, C. 2011. The Strange Non-Death of Neo-Liberalism. 

Cambridge, UK: Polity.

Culpeper, R. 2006. “Reforming the Global Financial 

Architecture: The Potential of Regional Institutions.” 
In J. A. Ocampo, ed., Regional Financial Cooperation. 
Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Cutler, D.M., F. Knaul, R. Lozano, O. Mendez, and B. 
Zurita. 2002. “Financial Crisis, Health Outcomes, and 
Aging: Mexico in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public 
Economics 84(2): 279–303.

Cutter, S., C. Emrich, J. Webb, and D. Morath. 2009. 
“Social Vulnerability to Climate Variability Hazards: A 
Review of the Literature.” Final Report to Oxfam America. 
University of South Carolina, Department of Geography, 
Hazards and Vulnerability Research Institute, Columbia, 
SC.

Dalman, C., and S. Bremberg. 1999. “How Do We Invest 
in the Children? Child Welfare Measures in the County 
of Stockholm, Measured in SEK.” Centre for Child and 
Adolescent Health, Stockholm.

Darity, W., and A. Goldsmith. 1996. “Social Psychology, 

Unemployment and Macroeconomics.” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 10(1): 121−40.

Date-Bah, E. 2003. Jobs after War: A Critical Challenge 

in the Peace and Reconstruction Puzzle. Geneva: 
International Labour Office.

Davidson, D.J. 2010. “The Applicability of the Concept 

of Resilience to Social Systems: Some Sources of 
Optimism and Nagging Doubts.” Society and Natural 
Resources 23(12): 1135–49.

Davies, R.B., and K.C. Vadlamannati. 2013. “A Race 

to the Bottom in Labor Standards? An Empirical 
Investigation.” Journal of Development Economics 103: 
1–14.

Davies, S.E., and L. Glanville. 2010. Protecting the 
Displaced: Deepening the Responsibility to Protect. 
Leiden, the Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

Deacon, B., and S. Cohen. 2011. “From the Global Politics 

of Poverty Alleviation to the Global Politics of Social 
Solidarity.” Global Social Policy 11(2–3): 233–249.
Devereux, S., and C. Solomon. 2006. “Employment 

Creation Programmes: The International Experience.” 
Issues in Employment and Poverty Discussion Paper 24. 
International Labour Organization, Geneva.

DFID (UK Department for International Development). 
2001. Making Government Work for Poor People: Building 
State Capability. London. www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/tsp.
pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

———. 2010. “Building Peaceful States and Societies.” A 
DFID Practice Paper. London. www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/
CON75.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2014.

Drèze J., and A. Sen. 1989. Hunger and Public Action. 

Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.

Duflo, E. 2000. Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age 
Pension and Intra-Household Allocation in South Africa. 
Working Paper 8061. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research. www.nber.org/papers/w8061.pdf 
?new_window=1. Accessed 26 March 2014.

Dunai, M. 2013. “Hungarian Roma Queue for Water in 

Heatwave after pumps shut down.” Reuters, 9 August. 
www.reuters.com/article/2013/08/09/us-hungary-roma 
-water-heat-idUSBRE9760ZI20130809. Accessed 
28 March 2014.

Duryea, S., and M. Morales. 2011. “Effects of the Global 

Financial Crisis on Children’s School and Employment 
Outcomes in El Salvador.” Development Policy Review 
29(5): 527–46.

Dutta, I., J. Foster, and A. Mishra. 2011. “On Measuring 

Vulnerability to Poverty.” Social Choice and Welfare 37(4): 
743−61.

Easterly, W., J. Ritzen, and M. Woolcock. 2006. “Social 

Cohesion, Institutions, and Growth.” Economics and 

Politics 18(2): 103–20. http://ssrn.com/abstract=909632 
or http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0343.2006.00165.x. 
Accessed 15 May 2014.

EC (European Commission). 2013a. Eurostat database: 
General government deficit/surplus. http://epp.eurostat.
ec.europa.eu/tgm/table.do?tab=table&init=1&language= 
en&pcode=tec00127&plugin=1. Accessed 9 December 
2013.

———. 2013b. Eurostat database: General government 

gross debt. http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/tgm/table.do 
?tab=table&init=1&language=en&pcode=tsdde410&plugin 
=1. Accessed 9 December 2013.

ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and 
the Caribbean. 2011. “El Envejecimiento y las Personas 
de Edad. Indicadores para América Latina y el Caribe.” 
Santiago de Chile. www.cepal.org/celade/noticias/
documentosdetrabajo/3/39343/Separata_Indicadores_
Envejecimiento.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

The Economist. 2013a. “Affirmative Action in Brazil: 

Slavery’s Legacy.” Americas View blog, 26 April. www.
economist.com/blogs/americasview/2013/04/affirmative 
-action-brazil. Accessed 15 May 2014.

———. 2013b. “Poverty: Not Always with Us.” 1 June.
Eliason, M., and D. Storrie. 2009. “Does Job Loss Shorten 

Life?” Journal of Human Resources 44(2): 277–382.

Emmerson, C., and A. Muriel. 2008. “Financial Resources 
and Well-being.” In J. Banks, E. Breeze, C. Lessof, and J. 
Nazroo, eds., Living in the 21st Century: Older People in 
England. The 2006 English Longitudinal Study of Ageing 
(Wave 3). London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.

Engel, S. and A.M. Ibanez. 2007. “Displacement Due 

to Violence in Colombia: A Household-Level Analysis.” 
Economic Development and Cultural Change 55(2): 
335–65.

Engle, P.L., M.M. Black, J.R. Behrman, M. Cabral de 

Mello, P.J. Gertler, L. Kapiriri, R. Martorell, and 
M.E. Young. 2007. “Strategies to Avoid the Loss of 
Developmental Potential in More than 200 Million Children 
in the Developing World.” Lancet 369(9557): 229–42.
Engle, P.L, L.C. Fernald, H. Alderman, J. Behrman, 
C. O’Gara, A. Yousafzai, M. Cabral de Mello, M. 
Hidrobo, N. Ulkuer, I. Ertem, S. Iltus, and the Global 
Development Steering Group. 2011. “Strategies for 
Reducing Inequalities and Improving Developmental 
Outcomes for Young Children in Low-Income and Middle-
Income Countries.” Lancet 378(9799): 1339–53.

Engle, P.L., N. Rao, and O. Petrovic. 2013. “Situational 
Analysis of Young Children in a Changing World.” In P. 
Rebello Britto, P.L. Engle, and C.M. Super, eds., Handbook 
of Early Childhood Development. Research and Its Impact 
on Global Policy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Equality Now. 2011. Discrimination against Women in 

Law. New York. www.equalitynow.org/sites/default/files/
WG_Report_EN.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

ESCWA (Economic and Social Commission for Western 

Asia). 2007. The Impact of Armed Conflict on Women. 
Beirut.

Esping-Andersen, G. 1999. Social Foundations of 

Postindustrial Economies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.

Esping-Andersen, G., and J. Myles. 2008. “The Welfare 
State and Redistribution.” Unpublished manuscript. http://

dcpis.upf.edu/~gosta-esping-andersen/materials/welfare 
_state.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2014.

EU (European Union). 2007. “Treaty of Lisbon.” http:// 

europa.eu/lisbon_treaty/full_text/index_en.htm. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

European Parliamentary Research Service. 2013. “Women 

in Politics: Background Notes on 12 Countries.” Brussels. 
www.europarl.europa.eu/eplibrary/EPRS-Background 
-Notes.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

Evans, P., and P. Heller. Forthcoming. “Human 

Development, State Transformation and the Politics of 
the Developmental State.” In S. Leibfried, F. Nullmeier, 
E. Huber, M. Lange, J. Levy, and J.D. Stephens, eds., The 
Oxford Handbook of Transformations of the State. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.

Evans, P., and W.H. Sewell. 2013. “The Neo-Liberal Era: 

Ideology, Policy and Social Effect.” In P.A. Hall and M. 
Lamont, eds., Social Resilience in the Neoliberal Era. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Falkingham, J. 2000. “From Security to Uncertainty: The 
Impact of Economic Change on Child Welfare in Central 
Asia.” Working Paper 76. United Nations Children’s Fund 
Innocenti Research Centre, Florence, Italy. www.unicef-irc.
org/publications/pdf/iwp76.pdf. Accessed 25 March 2014.

Fang, C., D. Yang, and W. Meiyan. 2010. “Employment 

and Inequality Outcomes in China.” Paper presented at the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
and European Union Joint High-Level Conference, 19 May, 
Paris. www.oecd.org/els/emp/42546043.pdf. Accessed 
22 May 2014.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations). 2013. “FAO Food Price Index.” www.fao.org/ 
worldfoodsituation/foodpricesindex/. Accessed 18 
February 2014.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations), IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural 
Development) and WFP (World Food Programme). 
2013. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2013: 
The Multiple Dimensions of Food Security. Rome.

Felitti, V.J., R.F. Anda, D. Nordenberg, D.F. Williamson, 
A.M. Spitz, V. Edwards, M.P. Koss, and J.S. Marks. 
1998. “The Relationship of Childhood Abuse and 
Household Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes 
of Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences 
(ACE) Study.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 
14(4): 245–58.

Fenner, F., D.A. Henderson, I. Arita, Z. Ježek, and I.D. 

Ladnyi. 1988. Smallpox and its Eradication. Geneva: 
World Health Organization.

Ferri, G., L.G. Liu, and J. Stiglitz. 1999. “The Procyclical 
Role of Rating Agencies: Evidence from the East Asian 
Crisis.” Economic Notes 28(3): 335–55.

Ferris, E., D. Petz, and C. Stark. 2013. “The Year of 

Recurring Disasters: A Review of Natural Disasters in 
2012.” Brookings Institution–London School of Economics, 
Project on Internal Displacement, Washington, DC. www.
brookings.edu/research/reports/2013/03/natural-disaster 
-review-ferris. Accessed 28 March 2014.

Fischer, A.M. 2008. “Resolving the Theoretical 

Ambiguities of Social Exclusion with Reference to 
Polarisation and Conflict.” DESTIN Working Paper 08-90. 
London School of Economics and Political Science, 
Development Studies Institute, London. www.lse.ac.uk/

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    141

internationalDevelopment/ 
pdf/WP/WP90.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Gagro, S. 2010. “The Crime of Rape in the ICTY’s and the 

ICTR’s Case-Law.” Zbornik PFZ 60(3): 1309–34.

---inst/documents/publication/wcms_192840.pdf. 
Accessed 21 March 2014.

———. 2013. “The Social Value of Employment and the 
Redistributive Imperative for Development.” Occasional 
Paper. United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office, New York.

Fitoussi, J.P., and K. Malik. 2013. “Choices, Capabilities 

and Sustainability.” Occasional Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Frankenberg, E., T. Duncan, and K. Beege. 1999. “The 

Real Cost of Indonesia’s Economic Crisis: Preliminary 
Findings from the Indonesia Life Surveys.” Labor and 
Population Program Working Paper 99-04. RAND, Santa 
Monica, CA. www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/
drafts/2008/DRU2064.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.
Fraser, S., G. Leonard, I. Matsuo, and H. Murakami. 

2012. “Tsunami Evacuation: Lessons from the Great East 
Japan Earthquake and Tsunami of March 11th 2011.” 
GNS Science Report 2012/17. Institute of Geological and 
Nuclear Sciences, Lower Hutt, New Zealand.

Frazer, H., and E. Marlier. 2012. 2011 Assessment of 
Social Inclusion Policy Developments in the EU: Main 
Findings and Suggestions on the Way Forward. European 
Commission, Directorate General of Employment, Social 
Affairs and Inclusion, Brussels.

Friedman, J., and N. Schady. 2009. “How Many More 

Infants Are Likely to Die in Africa as a Result of the Global 
Financial Crisis?” Policy Research Working Paper 5023. 
World Bank, Washington, DC. http://econ.worldbank.org/
external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&theSitePK= 
469372&piPK=64165421&menuPK=64166093&entityID= 
000158349_20090820140450&cid=decresearch%22. 
Accessed 28 March 2014.

Fuentes-Nieva, R., and N. Galasso. 2014. “Working for 

the Few: Political Capture and Economic Inequality.” 
Briefing Paper 178. Oxfam, Oxford, UK. www.oxfam.org/
sites/www.oxfam.org/files/bp-working-for-few-political 
-capture-economic-inequality-200114-en.pdf. Accessed 17 
March 2014.

Funk, A., J.L. Lang, and J. Osterhaus. 2005. Ending 

Violence against Women and Girls: Protecting Human 
Rights. Good Practices for Development Cooperation. 
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, 
Planning and Development Department Governance and 
Democracy, Eschborn, Germany. http://www2.gtz.de/
dokumente/bib/05-1048.pdf. Accessed 26 March 2014.

Furceri, D. 2009. “Stabilization Effects of Social Spending: 

Empirical Evidence from a Panel of OECD Countries 
Overcoming the Financial Crisis in the United States.” 
OECD Economics Department Working Paper 675. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
Paris.

Furceri, D., and P. Loungani. 2013. “Who Let the Gini 

Out?” Finance & Development 50(4): 25–27.

G20 (Group of Twenty). 2011. “G20 Coherent Conclusions 

for the Management of Capital Flows Drawing on 
Country Experiences.” 15 October. www.g20.utoronto.
ca/2011/2011-finance-capital-flows-111015-en.pdf. 
Accessed 24 March 2014.

———. 2013. “Tax Annex to the St. Petersburg G20 

Leaders’ Declaration.” http://en.g20russia.ru/news/ 
20130906/782776427.html. Accessed 20 March 2014.

142    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Gallagher, K.P., S. Griffith-Jones, and J.A. Ocampo, 

Hackman, D.A., M.J. Farah, and M.J. Meaney. 2010. 

eds. 2012. Regulating Global Capital Flows for Long-Run 
Development. Pardee Center Task Force Report. Boston, MA: 
Boston University, Fredrick S. Pardee Center for the Study 
of the Longer Range Future. http://stephanygj.net/papers/
RegulatingGlobalCapitalFlowsForLongRunDevelopment2012.
pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Gallopín, G.C. 2006. “Linkages between Vulnerability, 

Resilience, and Adaptive Capacity.” Global Environmental 
Change 16(3): 293–303.

Gallup. 2013. Gallup World Poll Database. http://worldview.

gallup.com. Accessed 15 October 2013.

Gasper, D., and O. Gomez. 2014. “Evolution of Thinking 
and Research on Human Security and Personal Security 
1994–2013.” Human Development Research Paper. United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office, New York.

Gassmann, F., and C. Behrendt. 2006. “Cash Benefits 
in Low-income Countries: Simulating the Effects on 
Poverty Reduction for Tanzania and Senegal.” Issues 
in Social Protection Discussion Paper 15. International 
Labour Organization, Social Security Department, 
Geneva. www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/SP21.pdf. Accessed 
15 May 2014.

Gavrilovic, M., C. Harper, N. Jones, R. Marcus, and P. 
Pereznieto. 2009. “Impact of the Economic Crisis and 
Food and Fuel Price Volatility on Children and Women 
in Kazakhstan.” Report for UNICEF Kazakhstan Office. 
Overseas Development Institute, London.

Ghanem, H. 2011. “How to Stop the Rise in Food 

Price Volatility.” 13 January. Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, Washington, DC. http:// 
carnegieendowment.org/2011/01/13/how-to-stop-rise-in 
-food-price-volatility/3bs. Accessed 24 March 2014.
Global Footprint Network. 2014. National Footprint 

Accounts, 2014 Edition. Oakland, CA.

Grabel, I. 2012. “Financial Architectures and Development: 

Resilience, Policy Space, and Human Development in 
the Global South.” Working Paper 281. University of 
Massachusetts Amherst, Political Economy Research 
Institute, Amherst, MA. www.peri.umass.edu/fileadmin/
pdf/working_papers/working_papers_251-300/WP281.
pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

“Socioeconomic Status and the Brain: Mechanistic 
Insights from Human and Animal Research.” Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience 11(9): 651–59.

Hale, T. 2014. “Improving Global Collective Action in a 
Connected World.” Human Development Research 
Paper. United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office, New York.

Hale, T., D. Held, and K. Young. 2013. Gridlock: Why 

Global Cooperation Is Failing When We Need It Most. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity.

Hall, P.A., and M. Lamont. 2013. Social Resilience in the 

Neoliberal Era. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hallegatte, S., F. Henriet, A. Patwardhan, K. Narayanan, 

S. Ghosh, S. Karmakar, U. Patnaik, A. Abhayankar, 
S. Pohit, J. Corfee-Morlot, C. Herweijer, N. Ranger, 
S. Bhattacharya, M. Bachu, S. Priya, K. Dhore, F. 
Rafique, P. Mathur, and N. Naville. 2010. “Flood 
Risks, Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Benefits 
in Mumbai: An Initial Assessment of Socio-Economic 
Consequences of Present and Climate Change Induced 
Flood Risks and of Possible Adaptation Options.” 
Environment Working Paper 27. Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Paris. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/5km4hv6wb434-en. Accessed 27 March 2014.

Hamdani, K. 2014. “Trans-border Vulnerabilities” 

Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Haque, U., M. Hashizume, K.N. Kolivras, H.J. 

Overgaard, B. Das, and T. Yamamoto. 2012. “Reduced 
Death Rates from Cyclones in Bangladesh: What More 
Needs to Be Done?” Bulletin of the World Health 
Organization 90: 150–56.

Hardgrove, A. 2012. “Life after Guns: The Life Chances and 

Trajectories of Ex-combatant and Other Post-war Youth 
in Monrovia, Liberia.” DPhil thesis. University of Oxford, 
Department of International Development, Oxford, UK.

Hardgrove, A., K. Pells, P. Dornan, and J. Boyden. 2014. 

“Life Course Vulnerabilities for Youth: The Trouble in 
Transitions.” Human Development Research Paper. United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office, New York.

Gupta, N.D., and M. Larssen. 2010. “Evaluating Labour 

Hart, B., and T.R. Risley. 1995. Meaningful Differences 

Market Effects of Wage Subsidies for the Disabled—The 
Danish Flexjob Scheme.” Working Paper 07:2010. Danish 
National Centre for Social Research, Copenhagen. http://
pisa2012.dk/Files/Filer/SFI/Pdf/Working_papers/wp-07 
-2010.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2014.

Gupta, S., and I.S. Leung. 2011. “Turning Good Practices 
into Institutional Mechanisms: Investing in Grassroots 
Women’s Leadership to Scale Up Local Implementation 
of the Hyogo Framework for Action.” An In-depth Study 
for the HFA Mid-Term Review. Huairou Commission 
and GROOTS International, New York. www.unisdr.org/
files/18197_201guptaandleung.theroleofwomenasaf.pdf. 
Accessed 28 March 2014.

Ha, B., C. McInerney, S. Tobin, and R. Torres. 2010. 

“Youth Employment in Crisis.” Discussion Paper 
DP/201/2010. International Institute for Labour Studies, 
Geneva. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/ 

in the Everyday Experience of Young American Children. 
Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Harvard Law and Policy Review. 2013. “India’s 

Parliament Passes New Law on Sexual Offenses.” 2 April. 
http://www3.law.harvard.edu/journals/hlpr/2013/04/
indias-parliament-passes-new-law-on-sexual-offenses/ 
#more-16. Accessed 27 March 2014.

Haughton, J., and S.H. Khandker. 2012. “The Surprising 

Effects of the Great Recession: Losers and Winners 
in Thailand in 2008-2009.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 6255. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
elibrary. worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-6255. 
Accessed 15 May 2014.

Hausmann, R. 2013. “The Logic of the Informal Economy.” 
Project Syndicate, 19 June. www.project-syndicate.org/ 
commentary/the-logic-of-the-informal-economy-by 
-ricardo-hausmann. Accessed 15 May 2014.

Heath, R. 2012. “Women’s Access to Labour Market 

Opportunities, Control of Household Resources, and 
Domestic Violence.” Policy Research Working Paper 6149. 
World Bank, Washington, DC. http://econ.worldbank.org/
external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&theSitePK= 
469372&piPK=64165421&menuPK=64166093&entityID= 
000158349_20120726090130. Accessed 25 March 2014.
Heckman, J. 2005. “Skill Formation and the Economics of 
Investing in Disadvantaged Children.” Science 312(5782): 
1900–02.

———. 2013. “The Economics of Inequality and Human 

Development.” Keynote presentation at the First National 
Congress meeting on building a legal framework for public 
policies for early childhood, 16 April, Brasilia.

Heintz, J. 2012. “Informality, Inclusiveness, and Economic 

Growth: An Overview of Key Issues.” Supporting Inclusive 
Growth Working Paper 2012/2. International Development 
Research Centre, Ottawa. www.idrc.ca/EN/Documents/
SIG-WP2-Informality.pdf. Accessed 25 March 2014.

Heise, L.H. 1998. “Violence against Women: An Integrated, 

Ecological Framework.” Violence against Women (4)3: 
262–90.

Held, D., and K. Young. 2011. “Crises in Parallel Worlds: 
The Governance of Global Risks in Finance, Security and 
the Environment.” In C.J. Calhoun and G.M. Derluguian, 
eds., The Deepening Crisis: Governance Challenges After 
Neoliberalism. Vol. 2. New York: New York University 
Press.

———. 2013. “Transforming Global Governance? Structural 

Deficits and Recent Developments in Security and 
Finance.” In J. Stiglitz and M. Kaldor, eds., The Quest 
for Security: Protection Without Protectionism and the 
Challenge of Global Governance. New York: Columbia 
University Press.

Heller, P. 2005. “Understanding Fiscal Space.” Policy 
Discussion Paper PDP/05/4. International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
pdp/2005/pdp04.pdf. Accessed 21 April 2014.

———. 2014. “Challenges and Opportunities: Civil Society 

in a Globalizing World.” Human Development Research 
Paper. United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office, New York.

HelpAge International. 2013. Global AgeWatch Index 

2013: Insight Report. London.

Herrera, J., D. Milbin, F. Roubaud, C. Saint-Macary, C. 
Torelli, and C. Zanuso. 2014. Enquête sur les Conditions 
de Vie des Ménages Après Séisme ECVMAS-Haïti 
2012. Port au Prince: Institut Haïtien de Statistique et 
d’Informatique, and Paris: Développement, institutions et 
mondialisation.

Herztman, C., and T. Boyce. 2010. “How Experience Gets 

Under the Skin to Create Gradients in Developmental 
Health.” Annual Review of Public Health 31: 329–47.

Heyer, J., F. Stewart, and R. Thorp. 1999. “Group 

Behaviour and Development.” Research Paper 161. United 
Nations University, World Institute for Development 
Economics Research, Helsinki. http://wider.unu.edu/
publications/working-papers/previous/en_GB/wp-161/_
files/82530858921501417/default/wp161.pdf. Accessed 
15 March 2014.

Hirsch, A. 2012. “Sahel Food Crisis Has Been Made Worse 

by the Widespread Unrest in Africa.” The Guardian, 29 
March.

Hoeffler, A. 2012. “On the Causes of Civil War.” In M.R. 
Garfinkel and S. Skaperdas, eds., The Oxford Handbook 
of the Economics of Peace and Conflict. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

Hoekman, B., and W. Martin. 2012. “Reducing Distortions 

in International Commodity Markets: An Agenda for 
Multilateral Cooperation.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 5928. World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Economic 
Management Network, International Trade Department, 
and Development Research Group, Washington, 
DC. www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/
WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2012/01/03/000158349_ 
20120103113143/Rendered/PDF/WPS5928.pdf. Accessed 
24 March 2014.

Hogerzeil, H.V., J. Liberman, V.J. Wirtz, S.P. Kishore, S. 

Selvaraj, R. Kiddell-Monroe, and T. von Schoen-
Angerer. 2013. “Promotion of Access to Essential 
Medicines for Non-Communicable Diseases: Practical 
Implications of the UN Political Declaration.” Lancet 
381(9867): 680–89.

Holden, K.C., R.V. Burkhauser, and D.A. Myers. 1986. 

“Income Transitions at Older Stages of Life: The Dynamics 
of Poverty.” Gerontologist 26(3): 292–97.

Holling, C.S. 1973. “Resilience and Stability of Ecological 
Systems.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 4: 
1−23.

Hollingshead, A. 2010. “The Implied Tax Revenue Loss from 
Trade Mispricing.” Global Financial Integrity, Washington, 
DC. www.gfintegrity.org/storage/gfip/documents/reports/
implied%20tax%20revenue%20loss%20report_final.pdf. 
Accessed 24 March 2014.

Hoon, H.T. 2011. “Wage Subsidies in a Program for 

Economic Inclusion and Growth.” Singapore Management 
University, Research Collection School of Economics, 
Singapore. http://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=2254&context=soe_research. Accessed 22 
April 2014.

Hornborg, A. 2009. “Zero-Sum World Challenges in 
Conceptualizing Environmental Load Displacement 
and Ecologically Unequal Exchange in the World-
System.” International Journal of Comparative Sociology 
50(3-4): 237–62.

Hughes, K., M.A. Bellis, L. Jones, S. Wood, G. Bates, L. 
Eckley, E. McCoy, C. Mikton, T. Shakespeare, and A. 
Officer. 2012. “Prevalence and Risk of Violence against 
Adults with Disabilities: A Systematic Review and Meta-
analysis of Observational Studies.” Lancet 379(9826): 
1621–29.

IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 

2013. “Climate Facts.” www.ifad.org/climate/facts.htm. 
Accessed 7 November 2013.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 1952. “Social 

Security (Minimum Standards) Convention.” www.ilo.org/
dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO:12100: 
P12100_ILO_CODE:C102. Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2006a. Changing Patterns in the World of Work 
International Labour Conference. 95th Session. Geneva. 
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/relm/ilc/
ilc95/pdf/rep-i-c.pdf Accessed 22 May 2014

———. 2006b. “Social Security for All: Investing 
in Global Social and Economic Development: A 
Consultation.” Issues in Social Protection Discussion 
Paper 16. Geneva.

———. 2008. “Can Low-income Countries Afford Basic 

Social Security?” Global Campaign on Social Security and 
Coverage for All Paper 3. Social Security Department, 
Geneva.

———. 2009. “Protecting People, Promoting Jobs: From 
Crisis Response to Recovery and Sustainable Growth.” 
Communication to G20 Leaders by ILO Director-General, 
Pittsburgh Summit, 24–25 September, Pittsburgh, PA.
———. 2010a. Constitution of the International Labour 
Organisation and Selected Texts. Geneva: International 
Labour Office. www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/leg/
download/constitution.pdf. Accessed 25 March 2014.

———. 2010b. “Pioneering a System of Migration 

Management in Asia: The Republic of Korea’s Employment 
Permit System Approach to Decent Work.” Geneva. www.
ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/
documents/publication/wcms_145630.pdf. Accessed 
20 March 2014.

———. 2010c. World Social Security Report 2010/11. 

Geneva: International Labour Office. www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/
documents/publication/wcms_146566.pdf. Accessed 20 
March 2014.

———. 2011a. “Conclusions Concerning the Recurrent 

Discussion on Social Protection (Social Security).” 
Adopted at the 100th Session of the International Labour 
Conference, Geneva.

———. 2011b. Social Protection Floor for a Fair and 

Inclusive Globalization. Report of the Advisory Group 
chaired by Michelle Bachelet convened by the ILO with the 
collaboration of the WHO. Geneva: International Labour 
Office.

———. 2012a. Global Employment Trends for Youth 2012. 
Geneva: International Labour Office. www.ilo.org/w-msp5/
groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/documents/ 
publication/wcms_180976.pdf. Accessed 21 March 2014.

———. 2012b. “Statistical Update on Employment in 
the Informal Economy.” International Labour Office, 
Geneva. http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/INFORMAL_
ECONOMY/2012-06-Statistical%20update%20-%20v2.
pdf. Accessed 15 May 2014.

———. 2012c. World of Work Report 2012. Geneva: 

International Labour Office. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/@dgreports/@dcomm/@publ/documents/ 
publication/wcms_179453.pdf. Accessed 25 March 2014.
———. 2013a. Global Employment Trends 2013: Recovering 

from a Second Jobs Dip. Geneva: International Labour 
Office. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/ 
---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_202326.
pdf. Accessed 21 March 2014.

———. 2013b. Global Employment Trends for Youth 2013: 
A Generation at Risk. Geneva: International Labour Office. 
www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/ 
---dcomm/documents/publication/wcms_212423.pdf. 
Accessed 21 March 2014.

———. 2013c. Global Wage Report 2012/2013: Wages 

and Equitable Growth. Geneva: International Labour 
Office.

———. 2013d. Key Indicators of the Labour Market. 8th ed. 

Geneva: International Labour Office.

———. 2013e. World of Work Report 2013: Repairing the 
Economic and Social Fabric. Geneva: International Labour 
Office. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/ 

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    143

---dcomm/documents/publication/wcms_214476.pdf. 
Accessed 24 March 2014.

———. 2014. Global Employment Trends 2014: The Risk of 
a Jobless Recovery. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ 
---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/
wcms_233953.pdf. Accessed 21 April 2014.

———. n.d. “Informal Economy.” www.ilo.int/global/ 
topics/employment-promotion/informal-economy/. 
Accessed 14 May 2014.

ILO (International Labour Organization) and UNDP 
(United Nations Development Programme). 2011. 
“Inclusive and Resilient Development: The Role of Social 
Protection.” Paper prepared for the G20 Development 
Working Group. Geneva.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2012. “The 

Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An 
Institutional View.” Washington, DC. www.imf.org/
external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf. Accessed 24 March 
2014.

———. 2014. World Economic Outlook: April 2014. 

Washington, DC.

Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre. 2013. Global 

Overview 2012: People Internally Displaced by Conflict and 
Violence. Geneva. www.internal-displacement.org/ 
publications/2013/global-overview-2012-people-internally 
-displaced-by-conflict-and-violence. Accessed 20 March 
2014.

International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and 

Statebuilding. 2011. A New Deal for Engagement in 
Fragile States. www.newdeal4peace.org/wp-content/
uploads/2013/01/new-deal-for-engagement-in-fragile 
-states-en.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth. 2009. 

“What Explains the Decline in Brazil’s Inequality?” One 
Pager 89. Brasilia.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 
2007. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

———. 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events 

and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation: 
Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

———. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical 

Science Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/. Accessed 
20 March 2014.

———. 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, 

and Vulnerability. Working Group II Contribution to the 
Fifth Assessment Report. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.

IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union). 2013. Women in 

Parliament in 2013. Geneva.

Ismi, Asad. 2013. “Maoist Insurgency Spreads to Over 40% 
of India. Mass Poverty and Delhi’s Embrace of Corporate 
Neoliberalism Fuels Social Uprising.” 20 December. Center 
for Research on Globalization, Montreal, Canada. www.
globalresearch.ca/maoist-insurgency-spreads-to-over 

144    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

-40-of-india-mass-poverty-and-delhis-embrace-of 
-corporate-neoliberalism-fuels-social-uprising/5362276. 
Accessed 14 May 2014.

ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2013. 

“The World in 2013: ICT Facts and Figures.” Geneva. 
www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/
ICTFactsFigures2013-e.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Jansen, M., and E. von Uexkuell. 2010. Trade and 

Employment in the Global Crisis. Geneva: International 
Labour Office. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ 
@dgreports/@dcomm/@publ/documents/publication/
wcms_141911.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Jäntti, M., and B. Bradbury. 2001. “Child Poverty across 

Industrialized Countries.” Journal of Population and Social 
Security 1(Supplement): 385–410.

Jolly, R., G.A. Cornia, D. Elson, C. Fortin, S. Griffith-

Jones, G. Helleiner, R. van der Hoeven, R. Kaplinsky, 
R. Morgan, I. Ortiz, R. Pearson and F. Stewart. 2012. 
“Be Outraged: There are Alternatives.” Sussex, UK: 
Richard Jolly. http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/ 
publications/be-outraged-there-are-alternatives-224184. 
Accessed 16 May 2014.

Kabeer, N. 2014. “Vulnerability, Capability and Citizenship: 

Addressing Violence against Women and Girls.” 
Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Kabeer, N., K. Huda, S. Kaur, and N. Lamhauge. 2012. 
“Productive Safety Nets for Women in Extreme Poverty: 
Lessons from Pilot Projects in India and Pakistan.” 
Discussion Paper 28/12. University of London, School of 
Oriental and African Studies, Centre for Development Policy 
and Research, London. www.soas.ac.uk/cdpr/ publications/
papers/file76193.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

———. 2014. “Fostering Sustainable Human Development: 

Managing the Macro-Risks of Vulnerability.” Human 
Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Kaul, I., and P. Conceição, eds. 2006. The New Public 
Finance: Responding to Global Challenges. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press.

Kaul, I., P. Conceição, K. Le Goulven, and R.U. 
Mendoza. 2003. Providing Global Public Goods: 
Managing Globalization. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.

KC, S., W. Lutz, E. Loichinger, R. Muttarak, and 
E. Striessnig. 2014. “Reducing Vulnerability in 
Critical Life Course Phases through Empowerment.” 
Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Keizer, A.B. 2008. “Non-regular Employment in Japan.” 

Work, Employment, and Society 22(3): 407–25. http://wes.
sagepub.com/content/22/3/407.abstract. Accessed 26 
March 2014.

Kelly, S. 2010. “The Psychological Consequences to 
Adolescents for Exposure to Gang Violence in the 
Community: An Integrated Review of the Literature.” 
Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Nursing 23(2): 
61–73. http://middleschoolgangsandcliques.wikispaces.
com/file/view/The+Psychological+Consequences+to+ 
Adolescents+of+Exposure+to+Gang+Violence+in+the+ 
Community-+An+Integrated+Review+of+the+Literaturejcap 
_225.pdf. Accessed 21 March 2014.

Kelly, T., W. Yang, C.S. Chen, K. Reynolds, and J. He. 

2008. “Global Burden of Obesity in 2005 and Projections to 
2030.” International Journal of Obesity 32(9): 1431–37.

Kabeer, N., K. Mumtaz, and A. Sayeed. 2010. “Beyond 

Kennedy, D., and J. Stiglitz, eds. 2013. Law and 

Risk Management: Vulnerability, Social Protection 
and Citizenship in Pakistan.” Journal of International 
Development 22: 1–19. www.researchcollective.org/
Documents/Beyond_Risk_Management_Vulnerability_
Social_Protection_and_Citizenship_in_Pakistan.PDF. 
Accessed 28 March 2014.

Kanbur, R. 2007. “Poverty and Conflict: The Inequality 

Link.” Coping with Crisis Working Paper Series. 
International Peace Institute, New York. www.isn.ethz.ch/
Digital-Library/Publications/Detail/?id=126966. Accessed 
21 March 2014.

Kant, E. 1781. Critique of Pure Reason. P. Guyer and A. Wood, 
trans. and eds, 1997. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

Kaplan, D.S., G. Martinez, and R. Robertson. 2005. 

“What Happens to Wages after Displacement?” Economía 
5(2): 197–242.

Karanikolos, M., P. Mladovsky, J. Cylus, S. Thomson, S. 

Basu, D. Stuckler, J. Mackenbach, and M. McKee. 
2013. “Financial Crisis, Austerity, and Health in Europe.” 
Lancet 381(9874): 1323–31.

Karoly, L.A., S.S. Everingham, J. Hoube, R. Kilburn, 

C.P. Rydell, M. Sanders, and P.W. Greenwood. 1997. 
“Benefits and Costs of Early-Childhood Interventions: A 
Documented Briefing.” RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.

Kaul, I. 2013. Global Public Goods: A Concept for Framing 

the Post-2015 Agenda? Bonn, Germany: Deutsche Institut 
für Entwicklungspolitik.

Economics with Chinese Characteristics: Institutions 
for Promoting Development in the Twenty-First Century. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Khor, M., and J.A. Ocampo. 2011. “The Unsettled Global 

Trade Architecture.” Queries 1(4): 68–88.

Kim, N., and P. Conceição. 2010. “The Economic Crisis, 

Violent Conflict, and Human Development.” 
International Journal of Peace Studies 15(1): 29–43.
Kinzig, A.P., P.R. Ehrlich, L.J. Alston, K. Arrow, S. 

Barrett, T.G. Buchman, G.C. Daily, B. Levin, S. Levin, 
M. Oppenheimer, E. Ostrom, and D. Saari. 2013. 
“Social Norms and Global Environmental Challenges: The 
Complex Interaction of Behaviors, Values, and Policy.” 
Bioscience 63(3): 164–75.

Kondkher, B.H., C. Knox-Vydmanov, and A. Vilela. 2013. 

“Old Age Social Protection Options for Bangladesh.” 
Dhaka University, Bureau of Economic Research, and 
HelpAge International. www.pension-watch.net/silo/
files/old-age-sp-options-for-bangladesh.pdf. Accessed 
26 March 2014.

Korpi, W., and J. Palme. 1998. “The Paradox of 

Redistribution and Strategies of Equality: Welfare State 
Institutions, Inequality, and Poverty in the Western 
Countries.” American Sociological Review 63(5): 661–87.

Kostzer, D. 2008. “Argentina: A Case study on the Plan Jefes 

y Jefas de Hogar Desocupados, or the Employment Road 
to Economic Recovery.” Working Paper 534. The Levy 
Economics Institute, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY. www.

levyinstitute.org/pubs/wp_534.pdf. Accessed 21 April 
2014.

Kraemer, K., G. Linden, and J. Dedrick. 2011. “Capturing 

Value in Global Networks: Apple’s iPad and iPhone.” 
Working Paper. University of California, Irvine, Paul 
Merage School of Business, Personal Computing 
Industry Center, Irvine, CA. http://pcic.merage.uci.edu/
papers/2011/value_iPad_iPhone.pdf. Accessed November 
2013.

Krug, E.G., L.L. Dahlberg, J.A. Mercy, A.B. Zwi, and 
R. Lozano, eds. 2002a. World Report on Violence and 
Health. Geneva: World Health Organization. http://
whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2002/9241545615_eng.
pdf?ua=1. Accessed 30 March 2014.

Krug, E.G., J. Mercy, L. Dahlberg, and A. Zwi. 2002b. “The 
World Report on Violence and Health.” Lancet 360: 1083–88.
Krutikova, S. 2010. “Who Gets to Stay in School? Long-run 
Impact of Income Shocks on Schooling in Rural Tanzania.” 
Working Paper 36. University of Oxford, Department of 
Economics, Centre for the Study of African Economies, 
Oxford, UK. www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Centre-for-the 
-Study-of-African-Economies-Series/who-gets-to-stay-in 
-school-long-run-impact-of-income-shocks-on-schooling 
-in-rural-tanzania. Accessed 26 March 2014.

Kuhn, A., R. Lavile, and J. Zweimuller. 2009. “The Public 

Health Cost of Job Loss.” Journal of Health Economics 
28(6): 1099–1115.

Kumhof, M., and R. Rancière. 2010. “Leveraging 
Inequality.” Finance & Development 47(4): 28–31.

Kumlin, S., and B. Rothstein. 2005. “Making and Breaking 
Social Capital: The Impact of Welfare-State Institutions.” 
Comparative Political Studies 38(4): 339–65.

Kwak, S., and S. Smith. 2011. “Multidimensional Poverty 

and Interlocking Poverty Traps: Framework and Application 
to Ethiopian Household Panel Data.” Working Paper 
2011-04. George Washington University, Elliott School of 
International Affairs, Institute for International Economic 
Policy, Washington, DC.

Kynge, J. 2014. “‘Fragile Five’ Falls Short As Tapering Leaves 
More Exposed.” Financial Times, 15 January. www.ft.com/
intl/cms/s/0/a245c70e-7e0c-11e3-95dd-00144feabdc0.
html#axzz2xBU9hUZg. Accessed 27 March 2014.
La Trobe, S. 2002. “Climate Change and Poverty.” 

Discussion paper. Tearfund, Middlesex, UK.

Lakner, C., and B. Milanovic. 2013. “Global Income 

Distribution: From the Fall of the Berlin Wall to the Great 
Recession.” Policy Research Working Paper 6719. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Lal, R., S. Miller, M. Lieuw-Kie-Song, and D. Kostzer. 

2010. “Public Works and Employment Programmes: 
Towards a Long-Term Development Approach.” Working 
Paper 66. International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth, 
Brasilia, and United Nations Development Programme, 
New York. www.ipc-undp.org/pub/IPCWorkingPaper66.
pdf. Accessed 21 April 2014.

Langer, A., F. Stewart, and R. Venugopal. 2012. “In 

Brief: Have Post-conflict Development Policies Addressed 
Horizontal Inequalities?” Centre for Research on 
Inequality, Human Security and Ethnicity, Oxford, UK. 
http://www.qeh.ox.ac.uk/pdf/pdf-research/crise-ib9. 
Accessed 22 May 2014.

Leach, M. 2008. “Re-Framing Resilience: A Symposium 

Report.” Brighton, UK: STEPS Centre.

Liem, R., and R. Rayman. 1982. “Health and Social Costs 
of Unemployment: Research and Policy Considerations.” 
American Psychologist 37(10): 1116−23.

Linden, G., K. Kraemer, and J. Dedrick. 2011. “Innovation 

and Job Creation in a Global Economy: The Case of 
Apple’s iPod.” Journal of International Commerce and 
Economics 3: 223–39.

resources/i_115_eys3_en_2nd_072412.pdf. Accessed 
18 March 2014.

McCain, M.N., J.F. Mustard, and D.S. Shanker. 2007. 

Early Years Study 2: Putting Science into Action. Toronto, 
Canada: Council of Early Child Development. http://
earlylearning.ubc.ca/media/publications/early_years_
study_2.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Lund, M., and R. Myers. 2007. “Can Fostering a Culture of 
Dialogue Change the Course of a Nation? An Evaluation of 
the United Nations Social Cohesion Programme in Guyana.” 
United Nations Development Programme, New York.

McEwen, B.S. 2008. “Understanding the Potency of 
Stressful Early Life Experiences on Brain and Body 
Function.” Metabolism Clinical and Experimental 57(2): 
S11–S15.

Lutsey, N., and D. Sperling. 2008. “America’s Bottom-Up 
Climate Change Mitigation Policy.” Energy Policy 36(2): 
673–85.

Lutz, L., and S. KC. 2013. “Demography and Human 

Development: Education and Population Projections.” In 
K. Malik and M. Kugler, eds., Human Progress and the 
Rising South. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme, Human Development Report Office.

Macfarlane, S.N., and Y.F. Khong. 2006. Human Security 
and the UN: A Critical History. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press.

Machinea, J.L., and D. Titelman. 2007. “Less Volatile 
Growth? The Role of Regional Financial Institutions.” 
Cepal Review 91: 7–28.

MacLeod, W.B., and M. Urquiola. 2012. Anti-lemons: 

Reputation and Educational Quality. NBER Working Paper 
15112. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Maddison, A. 2010. “Statistics on World Population, GDP 
and Per Capita GDP, 1-2008 AD.” Groningen Growth and 
Development Centre, the Netherlands. www.ggdc.net/
maddison/oriindex.htm. Accessed 15 March 2014.

Maisonnave, H., B. Decaluwé, and M. Chitiga. 2009. 
“Does South African Affirmative Action Policy Reduce 
Poverty?” Working Paper 09-36. Centre interuniversitaire 
sur le risque, les politiques économiques et l’emploi, 
Montreal, Canada.

McGee, R., and J. Gaventa. 2011. “Shifting Power? 

Assessing the Impact of Transparency and Accountability 
Initiatives.” Working Paper 383. Institute of Development 
Studies, Brighton, UK. http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/
Mis_SPC/60827_Wp383McGeeGaventa.pdf. Accessed 
24 April 2014.

McKenzie, D.J. 2003. “How Do Households Cope with 
Aggregate Shocks? Evidence from the Mexican Peso 
Crisis.” World Development 31(7): 1179–99.

McLaughlin, D.K., and L. Jensen. 2000. “Work History and 

US Elders’ Transitions into Poverty.” Gerontologist 40(4): 
469–79.

Mearns, R., and A. Norton, eds. 2010. Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change: Equity and Vulnerability in a Warming 
World. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Médecins Sans Frontières. 2013. Untangling the Web 

of Antiretroviral Price Reductions. Geneva. http:// 
d2pd3b5abq75bb.cloudfront.net/2013/09/11/10/25/44/896/
MSF_Access_UTW_16th_Edition_2013.pdf. Accessed 
20 March 2014.

Mejia-Mantilla, C. 2012. “Mid-term and Long-term Effects 

of the 1998 Asian Crisis in Indonesia.” University of 
California–Los Angeles.

Meng, Q., and S. Tang. 2010. “Universal Coverage of 
Health Care in China: Challenges and Opportunities.” 
Background Paper 7 for World Health Report 2010. World 
Health Organization, Geneva.

Mancini, L. 2008. “Horizontal Inequality and Communal 

Milanovic, B. 2012. “Global Income Inequality by the 

Violence: Evidence from Indonesian Districts.” In F. 
Stewart, ed., Horizontal Inequalities and Conflict: 
Understanding Group Violence in Multiethnic Societies. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

Marc, A., A. Willman, G. Aslam, M. Rebosio, and K. 

Balasuriya. 2013. Societal Dynamics and Fragility: 
Engaging Societies in Responding to Fragile Situations. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Marshall, K., and O. Butzbach, eds. 2003. New Social 

Policy Agendas for Europe and Asia: Challenges, 
Experience, and Lessons. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/
WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2003/02/07/000094946_0
3012804015776/Rendered/PDF/multi0page.pdf. Accessed 
22 May 2014.

Masset, E., and H. White. 2004. “Are Chronically Poor 

People Being Left out of Progress towards the Millennium 
Development Goals? A Quantitative Analysis of Older 
People, Disabled People and Orphans.” Journal of Human 
Development 5(2): 279–97.

McCain, M.N., J.F. Mustard, and K. McCuaig. 2011. Early 
Years Study 3: Making Decisions, Taking Action. Toronto, 
Canada: Margaret & Wallace McCain Family Foundation. 
www.misatoronto.ca/index.php/learning/exploring/

Numbers: In History and Now—An Overview.” Policy 
Research Working Paper 6259. World Bank, Washington, 
DC.

Miller, F., H. Osbahr, E. Boyd, F. Thomalla, S. Bharwani, 

G. Ziervogel, B. Walker, J. Birkmann, S. Van der 
Leeuw, J. Rockström, J. Hinkel, T. Downing, 
C. Folke, and D. Nelson. 2010. “Resilience and 
Vulnerability: Complementary or Conflicting Concepts?” 
Ecology and Society 15(3): 11.

Minorities at Risk Project. 2014. Database. University 
of Maryland, Center for International Development and 
Conflict Management, College, Park, MD. www.cidcm.
umd.edu/mar/data.asp. Accessed 28 April 2014.

Mkandawire, T. 2001. “Social Policy in a Development 
Context.” Social Policy and Development Programme 
Paper 7. United Nations Research Institute for Social 
Development, Geneva.

Mok, K., J. Lawler, and S.B. Hinsz. 2009. “Economic 

Shocks in Education: Analysis of the 1997 Asian Financial 
Crisis and Lessons for Today.” Global Social Policy 9(1 
suppl): 145–79.

Molina, G., E. Ortiz, A. Reyes, and P. Garcia. 2014. 

“Human Development Outliers: Progress That is Resilient 

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    145

to Shocks.” Human Development Research Paper. United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office, New York.

Morissette, R., X. Zhang, and M. Frenette. 2007. 
“Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers: Canadian 
Evidence from a Large Administrative Database on Firm 
Closures and Mass Lay-offs.” Analytical Studies Branch 
Research Paper. Catalogue no. 11F0019MIE—No. 
291. Statistics Canada, Ottawa. www.statcan.gc.ca/
pub/11f0019m/11f0019m2007291-eng.pdf. Accessed 
24 March 2014.

Morrone, A., K. Scrivens, C. Smith, and C. Balestra. 

2011. “Measuring Vulnerability and Resilience in 
OECD Countries.” Paper prepared for the IARIW-OECD 
Conference on Economic Insecurity, 22–23 November, 
Paris.

Morrow, V. 2013. “Troubling Transitions? Young People’s 
Experiences of Growing Up in Poverty in Rural Andhra 
Pradesh, India.” Journal of Youth Studies 16(1): 86–100.

Müller, J. 2010. “UN System Coordination: The Challenge of 
Working Together.” Journal of International Organizations 
Studies 1: 29–56.

Munyaneza, J. 2013. “Rwanda: Women Take 64 Percent 
Seats in Parliament.” The New Times, 19 September. 
http://allafrica.com/stories/201309190110.html. Accessed 
14 May 2014.

Muqtada, M. 1987. “Special Employment Schemes in Rural 
Bangladesh: Issues and Perspective.” Philippine Review of 
Economics 24(3&4): 323–86.

———. 2010. “The Crisis of Orthodox Macroeconomic 

Policy: The Case for a Renewed Commitment to 
Full Employment.” Employment Working Paper 53. 
International Labour Organization, Geneva.

Musgrave, R.A. 1959. Theory of Public Finance: A Study in 

Public Economy. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Mustard, J.F. 2006. “Early Child Development and 

Experience-based Brain Development—The Scientific 
Underpinnings of the Importance of Early Child 
Development in a Globalized World.” Paper prepared 
for the World Bank International Symposium on Early 
Child Development—A Priority for Sustained Economic 
Growth & Equity, 27–29 September, Washington, DC. 
www. brookings.edu/views/papers/200602mustard.pdf. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

Naidoo, V., and M. Kongolo. 2004. “Has Affirmative Action 
Reached South African Women?” Journal of International 
Women’s Studies 6(1): 124–36.

Narayan, A., J. Saavedra-Chanduvi, and S. Tiwari. 

2013. “Shared Prosperity: Links to Growth, Inequality and 
Inequality of Opportunity.” Policy Research Working Paper 
6649. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Narayan, D., and P. Petesch, eds. 2007. Moving out 

of Poverty: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.

Narayan, D., R. Chambers, M.K. Shah, and P. Petesch. 
2000. Voices of the Poor: Crying Out for Change. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.

Naudé, W., A.U. Santos-Paulino, and M. McGillivray, 

eds. 2011. Fragile States: Causes, Costs, and Responses. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Naudeau, S., S. Martinez, P. Premand, and D. Filmer. 
2011. “Cognitive Development among Young Children in 

146    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Low-Income Countries.” In H. Alderman, ed., No Small 
Matter: The Impact of Poverty, Shocks and Human Capital 
Investments in Early Childhood Education. Washington, 
DC: World Bank. http:// siteresources.worldbank.org/
EXTAFRREGTOPEDUCATION/Resources/444707 
-1291071725351/nosmallmatter.pdf. Accessed 19 March 
2014.

Naylor, R., and W. Falcon. 2010. “Food Security in an Era 

of Economic Volatility.” Population and Development 
Review 36(4): 693–723.

Nayyar, D. 2012. “On Macroeconomics and Human 

Development.” Journal of Human Development and 
Capabilities 13(1): 7–30.

Nelson, C.A., N.A. Fox, and C.H. Zeanah. 2014. Romania’s 

Abandoned Children: Deprivation, Brain Development, 
and the Struggle for Recovery. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.

Nelson, K. 2004. “Mechanisms of Poverty Alleviation: Anti-
Poverty Effects of Non-Means-Tested and Means-Tested 
Benefits in Five Welfare States.” Journal of European 
Social Policy 14(4): 371–90.

Newhouse, D. 2013. “New Estimates of Youth Idleness and 

Employment Outcomes in Developing Countries.” Social 
Protection and Labor. World Bank, Washington, DC.

NICHD (National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development) Early Child Care Research Network. 
2006. “Child-Care Effect Sizes for the NICHD Study of 
Early Child Care and Youth Development.” American 
Psychologist 61(2): 99–116. www.psy.miami.edu/faculty/
dmessinger/c_c/rsrcs/rdgs/childcare/NICHD_EffectSizes_
AmerPsy.2006.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

NOAA (United States Department of Commerce, 

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration). 
2013. “Hurricane Sandy Service Assessment.” 
Washington, DC. www.nws.noaa.gov/os/assessments/
pdfs/Sandy13.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Nussbaum, M.C. 2005. “Women’s Bodies: Violence, 

Security, Capabilities.” Journal of Human Development 
6(2): 167−83. https://www.amherst.edu/system/ 
files/media/1556/Picq-%2520nussbaum-women%2527s 
%2520bodies.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

O’Keefe, P., K. Westgate, and B. Wisner. 1976. “Taking 

the Naturalness out of Natural Disasters.” Nature 
260(5552): 566−67.

O’Sullivan, R., K. Mugglestone, and T. Allison. 

2014. “In This Together: The Hidden Cost of Young 
Adult Unemployment.” Policy Brief. Young Invincibles, 
Washington, DC.

Ocampo, J.A., ed. 2006. Regional Financial Cooperation. 

Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

———. 2010. “Rethinking Global Economic and Social 

Governance.” Journal of Globalization and Development 
1(1): 1–29.

———. 2013. “Global Economic and Social Governance and 
the United Nations System.” Initiative for Policy Dialogue 
Working Paper. New York. http://policydialogue.org/files/
publications/Global_Econ_and_UN_Ocampo_withCS.pdf. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

Ocampo, J.A., and S. Griffith-Jones. 2007. “A 

Counter-Cyclical Framework for a Development-Friendly 
International Financial Architecture.” Working Paper 
39. United Nations Department of Economic and Social 

Affairs, New York. www.un.org/esa/desa/papers/2007/
wp39_2007.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Ocampo, J.A., and J. Stiglitz. 2011. “From the G-20 to 
a Global Economic Coordination Council.” Journal of 
Globalization and Development 2(2): 1–18.

Odagiri, H., A. Goto, A. Sunami, and R.R. Nelson. 2012. 
Intellectual Property Rights, Development, and Catch Up: 
An International Comparative Study. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.

ODI (Overseas Development Institute). 2008. “The Indian 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act: Will It Reduce 
Poverty and Boost the Economy?” Project Briefing 7. 
London.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 

Development). 2010. “Gender Inequality and the MDGs: 
What Are the Missing Dimensions?” Paris. www.oecd.
org/social/poverty/45987065.pdf. Accessed 28 March 
2014.

———. 2011a. “Growing Income Inequality in OECD 

Countries: What Drives It and How Can Policy Tackle It?” 
OECD Forum on Tackling Inequality, 2 May, Paris. www.
oecd.org/social/soc/47723414.pdf. Accessed 31 March 
2014.

———. 2011b. Pensions at a Glance 2011: Retirement-

Income Systems in OECD and G20 Countries. Paris. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1787/pension_glance-2011-en. Accessed 
26 March 2014.

———. 2011c. Tax Transparency 2011: Report on Progress. 

Paris. www.oecd.org/tax/transparency/48981620.pdf. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2012. “Think Global, Act Global: Confronting Global 
Factors that Influence Conflict and Fragility.” A Summary 
of the Berlin Policy Forum, 15–16 November, Berlin.
———. 2013a. Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit 

Shifting. Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264202719 
-en. Accessed 24 March 2014.

———. 2013b. “Crisis Squeezes Income and Puts Pressure 
on Inequality and Poverty: Results from the OECD Income 
Distribution Database (May 2013).” Paris. www.oecd.
org/els/soc/OECD2013-Inequality-and-Poverty-8p.pdf. 
Accessed 15 May 2014.

———. 2013c. Education at a Glance 2013: OECD 

Indicators. Paris.

———. 2013d. Employment Outlook 2013. Paris.
———. 2013e. Health at a Glance 2013: OECD Indicators. 

Paris.

———. 2013f. “Unemployment Set to Remain High in 

OECD Countries through 2014 – Youth and Low-skilled Hit 
Hardest.” www.oecd.org/employment/unemployment-set 
-to-remain-high-in-oecd-countries-through-2014youth-and 
-low-skilled-hit-hardest.htm. Accessed 14 May 2014.

———. n.d. Social Expenditure Database. Paris. www.oecd.

org/social/expenditure.htm. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Ogata, S., and A. Sen. 2003. Human Security Now: 

Protecting and Empowering People. New York: 
Commission on Human Security.

Ono, Y., and D. Sullivan. 2013. “Manufacturing Plants’ 
Use of Temporary Workers: An Analysis Using Census 
Micro Data.” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy 
and Society 52(2): 419−43. ftp://tigerline.census.gov/ces/
wp/2008/CES-WP-08-40.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Onyango, M.A., B.L. Hixson, and S. McNally. 2013. 

“Minimum Initial Service Package (MISP) for Reproductive 
Health during Emergencies: Time for a New Paradigm.” 
Global Public Health 8(3): 342–56.

Ortiz, I., S. Burke, M. Berrada, and H. Cortés. 2013. 
“World Protests 2006-2013.” Working Paper. Initiative 
for Policy Dialogue and Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, New 
York. http://policydialogue.org/files/publications/World_
Protests_2006-2013-Complete_and_Final_4282014.pdf. 
Accessed 24 March 2014.

Østby, G. 2008a. “Inequalities, the Political Environment and 

Civil Conflict: Evidence from 55 Developing Countries.” 
In F. Stewart, ed., Horizontal Inequalities and Conflict: 
Understanding Group Violence in Multiethnic Societies. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

———. 2008b. “Polarization, Horizontal Inequalities and 
Violent Civil Conflict.” Journal of Peace Research 45(2): 
143−62.

Paardekooper, B., J.T.V.M. De Jong, and J.M.A. 

Hermanns. 1999. “The Psychological Impact of War 
and the Refugee Situation on South Sudanese Children 
in Refugee Camps in Northern Uganda: An Exploratory 
Study.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 40(4): 
529–36.

Paci, P., A. Revenga, and B. Rijkers. 2011. “Coping with 

Crises: Policies to Protect Employment and Earnings.” Vox, 
19 April. www.voxeu.org/article/coping-crises-policies 
-protect-employment-and-earnings. Accessed 15 May 
2014.

Palme, J. 2006. “Welfare States and Inequality: Institutional 

Designs and Distributive Outcome.” Research in Social 
Stratification and Mobility 24(4): 387–403.

Pardee Center for International Futures. 2013. 

“Development-Oriented Policies and Alternative Human 
Development Paths.” In K. Malik and M. Kugler, eds., 
Human Progress and the Rising South. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme.

Park, Y.C. 2006. “Regional Financial Integration in East 
Asia: Challenges and Prospects. Regional Financial 
Cooperation.” In J.A. Ocampo, ed., Regional Financial 
Cooperation. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Parliament of India Rajya Sabha. 2013. One Hundred and 

Sixty Seventh Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) 
Bill, 2012. New Delhi: Rajya Sabha Secretariat. www.
prsindia.org/uploads/media/Criminal%20Law/SCR%20
Criminal%20Law%20Bill.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.
Parlow, A. 2012. “Armed Conflict and Children’s Health – 
Exploring New Directions: The Case of Kashmir.” MPRA 
Paper 38033. Munich Personal RePEc Archive, Munich, 
Germany. http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/38033/1/
MPRA_paper_38033.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

Paxson, C., and N. Schady. 2007. “Cognitive Development 

among Young Children in Ecuador: The Roles of Wealth, 
Health and Parenting.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 3605. World Bank, Washington, DC. https:// 
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/8929. 
Accessed 19 March 2014.

Pells, K. 2011. “Poverty and Gender Inequalities: Evidence 
from Young Lives.” Young Lives Policy Paper 3. University 
of Oxford, Department of International Development, 
Oxford, UK.

Pereda, N., G. Guilera, M. Forns, and J. Gómez-

Benito. 2009. “The Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse 

in Community and Student Samples: A Meta-analysis.” 
Clinical Psychology Review 29(4): 328–38.

Revkin, A. 2012. “Beyond Rio: Pursuing ‘Ecological 

Citizenship.’” New York Times, 25 June.

Pick, S., and J. Sirkin. 2010. Breaking the Poverty Cycle: 

Ringen, S. 1988. “Direct and Indirect Measures of Poverty.” 

The Human Basis for Sustainable Development. New York: 
Oxford University Press.

Pineda, J. 2013. “Sustainability and Human Development: 

A Proposal for a Sustainability Adjusted Human 
Development Index.” Theoretical and Practical Research in 
Economic Fields 3(2): 71–98.

Journal of Social Policy 17(3): 351–65.

Robinson, A., V. Scherrer, and A. Gormally. 2013. 

“Disability and Vulnerability: A Primer.” Disability-inclusive 
DRR Network for Asia and the Pacific partners. www.
didrrn.net/home/files/3613/8614/3327/DiDRRN_GP_ 
vulnerability_primer_v.fin.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Pineda, J., and F. Rodríguez. 2006a. “The Political 

Rockström, J., W. Steffen, K. Noone, Å. Persson, F. 

Economy of Investment in Human Capital.” Economics of 
Governance 7: 167–93.

———. 2006b. “Public Investment in Infrastructure and 

Productivity Growth: Evidence from the Venezuelan 
Manufacturing Sector.” Wesleyan Economics Working 
Paper 2006-010. Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT.

Pinheiro, P.S. 2006. World Report on Violence against 

Children. United Nations Secretary-General’s Study on 
Violence against Children. New York: United Nations. 
www.unicef.org/lac/full_tex(3).pdf. Accessed 21 March 
2014.

Plan International. 2012. State of the World’s Girls 2012: 

Learning for Life. Report prepared for the “Because I Am a 
Girl” campaign. Woking, UK. http://plan-international.org/
girls/pdfs/2012-report/The-State-of-the-World-s-Girls 
-Learning-for-Life-Plan-International-2012.pdf. Accessed 
21 March 2014.

Polanyi, K. 1944. The Great Transformation: The Political 
and Economic Origins of Our Time. Boston, MA: Beacon 
Press.

Polk, W.R. 2013. Humpty Dumpty: The Fate of Regime 

Change. Stone, UK: Panda Press.

Pollock, R. 2006. The Value of the Public Domain. London: 
Institute for Public Policy Research. http://rufuspollock.
org/papers/value_of_public_domain.ippr.pdf. Accessed 
27 March 2014.

Posel, D., J.A. Fairburn, and F. Lund. 2006. “Labour 
Migration and Households: A Reconsideration of the 
Effects of the Social Pension on Labour Supply in South 
Africa.” Economic Modelling 23(5): 836–53.

Raman, A.V., and J.W. Björkman. 2008. “Public-Private 

Partnership in Health Care Services in India.” Health 
Administrator 21(1–2): 62–77.

Ratha, D., C. Eigen-Zucchi, S. Plaza, H. Wyss, 

and S. Yi. 2013. “Migration and Remittance 
Flows: Recent Trends and Outlook, 2013–2016.” 
Migration and Development Brief 21. World Bank, 
Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1288990760745/
MigrationandDevelopmentBrief21.pdf. Accessed 24 
March 2014.

Reinalda, B., ed. 2013. Routledge Handbook of International 

Organization. London: Routledge.

Reinhart, C. 2012. A Series of Unfortunate Events: Common 

Sequencing Patterns in Financial Crises. Working Paper 
17941. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research.

Rentschler, J.E. 2013. “Why Resilience Matters: The 

Poverty Impacts of Disasters.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 6699. World Bank, Washington, DC. http:// elibrary.
worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-6699. 
Accessed 26 March 2014.

Chapin, E. Lambin, T. Lenton, M. Scheffer, C. Folke, 
H. Schellnhuber, B. Nykvist, C. De Wit, T. Hughes, 
S. van der Leeuw, H. Rodhe, S. Sörlin, P. Snyder, R. 
Costanza, U. Svedin, M. Falkenmark, L. Karlberg, R. 
Corell, V. Fabry, J. Hansen, B. Walker, D. Liverman, 
K. Richardson, P. Crutzen, and J. Foley. 2009. 
“Planetary Boundaries: Exploring the Safe Operating 
Space for Humanity.” Ecology and Society 14(2): 32.

Rodrik, D. 2000. “Participatory Politics, Social Cooperation, 
and Economic Stability.” American Economic Review 90(2): 
140–44. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download 
?doi=10.1.1.298.5443&rep=rep1&type=pdf. Accessed 
15 May 2014.

Roemer, J.E. 1993. “A Pragmatic Approach to Responsibility 
for the Egalitarian Planner.” Philosophy and Public Affairs 
22(2): 146−66.

Rolleston, C., and Z. James. 2011. “The Role of Schooling 

in Skill Development: Evidence from Young Lives in 
Ethiopia, India, Peru and Vietnam.” Paper commissioned 
for the Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2012. 
www.younglives.org.uk/files/policy-papers/role-of 
-schooling-in-skill-development. Accessed 21 March 2014.
Rothstein, B. 2001. “Social Capital in the Social Democratic 

Welfare State.” Politics and Society 29(2): 207–41.

Roxburgh, C., and J. Mischke. 2011. European Growth 

and Renewal: The Path from Crisis to Recovery. McKinsey 
Global Institute. www.mckinsey.com/insights/europe/
european_growth_and_renewal_path_to_recovery. 
Accessed 22 April 2014.

Sander, R., and S. Taylor Jr. 2012. Mismatch: How 

Affirmative Action Hurts Students It’s Intended to Help, 
and Why Universities Won’t Admit It. New York: Basic 
Books.

Sandler, T., M. Arce, and G. Daniel. 2002. “A Conceptual 

Framework for Understanding Global and Transnational 
Public Goods for Health.” Fiscal Studies 23(2): 195–222.

Sassen, S. 2006. Territory, Authority, Rights: From Medieval 

to Global Assemblages. Vol. 7. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.

Schmieder, J.F., T.M. von Wachter, and S. Bender. 2009. 
“The Effects of Unemployment Insurance on Labour Supply 
and Search Outcomes: Regression Discontinuity Estimates 
from Germany.” Discussion Paper 0910-08. Columbia 
University, Department of Economics, New York. http://
doku.iab.de/discussionpapers/2010/dp0410.pdf. Accessed 
24 March 2014.

Schroder-Butterfill, E., and R. Marianti. 2006. “A 

Framework for Understanding Old-age Vulnerabilities.” 
Ageing & Society 26(1): 9–35. http://journals.cambridge.
org/action/displayFulltext?type=1&fid=371433&jid=ASO& 
volumeId=26&issueId=01&aid=371432&bodyId=& 
membershipNumber=&societyETOCSession. Accessed 
17 March 2014.

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    147

Sebastian, H. 2009. “The Culture of Fear and Control in 
Costa Rica: Crime Statistics and Law Enforcement.” 
Working Paper 104. German Institute of Global Affairs, 
Hamburg, Germany.

Seitz, S. 2013. “Indigenous Peoples and the Process of 

Decentralization: Conflicting Interests Regarding Upland 
Resource Management in Palawan Province/Philippines.” 
Occasional Paper 13. University of Freiburg, Germany. 
https://areastudies.uni-freiburg.de/Content/files/
occasional-paper-series/op13_seitz.pdf/at_download/file. 
Accessed 16 May 2014.

Sen, A. 1992. Inequality Reexamined. Oxford, UK: Oxford 

University Press.

———. 1999. “Democracy as a Universal Value.” Journal of 

Democracy 10(3): 3–17.

———. 2013. “The Ends and Means of Sustainability.” 

Journal of Human Development and Capabilities 14(1): 6–20.

Sen, A., J. Stiglitz, and J. Fitoussi. 2009. Report by 
the Commission on the Measurement of Economic 
Performance and Social Progress. Paris.

Sen, P. 1998. “Violence against Women.” Gender and 

Development 6(3): 7−16.

Shonkoff, J.P., and D.A. Phillips. 2000. From Neurons 

to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Childhood 
Development. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
Shonkoff, J.P., and L. Richter. 2013. “The Powerful Reach 
of Early Childhood Development.” In P. Rebello Britto, P.L. 
Engle, and C.M. Super, eds., Handbook of Early Childhood 
Development. Research and Its Impact on Global Policy. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

Shonkoff, J.P., L. Richter, J. van der Gaag, and Z.A. 
Bhutta. 2012. “The Biology of Adversity: Building an 
Integrated Science of Child Survival, Early Childhood 
Development, and Human Capital Formation.” Pediatrics 
129(2): 1–13.

Sierra Leone, Ministry of Finance and Economic 

Development, Development Assistance Coordination 
Office. 2013. Republic of Sierra Leone Fragility Assessment. 
Freetown. www.newdeal4peace.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
2013/05/Fragility-Assessment-SierraLeone-border-180313.
pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Sinclair, A.R.E., and J.M. Fryxell. 1985. “The Sahel 

of Africa: Ecology of a Disaster.” Canadian Journal of 
Zoology 63: 987–94.

Smith, J.P., G. Teruel, T. Duncan, K. Beegle, and E. 

Frankenberg. 2002. “Wages, Employment and Economic 
Shocks: Evidence from Indonesia.” Journal of Population 
Economics 15(1): 161−93. http://scholar.google.com/
scholar_url?hl=it&q=http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/ 
GetTRDoc%3FAD%3DADA385386&sa=X&scisig= 
AAGBfm327yyptkliH6W6JPPHV92yhL2HFA&oi=scholarr. 
Accessed 24 March 2014.

Sobhan, R. 2014. “Vulnerability Traps and Their Effects on 

Human Development. Human Development Research 
Paper. United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office, New York.

Somavia, J. 2013. The Meaning of Decent Work. Geneva: 

International Labour Office.

Stephan, G. 2009. “Employer Wage Subsidies and Wages 

in Germany: Some Evidence from Individual Data.” 
Discussion Paper 9/2009. Federal Employment Agency, 
Institute for Employment Research, Nuremberg, Germany.

148    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Stephens, A.H. 1997. “Persistent Effects of Job 

Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job Losses.” 
Journal of Labour Economics 15(1): 165−88. www.jstor.
org/stable/2535319?seq=1. Accessed 24 March 2014.

Stevens, A.H., and J. Schaller. 2011. “Short-run Effects of 
Parental Job Loss on Children’s Academic Achievement.” 
Economics of Education Review 30(2): 289−99.

Stewart, F., ed. 2008. Horizontal Inequalities and Conflict. 
Understanding Group Violence in Multiethnic Societies. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

———. 2010. “Horizontal Inequalities as a Cause of 
Conflict: A Review of CRISE Findings.” Background 
paper for World Development Report 2011. World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

———. 2013. “Capabilities and Human Development: 

Beyond the Individual—the Critical Role of Social 
Institutions and Social Competencies.” In K. Malik and M. 
Kugler, eds., Human Progress and the Rising South. New 
York: United Nations Development Programme.

Stewart, F., M. Barrón, G. Brown, and M. Hartwell. 

2006. “Social Exclusion and Conflict: Analysis and Policy 
Implications.” Policy Paper. Oxford University, Centre for 
Research on Inequality, Human Security and Ethnicity, 
Oxford, UK. www.qeh.ox.ac.uk/pdf/pdf-research/crise 
-pp1. Accessed 26 March 2014.

Stewart, F., G. Brown, and L. Mancini. 2005. “Why 
Horizontal Inequalities Matter: Some Implications for 
Measurement.” Working Paper 19. Oxford University, 
Centre for Research on Inequality, Human Security and 
Ethnicity, Oxford, UK. http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/outputs/
inequality/wp19.pdf. Accessed 26 March 2014.
Stiglitz, J. 2012a. “Macroeconomic Fluctuations, 

Inequality, and Human Development.” Journal of Human 
Development and Capabilities 13(1): 31–58.

———. 2012b. The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided 

Society Endangers Our Future. New York: W. W. Norton 
& Company.

———. 2013. “Social Protection without Protectionism.” 
In J. Stiglitz and M. Kaldor, eds., The Quest for Security: 
Protection Without Protectionism and the Challenge of 
Global Governance. New York: Columbia University Press.

Stiglitz, J., and M. Kaldor, eds. 2013a. The Quest for 

Security: Protection without Protectionism and the 
Challenge of Global Governance. New York: Columbia 
University Press.

———. 2013b. “Introduction.” In J. Stiglitz, and M. 

Kaldor, eds., The Quest for Security: Protection Without 
Protectionism and the Challenge of Global Governance. 
New York: Columbia University Press.

Stiglitz, J., A. Bougrov, Y. Boutros-Ghali, J.P. Fitoussi, 
C.A. Goodhart, and R. Johnson. 2009. “Report of the 
Commission of Experts of the President of the United 
Nations General Assembly on Reforms of the International 
Monetary and Financial System.” United Nations 
Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis 
and its Impact on Development, 24–26 June, New York. 
www.un.org/ga/president/63/interactive/financialcrisis/
PreliminaryReport210509.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.
Stiglitz, J., A. Sen, and J. Fitoussi. 2010. Mismeasuring 

Our Lives: Why GDP Doesn’t Add Up. New York: New 
Press.

Sullivan, D., and T. von Wachter. 2009. “Job Displacement 

and Mortality: An Analysis Using Administrative Data.” 

Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1265−1306. http://
qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/124/3/1265.abstract. 
Accessed 24 March 2014.

Sulmasy, G., and J. Yoo. 2007. “Challenges to Civilian 

Control of the Military: A Rational Choice Approach to the 
War on Terror.” UCLA Law Review 54. http://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1030761. Accessed 16 
May 2014.

Sundaram, J. 2013. “A World of Vulnerability.” Project 

Syndicate, 13 July. www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/ 
poverty--vulnerability--and-social-protection-by-jomo-kwame 
-sundaram. Accessed 28 April 2014.

Swiderska, K. A. Argumedo, Y. Song, J. Li, R. Pant, 
H. Herrera, D. Mutta, P. Munyi, and S. Vedavathy. 
2009. Protecting Community Rights over Traditional 
Knowledge: Implications of Customary Laws and 
Practices: Key Findings and Recommendations 
2005−2009. London: International Institute for 
Environment and Development.

Tarrow, S. 2013. The Language of Contention: Revolutions in 
Words, 1688-2012. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.

Telles, E.E. 2004. Race in Another America: The Significance 
of Skin Color in Brazil. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.

Temin, M. 2008. “Expanding Social Protection for Vulnerable 

Children and Families: Learning from an Institutional 
Perspective.” Working Paper. Inter-Agency Task Team 
on Children and HIV and AIDS: Working Group on Social 
Protection, New York. www.unicef.org/aids/files/
Expanding_Social_Protection.MTemin.May2008.pdf. 
Accessed 16 May 2014.

Thorp, R., F. Stewart, and A. Heyer. 2005. “When and How 

Far Is Group Formation a Route out of Chronic Poverty?” 
World Development 33(6): 907–20.

Thrasher, R., and K. Gallagher. 2008. 21st Century Trade 

Agreements: Implications for Long-Run Development 
Policy. Pardee Paper 2. Boston, MA: Boston University, 
Frederick S. Pardee Center for the Study of the Longer 
Range Future. http://ase.tufts.edu/gdae/Pubs/rp/
KGPardeePolSpaceSep08.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.
Tshimpanga, J.M., E. Enfors, R. Biggs, and G. Peterson. 
2011. “Maradi Agro-ecosystem.” Regime Shifts Database. 
www.regimeshifts.org/component/k2/item/57-maradi-agro 
-ecosystem#. Accessed 28 April 2014.

UCDP (Uppsala Conflict Data Program). 2013. UCDP Non-

State Conflict Dataset v. 2.5-2013, 1989–2012. Sweden. 
www.pcr.uu.se/research/ucdp/datasets/ucdp_non-state_
conflict_dataset_/. Accessed 18 February 2014.

UCDP (Uppsala Conflict Data Program) and PRIO 

(Peace Research Institute Oslo). 2013. UCDP/PRIO 
Armed Conflict Dataset v.4-2013, 1946–2012. Sweden and 
Oslo. www.pcr.uu.se/research/ucdp/datasets/ucdp_prio_
armed_conflict_dataset/. Accessed 18 February 2014.

UN (United Nations). 1948. “Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights.” G.A. Res. 217A(III), U.N. GAOR, 3d Sess., U.N. Doc. 
A/810 (Dec. 10, 1948). www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 1966. “International Convention on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights.” G.A. res. 2200A (XXI), 21 
U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 49, U.N. Doc. A/6316 (1966). 
www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.
aspx. Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 1989. “Convention on the Rights of the Child.” GA 

res. 44/25, annex, 44 UN GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, 
U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989). www.un.org/documents/ga/
res/44/a44r025.htm. Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 1995. “Report of the Fourth World Conference on 

Women.” 4–15 September, Beijing. www.un.org/ 
womenwatch/daw/beijing/pdf/Beijing%20full%20 
report%20E.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2000. “United Nations Millennium Declaration.” 

www.un.org/millennium/declaration/ares552e.htm. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2005. World Summit Outcome (A/60/L.I) 15 

September, 2005. New York. www.un.org/womenwatch/
ods/A-RES-60-1-E.pdf. Accessed 25 March 2014.

———. 2006. “Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Disabilities.” www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?id=259. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2009. “The Social Protection Floor.” www.un.org/
ga/second/64/socialprotection.pdf Accessed 20 March 
2014.

———. 2012a. “Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on 

Extreme Poverty and Human Rights.” A/67/278. New York.

———. 2012b. “Resolution Adopted by the General 
Assembly on 27 July 2012: Resolution 66/288. The 
Future We Want.” Sixty-Sixth Session of the General 
Assembly. New York. www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.
asp?symbol=A/RES/66/288&Lang=E. Accessed 27 March 
2014.

———. 2013a. “Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on 
International Migration and Development.” Sixty-Eighth 
Session of the General Assembly. New York. www.iom.
int/files/live/sites/iom/files/What-We-Do/docs/Final 
-Declaration-2013-En.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.
———. 2013b. A New Global Partnership: Eradicate 

Poverty and Transform Economies through Sustainable 
Development. Report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent 
Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. New 
York.

———. 2013c. The Global Partnership for Development: 

The Challenge We Face. MDG Gap Task Force Report 
2013. New York. www.un.org/en/development/desa/
policy/mdg_gap/mdg_gap2013/mdg_report_2013_en.pdf 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2013d. “Resolution Adopted by the General 

Assembly on 9 July 2013: Resolution 67/290. Format and 
Organizational Aspects of the High-Level Political Forum 
on Sustainable Development.” Sixty-Seventh Session of 
the General Assembly. New York. www.un.org/ga/search/
view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/67/290. Accessed 27 March 
2014.

———. 2013e. “Resolution Adopted by the General 

Assembly on 20 September 2013: Resolution 61/16 on 
‘Strengthening of the Economic and Social Council’.” 
Sixty-Eighth Session of the General Assembly. New 
York. www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
RES/68/1. Accessed 27 March 2014.

———. 2014a. “World Conference on Indigenous Peoples.” 

http://wcip2014.org/background. Accessed 20 March 
2014.

———. 2014b. World Population Prospects: The 2012 

Revision. New York. http://esa.un.org/wpp/Excel-Data/
population.htm. Accessed 18 February 2014.

UN (United Nations) General Assembly. 2009. “Legal 
Empowerment of the Poor and Eradication of Poverty.” 
Report of the Secretary General. A/64/133. New York. 
www.snap-undp.org/lepknowledgebank/Public%20
Document%20Library/Legal%20empowerment%20of%20
the%20poor%20and%20Eradication%20of%20Poverty.
pdf. Accessed 16 May 2014.

———. 2013a. “Draft Resolution Referred to the High-Level 
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly by the General 
Assembly at its Sixty-Fourth Session.” A/65/L.1. www.
un.org/en/mdg/summit2010/pdf/mdg%20outcome%20
document.pdf. Accessed 16 May 2014.

———. 2013b. “A Life of Dignity for All: Accelerating 
Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals 
and Advancing the United Nations Development Agenda 
beyond 2015.” Report of the Secretary-General. A/68/202. 
New York.

———. 2013c. “Report of the Secretary-General on the 

Situation in the Sahel Region.” New York.

UN (United Nations) News Centre. 2013a. “States Must 

Prioritize Migrants’ Human Rights, UN Independent 
Experts Reiterate.” 7 October. www.un.org/apps/news/
story.asp?NewsID=46206&Cr=Italy&Cr1=&Kw1= 
lampedusa&Kw2=&Kw3=#.U0XDET_XI25. Accessed 
20 March 2014.

———. 2013b. “Australia’s Transfer of Asylum-seekers 

to Pacific Islands Faulted in UN Reports.” 26 November. 
www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID= 
46596&Cr=asylum&Cr1. Accessed 20 March 2014.

UN Atlas of the Oceans. 2013. “Human Settlement on the 
Coasts.” www.oceansatlas.org/servlet/CDSServlet?status 
=ND0xODc3JjY9ZW4mMzM9KiYzNz1rb3M~. Accessed 
20 March 2014.

UN Enable. 2013. “Disability, Natural Disasters and 

Emergency Situations.” www.un.org/disabilities/default.
asp?id=1546. Accessed 30 March 2014.

UN Global Pulse. 2010. Voices of the Vulnerable: Recovery 
from the Ground Up. New York. www.unglobalpulse.org/
sites/default/files/reports/Voices-of-the-Vulnerable_0.pdf. 
Accessed 24 March 2014.

———. 2012. “Monitoring Household Coping Strategies 

during Complex Crises.” www.unglobalpulse.org/projects/
rivaf-research-monitoring-household-coping-strategies 
-during-complex-crises. Accessed 30 March 2014.

UN System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN 

Development Agenda. 2012a. Disaster Risk and 
Resilience. New York. www.unisdr.org/files/27462_ 
20120607unttpostmdgthinkpieceondrra.pdf. Accessed 
16 May 2014.

———. 2012b. Social Protection: A Development Priority in 
the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda. New York. http://
www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/Think%20Pieces/ 
16_social_protection.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

UNCSD (United Nations Conference on Sustainable 

Development). 2012. “The Future We Want.” Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil. www.uncsd2012.org/content/
documents/727The%20Future%20We%20Want%20
19%20June%201230pm.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and 

Development). 2012a. Corporate Social Responsibility in 
Global Value Chains: Evaluation and Monitoring Challenges 
for Small and Medium Sized Suppliers in Developing 
Countries. New York and Geneva. http://unctad.org/en/

PublicationsLibrary/diaeed2012d3_en.pdf. Accessed 
19 March 2014.

———. 2012b. Development and Globalization: Facts and 

Figures 2012. Geneva.

———. 2013. World Investment Report: Global Value 

Chains: Investment and Trade for Development. New York 
and Geneva. http://unctad.org/en/publicationslibrary/
wir2013_en.pdf. Accessed 19 March 2014.

———. 2014. UNCTADstat. http://unctadstat.unctad.org/
ReportFolders/reportFolders.aspx?sCS_referer=&sCS_
ChosenLang=en Accessed 20 March 2014.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and 

Social Affairs). 2009. State of the World’s Indigenous 
Peoples. New York. www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/ 
documents/SOWIP_web.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

———. 2013a. “LDC Information: The Criteria for 

Identifying Least Developed Countries.” www.un.org/
en/development/desa/policy/cdp/ldc/ldc_criteria.shtml. 
Accessed 14 May 2014.

———. 2013b. Report on World Social Situation 2013: 

Inequality Matters. New York.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 1990. 

Human Development Report 1990. New York.

———. 1993. Human Development Report 1993: People’s 

Participation. New York

———. 1994. Human Development Report 1994: New 

Dimensions of Human Security. New York.

———. 2003. Assessment of Micro-Macro Linkages in 

Poverty Alleviation: South Asia. Evaluation Office, New 
York.

———. 2005. Costa Rica National Human Development 

Report: Overcoming Fear: Citizen (In)security and Human 
Development in Costa Rica. New York. http://hdr.undp.
org/sites/default/files/costa_rica_2005_en.pdf. Accessed 
31 March 2014.

———. 2009a. Community Security and Social Cohesion: 

Towards a UNDP Approach. Geneva.

———. 2009b. Human Development Report 2009: 

Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillian. http://hdr.undp.org/sites/
default/files/reports/269/hdr_2009_en_complete.pdf. 
Accessed 31 March 2014.

———. 2010. Human Development Report 2010: The Real 

Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development. 
New York.

———. 2011a. Human Development Report 2011: 

Sustainability and Equity: A Better Future for All. New 
York.

———. 2011b. “Illicit Financial Flows from the Least 

Developed Countries 1990-2008.” Discussion Paper. New 
York. http://www.ginbot7.org/pdf/IFFs_from_LDCs_web.
pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

———. 2011c. Sharing Innovative Experiences: Successful 

Social Protection Floor Experiences. New York.

———. 2011d. Towards Human Resilience: Sustaining 

MDG Progress in an Age of Economic Uncertainty. New 
York.

———. 2012a. Africa Human Development Report 2012: 
Towards a Food Secure Future. www.undp.org/content/
dam/undp/library/corporate/HDR/Africa%20HDR/UNDP 
-Africa%20HDR-2012-EN.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    149

———. 2012b. Caribbean Human Development Report 

2012: Human Development and the Shift to Better Citizen 
Security. New York. www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/
library/corporate/HDR/Latin%20America%20and%20
Caribbean%20HDR/C_bean_HDR_Jan25_2012_3MB.pdf. 
Accessed 31 March 2014.

———. 2012c. Governance for Peace: Securing the Social 
Contract. New York. www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/
library/crisis%20prevention/governance-for-peace 
_2011-12-15_web.pdf.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.

———. 2012d. Seeing Beyond the State: Grassroots 

Women’s Perspectives on Corruption and Anti-corruption. 
New York.

———. 2012e. Somalia National Human Development 

Report: Empowering Youth for Peace and Development. 
New York. www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/
corporate/HDR/Arab%20States/HDR-Somalia-2012-E.pdf. 
Accessed 21 March 2014.

———. 2013a. Human Development Report 2013: The Rise 

of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World. New 
York.

———. 2013b. Informe Regional de Desarrollo Humano 
2013-2014: Seguridad Ciudadana con Rostro Humano: 
Diagnóstico y Propuestas para América Latina. New York. 
www.undp.org/content/dam/rblac/img/IDH/IDH-AL%20
Informe%20completo.pdf. Accessed 21 March 2014.

———. 2013c. The Millennium Development Goals Report 

2013. New York.

———. 2013d. Preventing Crisis, Enabling Recovery: A 

Review of UNDP’s Work in Conflict and Disaster-Affected 
Countries: 2012. New York. www.undp.org/content/dam/
undp/library/crisis%20prevention/BCPR_isuu-sm.pdf. 
Accessed 15 May 2014.

———. 2014. Humanity Divided: Confronting Inequality in 

Developing Countries. New York.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 

World Bank, and EC (European Commission). 2011. 
“Roma Data.” www.eurasia.undp.org/content/rbec/en/
home/ourwork/povertyreduction/roma-in-central-and 
-southeast-europe/roma-data/. Accessed 28 March 2014.

UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for 
Africa). 2010. Innovations and Best Practices in Public 
Sector Reforms: The Case of Civil Service in Ghana, 
Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa. Addis Ababa. www.
uneca.org/sites/default/files/publications/innovations_in_
the_public_sector.pdf. Accessed 16 May 2014.

UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change). 2009. “Copenhagen Accord.” 
FCCC/CP/2009/L.7. Bonn, Germany. http://unfccc.int/
resource/docs/2009/cop15/eng/l07.pdf. Accessed 27 
March 2014.

———. 2011. “Report of the Conference of the Parties on 
Its Sixteenth Session, Held in Cancun from 29 November 
to 10 December 2010.” FCCC/CP/2010/7/Add.1. Bonn, 
Germany. http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2010/cop16/
eng/07a01.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

———. 2012. “Report of the Conference of the Parties 
on Its Seventeenth Session, Held in Durban from 28 
November to 11 December 2011.” FCCC/CP/2011/9/Add.1. 
Bonn, Germany. http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2011/
cop17/eng/09a01.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund). 2008. “Linking 

Population, Poverty and Development. Migration: A 

150    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

World on the Move.” www.unfpa.org/pds/migration.html. 
Accessed 30 March 2014.

UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund). 2010. State of 

World Population 2010. New York. www.unfpa.org/ 
 webdav/site/global/shared/documents/ publications/2010/
EN_SOWP10.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund) and HelpAge 
International. 2012. Ageing in the Twenty-First Century: 
A Celebration and a Challenge. New York and London: 
UNFPA and HelpAge.

UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements 

Programme). 2011. Cities and Climate Change: 
Global Report on Human Settlements 2011. Nairobi. 
http://mirror.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.
aspx?publicationID=3086. Accessed 24 March 2014.

UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for 

Refugees). 2012. UNHCR Global Trends 2012: 
Displacement. The New 21st Century Challenge. Geneva. 
http://unhcr.org/globaltrendsjune2013/UNHCR%20
GLOBAL%20TRENDS%202012_V08_web.pdf. Accessed 
19 March 2014.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2006. 

State of the World’s Children Report 2007: Women 
and Children: The Double Dividend of Gender Equality. 
New York.

———. 2007. The Impact of International Migration: 
Children Left Behind in Selected Countries of Latin 
America and the Caribbean. New York. www.unicef.
org/videoaudio/PDFs/The_Impact_of_International_
Migration_LAC.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2008. The State of Asia-Pacific’s Children. New 
York. www.unicef.org/pacificislands/SAPC_Full_Report.
pdf. Accessed 22 May 2014.

UNISDR (United Nations International Strategy for 
Disaster Reduction). 2005. “Hyogo Framework for 
Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations 
and Communities to Disasters.” Geneva. www.unisdr.
org/2005/wcdr/intergover/official-doc/L-docs/Hyogo 
-framework-for-action-english.pdf. Accessed 20 March 
2014.

———. 2012a. “Japan’s Success in Risk Reduction 

Highlighted on March 11 Anniversary.” Press Release, 9 
March. Geneva.

———. 2012b. “UNISDR Counts the Cost of 20 Years of 
Inaction on Climate Change and Risk Reduction.” Press 
release, 13 June. Geneva.

———. n.d. “Key Focus Areas.” www.unisdr.org/2006/
ppew/iewp/iewp-introduction.htm. Accessed 16 May 
2014.

United Nations Global Pulse. 2012. “Monitoring 

Household Coping Strategies during Complex Crises.” 
www.unglobalpulse.org/projects/rivaf-research 
-monitoring-household-coping-strategies-during-complex 
-crises. Accessed 28 April 2014.

United Nations Population Division. 2013. “Trends 
in International Migrant Stock: The 2013 Revision.” 
New York. http://esa.un.org/unmigration/TIMSA2013/ 
migrantstocks2013.htm. Accessed 21 November 2013.

UNOCHA (UN Office for the Coordination of 

Humanitarian Affairs). 2014. “World Humanitarian 
Summit 2016 Concept Note.” https://docs.unocha.org/
sites/dms/Documents/WHS%20Concept%20Note.pdf. 
Accessed 20 March 2014.

UNOHCHR (Office of the High Commissioner for Human 

Rights). 2003. “Human Rights in the Administration 
of Justice: A Manual on Human Rights for Judges, 
Prosecutors and Lawyers.” Geneva. www.ohchr.org/
Documents/Publications/training9Titleen.pdf. Accessed 
16 May 2014.

UNRISD (United Nations Research Institute for Social 
Development). 2010. Combating Poverty and Inequality: 
Structural Change, Social Policy and Politics. Geneva. www.
unrisd.org/80256B3C005BCCF9%2F%28httpAuxPages%29 
%2F92B1D5057F43149CC125779600434441%2F. Accessed 
16 May 2014.

UNSSC (United Nations System Staff College). 2010. 
Indigenous Peoples and Peacebuilding: A Compilation of 
Best Practices. Turin, Italy.

Välilä, T., and A. Mehrotra. 2005. “Evolution and 

Determinants of Public Investment in Europe.” Economic 
and Financial Report 2005/01. European Investment Bank, 
Luxembourg.

Van de Gaer, D. 1993. “Equality of Opportunity and 

Investment in Human Capital.” Ph.D. thesis. Catholic 
University of Louvain, Belgium.

Vennam, U., A. Komanduri, E. Cooper, G. Crivello, 

and M. Woodhead. 2009. “Early Childhood Education 
Trajectories and Transitions: A Study of the Experiences 
and Perspectives of Parents and Children in Andhra 
Pradesh, India.” Young Lives Working Paper 52. University 
of Oxford, Department of International Development, 
Oxford, UK. www.younglives.org.uk/files/working-papers/
wp52-early-childhood-education-trajectories-and 
-transitions-a-study-of-the-experiences-and-perspectives 
-of-parents-and-children-in-andhra-pradesh-india. 
Accessed 21 March 2014.

Verick, S. 2009. “Who Is Hit Hardest during a Financial 
Crisis? The Vulnerability of Young Men and Women to 
Unemployment in an Economic Downturn.” Discussion 
Paper 4359. Institute for the Study of Labour, Bonn.  
http://ftp.iza.org/dp4359.pdf. Accessed 21 March 2014.

Vinding, D., and E.R. Kampbel. 2007. “Indigenous 

Women Workers with Case Studies from Bangladesh, 
Nepal and the Americas.” Working Paper. International 
Labour Office, Geneva. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/---dgreports/---gender/documents/publication/
wcms_173293.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

Von Braun, J., and G. Tadesse. 2012. “Global Food Price 
Volatility and Spikes: An Overview of Costs, Causes, and 
Solutions.” Discussion Paper on Development Policy 161. 
University of Bonn, Center for Development Research, 
Bonn, Germany. http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bit-
stream/120021/3/DP161Rev.pdf. Accessed 24 March 2014.
Von Wachter, T. 2014. “The Effect of Labour-market Related 
Shocks on Worker and Family Outcomes in Developed and 
Developing Countries.” Human Development Research 
Paper. United Nations Development Programme, Human 
Development Report Office, New York.

Wachs, T.D., and A. Rahman. 2013. “The Nature and 
Impact of Risk and Protective Influences on Children’s 
Development in Low-Income Countries.” In P.R. Britto, P. 
Engle, and C. Super, eds., Handbook of Early Childhood 
Development Research and Its Impact on Global Policy. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

Wadhams, N. 2010. “Iceland Volcano: Kenya’s Farmers Losing 

$1.3m a Day in Flights Chaos.” The Guardian, 18 April. 

www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/18/iceland 
-volcano-kenya-farmers. Accessed 19 March 2014.

Waldron, J. 2013. “Separation of Powers in Thought and 

Practice?” Boston College Law Review 54: 433–68. 
www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/centers/clough/pdf/ 
01_waldron.pdf. Accessed 16 May 2014.

Waters, H., F. Saadah, and M. Pradhan. 2003. “The 
Impact of the 1997–98 East Asian Economic Crisis on 
Health and Health Care in Indonesia in Health Policy 
Plan.” Health Policy and Planning 18(2): 172–81.

Weiss, T.G. 2011. “ECOSOC and the MDGs: What Can 
Be Done?” In R. Wilkinson, and D. Humle, eds., The 
Millennium Development Goals and Beyond: Global 
Development after 2015. New York: Routledge. www.
povertydialogue.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/26_
ECOSOC_and_the_MDGs_What_can_be_Done_
ThomasGWeiss.pdf. Accessed 27 March 2014.

Welford, R. 2013. “Climate Change Refugees.” CSR Asia 

Weekly. http://csr-asia.com/csr-asia-weekly-news-detail.
php?id=12312. Accessed 20 March 2014.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2000. “Reproductive 

Health during Conflict and Displacement: A Guide for 
Programme Managers.” Geneva. http://whqlibdoc.who.
int/hq/2001/WHO_RHR_00.13.pdf?ua=1. Accessed 
20 March 2014.

———. 2002. World Health Report 2002: Reducing Risks, 
Promoting Healthy Life. Geneva. www.who.int/whr/2002/
en/whr02_en.pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2007. Women, Ageing and Health: A Framework 

for Action. Geneva. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/ 
2007/9789241563529_eng.pdf. Accessed 26 March 2014.

———. 2010. Global Burden of Disease 2010. Geneva.
———. 2011a. Gender, Climate Change and Health. 

Geneva.

———. 2011b. World Report on Disability. Geneva. http://
whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2011/9789240685215_
eng.pdf. Accessed 30 March 2014.

———. 2013a. “Global Leaders Support New Six-year Plan 

to Deliver a Polio-free World by 2018.” News release. 
25 April. www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2013/
polio_six_year_plan_20130425/en/. Accessed 20 March 
2014.

———. 2013b. “Global and Regional Estimates of Violence 
against Women: Prevalence and Health Effects of Intimate 

Partner Violence and Nonpartner Sexual Violence.” 
Geneva. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/85239/ 
1/9789241564625_eng.pdf. Accessed 28 March 2014.

Wisner, B., P. Blaikie, T. Cannon, and I. Davis. 2004. At 

Risk: Natural Hazards, People’s Vulnerability and 
Disasters. 2nd ed. London: Routledge.

Woldehanna, T., N. Jones, and, B. Tefera. 2008. 

“The Invisibility of Children’s Paid and Unpaid Work: 
Implications for Ethiopia’s National Poverty Reduction 
Policy.” Childhood 15: 177−201.

Woodhead, M., P. Dornan, and H. Murray. 2013. What 

Inequality Means for Children, Evidence from Young Lives. 
Oxford, UK: Young Lives. www.younglives.org.uk/files/
policy-papers/what-inequality-means-for-children 
-evidence-from-young-lives. Accessed 27 March 2014.
World Bank. 2000. World Development Report 2000/01. 

Washington, DC.

———. 2010. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, 

Security and Development. Washington, DC.

———. n.d. “Workers in the Informal Economy.” http://

go.worldbank.org/1PVGLNWYC0. Accessed 28 April 2014.

World Economic Forum. 2014. Global Risks 2014: Ninth 
Edition. Geneva. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_
GlobalRisks_Report_2014.pdf. Accessed 21 March 2014.

WTO (World Trade Organization). 2001. “Ministerial 

Declaration.” WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1. www.wto.org/english/
thewto_e/minist_e/min01_e/mindecl_e.pdf. Accessed 
13 May 2014.

———. 2013. Ninth WTO Ministerial Conference. https://

mc9.wto.org. Accessed 24 March 2014.

WWF (World Wildlife Fund). 2007. “Climate Savers.” 
http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/how_we_work/
businesses/climate/climate_savers/. Accessed 20 March 
2014.

Xinhua News Service. 2013. “China Achieves 99% Rural 

Healthcare Coverage.” 23 August. www.china.org.cn/
china/2013-08/23/content_29808818.htm. Accessed 
16 May 2014.

———. 2011. “Malaysia Economic Monitor: Brain Drain.” 

Young, H.P. 2007. “Social Norms and Public Policy.” 

Bangkok.

Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.

———. 2012. World Development Report 2013: Jobs. 

Young, I.M. 1990. Justice and the Politics of Difference. 

Washington, DC.

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

———. 2013a. Remittance Prices Worldwide Databank. 

Young, M.E. 2002. From Early Child Development to 

http://remittanceprices.worldbank.org. Accessed 
27 March 2014.

———. 2013b. Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, 

Regional Impacts, and the Case for Resilience. 
Washington DC: World Bank. www.worldbank.org/
content/dam/Worldbank/document/Full_Report_Vol_2_
Turn_Down_The_Heat_%20Climate_Extremes_Regional_
Impacts_Case_for_Resilience_Print%20version_FINAL.
pdf. Accessed 20 March 2014.

———. 2013c. World Development Report 2014: Risk 
and Opportunity—Managing Risk for Development. 
Washington, DC.

———. 2014a. PovcalNet online database. Washington, 

DC. http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/. Accessed 
15 February 2014.

———. 2014b. World Development Indicators 

DataBank. http://databank.worldbank.org/data/views/ 
variableSelection/selectvariables.aspx?source= 
world-development-indicators. Accessed 20 March 2014.

Human Development: Investing in Our Children’s Future. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2014. “Addressing and Mitigating Vulnerability 
across the Life Cycle: The Case for Investing on Early 
Childhood.” Human Development Research Paper. United 
Nations Development Programme, Human Development 
Report Office, New York.

Zaidi, A. 2014. “Vulnerabilities in Old Age: A Review.” 
Human Development Research Paper. United Nations 
Development Programme, Human Development Report 
Office, New York.

Zeitlyn, S. 2004. “Social Exclusion in Asia – Some Initial 
Ideas.” UK Department for International Development, 
London.

Zepeda, E., S. McDonald, M. Panda, and G. Kumar. 

2013. “Employing India: Guaranteeing Jobs for the Rural 
Poor.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 
Washington, DC. www.un.org/en/development/desa/
policy/publications/seminars/india_rural_employment.
pdf. Accessed 22 May 2014.

Deepening progress: global goods and collective action    |    151

Statistical annex

Readers guide 

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2013 

Statistical tables
Human development indices
1  Human Development Index and its components 
2  Human Development Index trends, 1980–2013 
3 
Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index 
4  Gender Inequality Index 
5  Gender Development Index 
6  Multidimensional Poverty Index 
6A  Multidimensional Poverty Index: changes over time (select countries) 

Human development indicators
7  Health: children and youth 
8  Adult health and health expenditures 
9  Education 
10  Command over and allocation of resources 
11  Social competencies 
12  Personal insecurity 
13  International integration 
14  Environment 
15  Population trends 
16  Supplementary indicators: perceptions of well-being 

Regions 

Statistical references 

155

159

160
164
168
172
176
180
182

184
188
192
196
200
204
208
212
216
220

224

225

Statistical annex    |    153

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceReaders guide

The 17 statistical tables of this annex provide an overview of 
key aspects of human development. The first six tables contain 
the family of composite human development indices and their 
components estimated by the Human Development Report 
Office (HDRO). The remaining tables present a broader set of 
indicators related to human development.

Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the  notes,  tables  use  data 
available to the HDRO as of 15 November 2013. All indices 
and indicators, along with technical notes on the calculation 
of composite indices and additional source information, are 
available online at http://hdr.undp.org/en/data.

Countries and territories are ranked by 2013 Human Devel-
opment Index (HDI) value. Robustness and reliability analysis 
has shown that for most countries the differences in HDI are 
not statistically significant at the fourth decimal place.1 For 
this reason countries with the same HDI value at three decimal 
places are listed with tied ranks.

Sources and definitions

Unless otherwise noted, the HDRO uses data from interna-
tional data agencies with the mandate, resources and expertise 
to collect national data on specific indicators.

Definitions of indicators and sources for original data com-
ponents are given at the end of each table, with full source 
details in Statistical references.

Gross national income per capita in 
purchasing power parity terms

In comparing standards of living based on income across coun-
tries, the income component of the HDI uses gross national 
income (GNI) per capita converted into purchasing power 
parity (PPP) terms to eliminate differences in national price 
levels.

The International Comparison Programme (ICP) survey 
is the world’s largest statistical initiative that produces inter-
nationally  comparable  price  levels,  economic  aggregates  in 
real terms and PPP estimates. Estimates from ICP surveys 
conducted in 2011 and covering 180 countries became publicly 
available on 7 May 2014 and were used to compute the 2013 
HDI values.

Methodology updates

Over the past three years the HDRO has held intensive con-
sultations with leading academic experts and policymakers to 
discuss approaches to development measurement, including the 
Report’s family of composite indices. A key point of agreement 
among participants in these discussions was that the composite 
indices must be clearly and intuitively understandable to policy-
makers, media, civil society leaders and other audiences so that 
the indices will continue to be used for human development 
policy guidance and advocacy.

A formal policy on future modifications of human development 
indices is being elaborated. And the HDRO website (http://hdr.
undp.org/en) provides access for the first time to the proprietary 
software programs used to calculate the indices in this Report.

The 2014 Report retains the HDI, the Multidimensional 
Poverty index (MPI), the Inequality- adjusted Human Devel-
opment Index (IHDI) and the Gender Inequality Index (GII), 
with slight modifications to the HDI and MPI. The HDI now 
includes fixed maximum goalposts that we hope to maintain 
for at least five years. For details on the HDI goalposts, see 
Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org. For details on updates 
to the MPI, see Technical note 5 at http://hdr.undp.org.

Comparisons over time and across editions 
of the Report

Because national and international agencies continually improve 
their  data  series,  the  data—including  the  HDI  values  and 
ranks—presented in this Report are not comparable to those 
published in earlier editions. For HDI comparability across 
years and countries, see table 2, which presents trends using 
consistent data calculated at five-year intervals for 1980–2013.

Discrepancies between national and 
international estimates

National and international data can differ because international 
agencies harmonize national data using a consistent methodol-
ogy and occasionally produce estimates of missing data to allow 
comparability across countries. In other cases international 
agencies might not have access to the most recent national data. 

Readers guide    |    155

When HDRO becomes aware of discrepancies, it brings them 
to the attention of national and international data authorities.

Country groupings and aggregates

The  tables  present  weighted  aggregates  for  several  country 
groupings. In general, an aggregate is shown only when data are 
available for at least half the countries and represent at least two-
thirds of the population in that classification. Aggregates for each 
classification cover only the countries for which data are available.

Human development classification

HDI classifications are based on HDI fixed cut-off points, 
which are derived from the quartiles of distributions of com-
ponent indicators. The cut-off points are HDI of less than 0.550 
for low human development, 0.550–0.699 for medium human 
development, 0.700–0.799 for high human development and 
0.800 or greater for very high human development.

Regional groupings

Regional groupings are based on United Nations Development 
Programme regional classifications. Least Developed Countries 
and Small Island Developing States are defined according to 
UN classifications (see www.unohrlls.org).

Country notes

Data for China do not include Hong Kong Special Administra-
tive Region of China, Macao Special Administrative Region of 
China or Taiwan Province of China.

Data for Sudan include data for South Sudan, unless other-

wise indicated.

Symbols

A dash between two years, as in 2005–2013, indicates that the 
data are from the most recent year available in the period spec-
ified. A slash between years, as in 2005/2013, indicates average 
for the years shown. Growth rates are usually average annual rates 
of growth between the first and last years of the period shown.

The following symbols are used in the tables:

Not available

.. 
0 or 0.0  Nil or negligible
— 
Not applicable

156    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Statistical acknowledgements

The Report’s composite indices and other statistical resources 
draw on a wide variety of the most respected international 
data providers in their specialized fields. HDRO is particularly 
grateful to the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of 
Disasters; Economic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean; Eurostat; Food and Agriculture Organization; Gal-
lup; ICF Macro; Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre; 
International Labour Organization; International Monetary 
Fund; International Telecommunication Union; Inter-Parlia-
mentary Union; Luxembourg Income Study; Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development; Oxford Poverty 
and Human Development Initiative; United Nations Chil-
dren’s Fund; United Nations Conference on Trade and Devel-
opment; United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs; United Nations Economic and Social Commission for 
West Asia; United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cul-
tural Organization Institute for Statistics; Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime; United Nations World Tourism 
Organization; World Bank; and World Health Organization. 
The international education database maintained by Robert 
Barro (Harvard University) and Jong-Wha Lee (Korea Univer-
sity) was another invaluable source for the calculation of the 
Report’s indices.

Statistical tables

The first seven tables relate to the five composite human devel-
opment indices and their components.

Since the 2010 Human Development Report, four compos-
ite human development indices—the HDI, IHDI, GII and 
MPI—have been calculated. This year the Report introduces 
the Gender Development Index, which compares the HDI 
calculated separately for women and men.

The remaining tables present a broader set of human devel-
opment related indicators and provide a more comprehensive 
picture of a country’s human development.

Table 1, Human Development Index and its components, 
ranks countries by 2013 HDI value and details the values of 
the three HDI components: longevity, education (with two 
indicators) and income. The table also presents values for the 
2012 HDI based on the most recent data available for that year, 
along with the change in rank between 2012 and 2013.

Table 2, Human Development Index trends, 1980–2013, 
provides a time series of HDI values allowing 2013 HDI values 
to be compared with those for previous years. The table uses the 
most recently revised historical data available in 2013 and the 

same methodology applied to compute the 2013 HDI. Along 
with historical HDI values, the table includes the change in 
HDI rank over the last five years and the average annual HDI 
growth rates across three different time intervals.

Table 3, Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index, 
contains two related measures of inequality—the IHDI and 
the loss in HDI due to inequality. The IHDI looks beyond 
the average achievements of a country in health, education 
and income to show how these achievements are distributed 
among its residents. The IHDI can be interpreted as the level 
of human development when inequality is accounted for. The 
relative difference between the IHDI and HDI is the loss due 
to inequality in distribution of the HDI within the country. 
The table also presents a new measure, the coefficient of human 
inequality, which is an unweighted average of inequalities in 
three dimensions. In addition, the table shows each country’s 
difference in rank on the HDI and the IHDI. A negative value 
means that taking inequality into account lowers a country’s 
rank in the HDI distribution. The table also presents three 
standard measures of income inequality: the ratio of the top 
and the bottom quintiles; the Palma ratio, which is the ratio of 
income of the top 10 percent and the bottom 40 percent; and 
the Gini coefficient.

Table  4,  Gender  Inequality  Index,  presents  a  composite 
measure of gender inequality using three dimensions: repro-
ductive health, empowerment and labour market participation. 
Reproductive health is measured by two indicators: the mater-
nal mortality ratio and the adolescent birth rate. Empowerment 
is measured by the share of parliamentary seats held by women 
and the share of population with at least some secondary edu-
cation. And labour market is measured by participation in the 
labour force. A low GII value indicates low inequality between 
women and men, and vice-versa.

Table 5, Gender Development Index, measures disparities 
in HDI by gender. The table contains HDI values estimated 
separately for women and men; the ratio of which is the GDI. 
The closer the ratio is to 1, the smaller the gap between women 
and men. Values for the three HDI components— longevity, 
education (with two indicators) and income—are also present-
ed by gender.

Table 6, Multidimensional Poverty Index, captures the mul-
tiple deprivations that people face in their education, health 
and living standards. The MPI shows both the incidence of 
nonincome multidimensional poverty (a headcount of those 
in multidimensional poverty) and its intensity (the relative 
number of deprivations people experience at the same time). 
Based on intensity thresholds, people are classified as near 
multidimensional  poverty,  multidimensionally  poor  or  in 
severe poverty, respectively. The contributions of deprivations 
in each dimension to overall poverty are also included. The 

table also presents measures of income poverty—population 
living on less than PPP $1.25 per day and population living 
below the national poverty line. This year’s MPI includes some 
modifications to the original set of 10 indicators: height-for-age 
replaces weight-for-age for children under age 5 because stunt-
ing is a better indicator of chronic malnutrition. A child death 
is considered a health deprivation only if it happened in the five 
years prior to the survey. The minimum threshold for education 
deprivation was raised from five years of schooling to six to 
reflect the standard definition of primary schooling used in the 
Millennium Development Goals and in international measures 
of functional literacy, and the indicators for household assets 
were expanded to better reflect rural as well as urban house-
holds. The table also presents MPI estimates obtained under the 
earlier specifications for comparative purposes.

Table 6A, Multidimensional Poverty Index: Changes over 
time (select countries), presents estimates of MPI and its com-
ponents for two or more time points for countries for which 
consistent data were available in 2013. Estimation is based on 
the revised methodology.

Table 7, Health: children and youth, presents indicators of 
infant health (percentage of infants who are exclusively breast-
fed for the first six months of life, percentage of infants who 
lack immunization for DTP and measles, and infant mortality 
rate), child health (percentage of children under age 5 who are 
stunted, percentage of children who are overweight and child 
mortality rate) and HIV prevalence and prevention (number 
of children ages 0–14 living with HIV, youth HIV prevalence 
rate,  condom  use  among  young  people,  and  percentage  of 
pregnant women living with HIV not receiving treatment to 
prevent mother-to-child transmission). The table also includes 
data on antenatal coverage.

Table 8, Adult health and health expenditure, contains adult 
mortality rates by gender, age-standardized mortality rates 
from alcohol and drug use, and age-standardized obesity rates 
and HIV prevalence rates among adults. It also includes two 
indicators on life expectancy—life expectancy at age 60 and 
health-adjusted life expectancy at birth—and three indicators 
on quality of health care—number of physicians per 10,000 
people, health expenditure as a share of GDP and out of pocket 
expenditure for health.

Table 9, Education, presents standard education indicators 
along with indicators on education quality, including average 
test scores on reading, mathematics and science for 15-year-
old  students.  The  table  provides  indicators  of  educational 
 attainment —adult and youth literacy rates and the share of the 
adult population with at least some secondary education. Gross 
enrolment ratios at each level of education are complemented by 
primary school dropout rates. The table also includes two indi-
cators on education quality—primary school teachers trained 

Readers guide    |    157

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building Resilienceto teach and the pupil–teacher ratio—as well as an indicator on 
education expenditure as a percentage of GDP.

Table 10, Command over and allocation of resources, cov-
ers several macroeconomic indicators such as gross domestic 
product (GDP); gross fixed capital formation; taxes on income, 
profit  and  capital  gain  as  percentage  of  total  tax  revenue; 
share of agriculture, hunting, forestry and fisheries in GDP; 
and consumer price index. Gross fixed capital formation is 
a rough indicator of national income that is invested rather 
than consumed. In times of economic uncertainty or recession, 
gross fixed capital formation typically declines. The consum-
er price index is a measure of inflation. General government 
final consumption expenditure (presented as a share of GDP 
and as average annual growth) and research and development 
expenditure are indicators of public spending. In addition, 
the table presents three indicators on debt—domestic credit 
provided by the banking sector, external debt stock and total 
debt service, all measured as a percentage of GDP—and two 
indicators related to the price of food—the price level index 
and the price volatility index.

Table 11, Social competencies, contains indicators on three 
components: employment and related vulnerabilities, social 
protection and suicide rates by gender. Indicators on vulnera-
bilities related to employment include vulnerable employment, 
youth and total unemployment, child labour and working poor 
as well as length of mandatory paid maternity leave. Social 
protection is represented by the percentage of children under 
age 5 with birth registration and the percentage of pension-age 
population actually receiving an old-age pension.

Table 12, Personal insecurity, reflects the extent to which 
the population is insecure. It presents number of refugees by 
country of origin and number of internally displaced people. 
It shows long-term unemployment rates, homicide rates, and 
the size of the homeless population, prison population and 
orphaned children population. And it includes the depth of 
food deficit and a perception-based indicator on justification of 
wife beating by gender.

Table 13, International integration, provides indicators of 
several aspects of globalization. International trade is captured 
by measuring the remoteness of world markets and internation-
al trade as share of GDP. Capital flows are represented by net 
inflows of foreign direct investment and private capital, official 

development assistance and inflows of remittances. Human 
mobility is captured by the net migration rate, the stock of 
immigrants and the number of international inbound tourists. 
International communication is represented by the share of 
population that uses the Internet and international incoming 
and outgoing telephone traffic.

Table 14, Environment, covers environmental vulnerabil-
ity and effects of environmental threats. The table shows the 
proportion of fossil fuels and renewable energy sources in the 
primary energy supply, levels and annual growth of carbon 
dioxide emissions per capita and measures of ecosystem and 
natural resources preservation (natural resource depletion as a 
percentage of GNI, forest area and change in forest area and 
fresh water withdrawals). The table contains the under-five 
mortality rates due to outdoor and indoor air pollution and 
to unsafe water, unimproved sanitation or poor hygiene. The 
table also presents indicators of the direct impacts of natural 
disasters (number of deaths and population affected).

Table  15,  Population  trends,  contains  major  population 
indicators, including total population, median age, depend-
ency ratios and total fertility rates, which can help assess the 
burden of support that falls on the labour force in a country. 
Deviations from the natural sex ratio at birth have implications 
for population replacement levels, suggest possible future social 
and economic problems and may indicate gender bias.

Table 16, Supplementary indicators: perceptions of well- 
being, includes indicators that reflect individuals’ opinions 
and  self-perceptions  about  relevant  dimensions  of  human 
 development— quality of education, quality of health care, 
standard  of  living  and  labour  market,  personal  safety  and 
overall satisfaction with freedom of choice and life. The table 
also contains indicators regarding trust in other people and 
satisfaction with the community and a set of broader indicators 
reflecting perceptions about government policies on poverty 
alleviation and preservation of environment, and overall trust 
in national government.

Note

1.  Aguna  and  Kovacevic  (2011)  and  Høyland,  Moene  and 

Willumsen (2011).

158    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2013

Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Andorra 
Angola 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bahamas 
Bahrain 
Bangladesh 
Barbados 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Belize 
Benin 
Bhutan 
Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Botswana 
Brazil 
Brunei Darussalam 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Cape Verde 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
Colombia 
Comoros 
Congo 
Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 
Costa Rica 
Côte d’Ivoire 
Croatia 
Cuba 
Cyprus 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Djibouti 
Dominica 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt 
El Salvador 
Equatorial Guinea 
Eritrea 
Estonia 
Ethiopia 
Fiji 
Finland 
France 
Gabon 
Gambia 

169
95
93
37
149
61
49
87
2
21
76
51
44
142
59
53
21
84
165
136
113
86
109
79
30
58
181
180
136
152
8
123
185
184
41
91
98
159
140
186
68
171
47
44
32
28
10
170
93
102
98
110
115
144
182
33
173
88
24
20
112
172

Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Grenada 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Guyana 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hong Kong, China (SAR) 
Hungary 
Iceland 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Jamaica 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Kiribati 
Korea (Republic of) 
Kuwait 
Kyrgyzstan 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 
Latvia 
Lebanon 
Lesotho 
Liberia 
Libya 
Liechtenstein 
Lithuania 
Luxembourg 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Maldives 
Mali 
Malta 
Mauritania 
Mauritius 
Mexico 
Micronesia (Federated States of) 
Moldova (Republic of) 
Mongolia 
Montenegro 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
Namibia 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 

79
6
138
29
79
125
179
177
121
168
129
15
43
13
135
108
75
120
11
19
26
96
17
77
70
147
133
15
46
125
139
48
65
162
175
55
18
35
21
155
174
62
103
176
39
161
63
71
124
114
103
51
129
178
150
127
145
4
7
132
187
152

Norway 
Oman 
Pakistan 
Palau 
Palestine, State of 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Qatar 
Romania 
Russian Federation 
Rwanda 
Saint Kitts and Nevis 
Saint Lucia 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
Samoa 
Sao Tome and Principe 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia 
Seychelles 
Sierra Leone 
Singapore 
Slovakia 
Slovenia 
Solomon Islands 
South Africa 
Spain 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Suriname 
Swaziland 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania (United Republic of) 
Thailand 
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
Timor-Leste 
Togo 
Tonga 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Uganda 
Ukraine 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan 
Vanuatu 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 
Viet Nam 
Yemen 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 

1
56
146
60
107
65
157
111
82
117
35
41
31
54
57
151
73
97
91
106
142
34
163
77
71
183
9
37
25
157
118
27
73
166
100
148
12
3
118
133
159
89
84
128
166
100
64
90
69
103
164
83
40
14
5
50
116
131
67
121
154
141
156

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2013    |    159

E1

L
B
A
T

Human Development Index and its components

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Change  
in rank

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda

Value

2013

0.944
0.933
0.917
0.915
0.914
0.911
0.910
0.902
0.901
0.900
0.899
0.898
0.895
0.892
0.891
0.891
0.890
0.889
0.888
0.884
0.881
0.881
0.881
0.879
0.874
0.872
0.869
0.861
0.853
0.852
0.851
0.845
0.840
0.836
0.834
0.834
0.830
0.830
0.829
0.827
0.822
0.822
0.818
0.815
0.815
0.814
0.812
0.810
0.808

0.790
0.789
0.789
0.786
0.785
0.784
0.783
0.778
0.777
0.776
0.775
0.774

160    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

(years)

2013

(years)

2012a

(years)

2012a

(2011 PPP $)

2013

Value

2012

2012–2013

81.5
82.5
82.6
81.0
78.9
80.7
81.1
81.5
82.3
79.4
80.7
81.8
82.1
80.5
83.4
81.5
83.6
79.9 d
81.8
81.8
81.1
80.5
80.5
80.5
79.6
82.4
82.1
77.7
80.8
78.5
78.4
79.8
74.4
75.5
72.1
76.4
81.2 d
75.4
79.8
76.8
80.0
79.9
74.6
76.6
79.3
74.3
77.0
72.2
76.3

77.2
75.2
74.8
69.9
73.8
75.3
76.6
68.0
73.5
75.4
72.4 d
76.0

12.6
12.8
12.2
11.9
12.9
12.9
12.5
12.3
10.2 b
12.1
11.6
11.7 b
10.4
12.3
10.0
11.8
11.5
10.3 e
12.5
11.1
10.8 b
10.9 b
11.3
10.3
11.9
10.1 b
9.6
12.3
10.2
8.7
9.1
11.6
12.0
8.7
12.4
11.8
10.4 i
11.6
9.9
9.1
9.8
8.2
11.3 b
9.4
10.2
7.2
11.0
11.5 b
9.8

8.5
10.9
10.5 o
11.5 o
10.7
7.5
6.8
11.7
10.6 b
9.4
12.2 p
8.9 p

17.6
19.9
15.7
17.9
16.5
16.3
19.4
15.9
15.4 c
16.9
18.6
15.8
18.7
16.2
15.6
17.0
15.3
15.1
15.7
16.0
15.6
16.2
13.9
17.0
16.8
16.3
17.1
16.4
16.5
14.5
13.8
14.0
16.5
15.6
16.7
15.5
11.7
15.0
14.5
13.3 k
15.1
16.3
15.4
14.4 l
14.5
14.6
14.5
15.5
16.4

15.5
12.6 n
15.2
15.7
14.1
16.1
13.6
14.0
14.3
15.4
13.7
13.8

63,909
41,524
53,762
42,397
52,308
43,049
32,569
41,887
72,371
42,880
33,414
43,201
35,116
35,002
52,383
30,345
36,747
87,085 f,g
29,966
36,629
42,930
39,471
58,695
37,366
26,809
32,669
30,561
24,535
24,658
70,883 h
119,029 g
26,771
23,387
52,109
23,740
21,487
40,597 j
25,336
27,022
58,068
20,804
24,130
21,239
32,072 h
19,844 m
85,820 g
19,025
22,186
17,297 h

18,108
21,414
14,710
16,403
17,433
21,666 h
42,191 h
22,617
15,402
13,604
12,823
18,800

0.943
0.931
0.916
0.915
0.912
0.911
0.908
0.901
0.899
0.900
0.901
0.897
0.893
0.890
0.889
0.888
0.888
0.888
0.886
0.884
0.880
0.880
0.880
0.879
0.874
0.872
0.869
0.861
0.854
0.852
0.850
0.848
0.839
0.833
0.831
0.833
0.830
0.829
0.827
0.825
0.819
0.822
0.817
0.813
0.813
0.813
0.812
0.808
0.806

0.787
0.788
0.787
0.785
0.782
0.789
0.781
0.777
0.776
0.776
0.773
0.773

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
–3
–1
0
0
0
1
–1
–2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
–2
0
0
0

2
0
1
1
1
–5
0
0
0
–1
0
–1

TABLE1Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Change  
in rank

HDI rank
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde

Value

2013
0.773
0.771
0.766
0.765
0.765
0.764
0.763
0.759
0.757
0.756
0.756
0.750
0.750
0.749
0.747
0.745
0.745
0.744
0.744
0.744
0.737
0.734
0.732
0.732
0.731
0.730
0.724
0.722
0.721
0.719
0.719
0.717
0.717
0.716
0.715
0.714
0.711
0.711
0.705
0.705
0.700

0.698
0.698
0.698
0.694
0.686
0.684
0.683
0.682
0.676
0.674
0.667
0.663
0.662
0.661
0.660
0.658
0.658
0.642
0.638
0.638
0.636

(years)

(years)

(years)

(2011 PPP $)

Value

2013
75.0
73.6
69.9
80.0
77.6
74.6
79.9
75.3
66.5
77.5
73.2
73.6 d
74.3
74.0
70.8
73.9
74.1
73.9
74.3
72.8
74.8
68.5
73.9
75.2
76.4
74.6
69.8
74.4
75.9
75.3
72.5
71.0
77.7 d
77.4
73.5
74.8
74.0
76.5
71.0
72.7
73.4

77.9
67.5
65.5
73.2
73.2
70.8
64.4 v
71.2
72.3
63.5
67.3
68.9
72.6
68.2
68.7
56.9
74.6
69.4
66.3
75.9
75.1

2012a
9.5
8.5
10.8
7.9 o
9.4
8.6
8.4
7.6
10.4
8.5
9.4 o
8.4 p
10.8
7.8
11.2 o
9.9
9.5
7.2
12.1 r
8.6 p
9.0
11.3
9.3
8.2 r
8.3 o
10.8
9.9
7.3
6.5
7.5
8.6 p
7.6
7.7 p
9.3
9.6
8.3 p
7.1
7.6
7.7
9.4 b
7.5

5.8 b
8.3
9.9 s
10.3
8.9 o
7.5
8.8
6.4
7.7
7.4
9.2
9.8
6.5
10.0 r
8.9 b
9.9
6.6
5.6
8.5
5.5
3.5 p

2012a
12.7
15.6
12.3
13.2
12.4
14.2
13.5
14.4
15.0
12.8
11.6
12.9
13.6
15.2
11.8
13.3
13.6
15.2 q
13.2
15.8
13.1
15.1
13.7
13.3
13.6
12.3
15.7
13.1
14.6
12.9
13.3
14.0
12.7 n
10.8
12.5
12.8
13.2
12.3 n
12.0
14.7
12.3 l

12.7
15.0
12.6 p
12.9 t
13.2
12.7
11.7
13.0
11.9
12.3
13.2
11.8
12.1
11.5
11.3
13.1 p
12.0
10.1
10.7
11.9 n
13.2

2013
21,824
16,777
25,325
16,263
16,379
17,067
13,012
18,391
19,441
15,854
24,632
20,150
9,250
13,451 h
15,725
11,337
11,301
14,275
6,890
10,339
11,280
8,215
9,364
11,745
9,431
7,952
7,214
13,364
10,440
11,477
10,339
12,555
9,235
9,225
8,170
9,251
11,527
9,998
15,113
5,316
10,844

10,074
8,466
11,533
4,708
5,168 h,u
8,970
14,792
10,400
7,580
16,977
5,552
5,041
7,240
5,227
6,381
11,788
5,771 h,u
14,007
6,341
4,892
6,365

2012
0.770
0.769
0.765
0.764
0.761
0.763
0.761
0.756
0.755
0.755
0.755
0.749
0.745
0.749
0.745
0.744
0.743
0.742
0.741
0.743
0.734
0.733
0.731
0.730
0.729
0.728
0.722
0.720
0.719
0.715
0.717
0.715
0.716
0.714
0.715
0.715
0.708
0.708
0.702
0.704
0.698

0.695
0.692
0.693
0.693
0.683
0.681
0.681
0.681
0.670
0.670
0.663
0.657
0.660
0.657
0.656
0.654
0.662
0.641
0.635
0.635
0.635

2012–2013

0
0
0
0
2
–1
–1
0
0
–1
–1
0
2
–2
–1
0
1
1
2
–1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
–1
2
–3
–4
0
0
1
0
0

0
3
1
–2
0
0
–1
–2
0
–1
0
2
0
0
1
1
–4
0
0
0
–2

TABLE 1  Human Development Index and its components    |    161

TABLE1HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceHDI rank
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Change  
in rank

Value

2013
0.630
0.628
0.628
0.624
0.620
0.617
0.617
0.616
0.614
0.607
0.607
0.586
0.584
0.584
0.573
0.569
0.564
0.561
0.558
0.558
0.556

0.540
0.537
0.535
0.530
0.526
0.524
0.506
0.504
0.504
0.500
0.498
0.492
0.491
0.491
0.488
0.488
0.487
0.486
0.485
0.484
0.476
0.473
0.473
0.471
0.468
0.467
0.452
0.441
0.435
0.414
0.412
0.407
0.396
0.393
0.392
0.389
0.388
0.381
0.374
0.372
0.341

(years)

(years)

(years)

(2011 PPP $)

2013
69.0
72.1
67.5
64.5
67.5
73.8
70.9
71.6
74.8
68.9
67.2
66.4
68.3
71.9
61.1
68.3
58.8
58.1
70.7
66.3
53.1

68.4
66.6
61.7
49.0
51.9
65.2
64.1
55.1
52.5
63.1
64.7
59.9
62.4
67.7
60.9
61.5
61.6
49.4
63.5
59.2
59.3
62.1
56.5
63.1
60.9
61.8
50.7
58.8
63.6
55.3
60.6
55.0
54.3
50.3
56.1
54.1
56.3
62.9
45.6
51.2
50.2

2012a
8.8 s
5.6
9.3
6.2
4.4 w
5.5
4.4
9.0 o
5.8
7.8 p
9.9
4.4
2.3 w
5.8
7.0
4.6
6.1
6.5
5.1
4.7 w
5.4 p

3.2
4.7
6.3
7.1
4.7 w
4.0
3.3
5.9
5.2 w
2.5
5.2 p
7.2
3.9
4.5 p
2.8
5.1
3.7
5.9 b
4.5
5.4
3.2
3.1
5.3
4.9
3.2
3.8 r
4.3
2.8
2.4 w
4.2
3.9
2.0 b
2.3 r
3.2 w
1.6 w
2.7
1.3 r
3.4 p
2.9
1.5 s
3.5

2012a
11.4 p
10.7
12.5
11.3
11.7
11.6
11.6
10.6
10.5
12.3
11.2
11.7
12.4
10.9
11.5
10.2
11.1
13.5
10.0
11.3
8.5

12.4
7.7
11.0
11.3
11.4
8.6
13.2
10.4
9.0
9.2
10.3
9.3
8.9 p
9.2
12.8
9.2
8.2
11.1
7.9
10.8
11.0
7.3 p
12.2
7.6 p
9.3
6.4
8.9 p
9.1
8.5
10.8
8.5 p
8.6
9.0
9.5
8.7
10.1
7.5
4.1
7.5 p
7.4
7.2

2013
3,662
6,866
3,021
9,185
9,674
4,138
6,905
2,652
4,266
2,645
2,424
5,150
6,775
2,805
3,532
4,351
4,909
2,898
2,713
3,111
21,972

2,194
4,652
2,158
5,536
6,323
3,998 h
1,403
2,557
5,353
3,945
1,333
1,307
2,453
1,385
1,505
1,702
2,988
2,798
2,169
1,335
1,726
3,428
1,129
1,636
1,904
3,109 h
2,774
1,557
1,303
715
752
1,499
1,090
1,011
1,142
749
1,602
1,147
1,815
1,622
588

Value

2012
0.629
0.626
0.621
0.620
0.616
0.616
0.614
0.617
0.611
0.606
0.603
0.583
0.580
0.579
0.571
0.565
0.561
0.554
0.554
0.556
0.556

0.537
0.535
0.531
0.529
0.524
0.520
0.502
0.501
0.500
0.499
0.496
0.484
0.490
0.489
0.486
0.484
0.485
0.481
0.484
0.480
0.473
0.472
0.470
0.469
0.466
0.465
0.448
0.438
0.429
0.411
0.407
0.406
0.396
0.389
0.391
0.386
0.385
0.380
0.368
0.370
0.365

2012–2013

0
0
1
0
1
0
2
–3
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
1
–1
–3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
4
–1
0
–1
1
–2
1
–3
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
0
0
1
–1
0

162    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE 1 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX AND ITS COMPONENTSTABLE1HDI rank
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy 

at birth

Mean years of 

schooling

Expected years 

of schooling 

Gross national income 

(GNI) per capita 

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Change  
in rank

Value

2013
0.338
0.337

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.890
0.735
0.614
0.493

0.682
0.703
0.738
0.740
0.588
0.502
0.487
0.665
0.702

(years)

2013
50.0
58.4

70.0
72.6
..
..
..
55.1
55.3
..

80.2
74.5
67.9
59.4

70.2
74.0
71.3
74.9
67.2
56.8
61.5
70.0
70.8

(years)

2012a
3.1
1.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

11.7
8.1
5.5
4.2

6.3
7.4
9.6
7.9
4.7
4.8
3.9
7.5
7.7

(years)

2012a
9.7
5.4

..
..
..
9.3
15.3
..
..
10.8

16.3
13.4
11.7
9.0

11.8
12.5
13.6
13.7
11.2
9.7
9.4
11.0
12.2

(2011 PPP $)

2013
444
873

..
4,206
..
..
..
..
1,450
5,151

40,046
13,231
5,960
2,904

15,817
10,499
12,415
13,767
5,195
3,152
2,126
9,471
13,723

Value

2012
0.333
0.335

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.889
0.733
0.612
0.490

0.681
0.699
0.735
0.739
0.586
0.499
0.484
0.663
0.700

2012–2013

1
–1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

NOTES
a  Data refer to 2012 or the most recent year 

available.

b  Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO 

Institute for Statistics (2013b).

c  Calculated by the Singapore Ministry of 

Education.

d  Value from UNDESA (2011).
e  Assumes the same adult mean years of schooling 

as Switzerland before the most recent update.

f  Estimated using the purchasing power parity (PPP) 
rate and the projected growth rate of Switzerland.

g  For the purpose of calculating the HDI, GNI per 

capita is capped at $75,000.

h  Based on PPP conversion rates for GDP from 
World Bank (2014) and on GDP deflators and 
GNI per capita in national currency from United 
Nations Statistics Division (2014).

i  Assumes the same adult mean years of schooling 

as Spain before the most recent update.

j  Estimated using the PPP rate and the projected 

growth rate of Spain.

k  Based on data from UNESCO Institute for 

Statistics (2011).

 

l  Based on data on school life expectancy from 

w Based on data from Demographic and Health 

UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2013a).

Surveys conducted by ICF Macro.

m  Projected growth rate based on ECLAC (2013).
n  Based on data on school life expectancy from 

UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2012). 

o  Based on the estimate of educational attainment 
distribution from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
(2013b).

p  Based on cross-country regression.
q  HDRO calculations based on data from the 
National Institute for Educational Studies of 
Brazil (2013).

r  Based on data from United Nations Children’s Fund 

Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys for 2005–2012.

s  Based on data from household surveys in the 

World Bank’s International Income Distribution 
Database.

t  HDRO calculations based on data from Samoa 

Bureau of Statistics (n.d.).

u  Based on projected growth rates from UNESCWA 

(2013).

v  Unpublished provisional estimate from an October 

2013 communication note from the United 
Nations Population Division.

DEFINITIONS

Human Development Index (HDI): A composite 
index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and 
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of 
living. See Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org for 
details on how the HDI is calculated.

Life expectancy at birth: Number of years a 
newborn infant could expect to live if prevailing 
patterns of age-specific mortality rates at the time of 
birth stay the same throughout the infant’s life.

Mean years of schooling: Average number of 
years of education received by people ages 25 and 
older, converted from education attainment levels 
using official durations of each level.

Expected years of schooling: Number of years 
of schooling that a child of school entrance age can 
expect to receive if prevailing patterns of age-specific 
enrolment rates persist throughout the child’s life.

Gross national income (GNI) per capita: 
Aggregate income of an economy generated by 

its production and its ownership of factors of 
production, less the incomes paid for the use of 
factors of production owned by the rest of the world, 
converted to international dollars using PPP rates, 
divided by midyear population.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 6: HDRO calculations based on data 
from UNDESA (2013a), Barro and Lee (2013), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2013b), United Nations Statistics 
Division (2014), World Bank (2014) and IMF (2014).

Column 2: UNDESA 2013a.

Column 3: Barro and Lee (2013), UNESCO Institute 
for Statistics (2013b) and HDRO estimates based 
on data on educational attainment from UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2013b) and on methodology 
from Barro and Lee (2013).

Column 4: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2013b. 

Column 5: HDRO calculations based on data from 
World Bank (2014), IMF (2014) and United Nations 
Statistics Division (2014).

Column 7: Calculations based on data in columns 
1 and 6.

TABLE 1  Human Development Index and its components    |    163

TABLE1HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE2

L
B
A
T

Human Development Index trends, 1980–2013

Human Development Index (HDI) 

HDI rank

Average annual HDI growth

TABLE

2

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1980

1990

2000

2005

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia

0.793
0.841
0.806
0.783
0.825
0.739
0.793
0.809
..
0.781
0.734
0.776
0.754
0.735
0.698
0.628
0.772
..
0.749
0.722
0.736
0.753
0.729
0.752
..
0.718
0.702
..
0.713
0.740
0.729
0.661
..
0.583
..
0.687
..
..
0.704
0.640
0.640
0.643
0.696
0.677
0.681
0.702
..
..
0.665

0.658
..
..
..
0.685
0.641
..
..
0.658
0.658
..
..
0.577

0.841
0.866
0.829
0.826
0.858
0.782
0.821
0.848
0.744
0.806
0.775
0.807
0.800
0.768
0.775
0.731
0.817
..
0.785
0.779
0.786
0.805
0.786
0.792
0.769
0.763
0.755
0.762
0.749
0.786
0.756
0.726
0.730
0.662
0.737
0.714
..
0.747
0.730
0.725
0.704
0.708
0.701
0.729
0.729
0.723
0.689
0.710
0.694

0.691
..
..
..
0.703
0.684
..
0.729
0.696
0.706
..
..
0.641

0.910
0.898
0.886
0.874
0.883
0.854
0.873
0.867
0.800
0.859
0.862
0.889
0.858
0.863
0.810
0.819
0.858
..
0.849
0.848
0.835
0.873
0.866
0.841
0.821
0.825
0.826
0.806
0.798
0.822
0.811
0.800
0.776
0.744
0.757
0.784
..
0.776
0.770
0.797
0.753
0.780
0.774
0.784
0.742
0.804
0.748
0.729
0.753

0.740
0.766
..
..
0.706
0.745
..
0.717
0.714
0.745
0.741
..
0.717

0.935
0.912
0.901
0.888
0.897
0.887
0.894
0.892
0.840
0.891
0.890
0.887
0.888
0.888
0.839
0.856
0.873
..
0.869
0.867
0.851
0.865
0.876
0.869
0.855
0.858
0.844
0.845
0.853
0.838
0.840
0.828
0.821
0.773
0.806
0.803
..
0.803
0.801
0.823
0.785
0.790
0.805
0.811
0.786
0.795
0.781
0.786
0.758

0.755
0.787
0.750
0.725
0.750
0.772
0.733
0.750
0.749
0.761
0.771
..
0.747

164    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Value

2008

0.937
0.922
0.903
0.901
0.905
0.902
0.899
0.896
0.868
0.896
0.902
0.891
0.886
0.890
0.877
0.874
0.881
..
0.877
0.875
0.868
0.873
0.882
0.878
0.871
0.868
0.857
0.856
0.858
0.843
0.855
0.844
0.832
0.791
0.827
0.817
..
0.824
0.809
0.832
0.805
0.805
0.814
0.810
0.830
0.800
0.801
0.813
0.777

0.773
0.791
0.780
0.764
0.781
0.789
0.714
0.770
0.766
0.776
0.772
..
0.760

2010

2011

2012

2013

2012

2008–2013a 1980–1990 1990–2000 2000–2013

Change

(%)

0.939
0.926
0.915
0.904
0.908
0.904
0.903
0.896
0.894
0.898
0.899
0.895
0.886
0.895
0.882
0.882
0.884
0.882
0.881
0.879
0.877
0.877
0.881
0.877
0.873
0.869
0.864
0.858
0.856
0.844
0.847
0.848
0.830
0.815
0.829
0.826
0.832
0.826
0.821
0.824
0.808
0.816
0.817
0.812
0.824
0.807
0.806
0.809
0.799

0.779
0.788
0.784
0.779
0.779
0.799
0.780
0.773
0.773
0.779
0.768
0.778
0.766

0.941
0.928
0.914
0.914
0.911
0.908
0.904
0.900
0.896
0.899
0.900
0.896
0.890
0.891
0.886
0.886
0.887
0.887
0.885
0.882
0.879
0.880
0.881
0.879
0.874
0.872
0.868
0.861
0.854
0.846
0.843
0.850
0.836
0.825
0.828
0.830
0.831
0.827
0.823
0.824
0.815
0.819
0.817
0.812
0.819
0.810
0.812
0.804
0.804

0.783
0.789
0.787
0.784
0.782
0.753
0.781
0.775
0.774
0.780
0.770
0.772
0.768

0.943
0.931
0.916
0.915
0.912
0.911
0.908
0.901
0.899
0.900
0.901
0.897
0.893
0.890
0.889
0.888
0.888
0.888
0.886
0.884
0.880
0.880
0.880
0.879
0.874
0.872
0.869
0.861
0.854
0.852
0.850
0.848
0.839
0.833
0.831
0.833
0.830
0.829
0.827
0.825
0.819
0.822
0.817
0.813
0.813
0.813
0.812
0.808
0.806

0.787
0.788
0.787
0.785
0.782
0.789
0.781
0.777
0.776
0.776
0.773
0.773
0.770

0.944
0.933
0.917
0.915
0.914
0.911
0.910
0.902
0.901
0.900
0.899
0.898
0.895
0.892
0.891
0.891
0.890
0.889
0.888
0.884
0.881
0.881
0.881
0.879
0.874
0.872
0.869
0.861
0.853
0.852
0.851
0.845
0.840
0.836
0.834
0.834
0.830
0.830
0.829
0.827
0.822
0.822
0.818
0.815
0.815
0.814
0.812
0.810
0.808

0.790
0.789
0.789
0.786
0.785
0.784
0.783
0.778
0.777
0.776
0.775
0.774
0.773

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
12
10
8
11
13
14
15
16
16
16
19
20
21
21
21
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
36
34
37
38
39
40
42
41
43
44
44
44
47
48
49

52
51
52
54
55
50
56
57
58
58
60
60
62

0
0
1
3
–2
–1
1
1
14
–1
–6
–1
0
–2
2
5
–2
..
–1
0
3
1
–6
–7
–2
–2
1
1
–2
2
–1
–1
0
13
1
3
..
0
4
–5
3
3
–3
–2
–9
1
–1
–7
4

5
–3
1
7
–3
–5
6
0
0
–5
–4
..
1

0.59
0.29
0.29
0.53
0.39
0.57
0.35
0.48
..
0.31
0.54
0.38
0.59
0.45
1.06
1.52
0.57
..
0.48
0.76
0.67
0.68
0.75
0.52
..
0.60
0.74
..
0.49
0.60
0.35
0.95
..
1.28
..
0.38
..
..
0.36
1.25
0.96
0.96
0.08
0.75
0.68
0.29
..
..
0.43

0.49
..
..
..
0.25
0.65
..
..
0.57
0.71
..
..
1.05

0.80
0.37
0.66
0.57
0.29
0.89
0.62
0.21
0.72
0.63
1.08
0.98
0.70
1.18
0.43
1.14
0.48
..
0.78
0.85
0.61
0.81
0.98
0.60
0.66
0.78
0.90
0.56
0.64
0.46
0.71
0.96
0.61
1.17
0.28
0.94
..
0.39
0.53
0.95
0.67
0.97
0.99
0.72
0.17
1.08
0.82
0.26
0.81

0.69
..
..
..
0.05
0.85
..
–0.17
0.25
0.54
..
..
1.12

0.28
0.29
0.27
0.35
0.26
0.51
0.32
0.31
0.92
0.37
0.32
0.08
0.32
0.25
0.74
0.65
0.28
..
0.34
0.33
0.41
0.07
0.13
0.34
0.48
0.43
0.39
0.52
0.51
0.27
0.37
0.43
0.61
0.90
0.75
0.48
..
0.51
0.57
0.28
0.68
0.41
0.43
0.30
0.73
0.09
0.64
0.82
0.55

0.50
0.23
..
..
0.82
0.40
..
0.64
0.66
0.31
0.34
..
0.58

Human Development Index (HDI) 

HDI rank

Average annual HDI growth

HDI rank
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala

1980
0.558
0.658
..
0.627
0.639
0.605
0.496
..
0.595
..
..
0.569
0.490
..
0.587
..
0.545
..
..
0.595
..
0.619
..
..
..
0.587
0.503
0.484
0.423
..
0.509
..
0.603
0.614
..
0.557
0.605
..
0.602
0.527

..
0.515
..
..
..
0.471
0.470
0.452
0.550
0.540
0.494
..
0.517
..
0.566
0.569
0.528
0.500
0.516
0.463
..
..
0.445

1990
0.621
0.658
..
0.651
0.644
0.652
0.576
0.686
0.647
..
..
0.620
0.552
..
0.622
0.726
0.612
..
..
0.615
0.705
0.640
..
..
0.632
0.619
0.572
0.567
0.502
..
0.576
..
0.609
0.638
..
0.596
0.643
..
0.631
0.589

..
0.552
..
..
..
0.528
0.583
0.546
0.581
0.619
0.554
0.645
0.529
..
0.591
0.619
0.570
0.508
0.505
0.476
..
..
0.483

2000
0.686
0.697
..
0.709
0.677
0.705
0.653
0.679
0.699
0.743
..
0.679
0.652
0.639
0.705
0.713
0.682
..
..
0.682
0.668
0.675
..
..
0.648
0.674
0.649
0.653
0.591
..
0.634
0.691
0.655
0.671
..
0.655
0.658
..
0.672
0.645

0.599
0.580
..
0.654
..
0.609
0.560
0.621
0.625
0.632
0.615
0.598
0.607
..
0.619
0.628
0.605
0.606
0.570
0.563
0.573
..
0.551

2005
0.722
0.745
0.741
0.728
0.716
0.721
0.687
0.734
0.724
0.757
..
0.710
0.681
0.686
0.733
0.732
0.705
0.710
..
0.694
0.713
0.710
0.699
0.716
0.693
0.694
0.685
0.687
0.645
..
0.675
0.708
0.689
0.700
..
0.680
0.687
0.672
0.695
0.668

0.659
0.637
..
0.681
0.649
0.640
0.610
0.645
0.648
0.644
0.636
0.639
0.640
0.626
0.638
0.608
0.653
0.621
0.584
0.598
0.589
..
0.576

TABLE

2

Value

2008
0.741
0.764
0.750
0.752
0.758
0.744
0.710
0.744
0.739
0.766
..
0.725
0.711
0.724
0.746
0.743
0.731
0.730
..
0.707
0.729
0.710
0.724
0.727
0.722
0.712
0.704
0.706
0.682
..
0.695
0.712
0.703
0.710
..
0.700
0.697
0.694
0.696
0.684

0.675
0.665
..
0.683
0.672
0.654
0.656
0.667
0.661
0.654
0.649
0.652
0.648
0.643
0.648
0.623
0.658
0.632
0.621
0.617
0.613
..
0.601

2010
0.753
0.764
0.759
0.759
0.759
0.750
0.738
0.747
0.748
0.763
0.747
0.736
0.725
0.743
0.744
0.743
0.739
0.733
0.746
0.722
0.726
0.714
0.728
0.726
0.720
0.721
0.715
0.715
0.701
0.717
0.709
0.717
0.708
0.712
0.717
0.706
0.701
0.698
0.701
0.691

0.688
0.671
0.687
0.688
0.671
0.671
0.672
0.678
0.669
0.662
0.658
0.652
0.652
0.648
0.651
0.638
0.662
0.638
0.626
0.629
0.622
0.627
0.613

2011
0.759
0.764
0.764
0.757
0.761
0.758
0.752
0.750
0.752
0.749
0.745
0.740
0.733
0.743
0.744
0.744
0.740
0.736
0.747
0.727
0.730
0.717
0.730
0.729
0.724
0.722
0.716
0.716
0.710
0.715
0.715
0.718
0.714
0.714
0.718
0.710
0.705
0.701
0.702
0.695

0.692
0.682
0.690
0.690
0.679
0.678
0.678
0.679
0.672
0.666
0.661
0.656
0.657
0.653
0.652
0.646
0.662
0.639
0.632
0.632
0.631
0.627
0.620

2012
0.769
0.765
0.764
0.761
0.763
0.761
0.756
0.755
0.755
0.755
0.749
0.745
0.749
0.745
0.744
0.743
0.742
0.741
0.743
0.734
0.733
0.731
0.730
0.729
0.728
0.722
0.720
0.719
0.715
0.717
0.715
0.716
0.714
0.715
0.715
0.708
0.708
0.702
0.704
0.698

0.695
0.692
0.693
0.693
0.683
0.681
0.681
0.681
0.670
0.670
0.663
0.657
0.660
0.657
0.656
0.654
0.662
0.641
0.635
0.635
0.635
0.629
0.626

2013
0.771
0.766
0.765
0.765
0.764
0.763
0.759
0.757
0.756
0.756
0.750
0.750
0.749
0.747
0.745
0.745
0.744
0.744
0.744
0.737
0.734
0.732
0.732
0.731
0.730
0.724
0.722
0.721
0.719
0.719
0.717
0.717
0.716
0.715
0.714
0.711
0.711
0.705
0.705
0.700

0.698
0.698
0.698
0.694
0.686
0.684
0.683
0.682
0.676
0.674
0.667
0.663
0.662
0.661
0.660
0.658
0.658
0.642
0.638
0.638
0.636
0.630
0.628

2012
63
64
65
67
66
67
69
70
70
70
73
75
73
75
77
78
80
81
78
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
93
91
93
92
97
93
93
98
98
101
100
102

103
106
104
104
107
108
108
108
111
111
113
116
115
116
118
119
114
120
121
121
121
124
125

Change

(%)

2008–2013a 1980–1990 1990–2000 2000–2013

9
–3
2
1
–2
1
16
–1
2
–12
..
5
10
4
–8
–5
–4
–3
..
8
–5
3
–3
–7
–4
–4
3
1
10
..
5
–8
–1
–8
..
–2
–1
0
–2
–1

1
3
..
–3
1
4
2
–4
–3
0
2
0
1
2
–1
2
–8
–1
0
2
1
..
3

1.07
0.00
..
0.38
0.08
0.76
1.50
..
0.84
..
..
0.87
1.19
..
0.58
..
1.16
..
..
0.34
..
0.33
..
..
..
0.53
1.28
1.60
1.72
..
1.25
..
0.10
0.38
..
0.68
0.61
..
0.49
1.12

..
0.71
..
..
..
1.16
2.18
1.91
0.55
1.37
1.17
..
0.22
..
0.45
0.86
0.76
0.17
–0.22
0.28
..
..
0.82

1.01
0.58
..
0.85
0.50
0.79
1.27
–0.09
0.78
..
..
0.91
1.69
..
1.26
–0.19
1.10
..
..
1.03
–0.54
0.53
..
..
0.26
0.86
1.27
1.42
1.66
..
0.96
..
0.74
0.51
..
0.94
0.24
..
0.62
0.91

..
0.50
..
..
..
1.44
–0.40
1.30
0.73
0.21
1.04
–0.76
1.38
..
0.46
0.14
0.60
1.77
1.22
1.70
..
..
1.34

0.90
0.73
..
0.59
0.93
0.60
1.16
0.84
0.60
0.14
..
0.77
1.07
1.21
0.43
0.34
0.67
..
..
0.60
0.73
0.63
..
..
0.92
0.55
0.83
0.77
1.52
..
0.95
0.29
0.69
0.49
..
0.63
0.59
..
0.37
0.63

1.19
1.43
..
0.45
..
0.90
1.54
0.72
0.61
0.50
0.63
0.80
0.67
..
0.49
0.36
0.65
0.45
0.87
0.96
0.81
..
1.01

TABLE 2  Human Development Index trends, 1980–2013    |    165

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceHDI rank
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger

Human Development Index (HDI) 

HDI rank

Average annual HDI growth

1980
..
0.550
..
0.461
0.399
..
0.483
..
..
0.369
..
0.251
0.423
0.340
0.542
0.422
0.336
..
..

0.286
0.356
0.446
0.477
..
0.328
0.291
0.391
..
..
..
0.437
0.323
..
..
0.377
0.347
0.443
0.333
0.293
0.287
0.331
0.405
0.352
0.230
..
0.377
0.300
..
0.270
..
0.208
..
0.246
..
0.230
..
..
0.276
..
0.295
0.336
0.191

1990
0.607
0.577
..
0.507
0.459
..
0.491
..
0.610
0.431
..
0.403
0.502
0.395
0.553
0.407
0.382
..
..

0.388
0.402
0.471
0.538
..
0.347
0.238
0.440
..
0.390
..
0.488
0.363
..
..
0.354
0.367
0.493
0.384
0.310
0.342
0.342
0.404
0.413
0.296
..
0.380
0.334
..
0.283
..
0.232
..
0.216
..
0.291
..
..
0.263
..
0.310
0.319
0.218

2000
0.586
0.556
0.465
0.558
0.526
..
0.554
..
0.529
0.483
..
0.466
0.487
0.473
0.501
0.423
0.453
0.495
0.476

0.449
0.454
0.455
0.498
0.377
0.421
0.329
0.433
..
0.427
0.453
0.428
0.423
0.475
..
0.376
0.433
0.443
0.413
0.392
0.391
0.385
0.430
0.433
0.341
..
0.393
0.383
0.284
0.341
0.339
0.309
..
0.285
..
0.290
..
..
0.297
0.301
0.314
0.274
0.262

2005
0.605
0.570
0.505
0.584
0.569
..
0.585
..
0.572
0.527
..
0.536
0.511
0.511
0.525
0.471
0.494
0.520
0.517

0.477
0.504
0.479
0.498
0.446
0.472
0.391
0.457
0.466
0.462
0.470
0.412
0.441
0.483
0.464
0.419
0.455
0.437
0.451
0.429
0.432
0.423
0.442
0.447
0.396
0.412
0.407
0.414
0.339
0.368
0.335
0.359
0.387
0.343
0.366
0.319
0.321
..
0.329
0.324
0.327
0.292
0.293

Value

2008
0.617
0.598
0.579
0.604
0.588
0.608
0.599
..
0.591
0.554
..
0.564
0.544
0.533
0.548
0.505
0.515
0.537
0.543

0.501
0.536
0.508
0.518
0.490
0.500
0.432
0.477
0.483
0.471
0.487
0.422
0.467
0.506
0.474
0.451
0.466
0.456
0.474
0.458
0.454
0.447
0.447
0.458
0.430
0.438
0.427
0.432
0.394
0.395
0.374
0.385
0.397
0.366
0.377
0.362
0.349
..
0.346
0.338
0.344
0.307
0.309

2010
0.614
0.610
0.606
0.612
0.603
0.617
0.604
0.599
0.596
0.570
0.569
0.571
0.556
0.549
0.565
0.530
0.539
0.543
0.559

0.527
0.526
0.522
0.527
0.504
0.514
0.453
0.493
0.492
0.484
0.494
0.459
0.479
0.489
0.479
0.464
0.475
0.472
0.483
0.472
0.467
0.463
0.460
0.462
0.453
0.452
0.439
0.440
0.409
0.406
0.393
0.398
0.401
0.380
0.380
0.381
0.367
0.373
0.353
0.349
0.355
0.319
0.323

2011
0.618
0.616
0.606
0.615
0.612
0.618
0.608
0.599
0.600
0.581
0.579
0.575
0.566
0.560
0.549
0.543
0.549
0.548
0.553

0.533
0.531
0.527
0.530
0.521
0.517
0.463
0.498
0.496
0.497
0.495
0.473
0.484
0.494
0.483
0.478
0.475
0.476
0.483
0.477
0.471
0.468
0.467
0.466
0.458
0.461
0.443
0.436
0.422
0.411
0.402
0.405
0.402
0.384
0.387
0.384
0.376
0.377
0.360
0.365
0.361
0.323
0.328

2012
0.621
0.620
0.616
0.616
0.614
0.617
0.611
0.606
0.603
0.583
0.580
0.579
0.571
0.565
0.561
0.554
0.554
0.556
0.556

0.537
0.535
0.531
0.529
0.524
0.520
0.502
0.501
0.500
0.499
0.496
0.484
0.490
0.489
0.486
0.484
0.485
0.481
0.484
0.480
0.473
0.472
0.470
0.469
0.466
0.465
0.448
0.438
0.429
0.411
0.407
0.406
0.396
0.389
0.391
0.386
0.385
0.380
0.368
0.370
0.365
0.333
0.335

2013
0.628
0.624
0.620
0.617
0.617
0.616
0.614
0.607
0.607
0.586
0.584
0.584
0.573
0.569
0.564
0.561
0.558
0.558
0.556

0.540
0.537
0.535
0.530
0.526
0.524
0.506
0.504
0.504
0.500
0.498
0.492
0.491
0.491
0.488
0.488
0.487
0.486
0.485
0.484
0.476
0.473
0.473
0.471
0.468
0.467
0.452
0.441
0.435
0.414
0.412
0.407
0.396
0.393
0.392
0.389
0.388
0.381
0.374
0.372
0.341
0.338
0.337

2012
126
127
129
129
131
128
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
143
143
141
141

145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
160
156
157
158
160
159
163
160
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
179
178
180
181
182
184
183
185
187
186

Change

(%)

2008–2013a 1980–1990 1990–2000 2000–2013

–2
3
5
–2
3
–5
–3
..
–2
1
..
–1
1
3
–2
7
2
–1
–4

4
–1
–1
–5
2
0
17
2
1
2
–3
16
1
–10
–4
5
–2
0
–6
–4
–2
–1
–1
–8
1
–3
0
–4
2
0
3
0
–4
1
–2
0
0
..
0
1
–1
1
–1

..
0.48
..
0.95
1.41
..
0.17
..
..
1.58
..
4.83
1.73
1.51
0.19
–0.37
1.29
..
..

3.09
1.22
0.55
1.20
..
0.59
–2.01
1.19
..
..
..
1.12
1.19
..
..
–0.64
0.55
1.06
1.44
0.55
1.78
0.33
–0.03
1.61
2.56
..
0.10
1.08
..
0.46
..
1.14
..
–1.31
..
2.37
..
..
–0.49
..
0.50
–0.53
1.34

–0.34
–0.36
..
0.96
1.37
..
1.22
..
–1.42
1.15
..
1.47
–0.30
1.83
–0.98
0.39
1.71
..
..

1.47
1.21
–0.34
–0.77
..
1.94
3.31
–0.15
..
0.90
..
–1.30
1.53
..
..
0.59
1.67
–1.06
0.72
2.38
1.33
1.20
0.63
0.46
1.42
..
0.33
1.37
..
1.88
..
2.89
..
2.84
..
–0.03
..
..
1.23
..
0.13
–1.52
1.86

0.52
0.89
2.25
0.78
1.23
..
0.79
..
1.07
1.49
..
1.75
1.26
1.44
0.92
2.19
1.62
0.92
1.21

1.42
1.30
1.25
0.48
2.60
1.69
3.35
1.18
..
1.22
0.73
1.08
1.17
0.25
..
2.04
0.91
0.72
1.25
1.63
1.52
1.59
0.74
0.66
2.46
..
1.08
1.08
3.35
1.50
1.52
2.13
..
2.49
..
2.29
..
..
1.79
1.66
0.61
1.64
1.95

166    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE2TABLE 2 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX TRENDS, 1980–2013HDI rank
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

NOTES
a  A positive value indicates an improvement in 

rank.

 

Human Development Index (HDI) 

HDI rank

Average annual HDI growth

1980

1990

2000

2005

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.757
0.534
0.420
0.345

0.492
0.457
..
0.579
0.382
0.382
0.319
0.545
0.559

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.798
0.593
0.474
0.367

0.551
0.517
0.651
0.627
0.438
0.399
0.345
0.587
0.597

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.849
0.643
0.528
0.403

0.611
0.595
0.665
0.683
0.491
0.421
0.391
0.613
0.639

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.870
0.682
0.565
0.444

0.644
0.641
0.700
0.705
0.533
0.452
0.429
0.637
0.667

Value

2008

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.879
0.710
0.587
0.471

0.664
0.671
0.716
0.726
0.560
0.477
0.457
0.658
0.685

2010

2011

2012

2013

2012

2008–2013a 1980–1990 1990–2000 2000–2013

Change

(%)

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.885
0.723
0.601
0.479

0.675
0.688
0.726
0.734
0.573
0.488
0.472
0.662
0.693

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.887
0.729
0.609
0.486

0.678
0.695
0.733
0.737
0.582
0.495
0.480
0.663
0.698

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.889
0.733
0.612
0.490

0.681
0.699
0.735
0.739
0.586
0.499
0.484
0.663
0.700

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.890
0.735
0.614
0.493

0.682
0.703
0.738
0.740
0.588
0.502
0.487
0.665
0.702

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.52
1.04
1.22
0.64

1.14
1.23
..
0.79
1.37
0.44
0.79
0.75
0.66

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.62
0.81
1.09
0.95

1.05
1.42
0.21
0.87
1.16
0.52
1.26
0.43
0.67

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.37
1.04
1.17
1.56

0.85
1.29
0.80
0.62
1.39
1.37
1.70
0.62
0.73

DEFINITIONS

Human Development Index (HDI): A composite 
index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and 
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of 
living. See Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org for 
details on how the HDI is calculated.

Average annual HDI growth: A smoothed 
annualized growth of the HDI in a given period, 
calculated as the annual compound growth rate.

UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2013b), United 
Nations Statistics Division (2014), World Bank (2014) 
and IMF (2014).

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1–9: HDRO calculations based on data 
from UNDESA (2013a), Barro and Lee (2013), 

Columns 10–14: Calculated based on data in 
columns 1–9.

TABLE 2  Human Development Index trends, 1980–2013    |    167

TABLE2HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE3

L
B
A
T

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Coefficient 
of human 
inequality

Inequality 

in life 

expectancy

TABLE

3

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria

Value

2013

0.944
0.933
0.917
0.915
0.914
0.911
0.910
0.902
0.901
0.900
0.899
0.898
0.895
0.892
0.891
0.891
0.890
0.889
0.888
0.884
0.881
0.881
0.881
0.879
0.874
0.872
0.869
0.861
0.853
0.852
0.851
0.845
0.840
0.836
0.834
0.834
0.830
0.830
0.829
0.827
0.822
0.822
0.818
0.815
0.815
0.814
0.812
0.810
0.808

0.790
0.789
0.789
0.786
0.785
0.784
0.783
0.778
0.777

Value

2013

0.891
0.860
0.847
0.854
0.755
0.846
..
0.833
..
0.838
0.832
0.840
0.843
0.812
..
0.736
0.779
..
0.793
0.804
0.818
0.806
0.814
0.830
0.824
0.768
0.775
0.813
0.762
..
..
0.752
0.767
..
0.746
0.751
..
0.778
0.760
..
0.661
0.739
0.757
..
..
..
0.721
0.725
0.680

0.662
0.676
0.733
0.726
0.702
..
..
0.685
0.692

Overall 
loss (%)

Difference 
from HDI 

rankb

2013

2013

Value

2013

(%)

2013

5.6
7.8
7.7
6.7
17.4
7.1
..
7.6
..
6.9
7.5
6.5
5.7
8.9
..
17.4
12.4
..
10.7
9.0
7.2
8.5
7.6
5.5
5.8
11.9
10.9
5.6
10.6
..
..
11.0
8.7
..
10.6
9.9
..
6.3
8.3
..
19.6
10.1
7.4
..
..
..
11.2
10.6
15.8

16.1
14.3
7.2
7.6
10.5
..
..
12.0
11.0

0
0
–1
1
–23
1
..
–2
..
0
–1
3
5
–4
..
–20
–6
..
–4
–2
4
0
3
9
9
–1
1
9
0
..
..
–3
3
..
–3
–2
..
9
5
..
–16
0
7
..
..
..
–2
0
–4

–8
–3
5
6
4
..
..
3
5

5.5
7.5
7.6
6.6
16.2
7.0
..
7.5
..
6.8
7.4
6.4
5.6
8.6
..
16.8
12.2
..
10.4
8.9
7.1
8.5
7.5
5.5
5.7
11.6
10.5
5.5
10.5
..
..
10.9
8.5
..
10.4
9.7
..
6.2
8.2
..
18.5
9.8
7.3
..
..
..
11.1
10.3
15.3

15.7
14.0
7.1
7.5
10.4
..
..
11.6
10.8

3.4
4.2
3.9
3.9
6.2
3.7
4.8
4.6
2.8
4.0
3.7
3.1
2.8
4.5
2.8
3.9
3.2
..
3.8
4.0
3.7
3.9
3.3
3.5
3.8
3.4
3.9
3.7
4.0
4.4
6.0
3.7
5.6
8.7
6.6
5.7
..
5.6
4.8
5.5
5.9
3.9
5.4
6.3
5.1
7.2
5.2
7.6
9.3

9.2
9.4
7.6
6.8
8.8
10.1
7.0
9.8
7.9

168    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Inequality-
adjusted life 
expectancy 

index

Value

2013

0.914
0.921
0.926
0.902
0.851
0.900
0.895
0.902
0.932
0.877
0.899
0.922
0.928
0.890
0.948
0.910
0.947
..
0.915
0.913
0.906
0.895
0.901
0.899
0.882
0.927
0.918
0.855
0.898
0.861
0.844
0.887
0.791
0.779
0.749
0.818
..
0.805
0.875
0.826
0.868
0.886
0.795
0.816
0.865
0.775
0.832
0.741
0.786

0.799
0.770
0.779
0.716
0.755
0.765
0.809
0.666
0.759

Inequality 

in 

educationa

(%)

2013c

2.4
1.8
5.8
4.1
6.7
2.4
..
4.0
..
3.1
5.2
3.6
2.5
2.6
..
28.1
19.8
..
7.9
8.6
3.7
9.2
6.0
2.1
2.7
11.7
5.4
1.4
11.3
..
..
14.0
2.5
..
6.1
5.6
..
1.5
5.7
..
13.7
5.7
3.5
..
11.0
..
10.4
3.6
8.6

10.9
8.0
2.5
4.8
5.0
..
..
2.1
5.8

Inequality-
adjusted 
education 

index

Value

2013

0.888
0.910
0.795
0.857
0.830
0.863
..
0.816
..
0.846
0.841
0.800
0.826
0.838
..
0.622
0.648
..
0.786
0.745
0.765
0.738
0.716
0.798
0.840
0.697
0.751
0.854
0.707
..
..
0.668
0.837
..
0.823
0.779
..
0.790
0.691
..
0.644
0.686
0.777
..
0.661
..
0.690
0.784
0.716

0.635
0.657
0.754
0.781
0.710
..
..
0.764
0.706

Inequality 

in  

incomea

(%)

2013c

10.7
16.6
13.2
11.8
35.6
14.8
..
13.9
..
13.3
13.3
12.4
11.6
18.8
..
18.4
13.5
..
19.6
14.2
13.8
12.3
13.1
10.8
10.6
19.8
22.1
11.3
16.2
..
..
14.9
17.4
..
18.6
17.9
..
11.5
14.1
..
36.0
19.9
13.1
..
..
..
17.6
19.8
28.1

27.1
24.5
11.3
11.1
17.3
..
..
22.9
18.8

Inequality-
adjusted 
income 
index

Value

2013

0.871
0.760
0.824
0.806
0.609
0.781
..
0.785
..
0.794
0.761
0.803
0.783
0.719
..
0.704
0.772
..
0.693
0.765
0.789
0.792
0.837
0.798
0.755
0.701
0.673
0.737
0.697
..
..
0.719
0.681
..
0.673
0.666
..
0.740
0.727
..
0.516
0.664
0.703
..
..
..
0.653
0.654
0.560

0.573
0.612
0.669
0.685
0.645
..
..
0.631
0.618

Income inequality

Quintile 

ratio

Palma 
ratio

Gini 

coefficient

2003–2012 2003–2012 2003–2012

..
..
..
5.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
7.2
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
4.8
..
..
..
..
..
13.3
..
6.4
..
6.7
5.2
..
3.6
..
..
13.5
..
4.8
..
..
..
5.2
6.0
11.3

10.3
..
4.3
3.8
4.1
..
..
7.3
4.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
1.6
1.3
..
0.9
..
..
3.5
..
1.2
..
..
..
1.4
1.4
2.4

2.5
..
1.0
0.9
1.0
..
..
1.9
1.0

25.8
..
33.7
30.9
40.8
28.3
..
32.6
..
..
34.3
25.0
..
36.0
..
..
..
..
39.2
..
29.2
33.0
30.8
26.9
31.2
36.0
34.7
..
34.3
..
41.1
..
36.0
..
37.6
32.7
..
26.0
..
..
52.1
..
31.2
..
..
..
33.7
34.8
44.5

45.3
..
28.6
26.5
27.4
..
..
40.1
28.2

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Coefficient 
of human 
inequality

Inequality 

in life 

expectancy

HDI rank
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines

Value

2013
0.776
0.775
0.774
0.773
0.771
0.766
0.765
0.765
0.764
0.763
0.759
0.757
0.756
0.756
0.750
0.750
0.749
0.747
0.745
0.745
0.744
0.744
0.744
0.737
0.734
0.732
0.732
0.731
0.730
0.724
0.722
0.721
0.719
0.719
0.717
0.717
0.716
0.715
0.714
0.711
0.711
0.705
0.705
0.700

0.698
0.698
0.698
0.694
0.686
0.684
0.683
0.682
0.676
0.674
0.667
0.663
0.662
0.661
0.660

Overall 
loss (%)

Difference 
from HDI 

rankb

Value

2013
..
..
..
..
14.2
15.2
20.8
22.1
19.7
19.9
15.8
11.9
22.9
..
..
14.3
33.6
11.8
18.6
10.9
27.0
14.5
..
23.7
9.2
..
13.6
10.6
10.4
15.3
20.7
..
..
..
..
..
13.4
19.0
..
26.7
22.7
24.2
..
23.6

25.4
11.5
..
..
11.7
19.2
38.2
24.0
24.1
24.0
29.6
12.2
26.7
15.8
18.1

2013
..
..
..
..
–2
–6
–17
–18
–10
–11
–3
9
–13
..
..
1
–34
7
–5
12
–16
4
..
–9
18
..
7
13
15
6
–2
..
..
..
..
..
11
1
..
–10
–3
–6
..
–4

–7
16
..
..
13
5
–21
–5
–5
–5
–10
16
–7
14
10

2013
..
..
..
..
14.1
15.0
20.3
21.4
19.4
19.1
15.6
11.8
22.3
..
..
14.2
32.1
11.5
18.5
10.9
26.3
14.0
..
23.4
9.1
..
13.3
10.4
10.2
15.1
20.0
..
..
..
..
..
13.4
18.6
..
25.7
22.4
23.5
..
23.4

24.2
11.4
..
..
11.7
19.1
36.5
22.8
23.7
24.0
29.4
12.0
26.2
15.3
18.0

Value

2013

..
..
..
..
0.662
0.649
0.606
0.596
0.613
0.611
0.639
0.667
0.583
..
..
0.643
0.498
0.659
0.607
0.663
0.542
0.636
..
0.562
0.667
..
0.633
0.653
0.655
0.613
0.573
..
..
..
..
..
0.620
0.579
..
0.521
0.549
0.534
..
0.535

0.521
0.618
..
..
0.606
0.553
0.422
0.518
0.513
0.512
0.470
0.582
0.485
0.556
0.540

(%)

2013
8.1
..
8.0
4.9
9.2
16.4
6.7
12.1
12.2
7.3
11.0
16.7
10.9
7.9
..
8.3
12.5
21.7
11.9
8.5
14.5
12.9
8.4
13.9
10.4
11.4
7.6
6.7
12.7
12.3
9.8
10.6
9.8
12.9
16.7
..
9.9
15.0
9.9
13.5
13.4
13.6
13.7
16.9

8.1
16.6
26.0
13.3
13.1
16.4
21.9
13.4
19.2
28.0
24.5
11.0
14.5
24.3
15.2

Inequality-
adjusted life 
expectancy 

index

Value

2013
0.783
..
0.792
0.805
0.749
0.641
0.861
0.778
0.738
0.855
0.757
0.596
0.788
0.754
..
0.766
0.728
0.611
0.730
0.761
0.709
0.728
0.744
0.726
0.669
0.734
0.785
0.809
0.733
0.672
0.755
0.768
0.768
0.703
0.654
..
0.796
0.700
0.760
0.719
0.752
0.678
0.699
0.683

0.819
0.610
0.517
0.709
0.711
0.654
0.533
0.682
0.650
0.482
0.549
0.670
0.692
0.562
0.635

Inequality 

in 

educationa

(%)

2013c
..
12.0
..
..
13.2
6.6
24.1
16.3
17.6
15.7
14.1
5.9
21.4
..
..
14.6
37.3
8.3
22.4
10.7
24.7
3.3
..
25.6
6.1
..
10.6
5.2
3.7
10.5
16.1
..
..
..
..
..
11.9
10.6
..
22.1
21.6
19.5
..
24.0

41.2
5.2
..
..
6.9
23.2
32.1
40.9
17.2
23.5
27.6
6.1
30.2
1.4
13.5

Inequality-
adjusted 
education 

index

Value

2013
..
0.692
..
..
0.623
0.654
0.479
0.550
0.562
0.551
0.560
0.717
0.501
..
..
0.630
0.429
0.642
0.543
0.621
0.498
0.745
..
0.494
0.747
..
0.574
0.621
0.675
0.686
0.510
..
..
..
..
..
0.536
0.598
..
0.469
0.466
0.474
..
0.449

0.322
0.658
..
..
0.617
0.463
0.420
0.339
0.486
0.451
0.488
0.614
0.386
0.642
0.528

Inequality 

in  

incomea

(%)

2013c
..
23.0
..
..
19.8
21.9
30.0
35.8
28.4
34.3
21.8
12.7
34.6
..
..
19.6
46.6
4.5
21.1
13.5
39.7
25.9
..
30.6
10.9
37.9
21.8
19.2
14.3
22.6
34.0
..
29.5
..
..
..
18.3
30.1
..
41.5
32.1
37.3
..
29.3

23.2
12.3
..
..
15.0
17.7
55.5
14.2
34.6
20.4
36.1
18.9
34.0
20.1
25.2

TABLE

3

Inequality-
adjusted 
income 
index

Value

2013
..
0.565
..
..
0.621
0.653
0.538
0.494
0.556
0.483
0.616
0.695
0.500
..
..
0.550
0.395
0.730
0.564
0.618
0.452
0.474
..
0.495
0.593
0.426
0.563
0.555
0.567
0.500
0.488
..
0.505
..
..
..
0.558
0.465
..
0.420
0.472
0.475
..
0.500

0.535
0.588
..
..
0.507
0.559
0.336
0.602
0.428
0.617
0.388
0.480
0.427
0.478
0.470

Income inequality

Quintile 

ratio

Palma 
ratio

Gini 

coefficient

2003–2012 2003–2012 2003–2012

..
..
..
11.3
..
..
..
17.1
11.5
14.5
8.3
4.2
10.7
18.8
..
5.8
7.0
5.3
5.7
4.6
20.6
9.5
..
13.5
3.6
17.6
10.0
6.5
4.6
8.0
6.9
6.4
10.1
..
..
..
5.3
9.6
..
20.1
12.5
17.9
..
11.3

6.8
6.2
..
..
5.8
6.3
..
4.4
17.3
7.8
27.8
5.3
14.3
6.2
8.3

..
..
..
2.6
..
..
..
3.6
2.4
3.3
1.9
1.1
2.7
6.4
..
1.6
1.7
1.4
1.5
1.1
4.3
2.1
..
2.9
0.9
..
2.3
1.5
1.2
2.2
1.8
1.5
2.1
..
..
..
1.4
..
..
4.5
3.1
..
..
2.7

..
1.6
..
..
1.5
1.7
..
1.2
3.7
2.0
4.8
1.3
3.0
1.6
2.2

..
..
..
46.2
..
..
..
51.9
44.8
50.7
40.0
29.0
47.2
65.8
..
36.4
38.3
33.7
35.4
29.6
54.7
42.1
..
48.1
25.6
53.1
43.6
36.2
31.3
42.8
39.4
36.1
42.1
..
..
..
34.5
45.5
..
55.9
49.3
52.9
..
47.2

37.4
36.5
..
..
35.5
38.1
..
30.8
52.4
41.5
56.3
33.0
48.3
36.7
43.0

TABLE 3 

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index    |    169

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceHuman 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Coefficient 
of human 
inequality

Overall 
loss (%)

Difference 
from HDI 

rankb

2013
..
21.2
21.4
18.2
14.9
19.7
..
32.8
17.2
43.6
30.7
32.2
29.7
..
26.4
31.5
19.2
28.6
20.4
24.7
31.3
24.5
30.7
35.0
29.1
31.2
..

28.8
30.1
32.8
33.3
44.0
..
33.2
32.8
40.3
32.8
30.5
27.2
..
23.8
..
27.1
35.3
35.6
32.9
30.8
34.6
..
32.9
39.5
31.4
34.6
38.3
..
29.4
31.9
33.8
..

2013
..
4
0
10
15
4
..
–8
10
–22
–3
–6
0
..
4
–4
9
0
9
7
–1
8
0
–4
4
0
..

3
2
0
–2
–17
..
–4
–2
–14
–2
2
7
..
11
..
8
–2
–2
3
5
0
..
4
–3
7
2
–2
..
5
1
–1
..

Value

2013

..
0.518
0.505
0.522
0.543
0.511
..
0.422
0.519
0.352
0.430
0.418
0.433
..
0.452
0.416
0.491
0.418
0.465
0.440
0.394
0.430
0.391
0.365
0.396
0.384
..

0.384
0.375
0.360
0.354
0.295
..
0.338
0.339
0.300
0.336
0.346
0.358
..
0.374
..
0.356
0.315
0.313
0.326
0.335
0.311
..
0.317
0.285
0.321
0.306
0.279
..
0.307
0.282
0.273
..

Value

2013
..
20.8
21.2
18.0
14.9
19.4
..
32.0
16.9
39.3
29.4
31.1
28.5
..
25.8
30.1
18.8
27.7
20.2
24.6
31.2
24.1
30.6
34.5
28.7
30.4
..

27.8
28.7
32.7
33.1
43.6
..
33.1
32.4
40.2
31.7
30.3
26.8
..
23.8
..
26.9
34.6
34.9
32.3
30.8
34.2
..
32.6
38.9
30.0
33.7
37.9
..
28.0
31.6
32.8
..

Value

2013
0.658
0.658
0.642
0.638
0.638
0.636
0.630
0.628
0.628
0.624
0.620
0.617
0.617
0.616
0.614
0.607
0.607
0.586
0.584
0.584
0.573
0.569
0.564
0.561
0.558
0.558
0.556

0.540
0.537
0.535
0.530
0.526
0.524
0.506
0.504
0.504
0.500
0.498
0.492
0.491
0.491
0.488
0.488
0.487
0.486
0.485
0.484
0.476
0.473
0.473
0.471
0.468
0.467
0.452
0.441
0.435
0.414
0.412
0.407

HDI rank
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali

170    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Inequality 

in life 

expectancy

(%)

2013
25.7
12.6
17.6
19.2
12.1
12.0
19.8
17.4
20.0
21.7
22.8
17.0
16.8
15.4
13.2
20.6
29.3
25.0
22.2
25.3
30.8
21.5
36.0
37.2
20.1
26.9
44.4

21.1
29.9
31.5
35.0
46.2
27.1
30.2
39.4
40.8
30.3
24.8
26.8
26.5
22.3
34.2
30.4
36.6
33.5
29.5
33.8
37.0
32.8
36.8
27.9
34.3
32.5
40.2
34.8
30.2
40.0
33.1
45.6

Inequality-
adjusted life 
expectancy 

index

Value

2013
0.422
0.734
0.626
0.575
0.757
0.746
0.604
0.662
0.585
0.536
0.565
0.687
0.652
0.672
0.732
0.597
0.514
0.536
0.578
0.597
0.438
0.583
0.382
0.368
0.623
0.521
0.283

0.588
0.502
0.440
0.290
0.264
0.507
0.473
0.327
0.296
0.462
0.517
0.449
0.480
0.570
0.414
0.445
0.405
0.301
0.471
0.399
0.381
0.435
0.355
0.478
0.414
0.434
0.283
0.389
0.469
0.326
0.417
0.293

Inequality 

in 

educationa

(%)

2013c
18.1
31.5
29.8
10.5
18.0
18.2
..
36.1
6.6
27.8
47.6
29.6
45.8
..
33.3
21.4
12.2
42.1
13.3
28.3
35.6
34.1
25.4
23.8
37.8
20.0
..

44.0
45.2
30.7
26.8
34.6
19.4
29.4
34.8
45.2
47.2
30.1
17.8
11.5
22.8
47.4
29.5
45.9
24.3
44.6
31.2
42.0
..
37.6
40.4
45.0
47.0
45.4
..
44.3
30.2
46.4
36.9

Inequality-
adjusted 
education 

index

Value

2013
0.569
0.379
0.328
0.521
0.421
0.395
..
0.309
0.613
0.376
0.248
0.356
0.254
..
0.323
0.473
0.561
0.274
0.365
0.355
0.356
0.287
0.381
0.451
0.278
0.375
..

0.253
0.204
0.357
0.404
0.310
0.299
0.338
0.317
0.233
0.179
0.320
0.411
0.333
0.313
0.237
0.300
0.191
0.382
0.204
0.329
0.240
..
0.321
0.223
0.201
0.162
0.213
..
0.176
0.307
0.197
0.193

Inequality 

in  

incomea

(%)

2013c
..
18.3
16.1
24.4
14.6
28.0
63.1
42.5
24.1
68.3
17.8
46.8
23.0
18.5
31.0
48.4
15.0
16.1
25.1
20.3
27.2
16.8
30.3
42.6
28.3
44.2
..

18.3
11.0
36.0
37.6
50.0
..
39.6
23.1
34.5
17.6
36.1
35.8
..
26.3
..
20.9
21.2
47.0
22.7
27.3
23.6
..
23.5
48.4
10.8
21.7
28.1
26.9
9.5
24.6
19.0
..

Inequality-
adjusted 
income 
index

Value

2013
..
0.500
0.626
0.474
0.502
0.452
0.201
0.367
0.391
0.216
0.568
0.299
0.493
0.404
0.391
0.255
0.409
0.500
0.477
0.401
0.392
0.474
0.410
0.292
0.357
0.290
..

0.381
0.516
0.297
0.378
0.313
..
0.241
0.377
0.394
0.457
0.250
0.249
..
0.293
..
0.339
0.404
0.267
0.359
0.285
0.329
..
0.280
0.218
0.397
0.406
0.361
0.303
0.351
0.224
0.247
..

Income inequality

Quintile 

ratio

Palma 
ratio

Gini 

coefficient

2003–2012 2003–2012 2003–2012

25.3
5.7
4.6
..
5.9
..
..
19.6
5.4
21.8
..
29.7
7.3
..
7.6
..
4.7
5.0
6.8
5.6
9.3
5.9
10.7
17.4
4.7
..
..

5.0
4.2
11.0
14.0
9.0
..
11.0
6.9
12.2
6.3
9.3
..
..
..
26.7
6.6
7.8
19.0
7.7
8.7
6.6
6.2
7.6
..
4.0
..
8.5
11.0
5.3
8.9
7.0
5.2

7.1
..
1.2
..
1.5
..
..
4.5
1.3
..
..
5.2
2.0
..
1.9
..
1.2
1.4
1.7
1.5
2.2
1.6
2.8
4.8
1.3
..
..

1.3
1.2
2.8
3.5
2.2
..
3.2
1.8
3.0
1.7
2.3
..
..
..
..
1.7
1.9
3.9
1.9
2.3
1.8
1.4
1.8
..
1.0
..
2.0
2.8
1.4
2.3
1.7
1.3

63.1
35.8
30.9
..
35.6
50.5
61.1
55.9
33.4
63.9
..
57.0
40.9
..
40.5
..
30.8
33.9
38.1
36.0
42.8
36.7
47.3
57.5
32.1
50.8
..

32.8
30.0
47.7
51.5
42.7
..
50.8
38.9
48.8
37.7
44.1
..
..
..
64.3
37.6
40.5
52.5
40.3
44.3
38.6
35.3
39.3
59.2
27.8
40.0
41.5
47.3
33.6
43.9
38.2
33.0

TABLE 3 INEQUALITY-ADJUSTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEXTABLE3Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted 

HDI (IHDI)

Coefficient 
of human 
inequality

Overall 
loss (%)

Difference 
from HDI 

rankb

2013
39.6
29.5
38.0
33.9
35.0
..
44.3
37.8
40.4
37.6
32.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

12.3
19.7
25.6
32.6

24.9
19.7
13.3
24.5
28.7
33.6
31.0
25.3
22.9

2013
–4
2
–1
2
2
..
–3
1
–2
1
3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Value

2013
0.239
0.277
0.243
0.257
0.252
..
0.208
0.232
0.203
0.211
0.228

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.780
0.590
0.457
0.332

0.512
0.564
0.639
0.559
0.419
0.334
0.336
0.497
0.541

Value

2013
39.4
28.9
37.8
32.6
34.6
..
43.6
36.8
39.9
36.8
31.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

12.0
19.3
25.2
32.4

24.2
19.5
13.2
23.9
28.0
33.5
30.9
24.9
22.8

Value

2013
0.396
0.393
0.392
0.389
0.388
0.381
0.374
0.372
0.341
0.338
0.337

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.890
0.735
0.614
0.493

0.682
0.703
0.738
0.740
0.588
0.502
0.487
0.665
0.702

HDI rank
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Inequality 

in life 

expectancy

Inequality-
adjusted life 
expectancy 

index

Inequality 

in 

educationa

(%)

2013
45.3
40.2
40.3
43.6
41.1
24.7
51.2
46.1
45.7
49.9
37.9

15.4
..
..
..
..
42.1
40.8
..

4.9
10.7
21.9
35.0

17.4
11.7
14.2
13.2
24.4
36.6
32.3
18.5
17.3

Value

2013
0.289
0.278
0.332
0.296
0.329
0.496
0.192
0.259
0.252
0.231
0.367

0.651
..
..
..
..
0.312
0.321
..

0.881
0.749
0.575
0.394

0.639
0.734
0.676
0.733
0.549
0.359
0.433
0.626
0.647

(%)

2013c
40.3
18.2
42.0
41.0
38.5
..
48.7
43.4
45.9
29.4
39.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
10.5

8.7
17.4
35.1
38.2

38.0
19.7
8.6
22.2
41.6
35.7
35.6
22.1
27.0

Inequality-
adjusted 
education 

index

Value

2013
0.194
0.304
0.171
0.218
0.154
..
0.156
0.145
0.172
0.262
0.120

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.769
0.531
0.331
0.241

0.334
0.477
0.639
0.502
0.274
0.276
0.253
0.433
0.433

Inequality 

in  

incomea

(%)

2013c
32.5
28.4
31.1
13.2
24.2
..
31.0
21.0
28.1
31.2
17.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

22.4
29.9
18.6
23.9

17.3
27.0
16.9
36.3
18.0
28.1
24.7
34.2
24.1

Inequality-
adjusted 
income 
index

Value

2013
0.244
0.250
0.253
0.264
0.318
..
0.302
0.332
0.192
0.155
0.269

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.702
0.517
0.502
0.387

0.629
0.513
0.605
0.474
0.489
0.375
0.348
0.452
0.564

Income inequality

Quintile 

ratio

Palma 
ratio

Gini 

coefficient

2003–2012 2003–2012 2003–2012

..
9.8
7.3
4.8
7.0
..
5.6
7.4
18.0
9.3
5.3

..
70.0
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

..
2.5
1.8
1.3
1.9
..
1.5
1.8
4.5
2.4
1.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

35.5
45.7
39.4
33.3
39.8
..
35.4
39.8
56.3
44.4
34.6

..
..
..
..
..
..
45.5
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

NOTES
a  See http://hdr.undp.org for the list of surveys used 

to estimate inequalities.

b  Based on countries for which the Inequality-

adjusted Human Development Index is calculated.
c  Data refer to 2013 or the most recent year available.

DEFINITIONS

Human Development Index (HDI): A composite 
index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and 
healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of 
living. See Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org for 
details on how the HDI is calculated.

Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI): HDI value adjusted 
for inequalities in the three basic dimensions of 
human development. See Technical note 2 at http://
hdr.undp.org for details on how the IHDI is calculated.

Overall loss: Percentage difference between the 
IHDI and the HDI.

Difference from HDI rank: Difference in ranks on 
the IHDI and the HDI, calculated only for countries for 
which the IHDI is calculated.

Coefficient of human inequality: Average inequality 
in three basic dimensions of human development. See 
Technical note 2 at http://hdr.undp.org.
 

Inequality in life expectancy: Inequality in 
distribution of expected length of life based on 
data from life tables estimated using the Atkinson 
inequality index. 

Inequality-adjusted life expectancy index: The 
HDI life expectancy index adjusted for inequality in 
distribution of expected length of life based on data 
from life tables listed in Main data sources.

Inequality in education: Inequality in distribution 
of years of schooling based on data from household 
surveys estimated using the Atkinson inequality 
index.

Inequality-adjusted education index: The HDI 
education index adjusted for inequality in distribution 
of years of schooling based on data from household 
surveys listed in Main data sources.

Inequality in income: Inequality in income 
distribution based on data from household surveys 
estimated using the Atkinson inequality index.

Inequality-adjusted income index: The HDI 
income index adjusted for inequality in income 
distribution based on data from household surveys 
listed in Main data sources.

Quintile ratio: Ratio of the average income of the 
richest 20% of the population to the average income 
of the poorest 20% of the population.

Palma ratio: Ratio of the richest 10% of the 
population’s share of gross national income (GNI) 
divided by the poorest 40%’s share. It is based on the 
work of Palma (2011), who found that middle class 
incomes almost always account for about half of GNI 
and that the other half is split between the richest 
10% and poorest 40%, though their shares vary 
considerably across countries.

Gini coefficient: Measure of the deviation of 
the distribution of income among individuals or 
households within a country from a perfectly equal 
distribution. A value of 0 represents absolute 
equality, a value of 100 absolute inequality.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data from 
UNDESA (2013a), Barro and Lee (2013), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2013b), United Nations 
Statistics Division (2014), World Bank (2014) and 
IMF (2014).

Column 2: Calculated as the geometric mean of the 
values in columns 7, 9 and 11 using the methodology 
in Technical note 2 (available at http://hdr.undp.org).

Column 3: Calculated based on data in columns 1 and 2.

Column 4: Calculated based on data in column 2 and 
recalculated HDI ranks for countries for which the 

IHDI is calculated.

Column 5: Calculated as the arithmetic mean of the 
values in columns 6, 8 and 10 using the methodology 
in Technical note 2 (available at http://hdr.undp.org).

Column 6: Calculated based on abridged life tables 
from UNDESA (2013a).

Column 7: Calculated based on data in column 6 and 
the unadjusted life expectancy index.

Columns 8 and 10: Calculated based on data from 
the Luxembourg Income Study database, Eurostat’s 
European Union Statistics on Income and Living 
Conditions, the World Bank’s International Income 
Distribution Database, United Nations Children’s 
Fund Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys, and ICF 
Macro Demographic and Health Surveys using the 
methodology in Technical note 2 (available at http://
hdr.undp.org).

Column 9: Calculated based on data in column 8 and 
the unadjusted education index.

Column 11: Calculated based on data in column 10 
and the unadjusted income index.

Columns 12 and 13: HDRO calculations based on 
data from World Bank (2013a).

Column 14: World Bank 2013a. 

TABLE 3 

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index    |    171

TABLE3HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE4

L
B
A
T

Gender Inequality Index

Gender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratio

Adolescent  
birth rate

Share of seats 
in parliament

Population with at least some 

secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

TABLE

4

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau

Value

2013

0.068
0.113
0.030
0.057
0.262
0.046
0.185
0.136
0.090
0.056
0.115
0.054
0.088
0.193
..
0.101
0.138
..
0.101
0.080
0.056
0.068
0.154
0.075
0.021
0.067
0.100
0.087
0.146
..
0.524
0.136
0.154
0.321
0.116
0.139
..
0.164
0.220
0.244
0.355
0.116
0.247
0.253
0.350
0.288
0.172
0.222
0.381

0.364
0.316
..
0.152
0.320
0.215
0.348
0.314
0.207
0.350
..

172    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Rank

2013

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

2010

2010/2015a

9
19
2
7
47
3
34
23
15
5
20
4
14
35
..
17
25
..
17
12
5
9
29
11
1
8
16
13
27
..
113
23
29
56
21
26
..
32
41
43
68
21
45
46
66
50
33
42
74

70
53
..
28
54
40
64
52
38
66
..

7
7
8
6
21
7
15
12
3
12
6
4
5
12
..
16
5
..
7
8
4
8
20
5
12
4
6
5
3
24
7
10
2
24
8
5
..
6
8
12
25
8
21
20
73
14
17
34
77

29
47
8
4
27
58
32
34
11
51
..

7.8
12.1
1.9
6.2
31.0
3.8
25.3
14.5
6.0
5.1
8.2
6.5
11.5
25.8
3.3
2.2
5.4
..
7.8
5.7
4.1
6.7
8.3
9.2
0.6
4.0
10.6
4.9
11.9
23.0
9.5
5.5
16.8
10.2
10.6
12.2
..
15.9
18.2
27.6
55.3
12.6
12.1
13.8
43.1
14.5
12.7
13.5
54.4

58.3
28.5
15.2
20.6
31.0
2.5
10.6
25.7
35.9
48.4
..

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% held by women)

Female

Male

2013

39.6
29.2
27.2
37.8
18.2
32.4
32.2
28.0
24.2
39.1
19.5
44.7
39.7
22.6
..
15.7
10.8
20.0
22.5
25.1
28.7
38.9
21.7
42.5
24.6
30.6
35.2
20.6
21.0
..
0.1 f
10.7
20.8
19.9
24.1
21.8
50.0
18.7
14.3
17.5
13.9
28.7
8.8
18.8
48.9
6.2
23.8
23.0
37.7

12.3
16.7
17.3
29.5
11.6
16.5
9.6
12.1
24.6
21.6
10.3

2005–2012b

2005–2012b

97.4
94.3 c
95.0
87.7
95.1
96.3
95.0
100.0
74.1
95.5 d
80.5
86.5
91.0
99.8
72.2
77.0 e
87.0
..
84.4
78.0
100.0
77.5
100.0 d
100.0
95.8
71.2
66.8
99.9
59.5
66.6 e
66.7
72.2
100.0 d
60.5
89.1
79.4
49.5
99.1
68.6
73.1
73.3
47.7
97.9 d
74.4 e
73.9 e
55.6
85.0
98.9
57.0 e

54.4
91.2 e
84.2
87.0
86.1
55.6 e
47.2
89.6
93.0
89.5 e
..

96.7
94.6 c
96.6
90.5
94.8
97.0
95.3
100.0
81.0
96.6 d
78.6
87.3
91.6
99.9
79.2
89.1 e
85.8
..
87.3
83.2
100.0
82.9
100.0 d
100.0
98.0
80.5
73.1
99.7
67.0
61.2 e
59.0
79.6
100.0 d
70.3
94.3
85.5
49.3
99.5
78.2
61.3
76.4
48.2
98.7 d
80.4 e
80.4 e
56.3
93.6
99.0
54.9 e

50.3
87.6 e
94.7
92.2
92.0
44.0 e
57.1
92.5
95.7
87.6 e
..

Female

2012

61.5
58.8
61.2
79.9
56.8
53.5
62.1
61.6
59.0
59.1
52.7
60.2
70.6
55.7
51.6
49.9
48.1
..
58.1
50.9
54.6
46.9
50.7
56.0
52.3
39.4
52.6
50.1
44.2
52.9
50.8
55.8
56.0
18.2
55.8
48.9
..
51.0
38.0
46.6
49.0
55.4
44.7
39.4
43.3
43.4
44.8
54.5
47.3

55.5
69.3
..
49.9
48.5
30.0
28.6
57.0
47.8
65.9
..

Male

2012

69.5
71.9
75.3
87.3
69.3
66.4
73.9
71.2
77.5
67.5
67.9
68.1
77.3
68.8
68.0
72.0
70.4
..
69.5
61.8
67.7
59.4
64.9
64.3
63.5
59.4
66.5
67.8
62.6
75.6
95.6
70.8
68.7
75.5
66.3
64.8
..
68.7
66.5
91.0
74.6
67.2
59.9
87.2
70.1
82.8
58.5
67.1
75.0

76.8
79.3
..
62.7
64.7
76.4
81.8
71.4
58.8
76.7
..

Gender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratio

Adolescent  
birth rate

Share of seats 
in parliament

Population with at least some 

secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

HDI rank
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana

Value

2013
..
0.210
0.375
0.321
0.413
0.506
0.464
0.344
0.360
0.323
0.376
..
..
0.383
0.510
0.340
0.488
..
0.441
..
..
0.387
0.326
0.435
0.162
0.201
0.325
..
0.364
0.265
0.202
..
0.425
..
0.245
0.457
..
0.460
0.429
0.463
0.458
0.505

0.283
0.320
..
0.517
..
0.500
0.486
0.580
0.457
0.508
0.472
0.302
0.441
..
0.406
0.461
0.556
0.542
0.524

Rank

2013
..
39
72
56
80
107
96
63
69
59
73
..
..
75
109
62
101
..
85
..
..
77
61
84
31
36
60
..
70
48
37
..
81
..
44
88
..
92
82
95
90
105

49
54
..
111
..
103
100
130
88
108
97
51
85
..
78
94
125
120
113

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% held by women)

Female

Male

Female

Male

2010
..
29
60
46
25
92
92
40
20
51
50
..
..
35
21
43
63
12
56
67
24
67
32
53
10
8
30
26
48
56
37
48
97
..
27
110
35
92
110
130
110
150

60
63
67
100
64
220
160
66
99
230
190
41
81
28
99
300
70
63
280

2010/2015a

49.3
5.7
30.9
34.8
12.0
78.5
83.2
60.8
30.9
29.9
63.4
56.3
..
16.9
31.6
40.0
26.5
16.9
70.8
46.8
35.4
50.7
25.7
71.4
18.3
15.1
27.1
42.8
41.0
4.6
8.6
54.5
10.0
..
15.3
70.1
56.3
68.5
77.0
35.2
18.1
99.6

4.2
18.7
18.0
28.3
45.8
48.3
44.2
43.0
67.0
103.0
71.9
29.3
76.0
38.8
46.8
50.9
41.6
68.7
88.5

2013
19.4
13.9
18.8
26.0
3.1
8.5
17.0
38.6
14.2
18.2
36.0
43.8
6.7
5.8
3.1
16.0
12.0
33.2
9.6
12.0
25.0
21.5
9.4
13.3
34.1
19.3
10.7
..
15.7
26.7
23.4
13.0
25.8
12.5
17.9
15.5
17.2
13.6
38.7
11.8
3.6
19.1

6.5
14.9
16.8
4.1
..
18.6
7.9
2.8
18.4
16.7
30.1
19.8
26.2
19.2
26.9
41.1 g
12.0
25.2
31.3

2005–2012b

2005–2012b

..
66.0 e
49.4
59.4
38.8
63.5 e
56.5
54.5 e
39.0
99.3
55.7
66.9
..
72.7
62.2
93.7
69.5
58.4
51.9
..
..
56.3
91.5 e
35.2 e
40.2
44.8
94.1 e
57.5
35.7
32.8
58.7
..
20.9
29.7
81.8
74.0 e
..
56.9
40.1
44.6
87.5
55.6

13.3
85.3 e
..
64.3
31.5
39.9
73.6 e
43.4 e
36.8
53.8 e
47.6
93.6
36.8
..
65.9
72.7
29.0
22.0 e
61.5 e

..
72.8 e
58.0
59.2
38.9
60.7 e
50.8
52.8 e
60.0
99.4
60.6
66.6
..
75.5
67.6
97.4
78.5
73.6
49.0
..
..
66.1
96.1 e
32.8 e
55.6
70.0
94.8 e
58.1
40.8
46.1
71.9
..
27.3
23.2
87.9
71.1 e
..
55.6
39.4
47.1
88.3
53.1

16.6
84.1 e
..
60.0
32.2
49.2
77.3 e
59.3 e
40.8
34.7 e
59.1
96.6
43.6
..
63.8
75.9
38.9
42.7 e
48.8 e

TABLE

4

2012
..
44.3
43.5
52.9
22.8
49.0
50.9
46.4
29.4
67.5
45.0
..
..
35.0
16.4
62.5
15.3
..
59.5
56.2
..
68.0
53.0
49.1
42.9
34.1
51.6
37.5
64.4
25.1
63.8
55.7
15.0
..
45.0
56.1
62.6
55.7
54.4
40.4
53.5
51.2

55.9
56.1
46.7
23.4
15.2
51.3
71.8
23.6
55.4
56.0
64.1
37.0
47.6
47.9
51.0
44.2
13.4
14.7
42.3

2012
..
75.3
74.3
75.5
70.5
81.9
79.2
79.0
70.8
77.5
80.0
..
..
76.4
73.1
68.9
66.2
..
80.9
74.7
..
84.4
66.6
82.3
67.3
57.2
73.4
72.0
80.8
70.6
78.1
78.2
71.9
..
65.4
71.0
76.0
79.7
82.6
68.8
74.8
78.7

77.1
68.8
76.5
58.4
66.3
84.4
81.5
74.6
84.8
65.1
80.9
43.3
79.0
75.2
79.7
60.0
72.7
69.7
80.9

TABLE 4  Gender Inequality Index    |    173

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceGender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratio

Adolescent  
birth rate

Share of seats 
in parliament

Population with at least some 

secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

HDI rank
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea

Value

2013
0.322
..
..
0.523
0.348
0.450
..
0.482
0.460
..
0.458
..
0.383
0.563
0.495
0.505
0.549
0.534
0.617
0.617
0.529
..
..

0.479
0.563
0.548
0.529
..
0.430
0.410
0.622
..
0.733
..
0.516
0.617
..
..
0.553
0.644
0.557
0.537
0.529
0.614
0.628
0.579
0.599
0.705
..
0.645
0.624
0.547
0.591
0.655
0.673
..
0.657
..
0.501
0.607
..

Rank

2013
58
..
..
112
64
87
..
99
92
..
90
..
75
127
102
105
123
118
135
135
115
..
..

98
127
122
115
..
83
79
138
..
152
..
110
135
..
..
124
142
126
119
115
134
140
129
132
150
..
143
139
121
131
145
148
..
146
..
104
133
..

174    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

2010
59
79
100
120
71
200
300
100
100
110
95
..
65
200
180
250
350
470
560
440
240
70
240

170
260
360
320
450
200
340
690
630
200
240
570
230
93
280
460
510
620
370
310
350
730
300
350
460
200
400
360
350
460
770
540
790
490
610
800
300
240

2010/2015a

29.0
70.6
18.6
97.2
29.3
54.9
52.2
84.0
35.8
44.8
100.8
16.6
42.8
32.8
40.9
44.3
58.4
65.0
126.7
125.4
80.6
65.1
112.6

73.7
27.3
93.6
72.0
170.2
12.1
33.6
115.8
119.6
47.0
122.8
60.3
62.1
64.9
51.1
122.7
73.3
89.4
94.4
126.6
90.2
84.0
91.5
42.0
86.8
18.6
130.3
115.8
78.4
144.8
117.4
175.6
99.3
137.8
131.0
30.3
115.4
65.3

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% held by women)

Female

Male

Female

2013
24.4
20.8
0.1
13.3
23.3
25.0
38.5
19.5
11.0
0.1
40.2
8.7
17.5
10.9
6.9
18.1 h
10.9
25.0
9.6
11.5
19.7
18.2
18.8

33.2
19.7
19.9
21.9
34.1
4.6
51.9
16.1
6.6
0.7
15.8
35.1
2.7
2.0
3.0
36.0
19.2
26.8
42.7
35.0
8.4
24.1
15.4
3.5
27.6
12.7
10.4
7.5
25.5
22.3
11.7
10.2
14.0
39.2
..
34.9
15.7
22.0

2005–2012b

2005–2012b

59.4
..
..
21.9
94.5
33.0 e
..
28.0
20.1 e
..
30.8 e
..
89.9
26.6 e
34.0
9.9
45.2
22.9 e
43.8 e
25.7 e
30.8 e
..
..

17.9 e
19.3
25.3
49.9 e
..
18.0 e
7.4 e
21.1 e
..
7.6 e
..
48.8
6.8 e
..
..
5.6 e
8.0 e
21.9
7.2
22.9
11.2 e
12.8 e
15.3 e
22.5 e
5.8 e
..
13.7 e
16.9 e
7.8
10.4
15.7 e
7.7
..
1.5 e
..
5.2 e
0.9
..

71.2
..
..
23.2
96.8
34.0 e
..
25.8
36.3 e
..
44.7 e
..
95.0
50.4 e
34.5
22.2
64.7
36.8 e
48.7 e
44.2 e
39.3 e
..
..

39.9 e
46.1
31.4
46.1 e
..
17.6 e
8.0 e
34.9 e
..
24.4 e
..
62.0
14.1 e
..
..
9.2 e
20.8 e
19.8
15.4
33.5
25.6 e
18.2 e
45.1 e
36.3 e
34.0 e
..
29.9 e
31.4 e
18.2
20.4
39.2 e
15.1
..
6.0 e
..
9.3 e
3.2
..

2012
72.8
51.1
..
49.1
55.7
75.2
24.7
42.5
43.0
61.5
47.0
..
58.7
28.8
66.4
78.9
67.2
76.3
68.4
73.2
57.3
44.9
80.6

54.3
24.4
62.0
43.8
63.1
85.7
86.5
63.6
48.1
25.2
86.8
83.2
70.5
53.4
35.0
88.1
28.6
58.8
65.9
75.9
67.5
31.2
80.7
60.6
15.7
36.1
52.2
72.2
78.2
84.7
58.2
50.6
68.1
26.3
65.5
83.2
77.1
79.9

Male

2012
81.9
83.5
..
88.2
79.0
82.2
51.1
82.9
57.4
80.3
80.1
..
76.9
80.9
76.9
86.5
71.2
78.9
72.9
85.7
84.1
77.5
92.3

63.2
82.9
72.2
71.3
76.9
82.9
85.5
76.7
63.5
71.8
90.6
89.7
74.0
79.1
80.2
90.2
79.0
73.3
88.0
79.3
78.3
76.0
81.2
70.8
79.7
67.3
81.5
83.0
89.4
81.3
64.7
81.4
78.5
75.8
78.3
81.8
90.1
89.8

TABLE 4 GENDER INEQUALITY INDEXTABLE4Gender Inequality 

Index

Maternal 

mortality ratio

Adolescent  
birth rate

Share of seats 
in parliament

Population with at least some 

secondary education

Labour force participation rate 

HDI rank
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific 
Europe and Central Asia 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
South Asia 
Sub-Saharan Africa 

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Value

2013
0.643
0.707
0.654
0.669
0.674

Rank

2013
141
151
144
147
149

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.197
0.315
0.513
0.587

0.546
0.331
0.317
0.416
0.539
0.578
0.570
0.478
0.451

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

(deaths per 100,000 

live births)

(births per 1,000 women 

ages 15–19)

2010
890
1,100
890
540
590

81
..
..
..
..
1,000
..
..

16
42
186
427

164
72
31
74
202
474
389
195
145

2010/2015a
100.7
152.0
98.3
135.3
204.8

0.6
..
..
..
..
110.4
75.3
..

19.2
28.8
43.4
92.3

45.4
21.2
30.8
68.3
38.7
109.7
97.0
61.5
47.4

(% ages 25 and older)

(% ages 15 and older)

(% held by women)

Female

Male

Female

2013
12.4
14.9
12.5 i
8.3
13.3

15.6
3.0
20.8
5.3
18.3
13.8
24.3
6.7

26.7
18.8
17.5
20.0

13.8
18.7
18.2
25.3
17.8
21.7
20.3
23.0
21.1

2005–2012b

2005–2012b

9.5 e
1.7
10.3 e
10.7 e
44.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

86.1
60.2
34.2
14.9

32.9
54.6
70.4
53.3
28.4
22.9
16.5
50.4
54.2

20.4 e
9.9
26.2 e
36.2 e
49.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

87.7
69.1
51.4
29.6

46.4
66.4
80.6
53.9
49.9
32.9
27.2
55.2
64.2

2012
65.7
64.0
72.5
70.7
39.9

72.3
..
..
..
..
37.2
..
..

52.3
57.1
38.7
55.7

24.7
62.8
45.5
53.7
30.7
63.6
64.0
52.8
50.6

Male

2012
68.9
79.2
85.1
73.2
89.8

84.2
..
..
..
..
75.6
..
..

69.0
77.1
80.0
78.4

73.2
79.3
70.2
79.8
80.7
76.3
81.6
73.3
76.7

NOTES
a  Data are annual average of projected values for 

2010–2015.

b  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

c  Refers to population ages 25–64.
d  Refers to population ages 25–74.
e  Barro and Lee (2013) estimate for 2010 based on 

data from the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization’s Institute for Statistics.

f  For calculating the Gender Inequality Index, a 

value of 0.1% was used.

g  Does not include the 36 special rotating 
delegates appointed on an ad hoc basis.

h  Refers to 2012.

 

i  Refers to an earlier year than that specified.

DEFINITIONS

Gender Inequality Index: A composite measure 
reflecting inequality in achievement between women 
and men in three dimensions: reproductive health, 
empowerment and the labour market. See Technical 
note 3 at http://hdr.undp.org for details on how the 
Gender Inequality Index is calculated.

Maternal mortality ratio: Number of deaths due to 
pregnancy-related causes per 100,000 live births.

Adolescent birth rate: Number of births to women 
ages 15–19 per 1,000 women ages 15–19.

Share of seats in national parliament: 
Proportion of seats held by women in the national 

parliament, expressed as percentage of total seats. 
For countries with bicameral legislative systems, 
the share of seats is calculated based on both 
houses.

Population with at least some secondary 
education: Percentage of the population ages 25 
and older who have reached (but not necessarily 
completed) a secondary level of education.

Labour force participation rate: Proportion of 
a country’s working-age population (ages 15 and 
older) that engages in the labour market, either by 
working or actively looking for work, expressed as a 
percentage of the working-age population.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data from UN 
Maternal Mortality Estimation Group (2013), UNDESA 
(2013a), IPU (2013), Barro and Lee (2013), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2013b) and ILO (2013a).

Column 2: Calculated based on data in column 1.

Column 3: UN Maternal Mortality Estimation Group 
2013.

Column 4: UNDESA 2013a.

Column 5: IPU 2013.

Columns 6 and 7: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
2013b.

Columns 8 and 9: ILO 2013a.

TABLE 4  Gender Inequality Index    |    175

TABLE4HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE5

L
B
A
T

Gender Development Index

Gender Development 

Index

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy at birth Mean years of schooling

Expected years 

of schooling

Estimated gross national 

income per capitaa

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

Ratio of 
female to 
male HDI

2013

Rankb

2013

Female

2013

TABLE

5

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau

0.997
0.975
0.953
0.968
0.995
0.962
0.971
0.986
0.967
0.989
0.965
1.004
0.982
0.993
0.969
0.940
0.951
..
0.984
0.989
0.935
0.977
0.961
1.006
1.006
0.962
0.985
0.969
0.959
0.981
0.979
0.940
1.042
0.897
1.036
1.010
..
1.000
0.954
0.958
0.962
0.970
0.998
0.961
0.962
0.987
0.987
1.033
1.001

1.015
..
..
1.021
0.973
0.931
..
1.038
0.994
1.021
..

5
40
76
51
7
61
47
24
52
17
56
6
30
13
49
85
79
..
29
17
91
38
66
8
8
61
25
49
69
31
32
85
70
112
58
14
..
1
75
70
61
48
4
66
61
22
22
52
2

25
..
..
32
43
93
..
61
8
32
..

0.940
0.920
0.895
0.899
0.911
0.892
0.896
0.893
0.878
0.895
0.881
0.898
0.883
0.887
0.874
0.860
0.863
..
0.879
0.878
0.834
0.866
0.861
0.881
0.876
0.852
0.861
0.844
0.833
0.839
0.838
0.817
0.856
0.773
0.848
0.837
..
0.829
0.807
0.800
0.803
0.808
0.816
0.798
0.796
0.801
0.807
0.823
0.806

0.793
..
..
0.793
0.771
0.749
..
0.792
0.775
0.784
..

Value

(years)

(years)

(years)

(2011 PPP $)

Male

2013

0.943
0.944
0.939
0.929
0.915
0.928
0.923
0.906
0.908
0.906
0.913
0.894
0.899
0.894
0.902
0.915
0.907
..
0.893
0.888
0.892
0.887
0.896
0.876
0.871
0.886
0.874
0.871
0.868
0.856
0.856
0.869
0.821
0.861
0.818
0.828
..
0.829
0.846
0.835
0.835
0.833
0.818
0.831
0.827
0.812
0.818
0.797
0.805

0.781
..
..
0.777
0.793
0.805
..
0.763
0.779
0.767
..

Female

2013

83.6
84.8
84.9
82.9
81.3
83.1
83.0
83.6
84.7
81.5
82.9
83.9
83.9
82.5
86.4
84.8
87.0
..
83.6
85.2
83.6
83.1
83.0
83.7
82.8
85.0
85.3
80.7
83.1
80.5
79.5
81.8
79.6
77.6
78.2
80.5
..
79.2
82.0
78.2
82.7
82.9
78.6
77.5
81.3
75.5
80.4
77.5
79.9

80.6
78.2
77.2
75.8
77.5
77.3
79.0
74.4
77.3
77.8
..

Male

2013

79.4
80.3
80.2
79.1
76.5
78.3
79.2
79.3
79.8
77.3
78.6
79.7
80.3
78.6
80.4
78.1
80.1
..
79.9
78.3
78.5
78.0
78.0
77.4
76.4
79.6
78.9
74.6
78.4
76.7
77.8
77.9
69.1
73.9
66.0
72.3
..
71.5
77.5
76.1
77.1
76.9
70.5
75.9
77.3
73.5
73.7
66.7
72.6

73.7
72.1
72.5
64.2
70.3
73.5
74.8
61.8
70.0
73.0
..

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

2002–2012c

2002–2012c

2000–2012c

2000–2012c

2013

12.7
12.5
11.5
11.6
13.0
12.6
12.5
12.3
9.7 d
11.9
11.7
11.8 d
10.8
12.8
9.8
11.1
11.2
..
12.6
10.9
8.9
10.5 d
10.9
10.3
11.8
9.7
9.5
12.1
9.9
8.6
10.1
10.7
12.3
8.0
12.3
11.9
..
11.6 g
9.5
10.2
9.6
8.0
11.2 d
9.1
10.1 g
7.9
10.5
11.5 d
10.0

8.7
11.1
9.9 i
11.4 i
10.4
7.5
..
11.7
10.6 d
9.5
12.2

12.6
13.1
13.1
12.2
12.9
13.3
12.6
12.2
10.7 d
12.3
11.5
11.4 d
10.0
11.8
10.3
12.5
11.8
..
12.5
11.4
10.6
10.7 d
11.7
10.2
12.0
10.6
9.7
12.5
10.4
8.8
8.7
12.6
11.7
9.2
12.4
11.7
..
11.5 g
10.3
8.7
9.9
8.5
11.4 d
9.6
10.3 g
6.8
11.6
11.5 d
9.6

8.2
11.1
11.2 i
11.7 i
11.0
7.5
..
11.8
10.5 d
9.2
12.6

18.2
20.3
15.6
18.0
17.4
16.2
20.2
16.2
15.5 e
17.6
18.5
16.6
19.9
16.7
15.3
16.1
15.1
13.8
16.1
16.3
15.9
16.5
14.0
17.6
17.9
16.8
17.5
16.9
16.6
14.9
14.0
14.0
17.5
15.9
17.3
16.3
..
15.6
14.7
13.9 g
15.3
16.5
15.7
15.1 h
15.1
15.2
15.2
16.3
17.5

16.6
..
15.5
16.3
14.5
16.4
13.9
14.5
14.5
17.2
14.6

16.9
19.4
15.8
17.8
15.7
16.4
18.5
15.4
15.3 e
16.3
18.7
15.1
17.6
15.8
15.4
17.8
15.4
16.4
15.2
15.6
15.3
16.0
13.8
16.4
15.8
15.8
16.8
15.9
16.4
14.2
13.9
13.9
15.5
15.4
16.0
14.7
..
14.5
14.3
12.9 g
15.0
16.1
15.1
13.7 h
13.9
14.2
13.9
14.8
15.4

14.4
..
14.8
15.2
13.7
15.9
13.4
13.5
14.1
13.8
12.9

56,994
35,551
42,561
34,497
41,792
33,028
26,695
34,612
50,001
37,106
23,872
38,071
27,612
27,589
40,051
21,795
22,384
..
24,636
29,580
25,170
30,213
41,351
32,123
21,762
22,303
23,487
16,233
17,791
52,831
45,863
19,787
19,410
16,197
19,588
16,462
..
19,450
18,832
23,903
14,339
17,846
17,233
24,531
13,302
43,134
15,777
18,624
11,975

13,789
17,934
..
12,655
12,005
10,649
17,346
18,228
12,539
11,165
..

Male

2013

70,807
47,553
65,278
50,432
63,163
53,445
38,656
49,272
95,329 f
48,742
43,092
48,365
42,520
42,632
66,417
38,990
51,906
..
35,402
44,139
61,543
49,077
76,196 f
42,795
31,916
43,640
37,804
33,098
31,707
88,468
141,468 f
33,461
27,985
78,689
28,607
26,871
..
31,554
35,217
72,659
27,410
30,817
25,663
36,660
26,319
114,532 f
22,509
26,415
22,849

22,730
25,047
..
20,730
23,148
32,678
56,424
27,741
18,430
16,054
..

176    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Gender Development 

Index

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy at birth Mean years of schooling

Expected years 

of schooling

Estimated gross national 

income per capitaa

Ratio of 
female to 
male HDI

Rankb

Female

HDI rank
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq

2013
..
0.935
0.957
0.994
0.900
0.978
0.999
0.973
0.884
1.015
0.940
..
..
0.961
0.847
0.952
0.842
..
..
0.941
..
0.957
1.012
0.963
0.944
..
0.994
0.937
0.990
0.891
0.939
..
0.843
..
0.957
0.989
..
0.972
..
0.974
0.966
..

0.936
1.021
..
0.948
0.974
0.923
0.964
0.855
0.966
..
0.931
0.990
0.965
0.945
0.989
..
0.851
0.802

2013
..
91
72
8
110
36
2
43
118
25
85
..
..
66
128
77
130
..
..
84
..
72
21
60
83
..
8
89
14
116
88
..
129
..
72
17
..
46
..
41
54
..

90
32
..
81
41
98
58
125
54
..
93
14
56
82
17
..
127
137

2013
..
0.743
0.750
0.763
0.715
0.753
0.759
0.751
0.704
0.762
0.728
..
..
0.720
0.672
0.723
0.658
..
..
0.713
..
0.720
0.738
0.714
0.708
..
0.725
0.679
0.718
0.669
0.696
..
0.629
..
0.694
0.703
..
0.697
..
0.693
0.682
..

0.673
0.705
..
0.670
0.612
0.654
0.669
0.617
0.664
..
0.642
0.659
0.648
0.637
0.652
..
0.588
0.556

Value

(years)

(years)

(years)

(2011 PPP $)

Male

2013
..
0.794
0.784
0.767
0.794
0.770
0.760
0.772
0.796
0.751
0.775
..
..
0.749
0.793
0.759
0.781
..
..
0.758
..
0.753
0.729
0.742
0.750
..
0.729
0.725
0.725
0.751
0.740
..
0.746
..
0.725
0.711
..
0.718
..
0.711
0.706
..

0.718
0.691
..
0.707
0.628
0.709
0.694
0.722
0.687
..
0.690
0.666
0.672
0.674
0.659
..
0.691
0.693

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

2013
78.3
77.4
77.1
73.6
82.3
80.5
77.7
82.2
78.7
72.3
79.8
78.1
..
77.4
76.1
73.9
75.6
76.9
77.6
77.8
75.3
77.6
74.4
77.1
77.5
78.9
78.0
73.0
77.8
78.3
76.7
74.7
72.7
..
80.6
76.1
77.5
77.7
79.4
74.3
75.7
76.7

79.0
71.6
69.8
76.5
75.0
72.9
66.8
73.6
74.6
64.5
69.5
72.8
77.1
71.7
72.2
58.8
77.8
73.2

2013
73.5
72.7
70.3
66.4
78.1
74.8
71.7
77.8
71.8
61.0
75.1
69.0
..
71.2
72.2
67.6
72.3
71.3
70.4
70.5
70.3
72.2
62.8
70.9
72.9
73.8
71.3
67.0
71.1
73.6
74.1
70.4
69.4
..
74.6
71.0
72.2
70.4
73.7
67.9
69.8
70.4

76.9
63.7
61.4
70.2
71.5
68.8
62.1
68.8
70.1
62.4
65.1
65.0
67.8
65.0
65.4
54.7
71.8
65.9

2002–2012c

2002–2012c

2000–2012c

2000–2012c

..
9.2
8.0
10.9
7.6 i
9.6 g
8.7
8.4
6.4
10.2 g
8.1
9.4 i
..
10.7 g
7.1
10.5 i
9.4
9.2 g
7.3 g
11.9 j
..
8.5
11.2
9.2 g
7.9 j
7.2 i
10.8 g
9.8
7.0
5.5
6.9
..
5.9
..
9.1
9.8
..
7.0
7.4
7.3
9.2 d
7.7

5.4 d
8.5
..
10.3
8.4 i
6.9
8.7
5.3
7.5
8.4
8.4 g
9.6 g
6.1
9.5 j
8.8 d
9.8
6.1
4.4

..
9.9
9.1
10.6
8.2 i
9.2 g
8.4
8.3
8.7
10.5 g
8.8
9.4 i
..
9.4 g
8.6
11.2 i
10.4
9.9 g
7.2 g
12.4 j
..
9.6
11.4
9.3 g
8.5 j
9.5 i
10.8 g
10.0
7.7
7.5
8.2
..
7.8
..
9.5
9.2
..
7.1
7.8 g
8.0
9.5 d
7.2

6.2 d
8.2
..
10.3
9.3 i
8.1
9.0
7.5
7.9
6.4
10.0 g
10.0 g
6.9
9.9 j
8.5 d
10.1
7.1
6.7

13.7
12.7
15.9
12.5
13.0
12.9
15.3
13.9
13.8
15.4
12.9
12.1
13.4
13.9
15.0
11.6
13.5
14.1
..
12.8
16.3
13.2
15.3
14.1
13.4
..
13.6
14.1
13.4
15.0
13.0
13.4
14.2
..
10.3
12.4
12.5
13.5
..
12.9
14.0
..

12.8
15.6
..
13.3 k
14.0
12.8
11.7
12.7
12.2
..
12.9
12.1
12.0
11.3
11.5
..
12.0
8.7

13.8
12.7
15.2
12.1
13.3
11.9
13.1
13.2
15.0
14.7
12.6
11.1
12.4
13.4
15.3
11.9
13.1
13.2
..
12.8
15.3
13.1
14.9
13.3
13.2
..
11.2
13.7
12.7
14.0
12.8
13.1
13.8
..
10.3
11.5
11.8
12.9
..
11.2
13.4
..

12.5
14.4
..
12.5 k
12.5
12.7
11.6
13.3
11.7
..
13.4
11.6
12.3
11.7
11.1
..
12.1
11.4

2013
..
13,187
10,980
19,079
7,199
10,798
11,924
9,719
8,813
14,369
10,060
..
..
5,078
4,159
10,968
2,875
..
10,851
4,231
..
8,942
6,450
6,163
7,913
6,381
5,486
4,100
11,728
4,751
9,288
7,541
3,695
..
6,704
6,406
7,597
7,698
7,045
9,874
3,983
7,514

7,504
7,299
7,714
2,868
1,651
5,873
11,491
4,225
5,984
14,003
4,406
4,196
5,383
3,579
4,987
8,539
1,922
4,246

Male

2013
..
30,984
22,726
31,713
25,038
21,850
22,180
16,204
28,318
24,902
22,020
..
..
13,616
22,631
20,541
19,459
..
17,813
9,871
..
13,607
10,279
12,571
15,563
12,628
10,282
10,214
15,069
16,226
13,512
13,085
21,219
..
11,734
9,990
10,966
15,485
12,951
20,329
6,642
14,172

12,608
9,654
15,479
6,436
8,580
12,030
18,054
16,522
9,150
19,919
6,701
5,979
9,302
6,893
7,771
15,233
9,478
23,555

TABLE 5  Gender Development Index    |    177

TABLE5HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceGender Development 

Index

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy at birth Mean years of schooling

Expected years 

of schooling

Estimated gross national 

income per capitaa

Ratio of 
female to 
male HDI

Rankb

Female

2013
0.985
..
..
..
0.910
0.976
0.978
0.875
0.929
0.828
0.900
0.912
..
0.952
0.828
..
0.909
0.884
0.897
0.928
0.913
0.908
0.894
..

0.912
0.750
0.908
0.877
..
..
0.950
0.872
0.839
0.738
0.917
0.909
..
..
..
0.916
0.801
0.973
0.864
0.896
0.822
..
0.803
..
0.602
..
..
..
0.853
0.891
0.786
0.771
..
0.879
0.785

2013
25
..
..
..
104
39
36
122
95
132
110
102
..
77
132
..
105
118
112
96
101
107
115
..

102
145
107
121
..
..
80
123
131
146
99
105
..
..
..
100
138
43
124
114
134
..
136
..
148
..
..
..
126
116
140
143
..
120
141

2013
0.629
..
..
..
0.596
0.618
0.616
0.574
0.590
0.545
0.581
0.583
..
0.591
0.519
..
0.533
0.537
0.537
0.543
0.534
0.528
0.524
..

0.514
0.447
0.508
0.493
..
..
0.463
0.468
0.458
0.415
0.476
0.468
..
..
..
0.466
0.425
0.474
0.449
0.456
0.428
..
0.401
..
0.330
..
..
..
0.401
0.389
0.379
0.350
..
0.343
0.344

Value

(years)

(years)

(years)

(2011 PPP $)

Male

2013
0.638
..
..
..
0.655
0.633
0.631
0.656
0.634
0.658
0.646
0.639
..
0.621
0.627
..
0.587
0.607
0.599
0.585
0.585
0.582
0.586
..

0.564
0.596
0.560
0.562
..
..
0.487
0.537
0.546
0.562
0.519
0.515
..
..
..
0.509
0.530
0.488
0.520
0.509
0.520
..
0.499
..
0.549
..
..
..
0.470
0.437
0.482
0.455
..
0.391
0.439

Female

2013
68.9
80.5
78.8
69.9
75.6
71.9
67.1
69.1
76.2
72.7
73.8
77.9
71.8
70.8
68.3
68.7
74.5
62.1
69.7
60.2
60.0
71.5
68.3
54.6

69.6
67.5
63.6
48.3
53.4
67.2
65.7
56.2
52.8
64.5
66.2
60.8
64.6
69.2
62.3
62.9
63.1
49.5
64.9
60.4
60.7
63.9
57.4
65.0
62.2
63.4
51.6
60.2
65.3
55.4
61.5
54.9
55.8
51.0
56.9

Male

2013
63.6
71.3
71.1
68.0
68.5
63.4
61.7
66.0
71.5
69.1
69.7
71.8
66.1
64.1
64.7
68.0
69.1
60.2
66.9
57.4
56.3
69.9
64.3
51.7

67.3
65.7
59.8
49.6
50.4
63.1
62.4
53.9
52.2
61.8
63.2
58.8
60.4
66.3
59.5
60.2
60.0
49.2
61.9
58.0
57.9
60.3
55.6
61.2
59.7
60.2
50.0
57.5
62.0
55.1
59.6
55.1
52.8
49.3
55.3

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

2002–2012c

2002–2012c

2000–2012c

2000–2012c

9.0 g
5.2
..
5.6
5.0
9.3 g
6.3
3.6 l
5.3
3.2
8.0
4.8
..
10.0 g
3.2
..
3.2 g
5.9
3.8
5.5
5.8
4.6
4.0 l
..

2.4
3.3
5.4 g
7.4
..
4.1
3.1
5.1
4.2 l
1.2
4.8 k
6.7 g
3.2
..
..
4.5
2.6
6.8 d
3.4 g
4.3
2.0
2.5
3.3
3.2
1.2
..
3.1
2.0
1.4 l
3.4 g
2.3
1.4 d
1.4 j
0.8 l
0.8 l

8.1 g
5.7
..
9.2
6.4
9.3 g
6.1
5.3 l
5.7
5.6
10.0
6.7
..
9.7 g
5.6
..
5.0 g
8.1
5.4
6.7
7.2
5.6
5.5 l
..

4.2
6.1
7.1 g
6.8
..
3.8
3.6
6.7
6.3 l
3.8
5.6 k
7.8 g
8.4
..
..
5.8
4.9
4.6 d
5.6 g
6.4
4.4
3.8
6.7
6.7
5.1
..
5.4
3.6
3.6 l
5.1 g
5.6
2.6 d
3.4 j
1.7 l
2.6 l

11.7
..
13.6
..
10.3
12.7
11.4
11.3
12.1
10.6
10.2
10.8
12.7
10.4
11.3
12.5
10.3
10.9
9.5
10.9
13.0
10.3
11.4
6.9

12.5
6.9
10.7
10.9
8.7
..
10.3
9.5
8.2
7.7
10.2
9.1
..
8.8
12.3
9.0
8.1
11.6
7.8
10.6
9.4
..
8.5
..
7.2
5.9
..
..
8.0
10.8
8.9
7.6
..
8.9
7.4

9.9
..
12.9
..
11.1
12.3
11.3
12.0
11.2
11.6
10.9
10.3
11.9
12.0
11.8
12.3
11.5
12.1
10.8
11.3
13.9
9.7
11.2
10.0

12.2
8.4
11.3
11.8
14.0
..
10.2
11.2
9.8
10.6
10.5
9.5
..
9.7
13.2
9.3
8.3
10.6
8.1
10.9
12.7
..
11.9
..
11.3
6.9
..
..
9.0
10.7
12.4
9.6
..
10.1
10.1

2013
3,993
4,147
4,266
..
4,456
2,228
7,288
5,634
2,474
3,215
2,022
2,821
..
1,939
2,277
5,419
2,410
2,937
3,806
4,222
2,344
1,928
2,001
17,769

1,857
1,707
1,763
3,738
5,080
3,362
1,263
2,062
4,068
1,775
1,102
1,124
2,140
940
798
1,501
1,362
2,217
1,642
1,167
1,455
1,692
998
1,349
503
1,907
1,866
1,309
1,090
652
634
914
907
939
913

Male

2013
8,613
5,655
8,480
..
9,397
3,837
11,196
13,582
5,800
10,692
3,264
5,743
..
2,906
7,833
7,942
3,220
4,138
4,902
5,597
3,455
3,480
4,248
25,977

2,554
7,439
2,554
7,384
7,587
4,673
1,550
3,052
6,594
6,080
1,566
1,496
2,754
1,816
2,201
1,903
4,592
3,395
2,717
1,502
1,999
5,153
1,263
1,930
3,265
4,300
3,648
1,811
1,515
777
868
2,076
1,275
1,086
1,370

HDI rank
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea

178    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE 5 GENDER DEVELOPMENT INDEXTABLE5HDI rank
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific 
Europe and Central Asia 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
South Asia 
Sub-Saharan Africa 

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Gender Development 

Index

Human Development 

Index (HDI)

Life expectancy at birth Mean years of schooling

Expected years 

of schooling

Estimated gross national 

income per capitaa

Ratio of 
female to 
male HDI

2013
0.904
0.924
..
0.799
0.762
0.776
0.822
0.714

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.975
0.946
0.875
0.834

0.866
0.943
0.938
0.963
0.830
0.867
0.859
..
0.920

Rankb

Female

2013
109
97
..
139
144
142
134
147

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2013
0.370
0.376
..
0.329
0.319
0.296
0.304
0.275

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.874
0.710
0.565
0.446

0.626
0.682
0.705
0.716
0.522
0.460
0.447
..
0.655

Value

(years)

(years)

(years)

(2011 PPP $)

Male

2013
0.410
0.407
..
0.412
0.419
0.382
0.369
0.385

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.896
0.750
0.646
0.535

0.722
0.724
0.752
0.744
0.629
0.531
0.520
..
0.712

Female

2013
56.1
56.9
65.2
45.8
52.1
52.1
51.8
58.6

73.4
..
..
..
..
56.7
56.3
..

83.0
76.8
70.0
60.5

72.2
75.8
75.4
78.0
68.9
58.0
62.8
72.4
73.0

Male

2013
52.2
55.7
60.5
45.3
50.3
48.3
48.2
58.3

66.4
..
..
..
..
53.4
54.2
..

77.4
72.3
65.9
58.2

68.4
72.3
67.3
71.8
65.7
55.6
60.3
67.7
68.8

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

2002–2012c

2002–2012c

2000–2012c

2000–2012c

2.2
1.9 j
..
2.0
0.6
2.3
2.1
0.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

11.6
7.5
4.7
3.1

4.9
6.8
8.8
7.7
3.5
3.7
2.9
..
6.0

3.3
1.1 j
..
3.8
2.3
4.9
4.1
2.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

11.8
8.5
6.4
5.1

6.7
7.9
9.8
8.0
5.8
5.4
4.5
..
7.4

9.6
7.0
3.7
6.1
5.9
5.9
8.4
4.8

..
12.0
..
9.9
15.9
..
..
11.4

16.7
13.4
11.4
8.3

12.1
12.8
13.4
13.6
10.8
8.8
9.0
13.5
12.0

10.7
8.0
4.6
8.4
8.9
8.6
10.9
6.1

..
11.4
..
8.9
14.7
..
..
10.3

15.8
13.1
11.8
9.8

12.8
12.6
13.8
13.0
11.4
10.1
10.1
12.8
12.3

2013
685
1,335
986
1,617
1,289
482
390
471

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

26,677
9,426
3,199
2,011

6,991
8,154
7,287
8,962
2,384
2,492
1,576
6,993
8,956

Male

2013
815
1,871
1,309
2,016
1,953
698
499
1,268

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

53,683
16,966
8,619
3,789

23,169
12,488
17,867
18,732
7,852
3,812
2,629
12,017
18,277

NOTES
a  Because disaggregated income data are not 

available, data are crudely estimated. See 
Definitions and Technical note 4 at http://hdr.
undp.org for details on the methodology.

j  HDRO calculations based on recent data from 

Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys.

k  HDRO calculations based on data from the 

2011 population census from Samoa Bureau of 
Statistics (n.d.).

b  Countries are ranked by absolute deviation from 

l  HDRO estimate based on country’s most recent 

gender parity in HDI values.

Demographic and Health Survey data.

c  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

d  HDRO update based on data on educational 

attainment from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
(2013b) and methodology from Barro and Lee (2013).
e  Calculated by the Singapore Ministry of Education.
f  For the purpose of calculating the HDI for men, 
estimated earned income is capped at $75,000.
g  Based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2011).
h  Based on data on school life expectancy from 

UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2013a).

i  Based on the estimate of educational attainment 
distribution from UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
(2013a) .

 

DEFINITIONS

Gender Development Index: A composite 
measure reflecting disparity in human development 
achievements between women and men in three 
dimensions—health, education and living standards. 
See Technical note 4 at http://hdr.undp.org for 
details on how the Gender Development Index is 
calculated. 

Ratio of female to male HDI: Ratio of female to 
male HDI values.

Human Development Index (HDI): A composite 
index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and 

healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of 
living. See Technical note 1 at http://hdr.undp.org for 
details on how the HDI is calculated

Life expectancy at birth: Number of years a 
newborn infant could expect to live if prevailing 
patterns of age-specific mortality rates at the time of 
birth stay the same throughout the infant’s life.

Mean years of schooling: Average number of 
years of education received by people ages 25 and 
older, converted from educational attainment levels 
using official durations of each level.

Expected years of schooling: Number of years 
of schooling that a child of school entrance age can 
expect to receive if prevailing patterns of age-specific 
enrolment rates persist throughout the child’s life.

Estimated gross national income (GNI) per 
capita: Derived from the ratio of female to male 
wage, female and male shares of economically 
active population and GNI (in 2011 purchasing power 
parity terms). See Technical note 4 at http://hdr.
undp.org/ for details.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 2: Calculated based on data in 
columns 3 and 4.

Columns 3 and 4: HDRO calculations based on 
data from UNDESA (2013a), Barro and Lee (2013), 
United Nations Statistics Division (2014), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2013b), World Bank (2014) 
and ILO (2014).

Columns 5 and 6: UNDESA 2013a.

Columns 7 and 8: Barro and Lee (2013), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2013b) and HDRO estimates 
based on data on educational attainment from 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2013b) and on 
methodology from Barro and Lee (2013).

Columns 9 and 10: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
2013. 

Columns 11 and 12: HDRO calculations based 
on ILO (2013a), UNDESA (2013a) and World Bank 
(2014).

TABLE 5  Gender Development Index    |    179

TABLE5HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE6

L
B
A
T

Multidimensional Poverty Index

Multidimensional Poverty Indexb

Revised  

specificationsc

2010  

specificationsd

Population in 

multidimensional povertye

Index

Headcount

Index

Headcount

Headcount

Intensity of 
deprivation

Population near 
multidimensional 

povertye

Population 
in severe 
povertye

Contribution of 

deprivation in dimension 

to overall poverty

TABLE

6

Afghanistan
Albania
Argentina
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
China
Colombia
Congo
Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
Cote d’Ivoire
Djibouti
Dominican Republic
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Iraq
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova (Republic of)
Mongolia
Montenegro
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria

Year and surveya
Value
2010/2011 M 0.293 g
2008/2009 D 0.005
0.015 h
2005 N
0.002
2010 D
2006 D
0.009
0.237
2011 D
0.001
2005 M
0.030
2011 M
0.401 i
2006 D
2010 M
0.128
2008 D
0.097
2011/2012 M 0.006 j
0.012 g,k
2012 N
0.508
2010 D
2010 D
0.442
0.211
2010 D
0.260
2011 D
0.424
2010 M
0.026 k,l
2009 N
2010 D
0.032
2011/2012 D 0.192
2010 M
0.399
2011/2012 D 0.307
0.127
2006 M
2007 D
0.026
0.036 m
2008 D
0.537
2011 D
2012 D
0.073
2005/2006 M 0.329
2005 M
0.008
0.144
2011 M
0.548
2005 D
0.495
2006 M
0.031
2009 D
2012 D
0.242
2011/2012 D 0.098 i
2005/2006 D 0.282
0.024 g
2012 D
0.052
2011 M
2009 D
0.004
2010/2011 M 0.004
2008/2009 D 0.226
2005/2006 M 0.013
2011/2012 M 0.186
2009 D
0.227
2007 D
0.459
2008/2009 D 0.420
0.332
2010 D
0.008
2009 D
2006 D
0.533
0.362
2007 M
0.024
2012 N
0.005
2005 D
2005 M
0.077
2005/2006 M 0.012 j
2011 D
0.390
2006/2007 D 0.200
2011 D
0.197
2011/2012 D 0.088
0.584
2012 D
2011 M
0.239

(%)
58.8 g
1.2
3.7 h
0.6
2.4
49.5
0.4
7.4
69.8 i
29.4
20.6
1.7 j
3.1 g,k
82.8
81.8
46.8
48.2
76.3
6.0 k,l
7.6
43.0
74.4
59.3
26.9
6.2
8.9 m
88.2
16.7
60.8
2.2
30.5
86.5
80.4
7.8
50.2
20.7 i
55.3
5.9 g
13.3
1.0
1.1
48.2
3.4
36.8
49.5
81.9
77.0
66.7
2.0
85.6
66.0
6.0
1.3
18.3
3.0 j
70.2
42.1
41.4
19.4
89.8
43.3

Value
0.353 g
0.005
0.011 h
0.001
0.021
0.253
0.000
0.018
0.412 i
0.119
0.089
0.002 j

0.535
0.454
0.212
0.248
0.430
..
0.022
0.181
0.392
0.310
0.139
0.018
0.024 m
0.564
0.070
0.324
0.003
0.139
0.506
0.462
0.030
0.248
0.072 i
0.283
0.066 g
0.045
0.008
0.001
0.229
0.019
0.174
0.156
0.485
0.357
0.334
0.018
0.558
0.352
0.011
0.007
0.065
0.006 j
0.389
0.187
0.217
0.072
0.605
0.240

(%)
66.2 g
1.4
2.9 h
0.3
5.3
51.2
0.0
4.6
71.8 i
27.2
20.5
0.5 j

84.0
80.8
45.9
46.0
77.6
..
5.4
39.7
74.0
58.7
29.3
4.6
6.0 m
87.3
16.5
60.4
0.8
30.4
82.5
77.5
7.7
49.4
15.8 i
53.7
15.5 g
11.6
2.4
0.2
47.8
4.9
34.1
35.3
83.9
66.9
66.7
5.2
86.6
61.7
2.8
1.9
15.8
1.5 j
69.6
39.6
44.2
16.1
89.3
43.3

(thousands)
17,116 g
38
1,438 h
18
210
75,610
41
23
5,897 i
211
2,022
65 j
6,083 g,k
12,875
7,553
6,721
10,187
3,320
80,784 k,l
3,534
1,866
46,278
11,772
212
599
6,740 m
78,887
273
901
99
7,559
8,283
1,168
61
5,104
1,642 i
631,999
14,574 g
4,236
64
173
19,190
173
2,447
984
2,883
15,774
10,012
6
10,545
2,197
7,272
49
462
19 j
17,246
876
11,255
1,146
15,408
71,014

(%)
49.9 g
38.3
39.1 h
37.0
38.2
47.8
34.5
41.2
57.4 i
43.5
47.0
37.3 j
40.8 g,k
61.3
54.0
45.1
54.1
55.6
43.4 k,l
42.2
44.7
53.7
51.7
47.3
41.9
40.3 m
60.9
43.4
54.1
37.6
47.3
63.4
61.6
40.0
48.1
47.4 i
51.1
41.3 g
39.4
36.8
36.4
47.0
37.9
50.5
45.9
56.1
54.6
49.8
37.5
62.4
54.9
39.9
38.8
42.0
40.1 j
55.6
47.5
47.4
45.6
65.0
55.2

(%)
16.0 g
7.2
5.2 h
3.0
11.5
18.8
1.1
6.4
18.8 i
18.0
17.3
3.2 j
7.4 g,k
7.6
12.0
20.4
17.8
15.7
19.0 k,l
10.2
26.2
15.5
17.9
16.0
10.8
8.6 m
6.7
19.9
15.7
4.1
18.7
7.7
10.5
18.8
22.2
28.6 i
18.2
8.1 g
7.4
4.1
2.3
29.1
10.1
18.5
20.4
12.9
11.7
24.5
8.5
7.8
12.8
10.1
5.2
19.0
1.3 j
14.8
22.6
18.1
14.8
5.9
17.0

(%)
29.8 g
0.1
0.5 h
0.1
0.2
21.0
0.0
1.5
45.7 i
8.8
7.8
0.0 j
0.5 g,k
63.8
48.2
16.4
27.1
48.5
1.3 k,l
1.8
12.2
46.2
32.4
11.1
1.4
1.5 m
67.0
4.4
35.9
0.1
12.1
68.6
58.4
1.2
20.1
7.2 i
27.8
1.1 g
2.5
0.1
0.0
15.7
0.3
18.8
18.2
52.8
48.0
29.8
0.1
66.8
42.3
1.1
0.2
4.2
0.5 j
44.1
15.7
18.6
6.9
73.5
25.7

Education
45.6 g
22.4
38.2 h
3.4
20.0
28.4
2.6
36.2
35.0 i
40.3
21.9
7.8 j
27.7 g,k
39.0
25.0
25.9
24.5
23.8
21.0 k,l
34.3
10.6
18.5
36.5
36.1
36.2
41.8 m
27.4
15.2
34.0
7.4
27.7
34.4
30.5
16.8
24.8
36.6 i
22.7
24.7 g
50.1
33.7
4.3
11.2
5.0
37.7
14.8
30.4
31.6
18.9
27.8
37.4
33.5
31.4
17.7
13.5
21.0 j
30.4
14.8
27.3
37.8
35.9
26.9

180    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Population below 
income poverty line

(%)

PPP $1.25 

a day

National 
poverty line

Living 

standards 2002–2012f 2002–2012f

35.2 g
30.5
34.0 h
8.7
29.3
44.9
7.7
29.0
40.1 i
33.4
50.2
12.7 j
33.9 g,k
38.5
48.8
46.4
44.2
50.0
34.6 k,l
41.0
56.6
55.9
37.7
41.2
33.3
12.6 m
47.4
40.9
35.5
25.2
45.2
43.3
41.6
32.0
51.8
40.3 i
44.8
40.2 g
11.3
10.0
11.8
56.4
31.2
36.9
51.4
47.8
43.9
53.4
11.9
40.1
48.3
43.0
35.6
50.8
15.3 j
47.3
51.8
44.5
49.6
40.0
40.4

..
0.62
0.92
2.47
0.43
43.25
0.07
..
47.33
1.66
15.61
0.04
6.14
44.6
81.32
18.6
9.56
..
11.8
8.16
54.1
87.72
23.75
18.84
2.24
1.69
30.65
4.84
33.63
17.99
28.59
43.34
48.9
..
..
17.92
32.68
16.20
2.82
0.12
0.11
43.37
5.03
33.88
43.41
83.76
81.29
61.64
1.48
50.43
23.43
0.72
0.39
..
0.12
59.58
31.91
24.82
..
43.62
67.98

36
12.4
..
35.8
6
31.51
6.3
..
36.2
12
51.3
14
21.4
46.7
66.9
20.5
39.9
..
..
32.7
46.5
71.3
42.7
..
40.9
25.2
29.6
32.7
48.4
24.7
28.5
55.2
69.3
..
..
60
21.9
12
22.9
13.3
3.8
45.9
38
27.6
56.6
63.8
75.3
50.7
..
43.6
42
52.3
16.6
27.4
9.3
54.7
28.7
25.2
..
59.5
46

(%)

Health
19.2 g
47.1
27.8 h
87.8
50.7
26.6
89.7
34.8
24.9 i
26.3
27.9
79.5 j
38.4 g,k
22.5
26.3
27.7
31.3
26.2
44.4 k,l
24.7
32.8
25.5
25.8
22.7
30.4
45.6 m
25.2
43.8
30.5
67.4
27.1
22.3
27.9
51.2
23.4
23.1 i
32.5
35.1 g
38.6
56.3
83.9
32.4
63.9
25.4
33.8
21.8
24.5
27.7
60.2
22.6
18.2
25.6
46.6
35.7
63.8 j
22.3
33.4
28.2
12.6
24.0
32.6

Multidimensional Poverty Indexb

Revised  

specificationsc

2010  

specificationsd

Population in 

multidimensional povertye

Index

Headcount

Index

Headcount

Headcount

Intensity of 
deprivation

Population near 
multidimensional 

povertye

Population 
in severe 
povertye

Contribution of 

deprivation in dimension 

to overall poverty

Pakistan
Palestine (State of)
Peru
Philippines
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Serbia
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Suriname
Swaziland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania (United Republic of)
Thailand
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 2011 M
Timor-Leste
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Uganda
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Year and surveya
Value
2012/2013 D 0.237
2006/2007 N 0.007
0.043
2012 D
0.038 g,n
2008 D
2010 D
0.352
2008/2009 D 0.217
2010/2011 D 0.390
0.001
2010 M
0.405
2010 M
2006 M
0.500
0.041
2012 N
0.033 j
2010 M
0.113
2010 M
0.024
2006 M
2012 D
0.031
2010 D
0.335
2005/2006 M 0.004
0.007 j
2009/2010 D 0.322
2010 M
0.260
0.007 g
2006 M
2011/2012 M 0.006
0.359
2011 D
0.002 g
2007 D
2006 M
0.013
2007 M
0.135
2010/2011 M 0.026
0.191 g
2006 M
2007 D
0.318
2010/2011 D 0.181

(%)
45.6
2.0
10.4
7.3 g,n
70.8
47.5
69.4
0.3
72.7
81.8
10.3
7.6 j
25.9
6.4
7.9
66.4
1.0
1.7 j
64.3
50.9
1.7 g
1.5
70.3
0.6 g
3.5
31.2
6.4
37.5 g
62.8
41.0

Value
0.230
0.005
0.043
0.064 g,n
0.350
0.154
0.439
0.000
0.388
0.514
0.044
0.024 j
0.086
0.021
0.054
0.332
0.006
0.002 j
0.360
0.250
0.020 g
0.004
0.367
0.008 g
0.008
0.129
0.017
0.283 g
0.328
0.172

(%)
44.2
1.4
10.5
13.4 g,n
69.0
34.5
74.4
0.1
72.5
81.2
11.1
5.9 j
20.4
5.5
13.2
65.6
1.6
0.7 j
68.1
49.8
5.6 g
1.2
69.9
2.2 g
2.3
30.1
4.2
52.5 g
64.2
39.1

(thousands)
83,045
74
3,132
6,559 g,n
7,669
82
9,247
25
4,180
7,104
5,400
40 j
309
1,197
629
29,842
664
36 j
694
3,207
23 g
161
24,712
264 g
935
69
5,796
7,741 g
7,600
5,482

(%)
52.0
36.9
41.4
51.9 g,n
49.7
45.5
56.2
39.9
55.8
61.1
39.6
43.1 j
43.5
38.0
39.0
50.4
38.8
38.4 j
50.1
51.2
38.0 g
39.3
51.1
34.3 g
36.6
43.1
40.7
50.9 g
50.7
44.1

(%)
14.9
7.4
12.3
12.2 g,n
17.9
21.5
14.4
3.1
16.7
8.3
17.1
4.7 j
20.5
7.7
23.4
21.5
4.4
2.4 j
21.4
20.3
0.5 g
3.2
20.6
0.2 g
6.2
32.6
8.7
16.7 g
18.7
24.9

(%)
26.5
0.1
2.1
5.0 g,n
34.6
16.4
45.1
0.0
46.4
63.6
1.3
2.0 j
7.4
0.9
1.2
32.1
0.1
0.1 j
31.5
26.4
0.2 g
0.2
33.3
0.0 g
0.1
7.3
1.3
18.4 g
31.3
12.2

Education

36.2
16.6
19.4
37.1 g,n
23.8
29.1
36.7
24.7
24.2
33.7
8.4
31.0 j
13.7
44.4
13.4
16.9
19.4
18.5 j
20.0
28.9
2.2 g
33.7
18.0
1.0 g
3.7
24.4
35.9
33.4 g
16.3
7.8

Population below 
income poverty line

(%)

PPP $1.25 

a day

National 
poverty line

(%)

Health
32.3
72.3
29.8
25.7 g,n
27.2
26.5
33.1
48.6
28.3
18.8
61.4
37.2 j
41.0
43.1
52.6
28.2
51.3
57.2 j
30.4
25.0
86.1 g
48.2
30.2
95.1 g
83.4
24.1
25.7
21.3 g
29.4
37.9

Living 

standards 2002–2012f 2002–2012f

31.6
11.1
50.8
37.2 g,n
49.0
44.4
30.2
26.7
47.4
47.5
30.2
31.8 j
45.3
12.5
34.0
54.9
29.4
24.3 j
49.6
46.1
11.7 g
18.1
51.9
3.8 g
12.8
51.6
38.4
45.3 g
54.3
54.3

21.04
0.04
4.91
18.42
63.17
..
29.61
0.21
51.71
..
13.77
..
40.63
1.71
6.56
67.87
0.38
0.6
..
28.22
..
..
38.01
0.02
..
..
16.85
17.53
74.45
..

22.3
21.9
25.8
26.5
44.9
61.7
46.7
9.2
52.9
..
23
..
63
..
46.7
28.2
13.2
19
49.9
58.7
..
..
24.5
2.9
..
..
20.7
34.8
60.5
72.3

TABLE

6

NOTES
a  D indicates data from Demographic and Health 

Surveys, M indicates data from Multiple Indicator 
Cluster Surveys, and N indicates data from 
national surveys (see http://hdr.undp.org for the 
list of national surveys). 

b  Not all indicators were available for all countries, 

so caution should be used in cross-country 
comparisons. Where data were missing, indicator 
weights are adjusted to total 100%. 

c  The revised specifications refer to somewhat 
modified definitions of deprivations in some 
indicators compared to the 2010 specifications. 
See Technical note 5 at http://hdr.undp.org for 
details.

d  The 2010 specifications are based on a 

methodology from Alkire and Santos (2010).

e  Based on the revised specifications in Technical 

note 5 (available at http://hdr.undp.org).

f  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

 

g  Missing indicators on nutrition.
h  Refers only to the urban part of the country.
i  Missing indicator on electricity.
j  Missing indicator on child mortality.
k  Missing indicator on type of floor.
l  Refers only to a part of the country (nine 

provinces).

m  Missing indicator on cooking fuel.
n  Missing indicator on school attendance.

DEFINITIONS

Multidimensional Poverty Index: Percentage 
of the population that is multidimensionally poor 
adjusted by the intensity of the deprivations. See 
Technical note 5 at http://hdr.undp.org for details 
on how the Multidimensional Poverty Index is 
calculated.

Multidimensional poverty headcount: Population 
with a weighted deprivation score of at least 
33 percent.

Intensity of deprivation of multidimensional 
poverty: Average percentage of deprivation 
experienced by people in multidimensional poverty.

Population near multidimensional poverty: 
Percentage of the population at risk of suffering 
multiple deprivations—that is, those with a 
deprivation score of 20–33 percent.

Population in severe poverty: Percentage of the 
population in severe multidimensional poverty—that 
is, those with a deprivation score of 50 percent or 
more.

Contribution of deprivation to overall poverty: 
Percentage of the Multidimensional Poverty Index 
attributed to deprivations in each dimension.

Population below PPP $1.25 a day: Percentage of 
the population living below the international poverty 
line $1.25 (in purchasing power parity terms) a day.

Population below national poverty line: 
Percentage of the population living below the 

national poverty line, which is the poverty line 
deemed appropriate for a country by its authorities. 
National estimates are based on population-weighted 
subgroup estimates from household surveys.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Column 1: Calculated from various household 
surveys, including ICF Macro Demographic and 
Health Surveys, United Nations Children’s Fund 
Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys and several 
national household surveys conducted between 
2005 and 2012.

Columns 2, 3 and 6–12: HDRO calculations based 
on data on household deprivations in education, 
health and living standards from various household 
surveys listed in column 1 using the revised 
methodology described in Technical note 5 (available 
at http://hdr.undp.org).

Columns 4 and 5: Alkire, Conconi and Seth 2014.

Columns 13 and 14: World Bank 2013a.

TABLE 6  Multidimensional Poverty Index    |    181

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

6AT

Multidimensional Poverty Index: changes over time (select countries)

Population in multidimensional povertyc

Multidimensional 

Poverty Indexb

Headcount

Intensity of 
deprivation

Population near 
multidimensional 

poverty

Population 
in severe 
poverty

Contribution of deprivation to overall poverty

TABLE

6A

Bangladesh
Bangladesh
Belize
Belize
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Brazil
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Burundi
Cambodia
Cambodia
Cameroon
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Central African Republic
Congo
Congo
Cote d’Ivoire
Cote d’Ivoire
Ghana
Ghana
Guyana
Guyana
Haiti
Haiti
Honduras
Honduras
Indonesia
Indonesia
Iraq
Iraq
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Mexico
Mexico
Mozambique
Mozambique
Nepal
Nepal
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Niger
Niger
Nigeria
Nigeria
Pakistan
Pakistan
Peru
Peru
Peru
Peru
Rwanda
Rwanda
Senegal
Senegal
Serbia
Serbia
Sierra Leone

Year and surveya
2011 D
2007 D
2011 M
2006 M
2011/2012 M
2006 M
2012 N
2006 N
2010 D
2006 M
2010 D
2005 M
2010 D
2005 D
2011 D
2006 M
2010 M
2006 M
2011/2012 D
2009 D
2011/2012 D
2005 D
2011 M
2008 D
2009 D
2007 M
2012 D
2005/2006 D
2011/2012 D
2005/2006 D
2012 D
2007 D
2011 M
2006 M
2010/2011 M
2006 M
2011/2012 M
2006 M
2012 N
2006 N
2011 D
2009 D
2011 D
2006 D
2011/2012 D
2006/2007 D
2012 D
2006 D
2011 M
2008 D
2012/2013 D
2006/2007 D
2012 D
2011 D
2010 D
2008 D
2010 D
2005 D
2010/2011 D
2005 D
2010 M
2005/2006 M
2010 M

Value
0.237
0.294
0.030
0.028
0.006 d
0.013 d
0.012 e,f
0.017 g
0.508
0.538
0.442
0.485 e
0.211
0.282
0.260
0.304 d
0.424
0.464
0.192
0.154 e
0.307
0.269 e,g
0.144
0.186
0.031
0.032
0.242
0.315
0.098 h
0.156 h
0.024 e
0.043 e
0.052
0.077
0.004
0.007
0.186
0.320 d
0.024
0.028
0.390
0.395 e
0.197
0.314
0.088
0.137
0.584
0.677
0.239
0.294
0.237
0.218 e
0.043
0.051
0.056
0.069
0.352
0.481
0.390
0.436
0.001
0.011 d
0.405

(%)
49.5
59.5
7.4
6.9
1.7 d
3.5 d
3.1 e,f
4.0 g
82.8
85.2
81.8
87.9 e
46.8
58.0
48.2
51.8 d
76.3
80.5
43.0
32.7 e
59.3
50.0 e,g
30.5
39.2
7.8
7.9
50.2
59.3
20.7 h
31.5 h
5.9 e
10.1 e
13.3
18.5
1.1
1.8
36.8
55.0 d
6.0
6.9
70.2
70.0 e
41.4
62.1
19.4
27.9
89.8
93.4
43.3
53.8
45.6
43.5 e
10.4
12.2
13.2
16.1
70.8
86.5
69.4
71.1
0.3
3.0 d
72.7

(thousands)
75,610
87,185
23
19
65 d
134 d
6,083 e,f
7,578 g
12,875
11,775
7,553
6,833 e
6,721
7,746
10,187
9,644 d
3,320
3,245
1,866
1,308 e
11,772
8,693 e,g
7,559
9,057
61
61
5,104
5,566
1,642 h
2,214 h
14,574 e
23,432 e
4,236
5,182
173
277
2,447
3,242 d
7,272
7,779
17,246
16,343 e
11,255
15,910
1,146
1,561
15,408
12,774
71,014
81,357
83,045
71,378 e
3,132
3,607
3,859
4,605
7,669
8,155
9,247
8,018
25
296 d
4,180

(%)
47.8
49.3
41.2
40.8
37.3 d
38.1 d
40.8 e,f
41.4 g
61.3
63.2
54.0
55.2 e
45.1
48.7
54.1
58.7 d
55.6
57.7
44.7
47.1 e
51.7
53.9 e,g
47.3
47.4
40.0
40.1
48.1
53.2
47.4 h
49.6 h
41.3 e
42.4 e
39.4
41.8
36.4
38.5
50.5
58.3 d
39.9
40.9
55.6
56.5 e
47.4
50.6
45.6
49.2
65.0
72.5
55.2
54.7
52.0
50.0 e
41.4
42.2
42.1
42.7
49.7
55.6
56.2
61.3
39.9
38.3 d
55.8

(%)
18.8
18.7
6.4
6.5
3.2 d
5.3 d
7.4 e,f
11.2 g
7.6
6.9
12.0
8.5 e
20.4
17.5
17.8
14.0 d
15.7
12.1
26.2
29.9 e
17.9
22.7 e,g
18.7
20.3
18.8
10.7
22.2
18.1
28.6 h
26.6 h
8.1 e
15.4 e
7.4
15.0
2.3
4.7
18.5
11.1 d
10.1
10.7
14.8
14.7 e
18.1
15.5
14.8
15.3
5.9
3.4
17.0
18.2
14.9
13.2 e
12.3
12.3
14.3
53.8
17.9
9.7
14.4
11.7
3.1
3.8 d
16.7

(%)
21.0
27.2
1.5
1.2
0.0 d
0.1 d
0.5 e,f
0.7 g
63.8
67.1
48.2
53.5 e
16.4
26.4
27.1
35.9 d
48.5
54.5
12.2
15.1 e
32.4
26.7 e,g
12.1
15.4
1.2
1.5
20.1
32.8
7.2 h
13.3 h
1.1 e
2.3 e
2.5
4.3
0.0
0.2
18.8
35.2 d
1.1
1.6
44.1
43.2 e
18.6
31.6
6.9
12.9
73.5
86.1
25.7
31.4
26.5
21.7 e
2.1
2.8
3.1
15.1
34.6
60.4
45.1
51.6
0.0
0.3 d
46.4

Education

28.4
26.0
36.2
13.8
7.8 d
7.9 d
27.7 e,f
41.4 g
39.0
38.0
25.0
37.8 e
25.9
29.0
24.5
24.8 d
23.8
30.2
10.6
16.2 e
36.5
42.8 e,g
27.7
26.5
16.8
16.9
24.8
28.8
36.6 h
38.4 h
24.7 e
30.4 e
50.1
45.7
4.3
5.5
37.7
32.3 d
31.4
32.0
30.4
31.3 e
27.3
26.0
37.8
38.1
35.9
35.2
26.9
27.2
36.2
43.0 e
19.4
20.2
18.3
17.9
23.8
23.3
36.7
38.4
24.7
18.1 d
24.2

182    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

(%)

Health
26.6
26.5
34.8
52.6
79.5 d
76.3 d
38.4 e,f
20.4 g
22.5
22.3
26.3
11.1 e
27.7
26.3
31.3
31.7 d
26.2
24.3
32.8
25.6 e
25.8
20.8 e,g
27.1
28.5
51.2
44.8
23.4
22.8
23.1 h
22.6 h
35.1 e
21.0 e
38.6
33.9
83.9
73.4
25.4
32.6 d
25.6
29.0
22.3
20.3 e
28.2
28.0
12.6
12.3
24.0
24.5
32.6
30.8
32.3
19.7 e
29.8
29.0
30.3
29.1
27.2
22.3
33.1
26.1
48.6
60.1 d
28.3

Living standards

44.9
47.5
29.0
33.6
12.7 d
15.8 d
33.9 e,f
38.2 g
38.5
39.6
48.8
51.1 e
46.4
44.7
44.2
43.5 d
50.0
45.6
56.6
58.2 e
37.7
36.5 e,g
45.2
45.0
32.0
38.3
51.8
48.5
40.3 h
39.0 h
40.2 e
48.7 e
11.3
20.4
11.8
21.2
36.9
35.2 d
43.0
39.0
47.3
48.4 e
44.5
46.0
49.6
49.7
40.0
40.3
40.4
42.0
31.6
37.3 e
50.8
50.8
51.4
53.0
49.0
54.4
30.2
35.5
26.7
21.8 d
47.4

Multidimensional 

Poverty Indexb

Year and surveya
2008 D
Sierra Leone
2012 N
South Africa
2008 N
South Africa
2010 M
Suriname
2006 M
Suriname
2012 D
Tajikistan
2005 M
Tajikistan
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 2011 M
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 2005 M
2010 M
Togo
2006 M
Togo
Uganda
2011 D
2006 D
Uganda
2010/2011 D
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe
2006 D

Value
0.451
0.041
0.039 f
0.033 d
0.044
0.031
0.059
0.007 d
0.013
0.260
0.277
0.359
0.399
0.181
0.193

Population in multidimensional povertyc

Headcount

(thousands)

4,409
5,400
4,701 f
40 d
46
629
1,002
36 d
64
3,207
3,021
24,712
22,131
5,482
5,399

(%)
79.7
10.3
9.4 f
7.6 d
9.2
7.9
14.7
1.7 d
3.0
50.9
53.1
70.3
74.5
41.0
42.4

Intensity of 
deprivation

(%)
56.6
39.6
41.5 f
43.1 d
47.4
39.0
39.8
38.4 d
42.2
51.2
52.2
51.1
53.6
44.1
45.4

Population near 
multidimensional 

poverty

Population 
in severe 
poverty

Contribution of deprivation to overall poverty

(%)
12.5
17.1
21.4 f
4.7 d
6.3
23.4
18.6
2.4 d
7.1
20.3
20.3
20.6
18.2
24.9
22.8

(%)
51.7
1.3
1.4 f
2.0 d
3.6
1.2
2.3
0.1 d
0.7
26.4
28.8
33.3
41.5
12.2
15.7

Education

32.0
8.4
13.4 f
31.0 d
36.7
13.4
11.0
18.5 d
50.7
28.9
31.4
18.0
17.1
7.8
11.5

(%)

Health
22.7
61.4
45.6 f
37.2 d
21.1
52.6
57.3
57.2 d
22.3
25.0
23.2
30.2
30.4
37.9
29.6

Living standards

45.3
30.2
41.1 f
31.8 d
42.2
34.0
31.7
24.3 d
27.0
46.1
45.4
51.9
52.5
54.3
58.9

NOTES
a  D indicates data from Demographic and Health 

Surveys, M indicates data from Multiple Indicator 
Cluster Surveys, and N indicates data from 
national surveys (see http://hdr.undp.org for the 
list of national surveys). 

b  Not all indicators were available for all countries, 

so caution should be used in cross-country 
comparisons. Where data were missing, indicator 
weights are adjusted to total 100%.

c  Based on revised definitions of deprivations 

in some indicators compared to the 2010 
specificiations—outlined in Technical note 5 at 
http://hdr.undp.org.

d  Missing indicator on child mortality.
 

e  Missing indicators on nutrition.
f  Missing indicator on type of floor.
g  Missing indicator on cooking fuel.
h  Missing indicator on electricity.

DEFINITIONS

Multidimensional Poverty Index: Percentage 
of the population that is multidimensionally poor 
adjusted by the intensity of the deprivations. See 
Technical note 5 at http://hdr.undp.org for details on 
how the Multidimensional Poverty Index is calculated.

Intensity of deprivation of multidimensional 
poverty: Average percentage of deprivation 
experienced by people in multidimensional poverty.

Population near multidimensional poverty: 
Percentage of the population at risk of suffering 
multiple deprivations—that is, those with a 
deprivation score of 20–33 percent.

Population in severe poverty: Percentage of the 
population in severe multidimensional poverty—that 
is, those with a deprivation score of 50 percent or 
more.

Multidimensional poverty headcount: Population 
with a weighted deprivation score of at least 
33 percent.

Contribution of deprivation to overall poverty: 
Percentage of the Multidimensional Poverty Index 
attributed to deprivations in each dimension.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 2: Calculated from various 
household surveys, including ICF Macro 
Demographic and Health Surveys, United Nations 
Children’s Fund Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys 
and several national household surveys conducted 
between 2005 and 2012.

Columns 3–10: HDRO calculations based on data 
on household deprivations in education, health and 
living standards from various household surveys 
listed in column 1 using the revised methodology 
described in Technical note 5 (available at http://
hdr.undp.org).

TABLE 6A  Multidimensional Poverty Index : changes over time (select countries)    |    183

TABLE6AHUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE7

L
B
A
T

Health: children and youth

Infants 

exclusively 
breastfed

Infants lacking 
immunization

Mortality rates

Antenatal 
coverage

Child malnutrition

(% of one-year-olds)

(per 1,000 live births)

(% under age 5)

HIV prevention

HIV prevalence

Youth

Condom use among 
young people with 
multiple partners

Child (ages 

0–14)

(% ages 15–24)

(% ages 15–24)

Pregnant women living 
with HIV not receiving 
treatment to prevent 

mother-to-child 
transmissiona

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

(% ages 0–5 

months)

2008–2012b

DTP

2012

Measles

Infant

Under-five

(% of live 
births)

Stunting 
(moderate 
or severe)

Overweight 
(moderate 
or severe)

(thousands) Female Male

Female

Male

2012

2012

2012

2008–2012b 2008–2012b 2008–2012b

2012

2012

2012

2008–2012b 2008–2012b

(%)

2011

TABLE

7

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
63.0
..
..
..
48.6
..
..
..
54.0

65.2
..
19.0 c
9.0 c
16.0 c
..
..

1
8
5
1
2
3
6
2
2
3
2
1
3
1
..
1
1
..
4
1
7
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
4
6
1
4
2
3
1
1
1
1
6
10
1
1
1
4
1
3
5
6

2
1
2
2
4
1
1

6
6
8
4
8
3
8
2
5
10
8
3
10
7
..
1
4
..
4
11
24
4
4
3
5
10
3
2
1
1
3
14
6
2
7
2
2
1
7
6
10
3
1
1

1
1
5
10
6

4
9
10
2
6
2
1

2
4
4
3
6
3
5
5
2
3
3
2
2
4
..
3
2
..
3
3
3
3
2
2
3
3
4
3
4
7
6
3
3
7
4
4
3
6
6
7
8
3
5
8
4
10
4
8
13

6
14
6
4
11
13
10

3
5
4
4
7
4
6
5
3
4
4
3
2
5
..
4
3
..
4
4
4
4
2
3
3
4
5
4
5
8
7
3
4
9
5
5
3
8
7
8
9
4
6
10
6
11
5
9
14

7
17
6
5
12
15
12

..
98.3
..
..
..
100.0 c
..
100.0 c
..
..
99.5 c
100.0 c
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
99.8 c
..
..
..
99.8 c
99.5 c
99.0 c
..
..
..
99.0
100.0
99.2 c
..
97.0
100.0 c
..
..
96.9 c
100.0 c
100.0 c
..
100.0 c
..
100.0 c
100.0
100.0
..
91.8 c
99.2 c

96.2 c
98.0 c
97.4 c
99.4
93.5 c
93.0 c
99.0

..
..
..
..
3.3 c
..
..
..
4.4 c
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
8.2 c

..
..
..
..
7.0 c
..
..
..
2.6 c
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
9.9 c

14.7 c
..
7.0 c
4.0 c
13.0 c
21.0 c
9.8

10.0 c
..
15.6 c
9.7 c
8.3 c
22.4 c
1.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.1
..
..
..
0.1 e
..
..
..
0.1

0.2
..
..
0.2
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.2
..
..
..
0.1 e
..
..
..
0.2

0.5
..
..
0.3
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
66.4
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
5.0
..
..
..
..
..
5.0 d
..
..
..
5.0 d
..
..
5.0 d
5.0

5.0
..
..
..
5.0
..
..

184    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Infants 

exclusively 
breastfed

(% ages 0–5 

months)

2008–2012b

..
..
..
..
..
..
21.0
13.0 c
14.8
..
..
18.7 c
41.6
31.8
18.6
..
..
76.0 c
23.0 c
12.0 c
22.7
13.7
41.0
54.8
..
70.6
18.0 c
14.7
23.0
18.5
34.6
39.8 c
15.1
6.0
27.6
..
7.0
..
38.6 c
15.0 c
..
42.8
40.0 c
2.8
..
7.8 c

47.8
65.7
11.0 c
51.3
27.0 c
41.5
20.0 c
53.2
24.4
6.0
60.4

HDI rank
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

Infants lacking 
immunization

Mortality rates

Antenatal 
coverage

Child malnutrition

(% of one-year-olds)

(per 1,000 live births)

(% under age 5)

Child (ages 

0–14)

HIV prevention

Pregnant women living 
with HIV not receiving 
treatment to prevent 

mother-to-child 
transmissiona

HIV prevalence

Youth

Condom use among 
young people with 
multiple partners

(% ages 15–24)

(% ages 15–24)

TABLE

7

Measles

Infant

Under-five

2012
2
6
10
9
2
5
1
15
20
2
13
10
2
4
1
2
5
1
2
34
2
13
1
7
6
6
21
4
3
6
3
1
2
4
1
6
5
1
1
7
1
6
6
27
5
21

2
1
1
15
2
20
6
7
9

29
16

2012
9
11
17
15
9
7
13
18
8
16
13
9
12
17
14
11
7
8
15
31
16
6
13
18
11
14
9
16
7
6
15
19
11
14
12
21
17
12
15
14
15
15
20
19
11
23

9
23
45
15
19
26
41
18
19
42
33

2012
10
12
18
21
10
9
15
21
9
19
15
10
14
19
16
13
9
10
18
35
19
7
14
20
14
18
11
18
7
7
16
22
13
16
14
23
20
13
17
17
18
18
23
21
13
27

11
28
53
18
23
31
53
21
22
62
41

(% of live 
births)

Stunting 
(moderate 
or severe)

Overweight 
(moderate 
or severe)

2008–2012b 2008–2012b 2008–2012b

..
..
100.0 c
90.3
100.0
90.7
..
95.7 c
95.6 c
95.8
94.1 c
89.9
92.0
99.9
95.8
..
100.0 c
99.4 c
98.3
76.6
98.8
99.0
98.2
97.6
100.0 c
95.4
98.5 c
94.0
98.6
98.9
99.1
100.0
99.1
96.0
94.1
99.5
89.4 c
100.0
97.3
99.0
99.2 c
97.0
84.2 c
89.9
97.9
98.9 c

99.1
99.0
99.1 c
93.0
98.8
92.7
94.1 c
73.6
96.3
94.4
85.8

..
..
..
..
..
16.6 c
..
..
..
19.0
15.6 c
5.6
12.3
13.1
13.6 c
..
..
17.0 c
..
25.0 c
7.7
6.6
7.0 c
11.3
..
19.5
..
19.3
4.9
8.9 c
19.3
..
16.0 c
10.1
9.9
..
15.0 c
..
19.0 c
4.8
..
13.2
29.0 c
8.8 c
..
9.8 c

18.9
15.3
19.0 c
..
10.9
35.6
31.4 c
28.9
17.5 c
16.5
27.1

..
..
..
..
..
5.1
..
..
..
..
6.1 c
8.1
..
0.6
9.7 c
..
..
0.8
..
12.9 c
4.4
15.6
7.3 c
19.9
..
9.8
..
7.9
12.4
17.4 c
15.3
..
8.0 c
14.3
6.6
..
12.9 c
..
21.7 c
4.0
..
4.8
5.1 c
4.0 c
..
8.3

6.5
10.9 c
..
..
..
12.3
11.2 c
20.5
7.1 c
7.4
8.5

(thousands) Female Male

Female

Male

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
11.0
..
..
3.6
..

2012
..
..
..
..
..
0.1
0.3
..
..
0.3
0.3
0.2
..
..
0.1
..
..
0.1 e
0.1
0.1
..
..
..
0.1
..
0.2
0.5
0.6
..
..
0.1 e
0.1
0.3
0.1 e
..
..
..
..
..
0.5
..
0.2
0.2
0.7
..
0.2

0.1 e
0.1 e
..
..
..
0.5
6.7
0.1 e
0.3
1.6
0.1

2012
..
..
..
..
..
0.1
0.3
..
..
0.4
0.3
0.1
..
..
0.1
..
..
0.1 e
0.1
0.2
..
..
..
0.3
..
0.2
0.4
0.5
..
..
0.1 e
0.1
0.3
0.1 e
..
..
..
..
..
0.9
..
0.3
0.4
0.4
..
0.1

0.1 e
0.1 e
..
..
..
0.4
3.7
0.1 e
0.2
0.4
0.1

2008–2012b 2008–2012b

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
67.1 c
..
..
..
..
..
73.5
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
64.5 f
..
..
..

38.0 c,f
62.7 c
25.5 c,d

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
49.4
..
38.8
..
39.3 c
..
33.9 c

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
51.3
55.7
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
76.2
..
..
..
..
..
28.6
..
63.3
..
..
..
..
63.7 c
..
..
67.4
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
54.9
75.5
..
..
..
..
..
61.8 c

..
68.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
76.5
40.7

DTP

2012
3
4
7
1
1
1
1
3
16
1
10
8
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
19
2
9
1
6
1
1
24
1
3
5
2
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
8
1
6
5
8

1
1
2
1
2
9
2
6
4
14
15

(%)

2011
5.0 d
65.4
..
..
..
5.0 d
5.0 d
..
..
5.0 d
33.4
..
..
5.0 d
30.8
..
..
86.3
75.4
5.0 d
..
66.7
5.0 d
5.0 d
..
5.0 d
5.0 d
16.7
..
..
25.0
..
5.0 f
18.2
33.9
..
24.7
..
..
8.7
..
22.4
5.0
5.0
..
5.0

..
84.2
..
..
..
76.6
5.0
85.7
12.9
27.1
5.0

TABLE 7  Health: children and youth    |    185

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceInfants 

exclusively 
breastfed

(% ages 0–5 

months)

2008–2012b

46.0 c
31.4
26.0 c
34.0
8.0 c
42.6
19.6
33.2
17.0
60.0 c
..
49.6
32.0 c
24.0 c
51.5
31.2
31.0 c
40.0 c
30.6 c
69.0
25.0 c
46.4 c
48.7
73.5
45.7
26.0 c
19.0 c
61.0 c
64.1
51.4
24.0 c

69.6
37.0 c
32.0
44.1
11.0 c
23.6
84.9
20.0
15.1
12.0 c
50.7
31.4
56.0 c
74.0 c
..
49.8
45.9
53.5
39.0
63.2
32.5
41.0
62.4
39.7
..
1.0 c

HDI rank
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti

186    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

HIV prevalence

Youth

Condom use among 
young people with 
multiple partners

(% ages 15–24)

(% ages 15–24)

HIV prevention

Pregnant women living 
with HIV not receiving 
treatment to prevent 

mother-to-child 
transmissiona

Infants lacking 
immunization

Mortality rates

Antenatal 
coverage

Child malnutrition

(% of one-year-olds)

(per 1,000 live births)

(% under age 5)

Child (ages 

0–14)

Measles

Infant

Under-five

2012
9
7
1
15
21
39
31

1
4
4
9
7
2
24
38
7
1

48
1
9
6
26
5
7
12
28
20
17
4
8
49

14
17
7
12

3
16
3
18
58
29
31

10
33
15
15
3
25
15
16
18
28
15
28
42
32
17

2012
15
14
34
24
33
12
28
29
18
19
31
27
24
28
48
19
27
15
21
46
49
44
36
34
49
54
62
56
33
38
72

34
69
49
56
100
41
39
61
78
46
41
56
48
26
58
38
65
74
45
45
59
49
62
57
71
66

2012
18
16
40
30
45
15
34
35
23
22
39
32
27
39
57
23
31
18
24
60
58
56
45
40
72
72
96
89
41
53
100

42
86
73
80
164
52
55
95
124
60
58
90
63
31
78
54
84
100
60
69
90
73
96
76
99
81

(% of live 
births)

Stunting 
(moderate 
or severe)

Overweight 
(moderate 
or severe)

2008–2012b 2008–2012b 2008–2012b

98.0 c
94.0
99.0 c
91.1
97.1
87.7
83.8
92.1
93.7
97.6 c
80.0
93.2
96.9
94.6 c
84.4
91.7
77.1
84.3 c
90.2 c
88.4
88.8
74.2 c
97.3
89.1
96.4
35.1
93.0
93.7 c
54.6
97.9
86.1 c

58.3
60.9 c
91.5
96.8
79.8 c
83.1
98.0
84.7
57.7
47.0 c
86.3
89.8
78.8 c
73.9 c
75.0
87.8
75.4
91.8
93.3
93.3
85.8
55.9
71.6
84.5
47.9
92.3 c

10.0 c
19.2
19.0 c
32.0
33.0 c
27.5
22.6
18.2
22.7
..
..
48.0
22.6
29.0 c
58.1
22.6 c
14.9
26.3 c
22.0 c
..
26.2
48.0 c
33.5
39.9
22.7
44.2
30.0 c
45.4 c
41.3
29.3
35.0 c

40.5
43.7
35.3
30.9
29.0 c
35.1
44.2
32.5
35.8
57.7 c
50.1
32.0
43.6 c
32.8 c
30.1
42.0
22.5
39.0
26.5
33.4
44.6
35.0
29.7
21.9 c
59.0 c
30.8

9.1 c
6.0
12.8 c
4.3
19.2 c
17.9
11.8
6.2
4.4
..
..
4.9
4.4
4.6 c
4.7
5.1 c
10.7
4.5 c
6.2 c
..
5.9
1.9 c
7.6
1.6
2.6
2.0
3.3
7.9 c
1.5
10.5
8.3 c

1.5
6.4
4.7
10.7
..
2.6
7.1
6.5
3.0
5.0 c
..
5.5
4.4 c
2.5 c
9.3
5.0
1.2
7.3
2.5
3.4
17.9
..
1.6
3.6 c
4.6 c
8.1

(thousands) Female Male

Female

Male

2012
..
..
..
..
410.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
18.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
28.0
..
13.0
160.0
..
..
..

..
..
200.0
22.0
30.0
..
27.0
59.0
430.0
..
..
180.0
3.1
..
..
230.0
..
38.0
..
190.0
9.1
..
17.0
12.0
..
1.2

2012
0.2
0.2
0.1 e
0.1 d
13.9
..
..
0.8
0.1
0.1 e
..
0.2
0.1
4.1
..
0.2
0.1
..
0.2
..
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.2
1.3
4.6
0.1 e
0.4
..

0.1 e
0.1 e
3.6
20
1.2
0.1 e
1.3
1.8
1.3
0.1
0.3
6.3
0.1 e
..
1.6
3.6
0.2
10.7
0.3
4
0.4
..
0.9
0.9
0.1 e
0.3

2012
0.2
0.3
0.1 e
0.1 d
3.9
..
..
0.5
0.2
0.1 e
..
0.3
0.2
2.2
..
0.2
0.1
..
0.3
..
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.8
3.5
0.1 e
0.3
..

0.1 e
0.1 e
1.8
10.3
0.6
0.1 e
1
1.0
0.7
0.1
0.3
3.9
0.1 e
..
2.8
1.8
0.1
5.8
0.1
2.3
0.2
..
0.5
0.6
0.1 e
0.2

2008–2012b 2008–2012b

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
27.3 f
..
73.7
..
38.0 c
..
..
..
2.4 f
..

17.1 c,f

..
..
27.2
..
44.0
41.5 c,f

..
..
..

..
..
37.1
68.6
..
..
..
46.5
46.6
..
6.6
38.5 f
..
18.0 c
..
33.9
..
44.9
..
..
34.6
..
39.2
51.6 c
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
76.1
..
..
..
74.3
75.7
82.2
..
59.0
..
..
..
29.6
..
32.4 c
..
..
39.3
..
55.0
43.1 c
..
59.1
..

45.1
..
67.3
84.5
..
..
..
66.5
..
..
8.8
50.5
..
39.1
52.3
40.6
..
60.3
..
47.3
43.8
..
54.4
61.8 c
..
..

DTP

2012
3
8
1
10
30
32
13
1
1
1
3
2
4
11
31
12
1
22
1
6
4
12
3
3
8
13
10
14
1
2
35

10
12
11
3
1
11
1
6
53
11
4
5
15
6
9
1
5
7
3
11
12
1
6
19
14
15

(%)

2011
23.9
26.7
5.0
92.1
5.0
..
..
5.0
58.1
..
..
5.0
65.7
5.0
..
34.6
70.0
..
42.9
..
51.9
..
61.5
14.4
9.8
73.7
93.0
5.0
25.0
..
..

71.2
95.5
25.0
5.0
76.4
5.0
34.1
38.4
79.1
97.8
83.7
38.2
74.9
..
..
15.3
95.7
30.0
60.8
43.3
63.9
..
21.0
5.0
99.0 g
80.1

TABLE 7 HEALTH: CHILDREN AND YOUTHTABLE7Infants 

exclusively 
breastfed

(% ages 0–5 

months)

2008–2012b

12.1
33.5
52.0
71.4
29.0 c
20.4
38.3
42.8
48.0
69.3
38.2
52.0
31.6
3.4
34.3
37.0
23.3

65.0
31.0 c
..
67.0 c
..
9.0 c
45.1
35.0 c

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

HDI rank
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

HIV prevalence

Youth

Condom use among 
young people with 
multiple partners

(% ages 15–24)

(% ages 15–24)

HIV prevention

Pregnant women living 
with HIV not receiving 
treatment to prevent 

mother-to-child 
transmissiona

Infants lacking 
immunization

Mortality rates

Antenatal 
coverage

Child malnutrition

(% of one-year-olds)

(per 1,000 live births)

(% under age 5)

Child (ages 

0–14)

DTP

2012
2
1
20
1
14
15
8
9
14
1
6
1
6
36
31
14
20

3
3
1
2
2
48
21
1

2
2
10
18

8
4
6
4
11
20
10
11
9

Measles

Infant

Under-five

2012
15
5
34
10

20
41
31
18
42
7
13
1
20
36
51
27
27

1
22
1
4
13
54
38
2

6
3
20
27

15
6
7
5
22
28
20
25
16

2012
76
49
47
46
56
80
81
63
65
67
66
37
117
89
91
100
63

23
31
3
30
3
91
67
25

5
13
37
64

28
17
20
16
45
64
57
37
35

2012
108
73
68
71
75
128
129
90
101
104
102
52
182
150
129
146
114

29
38
4
37
3
147
104
30

6
15
46
94

37
21
23
19
57
97
84
49
47

(% of live 
births)

Stunting 
(moderate 
or severe)

Overweight 
(moderate 
or severe)

2008–2012b 2008–2012b 2008–2012b

90.6
98.1
42.5
94.7
79.3 c
70.4
92.6
92.3
88.4
98.9
94.3
70.3 c
93.0
53.1
68.3
88.8
46.1

100.0
81.2 c
..
94.5 c
..
26.1 c
40.3
97.4 c

..
94.9
78.7
70.5

78.1
93.4
95.2
96.1
71.8
76.9
69.1
92.1
84.8

29.8
23.4
44.4
47.1
41.8
27.8 c
32.2
42.6
34.5
57.7
32.9
44.0 c
44.4
38.7
40.7
43.4
43.9

27.9
..
..
24.0 c
..
42.0 c
31.1
10.0 c

..
..
40.3
39.8

27.7
18.4
15.5
14.6
46.7
37.8
41.1
..
..

3.0
1.9
1.7
8.3
4.6
1.0
3.2
7.4
3.6
2.7
2.4
1.6 c
9.6
2.8
1.8
4.9
2.4

..
..
..
2.8 c
..
4.7
5.4
6.3 c

..
..
5.3
4.2

..
7.0
9.7
..
2.5
4.6
3.8
..
..

(thousands) Female Male

Female

Male

2012
63.0
..
170.0
180.0
3.7
..
5.9
180.0
14.0
17.0
21.0
3.1
5.8
34.0
..
88.0
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
19.0
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
200.8
..
..
..

2012
1.2
0.5
0.5
4.5
0.1 e
0.3
1.7
6.6
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.2
1
1.1
..
0.8
0.1 e

..
..
..
..
..
0.2
1.2
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2012
0.7
0.2
0.3
2.7
0.1 e
0.2
0.9
2.8
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.3
0.6
..
0.4
0.1 d

..
..
..
..
..
0.2
0.6
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2008–2012b 2008–2012b

34.2
49.3 f
..
31.4
16.2
7.9 f
50.0
38.3
37.0
..
65.3
..
12.4
57.1 f
34.0 c
15.9
..

..
8.8 f
..
8.2
..
..
7.3
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

56.5
..
47.2
40.5
27.8
38.0
..
40.8
54.0
..
74.7
..
..
..
46.5 c
..
..

..
22.6
..
16.7
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

(%)

2011
18.6
5.0
72.3
39.4
23.1
57.9
59.5
39.0
44.9
38.0
45.8
..
5.0
86.0
25.5
..
57.6

..
..
..
..
..
94.0
90.0
..

..
..
8.3
46.1

..
..
..
11.9
..
34.8
33.7
..
..

NOTES
a  Estimates are upper limit.
b  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

c  Refers to an earlier year than that specified.
d  5 or less.
e  0.1 or less.
f  Based on a small denominator (typically 25–49 

unweighted cases).

g  99 or greater.

DEFINITIONS

Infants exclusively breastfed: Percentage of 
children ages 0–5 months who are fed exclusively 
with breast milk in the 24 hours prior to the survey.

 

Infants lacking immunization against DPT: 
Percentage of surviving infants who have not 
received their first dose of diphtheria, pertussis and 
tetanus vaccine.

Stunted children: Percentage of children ages 0–59 
months who are more than two standard deviations 
below the median height-for-age of the World Health 
Organization (WHO) Child Growth Standards.

Infants lacking immunization against measles: 
Percentage of surviving infants who have not 
received the first dose of measles vaccine.

Infant mortality rate: Probability of dying between 
birth and exactly age 1, expressed per 1,000 live births.

Under-five mortality rate: Probability of dying 
between birth and exactly age 5, expressed per 
1,000 live births.

Overweight children: Percentage of children 
ages 0−59 months who are more than two standard 
deviations above the median weight-for-height of 
the WHO Child Growth Standards.

Children living with HIV: Estimated number of 
children (ages 0–14) living with HIV.

HIV prevalence, youth: Percentage of the 
population ages 15–24 who are living with HIV.

Antenatal coverage: Proportion of women who 
used antenatal care provided by skilled health 
personnel for reasons related to pregnancy at least 
once during pregnancy, as a percentage of live births.

Condoms use among young people with multiple 
partners: Proportion of young people (ages 15–24) 
who reported having had more than one sexual partner 
in the past 12 months and who used a condom the last 

time they had sex with any partner, expressed as a 
percentage of all young people with multiple partners.

Pregnant women living with HIV not receiving 
treatment to prevent mother-to-child 
transmission: Proportion of pregnant women living 
with HIV who are not receiving antiretroviral medicines 
to prevent mother-to-child transmission, expressed as 
a percentage of all pregnant women living with HIV.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 6–13: UNICEF 2014.

Columns 2 and 3: HDRO calculations based on data 
from UNICEF (2014).

Columns 4 and 5: Inter-agency Group for Child 
Mortality Estimation 2013.

Column 14: WHO 2013a.

TABLE 7  Health: children and youth    |    187

TABLE7HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE8

L
B
A
T

Adult health and health expenditures

Adult mortality rate

Age-standardized 

death rates

(per 1,000 people)

(per 100,000 people)

Female

2011

Male

2011

From alcohol 

use

From drug use

2008

2008

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation

49
46
41
55
77
51
55
53
41
62
51
44
38
57
..
42
46
..
44
53
49
59
52
51
51
40
41
60
43
71
52
38
69
52
92
72
44
70
42
64
58
50
93
51
75
44
60
89
85

80
116
81
103
84
134
78
131

77
80
69
72
131
96
85
84
72
103
85
71
64
91
..
102
84
..
75
113
94
102
84
116
118
73
91
132
102
105
74
79
207
71
267
191
93
170
77
85
113
117
208
69
119
61
140
237
154

152
190
154
307
209
411
157
351

2.9
1.0
2.3
0.9
2.1
4.3
0.4
1.6
..
6.9
1.6
2.8
0.9
1.4
..
2.2
0.3
..
0.8
4.2
3.2
1.7
3.7
3.5
4.1
0.2
0.6
1.3
0.1
..
..
0.0
8.8
0.4
0.7
3.7
0.4
0.0
0.2
1.1
3.0
0.9
3.3
0.5
2.1
0.1
2.9
1.9
1.7

1.2
4.9
..
3.1
2.9
0.0
0.4
3.5

0.9
0.5
3.0
0.1
1.6
0.9
0.3
1.2
..
0.5
2.2
1.5
0.3
1.8
..
0.2
0.0
..
1.4
0.5
2.6
0.4
1.0
0.7
0.3
0.7
1.4
0.3
..
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.6
0.2
0.4
0.1
1.2
1.5
..
0.3
0.8
1.5
1.5
0.5
0.0
..
1.6
1.5
0.9

0.3
0.2
..
2.3
0.0
6.9
0.2
4.5

188    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Age-

standardized 

obesity 
rate, adult

HIV 

prevalence 
rate, adult

Life expectancy

Health expenditure

At age 60

Health-adjusted

Physicians

Total

Out of pocket

(% of 

population 
ages 20 
and older)

2008

19.8
25.1
14.9
16.2
31.8
21.3
27.0
24.3
6.4
16.2
24.5
16.6
21.9
24.9
..
7.3
4.5
..
25.5
15.6
18.3
19.1
23.4
19.9
27.0
17.2
24.1
28.7
17.5
7.9
33.1
23.4
18.9
35.2
24.7
23.2
24.2
24.6
26.6
33.7
29.1
21.6
24.8
32.6
20.5
42.8
21.3
22.0
29.4

23.6
35.0
21.8
23.4
17.7
30.8
22.0
24.9

(years)

(% ages 
15–49)

(years)

Female

2012

2010/2015a

2010

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.4
..
..
..
0.1 c
..
..
..
0.4

0.7
..
..
0.4
..
..
..
..

24.0
25.1
25.0
23.5
23.2
23.5
24.1
24.4
24.5
22.4
23.4
24.1
24.3
23.5
25.4
24.0
26.1
..
24.3
25.1
23.9
23.6
23.4
23.8
22.8
24.7
24.8
21.1
23.5
21.4
21.2
22.0
20.2
19.2
19.1
21.1
..
19.8
22.3
19.8
23.6
23.2
19.9
19.5
22.9
17.6
20.6
19.1
21.4

21.8
22.3
19.2
17.1
19.4
19.7
20.5
17.5

69.7
71.8
72.4
70.2
69.5
70.9
70.7
70.9
72.6
69.5
70.5
71.2
69.9
70.1
..
72.6
75.5
..
70.9
71.9
71.2
70.6
69.9
69.6
70.7
71.9
73.0
69.6
70.4
68.6
67.4
70.6
69.3
66.6
68.4
69.3
72.2
68.3
70.6
66.2
71.0
70.7
67.3
65.2
66.9
67.0
68.3
67.2
68.7

70.0
66.9
66.1
65.6
67.3
63.6
66.4
64.5

Male

2010

66.3
68.4
69.1
67.9
66.2
67.1
67.7
68.3
69.6
66.3
67.2
68.0
66.9
67.1
..
67.9
70.6
..
68.3
67.0
67.0
66.5
66.9
65.0
65.7
68.3
68.8
64.8
67.0
66.2
66.2
67.1
61.7
63.9
60.0
62.8
68.3
62.4
66.7
64.7
66.2
66.4
61.1
64.3
63.5
65.3
63.6
60.0
63.5

64.0
59.4
63.3
56.4
61.4
62.2
63.6
55.4

(per 10,000 

people)

(% of GDP)

2003–2012b

2011

..
38.5
40.8
..
24.2
36.9
27.4
20.7
19.2
..
..
38.7
34.6
27.7
..
20.2
21.4
..
31.1
33.8
48.6
37.8
27.8
..
25.4
38.0
39.6
37.1
..
13.6
27.6
27.5
33.4
9.4
36.4
20.7
39.1
30.0
32.3
19.3
10.3
..
34.1
14.9
67.2
17.9
27.2
29.0
31.6

37.4
28.2
20.3
37.6
23.9
19.0
20.5
43.1

9.1
9.0
10.9
12.0
17.9
11.1
10.1
11.2
4.6
11.2
9.4
9.4
9.1
9.3
..
7.2
9.3
..
7.7
11.6
10.6
10.6
7.7
8.9
9.1
9.5
9.4
7.4
10.8
2.5
1.9
7.4
6.0
3.7
6.6
6.7
7.2
8.7
8.7
3.3
7.5
10.4
7.7
3.8
10.0
2.7
7.8
6.2
8.1

8.0
7.7
9.3
5.3
5.8
4.4
2.3
6.2

(% of total 

health 

expenditure)

2011

13.6
19.8
25.0
5.1
11.3
12.4
10.5
14.4
60.4
13.2
14.5
16.9
18.2
9.2
..
32.9
16.4
..
21.4
7.5
16.3
19.1
11.4
19.2
13.0
19.9
20.1
15.1
36.7
14.8
13.6
49.4
18.6
18.0
27.9
22.9
19.6
26.2
33.9
16.2
37.2
27.3
26.2
16.6
5.3
16.1
14.6
39.6
24.7

13.1
28.7
30.0
26.7
19.4
31.2
11.4
35.4

Adult mortality rate

Age-standardized 

death rates

(per 1,000 people)

(per 100,000 people)

Age-

standardized 

obesity 
rate, adult

HIV 

prevalence 
rate, adult

Life expectancy

Health expenditure

At age 60

Health-adjusted

Physicians

Total

Out of pocket

Female

Male

From alcohol 

use

From drug use

(% of 

population 
ages 20 
and older)

(years)

(% ages 
15–49)

(years)

Female

HDI rank
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador

2011
86
70
109
164
90
94
104
99
82
90
66
68
152
95
101
83
77
85
85
99
86
100
88
122
93
120
139
74
66
94
153
102
72
81
115
100
118
87
103
88
76
89
111
242
148

61
147
201
105
..
166
238
85
97
266
165
109
138

2011
194
122
231
203
174
208
222
148
148
198
114
123
337
177
220
170
191
154
175
146
175
202
227
196
119
310
210
137
141
228
244
207
134
112
176
123
222
123
188
180
154
162
194
123
165

91
309
375
177
..
200
301
141
176
300
222
269
294

2008
0.8
0.7
0.1
5.5
0.9
4.1
0.8
2.0
0.3
0.6
1.3
..
3.1
1.1
4.5
4.4
5.2
1.2
1.7
0.7
..
4.8
0.2
3.7
1.0
3.6
2.0
1.8
0.2
1.3
0.2
1.9
1.6
0.9
4.1
0.5
1.9
0.1
0.1
1.9
0.0
3.7
0.7
0.0
1.8

3.6
0.8
5.9
0.1
..
1.0
0.6
0.4
3.2
0.7
1.5
2.8
22.8

2008
0.1
..
0.0
..
0.4
0.5
0.4
4.6
0.8
0.8
0.4
0.2
4.0
0.2
0.5
..
0.4
11.1
0.5
1.7
..
0.5
3.7
0.9
1.0
2.3
0.3
1.0
2.8
0.6
..
0.9
4.6
0.0
0.7
0.2
0.7
0.7
0.0
..
1.2
1.2
0.2
0.2
0.1

1.5
0.0
0.5
0.2
..
1.0
0.3
13.5
0.3
0.3
1.2
0.2
0.1

2008
21.4
33.4
50.7
25.8
14.1
18.2
30.0
28.2
25.8
30.8
24.6
29.3
24.4
32.8
24.6
40.9
5.0
21.6
24.7
34.3
23.0
19.5
21.2
24.0
16.5
20.1
34.9
20.3
24.2
23.4
31.9
8.5
23.8
5.6
25.1
17.5
25.0
21.1
24.6
22.3
18.1
22.0
25.8
59.6
21.9

16.1
16.4
14.3
55.5
..
4.7
13.5
34.6
19.2
15.0
18.9
20.4
26.9

2012
..
..
..
..
0.4
1.2
..
..
0.7
0.6
0.3
..
..
0.2
..
..
0.1
0.2
0.2
..
..
..
0.3
..
0.4
0.9
1.4
..
..
0.2
0.2
1.1
0.1 c
..
..
..
..
..
1.7
..
0.5
0.6
1.1
..
0.7

0.1 c
0.1 c
..
..
..
0.4
23.0
0.1 c
0.3
4.0
0.3
0.7
0.6

2010/2015a

18.8
19.5
..
21.5
19.0
19.3
17.8
22.7
23.9
21.1
23.8
20.9
16.5
22.7
19.4
..
19.6
19.9
18.3
19.0
18.7
21.8
19.8
18.5
21.5
17.4
21.5
19.1
20.2
20.0
17.0
21.4
20.2
19.5
19.7
17.9
..
21.1
21.3
21.0
21.3
23.6
18.5
18.6
21.9

21.0
16.3
17.0
18.9
18.7
17.8
16.4
17.5
20.8
18.2
18.6
16.2
22.0

2010
66.8
64.7
..
65.5
66.4
66.8
63.3
67.5
69.0
68.5
70.5
66.0
62.4
69.1
62.7
..
68.6
65.3
65.1
63.2
68.0
66.6
66.9
61.7
66.6
64.9
61.5
66.4
68.1
67.2
59.0
67.8
67.5
70.4
62.5
64.6
65.0
67.0
64.6
64.1
67.1
68.5
63.0
63.2
64.5

68.9
60.3
63.0
63.2
64.0
62.5
61.3
60.8
64.4
52.8
61.5
64.6
67.0

Male

2010
61.5
61.9
..
61.2
62.6
61.2
55.7
65.9
64.3
61.7
67.3
61.8
53.9
64.7
54.2
..
62.3
61.5
59.9
64.8
64.0
61.1
59.3
57.4
64.8
56.6
57.3
63.2
64.4
59.9
57.1
62.7
64.6
65.5
58.1
63.8
58.3
62.5
61.0
59.0
62.4
64.4
58.5
58.9
60.1

67.3
53.0
57.1
59.8
60.5
59.3
57.1
57.5
61.3
47.4
60.1
57.5
60.5

(per 10,000 

people)

2003–2012b

37.6
18.1
13.8
..
12.0
10.6
11.8
35.4
..
..
..
17.1
38.4
19.6
15.1
..
4.9
8.9
33.8
25.6
21.1
17.6
42.4
6.6
9.2
35.2
8.3
26.2
16.9
28.5
4.3
3.0
12.2
14.6
..
12.1
..
11.1
4.1
..
14.7
16.9
9.1
5.6
..

16.0
27.6
..
4.8
..
2.0
3.4
28.3
..
2.9
..
36.4
16.0

(% of GDP)

2011
7.3
7.7
10.6
5.9
3.6
5.9
5.7
6.3
8.2
5.2
10.9
6.7
3.9
6.2
3.8
4.4
3.4
6.0
5.2
8.4
10.4
8.9
9.9
6.2
4.8
7.2
5.7
6.6
10.2
4.3
3.8
4.1
6.2
5.2
4.9
3.9
5.9
6.3
4.9
7.2
6.1
7.3
5.3
5.3
5.4

8.5
5.3
2.7
7.0
..
2.7
5.1
4.9
9.7
3.2
4.9
11.4
6.8

(% of total 

health 

expenditure)

2011
43.2
29.0
11.6
28.2
41.7
53.0
38.5
56.5
26.8
57.0
27.2
16.1
41.5
46.5
5.4
41.8
45.9
58.5
70.1
24.7
36.2
31.3
69.5
50.5
38.4
45.2
23.4
38.3
31.3
57.4
21.0
13.7
39.5
34.8
18.3
18.2
23.6
55.0
32.5
51.1
17.0
49.4
11.0
11.1
40.0

49.1
39.7
39.2
7.1
..
49.9
5.0
58.2
56.1
46.6
25.8
44.9
32.3

TABLE 8  Adult health and health expenditures    |    189

TABLE8HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceAdult mortality rate

Age-standardized 

death rates

(per 1,000 people)

(per 100,000 people)

Age-

standardized 

obesity 
rate, adult

HIV 

prevalence 
rate, adult

Life expectancy

Health expenditure

At age 60

Health-adjusted

Physicians

Total

Out of pocket

HDI rank
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia

Female

Male

From alcohol 

use

From drug use

(% of 

population 
ages 20 
and older)

(years)

(% ages 
15–49)

(years)

Female

2011
132
137
407
75
116
258
87
103
152
155
135
242
224
114
89
117
119
164
156
159
157
220
217
164
287
377
136
189
331

157
152
294
504
331
181
291
372
360
185
167
473
235
159
229
322
218
541
239
363
270
216
313
223
245
308
310
237
265

2011
213
256
474
132
207
379
128
269
177
282
279
282
259
163
141
166
204
340
180
247
210
260
252
204
332
426
163
234
369

183
186
346
558
383
231
344
415
393
234
213
501
312
201
275
363
287
583
293
410
326
279
359
258
289
352
348
295
306

2008
0.3
0.9
0.9
0.6
0.3
1.1
0.9
0.5
0.1
14.7
1.7
0.5
0.9
13.7
0.8
0.1
10.5
..
0.5
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.8
1.2
0.7
0.8
1.0
1.8
1.0

1.0
0.4
0.7
0.7
1.3
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.9
0.5
0.8
0.8
1.1
0.1
0.6
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.3
0.8
9.2
0.7
0.1
1.1
0.8
0.7

2008
1.0
0.3
0.4
2.9
6.9
0.6
1.7
0.4
0.2
9.4
1.3
0.3
1.0
0.3
8.0
0.3
0.3
0.1
3.4
1.9
2.2
7.1
2.1
8.9
0.2
0.3
2.3
0.4
0.3

1.2
6.0
0.2
0.3
0.3
3.8
0.0
0.3
1.7
13.1
0.4
0.1
1.0
0.2
0.3
0.0
0.3
0.4
0.0
0.1
0.2
3.5
0.2
0.3
33.1
14.9
0.3
0.3
0.0

2008
17.3
6.4
33.5
31.6
29.4
16.9
1.6
11.5
42.0
20.7
17.2
10.9
2.9
19.8
17.3
29.8
24.2
45.8
9.9
1.9
5.5
2.3
8.0
3.0
5.3
4.2
1.1
11.3
11.5

1.5
5.9
4.7
23.4
7.2
4.1
4.3
11.1
7.1
16.7
1.7
8.6
15.9
32.1
4.4
5.4
14.0
16.9
8.0
4.6
6.5
6.6
4.6
8.4
2.4
10.4
6.7
8.5
1.2

2012
0.1
0.1 c
17.9
..
..
1.3
0.4
0.2
..
0.7
0.3
13.3
..
0.5
0.1
..
0.3
..
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.8
1.4
0.3
2.8
12.7
0.1 c
1.0
..

0.3
0.1 c
6.1
26.5
2.3
0.6
2.9
4.5
3.1
0.1
0.5
14.7
0.5
..
2.1
5.1
0.4
23.1
0.5
7.2
1.1
..
2.9
2.1
0.1 c
1.2
3.2
1.3
1.3

2010/2015a

18.3
17.0
16.0
19.9
17.5
16.6
22.4
19.9
17.3
21.5
16.8
17.3
16.9
22.1
17.9
18.0
22.2
17.4
18.2
17.0
19.5
23.8
15.5
17.1
17.1
17.0
18.4
18.2
15.9

17.1
17.4
17.8
16.3
15.7
16.6
17.8
16.4
13.7
16.2
16.9
18.8
14.9
16.9
15.9
17.9
16.4
15.5
16.2
17.5
15.6
17.4
14.5
17.2
15.9
17.5
13.9
15.2
17.8

2010
61.7
63.2
52.7
67.5
60.9
57.6
69.1
66.4
58.6
63.8
61.4
55.1
59.2
62.2
61.9
57.4
66.3
54.7
61.0
57.7
61.5
60.0
56.1
57.8
51.6
48.7
59.8
60.6
51.1

59.9
58.0
56.8
43.3
54.0
58.3
56.4
51.4
50.8
55.3
54.7
46.1
51.5
55.3
54.6
52.6
55.0
42.6
56.5
52.8
55.1
58.1
52.0
37.1
46.2
54.1
50.6
54.2
53.5

Male

2010
57.1
57.4
49.1
64.6
60.8
52.5
62.6
60.8
55.2
58.1
54.1
50.0
56.9
61.0
60.3
54.3
61.9
49.6
56.5
54.9
58.2
55.9
54.5
54.1
48.4
46.8
57.1
58.5
46.7

57.6
55.2
54.2
40.4
49.7
53.2
53.2
49.0
50.0
55.3
53.0
43.3
49.6
53.0
53.4
51.8
53.5
37.7
54.8
50.1
52.2
55.9
50.0
27.8
48.5
52.9
45.4
52.3
51.4

(per 10,000 

people)

2003–2012b

25.4
11.5
7.6
15.0
6.1
2.1
12.2
3.0
1.8
9.3
24.7
3.7
1.0
3.7
6.2
1.2
3.7
3.8
19.0
6.5
0.7
2.3
0.9
1.9
1.0
0.7
3.6
4.9
3.0

2.1
8.1
1.8
1.7
1.7
5.0
0.6
0.8
4.0
2.0
1.6
0.6
0.5
2.2
1.5
0.1
1.3
0.5
0.6
1.2
0.6
2.8
0.5
..
1.9
2.3
1.4
1.1
0.3

(% of GDP)

2011
5.4
4.1
8.5
3.7
8.3
5.9
6.8
4.8
13.4
6.7
6.5
5.3
5.1
8.6
6.0
4.1
10.1
10.1
5.8
3.9
4.1
5.7
4.8
2.8
2.5
6.1
3.7
7.7
4.0

5.4
2.5
4.5
8.0
3.5
2.0
10.8
5.2
5.3
5.5
4.1
..
4.3
8.8
5.3
7.3
5.4
12.8
6.0
9.5
4.6
8.4
8.0
7.9
9.6
7.9
6.8
4.4
4.7

190    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

(% of total 

health 

expenditure)

2011
43.9
55.9
7.2
51.0
19.3
18.0
55.7
23.4
9.0
53.4
34.4
7.7
4.0
47.9
58.0
6.9
42.2
1.3
60.1
59.4
15.3
56.9
29.1
39.7
31.5
27.0
61.3
56.9
31.6

54.8
63.0
46.4
13.1
27.3
80.7
21.4
65.1
60.4
78.1
25.2
..
11.7
3.0
42.2
31.7
37.3
17.9
32.7
47.8
42.6
69.1
40.4
22.1
79.4
31.6
64.3
22.3
33.8

TABLE 8 ADULT HEALTH AND HEALTH EXPENDITURESTABLE8Adult mortality rate

Age-standardized 

death rates

(per 1,000 people)

(per 100,000 people)

Age-

standardized 

obesity 
rate, adult

HIV 

prevalence 
rate, adult

Life expectancy

Health expenditure

At age 60

Health-adjusted

Physicians

Total

Out of pocket

HDI rank
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Female

Male

From alcohol 

use

From drug use

(% of 

population 
ages 20 
and older)

(years)

(% ages 
15–49)

(years)

Female

2011
347
292
304
352
421
294
321
236
259
438
311
420
358
272

131
392
51
57
46
316
344
283

59
89
157
270

111
99
104
98
153
327
246
155
127

2011
384
331
369
405
457
348
370
298
347
459
373
466
411
312

203
433
110
105
56
399
378
251

109
152
230
313

160
137
216
181
228
372
289
206
188

2008
0.8
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.7
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.6
1.2
1.0
0.9
0.9
1.1

0.8
0.2
2.0
0.9
..
2.1
..
0.2

1.9
1.6
1.3
0.9

0.7
1.0
2.3
3.4
1.1
0.9
1.0
3.0
1.4

2008
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.0
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.3

0.6
0.2
..
..
..
6.4
..
0.1

1.0
0.9
2.3
2.9

6.6
0.4
1.4
0.8
3.2
0.6
2.7
0.3
1.7

2008
4.5
5.5
4.8
5.4
5.4
4.7
3.3
2.4
1.8
7.0
3.1
3.7
1.9
2.5

3.8
46.5
..
71.1
..
5.3
..
..

22.0
12.5
5.9
5.4

25.5
5.6
23.1
23.6
3.2
7.6
3.6
18.6
11.6

2012
10.8
0.9
0.9
3.9
11.1
1.7
1.3
1.0
0.7
1.5
2.7
..
1.1
0.5

..
..
..
..
..
0.5
2.7
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2010/2015a

17.0
15.4
15.4
14.9
16.8
14.8
16.0
15.1
15.1
12.5
15.6
15.9
15.2
15.5

16.8
..
..
..
..
16.1
16.4
..

23.0
19.9
18.5
16.2

19.0
18.5
18.7
21.2
18.6
16.6
16.8
19.3
20.7

2010
46.4
47.9
48.4
49.5
46.1
50.6
46.8
48.8
52.0
50.7
48.6
41.7
48.1
49.4

64.4
55.8
..
..
..
48.2
..
..

70.9
68.6
59.5
53.0

61.8
68.2
64.8
66.8
58.3
51.6
53.7
57.1
63.7

Male

2010
43.7
47.6
48.8
46.7
42.9
49.8
45.5
45.4
50.3
47.6
45.1
37.7
44.7
48.5

60.3
53.1
..
..
..
46.8
..
..

66.9
63.6
56.3
50.7

60.0
63.5
58.9
62.0
55.5
49.4
51.3
52.5
59.8

(per 10,000 

people)

2003–2012b

0.2
0.1
0.8
0.7
0.3
1.0
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.2
0.4
0.5
1.1
0.2

32.9
4.4
70.6
7.1
48.8
0.4
..
10.9

27.8
17.2
7.4
2.8

13.7
12.1
26.2
..
6.3
1.8
1.7
25.5
13.4

(% of GDP)

2011
8.4
19.5
6.8
6.3
6.6
6.0
8.7
6.5
2.6
18.8
4.3
3.8
8.5
5.3

..
16.5
4.4
..
7.2
..
1.6
17.3

12.2
6.0
4.6
5.2

4.3
4.8
6.3
7.6
4.2
6.3
5.6
5.6
10.1

(% of total 

health 

expenditure)

2011
14.2
17.7
54.3
41.3
9.0
67.4
43.6
36.6
51.2
74.9
70.5
43.4
43.5
37.6

..
12.6
7.0
8.0
14.7
..
55.4
0.1

13.7
33.8
44.7
52.7

31.1
35.9
28.5
34.4
59.7
27.6
48.2
33.6
17.8

NOTES
a  Data are annual average of projected values for 

corresponding age groups of the World Health 
Organization standard population.

2010–2015.

b  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

c  0.1 or less.

DEFINITIONS

Adult mortality rate: Probability that a 15-year-old 
will die before reaching age 60, expressed per 1,000 
people.

Age-standardized death rate from alcohol use: 
The weighted average of the age-specific mortality 
rates from alcohol use per 100,000 people, where 
the weights are the proportions of people in the 

Age-standardized death rate from drug use: 
The weighted average of the age-specific mortality 
rates from drug use per 100,000 persons, where 
the weights are the proportions of people in the 
corresponding age groups of the WHO standard 
population.

Age-standardized obesity rate, adult: The 
weighted average of the age-specific obesity rate 
(with obesity defined as having a body mass index 
of 30 kilograms per square meter or higher) among 
adults ages 20 and older, expressed as a percentage 
of the total population ages 20 and older.

HIV prevalence rate, adult: Percentage of the 
population ages 15–49 who are living with HIV.

Life expectancy at age 60: Additional number 
of years that a 60-year-old could expect to live if 
prevailing patterns of age-specific mortality rates 
stay the same throughout the rest of his or her life.

Health-adjusted life expectancy: Average 
number of years that a person can expect to live in 
full health, taking into account years lived in less 
than full health due to disease and injury.

Physicians per 10,000 people: Number of 
medical doctors (physicians), both generalists and 
specialists, expressed per 10,000 people.

Health expenditure, total: Current and capital 
spending on health from government (central and 
local) budgets, external borrowing and grants 
(including donations from international agencies 
and nongovernmental organizations) and social (or 

compulsory) health insurance funds, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Out-of-pocket health expenditure: Household 
direct payments to public and private providers of 
health care services and nonprofit institutions and 
nonreimbursable cost sharing, such as deductibles, 
copayments and fee for services, expressed as a 
percentage of total health expenditure.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1–6 and 10: WHO 2013a. 

Column 7: UNDESA 2013a.

Columns 8 and 9: Salomon and others 2012.

Column 11: World Bank 2013a. 

Column 12: WHO 2013b.

 

TABLE 8  Adult health and health expenditures    |    191

TABLE8HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE9

L
B
A
T

Education

Literacy rates

Gross enrolment ratios

Education quality

Population 

with at 

least some 
secondary 
education

Adult

Youth

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

(% ages 
15–24)

(% ages 25 
and older)

Pre-primary

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% of 

children of 
pre-school 

age)

(% of 
primary 

school-age 
population)

(% of 

secondary 
school-age 
population)

(% of 
tertiary 

school-age 
population)

Primary 
school 
dropout 
rates

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

Performance of 15-year-old students

(%)

Mathematicsa Readingb

Sciencec

Pupil–
teacher 
ratio

Education 
expenditure

(number of 
pupils per 
teacher)

(% of GDP)

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d

2012

2012

2012

2003–2012d 2005–2012d

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
95.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
99.7
99.0
97.7
..
97.3
95.4
96.3
98.7
99.8
87.2
99.7
99.7
..
..
92.4
90.0
98.6
95.4
99.0
94.6
99.8
93.9
98.9
99.8
97.9

98.1
..
98.5
99.6
97.7
89.5
86.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
99.8
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
99.9
99.9
99.6
..
99.4
99.7
96.8
99.8
99.8
98.0
99.8
100.0
..
..
98.3
95.0
98.9
99.7
98.9
98.2
100.0
98.6
99.6
99.7
99.2

98.8
..
99.3
99.8
97.2
99.9
97.7

97.1
94.4 e
95.7
89.0
95.0
96.6
95.2
100.0
77.4
96.1 f
79.6
86.9
91.3
99.9
75.4
82.9 g
86.4
..
85.8
80.5
100.0
80.1
100.0 f
100.0
96.9
75.7
69.9
99.8
63.1
63.8 g
60.5
78.7
100.0 f
66.5
91.4
82.3
49.4
99.3
73.3
62.7
74.8
48.0
98.3 e
78.0 g
77.1 g
56.0
89.1 g
98.9
56.3 g

52.5
89.6
89.2 g
89.3
88.9
49.6 g
53.9

99
95
100
90
73
112
93
71
..
100
67
95
97
85
101
118
87
95
97
110
101
119
89
70
91
98
127
103
76
92
73
79
90
13
77
74
112
90
114
71
112
83
87
50
109
81
64
90
75

89
..
61
103
78
10
55

99
104
103
108
99
101
100
99
..
100
105
101
99
107
101
104
103
105
104
108
100
104
97
99
98
100
104
102
103
95
103
101
98
103
99
99
..
102
96
108
102
112
101
..
99
106
94
105
118

112
108
101
99
96
114
109

113
133
96
128
94
102
120
102
..
120
118
97
109
97
106
97
102
111
102
110
98
106
101
107
98
101
129
96
111
108
112
93
109
114
107
97
..
94
95
..
90
110
101
96
90
100
98
99
90

90
93
91
106
96
104
94

73
83
54
76
95
57
81
..
..
74
73
74
81
61
60
101
60
44
62
57
71
69
18
96
85
64
83
65
91
24
12
47
72
51
77
74
..
55
39
..
71
66
60
33
62
22
59
67
75

63
..
56
91
52
61
16

0.7
..
..
..
6.9
3.4
..
..
1.3
1.1
..
4.4
2.9
..
1.0
1.0
0.1
20.6
1.1
..
0.6
6.7
..
0.4
1.4
0.5
2.2
0.8
2.6
3.6
6.4
4.7
2.5
1.3
3.6
1.5
35.4
1.9
3.7
15.6
2.1
..
1.9
2.2
3.5
5.9
0.7
6.9
4.7

5.3
10.5
19.5
0.9
5.2
..
6.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
94
..
..
..
..
..
96
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
88
49
..
..
91
..
..
100
..
..
100
..
..
..
82
100
78
100
..
..

..
92
..
100
..
..
..

489
504
531
523
481
514
500
518
573
500
501
478
493
494
561
554
536
535
466
495
506
515
490
519
501
485
484
499
453
..
376
440
521
..
479
518
..
482
..
434
423
487
477
..
..
..
471
491
388

409
..
410
..
445
..
..

504
512
509
511
498
508
512
523
542
496
523
483
483
499
545
536
538
516
486
505
490
509
488
524
481
490
488
493
477
..
388
449
516
..
477
518
..
463
..
442
441
488
488
..
..
..
485
489
396

411
..
422
..
438
..
..

495
521
515
522
497
524
516
525
551
498
522
485
478
514
555
538
547
525
470
499
506
505
491
545
514
494
496
508
467
..
384
438
541
..
496
526
..
471
..
448
445
489
494
..
..
..
491
502
406

416
..
410
..
439
..
..

..
..
..
..
14
12
15
..
17
..
16
9
10
17
14
19
17
8
13
18
11
11
9
14
17
10
12
19
10
11
10
13
12
11
12
10
10
15
13
18
22
11
11
12
9
9
14
11
16

14
14
8
15
17
..
20

6.9
5.1
5.4
6.0
5.6
5.1
7.2
5.5
3.3
8.7
6.5
7.0
7.8
5.6
3.4
5.0
3.8
2.1
6.0
5.9
6.0
6.6
..
6.8
5.7
4.5
5.0
4.2
4.1
3.3
2.5
7.3
5.7
5.6
5.4
5.2
3.0
4.2
5.4
..
4.1
5.8
4.9
2.9
12.9
3.8
4.3
5.0
5.8

2.9
..
..
5.2
4.2
..
4.3

192    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Literacy rates

Gross enrolment ratios

Education quality

Population 

with at 

least some 
secondary 
education

Adult

Youth

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

(% ages 
15–24)

(% ages 25 
and older)

Pre-primary

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% of 

children of 
pre-school 

age)

(% of 
primary 

school-age 
population)

(% of 

secondary 
school-age 
population)

(% of 
tertiary 

school-age 
population)

Primary 
school 
dropout 
rates

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

Performance of 15-year-old students

(%)

Mathematicsa Readingb

Sciencec

HDI rank
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d

99.7
98.4
..
..
99.0
93.1
88.8
98.8
89.6
94.1
95.5
96.3
94.1
99.7
93.5
91.8
..
91.2
85.0
99.8
95.9
98.0
90.4
99.7
..
89.6
99.7
..
97.4
98.0
99.6
..
93.5
79.1
95.1
..
72.6
..
96.8
87.0
..
93.6
91.6
94.7
99.0
90.1

98.4
97.4
99.6
98.8
95.3
92.8
85.1
73.9
93.9
89.0
91.2

99.7
97.9
..
..
..
98.4
96.8
99.6
98.7
97.6
98.5
98.3
98.7
99.8
98.5
99.1
..
98.2
98.7
100.0
99.1
99.3
97.5
99.8
..
97.4
99.8
..
98.7
99.7
99.8
..
98.1
97.2
99.6
..
91.8
..
98.8
95.6
..
98.2
98.7
98.4
99.4
97.0

99.3
95.7
99.8
99.5
99.3
98.8
95.2
89.3
98.6
97.9
99.4

90.9
94.3
88.6 g
..
..
69.4 g
53.6
59.3
54.2
62.1 g
53.7
53.6 g
49.4
99.3
58.0
66.8
..
74.0
65.1
95.5
74.1
65.6
53.6
92.0
..
61.1
93.5 g
76.1 g
47.8
56.8
94.4 g
57.8
38.1
39.3
65.3 g
..
24.1
26.5
84.8
72.6 g
..
56.3
39.8
45.9
87.9
54.4

14.9
84.7 g
..
62.1
56.7
44.5
75.5 g
51.2 g
38.8
24.0 g
53.1

90
85
79
..
83
78
120
83
91
65
72
73
29
54
99
110
96
87
35
27
34
56
..
58
99
77
101
47
26
16
51
18
112
..
62
80
79
95
69
113
61
49
150
88
35
37

95
86
..
34
42
42
18
27
35
35
51

99
101
105
101
101
101
108
106
107
100
102
107
102
105
104
107
88
99
106
96
99
93
..
106
103
105
106
121
90
..
102
105
97
110
128
105
117
119
..
..
87
107
114
114
110
105

98
117
..
105
94
109
106
109
97
165
94

85
93
105
96
106
67
96
86
74
84
85
101
89
98
84
101
79
99
86
100
89
92
..
87
108
91
98
84
82
..
96
90
87
91
87
101
98
97
82
93
91
93
87
85
91
75

72
103
..
86
83
81
82
76
68
..
77

75
60
61
..
14
37
40
12
46
42
78
47
61
45
28
1
18
14
55
20
40
52
..
28
53
43
80
26
41
38
46
62
51
35
24
..
31
..
55
26
10
45
39
..
6
33

13
61
..
..
49
27
7
29
35
..
38

3.9
3.4
6.6
..
8.7
0.8
2.7
10.6
6.7
8.4
6.1
9.0
5.0
0.7
5.0
6.0
26.5
2.7
3.8
1.8
2.1
1.6
..
6.9
..
18.5
1.9
9.1
2.5
16.7
4.4
9.1
..
5.3
..
31.4
7.2
12.2
1.2
4.8
10.4
15.3
8.6
9.7
9.6
25.2

..
7.0
..
10.0
0.7
12.0
7.0
1.1
17.4
..
13.8

..
..
55
..
65
..
100
88
10
90
..
91
..
..
96
99
61
82
98
100
..
56
..
95
65
..
100
54
..
..
77
100
..
100
..
85
99
61
..
..
88
100
84
100
..
85

81
99
..
..
100
..
100
..
..
100
..

2012
482
439
..
..
..
421
..
..
..
..
..
407
448
432
413
..
..
..
..
..
386
449
391
..
..
368
..
..
..
..
..
..
427
388
613
..
..
..
394
..
..
376
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
375
..
..
..
..
..

2012
475
436
..
..
..
398
..
..
..
..
..
441
475
393
424
..
..
..
..
..
399
446
410
..
..
384
..
..
..
..
..
..
441
404
570
..
..
..
394
..
..
403
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
396
..
..
..
..
..

2012
486
446
..
..
..
420
..
..
..
..
..
429
463
425
415
..
..
..
..
..
409
445
405
..
..
373
..
..
..
..
..
..
444
398
580
..
..
..
397
..
..
399
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
382
..
..
..
..
..

Pupil–
teacher 
ratio

Education 
expenditure

(number of 
pupils per 
teacher)

(% of GDP)

2003–2012d 2005–2012d

18
17
13
..
15
13
21
18
14
23
..
17
..
16
28
13
16
24
20
12
20
16
..
6
16
20
16
22
16
..
19
31
16
17
17
16
23
16
19
28
17
25
18
15
21
25

12
29
..
30
24
16
25
28
28
25
24

4.1
4.1
7.5
..
2.5
5.1
3.7
..
1.6
4.1
3.6
6.3
2.9
3.1
5.3
4.8
4.2
2.0
4.7
2.8
..
4.7
5.8
2.7
..
2.6
5.3
6.6
..
..
3.1
4.1
5.8
6.2
..
5.1
4.3
3.5
3.3
6.4
4.4
4.5
5.2
..
..
2.2

7.2
5.5
..
5.8
..
2.8
7.8
3.8
4.1
..
7.6

TABLE 9  Education    |    193

TABLE9HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceLiteracy rates

Gross enrolment ratios

Education quality

Population 

with at 

least some 
secondary 
education

Adult

Youth

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

(% ages 
15–24)

(% ages 25 
and older)

Pre-primary

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% of 

children of 
pre-school 

age)

(% of 
primary 

school-age 
population)

(% of 

secondary 
school-age 
population)

(% of 
tertiary 

school-age 
population)

Primary 
school 
dropout 
rates

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

Performance of 15-year-old students

(%)

Mathematicsa Readingb

Sciencec

HDI rank
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti

2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d

99.0
84.5
99.4
95.4
93.0
84.1
78.5
85.0
93.4
84.9
..
75.9
99.2
76.5
58.3
85.1
67.1
83.2
78.0
..
99.7
62.8
52.8
73.9
71.5
72.7
..
61.4
57.7
69.5
94.2

57.4
54.9
72.2
87.8
70.4
92.7
65.9
71.3
51.1
65.3
64.5
83.6
62.4
..
75.5
67.8
58.6
75.8
49.7
73.2
28.7
71.9
60.4
48.7
..
..

100.0
96.0
99.9
97.8
98.8
95.3
82.4
93.1
97.1
98.4
..
87.4
99.8
87.1
79.5
95.9
81.5
94.6
87.0
..
99.9
81.1
74.4
87.1
85.7
83.9
..
64.0
78.7
80.2
98.1

82.4
70.7
82.4
93.7
73.0
96.1
77.3
80.6
66.4
86.4
64.9
90.9
70.8
..
86.0
74.6
69.0
83.2
65.0
87.4
42.4
87.3
79.9
72.3
..
..

95.0
39.8
..
64.8 g
74.3
34.1
32.4 g
31.2 g
65.0
..
..
22.6
95.6 g
33.5 g
..
27.0
28.0
..
37.6 g
..
92.4
38.7 g
34.4
15.5
54.3 g
29.7 g
46.2
35.0 g
26.7 g
..
..

28.3 g
33.2
28.6
48.1 g
..
17.8 g
7.7 g
27.9
..
16.0 g
..
55.4 g
10.5 g
..
..
7.4 g
14.2 g
20.9
10.8
28.8
18.4 g
15.5 g
29.8 g
29.1 g
20.3 g
..

80
63
25
51
77
11
7
63
77
75
..
64
25
30
10
42
59
61
55
..
9
58
9
15
114
24
14
..
26
50
73

82
49
51
25
87
9
13
30
13
2
9
..
100
43
24
34
..
36
14
14
19
..
11
..
..
4

94
114
93
106
102
122
107
80
105
112
112
114
106
109
125
109
116
122
117
116
100
113
112
124
110
123
109
114
114
118
91

139
93
112
115
140
114
134
111
81
97
145
..
60
141
117
93
97
111
84
110
123
..
133
..
97
70

75
67
105
85
102
74
53
105
..
93
83
65
88
65
57
73
69
60
69
86
86
69
74
45
58
47
54
101
51
71
..

66
37
60
60
32
50
32
50
44
47
38
38
..
48
73
35
27
52
41
28
48
..
55
..
52
44

38
25
9
28
..
26
16
13
25
21
..
18
41
9
18
21
16
5
18
..
22
23
9
16
12
17
10
..
13
8
..

14
10
4
6
7
14
7
12
10
10
4
6
..
..
11
4
5
11
8
9
12
..
10
..
4
5

4.2
16.0
1.9
24.2
..
6.8
..
16.5
2.5
10.7
..
29.1
2.9
15.5
16.4
30.4
8.4
28.5
51.6
..
2.0
..
5.1
34.1
27.8
30.1
29.7
46.9
33.8
33.9
27.9

38.3
39.0
..
32.7
68.1
25.2
64.4
30.2
20.1
..
59.3
..
..
36.6
..
18.6
18.8
36.8
38.6
75.2
40.7
9.1
48.3
..
..
..

..
96
100
..
87
..
100
68
100
95
..
..
72
98
..
36
100
100
75
85
94
..
91
100
52
97
80
..
58
48
49

93
84
97
78
..
100
96
79
66
..
95
..
..
54
55
97
100
68
65
95
47
60
83
..
..
100

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
511
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
508
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
528
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

194    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Pupil–
teacher 
ratio

Education 
expenditure

(number of 
pupils per 
teacher)

(% of GDP)

2003–2012d 2005–2012d

16
29
16
31
30
..
17
25
19
23
..
26
24
41
31
34
26
22
30
25
23
35
24
46
33
27
44
49
40
29
26

28
41
47
29
46
28
59
46
36
30
43
39
36
24
28
46
40
34
32
48
44
38
42
..
44
35

8.6
3.4
..
2.7
6.0
5.1
..
3.6
6.6
5.6
..
2.8
5.8
8.4
10.1
..
5.4
5.2
4.7
..
3.9
3.3
4.7
2.6
8.2
3.3
6.2
1.3
2.2
..
..

4.7
2.4
6.7
7.8
3.5
0.8
4.8
3.2
..
5.2
2.8
2.5
..
7.3
7.6
6.2
3.7
13.0
5.6
3.3
5.3
..
4.6
..
..
8.4

TABLE 9 EDUCATIONTABLE9Literacy rates

Gross enrolment ratios

Education quality

Population 

with at 

least some 
secondary 
education

Adult

Youth

(% ages 
15 and 
older)

(% ages 
15–24)

(% ages 25 
and older)

Pre-primary

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% of 

children of 
pre-school 

age)

(% of 
primary 

school-age 
population)

(% of 

secondary 
school-age 
population)

(% of 
tertiary 

school-age 
population)

Primary 
school 
dropout 
rates

(% of 
primary 
school 
cohort)

Primary 
school 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

Performance of 15-year-old students

(%)

Mathematicsa Readingb

Sciencec

HDI rank
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2005–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d 2003–2012d

56.9
51.1
39.0
61.3
42.9
33.4
55.3
50.6
25.3
86.9
28.7
68.9
43.3
35.4
56.6
61.2
28.7

100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
94.2
71.7
58.2

77.0
94.4
97.7
91.5
62.9
58.9
59.3
..
81.2

67.5
68.1
55.0
72.1
49.1
46.9
73.2
67.1
31.4
88.9
39.3
90.1
61.0
47.9
65.6
65.8
36.5

100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
98.9
85.9
70.2

89.9
98.8
99.4
97.1
80.6
69.2
71.5
..
87.9

22.1 g
24.0 g
12.5
8.6 g
27.3 g
10.9
..
3.6 g
..
7.1 g
2.0
..
14.8 g
5.5
17.9 g
16.5 g
48.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

86.9
64.9
47.5
22.1

41.1
..
75.6
54.7
38.4
28.1
..
..
63.6

5
30
18
..
..
4
7
..
16
5
4
13
9
1
6
4
6

..
48
..
94
108
..
..
105

85
67
51
24

32
58
43
79
54
24
20
67
52

94
85
95
141
102
88
116
105
91
137
85
42
131
95
95
111
71

..
105
..
93
92
29
..
100

103
118
111
98

105
120
101
106
110
100
105
96
108

..
57
37
34
45
51
34
26
39
28
26
30
..
23
18
43
16

..
103
..
63
95
7
..
..

101
87
70
39

76
84
95
85
64
43
42
79
74

8
4
8
1
..
7
3
5
9
3
5
2
..
2
3
8
2

..
43
..
..
64
..
..
..

76
35
23
8

28
..
50
44
22
8
9
..
31

17.8
17.2
63.4
50.9
32.2
38.4
..
69.4
41.4
56.2
31.0
31.0
..
61.9
53.4
29.3
30.7

..
16.5
..
..
3.8
..
..
..

3.6
8.1
18.3
42.7

5.8
..
4.1
14.6
21.2
37.7
39.9
15.8
17.1

99
63
57
78
56
52
39
84
75
95
95
90
55
62
58
94
97

..
..
..
74
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Pupil–
teacher 
ratio

Education 
expenditure

(number of 
pupils per 
teacher)

(% of GDP)

2003–2012d 2005–2012d

42
34
54
74
27
48
52
55
44
47
48
41
33
61
80
35
39

..
..
..
22
6
36
..
19

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

4.6
3.9
4.7
5.4
1.9
4.7
..
5.0
3.1
6.1
3.4
2.1
2.7
2.6
1.2
2.5
4.5

..
..
1.6
..
..
..
..
..

5.3
4.6
3.7
3.7

..
..
3.4
5.2
3.4
5.2
3.7
..
5.0

NOTES
a  Average score for Organisation for Economic 

Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries 
is 494.

b  Average score for OECD countries is 496.
c  Average score for OECD countries is 501.
d  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

e  Refers to population ages 25–64.
f  Refers to population ages 25–74.
g  Barro and Lee (2013) estimate for 2010 based 
on data from the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization Institute for 
Statistics.

 

DEFINITIONS

Adult literacy rate: Percentage of the population 
ages 15 and older who can, with understanding, 
both read and write a short simple statement on 
their everyday life.

Youth literacy rate: Percentage of the population 
ages 15–24 who can, with understanding, both 
read and write a short simple statement on their 
everyday life.

Population with at least some secondary 
education: Percentage of the population ages 25 
and older that reached at least a secondary level 
of education.

Gross enrolment ratio: Total enrolment in a given 
level of education (pre-primary, primary, secondary 

or tertiary), regardless of age, expressed as a 
percentage of the official school-age population for 
the same level of education. 

Primary school dropout rate: Percentage of 
students from a given cohort that have enrolled in 
primary school but that drop out before reaching 
the last grade of primary education. It is calculated 
as 100 minus the survival rate to the last grade of 
primary education and assumes that observed flow 
rates remain unchanged throughout the cohort life 
and that dropouts do not re-enter school.

Primary school teachers trained to teach: 
Percentage of primary school teachers that have 
received the minimum organized teacher training 
(pre-service or in-service) required for teaching at 
the primary level.

Performance of 15-year-old students in reading, 
mathematics and science: Score obtained in testing 
of skills and knowledge of 15-year-old students in 
these subjects essential for participation in society.

Pupil-teacher ratio: Average number of pupils per 
teacher in primary education in a given school year.

Education expenditure: Total public expenditure 
(current and capital) on education, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1–9 and 13: UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics 2013. 

Columns 10–12: OECD 2013. 

Column 14: World Bank 2013a.

TABLE 9  Education    |    195

TABLE9HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

10T

Command over and allocation of resources

GDP per 
capita

Gross fixed 

capital 
formation 

General government 
final consumption 

expenditure 

GDP

Taxes on 
income, 
profit and 
capital gain

(2011 PPP 
$ billions)

(2011 
PPP $)

(% of GDP)

Total 

(% of GDP)

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of total 
tax revenue)

Share of 

agriculture, 

hunting, 

forestry and 

fisheries

Domestic 

credit provided 
by the banking 

sector

DEBT

PRICES

External 
debt stock

Total 
debt 
service

Consumer 

price 
index

Domestic 

food price level

Research 

and 

development 
expenditure

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GNI)

(2005=100)

Index

Volatility 

index

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2012

2012

2005–2012a 2005–2012a 2005–2012

2005–2012a

2005–2012a

2012

2012

2005–2012a

2012

2012

2013

2013

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation

315.5
960.6
410.2
711.3

62,858
42,278
51,293
42,453
15,965.5 50,859
41,966
3,375.2
143.5
32,360
40,588
1,410.6
71,475
379.7
41,524
232.2
42,919
196.9
398.3
41,840
38,553
12.4
34,694
2,207.0
50,291
359.8
29,495
1,474.9
4,465.4
35,006
..
..
30,600
242.1
36,074
2,369.9
43,139
363.7
439.5
39,498
86,587
46.0
38,104
206.3
27,394
56.4
33,668
2,004.6
1,458.9
31,198
26,733
281.0
25,391
281.7
29.3
71,080
274.2 133,713
25.9
29,698
24,195
32.2
50,791
1,436.8
23,554
70.4
22,143
853.3
..
..
25,537
138.1
28,398
11.9
57,045
525.1
21,099
368.5
263.9
25,096
22,146
219.7
40,658
53.6
..
..
273.7 b 84,188 b
85.1
19,946
21,229
43.2
..
..

61.0
8.4
8.7
159.6
346.0
..
..
3,327.7

17,966
22,705
14,040
16,868
17,234
..
..
23,184

20.6
27.9
20.4
16.8
14.7
17.6
18.8
22.0
24.1
17.6
10.0
18.8
14.4
14.2
26.4
26.7
20.6
..
20.4
19.8
21.4
20.7
20.2
19.4
17.8
18.2
19.1
23.6
13.1
13.4
33.8
18.4
25.0
22.2
16.7
19.4
..
21.5
14.6
21.9
24.1
15.8
17.2
19.5
9.9
15.6
18.8
23.7
21.8

20.6
28.1
18.4
32.8
26.7
27.9
..
22.0

21.3
17.9
11.1
28.4
17.3
19.5
20.1
20.9
9.7
28.6
17.6
26.9
25.5
22.1
9.1
15.8
20.4
..
22.9
24.7
18.8
24.9
16.9
24.8
20.8
20.1
20.1
20.8
17.8
17.3
12.3
19.7
19.6
20.4
17.6
17.9
..
17.6
20.5
6.9
12.1
18.3
20.3
14.6
37.9
14.8
19.9
15.3
16.6

12.2
14.8
22.1
14.6
6.6
9.3
17.2
18.6

1.8
3.4
2.0
0.0
–2.6
1.2
0.3
0.8
–3.6
0.2
–3.4
0.7
–0.2
2.2
3.7
3.9
1.5
..
3.2
1.4
0.4
0.4
5.0
0.8
–1.3
–2.9
–0.5
–1.2
–4.2
2.0
..
0.5
4.0
..
0.7
0.1
..
–0.7
0.9
3.6
3.9
–4.4
–2.5
..
2.4
..
–1.9
–0.2
5.2

5.4
3.5
..
–1.2
2.3
..
..
–0.2

33.0
63.6
24.2
25.2
54.9
15.4
45.8
53.3
34.4
38.9
36.0
11.2
28.5
35.6
38.7
30.3
42.9
..
27.6
23.7
23.3
35.4
29.8
15.6
11.2
32.3
21.7
14.5
17.0
..
40.2
28.4
8.0
..
7.4
13.1
..
9.6
31.8
..
27.2
21.7
12.5
0.5
..
0.6
7.8
8.1
..

18.0
..
..
3.3
17.6
..
2.5
1.7

1.7
2.4
3.0
1.8
2.9
2.8
1.3
1.8
2.4
3.1
1.8
3.4
2.6
1.8
0.8
3.7
3.4
..
4.4
2.3
2.8
2.0
1.6
3.9
2.1
1.3
1.4
1.6
0.6
..
..
0.5
1.6
0.1
0.8
0.7
..
0.6
0.6
..
0.4
1.6
1.2
..
0.6
0.1
0.7
0.6
0.6

0.4
..
1.1
0.6
0.5
..
..
1.2

1.2
2.4
0.7
1.7
1.1
0.9
6.3
1.5
0.0
1.5
1.6
1.6
7.8
0.7
..
2.6
1.2
0.7
2.0
2.0
1.6
0.8
0.3
2.8
2.7
2.0
2.5
2.4
3.4
0.7
0.1
2.5
4.1
1.9
4.0
3.9
0.6
3.1
1.6
0.7
3.6
2.3
4.7
0.3
5.0
0.3
5.0
5.0
9.0

7.7
2.0
8.8
9.5
6.0
2.3
1.1
3.9

87.0 b
154.4
192.6
216.0
231.6
123.6
157.8 b
177.6 b
99.5
206.6
202.1
144.8
143.2
210.1
200.6
168.7
346.2
..
85.9 b
136.4
133.4
116.6
167.7
104.1
93.8
167.6
221.5
68.7
135.5
13.5
77.5
344.1
79.0
–10.5
52.3
63.8
..
54.1 b
154.1
76.5
74.3
198.7
68.2
73.1
..
54.8 b
96.3
63.0
37.3

32.0
105.0
57.9
32.2
54.3
–65.9 b
35.4
41.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
72.6
..
..
..
..
..
41.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
134.4
26.3

31.6
..
45.6
54.6
72.3
..
..
31.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
16.35
..
..
..
..
..
6.52
..
..
..
..
..
..
28.50
3.57

3.26
..
5.00
3.33
10.20
..
..
3.50

114
122
104
113
118
113
121
114
125
117
112
112
163
123
122
123
99
..
120
112
116
118
118
117
120
116
119
121
123
107
141
119
138
141
138
125
..
124
118
116
108
116
143
117
..
140
123
148
111 b

166
119
126 b
396
148
154
141
185

1.2
1.2 b
1.1 b
0.9 b
1.0 b
1.1
1.3 b
1.3 b
1.3
1.1 b
1.0 b
1.1 b
1.1 b
1.2
..
2.0 b
1.9
..
1.3 b
1.1 b
1.2
1.1 b
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.2 b
1.1 b
1.2
1.1 b
1.6 b
0.8
1.3 b
1.5 b
1.2 b
1.8 b
1.3 b
..
1.4
1.5
..
1.6
1.1 b
1.5 b
1.2 b
..
0.9
1.5
1.4
1.3

1.4
..
..
1.8 b
1.4 b
..
1.1 b
1.6 b

6.8
12.7
9.2
4.2
..
13.8
13.0
9.4
15.8
20.9
4.2
10.0
39.2
22.9
..
41.7
10.0
..
33.0
8.8
15.9
8.4
..
23.4
20.2
9.1
19.8
46.0
14.4
11.7
52.1
10.7
39.5
34.7
128.1
7.5
..
32.5
15.0
..
23.1
15.4
37.0
17.2
..
25.3
36.3
97.0
29.3

28.2
..
..
62.4
24.2
..
39.4
24.2

196    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

GDP per 
capita

Gross fixed 

capital 
formation 

General government 
final consumption 

expenditure 

GDP

Taxes on 
income, 
profit and 
capital gain

(2011 PPP 
$ billions)

(2011 
PPP $)

(% of GDP)

Total 

(% of GDP)

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of total 
tax revenue)

Share of 

agriculture, 

hunting, 

forestry and 

fisheries

Domestic 

credit provided 
by the banking 

sector

DEBT

PRICES

External 
debt stock

Total 
debt 
service

Consumer 

price 
index

Domestic 

food price level

Research 

and 

development 
expenditure

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GNI)

(2005=100)

Index

Volatility 

index

HDI rank
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador

2012
115.0

2012
15,738
4.3 b 15,299 b
0.3
14,411
19,714
1.8
21,897
640.3
16,194
20.9
29,086
38.9
73.1
16,509
16,655
63.3
17,642
528.5
13,091
62.9
18,167
1,344.3
361.1
21,506
16,144
1,950.9
23,152
2.0
20,895
1.1
180.1
8,862
1,181.6 b 15,461 b
15,888
11,340
11,587
14,301
6,691
11,786
11,603
8,332
8,438 b
11,708
9,184
7,291
7,552
13,586
10,612
14,548.6 10,771
10,271
12,779
9,629
9,243
8,421 b
10,242
11,687
9,900
15,174
5,127
11,016

147.7
71.6
83.7
2,840.9
30.0
1.2
347.9
379.9
2.7 b
24.7
35.2
21.6
6.6
907.3
114.4

1.1
491.7
0.7
29.2
22.8 b
1.9
557.5
153.4
8.1
0.5
113.2

3.8
23.2
64.5
0.9
..
2,186.3
28.9
862.5
48.3
29.4
59.3
14.8
46.9

11,270
8,288
12,460
4,935
..
8,856
14,443
10,685
7,215
17,997
5,650
4,146
7,445

2005–2012a 2005–2012a 2005–2012

2005–2012a

2005–2012a

21.4
14.6
..
29.3
25.6
24.0
9.7
31.2
27.7
20.3
20.2
20.3
20.6
20.7
..
29.9
27.1
25.8
22.5
25.2
26.3
18.1
21.8
21.9
26.6
18.9
25.4
20.6
21.9
31.3
20.7
28.5
22.7
46.1
25.2
38.3
22.8
25.3
20.8
35.7
23.6
26.6
24.9
30.7
16.3

40.4
51.7
54.1
..
25.7
33.1
36.1
16.0
14.7
25.9
18.2
23.4
14.2

7.8
20.3
..
17.8
13.5
13.5
9.5
14.5
11.2
12.2
17.9
14.8
11.6
11.5
..
10.4
14.8
11.2
10.3
16.5
18.9
21.5
17.7
17.1
10.3
19.4
15.8
18.3
23.0
11.9
14.8
13.6
13.8
13.5
16.2
14.2
17.6
8.2
16.0
16.6
16.1
13.5
23.3
17.1
8.1

16.8
14.1
9.5
..
32.6
8.9
19.3
11.6
12.2
8.9
13.5
20.6
11.2

–0.4
..
..
..
5.0
2.3
–0.6
6.9
18.1
6.3
1.7
5.7
11.3
1.5
..
..
6.3
–4.3
10.2
–13.5
–2.2
3.2
..
..
9.4
2.4
5.1
–2.8
1.7
14.2
..
7.5
3.3
9.7
..
6.6
..
7.6
..
..
770.6
7.7
..
..
11.5

..
9.4
..
..
8.5
2.3
2.2
3.1
21.0
13.6
4.9
11.1
2.5

15.5
31.6
..
..
52.0
18.2
47.5
17.2
..
21.5
15.5
25.5
36.5
..
31.5
6.8
16.6
19.3
18.1
12.3
8.8
28.4
35.2
15.2
34.5
12.8
29.8
12.7
6.6
19.4
32.5
38.0
29.0
23.1
23.6
60.2
..
..
31.4
..
22.0
..
..
..
18.7

3.1
15.3
..
..
2.1
35.6
28.5
29.7
13.8
..
9.6
1.0
24.3

0.6
..
..
..
0.6
0.4
0.1
..
0.2
..
0.5
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.3
..
0.1
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.9
1.2
0.2
..
..
0.9
..
0.2
0.0
0.3
..
0.2
1.1
1.7
..
0.1
..
0.2
..
..
0.2
0.3
..
..
..

..
0.2
..
..
..
0.1
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.6
0.2
0.5
0.1

2012
6.4
1.6
6.1
2.1
10.2
3.5
0.4
5.0
3.5
5.7
5.9
8.9
4.5
3.5
2.6
1.6
11.1
9.3
5.5
3.0
10.2
5.2
8.3
5.6
7.0
8.9
12.4
10.3
8.4
20.9
12.2
10.4
8.9
10.1
7.1
8.8
14.6
20.4
6.4
2.9
6.5
9.4
9.1
18.8
5.9

4.1
17.1
13.8
9.8
5.6
14.4
3.0
14.8
20.9
2.7
12.3
12.8
11.4

2012
71.0
136.3 b
..
94.5
134.5
113.6
36.5
176.4
89.0
42.0
53.3
71.9
41.8
47.1
38.8
108.2
48.4
18.0 b
24.7
113.4
62.4
110.5
35.0
92.4
17.8
80.2
66.9 b
48.8
67.0
44.4
117.1
168.9
82.2
152.7
56.8
–2.1
63.4
67.0
51.5
134.7
69.6
24.3 b
26.9
27.2
46.4

70.3
30.8
..
45.7
..
42.6
14.9
79.3
37.2
13.0
48.7
42.2
66.1

2005–2012a

77.9
..
..
..
34.8
12.5
..
61.7
43.7
21.8
25.7
40.1
77.9
25.2
184.4
..
41.0
..
14.9
61.5
71.8
16.6
79.1
73.8
25.8
83.3
96.0
62.8
58.6
68.3
23.6
24.0
50.4
9.4
42.1
3.4
59.9
46.0
98.8
37.6
24.3
25.1
..
43.5
28.8

50.2
32.7
2.0
58.5
..
26.0
13.8
15.7
25.7
19.7
27.6
72.0
53.5

2012
8.75
..
..
..
3.87
1.43
..
13.36
2.80
2.00
3.98
7.36
20.49
3.69
3.43
..
2.24
0.74
3.32
3.25
12.34
2.43
11.46
3.41
2.03
17.02
9.99
9.24
4.71
8.66
5.19
3.14
6.03
1.07
4.47
0.35
3.63
2.97
11.87
3.76
3.15
3.15
..
1.34
2.80

5.12
1.44
0.49
1.95
..
3.80
0.46
1.51
1.83
2.48
2.00
6.18
5.52

2012
148
151
..
120
120
152
178
118
137
249
173
178
184
134
203
133
196
316
179
147
183
141
154
127
123
212
116
124
125
145
144
124
134
125
131
139
121
122
205
123
134
137
179
141
153

174
211
..
141
119 b
160
181
204
157
117
157
173
127

2013
1.3 b
..
..
..
1.6
1.8 b
..
..
..
2.3
..
1.9
..
1.3
..
..
1.8 b
2.6 b
1.9 b
1.3
..
1.3 b
..
..
1.7
1.2 b
..
1.6 b
1.7 b
1.9
1.4 b
1.9
1.8
2.0 b
..
..
..
1.7
..
..
1.7
1.6
..
..
..

1.7 b
1.8 b
..
..
..
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.7
2.5 b
1.6 b
1.5
..

2013
39.3
..
..
..
7.6
71.4
..
..
..
82.1
..
81.7
15.0
6.7
..
..
33.9
58.6
66.4
20.5
..
25.2
7.2
..
9.1
70.6
..
38.8
17.5
51.0
19.3
16.4
19.3
65.9
..
..
..
22.8
..
..
30.3
13.1
..
..
..

55.4
59.0
..
..
..
23.5
64.6
102.7
66.7
19.7
35.9
46.8
..

TABLE 10  Command over and allocation of resources    |    197

TABLE10HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceGDP per 
capita

Gross fixed 

capital 
formation 

General government 
final consumption 

expenditure 

GDP

Taxes on 
income, 
profit and 
capital gain

(2011 PPP 
$ billions)

(2011 
PPP $)

(% of GDP)

Total 

(% of GDP)

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of total 
tax revenue)

Share of 

agriculture, 

hunting, 

forestry and 

fisheries

Domestic 

credit provided 
by the banking 

sector

DEBT

PRICES

External 
debt stock

Total 
debt 
service

Consumer 

price 
index

Domestic 

food price level

Research 

and 

development 
expenditure

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GNI)

(2005=100)

Index

Volatility 

index

HDI rank
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia

2012
140.1
580.7
626.7
..
473.3
4.8
436.1
3.1
0.4
105.4
16.0
20.6
2.2
35.1
227.5
0.7
25.5
0.2
18.6
6,245.4
5.6
41.5
92.3
29.2
24.4
42.1
365.7
0.5
27.6

2012
4,705
6,005
11,989
..
14,527
6,054
4,912
6,311
3,428
6,990
2,847
9,136
1,815
4,423
6,878
2,894
4,254
1,772
2,320
5,050
7,490
2,789
3,638
4,388
5,631
2,990
2,364
2,837
37,479

58.5
781.2
91.1
7.3
152.9
..
15.8
55.4
918.4
95.3
30.7
18.4
17.1
1.1
1.1
76.8
11.2
4.9
29.8
48.5
17.0
125.4
8.5
16.0
56.4 b
..
54.5
2.8
111.8

2,131
4,360
2,109
5,912
7,346
..
1,379
2,551
5,440
3,996
1,378
1,337
2,382
1,964
1,493
1,654
2,938
2,368
2,174
1,334
1,687
3,370
1,286
1,575
1,892 b
..
2,747
1,565
1,218

2005–2012a 2005–2012a 2005–2012

2005–2012a

2005–2012a

23.5
19.4
19.2
18.8
..
23.9
27.7
36.5
..
14.7
24.0
21.9
..
24.3
31.4
26.2
25.2
..
18.7
29.6
56.1
16.0
29.0
27.7
25.1
23.4
25.4
..
40.0

19.6
10.9
20.4
9.6
11.4
..
22.8
19.8
..
11.7
32.6
12.4
..
13.4
12.4
36.1
38.9
31.8
30.3
24.4
17.6
19.2
18.6
..
16.6
37.5
10.1
19.2
25.5

22.7
10.5
22.4
10.1
..
15.4
5.4
20.7
..
10.7
18.2
25.2
..
16.1
19.2
18.1
6.9
..
9.9
11.8
20.8
6.0
13.6
9.9
10.0
20.6
5.7
..
3.7

10.3
8.3
17.2
15.3
19.5
..
8.2
14.9
..
11.8
10.0
23.8
..
39.2
15.3
16.4
15.2
38.1
8.7
11.3
11.9
10.9
9.8
9.1
16.0
25.1
8.6
9.6
8.1

..
12.2
4.2
8.5
..
..
4.8
7.7
..
6.8
2.2
7.9
..
1.3
7.9
..
4.5
..
1.2
3.9
–2.1
7.8
5.1
11.8
2.8
38.8
5.6
..
3.4

12.5
8.2
9.3
–5.8
..
..
15.2
9.8
..
–14.1
3.9
..
..
..
..
14.2
6.4
17.6
4.8
3.3
2.9
20.9
15.8
..
..
8.0
0.4
–3.4
–0.8

..
42.1
50.2
..
..
..
..
18.2
..
29.6
20.3
28.3
..
22.7
25.4
..
29.6
..
..
49.5
15.9
12.1
24.7
15.8
4.9
44.0
22.4
..
..

19.2
28.8
42.5
..
..
25.2
..
..
0.6
..
11.8
..
..
..
..
..
..
17.4
..
39.1
17.1
..
10.3
..
2.7
..
..
..
16.0

..
0.1
0.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.1
0.2
..
..
..
0.6
..
..
..
0.1
0.8
..
..
0.2
..
..
0.3
..
..
..

..
0.5
0.4
..
..
..
..
..
0.2
..
0.1
..
..
..
..
0.4
..
0.0
0.4
0.4
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
0.2

2012
19.8
11.8
2.6
21.0
4.1
18.0
19.7
9.4
..
11.5
19.5
7.6
4.4
14.0
13.7
21.9
20.0
25.7
23.1
17.4
18.1
35.6
22.7
31.7
3.6
18.2
17.3
20.5
2.0

35.7
24.4
29.6
7.3
9.4
36.4
35.1
23.3
33.1
14.6
27.5
17.5
29.1
28.9
50.9
28.3 c
23.6
8.2
17.0
24.2
35.3
41.8 d
47.1
18.8
30.3
3.7
30.0
23.0
48.4

2012
..
50.9
187.2
47.7 b
–1.9
50.6
115.4
76.8
–19.0
39.2
14.0 b
49.5
–52.7
55.9
115.4
68.2 b
44.0
..
13.1
76.6
50.4
33.8
32.3
26.5 b
–8.9
18.5
69.2
35.1
–3.5

67.0
44.5
52.3
21.1
15.9
..
8.0 b
15.2
35.3
26.9
12.9
75.5 b
38.3
12.0
21.6
24.8
36.8
3.1
31.0
16.4
19.7
24.5
37.6
19.6
–3.0 b
26.5 b
27.3
43.9
37.1 b

2005–2012a

17.8
33.6
28.4
..
..
..
49.1
55.5
..
35.9
..
..
..
28.5
29.4
25.4
101.0
..
51.6
18.3
65.0
35.3
29.8
80.3
23.1
24.7
22.6
92.2
..

20.8
27.3
30.4
15.5
23.4
..
17.5
12.2
6.1
20.5
28.4
64.8
101.2
37.9
45.6
42.6
70.8
27.1
30.6
23.5
19.5
..
18.1
10.6
..
..
52.1
43.6
27.2

2012
1.32
4.85
1.66
1.09
..
1.78
2.88
2.15
..
4.54
7.24
..
..
6.12
3.36
0.83
7.02
..
8.99
1.57
4.90
0.63
0.91
3.63
0.96
1.05
1.22
0.67
..

1.06
1.34
1.27
1.16
3.12
..
0.31
1.28
0.19
0.93
0.43
12.45
9.86
2.27
0.65
0.64
2.72
1.40
2.50
0.44
0.53
0.91
0.46
0.07
0.06
..
2.36
2.82
1.12

2012
..
137
155
204
181 b
146
216
130
..
148
200
157
171
156
114
122
184
..
202
181
161
160
224
143
137
189
174
321
147

186
222
225
167
233
239
174
124
201
228
185
1,197 b
144
167
123
197
147
157
120
203
130
280
125
173
164
145
121
129 b
365

2013
..
1.6
1.5 b
1.5 b
1.6
..
1.7 b
1.5
..
..
..
1.8
..
..
1.6
..
..
..
..
1.6 b
1.8 b
1.2
1.7
2.2 b
2.5 b
1.4
1.6 b
2.4 b
..

1.6 b
2.1
2.4 b
..
2.4 b
..
1.8 b
2.0 b
2.4 b
1.6 b
2.0
2.1
..
..
..
2.4
2.2 b
1.8 b
2.0 b
1.9
2.0
..
2.2 b
..
..
..
2.1 b
2.8 b
1.9

2013
..
26.4
35.6
44.0
47.2
..
28.7
9.1
..
..
0.0
38.9
..
..
19.8
..
..
..
..
35.0
28.2
101.3
44.8
25.9
10.4
19.0
20.3
39.0
0.0

35.1
46.5
57.3
22.6
133.7
..
30.3
11.2
38.6
49.6
32.6
54.0
..
..
..
67.6
20.7
55.7
31.7
78.5
54.0
..
284.3
..
..
..
51.9
23.7
100.6

198    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE 10 COMMAND OVER AND ALLOCATION OF RESOURCESTABLE10GDP per 
capita

Gross fixed 

capital 
formation 

General government 
final consumption 

expenditure 

GDP

Taxes on 
income, 
profit and 
capital gain

(2011 PPP 
$ billions)

(2011 
PPP $)

(% of GDP)

Total 

(% of GDP)

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of total 
tax revenue)

Share of 

agriculture, 

hunting, 

forestry and 

fisheries

Domestic 

credit provided 
by the banking 

sector

DEBT

PRICES

External 
debt stock

Total 
debt 
service

Consumer 

price 
index

Domestic 

food price level

Research 

and 

development 
expenditure

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GNI)

(2005=100)

Index

HDI rank
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

2012

11.8
3.3
23.9
1.9
24.5
13.9
7.3
25.1
7.2
9.5
24.9
4.4
29.6
15.2

..
0.2
..
..
..
..
19.4
0.0

2012
739
782
1,607
1,164
971
1,216
737
1,528
1,180
1,586
2,003
964
451
884

..
3,526
..
..
..
..
1,790
3,489

45,473.5 40,397
31,426.4 12,920
5,875
12,959.8
3,010.1
2,830

5,098.0 16,367
19,423.3 10,151
2,879.7 12,453
7,482.5 13,554
5,147
8,878.4
3,237
2,797.2
1,971
1,602.4
286.4
6,736
92,889.4 13,599

2005–2012a 2005–2012a 2005–2012

2005–2012a

2005–2012a

13.5
25.0
22.2
..
24.7
17.6
20.0
16.7
10.0
40.3
31.8
12.5
20.5
36.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
10.5
..

18.2
33.0
27.4
17.1

23.7
..
22.0
20.1
27.0
21.0
21.6
..
22.6

19.9
15.2
17.1
..
14.0
10.6
28.0
19.3
21.1
10.1
13.2
8.1
13.2
14.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
17.1
..

19.2
14.9
12.0
12.6

14.5
..
15.0
16.6
11.3
17.8
12.4
..
17.6

10.0
2.9
3.8
..
14.7
69.2
2.3
9.5
–9.5
2.0
–0.9
–2.2
6.9
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
16.8
..

0.7
21.9
6.3
6.3

..
..
4.5
37.0
1.2
5.8
6.1
..
5.8

..
25.5
21.8
..
..
..
..
19.2
..
21.8
..
..
11.9
11.6

..
..
..
..
16.9
..
..
..

37.2
23.5
..
..

..
..
23.8
..
41.9
..
..
..
..

..
..
0.2
..
0.2
..
..
0.2
..
..
..
..
0.5
..

..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..

2.5
..
..
..

..
..
0.7
..
..
..
..
..
..

2012
32.0
70.7
42.3
46.4
30.0
25.9
39.7
35.0
16.9
45.8
18.7
54.3
41.6
40.4

21.2
14.1
..
5.1
0.1
60.2
9.7
22.8

1.5
7.8
14.4
28.1

8.1
10.7
9.0
5.6
18.1
18.4
24.6
8.7
4.4

2012
35.6
33.3
19.9
18.6
28.1
32.2 b
26.1
19.8
104.0 b
14.0
6.2
26.8
10.7
13.6

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

203.4
109.5
72.5
32.8

24.8
139.8
62.8
73.0
72.1
77.2
31.5
52.5
168.0

2005–2012a

22.3
42.9
29.1
29.2
32.1
65.6
26.9
23.8
40.8
48.2
21.4
26.5
37.9
23.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
20.7
23.8
23.4

..
..
50.0
22.7
20.0
24.0
27.4
..
..

2012
0.39
0.24
0.67
0.53
0.46
3.67
0.36
0.68
0.86
0.71
0.81
0.03
1.76
0.58

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
2.74
2.17
1.17

..
..
9.19
3.18
1.43
1.24
1.22
..
..

2012
203
188
126
127
175
331
211
123
..
214
122
132
2,378 b
117

..
..
..
..
120
..
149 b
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2013
1.9 b
..
2.0
2.0 b
2.1 b
2.9 b
..
2.1
..
2.4 b
2.7 b
..
..
2.5 b

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Volatility 

index

2013
67.0
..
24.0
11.7
23.5
66.7
0.0
34.8
..
108.9
60.6
11.2
..
31.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

NOTES
a  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

b  Refers to a year earlier than that specified.
c  Mainland Tanzania only.
d  Excludes South Sudan.

DEFINITIONS

Gross domestic product (GDP): Sum of gross 
value added by all resident producers in the 
economy plus any product taxes and minus any 
subsidies not included in the value of the products, 
expressed in 2005 international dollars using 
purchasing power parity rates. 

GDP per capita: GDP in a particular period divided 
by the total population for the same period. 

Gross fixed capital formation: Value of 
acquisitions of new or existing fixed assets by 
the business sector, governments and households 
(excluding their unincorporated enterprises) less 
 

disposals of fixed assets, expressed as a percentage 
of GDP. No adjustment is made for depreciation of 
fixed assets.

General government final consumption 
expenditure: All government current expenditures 
for purchases of goods and services (including 
compensation of employees and most expenditures 
on national defense and security but excluding 
government military expenditures that are part 
of government capital formation), expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Taxes on income, profit and capital gain: Taxes 
levied on the actual or presumptive net income 
of individuals, on the profits of corporations and 
enterprises, and on capital gains, whether realized 
or not, on land, securities and other assets.

Research and development expenditure: 
Current and capital expenditures (both public and 
private) on creative work undertaken systematically 
to increase knowledge and the use of knowledge 
for new applications, expressed as a percentage of 

GDP. It covers basic research, applied research, and 
experimental development.

Shares of agriculture, hunting, forestry and 
fisheries: Gross value added in the agriculture, 
hunting, forestry and fishery sectors, expressed as a 
percentage of a GDP.

Domestic credit provided by the banking 
sector: Credit to various sectors on a gross basis, 
with exception of credit to the central government, 
which is net, expressed as a percentage of GDP.

External debt stock as a percentage of GNI: 
Debt owed to nonresidents repayable in foreign 
currency, goods or services, expressed as a 
percentage of gross national income.

Total debt service: Sum of principal repayments 
and interest actually paid in foreign currency, 
goods or services on long-term debt; interest paid 
on short-term debt; and repayments (repurchases 
and charges) to the International Monetary Fund, 
expressed as a percentage of GNI.

Consumer price index: Index that reflects changes 
in the cost to the average consumer of acquiring a 
basket of goods and services that may be fixed or 
changed at specified intervals, such as yearly.

Domestic food price level index: Food 
purchasing power parity (PPP) rate divided by the 
general PPP rate. The index shows the price of 
food in a country relative to the price of the generic 
consumption basket in the country.

Domestic food price level volatility index: A 
measure of variation of the domestic food price level 
index, computed as the standard deviation of the 
deviations from the trend over the previous five years.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1 and 2: World Bank 2014. 

Columns 3–7 and 9–12: World Bank 2013a.

Column 8: United Nations Statistics Division 2013a. 

Columns 13 and 14: FAO 2013a.

TABLE 10  Command over and allocation of resources    |    199

TABLE10HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

11T

Social competencies

Employment and vulnerability

Old age pension recipientsa

Suicide rate

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Vulnerable 
employment

Youth 

unemployment

Unemployment 

rate

Child 
labour

Share of 
working 
poor (PPP 
$2 a day)

Mandatory 

paid 

maternity 

leave

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% of total 
employment)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 15 
and older)

(% ages 
5–14)

(% of total 
employment)

(days)

Birth 

registration

(% under 
age 5)

(% of statutory pension-

age population)

(per 100,000)

Total

Female

Male

Female Male

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2012

2003–2012b

2008–2012b

2004–2013b

2005–
2012

2003–2010b

2013

2005–2012b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b

2003–
2009b

2003–
2009b

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation

65.5
62.3
65.9
61.0
61.0
58.0
66.2
62.9
72.5
59.2
55.6
62.7
71.2
59.1
60.9
65.4
58.5
..
63.4
54.4
58.9
53.0
60.5
57.6
56.4
47.1
47.9
59.3
43.8
68.1
89.8
62.4
59.4
60.4
58.5
55.5
..
57.0
49.9
84.4
64.8
55.5
50.7
72.5
58.4
76.3
47.4
55.0
62.5

65.3
70.8
44.9
53.9
57.3
55.4
67.6
65.0

..
9.0
9.1
11.5
..
6.8
12.1
..
9.3
..
11.7
..
..
..
7.4
24.8
10.5
..
7.2
7.1
8.6
10.3
5.7
..
12.8
18.2
..
15.0
29.7
..
0.4
12.5
..
..
8.9
18.2
..
12.4
8.9
1.0
24.4
16.7
..
2.0
..
2.2
16.5
..
19.0

..
..
..
2.1
31.5
..
..
..

8.6
11.7
8.4
9.5
16.2
8.1
17.7
14.3
6.7
14.1
30.4
23.7
13.6
21.0
9.3
9.0
7.9
..
12.1
23.8
8.7
19.8
18.8
17.7
20.6
35.3
53.2
19.5
55.3
..
1.3
27.8
20.9
28.3
26.4
26.5
..
34.0
14.2
12.1
16.3
37.6
28.1
5.0
3.1
..
43.1
28.4
18.3

18.5
30.8
41.1
12.5
22.7
..
..
14.8

3.1
5.2
4.2
5.3
7.4
5.5
6.9
7.2
3.1
7.5
14.7
8.0
6.0
7.9
3.3
3.2
4.3
2.5 c
6.8
9.9
4.3
7.5
5.1
7.7
8.8
10.7
25.0
7.0
24.2
1.7
0.4
11.8
10.2
5.6
13.2
10.1
..
14.0
6.4
4.2
6.0
15.7
10.9
1.1
3.2
3.6
15.8
14.9
7.3

6.4
14.7
19.7
0.7
7.0
..
..
5.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
2.9
3.4 d,e

..
4.6
..
..
..
..
6.5 d

7.9 d
..
9.9
1.4
0.9 e
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
1.8

0.0
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
0.0

..
..
98
112
..
98
98
105
112
126
182
..
90
273
70
90
98
..
98
112
112
105
..
147
105
150
112
196
119
..
..
..
140
70
126
182
..
238
..
45
126
..
168
..
..
70
208
112
90

84
..
45
126
126
..
42
140

100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
..
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
..
..
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
..
..
100.0
100.0
..
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
99.8 d
100.0
100.0
..
100.0 d
..
..
100.0
99.0 d,e

100.0
..
99.0
100.0
..
..
..
100.0

100.0
83.0
100.0
100.0
92.5
100.0
98.0
97.7
..
100.0
90.5
100.0
100.0
99.5
72.9
77.6
80.3
..
73.6
100.0
100.0
84.6
90.0
100.0
95.1
81.1
68.2
100.0
77.4
81.7
7.9
85.2
98.0
..
100.0
96.5
..
100.0
60.5
..
74.5
100.0
91.4
40.1
..
27.3
57.6
100.0
90.7

68.2
84.2
52.3
93.6
98.0
43.3
24.7
100.0

100.0
87.6
100.0
100.0
..
100.0
96.5
..
..
100.0
66.3
100.0
100.0
99.2
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
93.7
67.8
56.4
100.0
85.9
69.2
46.6
100.0
54.6
..
..
57.2
97.5
..
100.0
94.9
..
100.0
32.0
..
73.4
100.0
87.6
..
..
..
44.2
100.0
93.3

64.4
..
..
..
88.0
..
..
100.0

100.0
77.5
100.0
100.0
..
100.0
99.8
..
..
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
77.5
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
97.4
100.0
100.0
..
..
100.0
98.5
..
100.0
100.0
..
100.0
97.5
..
76.4
100.0
97.7
..
..
..
85.1
100.0
86.8

73.6
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
100.0

6.5
3.6
11.4
5.5
4.5
6.0
5.5
5.4
7.7
6.4
4.7
6.8
7.0
3.0
10.7
22.1
13.2
..
1.5
8.5
7.1
10.3
3.2
10.0
9.4
2.8
3.4
4.4
1.0
..
..
1.7
7.3
..
10.4
4.1
..
3.4
1.0
..
4.2
4.0
10.6
3.5
5.5
1.7
7.5
8.2
3.0

6.3
0.6
..
8.8
3.5
..
..
9.5

17.3
12.8
24.8
13.1
17.7
17.9
18.1
17.3
12.9
17.5
19.0
18.7
16.5
10.9
19.0
39.9
36.2
..
7.0
24.7
23.8
28.8
16.1
29.0
34.6
10.0
11.9
23.9
6.0
..
..
7.4
30.6
..
61.3
26.4
..
22.3
5.9
..
18.2
15.6
40.0
4.0
19.0
1.9
28.9
40.0
12.6

26.0
1.9
..
48.7
21.0
..
..
53.9

200    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Employment and vulnerability

Old age pension recipientsa

Suicide rate

Birth 

registration

(% under 
age 5)

(% of statutory pension-

age population)

(per 100,000)

Total

Female

Male

Female Male

2005–2012b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b
100.0
..
..
..
..
..
97.0
99.5
..

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Vulnerable 
employment

Youth 

unemployment

Unemployment 

rate

Child 
labour

Share of 
working 
poor (PPP 
$2 a day)

Mandatory 

paid 

maternity 

leave

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% of total 
employment)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 15 
and older)

(% ages 
5–14)

(% of total 
employment)

(days)

HDI rank
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador

2012
50.3
67.5
..
..
65.5
59.3
64.5
50.0
68.8
68.2
64.0
48.5
75.2
63.9
..
..
57.9
44.7
73.0
44.3
47.2
68.4
62.4
..
78.9
58.2
66.9
42.9
36.4
58.6
56.3
77.0
47.1
72.2
..
45.4
..
53.3
65.3
..
68.2
72.2
56.3
..
63.2

67.4
69.3
62.1
..
40.3
70.7
74.5
51.2
71.5
63.2
78.5
42.7
64.5

2003–2012b

2008–2012b

2004–2013b

8.0
14.0
..
..
..
16.2
15.6
33.9
29.2
31.8
20.2
32.1
29.2
..
..
..
..
..
54.7
9.7
26.4
..
60.6
..
46.3
..
..
22.1
27.4
..
38.8
53.5
28.8
..
8.0
29.5
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
55.2
..

29.6
54.9
..
38.1
26.7
57.2
..
23.1
..
52.9
..
28.6
..

28.1
..
..
..
10.3
23.7
10.5
16.8
10.3
17.1
18.4
17.5
3.9
9.4
..
..
17.3
23.0
14.2
29.3
51.1
15.4
33.3
..
9.5
17.3
..
53.9
62.8
39.2
..
2.8
42.3
..
33.8
22.4
..
22.5
34.0
..
21.9
11.1
..
..
29.4

..
11.9
..
16.1
38.8
22.2
..
24.8
11.2
..
6.2
13.1
12.4

12.3
11.6
..
..
3.0
8.1
5.0 f
9.0
6.5
7.5
7.8
8.1
5.8
4.8
..
..
5.0
13.5
5.2
12.2
23.9
6.2
15.0
..
6.8 g
7.5
14.4
31.0
28.0
28.6
4.6
0.6
17.6
4.1 h
..
9.8
..
13.8
13.9
21.0
11.8
5.0
9.5
1.1
14.7

11.7
9.9
4.0
..
22.9
6.2
17.6
9.0
5.7
20.4
5.2
5.6
6.4

2005–
2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.7
1.9
5.6 d
7.7 e
4.7
2.6 d
2.2
6.3
..
..
..
11.4
6.5 d
1.9 d
4.4
8.6 d
18.4
..
33.5 d
7.3
5.8
12.5
5.3
3.9 d
..
8.3
2.1
..
..
4.7 d
..
12.0
6.1
..
13.0 d
7.5
4.1
..
12.9

..
10.4
..
..
5.7
6.9 d
9.0 d
9.3
14.6
13.4
26.4 d
16.3
10.4 d

2003–2010b

..
..
..
..
1.9
..
..
..
6.8
8.2
4.2
6.4
1.1
6.5
..
..
26.0
6.2
6.1
2.8
..
5.9
26.8
..
13.5
0.0
..
3.4
0.0
9.0
49.7
10.1
..
..
..
..
..
3.4
4.6
..
22.6
12.1
..
..
10.7

11.2
..
..
..
..
52.0
..
14.4
11.0
14.2
23.4
10.9
12.1

2013
410
..
..
..
60
84
..
49
98
182
120
112
126
84
..
..
84
90
126
70
135
120
126
..
90
126
..
270
365
140
84
45
30
98
..
98
..
365
56
..
98
84
..
..
84

..
120
..
..
70
90
84
90
63
98
84
126
84

81.0 d,e

..
93.7
99.7
93.4
..
..
97.2
98.6
93.6
99.1
98.9
93.4 d
98.5
..
96.0
99.8
95.2
99.7
99.5
99.6
..
100.0
99.2
..
..
99.3
..
98.6
97.8
..
96.5
90.0
98.9
..
82.4

92.5
99.0
95.5
47.7
99.3 d
67.0
72.2
99.0
76.0
89.6 e
75.8 d
100.0 e
98.6

96.9
68.3
48.0
69.7
19.8
100.0
98.7
0.0
37.3
59.4
55.8
88.1
95.9
25.2
100.0
44.7
17.1
26.4
81.7
42.2
46.1
86.3
89.8
34.0
33.2
95.0
64.6
52.2
29.6
80.0
10.6
81.7
68.8
74.4
76.6
63.6
38.5
77.0
55.5
26.5
23.0
53.0
..
1.0
11.1

95.5
..
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
28.9
50.2
48.8
..
..
17.2
..
39.7
..
..
79.0
11.8
44.8
83.0
..
..
26.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
84.6
..
..
..
..
..
60.8
..
8.3
18.4
50.8
..
..
6.2

99.4
..
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
49.4
70.0
65.4
..
..
34.6
..
51.6
..
..
82.6
82.3
48.4
90.6
..
..
41.4
..
..
..
..
..
..
77.9
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
..
10.3
28.3
55.5
..
..
16.5

2003–
2009b
6.2
0.0
..
..
..
1.9
3.8
..
1.9
1.2
1.9
..
9.4
1.5
0.0
..
..
..
0.3
0.0
10.0
2.0
1.7
0.0
1.0
7.0
0.7
4.0
..
1.1
..
3.8
..
..
1.9
..
..
3.3
..
0.0
2.0
3.6
4.8
..
0.7

0.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
2.0
..
..
5.6
3.6

2003–
2009b
18.8
7.3
..
..
..
11.8
17.9
..
9.0
5.3
10.2
..
43.0
7.0
8.9
..
..
..
1.0
0.2
28.1
7.7
7.1
0.0
1.9
37.8
6.6
9.5
..
2.8
..
12.0
..
..
5.4
..
..
4.7
..
4.9
7.9
10.5
23.9
..
3.9

0.7
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.1
5.1
..
..
30.1
12.9

99.7
100.0
..
49.5
8.0
8.1
100.0
32.7
22.2
38.8
100.0
72.8
18.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
8.0
20.0
..
100.0
77.0
10.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
61.7
24.9
..
100.0
63.7
31.6

TABLE 11  Social competencies    |    201

TABLE11HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceEmployment and vulnerability

Old age pension recipientsa

Suicide rate

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Vulnerable 
employment

Youth 

unemployment

Unemployment 

rate

Child 
labour

Share of 
working 
poor (PPP 
$2 a day)

Mandatory 

paid 

maternity 

leave

HDI rank
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% of total 
employment)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 15 
and older)

(% ages 
5–14)

(% of total 
employment)

(days)

2012
62.6
69.3
48.6
47.0
44.0
56.2
80.9
66.8
..
69.1
70.7
63.5
54.0
66.6
51.5
..
65.5
..
71.1
60.8
81.0
85.8
81.6
85.0
78.6
79.9
73.4
..
86.5

85.2
56.3
75.6
56.1
75.5
83.1
92.6
80.5
61.7
50.0
91.4
88.6
77.9
72.8
62.4
91.9
44.5
59.9
75.5
86.8
80.8
55.1
83.9
75.5
52.2
..
73.1
80.4
84.1

2003–2012b

2008–2012b

2004–2013b

..
39.8
10.1
32.9
..
..
62.5
..
..
..
47.3
32.7
69.6
..
50.7
70.0
..
..
..
80.8
53.1
..
76.8
..
75.1
81.0
85.0
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
87.7
..
..
..
..
89.9
..
89.1
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
16.3
51.5
19.2
..
..
5.5
..
..
7.5
..
34.3
14.8
8.0
18.6
..
11.9
..
16.7
10.7
7.2
3.4
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
7.7
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
33.7
..
..
..
..
..
7.1
..
34.4
..
5.4
..
22.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.4 c
7.3
25.1 e
8.6
8.0 i
..
1.8
..
..
2.9
8.4
16.7
..
4.3
9.0
5.5
7.8
30.6
11.5
9.3
2.0
7.1 i
5.3 e
1.4
10.0 j
13.2 k
4.5
16.6
..

..
5.5
..
28.2
..
..
..
3.8
23.9 l
16.2
3.8
5.4
..
..
..
4.3
10.1 e
24.4
10.4
9.1 g
..
19.8
..
..
8.5
..
..
..

17.5 e,j

2005–
2012
..
..
..
4.0
4.7
16.4
6.9
3.2 d,e

..
25.8 d
3.6
..
4.2
15.6
8.3
..
14.5 e
..
10.0
11.8
2.9
36.1 d
33.9
10.1
24.7
40.6 d
12.8
7.5
27.8 e

33.9 d
..
25.9 e
7.3
23.5 e
..
28.5
41.7
24.7
22.7 e
28.1 d
..
..
..
27.1 e
21.1 d
14.6
22.9 e
16.5 d
25.4 d
45.6
..
28.3
24.4
10.3
7.7
26.0
19.2
27.4 e

2003–2010b

66.5
40.9
19.7
12.9
16.6
..
37.3
..
..
..
25.5
..
68.2
29.6
13.0
..
27.4
..
48.3
74.5
50.8
53.1
48.3
64.0
72.9
76.1
80.1
..
14.0

74.1
57.0
33.6
..
..
60.8
87.4
..
79.2
33.5
88.1
87.1
..
44.2
61.2
84.7
..
51.2
61.1
61.7
71.3
..
66.7
..
73.6
..
45.5
54.5
73.1

2013
126
60
120
120
..
..
180
..
..
84
126
84
..
84
98
..
84
..
140
84
..
90
84
90
105
84
112
..
..

52
84
90
..
90
..
84
98
84
70
98
98
..
..
..
84
98
84
98
60
98
56
98
42
..
..
98
..
90

202    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Birth 

registration

(% under 
age 5)

(% of statutory pension-

age population)

(per 100,000)

Total

Female

Male

Female Male

2005–2012b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b

99.9
90.0 e
95.0 e
96.0
99.2
87.9
95.0
91.4
..
96.7
96.0
78.0
55.2
93.6
94.0 d,e
43.0
85.0 d
93.5
88.3
41.1
99.9
62.1
62.5
74.8
91.0 d
14.0
30.5
75.1
37.0 e

42.3
26.5
60.0
49.5
36.0 e
72.4
63.2
61.4
41.5
17.0
79.7
48.8
..
..
88.0 e
16.3
58.8
45.1
74.6
29.9
80.2
59.3
77.9
79.7
37.4
92.0
65.0
52.5
6.6

98.1
28.5
92.6
16.7
56.0
100.0
34.5
55.7
..
14.1
100.0
98.4
100.0
8.4
39.8
3.5
23.7
..
80.2
24.1
3.2
5.0
7.6
5.6
22.1
7.7
39.5
41.8
..

62.5
2.3
7.9
86.0
14.5
..
4.7
12.5
..
8.5
4.6
6.2
0.9
13.1
..
3.2
9.3 d
100.0
23.5
6.6
9.7
4.6
10.9
1.0
10.7
12.0 d
7.7
10.8
9.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
52.8
..
10.3
100.0
..
..
5.8
..
..
16.2
..
72.1
..
..
..
..
..
4.7
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
5.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
59.8
..
18.2
100.0
..
..
13.8
..
..
42.3
..
95.6
..
..
..
..
..
42.4
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
20.2
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2003–
2009b
2.3
..
0.4
..
..
13.4
..
..
..
1.7
3.6
..
..
..
..
..
2.6
..
2.3
7.8
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..

2003–
2009b
7.0
..
1.4
..
..
39.0
..
..
..
5.6
14.1
..
..
..
..
..
9.0
..
2.9
13.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..

TABLE 11 SOCIAL COMPETENCIESTABLE11HDI rank
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

NOTES
a  Because data are based on statutory pension age, 

which differs by country, comparisons should be 
made with caution.

b  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

c  Registered unemployed people only.
d  Refers to an earlier year than the period specified.
e  Differs from standard definition or refers to only 

part of the country.

f  Excludes first-time job seekers.
g  Main cities and metropolitan areas only.
h  Registered unemployed people in urban areas only.
i 
j 
k  Urban areas only.
l 

Includes those on nonstandard type of break.
Includes young people ages 12–14.

Includes those working less than 40 hours a week.

 

Employment and vulnerability

Old age pension recipientsa

Suicide rate

Employment 
to population 

ratio

Vulnerable 
employment

Youth 

unemployment

Unemployment 

rate

Child 
labour

Share of 
working 
poor (PPP 
$2 a day)

Mandatory 

paid 

maternity 

leave

(% ages 25 
and older)

(% of total 
employment)

(% ages  
15–24)

(% ages 15 
and older)

(% ages 
5–14)

(% of total 
employment)

(days)

2012
91.8
72.0
65.5
77.8
89.4
79.0
87.8
85.5
83.9
76.7
76.7
82.3
82.2
66.0

79.1
..
..
..
..
59.2
..
..

58.7
68.1
63.7
72.2

52.7
72.8
56.5
67.3
60.9
75.0
77.8
65.7
65.4

2003–2012b

2008–2012b

2004–2013b

..
78.7
82.9
..
87.8
..
94.6
89.6
..
..
..
..
..
84.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
5.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

18.3
16.2
..
..

24.6
..
19.2
14.0
..
..
..
..
..

..
3.7
7.3
..
22.5
1.7
..
2.3
..
2.8
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

7.9
5.4
8.3
..

10.4
..
8.3
6.6
8.6
..
..
..
7.5

2005–
2012
25.7
20.8
21.4
38.0
22.2
40.1
26.3
39.2
..
26.0
26.1
28.5
15.0
42.8

..
..
..
..
..
49.0
..
..

..
..
11.8
25.2

..
..
4.7
11.1
12.3
26.2
23.5
..
..

2003–2010b

89.3
94.4
77.7
..
81.1
70.2
89.8
81.1
73.1
78.2
80.4
77.5
82.2
73.7

60.8
..
..
..
..
74.5
..
..

..
..
60.5
74.9

..
..
19.7
..
74.2
71.1
77.8
..
..

2013
56
90
98
..
60
98
84
98
..
84
98
..
98
98

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Birth 

registration

(% under 
age 5)

(% of statutory pension-

age population)

(per 100,000)

Total

Female

Male

Female Male

2005–2012b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b 2004–2013b

..
3.6 d
80.8
24.1
47.9
43.2
75.2
76.9
..
78.0
15.7
61.0
27.8
31.8 d

100.0
95.9
100.0
82.6
100.0
3.0
35.4
49.9

99.9
..
57.2
40.3

80.8
79.0
96.5
92.5
41.3
43.5
38.1
..
62.3

4.1
..
5.7
6.2
17.3
8.8
4.0
3.2
..
0.9
1.6
..
15.0
6.1

..
64.2
..
56.5
..
..
..
19.5

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
3.7
..
15.9
..
2.0
0.5
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
8.5
..
20.0
..
6.8
7.1
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

87.5
..
..
..

97.5
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2003–
2009b
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.6
..
..
..

..
..
5.5
2.0
..
..
..
..
..

2003–
2009b
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

20.5
..
..
..

..
..
23.9
8.1
..
..
..
..
..

DEFINITIONS

Employment to population ratio: Percentage of 
the population ages 25 and older that is employed.

Vulnerable employment: Percentage of employed 
people engaged as unpaid family workers and own-
account workers.

Youth unemployment: Percentage of the labour 
force population ages 15–24 that is not in paid 
employment or self-employed but is available for 
work and has taken steps to seek paid employment 
or self-employment.

Unemployment rate: Percentage of the labour 
force population ages 15 and older that is not in paid 
employment or self-employed but is available for 
work and has taken steps to seek paid employment 
or self-employment.

Child labour: Percentage of children ages 5–11 
who, during the reference week, did at least one 
hour of economic activity or at least 28 hours of 
household chores, or children ages 12–14 who, 
during the reference week, did at least 14 hours of 
economic activity or at least 28 hours of household 
chores.

Share of working poor: Employed people living 
on less than $2 (in purchasing power parity terms) 
per day, expressed as a percentage of the total 
employed population ages 15 and older.

Mandatory paid maternity leave: Length of paid 
time off work that a female employee is entitled to 
in order to take care of a newborn child.

Birth registration: Percentage of children under age 
5 who were registered at the moment of the survey. 
It includes children whose birth certificate was seen 
by the interviewer and children whose mother or 
caretaker says the birth has been registered.

Old age pension recipient: People above the 
statutory pensionable age receiving an old age 
pension (contributory, noncontributory or both), 
expressed as a percentage of the eligible population.

Suicide rate: Number of deaths from purposely 
self-inflicted injuries, in the total population or of a 
given sex or age, divided by the total number of the 
reference population, expressed per 100,000 people.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1, 2, 3 and 6: ILO 2013a.

Column 4: ILO 2014b.

Columns 5 and 8: UNICEF 2014.

Column 7: World Bank 2013b.

Columns 9–11: ILO 2014a.

Columns 12 and 13: WHO 2013c.

TABLE 11  Social competencies    |    203

TABLE11HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

12T

Personal insecurity

Vulnerable groups

Attitudes

Refugees by 

country of origina

Internally 

displaced personsb

Homeless 

people

Orphaned 
children

Prison 

population

Long-term 

unemployment rate

Depth of 
food deficit

Homicide 

rate

Justification of 
wife beating

(thousands)

(thousands)

(% of population)

(thousands)

(per 100,000 

people)

(% of the 
labour force)

(kilocalories per 
person per day)

(per 100,000)

(% of women 
ages 15–49)

(% of men 
ages 15–49)

2012

2012

2009

2012

2002–2013c

2005–2012c

2011/2013

2008–2011

2005–2012c

2005–2012c

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
4.5 d
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.6
0.2
..
1.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
..
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.5
0.8
0.5
1.6
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.6
1.2
0.0
1.1
0.3
6.7
1.2
62.6
0.7
0.4

0.2
0.2
4.1
6.2
2.8
5.3
0.1
110.7
2.1
0.1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
208 f
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
50 h
..
9.9 i
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.4
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
0.0
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
0.6
..
..
0.0
1.9
..
..
..
0.4

0.4
0.6
..
..
..
0.0
0.0
..
..
1.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

72
130
82
82
716
79
192
118
230
73
88
67
47
148
128
99
51
24
223
98 e
98
108
122
58
66
106
147
154
111
122
60
106 g
238
162
329
217
38
187
145
238
266
136
186
275
510
137
108
304
147

281
444
208
335
155
81
61
475
151
521

0.3
1.1
1.5
1.7
2.4
2.5
0.8
0.9
0.6
4.7
9.0
1.3
1.5
2.7
..
0.0
1.6
..
0.8
3.9
1.1
3.4
1.6
1.6
4.2
5.6
11.1
3.0
14.4
..
0.1
3.6
5.5
..
6.5
3.5
..
8.9
3.0
..
..
7.6
5.1
..
..
..
10.2
7.7
2.0

..
7.1
15.8
..
3.2
..
..
1.7
6.8
2.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
2
..
..
..
12
..
..
..
..
..
25
23
..
..
..
4
11
..
..
23

42
40
..
..
..
8
..
..
..
23

2.3
1.1
0.6
0.9
4.7
0.8
0.9
1.5
0.3
0.8
0.9
0.9
0.9
1.2
0.2
2.6
0.3
0.0
2.0
1.2
0.8
1.8
0.8
2.2
0.8
0.9
0.8
0.8
1.6
..
0.9
0.8
4.8
..
6.4
1.2
1.2
1.8
0.7
..
3.7
1.1
1.4
0.5
5.0
2.2
1.1
3.1
5.5

5.9
36.6
3.6
4.9
1.6
2.9
0.7
9.7
1.7
11.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
10.9
4.1
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
4.2
..
..
..
..
..
..

204    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Refugees by 

country of origina

Internally 

displaced personsb

Homeless 

people

Orphaned 
children

Prison 

population

Long-term 

unemployment rate

Depth of 
food deficit

Homicide 

rate

Justification of 
wife beating

Vulnerable groups

Attitudes

(thousands)

(thousands)

(% of population)

(thousands)

HDI rank
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic

2012

..
0.0
0.5
0.1
0.3
15.1
0.1
8.2
0.3
135.4
3.6
8.4
0.0
0.0
132.8
75.6
15.9
2.4
157.9
1.1
9.3
0.3
5.2
25.3
0.0
7.6
51.9
16.1
1.3
0.4
1.9
193.3
1.3
5.7
0.1
12.6
1.4
0.6
111.8
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.3

0.0
2.1
0.7
0.0
5,366.7 p
10.1
0.1
10.0
0.1
0.2
0.6
6.1
8.2
7.1
1.0
0.4
728.2

2012

..
..
..
..
..
44.6
..
..
..
954–1,201 j
..
..
..
..
90
..
600 k
..
225
..
280 l
..
150
..
..
..
113
8.4
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
4,900–5,500
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
144.5
170
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
3.4
72 r
..
6500

2009
..
9.4
0.3
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.5
0.7
1.4
1.6
..
0.7
0.2
0.2
12.1
0.5
..
0.0
..
0.3
..
0.0
2.5
..
0.0
..
..
..
1.9
0.4
0.0
4.5
0.0
0.8
7.4
..
0.1
0.2
1.7
0.9
0.0
3.6
1.5

13.9
0.0
..
16.0
..
0.8
2.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.8
..
0.0
..
3.3
0.1
0.0

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
160
..
..
61
..
..
..
..
..
4,000
..

(per 100,000 

people)

(% of the 
labour force)

(kilocalories per 
person per day)

(per 100,000)

(% of women 
ages 15–49)

(% of men 
ages 15–49)

2002–2013c

2005–2012c

2011/2013

2008–2011

2005–2012c

2005–2012c

295
403
132
202
281
118
411
161
314
179
295
210
709
714
132
284
413
95
142
274
225 m
424
202
305
476
122
80
164
174
398
199
121 n
376
162
391
158
152
317
245
149
186
150
240

307 o
287
224
228
..
59
205
80
118
196
140
188 q
422
152
111
294
58

..
..
..
2.0
..
..
..
..
..
2.3
..
0.1
..
..
1.5
..
..
..
18.7
9.8
..
..
..
2.1
..
25.4
25.4
9.7
2.6
0.1
..
..
16.9
7.1
..
10.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
3.4
..
..
..
..
10.4
7.7
..
..
1.3
1.7
..
..
0.1
8.1
..

..
100
23
37
53
20
57
14
57
5
3
2
49
72
200
29
9
20
..
56
..
138
76
..
39
..
..
16
18
40
6
76
38
15
14
..
60
88
70
106
70
..
107

35
188
15
23
211
64
187
8
157
35
140
..
78
38
100
13
38

0.0
6.8
..
3.4
26.1
2.2
21.3
45.1
10.0
3.3
8.8
23.7
..
38.2
3.6
3.0
2.2
..
1.3
21.8
2.5
11.5
10.3
4.3
39.0
1.5
1.3
1.4
..
4.8
1.1
1.0
19.2
0.8
22.1
4.4
41.2
25.2
33.2
18.2
4.6
1.0
25.0

1.6
9.5
..
1.1
..
0.6
14.5
3.3
11.4
13.8
7.7
8.6
70.2
3.1
5.4
30.9
2.3

..
..
..
..
7.6
9.7 j
..
.. j
..
24.7
12.2
..
..
..
53.2 j
..
49.0
90.0 j
2.9
..
6.9
..
..
3.6
8.6
14.5
4.8
9.3
..
..
30.3
..
..
67.9
..
29.8
2.9 j
..
..
..
12.5
..
4.1

30.8 j
10.1
37.7 j
60.8
..
35.0 j
..
39.3
..
50.2
16.1
20.8
..
69.6
14.1
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
.. j
..
..
16.7
..
..
..
..
..
58.3
..
6.6 j
..
..
..
..
11.1
..
..
6.0
19.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
36.4
21.5 j
..
..
..
..
..
..

14.3 j
8.8 j
..
45.7
..
17.0 j
..
..
..
39.7
..
21.7 j
..
59.4 j
..
..
..

TABLE 12  Personal insecurity    |    205

TABLE12HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceRefugees by 

country of origina

Internally 

displaced personsb

Homeless 

people

Orphaned 
children

Prison 

population

Long-term 

unemployment rate

Depth of 
food deficit

Homicide 

rate

Justification of 
wife beating

Vulnerable groups

Attitudes

(thousands)

(thousands)

(% of population)

(thousands)

2012
746.4 s
0.8
336.9 t
0.0
..
6.4
3.5
1.1
0.0
2.6
2.4
0.0
1.5
0.0
0.7
14.3
41.6
14.0
24.3
8.0
12.2
0.2
10.2
0.0
0.2

7.6
33.6
8.9
0.1
20.2
215.3
97.5
13.4
18.0
2.6
0.3
22.1
0.2
0.1
0.5
1.1
33.8
0.0
18.7
5.6
0.5
558.5 y
15.7
38.6
2,585.6
0.6
100.7
3.1
74.9
0.3
23.5
149.9
1.2
0.2
14.2

2012
2,100
..
..
..
..
..
67
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
540
..
..
..
..
7.8
..
..
..
..

..
758 u
412 v
..
..
498
..
..
..
307
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
10–40
30
..
2900
..
360
493
..
40–80 z
..
..
..
..
353.4
..
..
..

2009
0.0
1.4
2.0
1.1
..
0.0
..
0.0
0.2
0.9
0.0
5.0
0.4
4.8
..
1.0
0.2
2.2
1.2
19.7
2.1
0.1
2.1
0.0
0.0

0.9
6.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.5
1.2
3.8
0.5
3.7
0.3
0.1
0.2
2.2
0.1
0.6
1.4
0.9
1.3
1.8
1.6
0.7
3.1
0.4
0.4
0.2
1.9
0.2
0.7
0.1
3.0
0.0

2012
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
130
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
1,000
..
220
1,400
..
..
..

..
..
2,600
120
1,100
..
590
1,300
11,500
..
..
1,200
320
..
..
3,100
..
220
..
2,700
450
..
360
430
..
43
1,300
..
4,500
1,300
190
..
120
2,000
670

(per 100,000 

people)

(% of the 
labour force)

(kilocalories per 
person per day)

(per 100,000)

(% of women 
ages 15–49)

(% of men 
ages 15–49)

2002–2013c

2005–2012c

2011/2013

2008–2011

2005–2012c

2005–2012c

110
260
145 o
267
80
105
181
191
25
153
220
76
153
114
130
30
135
106
54
69
31
119
42
128
95

48
39
121
284
105
120
492 w
119
32
55 x
87
129
48
55
16
78
45
121
64
97
75
56
64
96
76
83
34 aa
56
136
76
46
36
..
65
25

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
30.9
0.4
..
5.8
..
..
..
..
1.4
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

1.0
1.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
4.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
15.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
1.3
..
..
..
..
5.9
..

217
33
63
66
..
201
39
212
254
46
31
48
144
48
249
121
..
102
18
195
234
306
118
45
..

112
131
166
262
153
..
201
85
42
188
176
226
..
81
655
221
46
102
142
192
34
..
98
431
..
143
133
102
314
119
201
39
61
269
91

2.0
17.2
1.6
..
0.9
38.5
6.5
..
6.9
91.6
1.4
0.9
12.6
7.3
2.1
3.5
1.0
..
15.7
4.6
30.8
1.8
2.7
3.6
20.7

2.8
7.8
6.3
..
19.0
10.2
17.1
..
12.2
4.2
8.1
7.7
13.0
3.7
12.2
24.5
14.7
35.2
8.7
10.9
15.1
24.2
10.9
6.9
2.4
3.4
56.9
10.8
25.5
36.0
10.1
8.0
20.2
3.3
22.5

51.2
16.3
35.8
17.3
..
..
37.7
35.2
86.2
12.4
63.9
60.0
13.7
75.6
74.4 j
54.4
68.4
45.7 j
44.1
58.2
75.7
61.9
32.5
19.5
..

23.2
..
52.6
27.6
..
..
56.2
46.5
45.6
..
32.3
39.6
..
68.8
..
53.5
37.9
37.1
60.0
58.3
46.6
47.0
43.0
16.7
90.2
..
47.9
74.5
68.4
12.6
59.3
87.2
40.2
22.9
85.6

..
19.3
..
16.3 j
..
..
..
40.8
80.7
9.9
..
..
..
59.7
..
51.0
..
22.4 j
25.7 j
49.1
..
49.3
..
21.7
..

21.5
..
44.0
23.1 j
..
..
25.1
38.7
..
..
30.1
33.7
..
65.1
..
38.1
..
48.4
24.7
43.7
13.5
..
..
14.9
..
..
42.0
..
44.9
12.9
30.2
..
..
19.9
..

HDI rank
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea

206    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE 12 PERSONAL INSECURITYTABLE12HDI rank
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

NOTES
a  Data refer to those recognized under the 1951 
UN Convention, the 1967 UN Protocol and the 
1969 Organization of African Unity Convention. 
In the absence of government figures, the Office 
of the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) has estimated the refugee 
population in 25 industrialized countries based 
on 10 years of individual refugee recognition.

b  For more detailed comments on the estimates, 

see www.internal-displacement.org.

c  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

d  A limited number of countries record refugee 
and asylum statistics by country of birth rather 
than country of origin. This affects the number 
of refugees reported as originating from United 
States.

e  Excludes territories in Africa, the Americas and 

f 

Oceania.
Includes more than 200,000 Greek and Turkish 
Cypriots displaced in 1974.

g  Does not include the internationally 

unrecognized Turkish Republic of Northern 
Cyprus.

h  Excludes non-Libyans displaced within the country.
i 

Includes internally displaced persons from 
Chechnya and North Ossetia with forced migrant 
status in and outside the North Caucasus.
j  Based on a Hacettepe University survey 

commissioned by the government.
Includes internally displaced persons from 
Nagorno Karabakh and and surrounding districts 
as well as children born during displacement.
Includes people displaced in the 1990s and 
in 2008 as well as 10,000 people internally 

k 

l 

 

Refugees by 

country of origina

Internally 

displaced personsb

Homeless 

people

Orphaned 
children

Prison 

population

Long-term 

unemployment rate

Depth of 
food deficit

Homicide 

rate

Justification of 
wife beating

Vulnerable groups

Attitudes

(per 100,000 

people)

(% of the 
labour force)

(kilocalories per 
person per day)

(per 100,000)

(% of women 
ages 15–49)

(% of men 
ages 15–49)

2002–2013c

2005–2012c

2011/2013

2008–2011

2005–2012c

2005–2012c

(thousands)

(thousands)

(% of population)

(thousands)

2012
73.6
1.5
247.8
7.4
15.8
162.4
509.2
0.8

1.1
0.0
0.0
..
0.0
1,136.1

86.9 ad
0.0

86.9
1,136.6
7,369.0
5,085.4

8,585.0
784.3
463.9
207.9
2,901.2
1,768.7
6,185.7
54.1
14,902.2

2012
78.8
..
10
..
90
533 ab

2,770
..

..
..
..
..
..
1,133
430
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

2009
1.0
0.4
0.4
0.4
1.1
2.2
0.4
1.3

5.3
..
..
..
..
6.8
..
5.5

..
3.2
1.1
1.6

0.5
3.6
..
0.7
1.7
0.7
1.3
1.8
2.1

2012
680
980
160
370
960
..
5,100
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
470
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
4,535
..
..
..

72
28
..
52
41
19
33
42

..
58
73
277
6
..
65
120

283
186
63
71

116
123
220
230
46
91
77
231
145

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

3.1
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

581
178
488
209
216
196
..
77

238
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
62
104
157

56
76
..
57
119
149
187
152
..

4.1
18.0
17.8
14.9
15.8
29.3
21.7
3.8

15.2
..
0.0
9.8
..
1.5
..
..

2.3
6.4
4.7
14.1

4.9
1.8
3.8
22.7
3.8
17.4
12.8
14.2
6.5

72.9
43.5
70.7
73.3
62.3
79.6
75.9
70.1

..
55.9
..
..
..

75.7 ac
78.5
70.0

..
..
46.8
53.8

..
..
26.8
..
51.9
54.7
52.0
..
..

44.3
34.1
..
..
..
80.3 j
..
..

..
57.6
..
..
..
..
..
73.1

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

Prison population: Number of adult and juvenile 
prisoners (including pre-trial detainees, unless 
otherwise noted), expressed per 100,000 people.
Long-term unemployment rate: Percentage of 
the labour force (the employed and unemployed 
population) ages 15 and older who are not working 
but are available for work and have taken specific 
steps to seek paid employment or self-employment 
for at least 12 months.
Depth of food deficit: Number of kilocalories 
needed to lift the undernourished from their status, 
holding all other factors constant.
Homicide rate: Number of unlawful deaths 
purposefully inflicted on a person by another person, 
expressed per 100,000 people.
Justification of wife beating: Percentage of 
women and men ages 15–49 who consider a 
husband to be justified in hitting or beating his wife 
for at least one of the following reasons: if his wife 
burns the food, argues with him, goes out without 
telling him, neglects the children or refuses sexual 
relations.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Column 1: UNHCR 2013. 
Column 2: IDMC 2013.
Column 3: United Nations Statistics Division 2013. 
Columns 4, 9 and 10: UNICEF 2014. 
Column 5: International Centre for Prison Studies 2013. 
Column 6: ILO 2013a.
Column 7: FAO 2013a. 
Column 8: UNODC 2013.

TABLE 12  Personal insecurity    |    207

displaced in South Ossetia. Also includes people 
with internally displaced person status who 
have returned home or been relocated with their 
children.

x  Ministry of the Interior prisons only.
y  May include citizens of South Sudan.
z  Excludes people displaced during the 2002–2007 

conflict.

m  Excludes Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which 

have declared independence from Georgia.

n  Excludes people in pretrial or administrative 

aa  Prisons under government control only.
ab  Rough estimate, as access to affected 

populations is limited.

detention.

o  Sentenced prisoners only.
p 

Includes Palestinian refugees under the 
responsibility of United Nations Relief and Works 
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

q  Excludes the internationally unrecognized 

r 

Transnistria.
Includes people in government-recognized 
camps and relocation sites and people displaced 
by armed conflict, clan violence and crime in 
2012 but excludes internally displaced persons 
living with hosts and people whose return or 
settlement elsewhere has not been sustainable.
s  Refugee figures for Iraqis in Jordan and Syrian 

Arab Republic are government estimates. 
UNHCR has registered and is assisting 90,500 
Iraqis in both countries as of 31 December 2013.

u 

t  Some 300,000 Vietnamese refugees are well 
integrated and in practice receive protection 
from the government of China.
Includes only people displaced in Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa province and federally 
administered tribal areas who meet official 
internally displaced person registration criteria.
Includes people displaced by the 2007 post-
election violence and people still displaced by 
earlier episodes of violence.

v 

w  Includes thousands of people sentenced or 

awaiting trial in connection with the 1994 genocide.

ac  Differs from standard definition or refers to only 

part of the country.

ad  An unknown number of refugees and asylum-
seekers from South Sudan may be included in 
data for Sudan.

DEFINITIONS
Refugees by country of origin: Number of people 
who have fled their country of origin because of a 
well founded fear of persecution due to their race, 
religion, nationality, political opinion or membership 
in a particular social group and who cannot or do not 
want to return to their country of origin.
Internally displaced persons: Number of people 
who have been forced to leave their homes or places 
of habitual residence—in particular, as a result of or 
to avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations of 
generalized violence, violations of human rights or 
natural or human-made disasters—and who have not 
crossed an internationally recognized state border.
Homeless people: People who lack a shelter for 
living quarters as a result of natural disasters, who 
carry their few possessions with them and who 
sleep in the streets, in doorways or on piers, or in 
any other space, on a more or less random basis, 
expressed as a percentage of the total population.
Orphaned children: Number of children (ages 0–17) 
who have lost one or both parents due to any cause.

TABLE12HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

13T

International integration

Trade

Financial flows

Human mobility

Communication

Remoteness

International 

trade

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows

Private 
capital  
flows

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Remittances,  

inflows

Total 

reserves 
minus gold

migration 

Net 

rate

Stock of 
immigrants

International 

inbound 
tourists

(kilometres)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(per 1,000 
people)

(% of 

population)

(thousands)

Internet 
users

(% of 

population)

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

Incoming

Outgoing

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2012

2012b

2012b

2012b

2011

2011c

2012b

2010/2015d

2013

2011

2012

2006–2011e 2006–2011e

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria

5,709
13,506
5,878
5,741
8,678
5,972
14,121
7,000
10,132
5,696
5,796
5,735
5,866
5,930
8,740
8,000
8,956
..
6,783
5,990
5,860
5,746
5,740
5,763
5,889
6,224
6,320
5,776
6,347
10,034
7,409
6,581
5,743
7,423
5,785
5,814
..
5,843
6,380
7,526
12,324
6,380
5,885
7,323
8,274
7,114
5,911
5,749
12,258

12,159
8,002
..
5,823
6,077
6,566
7,626
6,080
6,106

68.2
42.6
91.6
165.9
31.7
97.6
59.0
62.1
379.1
104.6
192.4
91.3
112.1
65.7
447.2
109.9
31.2
..
72.2
57.1
110.5
168.4
311.4
80.1
147.3
59.3
63.4
150.7
59.0
112.5
96.5
86.7
184.4
86.4
167.9
92.0
..
186.3
185.5
169.6
68.1
78.1
181.8
123.7
38.6
95.7
86.6
125.7
37.1

65.2
101.0
106.4
158.7
85.1
94.8
94.5
51.6
137.0

1.5
4.8
1.5
–1.1
1.3
0.8
2.7
2.5
20.6
0.4
15.7
0.7
3.8
2.3
38.7
0.4
0.0
..
4.3
2.5
0.5
–0.4
31.0
0.7
0.0
0.4
2.7
5.4
1.2
7.4
–0.1
4.3
7.4
1.7
1.6
0.6
..
3.8
4.7
2.2
11.3
6.5
6.8
2.7
0.0
0.2
2.3
3.2
2.7

4.7
7.6
12.4
2.3
1.4
2.2
1.1
2.6
4.0

12.8
–3.6
4.0
9.4
–2.3
4.3
–4.5
–1.9
5.7
6.4
–1.2
0.5
41.9
14.3
4.2
0.8
2.7
..
1.3
–1.6
1.2
–9.2
–449.3
–2.2
0.0
–0.8
1.7
–5.8
50.3
–4.3
14.6
–32.2
–2.0
–0.6
–3.9
–4.8
..
–14.8
22.9
..
–2.2
9.4
–4.0
–18.8
..
9.6
–6.7
–7.5
–2.4

–8.9
–4.0
–13.0
–1.8
–4.0
5.0
0.8
–1.0
–0.8

–1.0
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
–0.2
–0.4
–0.3
–0.3
..
–0.9
–0.5
–1.0
–0.2
–0.6
..
..
–0.2
..
–0.1
–0.5
–0.3
–0.5
–1.0
–0.5
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
–0.1
1.0
..
..
–0.1
..
..
–0.1
..
–0.1
..
..
0.0
–0.3
–0.1
0.1
..
..
..
..
0.0

0.0
0.3
1.6
0.5
..
..
..
..
0.8

0.16
0.14
0.50
0.21
0.04
0.37
0.55
..
..
0.38
0.34
0.14
0.15
0.07
0.14
0.76
0.04
..
0.23
0.69
0.64
2.12
2.94
0.29
0.86
0.32
0.67
0.84
0.41
..
0.33
0.51
1.84
0.04
4.56
1.48
..
1.83
0.40
..
0.00
1.59
1.76
..
..
..
2.23
2.45
0.15

0.22
..
7.62
1.27
2.13
..
0.06
0.26
2.77

3.4
0.7
..
1.6
..
10.3
0.4
0.6
0.1
3.5
..
..
13.4
..
..
..
1.4
6.4
1.6
8.2
3.1
2.9
..
..
0.5
..
..
..
2.7
..
1.8
4.5
..
1.1
0.1
1.5
..
3.0
5.7
0.8
3.4
2.2
1.1
5.2
..
1.5
0.3
..
2.1

0.5
1.9
..
..
0.8
3.5
..
9.0
1.8

6.0
6.5
8.0
0.6
3.1
1.3
3.3
6.3
15.0
2.7
2.2
4.2
3.3
2.9
4.2
1.2
0.6
..
–2.0
2.0
3.5
2.7
9.7
1.8
2.1
3.0
2.6
3.8
0.9
0.8
48.8
6.2
0.0
2.1
–1.9
–0.2
..
0.6
2.1
11.4
0.3
1.9
1.5
3.4
–2.5
18.3
–0.9
–1.0
–0.5

–1.8
5.2
–0.8
–0.2
–0.4
–7.7
59.2
1.5
–1.4

13.8 f
27.7 g
28.9
11.7
14.3
11.9
25.1
20.7
42.9
9.9
15.9
15.9
10.4
12.4
38.9
2.5
1.9
33.1
26.5
11.6
15.7
10.4
43.3
5.4
11.3
9.4
13.8 h
4.0
8.9
49.3
73.8
18.2 i
16.3
31.4
4.9
1.7
56.9
2.7
8.0
83.7
2.3
8.4
4.7
54.7
0.1
60.2
17.6
13.8
4.5

2.2
16.3
8.2
11.6
0.9
12.2
30.6
7.7
1.2

4,963
5,875
8,534
11,300
62,711
28,374
2,572
16,014
10,390
7,363
7,630
5,006
566
29,306
22,316
9,795
6,219
53
2,820
81,411
23,012
7,494
871
4,192
2,037
46,119
56,694
8,775
16,427
242
2,527
2,392
2,665
17,498
1,775
13,350
1,948
1,460
1,412
..
3,070
7,264
10,250
6,732
2,688
269
9,927
1,493
5,705

2,857
1,346
1,201
116
7,611
34
1,048
24,932
6,328

95.0
82.3
85.2
93.0
81.0
84.0
89.5
86.8
74.2
93.0
79.0
94.0
96.0
87.0
72.8
84.1
79.1
89.4
73.4
83.0
81.0
82.0
92.0
91.0
70.0
58.0
72.0
75.0
56.0
60.3
88.1
61.0
79.0
54.0
68.0
65.0
86.4
80.0
70.0
85.0
61.4
64.0
72.0
88.0
25.6
79.2
63.0
74.0
55.8

55.1
71.7
56.8
46.9
50.0
19.9
60.0
53.3
55.1

..
..
..
..
81.2
..
..
..
483.4
176.7
..
..
209.5
..
492.3
22.4
14.1
..
..
172.9
..
..
809.9
..
85.6
..
..
125.5
88.1
..
427.4
248.8
127.0
106.6
81.4
..
641.0
100.2
..
313.3
22.7
..
115.9
285.7
32.2
..
98.7
..
..

76.2
..
..
88.2
115.5
..
247.9
..
107.3

251.0
..
422.2
99.9
199.8
180.5
174.0
..
1,582.4
205.0
430.5
173.7
131.3
143.2
1,700.7
51.2
27.3
..
..
190.7
211.3
257.5
821.8
..
101.4
162.2
118.1
46.5
168.1
..
..
460.5
85.0
632.4
37.3
34.6
711.5
73.3
141.5
654.5
11.5
115.6
50.2
1,585.8
2.9
..
53.1
..
18.4

47.9
..
..
64.7
40.3
..
215.8
59.3
51.1

208    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Trade

Financial flows

Human mobility

Communication

Remoteness

International 

trade

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows

Private 
capital  
flows

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Remittances,  

inflows

Total 

reserves 
minus gold

migration 

Net 

rate

Stock of 
immigrants

International 

inbound 
tourists

(kilometres)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(per 1,000 
people)

(% of 

population)

(thousands)

HDI rank
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines

2012
8,615
10,216
8,344
9,949
10,613
8,835
6,677
9,308
8,975
9,325
6,306
6,933
9,118
9,484
8,346
9,181
6,873
6,592
6,784
5,987
11,491
6,448
8,726
10,907
5,943
8,870
6,113
6,005
6,506
12,589
9,132
6,323
8,513
8,632
6,359
8,475
6,128
8,541
8,566
9,603
10,014
9,093
12,825
8,371

9,236
7,108
6,842
12,241
..
10,862
10,458
6,859
11,491
8,696
11,042
6,007
9,153
6,879
9,442

2012b
99.7
153.2
105.0
163.0
119.9
91.9
72.9
147.5
50.4
79.4
58.0
78.5
66.9
144.7
72.6
60.7
..
74.3
119.1
92.4
26.5
96.2
73.8
49.9
110.3
130.8
129.3
110.8
72.3
105.6
148.8
106.6
58.7
82.9
52.4
89.6
89.8
84.7
114.1
38.7
64.4
..
78.5
58.9

214.4
127.8
123.2
90.5
..
50.1
95.1
44.8
93.5
..
85.1
128.1
74.9
64.4
64.8

2012b
9.1
0.9
5.1
4.2
2.4
2.4
8.7
9.3
0.6
5.3
1.6
7.1
1.1
13.1
15.2
1.6
0.8
7.7
5.1
6.2
3.4
5.0
5.3
4.7
4.4
6.6
3.4
3.7
4.9
5.4
2.4
0.9
3.0
15.9
1.4
7.2
9.6
1.2
6.7
4.3
0.8
3.4
2.4
4.1

13.1
53.8
11.4
2.3
..
2.3
2.0
–0.2
1.6
3.9
3.6
2.3
1.1
3.1
1.1

2012b
–10.4
..
–6.6
–3.9
–96.7
..
–2.8
–8.0
–1.2
–8.8
–6.2
2.6
–5.2
–11.2
–12.2
–3.3
..
–1.6
–5.7
–6.6
–3.4
–9.2
–3.0
–4.3
–6.4
–5.6
–2.5
–3.3
–4.8
–6.0
0.2
–3.4
–2.9
–18.0
–1.0
–4.9
–6.9
–2.7
–11.6
–5.8
–0.9
–1.3
..
–5.6

–12.8
–65.6
..
–3.8
..
–2.7
–1.5
–0.2
–3.4
..
–2.6
–2.1
–5.9
..
–1.8

2011
0.1
20.7
1.4
0.0
1.7
..
1.1
0.4
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
2.1
2.5
1.0
..
0.5
3.3
1.3
0.2
3.9
1.6
0.4
0.5
0.4
1.6
0.1
3.5
2.0
0.0
1.5
0.0
2.8
0.1
5.2
2.4
0.4
3.0
0.4
0.3
2.3
21.1
0.4

2.7
4.3
0.1
16.6
..
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.5
6.0
1.3
0.5
–0.1

2011c
2.22
..
1.82
0.42
0.00
0.39
18.26
1.24
0.04
1.27
0.14
0.10
2.04
2.41
6.35
8.71
0.26
2.87
11.97
7.56
0.11
10.65
3.71
1.53
4.79
5.23
4.17
10.73
19.66
4.14
1.32
4.32
0.55
4.27
0.10
4.87
8.96
14.60
2.43
1.25
3.49
0.09
16.68
6.56

0.14
3.19
..
21.94
..
0.82
0.41
6.07
3.43
..
4.36
22.81
15.84
..
10.25

2012b
2.4
3.6
4.3
..
14.5
..
..
..
1.5
2.3
5.6
1.2
..
..
..
0.3
0.3
..
2.2
..
1.0
0.4
1.9
..
1.9
3.7
..
..
0.0
..
8.2
1.2
0.2
3.4
0.7
4.3
..
2.4
..
2.1
..
..
0.2
0.8

0.8
..
..
0.4
1.0
3.6
26.3
1.0
0.4
1.0
0.7
..
4.2
0.3
1.4

2010/2015d

1.4
..
–0.1
3.1
0.0
–2.2
21.3
1.5
0.3
2.7
0.9
0.0
–2.0
–3.4
..
–3.0
–0.8
0.0
11.3
–2.1
–0.2
–5.8
–8.1
–2.0
–0.2
4.6
–0.5
–0.3
–3.4
–6.6
0.3
–0.6
–0.2
–9.1
–0.3
..
–3.2
–5.8
0.0
–0.5
–0.4
–1.9
–15.4
–2.7

0.0
–1.1
–1.0
–13.4
–2.0
–0.6
2.0
–0.5
–1.2
0.6
–2.4
–5.9
–7.1
–1.4
–1.4

2013
11.3
26.7
31.9
8.3 j
3.6 k
2.4
17.6
4.1
3.9
8.6
2.5
21.1
0.9
13.0
10.5
1.5
3.4
3.4 l
40.2
5.6 m
0.3
4.4 n
10.7
0.3
11.4
15.3
6.6
0.6
10.6
2.6
5.6
0.3
0.1
9.4
0.7
8.9
3.1
1.3
6.7
0.3
2.3
7.7
5.2
3.9

24.4
0.6
4.3
3.0
5.9 o
0.1
7.2
0.4
2.7
23.6
1.4
11.2 p
0.7
4.4
0.2

2011
568
109
241
24,714
965
386
1,655
1,473
595
2,192
34,038
3,393
23,403
194
92
856
3,354
1,562
3,975
764
5,433
2,822
118
2,598
21,415
250
327
392
758
675
19,230
4,785
57,581
74
2,395
76
2,932
1,952
312
2,385
1,141
220
46
4,306

931
457
8
121
449
7,650
2,145
9,497
524
..
807
11
1,184
975
3,917

Internet 
users

(% of 

population)

2012
73.3
..
83.8
65.8
41.4
59.5
61.2
45.2
44.0
47.5
45.1
53.3
38.4
47.1
79.3
18.3
26.0
54.2
41.0
48.1
49.8
45.5
42.1
38.2
33.7
25.0
63.1
65.4
39.2
33.7
26.5
41.4
42.3
47.5
15.2
55.2
54.7
46.5
48.6
49.0
35.1
34.7
34.9
45.0

38.9
16.4
7.2
12.9
..
15.4
11.5
44.1
27.1
8.6
34.2
43.4
25.5
36.5
36.2

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

Incoming

Outgoing

2006–2011e 2006–2011e

..
157.6
367.6
..
150.0
192.2
314.6
54.7
34.2
85.5
58.3
45.1
..
63.2
821.4
28.5
..
78.7
108.0
99.4
1.0
62.4
487.2
92.1
..
130.0
230.2
200.1
176.2
..
14.3
57.2
9.1
439.1
57.9
134.1
252.0
259.7
284.5
..
60.6
..
..
123.9

..
38.6
..
..
..
..
..
69.8
76.5
11.0
83.7
224.1
258.4
..
..

..
180.0
180.0
..
102.4
205.9
86.3
102.5
21.8
43.0
16.1
41.5
..
93.4
630.3
..
..
19.9
143.4
40.5
2.1
34.9
315.3
19.7
..
147.6
22.2
43.8
253.3
..
11.1
15.9
2.8
146.4
25.5
164.3
24.0
882.7
200.8
..
11.6
..
..
21.0

327.6
19.1
..
..
..
..
31.3
6.9
14.3
17.7
6.8
62.7
234.8
..
..

TABLE 13 

International integration    |    209

TABLE13HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceTrade

Financial flows

Human mobility

Communication

Remoteness

International 

trade

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows

Private 
capital  
flows

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Remittances,  

inflows

Total 

reserves 
minus gold

migration 

Net 

rate

Stock of 
immigrants

International 

inbound 
tourists

HDI rank
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali

(kilometres)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(per 1,000 
people)

(% of 

population)

(thousands)

2012
11,090
6,710
6,848
9,073
8,671
8,000
10,636
9,114
6,892
10,276
11,254
9,074
6,601
12,466
9,205
11,212
6,986
7,843
7,944
9,332
8,385
8,816
9,012
9,846
8,214
8,714
8,465

7,855
7,322
8,954
10,604
9,343
..
8,925
8,455
8,326
7,912
10,325
10,030
11,638
11,809
9,758
9,370
7,690
10,772
7,941
8,793
8,305
7,763
8,327
8,407
7,192
..
8,429
8,008
8,268
9,792
8,424
7,964

2012b
59.6
71.1
..
..
180.0
114.8
..
60.8
136.2
95.0
..
120.6
86.6
95.0
98.2
..
73.9
55.4
87.3
113.6
102.1
82.3
122.1
83.1
60.3
68.8
139.9

42.4
33.1
71.8
141.3
108.3
..
46.0
65.4
75.2
65.1
63.2
137.3
..
72.9
67.1
81.3
152.3
154.5
68.0
58.1
41.9
34.8
97.6
68.8
45.3
..
85.3
76.0
48.7
69.1
120.8
61.8

2012b
1.5
2.5
0.8
6.4
6.0
2.8
2.5
2.3
11.2
7.7
4.3
5.9
2.5
7.4
7.7
2.3
0.2
1.7
0.9
7.0
8.1
3.7
20.3
10.3
1.0
8.5
4.4

0.5
0.4
1.0
2.4
–2.9
..
1.7
1.4
3.6
–2.2
9.2
4.0
–2.5
12.2
1.1
4.6
1.1
5.2
2.0
8.7
1.6
4.8
1.5
2.5
0.5
..
1.4
4.0
2.0
1.6
84.9
1.7

2012b
–1.8
–2.2
1.3
–6.7
–6.5
–3.7
..
–3.7
–5.8
–4.4
216.3
–5.9
–2.6
–7.4
–8.3
..
–0.2
–1.1
..
–10.6
–8.7
–3.8
..
–8.2
–0.9
–7.0
..

..
–0.4
–0.8
–5.0
8.6
..
–2.3
–0.5
–7.9
1.9
..
..
0.8
–16.3
..
–6.0
..
–5.4
–2.7
–8.7
–1.1
–4.2
–0.8
..
0.0
..
–3.4
..
..
–1.5
..
0.6

2011
0.3
..
1.7
6.2
3.0
0.1
41.2
0.9
9.2
2.4
..
3.8
1.3
12.4
7.6
27.1
5.5
0.2
0.2
0.1
4.8
5.2
2.4
6.1
0.9
30.2
0.2

4.7
1.6
7.4
3.2
0.2
..
20.2
0.3
0.8
1.5
4.2
7.4
4.9
49.6
8.5
10.4
9.2
9.0
7.4
9.6
0.1
1.9
15.5
23.2
35.0
..
6.2
15.6
11.8
14.5
53.6
12.3

2011c
0.29
2.74
0.21
14.48
6.95
9.28
..
9.45
27.57
0.12
11.99
15.87
7.31
2.77
9.48
..
46.91
3.41
0.57
1.25
0.38
1.34
..
0.24
10.78
2.77
..

22.22
5.82
2.72
1.38
0.00
..
1.62
0.45
8.45
4.43
..
..
0.09
0.19
..
0.32
..
25.72
10.23
5.64
2.53
2.22
9.13
21.12
..
..
1.55
10.09
1.62
0.31
23.29
4.44

2012b
1.6
..
1.2
1.3
0.4
4.0
1.5
3.3
..
..
4.3
..
0.0
1.5
2.4
..
0.0
3.5
4.8
..
..
2.1
0.0
2.5
1.6
..
1.8

3.7
..
2.5
4.7
..
0.2
..
0.1
..
5.4
0.1
..
..
..
4.5
0.4
3.0
..
8.5
0.7
3.2
4.7
5.3
2.0
1.3
..
0.0
..
0.8
3.0
..
0.9

2010/2015d

–0.4
–13.7
2.7
–8.2
–0.4
–6.9
–15.7
–1.0
–6.3
–0.3
–13.3
–1.2
–2.7
0.0
–4.0
–2.0
–2.5
–0.4
2.7
–2.3
–0.8
–2.2
–2.1
–0.6
–2.6
–1.6
5.3

–2.9
–1.8
–0.2
–1.0
0.6
–0.4
–0.8
–0.5
–0.4
–1.1
0.0
5.7
0.0
–4.3
–2.8
–0.6
–1.0
–1.9
–1.4
–0.8
–0.2
–4.3
–0.3
–3.4
–2.6
–3.7
0.5
–1.5
–0.1
0.0
–0.9
–4.0

2013
4.5
6.4
0.3
1.8
0.1
3.0
2.5
0.5
4.1
2.2
1.0
0.3
0.2
1.2
0.7
2.6
3.4
0.4
6.7
0.5
1.4
0.3
9.7
0.7
0.9
3.3
1.3

3.5
2.2
2.2
2.0
0.4
0.2
3.8
1.3
0.7
1.3
0.1
2.6
0.3
1.4
1.7
0.6
2.3
0.1
1.5
1.4
2.3
1.2
3.0
0.4
0.3
14.2
12.0
8.8
0.8
1.3
5.3
1.3

2011
8,339
8,546
1,518
157
6,014
428
26
1,823
3,114
984
51
871
9,342
94
1,060
5
183
6,309
66
2,882
931
1,786
101
815
303
8
..

736
907
1,470
879
481
391
619
573
715
1,025
225
2,423
165
23
11
795
..
397
1,001
1,151
209
536
300
349
..
53
270
106
523
767
..
160

210    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Internet 
users

(% of 

population)

2012
41.0
24.3
7.1
34.3
39.5
34.7
26.0
16.0
21.7
12.9
0.9
18.1
55.0
10.6
13.5
10.7
14.5
12.6
25.4
4.9
17.1
10.7
6.1
13.5
6.3
21.6
13.9

11.1
10.0
32.1
20.8
16.9
1.1
8.0
5.7
32.9
17.4
2.1
17.1
2.3
7.0
6.0
13.1
5.4
4.6
19.2
14.7
3.8
21.0
4.0
10.9
5.5
8.3
2.4
12.4
1.5
4.4
3.8
2.2

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

Incoming

Outgoing

2006–2011e 2006–2011e

..
81.1
..
110.2
..
172.6
..
138.6
47.0
41.1
7.0
91.1
123.3
..
..
..
..
20.4
..
..
50.8
..
31.9
8.7
141.6
46.2
..

14.0
44.2
14.6
339.8
..
2.7
3.2
22.1
18.6
80.9
4.0
32.6
..
..
..
3.7
38.4
8.4
77.0
..
32.6
34.7
33.4
..
5.4
43.6
29.3
..
8.0
6.7
29.4
45.4

..
22.2
..
46.1
..
34.1
..
48.7
83.0
28.9
11.7
186.1
23.9
..
..
..
..
7.6
..
..
27.3
..
73.3
4.9
2.9
21.8
..

..
20.6
15.3
22.7
..
0.2
9.0
5.2
7.9
4.8
2.1
14.5
..
..
..
3.1
15.2
5.6
26.3
6.0
27.8
12.6
9.8
..
2.6
222.0
29.2
..
0.4
0.9
36.8
19.5

TABLE 13 INTERNATIONAL INTEGRATIONTABLE13HDI rank
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

NOTES
a  A negative value refers to net official 

development assistance disbursed by donor 
countries.

b  Data refer to 2012 or the most recent year available.
c  Data refer to 2011 or the most recent year available.
d  Data are average of annual projected values for 

2010–2015.

e  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.
Includes Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands.

f 
g  Includes Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands 

and Norfolk Island.

Includes Nagorno-Karabakh.

Includes Northern Cyprus.
Includes Sabah and Sarawak.

h  Includes Canary Islands, Ceuta and Melilla.
i 
j 
k  Includes Agalega, Rodrigues and Saint Brandon
l 
m  Includes Kosovo.
n  Excludes Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
o  Includes East Jerusalem. Refugees are not part 
of the foreign-born migrant stock in the State of 
Palestine.

p  Includes Transnistria.

 

Trade

Financial flows

Human mobility

Communication

Remoteness

International 

trade

Foreign 
direct 

investment, 
net inflows

Private 
capital  
flows

Net official 
development 
assistance 
receiveda

Remittances,  

inflows

Total 

reserves 
minus gold

migration 

Net 

rate

Stock of 
immigrants

International 

inbound 
tourists

(kilometres)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(% of GNI)

(% of GDP)

(% of GDP)

(per 1,000 
people)

(% of 

population)

(thousands)

2012
8,103
10,596
8,264
9,017
7,930
7,842
8,304
7,888
8,423
9,216
7,825

..
10,788
..
..
5,958
..
..
11,948

7,825
8,536
8,741
8,360

7,037
8,809
6,364
10,621
7,845
9,496
8,646
9,133
8,078

2012b
..
75.7
78.4
47.0
49.7
37.5
69.9
66.2
35.6
146.3
76.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
94.2
..

63.1
60.0
63.3
66.1

91.9
66.2
77.0
45.8
53.5
76.9
74.3
69.2
62.4

2012b
2.0
16.5
18.8
0.1
0.1
0.7
24.3
17.5
5.0
10.2
16.8

..
4.2
..
..
..
..
..
5.0

1.9
2.8
2.2
2.5

1.5
3.0
3.6
3.1
1.4
3.3
3.2
2.5
2.2

2012b
–2.6
–36.0
–22.9
..
1.8
..
–25.5
..
..
..
–18.9

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.4
–3.0
–1.9
..

1.0
..
–4.5
–3.8
–1.1
..
..
–9.6
–0.7

2011
12.3
16.3
4.5
1.0
0.3
6.3
14.6
4.9
0.5
38.4
10.9

..
38.2
..
..
..
..
..
76.9

–0.3
0.1
0.5
5.1

..
0.1
0.5
0.3
0.6
3.8
6.9
3.3
0.1

2011c
4.74
1.25
1.27
1.93
1.06
..
2.00
..
..
0.73
1.69

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.26
0.82
3.67
5.03

..
0.93
2.06
1.11
3.57
2.73
4.67
5.79
0.71

2012b
1.5
..
..
7.0
3.3
0.1
0.8
0.7
4.7
0.9
2.8

0.1
1.3
..
..
0.5
..
2.3
6.7

..
..
2.7
2.4

1.3
0.9
..
1.5
2.7
2.2
2.4
..
2.9

2010/2015d

–1.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.4
–1.5
1.8
–0.7
–1.9
0.4
–0.2
–0.3

0.0
..
..
..
..
–2.9
15.7
..

2.5
–0.1
–0.9
–0.8

0.4
–0.3
–0.6
–1.0
–0.9
–0.1
–1.1
–2.8
0.0

2013
1.1
0.8
3.2
2.5
4.1
0.2
1.6
3.4
2.9
0.7
0.7

0.2
3.2
64.2
20.6
15.4
0.2
5.6
1.5

12.5
1.8
0.7
1.6

8.3
0.4
6.7
1.3
0.9
1.8
1.2
1.9
3.2

2011
30
1,718
30
142
238
107
52
71
54
186
82

..
5
295
..
156
..
..
1

581,506
282,225
84,432
19,970

71,884
125,944
74,011
70,256
13,462
30,695
18,701
16,456
968,591

Internet 
users

(% of 

population)

2012
2.9
4.8
1.5
1.2
3.7
0.8
1.3
2.1
3.0
1.7
1.4

..
10.0
87.0
..
50.9
1.4
..
35.0

77.1
42.5
17.6
12.3

34.2
36.7
41.1
43.4
12.3
15.2
6.8
25.1
35.5

International 

telephone traffic 
(minutes per person)

Incoming

Outgoing

2006–2011e 2006–2011e

..
5.8
..
..
..
47.5
..
..
..
4.1
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
21.2
..
..

92.0
..
79.3
39.9
34.1
..
..
..
..

..
13.9
..
..
..
1.7
..
..
7.3
5.6
..

174.8
13.1
..
10.3

106.3
..
34.1
25.4
..
9.7
..
..
42.4

DEFINITIONS

Remoteness: GDP-weighted average distance from 
world markets, calculated as the sum of all bilateral 
distance between the capitals of one country and 
all others, weighted by the partner country’s share 
in world GDP.

International trade: A basic indicator of openness 
to foreign trade and economic integration. It 
indicates the dependence of domestic producers on 
foreign demand (exports) and of domestic consumers 
and producers on foreign supply (imports), relative 
to the country’s economic size (GDP). Trade is the 
sum of exports and imports of goods and services 
measured as a share of gross domestic product.

Foreign direct investment, net inflows: Sum of 
equity capital, reinvestment of earnings, other long-
term capital and short-term capital, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Private capital flows: Net foreign direct 
investment and portfolio investment, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Net official development assistance received: 
Disbursements of loans made on concessional 
terms (net of repayments of principal) and grants by 
official agencies to promote economic development 
and welfare in countries and territories on the 

Development Assistance Committee list of aid 
recipients, expressed as a percentage of the 
recipient country’s GNI.

Remittances, inflows: Earnings and material 
resources transferred by international migrants or 
refugees to recipients in their country of origin or 
countries in which the migrant formerly resided.

Total reserves minus gold: Sum of special 
drawing rights, reserves of International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) members held by the IMF and holdings 
of foreign exchange under the control of monetary 
authorities, excluding gold holdings, expressed as a 
percentage of GDP.

Net migration rate: Ratio of the difference 
between the number of in-migrants and out-migrants 
from a country to the average population, expressed 
per 1,000 people.

Stock of immigrants: Ratio of the stock of 
immigrants into a country, expressed as a percentage 
of the country’s population. The definition of immigrant 
varies across countries but generally includes the stock 
of foreign-born people or the stock of foreign people 
(according to citizenship) or a combination of the two. 

Internet users: Percentage of people with access to 
the worldwide network.

International telephone traffic, incoming: 
Effective (completed) telephone calls (fixed and 
mobile) originating outside a given country with a 
destination inside the country, expressed in minutes 
of traffic per person.

International telephone traffic, outgoing: Effective 
(completed) telephone calls (fixed and mobile) originating 
inside a given country with a destination outside the 
country, expressed in minutes of traffic per person.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data on GDP 
from World Bank (2013a) and data on geo-distance 
from CEPII (2013).

Column 2: HDRO calculations based on data from 
World Bank (2013a).

Columns 3–7, 10 and 11: World Bank 2013a.

Column 8: UNDESA 2013a.

Column 9: UNDESA 2013c. 

International inbound tourists: Arrivals of 
nonresident visitors (overnight visitors, tourists, 
same-day visitors, excursionists) at national borders .

Columns 12 and 13: HDRO calculations based on 
data on incoming and outgoing telephone traffic 
from ITU (2013).

TABLE 13 

International integration    |    211

TABLE13HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

14T

Environment

Primary energy 

supply

Electrification 

rate

Carbon dioxide 

emissions per capita

Natural resource 

depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Deaths of children 
under age 5 due to

Fossil 
fuels

Renewable 

sources

(per 100,000 children under age 5)

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

Impact of natural 

disasters

Number 
of deaths

Population 
affected

Natural resources

Effects of environmental threats

(% of total)

(% of 

population)

(tonnes)

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of GNI)

(% of 

total land 

area)

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% 

change)

Outdoor 

Indoor 

pollution

pollution

air 

air 

Unsafe water, 
unimproved 
sanitation or 
poor hygiene

(per year 
per million 
people)

(per 
million 
people)

(%)

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2012a

2012a

2010

2010

1970/2010

2010–2012b

2011

1990/2011 2007–2011b

2008

2004

2004

2010

2005/2012 2005/2012

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation

57.3
95.4
51.1
91.4
83.6
80.2
61.4
73.7
97.2
70.6
84.7
31.7
15.3
85.1
94.8
82.8
94.8
..
96.7
49.1
67.1
70.1
87.4
43.0
66.6
83.7
75.9
76.9
90.6
100.0
100.0
94.9
88.1
100.0
74.0
90.7
..
67.5
94.5
101.0
75.6
74.9
71.1
99.9
86.7
100.0
81.6
63.7
89.7

57.0
..
60.2
90.4
77.7
98.7
100.0
91.0

47.8
4.6
49.7
6.7
16.3
20.4
38.4
27.9
2.8
26.8
6.4
70.5
84.7
14.4
0.4
17.2
5.2
..
4.8
52.4
32.2
28.3
4.0
47.5
34.5
13.9
24.9
26.5
8.8
0.0
0.0
5.1
14.6
0.0
14.5
9.6
..
32.3
5.5
0.1
24.2
22.0
26.0
0.0
13.3
0.0
10.6
33.8
9.3

42.1
..
28.4
5.9
22.8
1.3
0.0
9.2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
99.7
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
99.7
98.7
..
..
99.0
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
99.4
..
..
99.4
97.0
100.0
..
..
97.2

98.8
..
..
..
..
99.8
98.0
..

11.7
16.9
5.0
11.0
17.6
9.1
7.2
14.6
2.7
8.3
8.9
5.6
6.2
7.9
5.2
11.5
9.2
..
9.3
5.6
8.0
10.0
21.4
11.5
7.5
6.7
5.9
10.6
7.7
22.9
40.3
7.0
13.7
17.0
4.1
8.3
6.6
6.6
6.2
19.9
4.2
4.9
5.1
19.3
3.4
31.3
4.7
3.4
4.5

2.0
6.8
4.2
6.6
3.7
9.8
20.4
12.2

4.5
5.5
2.3
4.3
5.6
..
3.3
5.1
0.7
3.6
3.8
2.6
2.9
3.5
2.4
4.5
3.9
..
3.9
2.6
3.5
4.1
6.1
4.5
..
3.1
2.7
..
3.4
6.3
7.8
3.2
..
5.5
..
3.6
..
..
2.9
5.9
1.9
2.3
2.3
5.8
1.3
7.1
..
..
2.0

0.0
3.1
..
..
1.5
4.0
6.0
..

10.5
6.9
0.0
0.8
1.2
0.2
1.1
3.0
0.0
1.9
0.1
0.4
0.0
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
0.3
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.6
0.4
29.9
..
0.0
1.7
36.0
0.8
1.6
..
0.4
..
..
12.4
0.1
0.5
18.1
3.3
29.3
1.0
0.5
4.9

0.5
0.0
..
1.4
1.8
29.0
31.1
14.3

33.3
19.3
31.1
10.8
33.3
31.8
31.4
34.1
3.3
12.9
10.9
68.7
0.3
11.9
..
64.0
68.6
43.1
7.1
29.2
47.2
22.4
33.5
72.9
62.3
31.4
36.8
34.4
30.5
71.8
..
18.8
52.1
0.5
34.6
30.8
34.0
40.2
0.9
3.8
21.9
37.8
22.5
0.7
27.3
0.4
34.4
54.1
10.7

10.2
51.4
40.4
42.7
28.7
0.1
0.0
49.4

11.1
–4.0
8.1
5.9
2.9
3.3
7.0
0.0
–4.3
22.6
60.8
3.4
254.0
10.6
..
–0.8
0.2
6.2
16.5
10.1
3.1
..
..
1.5
5.6
21.6
33.0
1.2
19.2
–8.4
..
7.5
5.7
0.0
11.5
5.5
0.0
0.6
0.0
29.9
6.6
4.0
12.3
145.1
42.4
82.6
3.9
6.0
–16.2

94.4
0.0
0.0
11.4
3.4
0.0
0.0
0.1

0.8
4.6
4.9
11.7
15.6
21.0
1.5
1.5
31.7
10.8
1.5
1.5
0.1
8.8
..
36.5
20.9
..
79.7
15.0
4.7
34.0
1.9
1.5
3.0
23.7
29.0
12.9
12.7
1.1
381.0
19.3
14.0
936.2
9.6
19.4
..
1.4
71.3
1,867.0
2.9
12.3
5.4
205.8
11.6
2,075.0
0.6
1.2
4.0

2.6
..
..
7.5
3.2
615.4
86.6
1.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
..
0
0
..
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0
0
..
0
1
3
1
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
..
0
0
..
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0

0
0
..
0
6
2
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
..
0
0
1
..
0
0
..
..
..
0
..
..
..
0
0
2
0
..
..
0
1
..
..
6
13
0
..
..
..
0
0
..
10
1
..
0
..
1
..
0
0
3

3
2
..
1
..
..
..
5

0.2
9.0
0.5
5.4
1.1
8.1
5.3
2.7
..
8.5
0.5
0.3
..
2.7
..
2.9
0.3
..
12.9
3.9
2.7
10.5
..
0.0
8.4
2.2
1.4
4.2
1.1
..
0.1
11.4
5.0
4.3
4.8
13.2
..
9.1
..
1.9
1.1
2.3
17.1
..
17.0
0.6
17.5
1.8
1.7

5.7
..
8.0
4.7
13.5
8.5
5.8
3.1

0
3
0
7
2
0
5
0
..
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
18
..
1
3
0
10
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
..
..
0
0
1
1
3
..
3
..
..
4
1
7
..
0
..
1
3
0

1
1
0
0
3
..
3
44

41
1,503
92
0
5,691
3
20,003
407
..
0
45
0
0
1,049
558
289
795
..
2,675
881
28
13
0
75
2,133
184
64
241
218
..
..
0
37
63
0
310
..
38
..
..
25,719
21
522
..
61,215
..
130
0
1,837

10,565
12,130
4,999
349
778
..
2,528
176

212    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Natural resources

Effects of environmental threats

Primary energy 

supply

Electrification 

rate

Carbon dioxide 

emissions per capita

Natural resource 

depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Deaths of children 
under age 5 due to

Fossil 
fuels

Renewable 

sources

(% of total)

(% of 

population)

(tonnes)

HDI rank
2012a
75.0
58 Bulgaria
..
59 Barbados
..
60 Palau
..
61 Antigua and Barbuda
94.5
62 Malaysia
..
63 Mauritius
99.9
64 Trinidad and Tobago
95.5
65 Lebanon
79.7
65 Panama
88.9
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
48.3
68 Costa Rica
89.5
69 Turkey
98.9
70 Kazakhstan
90.1
71 Mexico
..
71 Seychelles
..
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
48.7
73 Sri Lanka
99.5
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
97.9
76 Azerbaijan
96.0
77 Jordan
89.1
77 Serbia
54.6
79 Brazil
72.8
79 Georgia
..
79 Grenada
76.0
82 Peru
79.6
83 Ukraine
..
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 82.1
93.9
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
71.5
87 Armenia
..
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
80.4
85.3
90 Tunisia
88.3
91 China
..
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
99.9
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
..
60.5
95 Albania
82.1
96 Jamaica
..
97 Saint Lucia
75.6
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
86.3
..
100 Suriname
..
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
89.3
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador

..
95.4
100.9
..
..
66.4
65.4
96.5
33.8
38.9
72.7
94.9
47.9

2012a
29.4
..
..
..
5.5
..
0.1
3.3
20.2
11.2
51.8
10.3
1.0
9.9
..
..
51.3
0.7
2.6
2.0
11.1
44.2
28.3
..
24.0
20.7
..
10.4
7.9
32.7
..
18.9
14.8
11.7
..
0.1
..
26.6
17.9
..
24.8
12.9
..
..
10.7

..
4.1
0.0
..
..
33.6
22.3
3.7
147.8
61.1
27.3
3.4
51.9

2010
..
..
..
..
99.4
99.4
99.0
99.9
88.1
99.5
99.2
..
..
..
..
..
76.6
98.4
..
99.4
..
98.7
..
..
85.5
..
..
..
..
..
..
87.7
99.5
99.7
..
99.3
..
..
92.0
..
97.4
92.2
..
..
96.9

..
86.2
..
..
..
73.0
45.4
99.6
97.4
60.0
80.2
..
91.6

2010
5.9
5.4
10.6
5.9
7.7
3.2
38.2
4.7
2.6
6.9
1.7
4.1
15.2
3.8
7.8
4.8
0.6
7.7
5.1
3.4
6.3
2.2
1.4
2.5
2.0
6.6
1.4
5.2
8.1
1.4
1.5
4.4
2.5
6.2
1.9
3.3
1.9
1.4
2.6
2.3
1.6
2.2
4.5
1.5
2.1

3.3
4.2
10.5
0.9
0.6
1.8
2.7
2.6
0.8
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.0

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of GNI)

1970/2010

2010–2012b

2.8
2.5
4.2
2.7
3.4
1.2
7.7
2.2
0.7
3.2
–0.5
1.8
..
1.6
3.5
2.2
–2.9
3.4
..
1.4
..
0.2
..
0.5
0.0
..
–0.9
..
..
..
–0.7
2.0
0.5
2.9
–0.1
1.3
–0.1
–1.0
0.7
0.3
–0.5
0.2
2.1
–0.7
0.1

..
1.9
..
–2.1
..
–0.3
..
0.7
–2.3
–0.5
–0.7
..
–1.7

2.4
..
..
..
6.2
0.0
30.9
0.0
0.5
20.8
0.1
0.5
28.0
7.0
0.0
..
0.3
19.6
33.9
1.7
..
3.6
0.5
..
9.9
3.9
0.0
4.0
..
1.7
0.5
3.5
5.2
6.1
0.0
18.4
0.0
3.7
1.1
..
10.4
16.4
8.5
0.0
0.4

0.0
32.2
..
0.3
..
7.2
3.1
9.1
0.0
34.7
14.7
0.1
0.5

(% of 

total land 

area)

2011
36.7
19.4
87.6
22.3
62.0
17.3
44.0
13.4
43.6
52.1
51.5
14.9
1.2
33.3
88.5
42.3
29.4
6.8
11.3
1.1
31.6
61.2
39.4
50.0
53.0
16.8
60.6
39.8
42.8
9.1
55.7
37.2
6.6
22.5
68.7
0.6
59.2
28.3
31.1
77.0
54.4
38.9
94.6
12.5
40.8

3.0
7.0
8.8
60.4
1.5
51.7
19.8
0.1
43.8
85.4
52.5
11.9
13.6

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% 

change)

1990/2011 2007–2011b

22.0
0.0
..
–4.9
–9.0
–9.7
–6.2
4.6
–14.6
–11.6
2.5
18.3
–3.5
–8.0
0.0
0.0
–21.5
0.0
0.7
–0.6
19.3
–10.0
–1.4
0.0
–3.3
4.9
–12.8
10.8
–1.1
–25.7
6.8
–2.9
59.0
33.4
5.8
–11.0
–11.2
–1.8
–2.3
7.3
–3.4
–22.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0

0.0
–13.7
0.0
31.5
1.0
–20.9
–18.1
60.5
–17.7
0.0
–9.4
22.5
–25.0

28.7
108.0
..
16.2
1.9
26.4
6.0
18.6
0.6
0.7
5.1
18.5
18.6
16.9
..
..
24.5
67.9
35.2
99.4
2.5
0.7
2.9
..
1.0
13.8
1.2
16.1
0.9
36.8
0.3
13.1
61.7
19.5
..
48.9
..
3.1
9.9
..
0.6
2.3
0.5
..
26.1

15.7
1.6
112.5
..
49.9
5.6
1.6
96.6
0.1
0.1
0.4
9.1
7.3

(per 100,000 children under age 5)

Outdoor 

Indoor 

pollution

pollution

air 

air 

Unsafe water, 
unimproved 
sanitation or 
poor hygiene

2008
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
5
1
0
0
0
6
2
3
..
0
2
0
2
0
0
0
1
2
1
0
1
2
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
2

1
19
2
0
..
2
4
2
1
9
0
1
1

2004
2
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
16
1
2
11
3
8
0
0
8
3
132
0
..
18
70
12
21
0
21
1
1
17
18
21
3
10
2
5
1
5
15
3
6
2
0
16
12

41
78
2
26
..
41
210
2
21
33
93
13
24

2004
2
0
40
0
33
7
5
40
55
30
4
85
249
23
..
28
42
..
269
59
..
123
169
5
69
3
27
..
2
65
11
59
64
55
..
101
0
50
47
2
33
63
43
55
73

167
195
449
63
..
130
341
86
56
102
245
15
82

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

Impact of natural 

disasters

Number 
of deaths

Population 
affected

(per year 
per million 
people)

(per 
million 
people)

2005/2012 2005/2012
1,145
4,482
..
178,447
2,054
689
0
4
2,749
785
13,250
242
1,213
10,808
38,151
..
33,200
954
3,632
..
3,731
4,236
5,359
7,910
14,947
1,344
56,475
96,337
3,222
..
13,877
70,880
312
68,601
21,068
433
54,721
41,348
16,769
8,562
19,920
8,368
30,325
2,448
5,827

2
0
..
0
1
1
0
0
2
1
2
1
0
1
0
..
5
2
0
0
0
1
0
1
8
3
4
0
0
0
6
3
0
8
0
1
3
0
2
7
4
1
1
9
6

1
3
..
96
0
6
26
0
2
0
3
1
9

4,596
147,305
..
33,004
979
3,976
2,694
18
41,164
16,269
17,376
13,802
11,704

(%)

2010
7.8
..
..
..
1.2
..
..
1.2
4.1
1.9
1.3
5.5
23.5
3.8
..
..
21.1
25.1
3.8
22.0
18.5
7.9
1.9
..
0.7
6.2
1.1
7.1
6.1
9.6
..
17.0
36.7
8.6
..
28.8
..
5.7
3.3
..
2.0
1.6
..
..
7.0

..
31.5
11.1
..
..
3.1
22.0
25.3
1.3
..
2.0
21.8
6.3

TABLE 14  Environment    |    213

TABLE14HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceNatural resources

Effects of environmental threats

Primary energy 

supply

Electrification 

rate

Carbon dioxide 

emissions per capita

Natural resource 

depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Deaths of children 
under age 5 due to

Fossil 
fuels

Renewable 

sources

(% of total)

(% of 

population)

(tonnes)

2012a
98.2
59.7
87.2
98.7
97.5
..
71.0
..
..
33.5
68.4
66.0
..
51.6
93.6
..
49.8
..
42.9
72.3
..
26.2
37.4
..
48.9
8.8
71.5
..
..

12.5
60.9
19.7
..
39.3
21.3
..
26.8
17.4
98.5
..
28.3
..
..
..
10.7
..
..
53.2
..
41.7
29.5
15.2
22.0
..
..
21.5
..
5.7

2012a
1.8
40.3
12.9
1.4
1.0
..
28.2
..
..
66.2
39.4
21.0
..
48.8
4.1
..
50.3
..
57.5
27.6
..
71.1
63.1
..
51.0
91.8
28.5
..
..

86.9
39.1
80.3
..
60.7
78.7
..
73.2
82.6
1.5
..
70.3
..
..
..
89.3
..
..
46.4
..
56.2
70.5
82.4
78.0
..
..
79.0
..
94.3

2010
..
83.3
75.8
92.7
98.0
..
97.6
..
..
80.0
..
43.7
38.0
79.9
98.9
..
72.1
..
..
75.0
..
31.1
60.5
63.0
37.1
18.5
46.5
..
..

76.3
67.4
18.1
..
40.2
48.8
..
48.7
50.3
39.6
17.4
36.9
..
..
..
14.8
..
17.0
53.5
8.5
27.9
35.9
27.9
20.0
30.0
..
58.9
..
23.0

2010
3.7
0.9
9.2
2.9
3.7
2.2
1.7
0.7
1.0
0.8
1.2
1.5
0.2
1.1
1.6
0.5
0.8
0.6
0.4
1.7
0.7
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.2
0.4
0.6
6.7

0.1
0.9
0.3
0.9
1.6
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.5
1.0
0.1
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.6
0.0
0.5
0.1
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.6
0.3
0.3
0.1

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of GNI)

1970/2010

2010–2012b

..
–2.1
3.9
0.9
1.6
0.2
–0.4
–2.5
..
–2.3
..
..
..
–1.6
–0.6
–3.4
–2.3
–2.8
..
–0.5
–2.7
–4.7
–4.1
–4.7
–3.4
–5.8
..
–3.2
3.1

–6.4
–1.9
–4.6
–2.1
–0.6
–5.9
–8.6
–4.3
–3.4
–1.8
–7.3
–2.5
–3.6
–4.0
–5.5
–6.2
–2.9
..
–3.2
–7.0
–3.2
–4.5
–5.1
–5.4
–4.7
–2.8
–4.6
–4.8
–7.9

17.5
2.7
6.7
13.3
50.6
10.5
9.6
0.1
..
2.1
9.7
1.0
..
0.6
2.6
0.0
1.2
..
1.1
4.9
3.4
0.1
10.5
10.5
67.8
17.5
2.3
0.7
40.4

2.2
2.6
1.2
0.0
35.0
..
2.9
5.3
24.4
15.6
2.7
3.4
23.1
15.1
1.1
4.4
39.2
1.0
1.6
5.0
0.3
9.8
3.7
0.6
2.1
0.3
4.4
0.7
5.2

HDI rank
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia

214    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

(% of 

total land 

area)

2011
7.7
25.9
7.6
2.7
1.9
77.2
45.0
21.0
58.4
33.6
5.1
8.8
49.1
45.3
11.5
36.1
25.3
15.0
2.9
23.1
84.9
56.5
21.2
67.9
65.6
66.3
11.1
28.1
57.5

25.4
2.1
6.1
33.0
46.8
48.2
18.0
41.7
9.5
1.0
21.5
39.5
63.1
78.9
1.4
37.3
0.2
1.5
43.8
14.5
40.0
23.2
4.9
3.6
2.1
0.2
32.7
47.6
12.2

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% 

change)

1990/2011 2007–2011b

7.4
17.5
0.0
33.7
3.3
0.0
56.3
46.7
–0.4
–24.2
16.1
–17.6
–24.3
–37.7
1.8
0.0
–32.6
0.0
0.5
7.3
31.5
–23.0
–35.2
–9.5
–1.4
–6.6
–3.7
0.0
–13.2

–24.7
–34.9
–6.8
20.2
–4.3
–19.7
39.9
–19.0
–49.9
0.0
–8.7
–31.0
–9.3
–5.0
–78.3
–20.4
–42.9
10.5
–9.8
–39.0
–21.7
–27.9
–61.0
–13.6
0.0
0.0
1.8
9.0
–20.0

100.6
17.0
24.3
86.4
73.4
0.7
9.3
6.8
..
3.1
32.6
1.6
14.3
2.2
43.5
..
0.7
..
51.1
33.9
0.4
0.5
1.8
1.0
0.0
1.5
2.9
0.3
0.1

4.5
74.4
8.9
23.1
0.5
2.8
1.6
0.3
4.6
168.6
4.9
21.0
0.0
..
0.8
5.4
11.8
1.4
5.7
0.5
0.5
42.8
1.2
8.6
31.0
6.3
1.9
1.1
4.6

(per 100,000 children under age 5)

Outdoor 

Indoor 

pollution

pollution

air 

air 

Unsafe water, 
unimproved 
sanitation or 
poor hygiene

2008
1
1
2
2
12
0
1
0
0
2
1
1
0
1
6
0
1
0
1
5
0
3
3
1
19
12
2
9
10

1
22
4
2
11
3
2
14
14
5
2
5
1
0
2
4
16
2
14
2
8
11
5
5
21
31
9
7
2

2004
192
37
23
12
12
38
27
26
30
57
115
11
0
49
8
9
49
0
343
131
124
346
152
157
149
378
142
225
0

139
132
217
148
1,073
181
803
361
370
174
390
168
108
54
108
239
220
19
292
327
394
181
302
297
1,183
41
370
197
538

2004
325
96
104
54
383
132
65
93
83
126
245
21
149
106
114
41
102
206
551
316
324
595
226
242
220
503
334
428
505

337
205
362
252
1,266
378
970
497
559
377
540
256
288
84
177
322
390
44
530
427
518
255
419
428
1,405
454
561
286
705

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

Impact of natural 

disasters

Number 
of deaths

Population 
affected

(per year 
per million 
people)

(per 
million 
people)

2005/2012 2005/2012
29
68,576
967
30,906
337
131,160
17,587
41,479
0
51,710
47,549
79,190
3,007
13,635
619
13,300
13,510
883
43,344
11,130
14,213
22,695
3,586
31,911
2,080
33,251
29,222
..
1,398

0
12
1
0
0
5
3
2
0
15
2
14
2
5
0
0
7
0
3
1
4
4
2
1
10
3
5
..
2

6
48
3
0
21
290
2
5
3
2
3
37
7
17
5
1
2
1
3
3
2
8
2
2,485
13
1
1
1
2

9,560
29,793
47,765
89,821
13,856
6,913
14,103
702
7,126
239
13,101
43,309
9,760
9,788
106,714
15,931
77,339
202,696
13,748
11,021
18,298
31,574
9,785
58,688
18,859
223,142
176
59,517
32,750

(%)

2010
27.0
2.2
17.5
33.3
4.5
..
8.0
..
..
9.1
9.7
28.5
..
15.0
39.1
..
13.9
..
10.5
9.6
0.1
39.3
1.4
4.1
0.1
4.6
11.3
..
..

2.3
4.5
31.0
..
3.3
19.2
10.1
15.3
11.5
32.4
0.0
29.4
..
..
..
25.0
23.8
63.6
16.2
23.5
1.6
39.9
5.1
15.2
11.0
7.5
1.3
17.9
72.3

TABLE 14 ENVIRONMENTTABLE14Natural resources

Effects of environmental threats

Primary energy 

supply

Electrification 

rate

Carbon dioxide 

emissions per capita

Natural resource 

depletion

Forest area

Fresh water 
withdrawals

Deaths of children 
under age 5 due to

Fossil 
fuels

Renewable 

sources

(% of total)

(% of 

population)

(tonnes)

2012a
..
..
..
..
9.5
..
..
..
21.7
..
..
..
4.2
..

88.4
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

82.0
87.2
74.9
..

96.8
..
89.4
74.2
76.3
..
..
..
81.4

2012a
..
..
..
..
93.3
..
..
..
78.3
..
..
..
95.8
..

11.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

17.9
12.8
25.3
..

3.2
..
10.5
25.8
23.7
..
..
..
18.6

2010
8.7
..
..
..
15.0
..
..
14.6
32.0
..
..
..
15.2
..

26.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

87.8
..
..
..
72.0
..
..
..
..

2010
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1

2.9
2.0
..
..
..
0.1
..
..

11.2
5.8
1.8
0.4

4.6
4.9
5.4
2.9
1.7
0.9
0.3
2.7
4.6

Average 
annual 
growth (%)

(% of GNI)

1970/2010

2010–2012b

–7.7
–5.6
–9.1
–6.3
–6.8
–6.9
–9.7
–7.0
..
–6.8
–9.3
–8.4
–8.9
–7.5

..
..
..
..
..
–8.3
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

1.7
4.7
9.8
0.5
2.8
14.2
9.6
7.8
0.0
1.8
25.4
0.1
18.0
1.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

2.4
7.8
7.7
12.1

24.7
..
7.2
6.9
6.1
14.8
8.7
4.9
5.3

HDI rank
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

(% of 

total land 

area)

2011
34.0
44.6
10.2
71.6
49.4
26.5
6.6
20.4
15.1
37.8
9.1
36.2
67.9
0.9

46.0
70.2
..
..
..
10.6
..
33.3

27.6
36.6
27.6
26.3

5.9
29.7
9.1
46.7
14.6
28.3
28.9
63.0
31.0

(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)

(% 

change)

1990/2011 2007–2011b
–17.8
–12.8
–11.8
–9.2
–10.5
–10.4
–41.1
–18.4
–5.8
–13.2
–12.7
–2.7
–4.1
–38.7

7.9
0.1
6.5
0.6
0.4
0.2
2.3
5.7
9.2
0.1
2.0
0.1
0.1
2.9

–32.5
..
..
..
..
–19.5
..
0.0

1.7
–1.0
–8.7
–13.9

–22.5
2.6
7.7
–9.2
3.3
–10.8
–12.0
–3.6
–3.5

11.2
..
..
..
..
22.4
..
..

8.5
4.6
13.9
6.5

71.1
..
34.8
1.5
26.8
1.6
3.1
..
7.6

(per 100,000 children under age 5)

Outdoor 

Indoor 

pollution

pollution

air 

air 

Unsafe water, 
unimproved 
sanitation or 
poor hygiene

2008
3
6
9
12
11
11
4
9
3
11
14
10
16
6

3
..
0
0
0
19
..
0

0
2
4
10

6
2
2
1
7
8
7
2
5

2004
498
676
703
648
270
324
897
632
237
1,207
488
411
644
1,023

0
45
0
1
0
710
..
18

0
10
106
396

73
28
63
22
153
428
431
123
140

2004
617
885
880
873
388
480
1,088
786
379
1,473
618
511
786
1,229

245
201
2
..
..
885
..
148

..
61
261
542

214
90
169
80
328
576
590
218
258

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land

Impact of natural 

disasters

Number 
of deaths

Population 
affected

(per year 
per million 
people)

(per 
million 
people)

2005/2012 2005/2012
61,541
28,135
55,720
20,739
20,084
1,704
39,618
28,139
305,872
1,069
54,883
1,959
604
122,010

2
1
1
41
4
4
2
27
0
11
11
1
4
5

6
0
..
..
..
16
0
0

3
8
3
48

2
15
1
44
7
4
51
479
12

26,951
66,716
..
..
..
145,928
16,491
0

2,989
42,653
14,518
24,030

10,933
54,689
5,389
12,252
14,621
22,382
28,158
33,638
24,203

(%)

2010
19.4
..
59.5
1.0
1.9
0.8
18.5
73.2
58.8
..
45.4
..
0.1
25.0

2.9
..
..
..
..
26.3
..
..

3.3
8.8
10.3
20.2

24.3
..
10.7
5.3
10.0
22.3
23.5
..
10.2

NOTES
a  Data refer to 2012 or the most recent year available.
b  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

DEFINITIONS
Fossil fuels: Percentage of total energy supply that 
comes from natural resources formed from biomass in 
the geological past (such as coal, oil and natural gas).
Renewable energy sources: Percentage of 
total energy supply that comes from constantly 
replenished natural processes, including solar, 
wind, biomass, geothermal, hydropower and ocean 
resources, and some waste. Excludes nuclear energy.
Electrification rate: Proportion of people with access 
to electricity, expressed as a percentage of the total 
population. It includes electricity sold commercially 
(both on grid and off grid) and self-generated electricity 
but excludes unauthorized connections.
Carbon dioxide emissions per capita: Human-
originated carbon dioxide emissions stemming 
from the burning of fossil fuels, gas flaring and the 
 

production of cement, divided by midyear population. 
Includes carbon dioxide emitted by forest biomass 
through depletion of forest areas.
Natural resource depletion: Monetary expression 
of energy, mineral and forest depletion, expressed as 
a percentage of total gross national income (GNI).
Forest area: Land spanning more than 0.5 hectare 
with trees taller than 5 metres and a canopy cover 
of more than 10 percent or trees able to reach these 
thresholds in situ. Excludes land predominantly 
under agricultural or urban land use, tree stands in 
agricultural production systems (for example, in fruit 
plantations and agroforestry systems) and trees in 
urban parks and gardens. Areas under reforestation 
that have not yet reached but are expected to reach 
a canopy cover of 10 percent and a tree height of 
5 meters are included, as are temporarily unstocked 
areas resulting from human intervention or natural 
causes that are expected to regenerate. 
Fresh water withdrawals: Total fresh water 
withdrawn, expressed as a percentage of total 
renewable water resources.

Deaths due to outdoor air pollution: Deaths of 
children under age 5 due to respiratory infections and 
diseases, lung cancer and selected cardiovascular 
diseases attributable to outdoor air pollution. 
Deaths due to indoor air pollution: Deaths of 
children of age under 5 due to acute respiratory 
infections attributable to indoor smoke from solid fuels. 
Deaths due to unsafe water, unimproved 
sanitation or poor hygiene: Deaths of children 
under age 5 due to diarrhoea attributable to poor 
water, sanitation or hygiene. 
Population living on degraded land: Percentage 
of the population living on severely or very severely 
degraded land. Land degradation estimates consider 
biomass, soil health, water quantity and biodiversity.
Number of deaths due to natural disaster: Number 
of people confirmed as dead and missing and presumed 
dead as a result of a natural disaster, expressed 
per million people. Natural disasters are classified 
as climatological, hydrological and meteorological 
disasters and include drought, extreme temperature, 
flood, mass movement, wet storm and wildfire.

Population affected by natural disasters: People 
requiring immediate assistance during a period of 
emergency as a result of a natural disaster, including 
displaced, evacuated, homeless and injured people, 
expressed per million people.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1 and 2: HDRO calculations based on 
data on total primary energy supply from World 
Bank (2013a).
Columns 3–5 and 7: World Bank 2013a.
Column 6: HDRO calculations based on World Bank 
(2013a).
Column 8: HDRO calculations based on data on 
forest and total land area from World Bank (2013a)
Column 9: FAO 2013b.
Columns 10–12: WHO 2013a. 
Column 13: FAO 2013a. 
Columns 14 and 15: CRED EM-DAT 2013 and 
UNDESA 2013a.

TABLE 14  Environment    |    215

TABLE14HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

15T

Population trends

Population

Total

Under  
age 5

Ages 65 
and older

Average annual 

growth rate

 Urbana Median age

(millions)

(millions)

(millions)

(%)

(% of 

population)

2013c

2030c

2013c

2013c

2000/2005

2010/2015c

2013c

(years)

2015c

Dependency ratio

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

Total fertility rate

Young age 

(0–14)

Old age (65 
and older)

(births  
per woman)

Sex ratio 
at birthb

(male to 
female 
births)

2015

2015

2000/2005

2010/2015c

2010/2015c

5.0 d
23.3 e
8.1
16.8
320.1
82.7
4.5
35.2
5.4
5.6
4.6
9.6
0.3
63.1
7.2
49.3
127.1
0.0
7.7
64.3
8.5
11.1
0.5
5.4 f
2.1
61.0
46.9 g
10.7
11.1
0.4
2.2
1.1 h
1.3
28.8
3.0
38.2
0.1
5.5
0.4
9.3
17.6
10.6
10.0
1.3
11.3
3.4
4.3
2.1
41.4

3.4
0.4
0.6
9.4
21.7
6.2
3.6
142.8
7.2
0.3

5.8 d
28.3 e
9.5
17.3
362.6
79.6
5.2
40.6
6.6
6.0
5.3
10.7
0.4
68.6
7.9
52.2
120.6
0.0
9.6
69.3
9.0
11.7
0.6
5.6 f
2.1
61.2
48.2 g
11.1
11.0
0.5
2.8
1.3 h
1.2
35.6
2.8
37.4
0.1
5.4
0.4
12.3
19.8
10.4
9.5
1.6
10.8
4.8
4.0
1.9
46.9

3.6
0.4
0.6
8.5
20.2
7.5
4.9
133.6
6.2
0.3

0.3 d
1.6 e
0.4
0.9
20.8
3.5
0.3
2.0
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.0
4.0
0.3
2.4
5.4
..
0.8
3.9
0.4
0.7
0.0
0.3 f
0.1
2.9
2.5 g
0.6
0.6
0.0
0.1
0.1 h
0.1
2.9
0.2
2.1
..
0.3
0.0
0.7
1.2
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.1
3.4

0.2
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.1
0.6
0.4
8.3
0.3
0.0

0.8 d
3.3 e
1.4
2.9
44.7
17.5
0.6
5.3
0.6
1.0
0.6
1.8
0.0
11.0
1.0
6.0
31.9
..
0.8
11.5
1.6
2.0
0.1
1.0 f
0.4
12.9
8.3 g
1.8
2.2
0.0
0.0
0.1 h
0.2
0.8
0.5
5.5
..
0.7
0.1
0.0
1.8
2.0
1.7
0.0
1.5
0.1
0.8
0.4
4.5

0.5
0.0
0.1
1.3
3.3
0.3
0.1
18.6
1.4
0.0

0.6 d
1.3 e
0.7
0.6
0.9
0.1
1.4
1.0
2.7
0.3
1.8
0.4
1.1
0.5
0.2
0.5
0.2
1.0
1.9
0.7
0.5
0.5
1.0
0.3 f
0.1
0.6
1.5 g
0.0
0.1
2.1
6.5
1.8 h
–0.6
4.1
–1.2
–0.1
4.3
0.0
0.4
6.3
1.1
0.4
–0.3
5.5
0.3
3.7
–0.4
–1.3
0.9

0.0
2.0
0.2
–0.6
–0.2
1.6
2.8
–0.4
–0.8
0.5

1.0 d
1.3 e
1.0
0.3
0.8
–0.1
1.0
1.0
2.0
0.4
1.1
0.7
1.1
0.6
0.7
0.5
–0.1
0.7
1.3
0.5
0.4
0.4
1.3
0.3 f
0.2
0.2
0.4 g
0.4
0.0
1.4
5.9
1.1 h
–0.3
1.8
–0.5
0.0
0.8
0.1
0.3
2.5
0.9
0.0
–0.2
1.7
–0.1
3.6
–0.4
–0.6
0.9

0.3
1.4
0.0
–0.5
–0.3
0.9
7.9
–0.2
–0.8
0.5

79.9 d
89.5 e
73.8
84.0
82.9
74.2
86.3
80.9
100.0
87.2
62.8
85.5
93.9
79.9
100.0
83.8
92.5
14.3
92.0
86.9
68.1
97.5
85.9
83.9 f
49.8
68.7
77.7 g
73.4
61.9
76.7
99.1
70.9 h
69.6
82.7
67.3
60.7
86.2
54.6
95.2
84.9
89.6
62.1
70.4
88.8
75.1
98.3
58.4
67.7
92.8

92.7
84.6
63.7
75.9
52.8
78.1
73.9
74.2
74.3
45.4

39.2 d
37.4 e
42.3
42.4
37.7
46.3
37.3
40.5
38.7
41.5
35.9
41.2
35.9
40.5
43.2
40.5
46.5
..
30.1
41.0
43.3
41.9
39.1
42.6 f
43.0
45.0
42.2 g
40.9
43.5
31.1
31.7
35.9 h
41.3
28.4
39.7
39.4
..
38.9
41.4
31.4
33.7
43.0
41.0
30.2
41.3
29.7
43.1
41.7
31.6

34.8
32.5
37.6
39.5
40.0
27.2
27.1
38.5
43.4
37.4

28.6 d
29.1 e
21.9
25.8
29.4
19.7
30.8
24.4
20.8
27.0
32.9
27.6
31.2
27.4
16.0
19.5
21.2
..
45.8
28.6
21.6
26.7
25.4
26.1 f
21.4
21.8
23.4 g
23.0
22.6
34.6
15.9
23.5 h
24.7
41.2
22.4
21.7
..
21.4
20.8
19.4
29.9
21.8
21.9
28.3
22.1
33.6
22.0
23.5
36.7

33.4
29.4
26.9
22.4
21.8
44.7
29.2
23.4
21.2
26.7

25.2 d
22.7 e
27.1
27.8
22.2
32.7
22.5
23.7
15.2
29.1
19.2
31.8
20.3
28.1
20.5
17.9
43.6
..
17.8
29.6
27.9
29.0
21.2
32.3 f
26.4
33.8
27.6 g
26.3
31.1
6.9
1.1
18.1 h
28.2
4.4
22.8
22.0
..
19.1
26.0
0.6
15.3
29.3
26.1
3.0
19.9
3.3
28.6
28.2
17.3

22.3
11.7
20.2
19.7
22.3
7.6
4.0
18.8
30.1
16.2

1.8 e
1.8 e
1.4
1.7
2.0
1.4
1.9
1.5
1.3
1.8
2.0
1.7
2.0
1.7
1.0
1.2
1.3
..
2.9
1.9
1.4
1.7
1.7
1.8 f
1.2
1.3
1.3 g
1.2
1.3
2.3
3.0
1.6 h
1.4
3.5
1.3
1.3
..
1.2
1.4
2.4
2.0
1.5
1.3
2.7
1.6
2.6
1.4
1.3
2.4

2.2
1.9
1.8
1.2
1.3
2.9
3.2
1.3
1.2
1.8

1.9 d
1.9 e
1.5
1.8
2.0
1.4
2.1
1.7
1.3
1.9
2.0
1.9
2.1
1.9
1.1
1.3
1.4
..
2.9
2.0
1.5
1.9
1.7
1.9 f
1.5
1.5
1.5 g
1.6
1.5
2.0
2.1
1.5 h
1.6
2.7
1.5
1.4
..
1.4
1.4
1.8
1.8
1.3
1.4
2.1
1.5
2.6
1.5
1.6
2.2

2.1
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.4
2.4
2.9
1.5
1.5
1.9

1.06 d
1.06 e
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.07
1.07
1.06
..
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.04 f
1.05
1.06
1.06 g
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.05
1.07 h
1.06
1.03
1.05
1.06
..
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.04
1.06
1.06
1.04
1.06
1.04
1.06
1.05
1.04

1.05
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.04

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados

216    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Population

Total

Under  
age 5

Ages 65 
and older

Average annual 

growth rate

 Urbana Median age

Dependency ratio

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

Total fertility rate

(millions)

(millions)

(millions)

(%)

(% of 

population)

(years)

Young age 

(0–14)

Old age (65 
and older)

(births  
per woman)

Sex ratio 
at birthb

(male to 
female 
births)

HDI rank
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic

2013c
0.0
0.1
29.7 i
1.2 j
1.3
4.8
3.9
30.4
4.9
74.9
16.4
122.3
0.1
0.1
21.3
77.4
9.4 k
7.3
9.5 l
200.4
4.3 m
0.1
30.4
45.2
0.3
2.1
3.8
3.0
0.9
67.0
11.0
1,385.6
0.1
39.2
0.1
3.2
2.8
0.2
48.3
15.7
0.5
0.1
10.4

0.3
2.8
5.2
0.2
4.3 n
249.9
2.0
82.1
6.8
1.7
10.7
3.5 o
6.3
28.9
98.4
52.8
21.9

2030c
0.0
0.1
36.8 i
1.3 j
1.3
5.2
4.9
37.2
5.8
86.8
18.6
143.7
0.1
0.1
23.3
91.3
10.5 k
9.4
8.6 l
222.7
4.0 m
0.1
36.5
39.8
0.5
2.1
3.7
3.0
0.9
67.6
12.6
1,453.3
0.1
48.6
0.1
3.3
2.9
0.2
57.2
19.6
0.6
0.1
12.2

0.4
3.4
6.2
0.2
6.4 n
293.5
2.3
102.6
8.7
2.4
13.7
3.1 o
6.9
34.1
127.8
58.1
29.9

2013c
..
0.0
2.5 i
0.1 j
0.1
0.3
0.4
3.0
0.4
6.4
1.7
11.3
0.0
..
1.9
7.1
0.8 k
1.0
0.5 l
14.6
0.3 m
0.0
2.9
2.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
3.6
0.9
90.2
0.0
4.6
..
0.2
0.2
0.0
4.5
1.6
0.0
0.0
1.1

0.0
0.3
0.5
0.0
0.6 n
24.0
0.2
9.3
0.8
0.2
1.3
0.2 o
0.6
3.0
11.3
5.4
2.6

2013c
..
0.0
1.6 i
0.1 j
0.1
0.4
0.3
1.9
0.3
5.5
1.1
7.8
0.0
..
1.8
4.1
0.5 k
0.3
1.4 l
15.1
0.6 m
0.0
1.9
6.8
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.3
0.0
6.5
0.8
123.0
0.0
1.8
..
0.3
0.2
0.0
3.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.7

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.1 n
13.1
0.1
4.7
0.4
0.1
0.5
0.4 o
0.5
1.2
3.8
2.9
0.9

2000/2005

2010/2015c

0.8
1.2
2.0 i
0.5 j
0.5
4.2
1.9
1.8
1.9
1.4
0.7
1.3
1.8
1.5
1.1
1.2
1.1 k
1.9
–0.6 l
1.3
–1.2 m
0.3
1.3
–0.8
2.6
0.4
0.2
–0.4
0.3
1.0
1.0
0.6
0.2
1.4
0.2
–0.7
0.8
1.1
1.6
1.9
1.4
0.6
1.5

1.7
1.0
1.1
0.6
2.1 n
1.4
1.3
1.6
2.0
2.4
1.9
–1.7 o
0.4
1.0
2.0
1.5
2.1

0.8
1.0
1.6 i
0.4 j
0.3
3.0
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.0
1.2
0.6
1.1
0.8
1.3
1.1 k
3.5
–0.5 l
0.8
–0.4 m
0.4
1.3
–0.6
2.4
0.1
–0.1
0.2
0.7
0.3
1.1
0.6
0.0
1.8
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.8
1.3
1.6
0.9
0.4
1.2

1.9
1.5
1.3
0.8
2.5 n
1.2
0.9
1.6
1.7
2.4
1.6
–0.8 o
0.7
1.4
1.7
0.8
0.7

2013c
85.8
29.8
74.2 i
41.8 j
14.2
87.5
76.5
93.9
65.6
73.4
53.4
78.7
54.4
32.1
15.2
69.3
54.1 k
83.2
57.1 l
85.2
53.0 m
39.8
77.9
69.3
44.3
59.5
49.3
64.2
53.0
34.8
66.7
53.2
50.1
74.7
67.4
55.6
52.2
16.1
75.8
68.6
70.5
23.6
70.8

43.4
70.4
49.4
19.4
74.8 n
52.2
62.9
43.8
63.0
86.9
67.7
49.1 o
65.8
36.3
49.3
62.9
56.9

2015c
..
30.9
28.2 i
35.5 j
34.2
30.7
28.5
27.7
30.6
30.1
29.7
27.7
33.2
..
32.0
29.5
30.4 k
24.0
39.3 l
31.2
38.1 m
27.2
27.1
39.9
23.7
37.8
40.1
33.4
27.5
38.0
31.2
36.0
29.8
27.5
..
33.5
28.2
31.2
28.3
26.7
29.1
21.3
26.4

26.0
27.5
26.4
21.2
19.7 n
28.4
22.8
25.8
24.4
20.9
22.8
36.3 o
24.7
26.0
23.4
26.5
22.7

2015
..
35.2
36.6 i
26.4 j
29.9
27.1
42.5
42.6
32.5
37.0
39.4
41.7
31.7
..
38.1
34.2
30.8 k
53.0
22.9 l
33.6
27.6 m
40.0
42.9
21.4
52.1
23.2
21.2
29.2
43.9
24.2
33.4
25.1
36.0
42.4
..
28.1
39.5
34.1
40.7
45.8
39.6
64.3
46.4

42.2
40.4
41.7
64.9
67.3 n
42.2
52.3
48.8
50.8
67.6
56.1
23.6 o
45.2
41.5
53.4
45.1
56.4

2015
..
10.4
8.3 i
13.3 j
13.8
12.3
11.7
10.1
10.8
11.4
10.1
10.3
11.2
..
13.7
7.8
7.8 k
5.8
21.7 l
11.6
22.0 m
10.7
10.3
21.2
6.5
18.3
22.9
15.0
8.9
14.5
10.8
13.1
10.7
7.0
..
16.3
12.3
13.2
10.0
10.7
10.2
10.2
10.3

7.3
5.6
6.1
9.1
5.3 n
8.2
6.0
9.4
9.1
8.9
8.3
16.4 o
11.5
6.4
6.5
8.8
7.1

2000/2005

2010/2015c

2010/2015c

..
2.3
2.5 i
1.9 j
1.8
2.0
2.8
2.7
2.3
2.3
2.0
2.5
2.2
..
2.3
2.0
2.0 k
3.9
1.6 l
2.3
1.6 m
2.4
2.8
1.2
3.4
1.6
1.2
1.7
3.0
1.6
2.0
1.6
2.2
2.4
..
2.2
2.5
2.1
2.6
3.0
2.6
4.2
2.8

2.8
2.1
2.8
4.4
5.0 n
2.5
3.2
3.2
3.5
4.5
4.0
1.5 o
2.6
2.6
3.7
2.8
3.7

..
2.1
2.0 i
1.5 j
1.8
1.5
2.5
2.4
1.8
2.1
2.4
2.2
2.2
..
2.4
1.9
1.9 k
3.3
1.4 l
1.8
1.8 m
2.2
2.4
1.5
2.7
1.4
1.3
1.7
2.6
1.4
2.0
1.7
2.0
2.8
..
1.8
2.3
1.9
2.3
2.6
2.3
3.8
2.5

2.3
2.4
2.3
4.2
4.1 n
2.4
2.6
2.8
2.9
4.1
3.3
1.5 o
2.2
2.3
3.1
2.4
3.0

..
1.03
1.06 i
1.04 j
1.04
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.07
1.05
1.06
..
1.04
1.05
1.15 k
1.05
1.05 l
1.05
1.11 m
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.03
1.05
1.07
1.14
1.06
1.06
1.05
1.16
1.03
1.05
..
1.08
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.08
1.05
1.05

1.06
1.03
1.05
1.08
1.05 n
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.05
1.06 o
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.03
1.05

TABLE 15  Population trends    |    217

TABLE15HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResiliencePopulation

Total

Under  
age 5

Ages 65 
and older

Average annual 

growth rate

 Urbana Median age

Dependency ratio

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

Total fertility rate

(millions)

(millions)

(millions)

(%)

(% of 

population)

(years)

Young age 

(0–14)

Old age (65 
and older)

(births  
per woman)

Sex ratio 
at birthb

(male to 
female 
births)

2013c
33.8
0.8
91.7
0.5
0.1
15.5
5.5
2.3
1.1
8.1
33.0
0.3
6.1
0.1
8.2
1,252.1
0.8
15.1
25.9
6.8
4.4
14.5
156.6
0.2
0.8

27.8
182.1
44.4
1.2
21.5
53.3
11.8
22.3
173.6
24.4
22.9
14.1
7.3
0.6
0.7
49.3 p
3.9
2.1
14.1
37.6
10.3
38.0
6.8
10.3
30.6
0.9
20.3
1.8
94.1
16.4
4.3
15.3
1.7
25.8
11.7

2030c
51.0
0.9
101.8
0.6
0.1
22.6
6.9
3.0
1.6
10.8
39.2
0.4
7.4
0.1
11.4
1,476.4
0.9
19.1
35.3
8.8
6.8
25.0
185.1
0.3
1.1

32.9
231.7
66.3
1.5
34.8
58.7
17.8
33.1
273.1
34.0
36.0
20.3
10.0
0.8
1.1
79.4 p
5.6
2.4
21.9
63.4
15.5
55.1
10.0
12.5
43.5
1.1
29.2
3.1
137.7
26.0
6.4
26.0
2.5
38.9
17.3

2013c
4.9
0.1
7.1
0.0
0.0
2.3
0.7
0.3
0.2
1.0
3.4
0.0
0.7
0.0
1.2
121.3
0.1
1.7
3.7
0.9
0.7
2.7
15.1
0.0
0.1

2.9
21.8
7.0
0.2
4.0
4.4
1.9
3.6
30.5
3.4
3.6
2.0
1.0
0.1
0.1
8.7 p
0.6
0.3
2.4
7.1
1.7
5.7
1.1
1.3
4.9
0.1
3.2
0.3
14.2
2.9
0.7
3.0
0.3
4.4
1.9

2013c
1.1
0.0
6.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.4
1.6
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.3
66.0
0.0
0.8
0.9
0.3
0.2
0.4
7.5
0.0
0.0

1.4
8.0
1.2
0.0
0.5
2.8
0.3
0.7
4.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.2
0.0
0.0
1.6 p
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.9
0.3
1.2
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.0
0.6
0.0
3.2
0.5
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.8
0.4

2000/2005

2010/2015c

2.8
0.4
1.0
1.6
–0.2
2.5
0.4
1.3
3.1
2.0
1.0
2.5
1.3
1.8
1.9
1.6
2.8
1.8
2.5
1.4
2.5
2.5
1.6
2.1
3.1

1.7
1.9
2.7
0.8
3.4
0.7
2.3
2.6
2.6
2.8
3.0
0.3
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.6 p
3.0
0.7
2.7
3.4
3.3
2.6
2.6
1.5
3.8
1.4
1.5
3.1
2.9
2.6
2.5
3.0
2.2
2.8
1.8

2.9
0.5
1.0
0.8
0.2
2.5
1.4
1.9
1.7
2.0
1.4
2.2
1.4
1.5
2.4
1.2
1.6
1.7
2.1
1.9
2.6
3.2
1.2
2.6
2.8

1.2
1.7
2.7
1.5
3.1
0.8
2.7
2.5
2.8
2.3
2.8
2.8
2.1
2.1
2.4
3.0 p
2.5
1.1
2.9
3.3
2.7
2.1
2.6
1.4
2.4
1.5
2.3
3.2
2.6
2.8
2.6
3.0
2.4
2.5
2.5

2013c
66.4
28.5
32.3
64.1
22.8
50.7
35.5
39.5
29.1
53.3
57.8
25.5
58.1
44.1
26.6
32.0
37.1
20.3
53.2
36.5
64.5
40.0
29.4
64.1
39.8

17.7
36.8
24.8
21.2
60.7
33.8
19.7
53.2
50.9
33.5
33.8
39.6
12.6
21.4
28.2
27.6 p
42.0
29.0
43.1
16.4
46.2
33.5
39.0
56.1
24.1
77.2
52.8
58.4
17.5
16.0
48.9
36.2
45.3
31.7
36.4

2015c
20.0
23.0
30.7
25.2
21.5
19.7
25.1
21.8
16.9
22.5
27.5
22.1
23.8
24.1
22.0
26.9
26.7
25.0
20.9
22.0
18.7
16.7
25.8
19.4
20.9

23.1
23.2
19.0
20.5
16.4
29.8
18.4
18.5
17.7
19.7
18.7
20.1
21.2
19.9
19.1
17.6 p
20.0
21.2
18.2
15.9
18.6
19.4
19.0
22.7
17.0
23.4
19.1
17.0
18.6
17.3
18.6
16.2
19.3
17.3
18.8

2015
68.1
55.7
31.7
42.4
55.3
71.3
47.6
57.0
86.5
56.1
41.7
60.3
50.4
47.8
59.4
42.9
39.9
49.0
65.0
55.6
78.5
90.6
43.8
74.8
65.6

53.4
52.3
75.4
63.1
92.9
34.4
74.1
78.4
83.9
67.5
75.2
66.9
62.2
69.4
75.1
85.9 p
69.4
59.2
80.5
96.6
76.7
72.1
74.6
55.8
85.4
53.9
73.4
87.9
75.2
86.3
77.4
95.5
73.3
87.4
75.9

2015
5.5
5.7
9.6
7.9
7.1
8.4
6.3
5.9
6.6
7.5
7.6
6.7
7.6
6.7
5.2
8.3
7.3
8.9
5.9
6.2
6.3
5.0
7.3
5.8
4.8

8.6
7.0
5.0
6.1
4.8
7.7
4.5
5.9
5.1
5.1
5.1
6.7
5.0
5.9
5.1
6.2 p
5.6
6.9
5.4
4.9
5.3
5.9
4.9
7.5
4.7
6.6
5.7
4.5
6.3
6.3
5.5
5.4
5.3
6.4
5.6

2000/2005

2010/2015c

2010/2015c

4.8
2.7
1.9
3.3
4.1
4.6
2.5
3.8
7.0
3.7
2.5
4.1
3.0
3.6
3.7
3.0
3.1
3.5
4.6
3.7
5.1
6.0
2.9
4.6
5.6

3.7
4.0
5.0
4.0
6.8
2.2
5.6
5.5
6.1
5.9
5.3
4.0
4.4
4.6
5.3
5.7 p
5.2
3.8
5.4
6.7
5.8
5.3
5.1
4.0
7.4
4.2
5.2
5.9
6.1
6.1
5.7
6.8
5.7
5.7
5.8

4.1
2.6
1.8
2.3
3.3
3.8
3.1
3.1
5.9
3.0
2.8
3.4
2.5
3.0
3.9
2.5
2.3
2.9
3.9
3.1
5.0
5.7
2.2
4.1
4.9

2.3
3.2
4.4
3.4
5.9
2.0
4.6
4.8
6.0
4.2
4.5
3.5
3.8
4.1
4.7
5.2 p
4.7
3.1
5.0
5.9
4.9
4.5
4.7
3.2
5.0
3.4
4.9
5.8
4.6
5.4
4.8
6.9
5.0
5.2
5.0

1.07
1.05
1.10
1.03
1.07
1.05
1.06
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.05
1.07
1.05
1.11
1.04
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.02
1.05
1.03
1.03

1.07
1.09
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.02
1.03
1.06
1.05
1.03
1.02
1.08
1.07
1.05
1.03 p
1.05
1.03
1.04
1.03
1.04
1.04
1.02
1.05
1.06
1.04
1.03
1.03
1.04
1.03
1.05
1.05
1.03
1.03
1.02

HDI rank
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea

218    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE 15 POPULATION TRENDSTABLE15HDI rank
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

NOTES
a  Because data are based on national definitions 
of what constitutes a city or metropolitan area, 
cross-country comparisons should be made with 
caution.

b  The natural sex ratio at birth is commonly 

assumed and empirically confirmed to be 1.05 
male births to 1 female births.

c  Projections based on medium-fertility variant.
d  Includes Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands.
e  Includes Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands 

and Norfolk Island.
Includes Åland Islands.

f 
g  Includes Canary Islands, Ceuta and Melilla.
h  Includes Northern Cyprus.
i 
j 
 

Includes Sabah and Sarawak.
Includes Agalega, Rodrigues and Saint Brandon.

Population

Total

Under  
age 5

Ages 65 
and older

Average annual 

growth rate

 Urbana Median age

(millions)

(millions)

(millions)

(%)

(% of 

population)

2013c
10.2
16.9
6.3
6.1
12.8
4.6
67.5
17.8

24.9
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.5
11.3
0.0

2030c
16.4
26.6
9.8
8.1
20.9
6.3
103.7
34.5

26.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
16.9
17.3
0.0

1,189.7
2,485.5
2,262.1
1,145.6

366.0
2,035.9
233.4
611.3
1,749.0
888.2
898.4 T
54.3
7,162.1 T

1,276.5
2,662.3
2,716.0
1,675.6

481.3
2,211.9
251.0
711.1
2,085.5
1,348.9
1,287.0 T
63.4
8,424.9 T

2013c
1.9
3.0
1.1
0.9
2.5
0.7
11.9
3.7

1.7
..
..
..
..
2.0
1.8
..

69.4
176.8
228.7
176.9

43.9
149.2
18.9
53.6
175.1
146.6
132.1 T
5.4
659.0 T

2013c
0.2
0.4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
1.9
0.5

2.4
..
..
..
..
0.3
0.4
..

193.9
215.9
115.9
38.0

15.4
160.7
21.2
44.0
89.6
27.6
31.7 T
3.7
570.5 T

2000/2005

2010/2015c

3.0
2.9
4.2
4.3
3.8
1.7
2.8
3.6

0.8
0.0
1.0
0.1
2.0
2.7
3.8
0.6

0.7
0.7
1.6
2.5

2.2
0.8
0.4
1.3
1.6
2.6
2.4 T
1.3
1.2 T

3.2
2.8
3.2
1.9
3.0
2.0
2.7
3.9

0.5
0.2
0.8
0.2
0.6
2.9
4.0
0.2

0.6
0.7
1.3
2.4

2.0
0.8
0.7
1.1
1.3
2.7
2.3 T
1.1
1.1 T

2013c
11.5
28.2
22.2
40.0
22.0
39.5
35.4
18.3

60.6
72.5
100.0
100.0
94.2
38.7
18.4
51.4

81.6
61.4
38.3
34.5

57.8
50.8
60.5
79.5
33.4
37.4
29.4 T
53.0
53.0 T

(years)

2015c
17.6
17.3
18.5
19.3
15.9
20.0
17.5
15.0

33.9
..
..
..
..
16.5
18.9
..

40.2
34.2
26.5
19.5

24.6
33.7
32.2
29.0
26.4
18.5
19.9 T
27.9
29.6 T

Dependency ratio

(per 100 people 
ages 15–64)

Total fertility rate

Young age 

(0–14)

Old age (65 
and older)

(births  
per woman)

Sex ratio 
at birthb

(male to 
female 
births)

2015
85.3
85.6
78.8
72.4
96.3
68.7
84.7
106.0

30.5
..
..
..
..
92.6
75.3
..

26.1
28.7
44.6
72.6

50.8
29.5
33.4
39.4
44.2
78.9
69.1 T
45.4
39.5 T

2015
4.5
4.6
4.3
4.7
4.8
6.7
5.4
5.5

13.8
..
..
..
..
5.6
6.4
..

25.7
12.9
8.1
6.0

6.8
11.8
13.4
11.4
8.1
5.8
6.2 T
11.0
12.5 T

2000/2005

2010/2015c

2010/2015c

6.9
6.4
5.7
5.7
7.2
5.3
6.9
7.7

2.0
..
..
..
..
7.4
5.9
..

1.7
1.8
3.0
5.3

3.6
1.8
2.0
2.5
3.1
5.7
4.9 T
3.1
2.6 T

6.1
5.7
4.7
4.8
6.3
4.4
6.0
7.6

2.0
..
..
..
..
6.6
5.0
..

1.8
1.8
2.6
4.6

3.2
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.6
5.1
4.2 T
2.7
2.5 T

1.03
1.05
1.05
1.02
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.05

1.05
..
..
..
..
1.03
1.04
..

1.05
1.06
1.05
1.04

1.05
1.05
1.07
1.05
1.06
1.03
1.04
1.06
1.07

Includes Kosovo.

k  Includes Nagorno-Karabakh.
l 
m  Includes Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
n  Includes East Jerusalem.
o  Includes Transnistria.
p  Includes Zanzibar
T  From original data source.

DEFINITIONS

Population: De facto population in a country, area 
or region as of 1 July. 

Population under age 5: De facto population in a 
country, area or region under age 5 as of 1 July.

Population ages 65 and older: De facto 
population in a country, area or region ages 65 and 
older as of 1 July.

Population average annual growth rate: 
Average annual exponential growth rate for the 
period specified.

Urban population: De facto population living in 
areas classified as urban according to the criteria 
used by each country or area as of July 1. 

Median age: Age that divides the population 
distribution into two equal parts—that is, 50 percent 
of the population is above that age and 50 percent 
is below it.

Young age dependency ratio: Ratio of the 
population ages 0–14 to the population ages 15–64, 
expressed as the number of dependants per 100 
persons of working age (ages 15–64).

Old age dependency ratio: Ratio of the population 
ages 65 and older to the population ages 15–64, 

expressed as the number of dependants per 100 
people of working age (ages 15–64).

Total fertility rate: Number of children that would 
be born to a woman if she were to live to the end 
of her child-bearing years and bear children at each 
age in accordance with prevailing age-specific 
fertility rates.

Sex ratio at birth: Number of male births per 
female birth.

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1–6 and 8–13: UNDESA 2013a.

Column 7: UNDESA 2013b.

TABLE 15  Population trends    |    219

TABLE15HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceE
L
B
A

16T

Supplementary indicators: perceptions of well-being

Perceptions of individual well-being

Perceptions about community

Perceptions about government

Education 

quality

Health 
care 
quality

Standard 
of living

Job

Safety

Freedom 
of choice

Overall life 
satisfaction 

index

Local 
labour 
market

Trust in 
other 
people

Efforts to 
deal with 
the poor

Actions to 
preserve the 
environment

Trust in 
national 
government

Community

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(0, least 

satisfied, to 10, 
most satisfied)

(% answering 

good)

(% answering 

can be 
trusted)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

2012

2008–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2012a

2007–2012

2007–2012

2007–2012a

2007–2012a

2009–2011a

2007–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2013a

2007–2012a

78
66
77
74
64
60
71
74
85
72
82
65
78
73
46
55
55
..
62
67
72
69
65
81
76
62
63
62
46
..
72
66
51
65
54
60
..
61
64
83
49
67
60
82
..
65
62
54
64

62
..
60
53
53
33
..
39

82
81
94
88
73
86
83
75
84
81
64
81
79
86
54
68
75
..
69
78
93
87
88
65
81
55
74
71
29
..
90
62
45
56
51
42
..
59
70
82
35
57
64
70
..
62
63
48
63

76
..
48
38
52
41
78
27

90
87
94
88
72
90
87
86
80
88
76
90
81
80
79
72
71
..
68
83
95
87
92
82
71
66
80
65
38
..
84
69
43
77
29
66
..
49
63
87
72
52
40
66
..
88
39
32
67

79
..
37
37
36
57
87
42

91
87
93
92
85
91
86
90
88
92
88
90
93
88
81
73
79
..
80
81
93
86
91
91
86
83
86
78
73
..
88
88
78
90
73
83
..
78
80
87
82
83
75
77
..
93
73
77
81

83
..
59
62
70
74
86
70

87
65
78
77
74
79
64
84
89
80
74
81
80
75
88
67
77
..
63
67
82
66
73
77
85
66
78
59
47
..
92
68
61
77
45
68
..
55
72
90
57
60
56
60
..
..
66
58
45

51
..
74
61
54
91
..
39

92
93
94
87
82
90
90
92
82
92
90
93
87
88
87
59
70
..
65
83
90
82
91
91
89
55
74
71
36
..
90
69
65
59
46
75
..
53
82
88
72
73
55
63
..
93
46
51
73

85
..
43
53
60
68
91
51

7.7
7.2
7.8
7.5
7.0
6.7
7.2
7.4
6.5
7.5
7.0
7.6
7.6
6.9
5.5
6.0
6.0
..
7.1
6.6
7.4
6.9
7.0
7.4
6.1
5.8
6.3
6.3
5.1
..
6.7
6.2
5.4
6.5
5.8
5.9
..
5.9
6.0
7.2
6.6
5.0
4.7
5.0
..
6.2
6.0
5.1
6.5

6.4
..
5.2
5.7
5.2
5.8
6.9
5.6

54
27
35
14
28
46
29
43
63
18
6
32
33
9
46
25
16
..
26
16
35
19
18
24
9
3
5
11
1
..
66
11
18
73
14
18
..
8
19
47
57
7
7
44
..
69
5
17
34

56
..
7
26
9
49
69
26

..
..
44
46
37
31
..
42
33
60
30
55
..
35
29
26
33
..
26
20
29
30
26
58
15
20
22
24
16
..
23
11
33
36
25
25
..
21
16
18
15
27
13
11
..
11
16
13
23

27
..
21
34
15
..
..
24

92
90
94
93
85
94
89
91
92
94
90
94
75
88
82
79
85
..
79
86
94
91
94
92
92
75
88
84
80
..
92
85
85
93
84
90
..
83
82
93
82
88
74
90
..
93
75
85
82

82
..
69
82
82
72
90
72

34
45
67
63
43
50
53
45
66
57
52
30
34
51
38
33
33
..
14
44
54
45
72
42
44
30
42
21
7
..
91
39
8
80
18
22
..
22
47
85
35
29
17
57
..
89
9
12
34

58
..
9
26
8
56
..
12

52
69
74
66
59
67
77
60
84
70
63
57
55
71
38
33
41
..
42
53
61
58
76
57
58
32
41
52
17
..
91
49
54
56
42
47
..
42
64
89
38
43
45
57
..
78
40
55
42

58
..
35
45
23
37
..
17

66
42
77
57
35
52
61
52
83
53
35
63
26
42
50
23
17
..
34
44
38
44
74
60
24
28
34
17
13
..
89
34
27
..
15
27
..
37
50
..
34
23
21
..
..
..
31
19
42

58
..
36
59
24
..
..
45

HDI rank
VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Switzerland
4 Netherlands
5 United States
6 Germany
7 New Zealand
8 Canada
9 Singapore
10 Denmark
11 Ireland
12 Sweden
13 Iceland
14 United Kingdom
15 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
15 Korea (Republic of)
17 Japan
18 Liechtenstein
19 Israel
20 France
21 Austria
21 Belgium
21 Luxembourg
24 Finland
25 Slovenia
26 Italy
27 Spain
28 Czech Republic
29 Greece
30 Brunei Darussalam
31 Qatar
32 Cyprus
33 Estonia
34 Saudi Arabia
35 Lithuania
35 Poland
37 Andorra
37 Slovakia
39 Malta
40 United Arab Emirates
41 Chile
41 Portugal
43 Hungary
44 Bahrain
44 Cuba
46 Kuwait
47 Croatia
48 Latvia
49 Argentina
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
50 Uruguay
51 Bahamas
51 Montenegro
53 Belarus
54 Romania
55 Libya
56 Oman
57 Russian Federation

220    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Perceptions of individual well-being

Perceptions about community

Perceptions about government

Education 

quality

Health 
care 
quality

Standard 
of living

Job

Safety

Freedom 
of choice

Overall life 
satisfaction 

index

Local 
labour 
market

Trust in 
other 
people

Efforts to 
deal with 
the poor

Actions to 
preserve the 
environment

Trust in 
national 
government

Community

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(0, least 

satisfied, to 10, 
most satisfied)

(% answering 

good)

(% answering 

can be 
trusted)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

HDI rank
58 Bulgaria
59 Barbados
60 Palau
61 Antigua and Barbuda
62 Malaysia
63 Mauritius
64 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Lebanon
65 Panama
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
68 Costa Rica
69 Turkey
70 Kazakhstan
71 Mexico
71 Seychelles
73 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Sri Lanka
75 Iran (Islamic Republic of)
76 Azerbaijan
77 Jordan
77 Serbia
79 Brazil
79 Georgia
79 Grenada
82 Peru
83 Ukraine
84 Belize
84 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
86 Bosnia and Herzegovina
87 Armenia
88 Fiji
89 Thailand
90 Tunisia
91 China
91 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
93 Algeria
93 Dominica
95 Albania
96 Jamaica
97 Saint Lucia
98 Colombia
98 Ecuador
100 Suriname
100 Tonga
102 Dominican Republic
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
103 Maldives
103 Mongolia
103 Turkmenistan
106 Samoa
107 Palestine, State of
108 Indonesia
109 Botswana
110 Egypt
111 Paraguay
112 Gabon
113 Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
114 Moldova (Republic of)
115 El Salvador

2012
45
..
..
..
91
..
..
63
68
77
83
55
59
62
..
..
80
61
50
61
50
52
67
..
53
44
..
62
54
52
..
91
44
62
..
64
..
60
..
..
65
76
82
..
72

..
55
..
..
67
82
68
40
76
36
70
55
78

2008–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2012a

2007–2012

2007–2012

2007–2012a

2007–2012a

2009–2011a

2007–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2013a

2007–2012a

39
..
..
..
87
77
63
46
61
64
65
60
47
71
..
..
78
52
34
72
43
25
48
..
37
18
..
47
42
40
..
88
32
65
..
52
..
38
58
..
46
60
78
..
59

..
40
64
..
62
80
56
35
69
29
48
40
67

29
..
..
..
75
64
71
45
79
79
75
55
64
78
..
..
60
67
49
46
34
77
24
..
60
24
69
39
32
30
..
83
54
73
..
66
..
48
42
..
75
69
64
..
63

..
59
89
..
47
63
36
63
86
29
71
45
72

74
..
..
..
83
85
90
63
89
89
85
71
75
76
..
..
84
67
66
69
65
83
50
..
74
67
..
60
59
50
..
97
63
72
..
72
..
68
68
..
82
84
83
..
70

..
81
86
..
64
77
52
71
89
50
85
64
80

59
..
..
..
45
55
69
62
48
26
53
55
51
54
..
..
77
55
69
81
62
46
91
..
46
46
43
63
65
78
..
74
59
82
..
53
..
59
56
..
45
47
60
..
39

..
46
77
..
63
89
35
57
44
35
40
46
53

59
..
..
..
82
83
77
61
73
78
92
45
75
77
..
..
77
57
54
65
45
80
60
..
66
49
62
58
40
46
..
83
53
77
..
56
..
58
75
..
81
81
87
..
83

..
59
63
..
53
70
79
44
75
56
85
55
67

4.2
..
..
..
5.9
5.5
6.5
4.6
6.9
7.1
7.3
5.3
5.8
7.3
..
..
4.2
4.6
4.9
5.1
5.2
6.9
4.3
..
5.8
5.0
6.5
4.6
4.8
4.3
..
6.3
4.5
5.1
..
5.6
..
5.5
5.4
..
6.4
6.0
6.3
..
4.8

..
4.9
5.5
..
4.6
5.4
4.8
4.2
5.8
4.0
6.0
6.0
5.9

6
..
..
..
44
38
46
13
57
57
26
32
38
43
..
..
50
22
27
13
3
56
12
..
43
15
44
8
5
12
..
73
22
38
..
53
..
12
20
..
41
35
34
..
21

..
12
57
..
8
38
32
10
60
35
50
6
35

20
..
..
..
14
..
..
7
21
13
14
8
33
29
..
..
17
..
27
9
17
15
16
..
12
29
..
11
18
15
..
27
15
57
..
16
..
7
..
..
14
9
..
..
15

..
14
27
..
9
21
9
25
12
..
10
12
18

77
..
..
..
83
91
87
81
87
81
85
78
80
79
..
..
90
76
73
74
65
74
77
..
72
76
67
65
66
55
..
95
71
80
..
83
..
71
72
..
83
84
90
..
81

..
76
94
..
76
90
61
63
92
45
84
73
85

9
..
..
..
70
..
34
19
37
60
40
41
32
41
..
..
58
58
22
51
10
43
36
..
37
8
20
16
6
14
..
67
30
68
..
41
..
13
21
..
34
59
61
..
46

..
16
38
..
39
28
74
31
33
26
56
18
43

33
..
..
..
72
79
44
27
46
63
72
45
40
53
..
..
70
61
48
47
25
46
53
..
40
18
30
37
19
32
..
75
38
72
..
48
..
27
32
..
49
67
65
..
57

..
22
61
..
40
54
67
20
46
49
58
19
50

34
..
..
..
76
67
52
37
36
54
28
53
73
36
..
..
78
56
71
77
22
46
61
..
27
24
26
37
19
29
..
70
44
..
..
53
..
36
36
..
36
64
72
..
43

..
31
..
..
47
67
66
60
30
36
44
21
31

TABLE 16  Supplementary indicators: perceptions of well-being    |    221

TABLE16HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResiliencePerceptions of individual well-being

Perceptions about community

Perceptions about government

Education 

quality

Health 
care 
quality

Standard 
of living

Job

Safety

Freedom 
of choice

Overall life 
satisfaction 

index

Local 
labour 
market

Trust in 
other 
people

Efforts to 
deal with 
the poor

Actions to 
preserve the 
environment

Trust in 
national 
government

Community

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(0, least 

satisfied, to 10, 
most satisfied)

(% answering 

good)

(% answering 

can be 
trusted)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

2012
83
83
67
43
50
..
83
..
..
74
64
..
..
64
41
..
83
..
76
69
..
92
59
73
56
54
84
..
..

79
59
69
..
..
69
76
67
55
35
50
62
..
..
49
35
30
..
31
48
52
38
..
39
64
..
..
..
..

2008–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2012a

2007–2012

2007–2012

2007–2012a

2007–2012a

2009–2011a

2007–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2013a

2007–2012a

86
83
46
30
30
..
59
..
..
49
53
..
..
49
25
..
65
..
68
48
..
83
46
66
38
50
63
..
..

56
43
57
58
30
54
65
48
47
19
35
58
..
..
24
28
30
21
42
41
44
28
23
24
43
49
21
..
..

64
70
43
38
45
64
68
..
..
66
62
61
..
56
74
..
71
..
81
47
..
49
35
73
42
34
74
..
..

57
58
33
45
50
45
30
43
49
47
18
48
..
..
38
40
43
27
37
38
20
44
16
17
31
63
17
..
..

89
83
55
53
60
..
82
..
..
85
69
..
..
82
68
..
85
..
84
67
..
84
63
85
63
54
80
..
..

85
74
50
55
65
71
43
63
64
53
48
53
..
..
61
66
56
47
68
59
51
48
42
38
88
70
..
..
..

84
66
27
49
41
47
67
..
..
53
51
33
..
49
56
..
56
..
86
61
..
63
73
75
51
46
81
..
..

61
41
50
42
45
89
86
60
61
65
40
52
..
..
72
58
63
38
57
41
71
68
52
40
39
72
47
..
..

88
91
58
40
29
66
73
..
..
84
66
76
..
69
72
..
84
..
67
57
..
95
68
87
77
78
64
..
..

57
35
61
61
57
65
84
76
63
67
48
46
..
..
53
57
48
62
67
64
77
40
56
43
49
74
76
..
..

6.0
5.0
5.1
3.2
4.7
6.0
5.5
..
..
5.9
5.2
4.9
..
4.6
5.0
..
5.4
..
4.5
4.6
..
3.9
5.1
4.9
3.9
5.0
4.7
..
..

4.2
5.1
4.5
4.9
5.6
4.4
3.3
4.2
5.5
4.1
3.6
5.0
..
..
4.0
4.0
4.7
4.9
3.7
4.3
3.2
4.6
2.9
4.4
3.8
4.4
4.2
..
..

55
65
29
17
40
33
35
..
..
33
38
33
..
31
21
..
40
..
58
30
..
55
29
66
53
32
35
..
..

36
17
34
25
44
32
44
33
31
12
29
33
..
..
30
32
32
21
40
21
27
17
24
17
37
55
25
..
..

26
14
17
9
15
..
26
..
..
15
34
..
..
13
58
..
11
..
31
20
..
9
19
..
..
31
15
..
..

17
20
10
..
..
..
30
13
13
27
..
15
..
..
35
26
30
..
28
17
..
31
..
30
25
55
13
..
..

93
90
54
35
64
75
81
..
..
88
87
77
..
84
77
..
89
..
91
75
..
92
55
94
67
56
90
..
..

84
79
65
62
50
90
60
60
69
71
83
65
..
..
75
60
64
52
64
65
63
63
58
40
70
75
41
..
..

67
82
25
47
8
20
59
..
..
41
35
35
..
32
48
..
53
..
53
39
..
89
22
66
28
27
57
..
..

34
16
26
..
60
51
66
29
15
27
23
36
..
..
17
26
26
..
23
21
25
22
10
15
20
55
8
..
..

82
87
42
44
15
34
50
..
..
49
44
58
..
47
51
..
67
..
58
40
..
92
44
90
61
41
60
..
..

45
19
51
56
42
50
90
53
35
21
36
58
..
..
39
36
37
23
40
44
46
26
46
38
43
58
32
..
..

..
76
43
..
34
46
86
..
..
50
51
82
..
26
45
..
57
..
92
54
..
83
58
98
54
59
71
..
..

44
23
40
35
23
..
95
53
30
60
35
41
..
..
46
41
38
40
65
40
58
54
51
37
44
68
42
..
..

HDI rank
116 Uzbekistan
117 Philippines
118 South Africa
118 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Iraq
121 Guyana
121 Viet Nam
123 Cape Verde
124 Micronesia (Federated States of)
125 Guatemala
125 Kyrgyzstan
127 Namibia
128 Timor-Leste
129 Honduras
129 Morocco
131 Vanuatu
132 Nicaragua
133 Kiribati
133 Tajikistan
135 India
136 Bhutan
136 Cambodia
138 Ghana
139 Lao People's Democratic Republic
140 Congo
141 Zambia
142 Bangladesh
142 Sao Tome and Principe
144 Equatorial Guinea
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
145 Nepal
146 Pakistan
147 Kenya
148 Swaziland
149 Angola
150 Myanmar
151 Rwanda
152 Cameroon
152 Nigeria
154 Yemen
155 Madagascar
156 Zimbabwe
157 Papua New Guinea
157 Solomon Islands
159 Comoros
159 Tanzania (United Republic of)
161 Mauritania
162 Lesotho
163 Senegal
164 Uganda
165 Benin
166 Sudan
166 Togo
168 Haiti
169 Afghanistan
170 Djibouti
171 Côte d'Ivoire
172 Gambia
173 Ethiopia

222    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

TABLE 16 SUPPLEMENTARY INDICATORS: PERCEPTIONS OF WELL-BEINGTABLE16Perceptions of individual well-being

Perceptions about community

Perceptions about government

Education 

quality

Health 
care 
quality

Standard 
of living

Job

Safety

Freedom 
of choice

Overall life 
satisfaction 

index

Local 
labour 
market

Trust in 
other 
people

Efforts to 
deal with 
the poor

Actions to 
preserve the 
environment

Trust in 
national 
government

Community

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(0, least 

satisfied, to 10, 
most satisfied)

(% answering 

good)

(% answering 

can be 
trusted)

(% answering 

yes)

(% satisfied)

(% satisfied)

(% answering 

yes)

2012
66
..
35
..
..
22
..
66
..
..
58
..
40
47

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

63
60
71
..

48
..
57
..
69
..
..
..
64

2008–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2012a

2007–2012

2007–2012

2007–2012a

2007–2012a

2009–2011a

2007–2012a 2007–2013a 2007–2013a

2007–2012a

64
32
31
..
47
21
41
42
..
34
47
23
32
37

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

72
58
54
42

39
..
50
47
49
42
45
..
57

37
43
26
..
38
20
26
35
..
32
42
34
42
57

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

50
63
60
..
63
49
65
56
..
61
71
67
55
72

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

84
74
71
64

68
..
71
80
70
59
67
..
74

49
43
67
..
42
50
65
70
..
50
33
60
48
86

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

72
68
65
55

60
..
60
47
60
53
62
..
66

64
87
70
..
64
64
49
62
..
77
56
78
54
73

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

77
73
62
56

53
..
56
77
55
63
62
..
68

4.3
4.2
4.3
..
5.0
3.7
3.7
4.0
..
4.5
4.0
3.7
4.6
3.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.6
5.5
4.8
4.6

4.8
..
5.3
6.6
4.6
4.6
4.3
..
5.3

32
53
31
..
45
46
17
27
..
30
37
36
35
45

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

33
12
45
..
..
..
38
26
..
16
21
37
39
40

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

31
..
..
..

25
..
21
..
20
..
..
..
30

78
63
60
..
83
64
76
78
..
52
68
76
60
77

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

86
79
78
70

71
..
79
78
77
65
74
..
78

47
17
13
..
35
10
27
23
..
11
19
27
27
34

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

41
55
41
24

39
..
33
41
39
24
37
..
44

61
34
42
..
55
43
71
61
..
46
67
69
40
57

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

53
60
46
39

36
..
43
49
41
44
49
..
51

47
53
49
..
63
56
85
62
..
58
30
78
44
53

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

36
48
59
40

..
..
47
42
52
44
55
..
48

HDI rank
174 Malawi
175 Liberia
176 Mali
177 Guinea-Bissau
178 Mozambique
179 Guinea
180 Burundi
181 Burkina Faso
182 Eritrea
183 Sierra Leone
184 Chad
185 Central African Republic
186 Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
187 Niger
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
South Sudan
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

NOTES
a  Data refer to the most recent year available 

during the period specified.

DEFINITIONS

Satisfaction with education quality: Percentage 
of respondents who answered “satisfied” to the 
Gallup World Poll question, “Are you satisfied or 
dissatisfied with the education system?”

Satisfaction with health care quality: 
Percentage of respondents who answered 
“satisfied” to the Gallup World Poll question, “Are 
you satisfied or dissatisfied with the availability of 
quality health care?”

Satisfaction with standard of living: Percentage 
of respondents answering “satisfied” to the 
Gallup World Poll question, “Are you satisfied or 
dissatisfied with your standard of living, all the 
things you can buy and do?”

 

Satisfaction with job: Percentage of respondents 
answering “satisfied” to the Gallup World Poll 
question, “Are you satisfied or dissatisfied with 
your job?”

Perception of safety: Percentage of respondents 
answering “yes” to the Gallup World Poll question, 
“Do you feel safe walking alone at night in the city 
or area where you live?”

Satisfaction with freedom of choice: Percentage 
of respondents answering “satisfied” to the Gallup 
World Poll question, “In this country, are you 
satisfied or dissatisfied with your freedom to choose 
what you do with your life?”

Overall life satisfaction index: Average response 
to the Gallup World Poll question: “Please imagine a 
ladder, with steps numbered from zero at the bottom 
to ten at the top. Suppose we say that the top of 
the ladder represents the best possible life for you, 
and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst 

possible life for you. On which step of the ladder 
would you say you personally feel you stand at this 
time, assuming that the higher the step the better 
you feel about your life, and the lower the step the 
worse you feel about it? Which step comes closest 
to the way you feel?”

Satisfaction with local labour market: 
Percentage of respondents answering “good” to 
Gallup World Poll question, “Thinking about the job 
situation in the city or area where you live today, 
would you say that it is now a good time or a bad 
time to find a job?”

Trust in other people: Percentage of respondents 
answering “can be trusted” to the Gallup World Poll 
question, “Generally speaking, would you say that 
most people can be trusted or that you have to be 
careful in dealing with people?”

Satisfaction with community: Percentage of 
respondents answering “yes” to the Gallup World 

Poll question, “Are you satisfied or dissatisfied with 
the city or area where you live?”

Satisfaction with efforts to deal with the 
poor: Percentage of respondents who answered 
“satisfied” to Gallup World Poll question, “In this 
country, are you satisfied or dissatisfied with efforts 
to deal with the poor?”

Satisfaction with actions to preserve the 
environment: Percentage of respondents answering 
“satisfied” to Gallup World Poll question: “In this 
country, are you satisfied or dissatisfied with the 
efforts to preserve the environment?”

Trust in national government: Percentage 
of respondents answering “yes” to the Gallup 
World Poll question, “In this country, do you have 
confidence in the national government?”

MAIN DATA SOURCES

Columns 1–13: Gallup 2013.

TABLE 16  Supplementary indicators: perceptions of well-being    |    223

TABLE16HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014Sustaining Human Progress Reducing Vulnerabilities and Building ResilienceRegions

Arab States (20 countries or territories)
Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, State of Palestine, Oman, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen

East Asia and the Pacific (24 countries)
Cambodia, China, Fiji, Indonesia, Kiribati, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 
Malaysia, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, 
Philippines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Viet Nam

Europe and Central Asia (17 countries)
Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Moldova, 
Montenegro, Serbia, Tajikistan, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan

Latin America and the Caribbean (33 countries)
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, 
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, 
Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

South Asia (9 countries)
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa (46 countries)
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, 
Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, 
Nigeria, Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, South Sudan, Swaziland, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Note: Countries included in aggregates for Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States follow UN classifications, which are available at www.unohrlls.org.

224    |    HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2014

Statistical references

Aguna, C., and M. Kovacevic. 2011. “Uncertainty and Sensi-
tivity Analysis of the Human Development Index.” Human 
Development Research Paper 2010/47. UNDP–HDRO, 
New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/ uncertainty-
and-sensitivity-analysis-human-development-index.

Alkire, S.,  A. Conconi, and S. Seth. 2014. “Multi-

dimensional Poverty Index 2014: Brief Methodological 
Note and Results.” Oxford Poverty and Human Develop-
ment Initiative, Oxford University, UK.

Akire, S., and M. Santos. 2010. “Acute Multidimension-

al Poverty: A New Index for Developing  Countries.” 
Human Development Research Paper 2010/11. 
UNDP-HDRO. New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/
acute-multidimensional-poverty.

Barro, R.J., and J.W. Lee. 2013. A New Data Set of Edu-
cational Attainment in the World, 1950–2010. National 
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15902. Cam-
bridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. www.
nber.org/papers/w15902. Accessed 15 November 2013.
CEPII (Centre d’Etudes Prospectives et d’Informations 
Internationales). 2013. GeoDist. www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/
bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=6. Accessed 15 Novem-
ber 2013.

CRED EM-DAT (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology 
of Disasters). 2013. The International Disaster Database. 
www.emdat.be. Accessed 15 November 2013.

ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean). 2013. Preliminary Overview of the Economies 
of Latin America and the Caribbean. Santiago. www.eclac.
org/cgi-bin/getProd.asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/4/41974/
P41974.xml. Accessed 15 November 2013.

Eurostat. 2013. “European Union Statistics on Income and 

Living Conditions (EUSILC)”. Brussels. http://epp.eurostat.
ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/microdata/eu_silc. 
Accessed 15 September 2013.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2013a. FAOSTAT 
database. http://faostat3.fao.org/faostat-gateway/go/to/
home/E. Accessed 15 November 2013.

———. 2013b. AQUASTAT database. www.fao.org/nr/
water/aquastat/data. Accessed 15 December 2013. 

Gallup. 2013. Gallup World Poll database. http://worldview.

gallup.com. Accessed 15 December 2013.

Høyland, B., K. Moene, and F. Willumsen. 2011. “The Tyr-

anny of International Index Rankings.” Journal of Develop-
ment Economics 97(1): 1–14.

ICF Macro. Various years. The DHS Program. www.

dhsprogram.com. Accessed 15 November 2013.

IDMC (Internally Displaced Monitoring Centre). 2013. 

IDPs worldwide. www.internal-displacement.org. 
Accessed 15 December 2013.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2013a. Key Indica-

tors of the Labour Market. 7th edition. Geneva. www.ilo.
org/empelm/what/WCMS_114240/lang--en/index.htm. 
Accessed 15 December 2013.

———. 2013b. LABORSTA database. http://laborsta.ilo.org. 

Accessed 15 November 2013.

———. 2014a. Social Protection Department database. 

www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/RessourceDownload 

.action?ressource.ressourceId=37897. Accessed 15 Feb-
ruary 2014

———. 2014b. ILOSTAT database. www.ilo.org/ilostat. 

Accessed 15 February 2014.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2014. World Econom-
ic Outlook database. April 2014. www.imf.org/external/
pubs/ft/weo/2014/01/weodata/index.aspx. Accessed 
7 May 2014.

Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation. 

2013. Child mortality estimates. www.childmortality.org. 
Accessed 15 December 2013.

International Centre for Prison Studies. 2013. World  prison 

brief. www.prisonstudies.org. Accessed 15 September 
2013.

IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union). 2013. Women in national 
parliaments. www.ipu.org/wmn-e/classif.htm. Accessed 
15 October 2013.

ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2013. 

World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators database. www.
itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics. Accessed 15 August 2013.

UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2011. Global Education 

Digest 2011. Montreal.

———. 2012. Global Education Digest 2012. Montreal.
———. 2013a. Data Centre. http://stats.uis.unesco.org. 

Accessed 15 May 2013.

———. 2013b. Data Centre. http://stats.uis.unesco.org. 

Accessed 15 December 2013.

UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Com-
mission for Western Asia). 2013. Survey of Economic 
and Social Developments in Western Asia, 2012–2013. 
Beirut. www.escwa.un.org/information/pubaction.asp 
?PubID=1370. Accessed 15 November 2013.

UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refu-
gees). 2013. Correspondence on refugees, September 
2013. Geneva.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2014. The 
State of the World’s Children 2014 in Numbers: Every 
Child Counts: Revealing Disparities, Advancing Children’s 
Rights. New York. www.unicef.org/sowc2014/numbers. 
Accessed 15 April 2014.

LIS (Luxembourg Income Study). 2013. Luxembourg Income 
Study Project. www.lisdatacenter.org/our-data/lis-database/. 
Accessed 15 September 2013.

———. Various years. Multiple Indicators Cluster Surveys. 
New York. www.unicef.org/statistics/index_24302.html. 
Accessed November 2013.

National Institute for Educational Studies of Brazil. 2013. 

Correspondence on school life expectancy. Brasilia.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development). 2013. PISA 2012 results. www.oecd.
org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-results.htm. Accessed 
15 December 2013.

Palma, J.G. 2011. “Homogeneous Middles vs. Heteroge-
neous Tails, and the End of the ‘Inverted-U’: The Share 
of the Rich Is What It’s All About.” Cambridge Working 
Papers in Economics 1111. Cambridge University, UK. 
www.econ.cam.ac.uk/dae/repec/cam/pdf/cwpe1111.pdf. 
Accessed 15 September 2013.

Salomon, J.A., H. Wang, M.K. Freeman, T. Vos, A.D. Flax-
man, A.D. Lopez, and C.J.L. Murray. 2012. “Healthy Life 
Expectancy for 187 Countries, 1990–2010: A Systemat-
ic Analysis for the Global Burden Disease Study 2010.” 
 Lancet 380(9859): 2144–62.

Samoa Bureau of Statistics. n.d. Census tables. www.sbs.

gov.ws. Accessed 15 November 2013.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs). 2011. World Population Prospects: The 
2010 Revision. New York. www.un.org/en/development/
desa/population/publications/trends/population 
-prospects_2010_revision.shtml. Accessed 15 October 
2013.

———. 2013a. World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revi-
sion. New York. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp. Accessed 
15 October 2013.

———. 2013b. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2011 
Revision. New York. http://esa.un.org/unup/CD-ROM/
Urban-Rural-Population.htm. Accessed 15 October 2013.
———. 2013c. Trends in International Migrant Stock: The 
2013 Revision. New York. http://esa.un.org/unmigration/
migrantstocks2013.htm. Accessed 15 September 2013.

United Nations Statistics Division. 2013. National report-
ing of household characteristics, living arrangements and 
homeless households. www.un.org/en/development/
desa/policy/cdp/ldc/ldc_data.shtml. Accessed 15 Novem-
ber 2013.

———. 2014.  National Accounts Main Aggregate Database. 

http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama. Accessed 7 May 
2014.

UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). 
2013. Homicide statistics. www.unodc.org/unodc/en/
data-and-analysis/homicide.html. Accessed 15 Novem-
ber 2013. 

WHO (World Health Organization). 2013a. Global Health 
Observatory. www.who.int/entity/gho/mortality_burden_ 
disease/mortality_adult/en/. Accessed 15 September 
2013.

———. 2013b. Global Health Expenditure database. http://
apps.who.int/nha/database. Accessed 15 November 2013.

———. 2013c. Mental health. www.who.int/gho/mental_

health. Accessed 15 November 2013.

WHO (World Health Organization), UNICEF (United 
Nations Children’s Fund), UNFPA (United Nations 
Population Fund) and the World Bank. 2013. Trends 
in estimates of maternal mortality ratio. www.childinfo.
org/maternal_mortality_ratio.php. Accessed 15 Novem-
ber 2013.

World Bank. 2013a. World Development Indicators data-

base. Washington, D.C. http://data.worldbank.org. 
Accessed 15 October 2013.

———. 2013b. “Getting a Job.” http://wbl.worldbank.org/

Data/ExploreTopics/getting-a-job#Parental. Accessed 
15 July 2013.

———. 2014. World Development Indicators database. 
Washington, D.C. http://data.worldbank.org. Accessed 
7 May 2014.

Statistical references    |    225

Countries and HDI ranks in 2013 and change in rank from 2012 to 2013

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo (Democratic Republic of the)
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia

169
95
93
37
149
61
49
87
2
21
76
51
44
142
59
53
21
84
165
136
113
86
109
79
30
58
181
180
136
152
8
123
185
184
41
91
98
159
140
186
68
171
47
44
32
28
10
170
93
102
98
110
115
144
182
33
173
88
24
20
112
172

2

–1

–1

1
–1
1

–1
1

1

–2

–1
1
2

–1

1
–1

–1

–2

–3

–1

Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea (Republic of)
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People's Democratic Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Moldova (Republic of)
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria

79
6
138
29
79
125
179
177
121
168
129
15
43
13
135
108
75
120
11
19
26
96
17
77
70
147
133
15
46
125
139
48
65
162
175
55
18
35
21
155
174
62
103
176
39
161
63
71
124
114
103
51
129
178
150
127
145
4
7
132
187
152

2

–1

–1

–2

–3

–3
–1

1
–2
1

1

–5
–2
1

–2

–1

2
3
1
2
1

–1
1

Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestine, State of
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania (United Republic of)
Thailand
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1
56
146
60
107
65
157
111
82
117
35
41
31
54
57
151
73
97
91
106
142
34
163
77
71
183
9
37
25
157
118
27
73
166
100
148
12
3
118
133
159
89
84
128
166
100
64
90
69
103
164
83
40
14
5
50
116
131
67
121
154
141
156

2
–1

1
–1

1

–4

–2
–1

–3
1
–1
1
3
1

1

2

1

–1

–4
1
1

1
1
1

1

2

–3
–1

2
4

Note: Positive or negative values in the rightmost column indicate the number of positions upward or downward in the country’s ranking over 2012–2013 using consistent data and methodology; 
a blank indicates no change.

United Nations Development Programme
One United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017

ISBN 978-92-1-126368-8 

www.undp.org

Empowered lives. 
Resilient nations. 

More  than  200  million  people  a  year,  most  of  them 
in  developing  countries,  are  affected  by  natural 
disasters. The number of people displaced by conflict 
or persecution—45 million by the end of 2012—is the 
highest  in  18  years.  Economic  setbacks  threaten  to 
undermine social gains even in advanced industrialized 
societies. And in addition to bringing many benefits, 
globalization has also conveyed new vulnerabilities: 
Shocks  in  one  part  of  the  world  can  spread  rapidly, 
impacting people’s lives everywhere. 

This Report highlights the need for both promoting 
people’s choices and protecting human development 
achievements. It stresses the importance of identifying 
and addressing persistent vulnerabilities by building 
resilience and enhancing people’s capability to cope 
with shocks—financial, natural or otherwise. 

Although almost everyone is likely to feel vulnerable 
at some point in life, some individuals and groups are 
systematically worse off. Almost 1.5 billion people are 
multidimensionally poor, with overlapping deprivations 
in  health,  education  and  living  standards.  And  close 

to 800 million people are vulnerable to falling back into 
poverty when setbacks occur. This Report focuses on 
the people at greatest risk and on key underlying drivers 
of vulnerability. It analyses structural causes—social 
marginalization,  position  in  society  and  insufficient 
public services—and pays attention to the different 
vulnerabilities faced at different stages of the life cycle.

Hazards  and  shocks  will  inevitably  occur,  but 
measures can be taken to contain how far these events 
reduce human development. This Report argues that 
most shocks and setbacks can be overcome with the 
right  policies  and  a  stronger  commitment  to  social 
cohesion.  Early  detection  mechanisms  and  modest 
investments at the right time can often considerably 
reduce  vulnerability  and  build  resilience.  A  human 
development approach is therefore incomplete unless 
it  incorporates  vulnerability  and  resilience  into 
the  analysis.  Identifying  and  targeting  vulnerable 
groups, reducing inequality and addressing structural 
vulnerabilities  are  essential  to  yield  robust  and 
sustainable human progress across generations.

“By addressing vulnerabilities, all people may share in development progress, and human development will become increasingly 
equitable and sustainable.” 
—United Nations Development Programme Administrator Helen Clark

“Vulnerability has multiple causes and consequences. Reducing vulnerability is a key ingredient in any agenda for 
improving human development. But if we are to succeed in reducing vulnerability, we need to approach it from a broad 
systemic perspective.” 
—Nobel Laureate Joseph Stiglitz, from chapter 4

“Human resilience is about removing the barriers that hold people back in their freedom to act. It is also about enabling 
disadvantaged and excluded groups to express their concerns, to be heard and to be active agents in shaping their 
—Report lead author Khalid Malik, from chapter 1
destiny.” 

“Despite great and varied progress, vulnerable people and vulnerable groups remain—none more so than the disabled. The 
United Nations estimates that more than a billion people live with some form of disability, and they are disproportionately 
represented among the world’s poorest.”

—Professor Stephen Hawking, from chapter 1

