KEY TO COUNTRIES
2011 HDI rank and change in rank from 2005 to 2011

172
70 ࢏ 1
96
32
148
60 ࢏ 1
45 ࢏ 1
86
2
19
91
53
42
146
47
65
18
93 ࢑ –1
167
141 ࢑ –1
108
74
118 ࢑ –1
84 ࢏ 1
33
55 ࢏ 1
181
185
139 ࢏ 2
150 ࢏ 1

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia, Plurinational State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 78 ࢑ –2
France
Gabon
Gambia

6
133
179
183 ࢑ –1
44
101
87 ࢏ 1
163
137
187
69 ࢑ –1
170
46 ࢑ –1
51
31
27
16
165 ࢑ –1
81 ࢑ –1
98 ࢏ 2
83
113 ࢑ –1
105
136 ࢑ –1
177
34
174
100 ࢑ –3
22

20
106
168

Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

75
9

135 ࢏ 1
29
67
131
178
176
117 ࢏ 2
158 ࢏ 1
121 ࢑ –1
13 ࢏ 1
38
14 ࢑ –1
134
124 ࢏ 1
88 ࢑ –1
132
7
17
24
79 ࢑ –1
12
95 ࢑ –1
68 ࢏ 1
143 ࢏ 1
122
15
63 ࢑ –1
126
138 ࢏ 1
43
71 ࢑ –1
160
182 ࢏ 1
64 ࢑ –10
8
40 ࢏ 1
25
151 ࢑ –2
171
61 ࢏ 3
109
175
36
159 ࢑ –1
77
57
116
111
110
54 ࢏ 1
130
184
149 ࢏ 1
120 ࢏ 1
157 ࢑ –1

3
5
129
186
156 ࢏ 1

1

Occupied Palestinian Territory
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania, United Republic of
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1

࢏

114
89
145
49
58 ࢏ 1
153 ࢑ –1
107
80 ࢏ 1
112 ࢏ 1
39
41 ࢑ –1
37
50
66
166
72
82
85 ࢑ –1
99
144 ࢑ –1
56 ࢏
2
155
59
52
180
26
35
21
142
123 ࢏ 1
23
97 ࢏ 1
169
104
140 ࢑ –2
10
11
119 ࢑ –1
127
152 ࢏ 1
103
147
162
90
62 ࢏ 1
94 ࢑ –1
92 ࢏ 3
102
161
76 ࢏ 3
30
28
4
48
115
125 ࢑ –2
73
128
154
164 ࢏ 1
173

NOTE
Arrows indicate upward or downward movement in the country’s ranking over 2005–2011 using consistent data and methodology; a blank indicates no change.

The great development challenge of the 21st century is to safeguard the right of generations today and in the future to 
live healthy and fulﬁlling lives. The 2011 Human Development Report offers important new contributions to the global 
dialogue on this challenge, showing how sustainability is inextricably linked to equity—to questions of fairness and 
social justice and of greater access to a better quality of life. 

Forecasts suggest that continuing failure to reduce the grave environmental risks and deepening inequalities threat-
ens to slow decades of sustained progress by the world’s poor majority—and even to reverse the global convergence 
in human development. Our remarkable progress in human development cannot continue without bold global steps to 
reduce both environmental risks and inequality. This Report identiﬁes pathways for people, local communities, coun-
tries and the international community to promote environmental sustainability and equity in mutually reinforcing ways.

New analysis shows how power imbalances and gender inequalities at the national level are linked to reduced access 
to clean water and improved sanitation, land degradation and illness and death due to air pollution, amplifying the 
effects associated with income disparities. Gender inequalities also interact with environmental outcomes and make 
them  worse.  At  the  global  level  governance  arrangements  often  weaken  the  voices  of  developing  countries  and 
exclude marginalized groups.

But there are alternatives to inequality and unsustainability. Investments that improve equity—for example, in access 
to  renewable  energy,  water  and  sanitation,  and  reproductive  healthcare—could  advance  both  sustainability  and 
human  development.  Stronger  accountability  and  democratic  processes  can  also  improve  outcomes.  Successful 
approaches rely on community management, broadly inclusive institutions and attention to disadvantaged groups. 
Beyond  the  Millennium  Development  Goals,  the  world  needs  a  development  framework  that  reﬂects  equity  and 
sustainability.  This  Report  shows  that  approaches  that  integrate  equity  into  policies  and  programmes  and  that 
empower people to bring about change in the legal and political arenas hold enormous promise. 

The ﬁnancing needed for development are many times greater than current ofﬁcial development assistance. Today’s 
spending on low-carbon energy sources, for example, is less than 2 percent of even the lowest estimate of need. 
Financing ﬂows need to be channeled towards the critical challenges of unsustainability and inequity. While market 
mechanisms and private funding will be vital, they must be supported and leveraged by proactive public investment. 
Closing the ﬁnancing gap requires innovative thinking, which this Report provides.

The Report also advocates reforms to promote equity and voice. We have a collective responsibility towards the least 
privileged among us today and in the future around the world—and a moral imperative to ensure that the present is 
not the enemy of the future. This Report can help us see the ways forward. 

ISBN 978-0-230-36331-1

www.palgrave.com

Human Development
Report 2011
Sustainability and Equity:
A Better Future for All

 

H
D
R
2
0
1
1

 
 

S
u
s
t
a
i

n
a
b

 

i
l
i
t
y
a
n
d
E
q
u

 

i
t
y

:

 

A
B
e
t
t
e
r
 

F
u
t
u
r
e

 
f
o
r
 
A

l
l

GREATEST

E Q UITY
E Q UITY

S
S

U
U

S
S

T
T

Human capabilities
supported equitably

and sustainably

A
A
I
I
N
N

A
A

B
B
I
I
L
L
I
I
T
T

Y
Y

Sustainable
Sustainable

but not equitable
but not equitable

LEAST

Equitable
Equitable,

but not sustainable
but not sustainable

LEAST

Unsustainable
Unsustainable
and inequitable
and inequitable

This Report explores the integral links between environmental sustainability and equity and shows that these 
are critical to expanding human freedoms for people today and in generations to come. The point of departure 
is that the remarkable progress in human development over recent decades that the Human Development 
Report  has  documented  cannot  continue  without  bold  global  steps  to  reduce  environmental  risks  and 
inequality.  We  identify  pathways  for  people,  communities,  countries  and  the  international  community  to 
promote environmental sustainability and equity in mutually reinforcing ways.

The cover diagram symbolizes how different policies can have different implications for sustainability and 
equity. Whenever available, we should prefer solutions that are good for the environment while also promot-
ing equity and human development. Pursuing sustainability and equity jointly does not require that they be 
mutually reinforcing. In many instances they will not be. Sometimes the most feasible alternative involves 
trade-offs between sustainability and equity and requires explicit and careful consideration. No trade-off is 
isolated  from  a  society’s  structural  and  institutional  conditions,  and  so  we  must  address  the  underlying 
constraints and identify positive synergies between sustainability and equity. This Report is aimed not only at 
ﬁnding positive synergies but also at identifying ways to build them.

Global, Regional and National Human Development reports
Human Development Reports: (cid:31)e annual global Human Development Reports (HDRs) have been published by UNDP 
since 1990 as intellectually independent and empirically grounded analyses of development issues, trends, progress and 
policies. Resources related to the 2011 Report and earlier HDRs are available free of charge at hdr.undp.org, including full 
texts and summaries in major UN languages, summaries of consultations and network discussions, the Human Develop-
ment Research Paper Series and HDR news bulletins and other public information materials. Also available are statistical 
indicators, other data tools, interactive maps, country fact sheets and additional information associated with the HDRs.

Regional Human Development Reports: More than 40 editorially autonomous HDRs with a regional focus have been 
produced in the past two decades with support from UNDP’s regional bureaus. With o(cid:30)en provocative analyses and 
policy advocacy, these reports have examined such critical issues as civil liberties and the empowerment of women in the 
Arab States, corruption in Asia and the Paci(cid:29)c, treatment of the Roma and other minorities in Central Europe and the 
inequitable distribution of wealth in Latin America and the Caribbean.

National Human Development Reports: Since the release of the (cid:29)rst National HDR in 1992, National HDRs have been 
produced  in  140  countries  by  local  editorial  teams  with  UNDP  support.  (cid:31)ese  reports—more  than  650  have  been 
published to date—bring a human development perspective to national policy concerns through locally managed consul-
tations and research. National HDRs o(cid:30)en focus on issues of gender, ethnicity or rural-urban divides to help identify 
inequality, measure progress and detect early warning signs of potential con(cid:28)ict. Because these reports are grounded in 
national needs and perspectives, many have had substantial in(cid:28)uence on national policies, including strategies for achiev-
ing the Millennium Development Goals and other human development priorities.

For more information on National and Regional HDRs, including related training and reference resources, see
hdr.undp.org/en/nhdr/.

1990  Concept and Measurement of Human Development
1991  Financing Human Development
1992  Global Dimensions of Human Development
1993  People’s Participation
1994  New Dimensions of Human Security
1995  Gender and Human Development
1996  Economic Growth and Human Development
1997  Human Development to Eradicate Poverty
1998  Consumption for Human Development
1999  Globalization with a Human Face
2000  Human Rights and Human Development
2001  Making New Technologies Work for Human Development
2002  Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented World
2003  Millennium Development Goals: A Compact among Nations to End Human Poverty
2004  Cultural Liberty in Today’s Diverse World
2005 
2006  Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global Water Crisis

Human Development Reports 1990–2010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2007/2008  Fighting Climate Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World
 
 

International Cooperation at a Crossroads: Aid, Trade and Security in an Unequal World

2009  Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development
2010  (cid:31)e Real Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development

For more information visit:
http://hdr.undp.org

Human Development Report 2011

Sustainability and Equity:
A Better Future for All

Published for the
United Nations
Development
Programme
(UNDP)

Copyright © 2011
by the United Nations Development Programme
1 UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior permission.

ISBN: 9780230363311

Palgrave Macmillan
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010

Companies and representatives throughout the world

Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited,
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke,
Hampshire RG21 6XS.

Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.

Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.

Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library and the Library of Congress.

Printed in the United States by Consolidated Graphics. Cover is printed on Tembec’s 12 pt Kallima coated‑one‑side 
paper. Text pages are printed on Cascades Mills’ 60# Rolland Opaque Smooth text that is 50% de‑inked post‑
consumer recycled fibre. Both sheets are Forest Stewardship Council Certified, elemental chlorine‑free papers and 
printed with vegetable‑based inks and produced by means of environmentally compatible technology.

Editing and production: Communications Development Incorporated, Washington DC
Design: Gerry Quinn

For a list of any errors or omissions found subsequent to printing please visit our
website at http://hdr.undp.org

Human Development Report 2011 team

The UNDP Human Development Report Office
The Human Development Report is the product of a collective effort under the guidance of the 
Director, with research, statistics, communications and publishing staff, and a team supporting National 
Human Development Reports. Operations and administration colleagues facilitate the work of the office.

Director and lead author
Jeni Klugman

Research
Francisco Rodríguez (Head), Shital Beejadhur, Subhra Bhattacharjee, Monalisa Chatterjee, Hyung-Jin Choi, 
Alan Fuchs, Mamaye Gebretsadik, Zachary Gidwitz, Martin Philipp Heger, Vera Kehayova, José Pineda, 
Emma Samman and Sarah Twigg

Statistics
Milorad Kovacevic (Head), Astra Bonini, Amie Gaye, Clara Garcia Aguña and Shreyasi Jha

Communications and publishing
William Orme (Head), Botagoz Abdreyeva, Carlotta Aiello, Wynne Boelt and Jean-Yves Hamel

National Human Development Reports
Eva Jespersen (Deputy Director), Mary Ann Mwangi, Paola Pagliani and Tim Scott

Operations and administration
Sarantuya Mend (Operations Manager), Diane Bouopda and Fe Juarez-Shanahan

 

Foreword

In June 2012 world leaders will gather in Rio de Janeiro to seek a new consensus on global 
actions to safeguard the future of the planet and the right of future generations everywhere to 
live healthy and fulfilling lives. This is the great development challenge of the 21st century.

The 2011 Human Development Report offers important new contributions to the global dia-
logue on this challenge, showing how sustainability is inextricably linked to basic questions of 
equity — that is, of fairness and social justice and of greater access to a better quality of life. Sus-
tainability is not exclusively or even primarily an environmental issue, as this Report so persua-
sively argues. It is fundamentally about how we choose to live our lives, with an awareness that 
everything we do has consequences for the 7 billion of us here today, as well as for the billions 
more who will follow, for centuries to come.

Understanding the links between environmental sustainability and equity is critical if we 
are to expand human freedoms for current and future generations. The remarkable progress in 
human development over recent decades, which the global Human Development Reports have 
documented, cannot continue without bold global steps to reduce both environmental risks 
and inequality. This Report identifies pathways for people, local communities, countries and 
the international community to promote environmental sustainability and equity in mutually 
reinforcing ways.

In the 176 countries and territories where the United Nations Development Programme 
is working every day, many disadvantaged people carry a double burden of deprivation. They 
are more vulnerable to the wider effects of environmental degradation, because of more severe 
stresses and fewer coping tools. They must also deal with threats to their immediate environ-
ment from indoor air pollution, dirty water and unimproved sanitation. Forecasts suggest that 
continuing failure to reduce the grave environmental risks and deepening social inequalities 
threatens to slow decades of sustained progress by the world’s poor majority — and even to reverse 
the global convergence in human development.

Major disparities in power shape these patterns. New analysis shows how power imbal-
ances and gender inequalities at the national level are linked to reduced access to clean water 
and improved sanitation, land degradation and deaths due to indoor and outdoor air pollution, 
amplifying the effects associated with income disparities. Gender inequalities also interact with 
environmental outcomes and make them worse. At the global level governance arrangements 
often weaken the voices of developing countries and exclude marginalized groups.

Yet there are alternatives to inequality and unsustainability. Growth driven by fossil fuel con-
sumption is not a prerequisite for a better life in broader human development terms. Investments 
that improve equity — in access, for example, to renewable energy, water and sanitation, and 
reproductive healthcare — could advance both sustainability and human development. Stronger 
accountability and democratic processes, in part through support for an active civil society and 
media, can also improve outcomes. Successful approaches rely on community management, 
inclusive institutions that pay particular attention to disadvantaged groups, and cross-cutting 
approaches that coordinate budgets and mechanisms across government agencies and develop-
ment partners.

Beyond the Millennium Development Goals, the world needs a post-2015 development 
framework that reflects equity and sustainability; Rio+20 stands out as a key opportunity to 

iv

Human Development RepoRt 2011

reach a shared understanding of how to move forward. This Report shows that approaches that 
integrate equity into policies and programmes and that empower people to bring about change 
in the legal and political arenas hold enormous promise. Growing country experiences around 
the world have demonstrated the potential of these approaches to generate and capture positive 
synergies.

The financing needed for development — including for environmental and social protection 
— will have to be many times greater than current official development assistance. Today’s spend-
ing on low-carbon energy sources, for example, is only 1.6 percent of even the lowest estimate of 
need, while spending on climate change adaptation and mitigation is around 11 percent of esti-
mated need. Hope rests on new climate finance. While market mechanisms and private funding 
will be vital, they must be supported and leveraged by proactive public investment. Closing the 
financing gap requires innovative thinking, which this Report provides.

Beyond raising new sources of funds to address pressing environmental threats equitably, the 
Report advocates reforms that promote equity and voice. Financing flows need to be channelled 
towards the critical challenges of unsustainability and inequity — and not exacerbate existing 
disparities.

Providing opportunities and choices for all is the central goal of human development. We 
have a collective responsibility towards the least privileged among us today and in the future 
around the world — and a moral imperative to ensure that the present is not the enemy of the 
future. This Report can help us see the way forward.

Helen Clark 
Administrator 
United Nations Development Programme

The analysis and policy recommendations of this Report do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations Development 
Programme or its Executive Board. The Report is an independent publication commissioned by UNDP. The research and writing 
of the Report was a collaborative effort by the Human Development Report team and a group of eminent advisors led by 
Jeni Klugman, Director of the Human Development Report Office.

Human Development RepoRt 2011

v

Acknowledgements

This is my third and final year of directing the global Human Development Report, which, as ever, 
has been an enormous collaborative effort. The hard work and dedication of the Human Devel-
opment Report Office team anchor the work, supported by a much broader family of researchers, 
advocates and officials whose commitment and vision are equally critical to our success.

An academic advisory panel provided valuable guidance, for which we thank Bina  Agarwal, 
Sabina Alkire, Anthony Atkinson, Tariq Banuri, François Bourguignon, William Easterly, 
 Daniel Esty, Sakiko Fukuda-Parr, Enrico Giovannini, Stephany Griffith-Jones, Brian Hammond, 
Geoffrey Heal, Cesar Hidalgo, Richard Jolly, Gareth Jones, Martin Khor, Mwangi S. Kimenyi, 
Adil Najam, Eric Neumayer, Michael Noble, José Antonio Ocampo, Marcio  Pochmann, Henry 
Richardson, Ingrid Robeyns, José Salazar-Xirinachs, Frances Stewart, Pavan Sukhdev, Miguel 
Székely, Dennis Trewin, Leonardo Villar and Tarik Yousef.

A reconstituted statistical advisory panel, comprising official statisticians and academic 
experts, provided excellent advice on the methodology and data sources related to the fam-
ily of human development indices: Anthony Atkinson, Grace Bediako,  Haishan Fu, Enrico 
 Giovannini, Peter Harper, Gareth Jones, Irena Krizman, Charles Leyeka Lufumpa, Michael 
Noble, Eduardo Nunes, Marcio Pochmann, Eric Swanson, Miguel Székely and Dato’ Hajan Wan 
 Ramlah Wan Abd. Raof. More generally, the United Nations Statistical Commission provided 
useful feedback from member states.

An extensive series of consultations involved some 500 researchers, civil society advocates, 
development practitioners and policy-makers from around the globe. Twenty-six events were held 
between February 2010 and September 2011—in Amman, Bamako, Bangkok, Beijing, Berke-
ley, Bonn, Copenhagen, Dubai, Geneva, Kigali, Ljubljana, London, Nairobi, New Delhi, New 
York, Paris, Quito, San José—with the support of the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) country and regional offices. Support from partnering institutions, listed at http://hdr.
undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2011/consultations, is also gratefully acknowledged.

Background research, commissioned on a range of thematic issues, is available online in our 
Human Development Research Papers series and listed in References. Special thanks to Sabina 
Alkire and the Oxford Human Development and Poverty Initiative for their continued collabo-
ration and efforts to improve our measure of multidimensional poverty.

The statistics used in this Report rely on various databases. We are particularly grateful to the 
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center of the US Department of Energy, Yale Center for 
Environmental Law and Policy, Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee, Food and Agricultural Organ-
ization, Gallup World Poll, Global Footprint Network, ICF Macro, International Monetary 
Fund, International Energy Agency, International Labour Organization, International Union 
for Conservation of Nature, Inter-Parliamentary Union, Luxembourg Income Study, United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization Institute for Statistics, United Nations Children’s Fund, World Bank 
and World Health Organization.

Claudio Montenegro conducted the analysis on the World Bank’s International Income 
Distribution Database, Suman Seth on the European Union Statistics on Income and Living 
Conditions and Kenneth Harttgen on the ICF Macro Demographic and Health Surveys.

vi

Human Development RepoRt 2011

A UNDP Readers Group, representing all the regional and policy bureaus, and other col-
leagues, too numerous to list, provided valuable advice throughout the preparation of the Report. 
Particular thanks are due to Jennifer Laughlin, Charles MacPherson and colleagues at the 
Bureau of Development Policy. The HD Network, which comprises some 1,500 UNDP staff, 
academics and nongovernmental organizations, generated a range of useful ideas and feedback 
through online discussions. Martha Mai of the UN Office for Project Services provided admin-
istrative support.

Several hard working interns made important contributions over the course of the year: 
Raphaelle Aubert, Uttara Balakrishnan, Luis Fernando Cervantes, Nicole Glanemann, Faith 
Kim, Meng Lu, Francesca Rappocciolo, Andrés Méndez Ruiz, Fredrik M. Sjoberg and Seol Yoo.
A team at Communications Development Incorporated, led by Bruce Ross- Larson, with 
Meta de Coquereaumont, Rob Elson, Jack Harlow, Christopher Trott and Elaine Wilson, edited, 
proofread and laid out the Report. Gerry Quinn designed the Report and created the figures.

We thank all of those involved directly or indirectly in contributing to our efforts, while 

acknowledging sole responsibility for errors of commission and omission.

Directing the global Human Development Report has been a great experience for me, both 
personally and professionally over the past three years. The human development approach con-
tinues to demonstrate its value as a lens for critical and constructive thinking about some of the 
most fundamental challenges facing us today, and I am confident that the independent global 
reports, commissioned by UNDP, will remain as central as ever in key global debates. I wish my 
successor, Khalid Malik, the best of luck in taking this endeavour forward into the next decade.

Jeni Klugman
Director and lead author
Human Development Report 2011

Human Development RepoRt 2011

vii

Contents

Foreword 

Acknowledgements 

Overview 

ChApter 1
Why sustainability and equity? 

Are there limits to human development? 

Competing paradigms 
The critical role of uncertainty 

Sustainability, equity and human development 

What we mean by sustainability 
What we mean by equity 
Why centre on equitable sustainability? 

Our focus of inquiry 

ChApter 2
Patterns and trends in human development, 
equity and environmental indicators 

Progress and prospects 

Progress in human development 
Equity trends 
Prospects — and environmental threats 

Threats to sustaining progress 

Climate change 
Chronic environmental threats 

Success in promoting sustainable and equitable human 

development 

iv

vi

1

13

14
15
16

17
17
18
19

20

23

23
23
28
30

31
32
37

41

ChApter 3
Tracing the effects—understanding the relations  45

A poverty lens 

Deprivations facing the poor 
Understanding the relations  

Environmental threats to people’s well-being  

Harming health  
Impeding education 
Endangering livelihoods 

45
46
47

50
51
54
54

Other adverse repercussions 

Disequalizing effects of extreme events 

Disempowerment and environmental degradation 

Gender equality 
Power inequalities 

ChApter 4
Positive synergies—winning strategies for the 
environment, equity and human development 

Scaling up to address environmental deprivations and 

build resilience 
Energy 
Water access, water security and sanitation 

Averting degradation 

Expanding reproductive choice  
Supporting community management of natural resources  
Conserving biodiversity while promoting equity  

Addressing climate change— risks and realities 

Equitable and adaptive disaster responses 
Innovative social protection  

ChApter 5
Rising to the policy challenges 

Business-as-usual is neither equitable nor sustainable 

Rethinking our development model — levers for change 
Integrating equity concerns into green economy policies 
Empowering people to bring 

about change 

Financing investment and the reform agenda 

Where does the world stand? 
What development assistance can do 

Innovations at the global level 

Innovative new sources to meet the financing gap 
Ensuring equity and voice in governing and in access to finance 
Enabling universal access to energy 

Notes 

References 

57

59

61
61
64

67

67
67
71

73
73
75
76

77
77
78

81

81

83
83

86

90
90
90

94
94
96
98

99

105

Human Development RepoRt 2011

ix

StAtiStiCAl Annex

Readers guide 

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2011 

Statistical tables

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 

Human Development Index and its components 
Human Development Index trends, 1980–2011 
Inequality‑adjusted Human Development Index 
Gender Inequality Index and related indicators 
Multidimensional Poverty Index  
Environmental sustainability 
Human development effects of environmental threats 
Perceptions about well‑being and the environment 
Education and health 
Population and economy 

Technical notes 

Regions 

Statistical references 

Environmental risk management — gambling with the planet 

BOxeS
1.1 
1.2  Measures of sustainability — a conceptual overview 
2.1 

Overcoming the democratic deficit — empowerment and the 

Arab Spring 

2.2  What can we learn from trends in aggregate measures of 

sustainability? 

Consumption and human development 
Sustainability, crises and inequality 

2.3 
2.4 
2.5  Are people aware of climate change and its causes? 
Impacts of climate change on small island developing states 
2.6 
Biodiversity — the accelerating loss of our ecosystems 
2.7 
2.8 
Land grabbing — a growing phenomenon? 
2.9  Hazardous waste and the Basel Convention 
2.10  Positive synergies in Sweden and Costa Rica  
3.1 
3.2 

Trends in multidimensional poverty 
Air pollution and its health consequences in China  

x

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Indigenous peoples, land rights and livelihoods 

3.3 
3.4  Women’s participation in community forest management 
4.1 

From subsidy to self‑respect — the revolution of Community‑led 

Total Sanitation 

4.2 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 

Culture, norms and environmental protection 
Distributional impacts of policies to cut pollution 
Innovative financing schemes for water and sanitation 
The currency transaction tax: newfound feasibility 

FigureS
1.1 

An illustration of policy synergies and trade‑offs between equity 

and sustainability 

2.1 

The association with carbon dioxide emissions per capita is 
positive and strong for income, positive for the HDI and 
nonexistent for health and education 

2.2 

Countries with higher growth also experience faster increase in 

carbon dioxide emissions per capita 

2.3 

Patterns of risk change: environmental transitions and human 

development 

2.4 

High HIV/AIDS prevalence rates in Southern Africa stall 

improvements in health inequality 

2.5 

Scenarios projecting impacts of environmental risks on human 

development through 2050 

2.6 

Scenarios projecting slowdown and reversals of convergence 

55
65

73
76
84
93
95

20

26

26

27

29

31

in human development due to environmental risks 
through 2050 

Average world temperatures have risen since 1900 
Sources of greenhouse gas growth 
Rising temperatures and reduced rainfall 

31
32
2.7 
34
2.8 
35
2.9 
2.10  Some regions deforest, others reforest and afforest 
38
3.1  Multidimensional Poverty Index—a focus on the most deprived  46
46
3.2 
3.3 

Environmental deprivations in the MPI 
Environmental deprivations are greatest for access to modern 

cooking fuel 

47

3.4 

The share of the population with environmental deprivations 

rises with the MPI but with much variation around the trend  48

3.5 

Deaths attributable to environmental risks are associated with 

high MPI levels 

3.6 

Gender equality and contraceptive prevalence are closely linked 

51
62

123

126

127
131
135
139
143
146
150
154
158
162

167

174

175

16
18

24

25
27
30
33
36
38
39
41
42
50
52

3.7 

Unmet contraceptive need is higher among the 

2.3 

Disaster‑related casualties and costs, median annual values by 

multidimensionally poor 

4.1 

Large regional differences in the share of multidimensionally 

poor people lacking electricity 
Integrating equity into policy design 
Official development assistance falls far short of needs 
Key elements in transforming climate financing efforts 

5.1 
5.2 
5.3 

MAp
2.1 

Temperature changes are greatest in polar regions and higher 

latitudes 

tABleS
2.1 
2.2 

Growth in carbon dioxide emissions and its drivers, 1970–2007 
Projected impacts of a half‑metre rise in sea level by 2050 

63

68
84
91
97

34

32
36

HDI group, 1971–1990 and 1991–2010 

2.4 

Good performers on the environment, equity and human 

development, most recent year available 

3.1 

Ten countries with the lowest share of environmental 

deprivations among the multidimensionally poor, most 
recent year available for 2000–2010 

3.2 

Average time per week spent fetching wood and water, rural 

areas of selected Sub‑Saharan African countries 

3.3 

Attitudes towards the environment, by gender, low and very 

high HDI countries, 2010 

4.1 

Key equity aspects of a menu of instruments to reduce carbon 

dioxide emissions 

4.2 

Social protection for adaptation and disaster risk reduction: 

benefits and challenges 

37

42

48

58

64

70

78

Human Development RepoRt 2011

xi

Overview

This  year’s  Report  focuses  on  the  challenge 
of sustainable and equitable progress. A joint 
lens  shows  how  environmental  degradation 
intensifies inequality through adverse impacts 
on already disadvantaged people and how ine-
qualities in human development amplify envi-
ronmental degradation.

Human  development,  which  is  about 
expanding people’s choices, builds on shared 
natural  resources.  Promoting  human  devel-
opment  requires  addressing  sustainability — 
locally, nationally and globally — and this can 
and should be done in ways that are equitable 
and empowering.

We seek to ensure that poor people’s aspi-
rations  for  better  lives  are  fully  taken  into 
account in moving towards greater environ-
mental sustainability. And we point to path-
ways that enable people, communities, coun-
tries  and  the  international  community  to 
promote sustainability and equity so that they 
are mutually reinforcing.

why sustainability and equity?

The human development approach has endur-
ing relevance in making sense of our world and 
addressing challenges now and in the future. 
Last year’s 20th anniversary Human Develop-
ment Report (HDR) celebrated the concept of 
human development, emphasizing how equity, 
empowerment and sustainability expand peo-
ple’s choices. At the same time it highlighted 
inherent  challenges,  showing  that  these  key 
aspects of human development do not always 
come together.

The case for considering 
sustainability and equity together
This year we explore the intersections between 
environmental  sustainability  and  equity, 
which  are  fundamentally  similar  in  their 

concern for distributive justice. We value sus-
tainability because future generations should 
have at least the same possibilities as people 
today. Similarly, all inequitable processes are 
unjust: people’s chances at better lives should 
not  be  constrained  by  factors  outside  their 
control.  Inequalities  are  especially  unjust 
when  particular  groups,  whether  because  of 
gender, race or birthplace, are systematically 
disadvantaged.

More than a decade ago Sudhir Anand and 
Amartya Sen made the case for jointly consid-
ering sustainability and equity. “It would be a 
gross violation of the universalist principle,” 
they argued, “if we were to be obsessed about 
intergenerational equity without at the same 
time seizing the problem of intragenerational 
equity” (emphasis in original). Similar themes 
emerged from the Brundtland Commission’s 
1987 report and a series of international dec-
larations  from  Stockholm  in  1972  through 
Johannesburg in 2002. Yet today many debates 
about sustainability neglect equality, treating 
it as a separate and unrelated concern. This per-
spective is incomplete and counterproductive.

Some key definitions
Human development is the expansion of peo-
ple’s freedoms and capabilities to lead lives that 
they value and have reason to value. It is about 
expanding choices. Freedoms and capabilities 
are a more expansive notion than basic needs. 
Many ends are necessary for a “good life,” ends 
that can be intrinsically as well as instrumen-
tally valuable — we may value biodiversity, for 
example, or natural beauty, independently of 
its contribution to our living standards.

Disadvantaged people are a central focus of 
human development. This includes people in 
the future who will suffer the most severe con-
sequences of the risks arising from our activi-
ties  today.  We  are  concerned  not  only  with 

Overview

1

what happens on average or in the most prob-
able scenario but also with what happens in the 
less likely but still possible scenarios, particu-
larly when the events are catastrophic for poor 
and vulnerable people.

Debates  over  what  environmental  sus-
tainability  means  often  focus  on  whether 
human-made capital can substitute for natu-
ral  resources — whether  human  ingenuity 
will relax natural resource constraints, as in 
the past. Whether this will be possible in the 
future is unknown and, coupled with the risk 
of catastrophe, favours the position of preserv-
ing basic natural assets and the associated flow 
of  ecological  services.  This  perspective  also 
aligns with human rights–based approaches to 
development. Sustainable human development 
is the expansion of the substantive freedoms of 
people today while making reasonable efforts to 
avoid seriously compromising those of future gen-
erations. Reasoned public deliberation, vital to 
defining the risks a society is willing to accept, 
is crucial to this idea.

The  joint  pursuit  of  environmental  sus-
tainability  and  equity  does  not  require  that 
the  two  always  be  mutually  reinforcing.  In 
many instances there will be trade-offs. Meas-
ures  to  improve  the  environment  can  have 
adverse effects on equity — for example, if they 
constrain  economic  growth  in  developing 
countries. This Report illustrates the types of 
joint impacts that policies could have, while 
acknowledging that they do not hold univer-
sally and underlining that context is critical.

The framework encourages special atten-
tion to identifying positive synergies and to 
considering  trade-offs.  We  investigate  how 
societies  can  implement  win-win-win  solu-
tions  that  favour  sustainability,  equity  and 
human development.

patterns and trends, 
progress and prospects

Increasing  evidence  points  to  widespread 
environmental degradation around the world 
and  potential  future  deterioration.  Because 
the extent of future changes is uncertain, we 
explore a range of predictions and consider the 
insights for human development.

Our  starting  point,  and  a  key  theme  of 
the 2010 HDR, is the enormous progress in 
human  development  over  the  past  several 
decades — with three caveats:
•	

Income growth has been associated with 
deterioration in such key environmental 
indicators as carbon dioxide emissions, soil 
and water quality and forest cover.

•	 The distribution of income has worsened 
at the country level in much of the world, 
even with the narrowing of gaps in health 
and education achievement.

•	 While empowerment on average tends to 
accompany a rising Human Development 
Index (HDI), there is considerable varia-
tion around the relationship.
Simulations for this Report suggest that by 
2050 the global HDI would be 8 percent lower 
than in the baseline in an “environmental chal-
lenge” scenario that captures the adverse effects 
of global warming on agricultural production, 
on access to clean water and improved sanita-
tion and on pollution (and 12 percent lower 
in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa). Under 
an even more adverse “environmental disaster” 
scenario,  which  envisions  vast  deforestation 
and  land  degradation,  dramatic  declines  in 
biodiversity and accelerated extreme weather 
events, the global HDI would be some 15 per-
cent below the projected baseline.

If  we  do  nothing  to  halt  or  reverse  cur-
rent  trends,  the  environmental  disaster  sce-
nario leads to a turning point before 2050 in 
developing countries — their convergence with 
rich countries in HDI achievements begins to 
reverse.

These  projections  suggest  that  in  many 
cases  the  most  disadvantaged  people  bear 
and  will  continue  to  bear  the  repercussions 
of environmental deterioration, even if they 
contribute little to the problem. For example, 
low HDI countries have contributed the least 
to global climate change, but they have experi-
enced the greatest loss in rainfall and the great-
est increase in its variability, with implications 
for agricultural production and livelihoods.

Emissions per capita are much greater in 
very high HDI countries than in low, medium 
and high HDI countries combined because of 
more energy-intensive activities — driving cars, 

Sustainable human 
development is the 
expansion of the 

substantive freedoms 

of people today 

while making reasonable 
efforts to avoid seriously 
compromising those of 

future generations

2

Human Development RepoRt 2011

cooling  and  heating  homes  and  businesses, 
consuming processed and packaged food. The 
average  person  in  a  very  high  HDI  country 
accounts for more than four times the carbon 
dioxide emissions and about twice the meth-
ane and nitrous oxide emissions of a person 
in a low, medium or high HDI country — and 
about 30 times the carbon dioxide emissions 
of a person in a low HDI country. The average 
UK citizen accounts for as much greenhouse 
gas emissions in two months as a person in a 
low HDI country generates in a year. And the 
average Qatari — living in the country with the 
highest per capita emissions — does so in only 
10 days, although that value reflects consump-
tion as well as production that is consumed 
elsewhere.

While  three-quarters  of  the  growth 
in  emissions  since  1970  comes  from  low, 
medium and high HDI countries, overall lev-
els of greenhouse gases remain much greater 
in very high HDI countries. And this stands 
without  accounting  for  the  relocation  of 
carbon- intensive production to poorer coun-
tries, whose output is largely exported to rich 
countries.

Around  the  world  rising  HDI  has  been 
associated  with  environmental  degradation 
— though  the  damage  can  be  traced  largely 
to economic growth. Countries with higher 
incomes generally have higher carbon dioxide 
emissions per capita. But our analysis finds no 
association between emissions and the health 
and education components of the HDI. This 
result is intuitive: activities that emit carbon 
dioxide into the atmosphere are those linked 
to the production of goods, not to the provi-
sion of health and education. These results also 
show the nonlinear nature of the relationship 
between carbon dioxide emissions per capita 
and  HDI  components:  little  or  no  relation-
ship at low HDI, but as the HDI rises a “tip-
ping point” is reached, beyond which appears 
a strong positive correlation between carbon 
dioxide emissions and income.

Countries with faster improvements in the 
HDI have also experienced faster increases in 
carbon  dioxide  emissions  per  capita.  These 
changes  over  time — rather  than  the  snap-
shot relationship — highlight what to expect 

tomorrow  as  a  result  of  development  today. 
Again, income changes drive the trend.

But these relationships do not hold for all 
environmental indicators. Our analysis finds 
only a weak positive correlation between the 
HDI and deforestation, for example. Why do 
carbon  dioxide  emissions  differ  from  other 
environmental threats? We suggest that where 
the link between the environment and quality 
of life is direct, as with pollution, environmen-
tal achievements are often greater in developed 
countries;  where  the  links  are  more  diffuse, 
performance is much weaker. Looking at the 
relationship between environmental risks and 
the HDI, we observe three general findings:
•	 Household environmental deprivations — 
indoor air pollution, inadequate access to 
clean water and improved sanitation — are 
more severe at low HDI levels and decline 
as the HDI rises.

•	 Environmental  risks  with  community 
effects — such  as  urban  air  pollution — 
seem  to  rise  and  then  fall  with  devel-
opment;  some  suggest  that  an  inverted 
U-shaped curve describes the relationship.
•	 Environmental  risks  with  global  effects 
— namely  greenhouse  gas  emissions — 
typically rise with the HDI.
The  HDI  itself  is  not  the  true  driver  of 
these  transitions.  Incomes  and  economic 
growth have an important explanatory role for 
emissions — but the relationship is not deter-
ministic either. And complex interactions of 
broader forces change the risk patterns. For 
example, international trade allows countries 
to  outsource  the  production  of  goods  that 
degrade  the  environment;  large-scale  com-
mercial use of natural resources has different 
impacts  than  subsistence  exploitation;  and 
urban and rural environmental profiles differ. 
And as we will see, policies and the political 
context matter greatly.

It follows that the patterns are not inevi-
table. Several countries have achieved signifi-
cant progress both in the HDI and in equity 
and  environmental  sustainability.  In  line 
with our focus on positive synergies, we pro-
pose a multidimensional strategy to identify 
countries that have done better than regional 
peers in promoting equity, raising the HDI, 

where the link between 
the environment and 
quality of life is direct, 

as with pollution, 
environmental 

achievements are often 
greater in developed 

countries; where 
the links are more 
diffuse, performance 

is much weaker

Overview

3

reducing household indoor air pollution and 
increasing access to clean water and that are 
top  regional  and  global  performers  in  envi-
ronmental sustainability. Environmental sus-
tainability is judged on greenhouse gas emis-
sions, water use and deforestation. The results 
are illustrative rather than indicative because 
of patchy data and other comparability issues. 
Just one country, Costa Rica, outperforms its 
regional median on all the criteria, while the 
three other top performers display unevenness 
across dimensions. Sweden is notable for its 
high reforestation rate compared with regional 
and global averages.

Our list shows that across regions, devel-
opment  stages  and  structural  characteristics 
countries can enact policies conducive to envi-
ronmental sustainability, equity and the key 
facets of human development captured in the 
HDI. We review the types of policies and pro-
grammes associated with success while under-
lining the importance of local conditions and 
context.

More  generally,  however,  environmental 
trends over recent decades show deterioration 
on several fronts, with adverse repercussions 
for human development, especially for the mil-
lions of people who depend directly on natural 
resources for their livelihoods.
•	 Globally,  nearly  40  percent  of  land  is 
degraded due to soil erosion, reduced fer-
tility  and  overgrazing.  Land  productiv-
ity is declining, with estimated yield loss 
as high as 50 percent in the most adverse 
scenarios. 

•	 Agriculture accounts for 70–85 percent of 
water use, and an estimated 20 percent of 
global grain production uses water unsus-
tainably,  imperilling  future  agricultural 
growth.

•	 Deforestation is a major challenge. Between 
1990  and  2010  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean and Sub-Saharan Africa expe-
rienced the greatest forest losses, followed 
by the Arab States. The other regions have 
seen minor gains in forest cover.

•	 Desertification  threatens  the  drylands 
that  are  home  to  about  a  third  of  the 
world’s people. Some areas are particularly 
vulnerable — notably Sub-Saharan Africa, 

where the drylands are highly sensitive and 
adaptive capacity is low.
Adverse  environmental 

factors  are 
expected to boost world food prices 30–50 per-
cent in real terms in the coming decades and to 
increase price volatility, with harsh repercus-
sions for poor households. The largest risks are 
faced by the 1.3 billion people involved in agri-
culture, fishing, forestry, hunting and gather-
ing. The burden of environmental degradation 
and climate change is likely to be disequalizing 
across groups — for several reasons:
•	 Many  rural  poor  people  depend  over-
whelmingly on natural resources for their 
income. Even people who do not normally 
engage in such activities may do so as a cop-
ing strategy during hardship.

•	 How  environmental  degradation  will 
affect people depends on whether they are 
net producers or net consumers of natural 
resources, whether they produce for sub-
sistence or for the market and how read-
ily they can shift between these activities 
and diversify their livelihoods with other 
occupations.

•	 Today, around 350 million people, many of 
them poor, live in or near forests on which 
they rely for subsistence and incomes. Both 
deforestation and restrictions on access to 
natural resources can hurt the poor. Evi-
dence from a range of countries suggests 
that women typically rely on forests more 
than men do because women tend to have 
fewer occupational options, be less mobile 
and bear most of the responsibility for col-
lecting fuelwood.

•	 Around 45 million people — at least 6 mil-
lion of them women — fish for a living and 
are threatened by overfishing and climate 
change. The vulnerability is twofold: the 
countries most at risk also rely the most 
on  fish  for  dietary  protein,  livelihoods 
and exports. Climate change is expected 
to lead to major declines in fish stocks in 
the Pacific Islands, while benefits are pre-
dicted at some northern latitudes, includ-
ing  around  Alaska,  Greenland,  Norway 
and the Russian Federation.
To the extent that women in poor coun-
tries  are  disproportionately  involved  in 

Environmental trends 
over recent decades 
show deterioration on 
several fronts, with 
adverse repercussions 
for human development, 

especially for the 

millions of people who 

depend directly on 
natural resources for 

their livelihoods

4

Human Development RepoRt 2011

subsistence  farming  and  water  collection, 
they  face  greater  adverse  consequences  of 
environmental  degradation.  Many  indig-
enous  peoples  also  rely  heavily  on  natural 
resources  and  live  in  ecosystems  especially 
vulnerable to the effects of climate change, 
such as small island developing states, arctic 
regions and high altitudes. Evidence suggests 
that traditional practices can protect natural 
resources, yet such knowledge is often over-
looked or downplayed.

The effects of climate change on farmers’ 
livelihoods depend on the crop, region and sea-
son, underlining the importance of in-depth, 
local analysis. Impacts will also differ depend-
ing on household production and consumption 
patterns, access to resources, poverty levels and 
ability to cope. Taken together, however, the 
net biophysical impacts of climate change on 
irrigated and rainfed crops by 2050 will likely 
be negative — and worst in low HDI countries.

understanding the links

Drawing  on  the  important  intersections 
between  the  environment  and  equity  at  the 
global level, we explore the links at the com-
munity and household levels. We also high-
light countries and groups that have broken 
the pattern, emphasizing transformations in 
gender roles and in empowerment.

A key theme: the most disadvantaged peo-
ple carry a double burden of deprivation. More 
vulnerable to the wider effects of environmen-
tal  degradation,  they  must  also  cope  with 
threats to their immediate environment posed 
by indoor air pollution, dirty water and unim-
proved  sanitation.  Our  Multidimensional 
Poverty Index (MPI), introduced in the 2010 
HDR and estimated this year for 109 coun-
tries, provides a closer look at these depriva-
tions to see where they are most acute.

The  MPI  measures  serious  deficits  in 
health, education and living standards, look-
ing at both the number of deprived people and 
the intensity of their deprivations. This year 
we explore the pervasiveness of environmental 
deprivations  among  the  multi dimensionally 
poor and their overlaps at the household level, 
an innovation in the MPI.

The  poverty-focused  lens  allows  us  to 
examine environmental deprivations in access 
to modern cooking fuel, clean water and basic 
sanitation. These absolute deprivations, impor-
tant  in  themselves,  are  major  violations  of 
human rights. Ending these deprivations could 
increase  higher  order  capabilities,  expand-
ing  people’s  choices  and  advancing  human 
development.

In developing countries at least 6 people 
in 10 experience one of these environmental 
deprivations, and 4 in 10 experience two or 
more. These deprivations are especially acute 
among multidimensionally poor people, more 
than  9  in  10  of  whom  experience  at  least 
one. Most suffer overlapping deprivations: 8 
in  10  multidimensionally  poor  people  have 
two or more, and nearly 1 in 3 (29 percent) 
is deprived in all three. These environmental 
deprivations disproportionately contribute to 
multidimensional poverty, accounting for 20 
percent of the MPI — above their 17 percent 
weight in the index. Across most developing 
countries  deprivations  are  highest  in  access 
to cooking fuel, though lack of water is para-
mount in several Arab States.

To better understand environmental dep-
rivations, we analysed the patterns for given 
poverty levels. Countries were ordered by the 
share of multidimensionally poor people fac-
ing  one  environmental  deprivation  and  the 
share facing all three. The analysis shows that 
the shares of the population with environmen-
tal deprivations rise with the MPI, but with 
much variation around the trend. Countries 
with the lowest share of poor people facing at 
least one deprivation are mainly in the Arab 
States and Latin American and the Caribbean 
(7 of the top 10).

Of the countries with the fewest multidi-
mensionally poor people with all three envi-
ronmental deprivations, better performers are 
concentrated in South Asia — 5 of the top 10. 
Several  South  Asian  countries  have  reduced 
some  environmental  deprivations,  notably 
access to potable water, even as other depriva-
tions have remained severe. And five countries 
are in both top 10 lists — not only is their envi-
ronmental poverty relatively low, it is also less 
intense.

the most disadvantaged 
people carry a double 
burden of deprivation: 

more vulnerable to 
the wider effects 
of environmental 

degradation, they must 
also cope with threats 
to their immediate 

environment posed by 
indoor air pollution, 

dirty water and 

unimproved sanitation

Overview

5

Performance on these indicators does not 
necessarily identify environmental risks and 
degradation  more  broadly,  for  example,  in 
terms of exposure to floods. At the same time 
the poor, more subject to direct environmental 
threats, are also more exposed to environmen-
tal degradation writ large.

We  investigate  this  pattern  further  by 
looking at the relationship between the MPI 
and stresses posed by climate change. For 130 
nationally  defined  administrative  regions  in 
15 countries, we compare area-specific MPIs 
with  changes  in  precipitation  and  tempera-
ture. Overall, the poorest regions and locales 
in these countries seem to have gotten hotter 
but not much wetter or drier — change that is 
consistent with evidence exploring the effects 
of climate change on income poverty.

Environmental threats to selected 
aspects of human development
Environmental  degradation  stunts  people’s 
capabilities  in  many  ways,  going  beyond 
incomes  and  livelihoods  to  include  impacts 
on health, education and other dimensions of 
well-being.

Bad environments and health — 
overlapping deprivations
The disease burden arising from indoor and 
outdoor air pollution, dirty water and unim-
proved  sanitation  is  greatest  for  people  in 
poor countries, especially for deprived groups. 
Indoor air pollution kills 11 times more people 
living in low HDI countries than people else-
where. Disadvantaged groups in low, medium 
and high HDI countries face greater risk from 
outdoor air pollution because of both higher 
exposure  and  greater  vulnerability.  In  low 
HDI countries more than 6 people in 10 lack 
ready access to improved water, while nearly 4 
in 10 lack sanitary toilets, contributing to both 
disease and malnourishment. Climate change 
threatens to worsen these disparities through 
the spread of tropical diseases such as malaria 
and dengue fever and through declining crop 
yields.

The World Health Organization’s Global 
Burden  of  Disease  database  provides  some 
striking  findings  on  the  repercussions  of 

environmental factors, including that unclean 
water and inadequate sanitation and hygiene 
are  among  the  10  leading  causes  of  disease 
worldwide.  Each  year  environment-related 
diseases, including acute respiratory infections 
and diarrhoea, kill at least 3 million children 
under age 5 — more than the entire under-five 
populations of Austria, Belgium, the Nether-
lands, Portugal and Switzerland combined.

Environmental  degradation  and  climate 
change  affect  physical  and  social  environ-
ments,  knowledge,  assets  and  behaviours. 
Dimensions of disadvantage can interact, com-
pounding adverse impacts — for example, the 
intensity of health risks is highest where water 
and  sanitation  are  inadequate,  deprivations 
that often coincide. Of the 10 countries with 
the highest rates of death from environmental 
disasters, 6 are also in the top 10 in the MPI, 
including Niger, Mali and Angola.

Impeding education advances for 
disadvantaged children, especially girls
Despite near universal primary school enrol-
ment in many parts of the world, gaps remain. 
Nearly 3 in 10 children of primary school age 
in low HDI countries are not even enrolled in 
primary school, and multiple constraints, some 
environmental, persist even for enrolled chil-
dren. Lack of electricity, for example, has both 
direct and indirect effects. Electricity access 
can enable better lighting, allowing increased 
study time, as well as the use of modern stoves, 
reducing time spent collecting fuelwood and 
water, activities shown to slow education pro-
gress  and  lower  school  enrolment.  Girls  are 
more often adversely affected because they are 
more likely to combine resource collection and 
schooling. Access to clean water and improved 
sanitation is also especially important for girls’ 
education, affording them health gains, time 
savings and privacy.

Other repercussions
Household  environmental  deprivations  can 
coincide  with  wider  environmental  stresses, 
constricting people’s choices in a wide range 
of  contexts  and  making  it  harder  to  earn  a 
living from natural resources: people have to 
work more to achieve the same returns or may 

Environmental 

degradation stunts 
people’s capabilities 
in many ways, going 
beyond incomes and 
livelihoods to include 
impacts on health, 
education and other 

dimensions of well-being

6

Human Development RepoRt 2011

even have to migrate to escape environmental 
degradation.

Resource-dependent livelihoods are time 
consuming, especially where households face 
a lack of modern cooking fuel and clean water. 
And time-use surveys offer a window into the 
associated gender-based inequalities. Women 
typically spend many more hours than men 
do fetching wood and water, and girls often 
spend  more  time  than  boys  do.  Women’s 
heavy involvement in these activities has also 
been shown to prevent them from engaging in 
higher return activities.

As argued in the 2009 HDR, mobility — 
allowing people to choose where they live — is 
important  for  expanding  people’s  freedoms 
and achieving better outcomes. But legal con-
straints make migration risky. Estimating how 
many  people  move  to  escape  environmental 
stresses is difficult because other factors are in 
play, notably poverty. Nevertheless, some esti-
mates are very high. 

Environmental stress has also been linked 
to an increased likelihood of conflict. The link 
is not direct, however, and is influenced by the 
broader political economy and contextual fac-
tors that make individuals, communities and 
society  vulnerable  to  the  effects  of  environ-
mental degradation.

Disequalizing effects of extreme 
weather events
Alongside pernicious chronic threats, environ-
mental degradation can amplify the likelihood 
of acute threats, with disequalizing impacts. 
Our analysis suggests that a 10 percent increase 
in the number of people affected by an extreme 
weather event reduces a country’s HDI almost 
2 percent, with larger effects on incomes and in 
medium HDI countries.

And the burden is not borne equally: the 
risk  of  injury  and  death  from  floods,  high 
winds  and  landslides  is  higher  among  chil-
dren, women and the elderly, especially for the 
poor. The striking gender inequality of natural 
disasters suggests that inequalities in exposure 
— as  well  as  in  access  to  resources,  capabili-
ties and opportunities — systematically disad-
vantage some women by making them more 
vulnerable.

Children  disproportionately  suffer  from 
weather shocks because the lasting effects of 
malnourishment  and  missing  school  limit 
their  prospects.  Evidence  from  many  devel-
oping countries shows how transitory income 
shocks can cause households to pull children 
out of school. More generally, several factors 
condition  households’  exposure  to  adverse 
shocks and their capacity to cope, including 
the type of shock, socioeconomic status, social 
capital and informal support, and the equity 
and effectiveness of relief and reconstruction 
efforts.

Empowerment — reproductive 
choice and political imbalances
Transformations in gender roles and empower-
ment have enabled some countries and groups 
to improve environmental sustainability and 
equity, advancing human development.

Gender inequality
Our Gender Inequality Index (GII), updated 
this year for 145 countries, shows how repro-
ductive health constraints contribute to gender 
inequality. This is important because in coun-
tries where effective control of reproduction 
is universal, women have fewer children, with 
attendant gains for maternal and child health 
and  reduced  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  For 
instance,  in  Cuba,  Mauritius,  Thailand  and 
Tunisia,  where  reproductive  healthcare  and 
contraceptives  are  readily  available,  fertility 
rates are below two births per woman. But sub-
stantial unmet need persists worldwide, and 
evidence suggests that if all women could exer-
cise reproductive choice, population growth 
would slow enough to bring greenhouse gas 
emissions below current levels. Meeting unmet 
need for family planning by 2050 would lower 
the  world’s  carbon  emissions  an  estimated 
17 percent below what they are today.

The GII also focuses on women’s partici-
pation  in  political  decision-making,  high-
lighting  that  women  lag  behind  men  across 
the world, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, 
South  Asia  and  the  Arab  States.  This  has 
important implications for sustainability and 
equity.  Because  women  often  shoulder  the 
heaviest burden of resource collection and are 

a 10 percent increase in 
the number of people 
affected by an extreme 
weather event reduces 
a country’s HDI almost 
2 percent, with larger 
effects on incomes and 
in medium HDI countries

Overview

7

Meeting unmet need 
for family planning 
by 2050 would lower 
the world’s carbon 

emissions an estimated 

17 percent below 
what they are today

the most exposed to indoor air pollution, they 
are often more affected than men by decisions 
related  to  natural  resources.  Recent  studies 
reveal that not only is women’s participation 
important but also how they participate — and 
how much . And because women often show 
more  concern  for  the  environment,  support 
pro environmental policies and vote for pro-
environmental leaders, their greater involve-
ment  in  politics  and  in  nongovernmental 
organizations could result in environmental 
gains, with multiplier effects across all the Mil-
lennium Development Goals.

These  arguments  are  not  new,  but  they 
reaffirm the value of expanding women’s effec-
tive freedoms. Thus, women’s participation in 
decision-making has both intrinsic value and 
instrumental importance in addressing equity 
and environmental degradation.

Power disparities
As argued in the 2010 HDR, empowerment 
has  many  aspects,  including  formal,  proce-
dural democracy at the national level and par-
ticipatory processes at the local level. Political 
empowerment at the national and sub national 
levels  has  been  shown  to  improve  environ-
mental  sustainability.  And  while  context  is 
important,  studies  show  that  democracies 
are typically more accountable to voters and 
more  likely  to  support  civil  liberties.  A  key 
challenge everywhere, however, is that even in 
democratic systems, the people most adversely 
affected  by  environmental  degradation  are 
often the worst off and least empowered, so 
policy priorities do not reflect their interests 
and needs.

Evidence  is  accumulating  that  power 
in equalities, mediated through political insti-
tutions, affect environmental outcomes in a 
range of countries and contexts. This means 
that  poor  people  and  other  disadvantaged 
groups  disproportionately  suffer  the  effects 
of environmental degradation. New analysis 
for this Report covering some 100 countries 
confirms that greater equity in power distri-
bution, broadly defined, is positively associated 
with better environmental outcomes, includ-
ing better access to water, less land degradation 
and fewer deaths due to indoor and outdoor 

air pollution and dirty water — suggesting an 
important scope for positive synergies.

positive synergies — winning 
strategies for the environment, 
equity and human development

In  facing  the  challenges  elaborated  here,  a 
range of governments, civil society, private sec-
tor actors and development partners have cre-
ated approaches that integrate environmental 
sustainability and equity and promote human 
development — win-win-win strategies. Effec-
tive solutions must be context- specific. But it 
is  important,  nonetheless,  to  consider  local 
and national experiences that show potential 
and to recognize principles that apply across 
contexts. At the local level we stress the need 
for inclusive institutions; and at the national 
level, the scope for the scaling up of successful 
innovations and policy reform.

The policy agenda is vast. This Report can-
not do it full justice — but the value added is in 
identifying win-win-win strategies that dem-
onstrate success in addressing our social, eco-
nomic and environmental challenges by man-
aging, or even bypassing, trade-offs through 
approaches  that  are  good  not  only  for  the 
environment but also for equity and human 
development more broadly. To inspire debate 
and action, we offer concrete examples show-
ing how the strategy of overcoming potential 
trade-offs  and  identifying  positive  synergies 
has worked in practice . Here, we present the 
example of modern energy.

Access to modern energy
Energy is central to human development, yet 
some  1.5  billion  people  worldwide — more 
than one in five — lack electricity. Among the 
multidimensionally poor the deprivations are 
much greater — one in three lacks access.

Is  there  a  trade-off  between  expanding 
energy provision and carbon emissions? Not 
necessarily. We argue that this relationship is 
wrongly characterized. There are many prom-
ising prospects for expanding access without a 
heavy environmental toll:
•	 Off-grid decentralized options are techni-
cally feasible for delivering energy services 

8

Human Development RepoRt 2011

to poor households and can be financed 
and delivered with minimal impact on the 
climate.

•	 Providing basic modern energy services for 
all  would  increase  carbon  dioxide  emis-
sions by only an estimated 0.8 percent — 
taking into account broad policy commit-
ments already announced.
Global  energy  supply  reached  a  tipping 
point in 2010, with renewables accounting for 
25 percent of global power capacity and deliv-
ering more than 18 percent of global electric-
ity. The challenge is to expand access at a scale 
and speed that will improve the lives of poor 
women and men now and in the future.

Averting environmental degradation
A broader menu of measures to avert environ-
mental  degradation  ranges  from  expanding 
reproductive  choice  to  promoting  commu-
nity forest management and adaptive disaster 
responses.

Reproductive  rights,  including  access  to 
reproductive health services, are a precondi-
tion  for  women’s  empowerment  and  could 
avert  environmental  degradation.  Major 
improvements  are  feasible.  Many  examples 
attest to the opportunities for using the exist-
ing health infrastructure to deliver reproduc-
tive health services at little additional cost and 
to the importance of community involvement. 
Consider Bangladesh, where the fertility rate 
plunged from 6.6 births per woman in 1975 
to 2.4 in 2009. The government used outreach 
and  subsidies  to  make  contraceptives  more 
easily  available  and  influenced  social  norms 
through discussions with opinion leaders of 
both sexes, including religious leaders, teach-
ers and nongovernmental organizations.

Community  forest  management  could 
redress local environmental degradation and 
mitigate  carbon  emissions,  but  experience 
shows that it also risks excluding and disad-
vantaging  already  marginalized  groups.  To 
avoid these risks, we underline the importance 
of broad participation in designing and imple-
menting  forest  management,  especially  for 
women, and of ensuring that poor groups and 
those who rely on forest resources are not made 
worse-off.

Promising  avenues  are  also  emerging  to 
reduce the adverse impacts of disasters through 
equitable and adaptive disaster responses and 
innovative social protection schemes. Disas-
ter responses include community-based risk-
mapping and more progressive distribution of 
reconstructed assets. Experience has spurred a 
shift to decentralized models of risk reduction. 
Such efforts can empower local communities, 
particularly women, by emphasizing participa-
tion in design and decision-making. Commu-
nities can rebuild in ways that redress existing 
inequalities.

rethinking our development 
model — levers for change

The large disparities across people, groups and 
countries that add to the large and growing 
environmental  threats  pose  massive  policy 
challenges. But there is cause for optimism. 
In  many  respects  the  conditions  today  are 
more conducive to progress than ever — given 
innovative  policies  and  initiatives  in  some 
parts of the world. Taking the debate further 
entails bold thinking, especially on the eve of 
the  UN  Conference  on  Sustainable  Devel-
opment (Rio+20) and the dawn of the post-
2015 era. This Report advances a new vision 
for promoting human development through 
the joint lens of sustainability and equity. At 
the local and national levels we stress the need 
to bring equity to the forefront of policy and 
programme design and to exploit the poten-
tial multiplier effects of greater empowerment 
in  legal  and  political  arenas.  At  the  global 
level  we  highlight  the  need  to  devote  more 
resources to pressing environmental threats 
and to boost the equity and representation of 
disadvantaged countries and groups in access-
ing finance.

Integrating equity concerns into green 
economy policies
A key theme of this Report is the need to fully 
integrate  equity  concerns  into  policies  that 
affect the environment. Traditional methods 
of assessing environmental policies fall short. 
They might expose the impacts on the path 
of future emissions, for example, but they are 

there are many 

promising prospects 

for expanding 
energy provision 
without a heavy 
environmental toll

Overview

9

traditional methods of 
assessing environmental 
policies are often silent 
on distribution issues. 
while the importance 
of equity and inclusion 
is already explicit in 
the objectives of green 
economy policies, we 
propose taking the 

agenda further

often silent on distributive issues. Even when 
the effects on different groups are considered, 
attention  is  typically  restricted  to  people’s 
incomes. The importance of equity and inclu-
sion  is  already  explicit  in  the  objectives  of 
green  economy  policies.  We  propose  taking 
the agenda further.

Several key principles could bring broader 
equity concerns into policy-making through 
stakeholder  involvement  in  analysis  that 
considers:
•	 Nonincome  dimensions  of  well-being, 

through such tools as the MPI.
Indirect and direct effects of policy.

•	
•	 Compensation mechanisms for adversely 

affected people.

•	 Risk of extreme weather events that, how-

ever unlikely, could prove catastrophic.

Early analysis of the distributional and envi-
ronmental consequences of policies is critical.

A clean and safe environment —  
a right, not a privilege
Embedding environmental rights in national 
constitutions and legislation can be effective, 
not  least  by  empowering  citizens  to  protect 
such rights. At least 120 countries have con-
stitutions that address environmental norms. 
And many countries without explicit environ-
mental rights interpret general constitutional 
provisions  for  individual  rights  to  include  a 
fundamental right to a healthy environment.
Constitutionally recognizing equal rights 
to a healthy environment promotes equity by 
no  longer  limiting  access  to  those  who  can 
afford  it.  And  embodying  this  right  in  the 
legal framework can affect government priori-
ties and resource allocations.

Alongside legal recognition of equal rights 
to a healthy, well functioning environment is 
the need for enabling institutions, including a 
fair and independent judiciary, and the right 
to information from governments and corpo-
rations.  The  international  community,  too, 
increasingly recognizes a right to environmen-
tal information.

Participation and accountability
Process freedoms are central to human devel-
opment and, as discussed in last year’s HDR, 

have  both  intrinsic  and  instrumental  value. 
Major disparities in power translate into large 
disparities  in  environmental  outcomes.  But 
the  converse  is  that  greater  empowerment 
can bring about positive environmental out-
comes equitably. Democracy is important, but 
beyond that, national institutions need to be 
accountable  and  inclusive — especially  with 
respect to affected groups, including women 
— to  enable  civil  society  and  foster  popular 
access to information.

A  prerequisite  for  participation  is  open, 
transparent and inclusive deliberative processes 
— but in practice, barriers to effective partici-
pation persist. Despite positive change, further 
efforts are needed to strengthen the possibili-
ties  for  some  traditionally  excluded  groups, 
such  as  indigenous  peoples,  to  play  a  more 
active role. And increasing evidence points to 
the importance of enabling women’s involve-
ment, both in itself and because it has been 
linked to more sustainable outcomes.

Where governments are responsive to pop-
ular concerns, change is more likely. An envi-
ronment  in  which  civil  society  thrives  also 
engenders accountability at the local, national 
and global levels, while freedom of press is vital 
in  raising  awareness  and  facilitating  public 
participation.

Financing investments: where do 
we stand?
Sustainability  debates  raise  major  questions 
of costs and financing, including who should 
finance  what — and  how.  Equity  principles 
argue for large transfers of resources to poor 
countries ,   both  to  achieve  more  equitable 
access to water and energy and to pay for adapt-
ing to climate change and mitigating its effects.
Four important messages emerge from our 

financing analysis:
•	

Investment needs are large, but they do not 
exceed current spending on other sectors 
such as the military. The estimated annual 
investment to achieve universal access to 
modern sources of energy is less than an 
eighth of annual subsidies for fossils fuels.
•	 Public sector commitments are important 
(the generosity of some donors stands out), 
and  the  private  sector  is  a  major — and 

10

Human Development RepoRt 2011

critical — source of finance. Public efforts 
can catalyse private investment, emphasiz-
ing  the  importance  of  increasing  public 
funds  and  supporting  a  positive  invest-
ment climate and local capacity.

•	 Data constraints make it hard to monitor 
private and domestic public sector spend-
ing on environmental sustainability. Avail-
able information allows only official devel-
opment assistance flows to be examined.

•	 Funding architecture is complex and frag-
mented,  reducing  its  effectiveness  and 
making spending hard to monitor. There 
is  much  to  learn  from  earlier  commit-
ments  to  aid  effectiveness  made  in  Paris 
and Accra.
Although  the  evidence  on  needs,  com-
mitments  and  disbursements  is  patchy  and 
the magnitudes uncertain, the picture is clear. 
The gaps between official development assis-
tance  spending  and  the  investments  needed 
to address climate change, low-carbon energy, 
and  water  and  sanitation  are  huge — even 
larger  than  the  gap  between  commitments 
and investment needs. Spending on low-car-
bon energy sources is only 1.6 percent of the 
lower bound estimate of needs, while spend-
ing on climate change adaptation and mitiga-
tion is around 11 percent of the lower bound 
of estimated need. For water and sanitation the 
amounts are much smaller, and official devel-
opment assistance commitments are closer to 
the estimated costs.

Closing the funding gap: currency 
transaction tax — from great idea to 
practical policy
The  funding  gap  in  resources  available  to 
address the deprivations and challenges docu-
mented in this Report could be substantially 
narrowed by taking advantage of new opportu-
nities. The prime candidate is a currency trans-
action tax. Argued for by the 1994 HDR, the 
idea is increasingly being accepted as a practi-
cal policy option. The recent financial crisis has 
revived interest in the proposal, underscoring 
its relevance and timeliness.

Today’s  foreign  exchange  settlement 
infrastructure  is  more  organized,  central-
ized  and  standardized,  so  the  feasibility  of 

implementing  the  tax  is  something  new  to 
highlight.  It  has  high-level  endorsement, 
including from the Leading Group on Innova-
tive Financing, with some 63 countries, among 
them China, France, Germany, Japan and the 
United Kingdom. And the UN High-Level 
Advisory Group on Climate Change Financ-
ing recently proposed that 25–50 percent of 
the proceeds from such a tax be directed to 
climate change adaptation and mitigation in 
developing countries.

Our updated analysis shows that at a very 
minimal rate (0.005 percent) and without any 
additional administrative costs, the currency 
transaction tax could yield additional annual 
revenues of about $40 billion. Not many other 
options at the required scale could satisfy the 
new and additional funding needs that have 
been stressed in international debates.

A  broader  financial  transaction  tax  also 
promises large revenue potential. Most G-20 
countries have already implemented a financial 
transaction tax, and the International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF) has confirmed the adminis-
trative feasibility of a broader tax. One version 
of the tax, a levy of 0.05 percent on domestic 
and international financial transactions, could 
raise an estimated $600–$700 billion.

Monetizing part of the IMF’s surplus Spe-
cial Drawing Rights has also attracted inter-
est. This could raise up to $75 billion at little 
or no budgetary cost to contributing govern-
ments.  The  SDRs  have  the  added  appeal  of 
acting as a monetary rebalancing instrument; 
demand is expected to come from emerging 
market economies looking to diversify their 
reserves.

Reforms for greater equity and voice
Bridging the gap that separates policy-makers, 
negotiators and decision-makers from the citi-
zens most vulnerable to environmental degra-
dation requires closing the accountability gap 
in global environmental governance. Account-
ability alone cannot meet the challenge, but 
it is fundamental for building a socially and 
environmentally  effective  global  governance 
system that delivers for people.

We  call  for  measures  to  improve  equity 
and voice in access to financial flows directed 

at a minimal rate and 
without additional 
administrative costs, 
a currency transaction 
tax could yield annual 
revenues of $40 billion. 
Not many other options 
could satisfy the new 
and additional funding 

needs stressed in 

international debates

Overview

11

any truly 

transformational effort 

to scale up efforts to 
slow or halt climate 
change will require 

blending domestic and 
international, private 
and public, and grant 
and loan resources

at supporting efforts to combat environmental 
degradation.

Private resources are critical, but because 
most  of  the  financial  flows  into  the  energy 
sector, for example, come from private hands, 
the  greater  risks  and  lower  returns  of  some 
regions in the eyes of private investors affect 
the patterns of flows. Without reform, access 
to financing will remain unevenly distributed 
across countries and, indeed, exacerbate exist-
ing  inequalities.  This  underlines  the  impor-
tance of ensuring that flows of public invest-
ments are equitable and help create conditions 
to attract future private flows.

The  implications  are  clear — principles 
of  equity  are  needed  to  guide  and  encour-
age international financial flows. Support for 
institution building is needed so that devel-
oping  countries  can  establish  appropriate 
policies and incentives. The associated gov-
ernance mechanisms for international pub-
lic financing must allow for voice and social 
accountability.

Any truly transformational effort to scale 
up  efforts  to  slow  or  halt  climate  change 
will  require  blending  domestic  and  inter-
national,  private  and  public,  and  grant  and 
loan  resources.  To  facilitate  both  equitable 
access and efficient use of international finan-
cial flows, this Report advocates empowering 
national stakeholders to blend climate finance 
at the country level. National climate funds 
can  facilitate  the  operational  blending  and 
monitoring of domestic and international, pri-
vate and public, and grant and loan resources. 
This is essential to ensure domestic account-
ability and positive distributional effects.

The Report proposes an emphasis on four 
country-level sets of tools to take this agenda 
forward:
•	 Low-emission,  climate-resilient  strategies 
— to  align  human  development,  equity 
and climate change goals.

•	 Public-private  partnerships — to  catalyse 

capital from businesses and households.

•	 Climate deal-flow facilities — to bring about 
equitable  access  to  international  public 
finance.

•	 Coordinated implementation and monitor-
ing, reporting and verification systems — to 
bring about long-term, efficient results and 
accountability to local populations as well 
as partners.
Finally,  we  call  for  a  high-profile,  global 
Universal Energy Access Initiative with advo-
cacy and awareness and dedicated support to 
developing clean energy at the country level. 
Such an initiative could kickstart efforts to shift 
from incremental to transformative change.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

This Report casts light on the links between sus-
tainability and equity and shows how human 
development can become more sustainable and 
more equitable. It reveals how environmental 
degradation hurts poor and vulnerable groups 
more than others. We propose a policy agenda 
that will redress these imbalances, framing a 
strategy  for  tackling  current  environmental 
problems in a way that promotes equity and 
human development. And we show practical 
ways to promote jointly these complementary 
goals, expanding people’s choices while pro-
tecting our environment.

12

Human Development RepoRt 2011

r
e
t
p
a
h
c

1 why sustainability and equity?

The human development approach has endur-
ing relevance for making sense of our world. 
Last  year’s  Human  Development  Report 
(HDR)  reaffirmed  the  concept  of  human 
development — emphasizing  empowerment, 
equity and sustainability in expanding people’s 
choices. It showed that these key aspects do not 
always coincide and highlighted challenges in 
addressing them. And it raised the need to pro-
mote empowerment, equity and sustainability 
so that they are mutually reinforcing.

That  report  also  documented  substan-
tial progress over the past four decades. The 
Human Development Index (HDI) has risen 
dramatically  since  1970 — 41  percent  over-
all  and  61  percent  in  low  HDI  countries — 
reflecting  strong  advances  in  health,  educa-
tion and incomes. Significant gains have been 
made in girls’ primary and secondary educa-
tion, for example. If these rates of progress are 
sustained, by 2050 more than three-quarters 
of the world’s people will live in countries with 
an HDI similar to that of very high HDI coun-
tries  today.  There  has  also  been  progress  in 
other dimensions: the share of countries that 
are democracies has risen from less than a third 
to three-fifths. The 2011 Arab Spring marked 
another leap forward, appearing to end dec-
ades of autocratic rule for some 100 million 
people.

But  we  cannot  assume  that  average  past 
rates of progress will continue: progress has 
been far from uniform across countries and 
over  time.  And  in  two  key  dimensions  of 
human  development,  conditions  have  dete-
riorated.  For  environmental  sustainability, 
evidence  of  devastating  current  and  future 
impacts is mounting. And income inequality 
has worsened, while disparities in health and 
education remain significant.

These are the themes of this Report: the 
adverse human repercussions of environmental 

degradation,  which  causes  disproportionate 
harm to poor and disadvantaged people, and 
the need to make greater equity part of the 
solution. Exploring patterns and implications, 
the Report sounds a bold call to action. In so 
doing, it identifies ways to break the pernicious 
link between environmental degradation and 
economic  growth  that  has  tainted  much  of 
the development experience of at least the past 
half-century and threatens future progress.

This  vision  aligns  with  that  of  interna-
tional declarations on sustainable development 
— including those in Stockholm (1972), Rio 
de Janeiro (1992) and Johannesburg (2002)— 
which advanced the notion of three pillars of 
sustainable development: environmental, eco-
nomic and social.1 Intragenerational equity is 
part of the social pillar. Our call for prudence 
in managing the environment and basic nat-
ural  resources  springs  from  an  emphasis  on 
expanding opportunities for the most disad-
vantaged and from the need to consider the 
risks of catastrophic events.

We  do  not  deal  at  length  with  broader 
issues of economic, financial and political sus-
tainability, though we draw on some impor-
tant lessons from those spheres. We can add 
more value by concentrating on a well defined 
set of issues, rather than attempting to cover 
related fields. The choice of scope is also driven 
by the urgency of addressing today’s grave envi-
ronmental threats.

In sum, this Report highlights the links 
between two closely related challenges to show 
how  human  development  can  become  both 
more environmentally sustainable and more 
equitable.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

This chapter sets the stage by reviewing the 
notion of limits to human development and 
two alternate paradigms of sustainability that 

CHapteR 1  why SuStAinABility And equity?

13

we care about 
environmental 

sustainability because 
of the fundamental 

injustice of one 

generation living at 
the expense of others. 
Poeple born today should 
not have a greater claim 

on Earth’s resources 
than those born a 

hundred or a thousand 

years from now

fundamentally affect how we assess some of 
humanity’s most pressing choices. We take a 
conservative stance because we cannot be cer-
tain of always finding technological fixes to the 
problems we create. Central to this approach 
is recognizing the inherent uncertainty associ-
ated with the future and the need to deal with 
risks  responsibly  to  meet  our  obligations  to 
current and future generations.

Are there limits to 
human development?

Most people around the world have seen major 
improvements  in  their  lives  over  the  last  40 
years.  But  there  are  major  constraints  in  our 
capacity to sustain these trends. If we deal deci-
sively  with  these  challenges,  we  could  be  on 
the cusp of an era of historic opportunities for 
expanded choices and freedoms. But if we fail to 
act, future generations may remember the early 
21st century as the time when the doors to a bet-
ter future closed for most of the world’s people.
We  care  about  environmental  sustain-
ability because of the fundamental injustice 
of  one  generation  living  at  the  expense  of 
others. Poeple born today should not have a 
greater claim on Earth’s resources than those 
born a hundred or a thousand years from now. 
We  can  do  much  to  ensure  that  our  use  of 
the world’s resources does not damage future 
opportunities — and we should.

Amartya Sen notes that “a fouled environ-
ment in which future generations are denied 
the presence of fresh air … will remain foul 
even if future generations are so very rich.”2 
The  fundamental  uncertainty  about  what 
people will value in the future means that we 
need to ensure equal freedom of choice, the 
lynchpin of the capability approach, in part 
by protecting the availability and diversity of 
natural resources.3 Such resources are critical 
in allowing us to lead lives that we value and 
have reason to value.4

The early HDRs recognized the centrality 
of the environment. The first report warned 
of the continuing increase in environmental 
hazards, including health risks, from Earth’s 
warming, damage to the ozone layer, indus-
trial pollution and environmental disasters.5 

The 1994 HDR asserted “there is no tension 
between human development and sustainable 
development. Both are based in the universal-
ism of life claims.”6

The  2010  HDR  went  further,  empha-
sizing  sustainability  in  reaffirming  human 
development:7

Human development is the expansion of 
people’s freedoms to live long, healthy and 
creative lives; to advance other goals they 
have reason to value; and to engage actively 
in shaping development equitably and sus-
tainably on a shared planet. People are both 
the beneficiaries and the drivers of human 
development, as individuals and in groups.

Sustainable  development  gained  promi-
nence with the 1987 publication of Our Com-
mon  Future,  the  report  of  the  UN  World 
Commission on Environment and Develop-
ment,  headed  by  former  Norwegian  Prime 
Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland. The report 
produced what became the standard definition 
of  sustainable  development:  “development 
that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs.”8 But the commis-
sion’s work is relevant for much more. It dif-
fered from much subsequent work on sustain-
ability in its emphasis on equity:

Many problems of resource depletion and 
environmental  stress  arise  from  dispari-
ties in economic and political power. An 
industry may get away with unacceptable 
levels of water pollution because the people 
who bear the brunt of it are poor and una-
ble to complain effectively. A forest may be 
destroyed by excessive felling because the 
people living there have no alternatives or 
because timber contractors generally have 
more influence than forest dwellers. Glob-
ally,  wealthier  nations  are  better  placed 
financially  and  technologically  to  cope 
with the effects of climatic change. Hence, 
our inability to promote the common interest 
in sustainable development is often a prod-
uct of the relative neglect of economic and 
social justice within and amongst nations.

14

Human Development RepoRt 2011

the thesis of weak 

sustainability focuses on 
total capital stock rather 
than on natural resource 
depletion; that of strong 
sustainability focuses 
on the belief that some 
basic natural assets have 
no real substitutes and 
thus must be preserved

The  commission  also  voiced  concerns 
that the world was reaching its natural lim-
its to growth in economic activity. In 1972 a 
group of scientists commissioned by the Club 
of Rome published The Limits to Growth, pre-
dicting that at current rates of consumption 
growth,  many  natural  resources  would  run 
out in the next century. Economists criticized 
this thesis for its disregard of price adjustments 
and technological change that would moder-
ate rising demand for resources.9 But the facts 
seemed to bear out some of their predictions 
— adjusted for inflation, oil prices rose fivefold 
between 1970 and 1985.10

Over the next two decades the perception 
of scarcity changed. Most commodity prices 
peaked in the mid-1980s, and by 1990 prices 
had  fallen  from  their  1980s  highs— 57  per-
cent  for  petroleum,  45  percent  for  coal  and 
19 percent for copper. Against this backdrop 
the belief that we were approaching a global 
resource constraint became less plausible — if 
resources were becoming scarce, prices should 
be rising not falling. By 1997 even the United 
Nations  Economic  and  Social  Council  was 
referring to the Club of Rome report’s predic-
tions as “dogmatic,” “unreliable” and “politi-
cally counterproductive.”11

Now, the pendulum has swung back again. 
Concerns differ in some respects from those 
four  decades  ago.  Today,  the  problems  are 
more evident in the preservation of renewable 
natural  resources,  ranging  from  forests  and 
fisheries to the air we breathe. But the message 
is clear: our development model is bumping up 
against concrete limits.

Competing paradigms
The  idea  that  resource  scarcity  limits  the 
world’s development potential has a long his-
tory. In the late 18th century Malthus believed 
that limited land was an absolute constraint on 
food consumption and therefore on the popu-
lation that could inhabit the Earth. Yet 200 
years later, the world is home to seven times 
more people than when Malthus wrote.

In  practice,  technological  improvements 
and  substitution  of  abundant  for  scarce 
resources have allowed living standards to con-
tinue to rise over the past two centuries. The 

inflation-adjusted price of food is much lower 
today  than  it  was  200 — or  even  50 — years 
ago, and known reserves of many minerals are 
now substantially higher than in 1950.12 With 
improved farming techniques, world food pro-
duction has outstripped population growth. 
The Green Revolution doubled rice and wheat 
yields in Asia between the 1960s and 1990s 
through the introduction of high-yield plant 
varieties, better irrigation and the use of ferti-
lizers and pesticides.13 These increased yields 
were achieved, however, through means that 
were  not  always  sustainable.  Our  concerns 
for  more  sustainable  agricultural  practices 
go  hand  in  hand  with  our  awareness  of  the 
roughly 1 billion people who are undernour-
ished and face serious food insecurity.14

These observations have led some to posit 
that as the stock of nonrenewable resources is 
consumed, technological innovation and price 
signals will avert shortages that limit future 
development. As a resource becomes scarcer, 
rising  relative  prices  mean  higher  potential 
profits for innovators and for the owners of 
assets that can be substituted for the dimin-
ished  scarce  resource.  These  forces  can  cut 
resource use substantially even as consumption 
grows.  The  Worldwatch  Institute  estimates 
that the production of one unit of output in 
the United States in 2000 required less than 
a fifth as much energy as it did in 1800.15 This 
leads to a thesis known as weak sustainabil-
ity, which focuses on total capital stock rather 
than on natural resource depletion.

Disputing this view, advocates of the strong 
sustainability  thesis  believe  that  some  basic 
natural  assets  have  no  real  substitutes  and 
thus must be preserved.16 These assets are fun-
damental not only to our capacity to produce 
goods and services but also to human life. Soci-
eties should strive to sustain the flow of ser-
vices from natural capital over time because 
the accumulation of physical or other kinds of 
capital cannot compensate for Earth’s warm-
ing, ozone layer depletion and major biodiver-
sity losses.

While advocates of strong sustainability do 
not disregard the growing efficiency of resource 
use, they argue that history is not necessarily 
a good guide to the future. In the past some 

CHapteR 1  why SuStAinABility And equity?

15

constraints  on  natural  capital  may  not  have 
been binding, but today some types of natu-
ral capital are irreplaceable. No example illus-
trates this better than Earth’s warming. There 
is overwhelming evidence that we are reaching 
an upper limit to our capacity to emit green-
house gases without dire consequences. As one 
advocate  of  strong  sustainability  argues,  we 
are moving from an “empty world” economy, 
where human-made capital was limiting and 
natural capital superabundant, to a “full world” 
economy, where the opposite is true.17

Beyond these debates, more recent think-
ing has emphasized the potential congruence 
of  growth  and  environmental  sustainabil-
ity  within  the  broader  paradigm  of  a  green 
economy.18  This  thinking  diverges  from  the 
traditional  discourse  on  sustainability  by 
focusing on ways in which economic policies 

BOX 1.1
Environmental risk management — gambling with the planet
We are gambling with our planet through “games” in which private individuals reap the benefits 
while society bears the costs. A system that allows such outcomes is doomed to mismanage 
risk. As Nobel Prize–winning economist Joseph Stiglitz recently noted, “the bankers that put 
our economy at risk and the owners of energy companies that put our planet at risk may walk 
off with a mint. But on average and almost certainly, we as a society, like gamblers, will lose.”
Perverse incentives provide investment banks and energy companies with hidden sub-
sidies, like low liability caps, the prospect of bailouts, and the knowledge that taxpayers will 
shoulder the costs. Because these companies do not have to bear the full cost of any resulting 
crises, they may take excessive risks. Consider the 2010 BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 
the United States, for example, where the costs well exceeded the $75 million liability limit. 
And even where liability is limitless, loopholes exist. In Japan, for instance, the Nuclear Com-
pensation Act excludes cases in which “the damage is caused by a grave natural disaster of 
exceptional character.”

Rare events with huge consequences are of course difficult to predict. But we can no 
longer afford to turn a blind eye, notwithstanding uncertainties. These events are occurring 
more frequently. And because most greenhouse gases will remain in the atmosphere for cen-
turies, we cannot wait until all uncertainties are resolved. The sooner we act, the better.

What level of risk will persuade people of the need to change their behaviour? Research 
in behavioural psychology and experimental economics yields sobering insights. In simulation 
exercises showing how groups of participants respond when asked to invest collectively in 
preventing climate change, too many players were free riding, that is, counting on the altru-
ism of others. In scenarios where the probability of disastrous climate change was very low, 
almost no funds were pledged. But even when the probability was 90 percent, only about half 
of 30 study groups pledged sufficient funds.

The projected costs of averting climate change pale beside those of allowing change to 
continue unbridled. But precisely because cooperation is not guaranteed, even under high- 
probability scenarios, strong political and advocacy efforts are needed to elicit commitments.
As Joseph Stiglitz warns, the risks of inaction are too high: “If there were other planets 
to which we could move at low cost in the event of the almost certain outcome predicted by 
scientists, one could argue that this risk is worth taking. But there aren’t, so it isn’t.”

Source: Stiglitz 2011; Milinksi and others 2008; Speth 2008.

16

Human Development RepoRt 2011

can engender sustainable production and con-
sumption  patterns  with  inclusive,  pro-poor 
solutions  that  integrate  environmental  con-
siderations into everyday economic decisions.19 
Our approach complements and enriches the 
green  economy  discourse,  emphasizing  peo-
ple, the multiple dimensions of well-being and 
equity. Our concerns include — but go beyond 
— growth alone.

The critical role of uncertainty
Differences between strong and weak sustain-
ability approaches go beyond whether finan-
cial savings can substitute for natural resource 
depletion. A key difference lies in the role of 
uncertainty.

How can we be sure of finding ways to off-
set the damage caused by current and future 
production and consumption? The answer is 
that we cannot be certain. Acknowledging this 
inherent uncertainty supports the strong sus-
tainability thesis.

Consider  biodiversity.  Its  instrumental 
benefits  for  people  are  well  known:  greater 
biodiversity increases the chances of finding 
cures for illnesses, developing high-yield crops 
and maintaining ecosystem goods and services 
such as water quality. We know that ecosys-
tems are resilient —up to a point. Yet defining 
the threshold at which ecosystems break down 
is hard. An ecosystem might sustain piecemeal 
destruction for some time until an unknown 
threshold is breached such that it unravels.20 
These  risks  and  unknown  thresholds  have 
led to real concerns about gambling with the 
planet (box 1.1).

Technological  change  is  uncertain.  Pro-
ductivity growth accelerated after the Second 
World War, for example, then slowed between 
the 1970s and 1990s.21 We can understand ret-
roactively what drove accelerations and slow-
downs, but it is very difficult to predict the 
future. Even more uncertainty surrounds the 
types of innovations that will emerge. History 
is replete with unfulfilled predictions of spe-
cific innovations — from all-purpose personal 
robots to mass-market space travel — and with 
the  failure  to  anticipate  other  innovations, 
such as personal computers, the Internet and 
mobile communications.22

Since we cannot 
place a meaningful 
upper bound on the 
catastrophic losses 

from large temperature 

changes, we need 
to cut greenhouse 
gas emissions not 
only to mitigate the 
known consequences 
but also to protect 
against uncertain 
worst-case scenarios

Climate change debates have brought into 
sharp relief the relevance of uncertainty and 
risk for understanding the future.23 Scientists 
have concluded that the probability of a dis-
astrous systemwide collapse is not negligible. 
And since we cannot place a meaningful upper 
bound on the catastrophic losses from large 
temperature  changes,  we  need  to  cut  green-
house gas emissions not only to mitigate the 
consequences known to result from their accu-
mulation but also to protect ourselves against 
uncertain worst-case scenarios.24

It  follows  that  weak  and  strong  sustain-
ability  differ,  more  than  anything,  in  their 
attitude  towards  risk.  The  question  is  not 
whether different types of natural and other 
forms of capital were substitutes in the past, 
but  whether  technological  and  institutional 
change will proceed at a pace and direction 
that  ensure  continuing  improvements  in 
human development.

The position we take depends also on the 
value we put on the well-being of future gen-
erations relative to that of current generations 
— in  other  words,  on  how  we  discount  the 
future.  From  the  perspective  of  capabilities, 
there  is  no  justification  to  assume  that  the 
future  will  provide  greater  opportunities 
than the present or to place a lower value on 
the well-being of the present generation over 
future ones.25

Given  the  principles  underlying  the 
human  development  approach,  the  inclina-
tion to give equal weight to the well-being of 
all generations and the centrality of risk and 
uncertainty, our position leans towards that of 
strong sustainability.

Sustainability, equity and 
human development

Since  the  Brundtland  Report,  scholars  have 
offered  further  definitions  of  sustainable 
development. One point of contention was the 
commission’s reference to “needs,” often inter-
preted to mean basic needs, which some believe 
is too narrow.

Economist Robert Solow offered an alter-
native definition in 1993, arguing that the duty 
of sustainability was “to bequeath to posterity 

not any particular thing but rather to endow 
them with whatever it takes to achieve a stand-
ard of living at least as good as our own and 
to look after their next generation similarly.” 
Solow added, “We are not to consume human-
ity’s capital, in the broadest sense,” which is a 
succinct statement of the case for weak sustain-
ability. Of course, just what “standard of liv-
ing” refers to is an open question,26 while what 
is “good” is also value dependent.

What we mean by sustainability
Most definitions of sustainable development 
capture the precept that the possibilities open 
to  people  tomorrow  should  not  differ  from 
those  open  today,  but  generally  do  not  ade-
quately  capture  sustainable human  develop-
ment. They do not refer to the expansion of 
choice, freedoms and capabilities intrinsic to 
human development. They do not recognize 
that some dimensions of well-being are incom-
mensurable. And they do not consider risk.

Human development is the expansion of 
the freedoms and capabilities people have to 
lead lives they value and have reason to value. 
Freedoms  and  capabilities  that  enable  us  to 
lead meaningful lives go beyond satisfaction 
of essential needs. In recognizing that many 
ends are necessary for a good life and that these 
ends can be intrinsically valuable, freedoms and 
capabilities are also very different from living 
standards and consumption.27 We can respect 
other species, independent of their contribu-
tion to our living standards, just as we can value 
natural beauty, regardless of its direct contribu-
tion to our material standard of living.

The  human  development  approach  rec-
ognizes that people have rights that are not 
affected by the arbitrariness of when they were 
born. Further, the rights in question refer not 
only to the capacity to sustain the same living 
standards but also to access the same oppor-
tunities. This limits the substitution that can 
occur across dimensions of well-being. Today’s 
generation  cannot  ask  future  generations  to 
breathe polluted air in exchange for a greater 
capacity to produce goods and services. That 
would restrict the freedom of future genera-
tions to choose clean air over more goods and 
services.

CHapteR 1  why SuStAinABility And equity?

17

A central concern of the human develop-
ment approach is protecting the most disad-
vantaged groups. The most disadvantaged are 
not just the generations that are worse off on 
average. They are also those who would suffer 
most from the realizations of the adverse risks 
they face as a result of our activity. Thus, we 
are concerned not only with what happens on 
average or in the most likely scenario but also 
with what happens in less likely but still pos-
sible scenarios, particularly those that entail 
catastrophic risks.

Building on the work of Anand and Sen,28 
we define “sustainable human development” 
as “the expansion of the substantive freedoms 
of  people  today  while  making  reasonable 
efforts to avoid seriously compromising those 
of future generations.” Like the 1994 HDR, 
this definition emphasizes that the objective 
of development is to sustain the freedoms and 
capabilities that allow people to lead meaning-
ful lives. Our definition of sustainable human 
development  is  normative:  we  seek  the  sus-
tainability not just of any state of events but 
of  those  that  expand  substantive  freedoms. 

BOX 1.2
Measures of sustainability — a conceptual overview

The  conceptual  paradigm — weak  sustainability  or  strong — has  implications  for  how  we 
measure and assess trends. Given the range of opinions on how to define sustainability, it 
is not surprising that a broadly acceptable quantitative measure is hard to pin down. Many 
measures have emerged in the literature. One recent study identified 37 — some better known 
than others. Here we review those that are most in use.

Green national accounting adjusts such measures as gross domestic product or savings 
for environmental quality and resource depletion. Adjusted net savings, a measure of weak 
sustainability, adds education spending and subtracts for the depletion of energy, minerals 
and forests and for damage from carbon dioxide emissions and pollution. It is an aggregate 
measure of all capital in an economy — financial, physical, human and environmental. It implies 
that the different kinds of capital are perfect substitutes, so that financial savings can replace 
a loss of natural resources, for example.

Composite indices aggregate social, economic and environmental indicators into a single 
index. A great deal of innovative work has pursued this approach. Two examples capturing 
strong sustainability are the ecological footprint — a measure of the annual stress people put 
on the biosphere — and the environmental performance index.

None of the aggregate measures is perfect. For instance, some scholars take issue with 
adjusted net savings’ valuing such nonmarket components as the damage from carbon dioxide 
emissions, while the ecological footprint has been criticized for neglecting biodiversity.

Informed by ongoing debates about measurement, we refer to the main composite meas-
ures alongside a dashboard that presents specific indicators to capture different aspects of 
sustainability (see statistical tables 6 and 7). The single indicators underline the importance of 
strong sustainability by exposing poor performance and deterioration on any front.

Source: Jha and Pereira 2011; Dasgupta 2007; Neumayer 2010a, 2010b.

18

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Therefore, inequitable development can never 
be sustainable human development.

This  Report  does  not  propose  a  unique 
measure of sustainable human development. 
Despite recent advances, measuring sustain-
ability remains plagued by major data limita-
tions (box 1.2). A perennial challenge is the 
disconnect among local, national and global 
measures — such  as  the  distinction  between 
whether a national economy is sustainable and 
its contribution to global sustainability. For 
example, attributing the damage from carbon 
dioxide to the economy that produces goods 
that  have  been  exported  for  consumption 
ignores both who benefited from consuming 
the goods and services and the global nature 
of the damage.

Focusing too much on measurement can 
obscure  some  key  but  unquantifiable  issues. 
These include the risks faced by different peo-
ple and groups and the role of public delibera-
tion in making policy choices and enabling a 
society to decide how to avoid seriously com-
promising future well-being.

What we mean by equity
Early ideas of equity postulated that individu-
als should be rewarded according to their con-
tribution  to  society.29  Used  interchangeably 
with fairness, equity has come to refer primar-
ily to distributive justice — that is, unjust ine-
qualities between people.

Contemporary  thinking  on  equity  owes 
much  to  the  work  of  US  philosopher  John 
Rawls, who argued that just outcomes are those 
that  people  would  agree  to  under  a  “veil  of 
ignorance” — that is, if they did not know what 
status they would occupy in society.30 Rawls’s 
idea of justice espoused basic liberties and pro-
cedural  fairness  and  permitted  inequalities 
only if they could reasonably be expected to be 
to everyone’s advantage (and if reducing them 
would make everyone worse off).

The  capability  approach  emerged  from 
thinking about which inequalities are just or 
unjust. In a set of landmark lectures in 1979, 
Amartya  Sen  proposed  that  we  think  about 
equality in terms of capabilities. Equality is nei-
ther necessary nor sufficient for equity. Differ-
ent individual abilities and preferences lead to 

Promoting human 
development entails 

addressing local, 
national and global 
sustainability; this 
can — and should 
— be equitable and 

empowering

different outcomes, even with identical oppor-
tunities and access to resources. Absolute levels 
of capabilities matter: inequality between mil-
lionaires and billionaires is less the focus than 
inequalities between the poor and the wealthy. 
And  personal  characteristics  are  also  impor-
tant: poor and disadvantaged groups, includ-
ing people with mental or physical disabilities, 
need greater access to public goods and services 
to achieve equality of capabilities.

Despite  conceptual  differences,  inequity 
and inequality in outcomes are closely linked in 
practice — because inequalities in outcomes are 
largely the product of unequal access to capa-
bilities. A Malian can expect to live 32 fewer 
years on average than a Norwegian because the 
possibilities for people in Mali are far narrower 
on average than those for people in Norway. In 
this case, clearly the inequalities between Mali 
and Norway are also inequitable. Moreover, 
we can measure inequality in key outcomes, 
whereas we cannot readily observe the distri-
bution of capabilities. So, in this Report we 
use inequality as a proxy for inequity, point-
ing out the exceptions where the relationship 
is not straightforward. We also consider ine-
quality  in  human  development — extending 
beyond  income  inequality  to  inequalities  in 
access to health, education and broader politi-
cal freedoms.

Why centre on equitable 
sustainability?
This Report concentrates on the links between 
sustainability and equity. The main issues are 
the adverse repercussions for human develop-
ment of the lack of environmental sustainabil-
ity,  especially  for  those  currently  disadvan-
taged, and more positively, the intersections 
between greater sustainability and equity, as 
well as the potential for progressive reforms 
that  promote  both  goals.  We  will  argue 
that  promoting  human  development  entails 
addressing local, national and global sustain-
ability  and  that  this  can — and  should — be 
equitable and empowering.

We  ensure  that  the  aspirations  of  the 
world’s  poor  for  better  lives  are  fully  taken 
into account in moving towards greater envi-
ronmental sustainability.31 Expanding people’s 

opportunities and choices is a major imperative 
of  the  human  development  approach.  There 
may be trade-offs and difficult choices. But as 
we discuss below, the existence of these choices 
also implies a higher order moral imperative to 
consider how to build positive synergies that 
keep the present from being at odds with the 
future.

Concerns with sustainability and equity 
are  similar  in  one  fundamental  sense:  both 
are about distributive justice. Inequitable pro-
cesses  are  unjust,  whether  across  groups  or 
generations. Inequalities are especially unjust 
when they systematically disadvantage specific 
groups of people, whether because of gender, 
race or birthplace, or when the gap is so great 
that acute poverty is high. The current genera-
tion’s destroying the environment for future 
generations is no different from a present-day 
group’s  suppressing  the  aspirations  of  other 
groups for equal opportunities to jobs, health 
or education.

Anand and Sen made the case for jointly 
considering  sustainability  and  equity  more 
than a decade ago: “It would be a gross viola-
tion of the universalist principle,” they argued, 
“if we were to be obsessed about intergenera-
tional equity without at the same seizing the 
problem  of  intragenerational  equity.”32  Yet 
many  theories  on  sustainability  view  equity 
and  the  plight  of  the  poor  as  separate  and 
unrelated.  Such  thinking  is  incomplete  and 
counterproductive.  Thinking  about  policies 
to restore sustainability independent of poli-
cies to address inequalities between and within 
countries is equivalent to framing policies to 
address  inequalities  between  groups  (such 
as  rural  and  urban)  while  disregarding  the 
interrelationships with equity between other 
groups (such as poor and rich).

While we argue strongly for the need to 
consider  sustainability  and  equity  jointly, 
we do not claim that the two are the same. 
Sustainability is concerned with one type of 
equity — across people born in different times 
— as  distinct  from  the  distribution  of  out-
comes,  opportunities  or  capabilities  today. 
If this were not the case, it would be mean-
ingless to speak about the effect of equity on 
sustainability.

CHapteR 1  why SuStAinABility And equity?

19

The reasons to focus on the links between 
sustainability and equity are normative but 
also empirical. The empirics help us under-
stand their links — how they reinforce each 
other in some cases —and the trade-offs that 
can  arise,  as  we  investigate  in  chapters  2 
and 3.

Our focus of inquiry

This Report identifies ways to jointly advance 
sustainability and equity. Our line of inquiry 
supports  the  broader  human  development 
agenda, which seeks to understand the actions 
and strategies people can use to expand their 
freedoms and capabilities. While we recognize 
that many factors could impede or enhance the 
sustainability of human development, we limit 
our focus to environmental sustainability. We 
discuss  what  people,  communities,  societies 
and the world can do to ensure that processes 
respect distributive justice between and across 
generations while expanding capabilities wher-
ever possible.

Pursuing sustainability and equity jointly 
does not require that they be mutually rein-
forcing. In many instances they will not be. 
But it compels us to identify positive synergies 
between the two and to give special considera-
tion to the trade-offs.

FIGURE 1.1
An illustration of policy synergies and trade-offs between equity 
and sustainability

This framework encourages special attention to identifying positive synergies between the two 
goals and to considering trade-offs.

Expand access to

renewable

energy

G

R

E

A

T

E

S

T

Subsidize coal
in developing

countries

4

1

3

2

Restrict access

to public
forests

GREATEST

S U STAIN ABILITY

E

Q

U

I
T

Y

Subsidize
gasoline

consumption

LEAST

20

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Figure 1.1 illustrates this logic with exam-
ples of specific policies that typically improve 
or worsen sustainability and equity.33 While 
we have sought to highlight likely outcomes, 
the implications are often context-specific, so 
the figure is not intended to be deterministic. 
Some examples:
•	 Expanded access to renewable energy and a 
global currency transaction tax to finance 
climate change mitigation and adaptation 
can advance both sustainability and equity 
(quadrant 1), as we will explore in chapters 
4 and 5.

•	 Subsidies  on  gasoline  consumption,  still 
common  in  many  countries,  may  set  us 
back  in  both  dimensions  (quadrant  3) 
by favouring those who can afford a car 
while  generating  an  incentive  for  exces-
sive resource depletion. Countless cases of 
regressive, inequitable subsidies in agricul-
ture, energy and water are also often associ-
ated with environmental damage.34

•	 Some policies may advance one objective 
but set back the other. Subsidizing coal in 
developing countries may promote growth 
but also contribute to higher greenhouse 
gas  emissions.  Such  a  policy  could  have 
positive effects on global equity but nega-
tive effects on sustainability (quadrant 4).
•	 The converse can also occur: policies can 
improve  sustainability  while  worsening 
inequity (quadrant 2). For example, poli-
cies  that  limit  access  to  common  prop-
erty resources such as forests may enhance 
sustainability  by  preserving  the  natural 
resource  but  can  deprive  poor  groups  of 
their primary source of livelihoods, though 
this is certainly not always the case.
We  do  not  assume  a  positive  empiri-
cal  association  between  sustainability  and 
equity. This association may well exist, and 
it  requires  investigation.  Schematically,  it 
can arise whenever most of the feasible alter-
natives fall in either quadrant 1 or 3 of fig-
ure 1.1. But it is also possible that most feasi-
ble alternatives fall in quadrant 2 or 4, which 
present trade-offs between sustainability and 
equity. And the pathways may be nonlinear. 
Such possibilities require explicit and careful 
consideration.

But  we  can  go  further.  A  trade-off 
between  sustainability  and  equity  is  like  a 
trade-off in the well-being of two disadvan-
taged  groups.  Because  no  trade-off  is  iso-
lated from a society’s structural and institu-
tional conditions, as in the case of trade-offs 
between the claims of different groups, we 
must address the underlying constraints. So, 
our policy focus is aimed not only at finding 
positive synergies but also at identifying ways 
to build synergies. Our objective is to find 
solutions that fall in quadrant 1 — solutions 
that are win-win-win (good for the environ-
ment  while  promoting  equity  and  human 

development). We should prefer approaches 
in quadrant 1, whenever available, to those 
that  fall  in  quadrant  2  or  3  but  recognize 
that options in quadrant 1 may not always 
be available.35

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

The next chapter reviews how resource con-
straints and environmental thresholds impede 
human  development  and  equity.  We  review 
the  cross-national  evidence  of  links  among 
sustainability, equity and human development 
— and identify the challenges to meeting these 
goals successfully.

CHapteR 1  why SuStAinABility And equity?

21

patterns and trends in 
human development, equity 
and environmental indicators

r
e
t
p
a
h
c

2

This  chapter  reviews  patterns  and  trends 
in  human  development,  inequality  and  key 
environmental  indicators.  We  present  new 
evidence of the threats to progress posed by 
environmental  degradation  and  inequalities 
within and across countries. The most disad-
vantaged bear and will continue to bear the 
consequences of environmental degradation, 
even  if  many  contribute  little  to  the  under-
lying causes.

progress and prospects

Progress in many aspects of human develop-
ment  has  been  substantial  over  the  past  40 
years, as the 2010 Human Development Report 
(HDR) showed. But income distribution has 
worsened,  and  environmental  degradation 
threatens future prospects.

Progress in human development
Most people today live longer, are more edu-
cated and have more access to goods and ser-
vices than ever before. Even in economically 
distressed countries, people’s health and educa-
tion have improved greatly. And progress has 
extended to expansions in people’s power to 
select leaders, influence public decisions and 
share knowledge.

Witness the gains in our summary meas-
ure of development, the Human Development 
Index  (HDI),  a  simple  composite  measure 
that  includes  health,  schooling  and  income. 
The  world’s  average  HDI  increased  18  per-
cent between 1990 and 2010 (41 percent since 
1970),  reflecting  large  improvements  in  life 
expectancy,  school  enrolment,  literacy  and 
income.1 Almost all countries benefited. Of 
the  135  countries  in  our  sample  for  1970–
2010 (with 92 percent of the world’s people), 
only three had a lower HDI in 2010 than in 
1970. Poor countries are catching up with rich 

countries on the HDI, convergence that paints 
a far more optimistic picture than do trends in 
income, where divergence continues.

But not all countries have seen rapid pro-
gress, and the variations are striking. People in 
Southern Africa and the former Soviet Union 
have  endured  times  of  regress,  especially  in 
health. And countries starting from the same 
position had markedly different experiences. 
China’s per capita income grew an astounding 
1,200 percent over the 40 years, but the Demo-
cratic Republic of the Congo’s fell 80 percent. 
Advances in technical knowledge and globali-
zation made progress more feasible for coun-
tries at all levels of development, but countries 
took advantage of the opportunities in differ-
ent ways.

The  2010  HDR  reviewed  trends  in 
empowerment — people’s  ability  to  exercise 
choices and to participate in, shape and ben-
efit from household, community and national 
processes.  For  the  Arab  States  the  situation 
described last year — of few signs of in-depth 
democratization — has  changed  profoundly 
since late 2010 (box 2.1).

Has progress come at the cost of 
environmental degradation?
Not all sides of the story are positive. Income 
inequality has worsened, and production and 
consumption patterns, especially in rich coun-
tries, seem to be unsustainable.

To  explore  environmental  trends,  we 
need  to  decide  which  measure  of  environ-
mental  degradation  to  use.  The  concep-
tual  challenges  were  considered  in  chapter 
1. There are also data challenges, and some 
measures are available only for recent years. 
Box  2.2  discusses  the  important  insights 
offered  by  leading  aggregate  sustainability 
measures.  But  to  understand  patterns  and 
trends, we prefer to use specific indicators.2 

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

23

BOX 2.1
Overcoming the democratic deficit — empowerment and the Arab Spring

Last year’s Human Development Report (HDR) looked at the “democratic 
deficit” in the Arab States, seeking to understand why the region had dem-
onstrated few signs of significant democratization.

Drawing  on  the Arab  Human  Development  Reports since  2002,  the 
2010 global HDR pointed to the stark contrasts between actual practice 
and formal adherence to democracy, human rights and the rule of law. It 
emphasized that many democratic reforms in the region had been offset by 
countermeasures limiting citizen rights in other respects — including nearly 
unchecked concentration of power in the executive branch. Civil society, in 
turn, was weak: “Popular demand for democratic transformation and citi-
zens’ participation is a nascent and fragile development in the Arab coun-
tries,” noted the 2009 Arab Human Development Report (p. 73).

Even so, in most of the Arab States long-term trends showed major 
progress in income, health and education, the Human Development Index 
(HDI) dimensions, since 1970. Five Arab States emerged among the top 10 
performers — Oman, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco — while 
Libya  was  among  the  top  10  countries  in  nonincome  HDI  achievement. 
All these countries advanced due mainly to improvements in health and 
education.

Particularly striking were the changes in these countries relative to 
others at a similar HDI 40 years earlier. For instance, in 1970 Tunisia had a 
lower life expectancy than the Democratic Republic of the Congo and fewer 
children in school than Malawi. Yet by 2010 Tunisia was in the high HDI 
category, with an average life expectancy of 74 years and most children 
enrolled through secondary school.

The recent pro-democracy protests across the Arab States began in 
Tunisia and Egypt, driven in both cases by educated urban youth. Multiple 
and complex causes underlie any social phenomena, but the democratization 
movement can be considered a direct consequence of human development 
progress. Indeed, many analysts over the years — sociologists, political sci-
entists and others both in and outside the region — have argued that popular 

demand for democracy and human rights is an integral part of broader mod-
ernization and development. As the first Arab Human Development Report 
affirmed in 2002 (p. 18): “Human development, by enhancing human capa-
bilities, creates the ability to exercise freedom, and human rights, by provid-
ing the necessary framework, create the opportunity to exercise it. Freedom 
is both the guarantor and the goal of both human development and human 
rights.”

In the long run people who have attained higher levels of education and 
who have experienced rising living standards are unwilling to tolerate con-
tinued autocratic rule. For example, health and education are often neces-
sary for meaningful participation in public life. Progress in these areas often 
occurs through their extension to the disadvantaged and disenfranchised, 
and once extended, it is very hard for elites to exclude the broader popula-
tion from civic and political rights. The transition in the former Soviet Union 
is an earlier example of this pattern.

But this progress must be placed within a broader context. Develop-
ment has led to other contradictions, with rising but unfulfilled expectations 
often generating deep social frustrations. Inequality has increased while 
cellphones and Twitter™ have permitted more rapid transmission of ideas. 
Many analysts have pointed to high unemployment and underemployment 
among educated youth as a key factor driving political dissent in the region. 
Half the population in the Arab States is under 25, and youth unemployment 
rates are nearly double the global average. In Egypt an estimated 25 percent 
of college graduates cannot find full-time professional work — in Tunisia that 
figure rises to 30 percent.

Although the outcome of this year’s political upheavals will not be clear 
for some time, the region has already profoundly changed. What was strik-
ing until recently was the juxtaposition of authoritarian rule and rising de-
velopment achievement. In 2011 this “Arab democracy paradox” seemed to 
be coming to a sudden end, opening the door to a much fuller realization of 
people’s freedoms and capabilities throughout the region.

Source: 2010 HDR (UNDP–HDRO 2010; see inside back cover for a list of HDRs); UNDP 2002, 2009; Kimenyi 2011.

We have drawn on a wealth of research and 
analysis to determine which indicators pro-
vide the best insights.

We start by looking at patterns of carbon 
dioxide emissions over time, a good if imper-
fect proxy for the environmental impacts of a 
country’s economic activity on climate. Emis-
sions per capita are much greater in very high 
HDI countries than in low, medium and high 
HDI  countries  combined,  because  of  many 
more energy-intensive activities, such as driv-
ing  cars,  using  air  conditioning  and  relying 
on  fossil  fuel–based  electricity.3  Today,  the 
average  person  in  a  very  high  HDI  country 
accounts for more than four times the carbon 
dioxide emissions and about twice the emis-
sions of the other important greenhouse gases 
(methane, nitrous oxide) as a person in a low, 

medium  or  high  HDI  country.4  Compared 
with an average person living in a low HDI 
country, a person in a very high HDI country 
accounts for about 30 times the carbon dioxide 
emissions. For example, the average UK citizen 
accounts for as much greenhouse gas emissions 
in two months as a person in a low HDI coun-
try generates in a year. And the average Qatari 
— living in the country with the highest per 
capita greenhouse gas emissions — does so in 
only 10 days, although this figure reflects both 
consumption within the country and produc-
tion that is consumed elsewhere, an issue we 
revisit below.

Of course, development has many dimen-
sions.  The  HDI  recognizes  this  by  aggre-
gating  measures  of  three  key  dimensions — 
income, health and education. How do these 

24

Human Development RepoRt 2011

BOX 2.2
What can we learn from trends in aggregate measures of sustainability?

Of the aggregate measures of sustainability surveyed in box 1.2 in chapter 1, 
only two are available for a large number of countries over a reasonably 
long period: the World Bank’s adjusted net savings and the Global Footprint 
Network’s ecological footprint. What do these measures tell us?

Adjusted net savings is positive for all Human Development Index (HDI) 
groups, meaning that the world is (weakly) sustainable (see figure). The posi-
tive trend for low, medium and high HDI countries suggests that their sus-
tainability has improved over time, while that of the very high HDI countries 
is declining over time.

However, as reviewed in chapter 1, the concept of weak sustainability 
underlying adjusted net savings has been criticized for not acknowledging 
that sustainability requires maintaining some natural capital. Adjusted net 
savings also involves some other controversial methodological choices. For 
example, valuing natural resources at market prices can overestimate the 
sustainability of an economy that produces them as the resources become 
scarcer and thus more expensive.

Further  analysis — taking  into  account  the  uncertainty  embodied  in 
greenhouse gas emissions and their monetary valuation — shows that the 
number of countries considered unsustainable in 2005 would rise about 
two-third s — from 15 to 25— if adjusted net savings used a more compre-
hensive measure of emissions that includes methane and nitrous oxide as 
well as carbon dioxide and acknowledged valuation uncertainties. In other 
words, adjusted net savings may be overestimated.

The ecological footprint, by contrast, shows that the world is increas-
ingly exceeding its global capacity to provide resources and absorb wastes. 
If everyone in the world had the same consumption as people in very high 
HDI countries and with current technologies, we would need more than 
three Earths to withstand the pressure on the environment.

Source: Garcia and Pineda 2011; Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi 2009.

Adjusted net savings 
and ecological footprint 
show different results for 
sustainability trends over time

Adjusted net savings (percent of GNI)

Low,
medium
and high
HDI
Very high
HDI

The big message from the ecologi-
cal  footprint  is  that  patterns  of 
consumption  and  production  are 
unsustainable at the global level 
and  imbalanced  regionally.  And 
the situation is worsening, espe-
cially in very high HDI countries.

20

10

6

4

2

1990

2005

1990

2005

0
1980

0
1980

Low,
medium
and high
HDI

Source:  HDRO  calculations  based  on  data  from 
World Bank (2011b) and www.footprintnetwork.org.

Ecological footprint (hectares per capita)
Very high
HDI

The  ecological  footprint  es-
timates the amount of forest that 
would be required to absorb carbon 
dioxide emissions — though this is 
not the only method for sequester-
ing emissions. It neglects other key 
aspects of the environment, includ-
ing biodiversity, and such amenities 
as water quality. And it focuses on 
consumption, so that the consumer 
country  rather  than  the  producer 
country is responsible for the im-
pact of imported natural resources. 
One further issue is that most changes over time (both global and national) are 
driven by carbon dioxide emissions, and there is a strong correlation between 
the volume of carbon emissions and the value of the ecological footprint.
Another more recent measure is the environmental performance index, 
developed at Yale and Columbia Universities. This composite index uses 25 
indicators to establish how close countries are to established environmental 
policy goals — a useful policy tool, built from a rich set of indicators and pro-
viding a broad definition of sustainability. But the measure’s data intensity 
(requiring 25 indicators for more than 160 countries) inhibits construction of 
a time series for the analysis of trends in this Report.

dimensions interact with measures of environ-
mental degradation?

The  dimensions  interact  very  differently 
with carbon dioxide emissions per capita: the 
association is positive and strong for income, 
still positive but weaker for the HDI and non-
existent for health and education (figure 2.1). 
This result is of course intuitive: activities that 
emit carbon dioxide into the atmosphere are 
those linked to the production and distribu-
tion of goods. Carbon dioxide is emitted by 
factories and trucks, not by learning and vac-
cinations. These results also show the nonlin-
ear relationship between carbon dioxide emis-
sions per capita and HDI components: there is 
practically no relation at low levels of human 
development, but a “tipping point” appears to 
be reached beyond which a strong positive cor-
relation between carbon dioxide emissions per 
capita and income is observed.

The correlation between some key meas-
ures  of  sustainability  and  national  levels 
of  development  are  well  known.  Less  well 
known,  and  emerging  from  our  analysis,  is 
that growth in carbon dioxide emissions per 
capita is related to the speed of development. 
Countries  with  faster  HDI  improvements 
also  experience  a  faster  increase  in  carbon 
dioxide  emissions  per  capita  (figure  2.2).5 
Changes  over  time — not  the  snapshot  rela-
tionship, which reflects cumulative effects — 
are the best guide to what to expect as a result 
of development today.

The  bottom  line:  recent  progress  in  the 
HDI has come at the cost of global warming. 
In  countries  advancing  fastest  in  the  HDI, 
carbon dioxide emissions per capita also grew 
faster.  But  these  environmental  costs  come 
from economic growth, not broader gains in 
HDI, and the relationship is not fixed. Some 

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

25

FIGURE 2.1
the association with carbon dioxide emissions per capita is positive and strong for income, positive for the 
hdi and nonexistent for health and education
Carbon dioxide emissions per capita (tonnes)
35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0.1

0.3

0.6

0.2
0.8
Income component of the HDI

0.4

0.7

0.5

0.9

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.5
HDI

–0.2

–0.3
0.2
Health and education (nonincome)

–0.1

0.1

0

components of the HDI

Note: Data are for 2007.
Source: HDRO calculations, based on data from the HDRO database.

countries  have  advanced  in  both  the  HDI 
and  environmental  sustainability  (those  in 
the lower right quadrants of figure 2.2) — an 
important point investigated below.

This relationship does not hold for all envi-
ronmental indicators. Our analysis finds only a 
weak positive correlation between levels of the 
HDI and deforestation, for example. Why do 
carbon dioxide emissions per capita differ from 
other environmental threats?

Research  shows  that  some  environmen-
tal threats have increased with development 
and others have not. A seminal study points 
to an inverted-U relationship for air and water 
pollution,  showing  that  environmental  deg-
radation  worsens  then  improves  as  the  level 
of development rises (a pattern known as the 
environmental Kuznets curve).6 This can be 
explained in terms of the increasing respon-
siveness of governments to people’s desire for 

FIGURE 2.2
Countries with higher growth also experience faster increase in carbon dioxide emissions per capita
Change in carbon dioxide emissions per capita (tonnes)
0.06

0.04

0.02

0

–0.02

–0.04

–0.06

–0.08

–0.01

0

0.01

–0.01

0

0.01

–0.01

0

0.01

Change in the income
component of the HDI

Change in the HDI

Change in the health and education
(nonincome) components of the HDI

Note: Data are for 2007.
Source: HDRO calculations, based on data from the HDRO database.

26

Human Development RepoRt 2011

clean and healthy environments as countries 
become richer. But with carbon dioxide emis-
sions, the damage is global and harms mostly 
future generations, so even very rich countries 
have little to gain from reining in greenhouse 
gas emissions unless others act too.

These global patterns can be seen as a series 
of environmental transitions and related risks 
for people, set against overall HDI trends. In 
a twist on the traditional Kuznets story, the 
global evidence suggests that countries address 
direct  household  deprivations  first  (such  as 
access to water and energy), then community 
deprivations  (notably  pollution)  and  finally 
deprivations  with  global  effects  and  exter-
nalities (namely climate change).7 Where the 
link between the environment and quality of 
life is direct, as with pollution, environmen-
tal  achievements  are  often  greater  in  devel-
oped countries; where the links are more dif-
fuse, performance is much weaker. Figure 2.3 
depicts three generalized findings:
•	 Environmental  risk  factors  with  an 
immediate  impact  on  households — such 
as  indoor  air  pollution,  poor  water  and 
sanitation — are more severe at lower HDI 
levels and decline as the HDI rises. As we 
show in chapter 3, within countries these 
threats also tend to be concentrated among 
the multidimensionally poor.

•	 Environmental  risks  with  community 
effects — such  as  urban  air  pollution — 
seem to worsen as the HDI rises from low 
levels and then begin to improve beyond a 
certain point.8 This is the Kuznets part of 
the story.

•	 Environmental  risk  factors  with  global 
effects — such as greenhouse gas emissions 
— tend to increase with the HDI, as shown 
empirically in figure 2.2.
Of course, the HDI itself is not the true 
driver  of  these  transitions.  Public  policies 
are  important  too.  Incomes  and  economic 
growth  have  an  important  explanatory  role 
for  emissions — but  the  relationship  is  not 
deterministic.  For  example,  Norway’s  per 
capita carbon dioxide emissions (11 tonnes) 
are less than a third those of the United Arab 
Emirates (35 tonnes), although both have high 
incomes.9 Patterns of natural resource use also 

FIGURE 2.3
patterns of risk change: environmental transitions and human 
development

Household
Indoor air pollution
Poor water and
sanitation

Community

Urban air pollution

Global
Greenhouse
gas emissions

Severity of
environmental
impact

HDI

Source: Based on Hughes, Kuhn and others (2011).

BOX 2.3
Consumption and human development

Runaway growth in consumption among the best-off people in the world is putting unprec-
edented pressure on the environment. The inequalities remain stark. Today, there are more 
than 900 cars per 1,000 people of driving age in the United States and more than 600 in West-
ern Europe, but fewer than 10 in India. US households average more than two television sets, 
whereas in Liberia and Uganda fewer than 1 household in 10 has a television set. Domestic 
per capita water consumption in the very high Human Development Index (HDI) countries, at 
425 litres a day, is more than six times that in the low HDI countries, where it averages 67 
litres a day.

Consumption patterns are converging in some respects as people in many developing 
countries are consuming more luxury goods: China is poised to overtake the United States 
as the world’s largest luxury consumer market. But even among very high HDI countries, con-
sumption patterns vary. Consumption accounts for 79 percent of GDP in the United Kingdom 
and 34 percent in Singapore despite the countries’ having nearly the same HDI. Among the 
explanations for these differences are demographic patterns and social and cultural norms, 
which affect savings practices, for example.

At the same time, the links with human development are often broken, as explored in the 
1998 Human Development Report: new products often target richer consumers, discounting 
the needs of the poor in developing countries.

Education can be fundamentally important in tempering excessive consumption. Such ef-
forts have been promoted by the UN General Assembly’s declaration of the UN Decade of Edu-
cation for Sustainable Development (2005–2014) and United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization activities geared at encouraging sustainable consumption.

Source: Data from Morgan Stanley, as cited in The Economist 2008a; data from Bain and Company 2011, as cited in Reuters 
2011; Heston, Summers and Aten 2009 (Penn World Table 6.3).

vary: Indonesia deforested nearly 20 percent 
a  year  between  1990  and  2008;  the  Philip-
pines, with similar per capita income, refor-
ested 15 percent over the same period.10 And 
consumption patterns are also important (box 
2.3). At the international level broader forces 

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

27

the findings of the 
quasi-experimental 
analysis lend empirical 
weight to our argument 
that inequality is bad 
not just intrinsically 

but also for the 

environment and that 
weak environmental 

performance can worsen 

disparities in the HDI

interact in a complex manner, changing pat-
terns  of  risk — trade  often  allows  countries 
to  outsource  the  production  of  goods  that 
degrade the environment, as we discuss below 
for deforestation. There are also outlier coun-
tries that have performed relatively well, as we 
show later using a broader framework of envi-
ronmental risk.

Are there causal relations at play?
Did changes in sustainability come before or 
after changes in human development? Is there 
a  causal  relation?  Are  increasing  inequality 
and environmental unsustainability causally 
related? For example, if wealthier groups and 
corporations  have  disproportionate  political 
and economic power and benefit from activi-
ties that degrade the environment, they may 
obstruct  measures  that  protect  the  environ-
ment. A counter-example is how the empower-
ment of women often goes hand in hand with 
greater protection of the environment.

Our analysis of sequencing finds that in 
the short run the effects go in both directions 
for  the  HDI,  greenhouse  gas  emissions  and 
pollution. In the long run, however, a rising 
HDI precedes a rise in greenhouse gas emis-
sions, so while not conclusive, the evidence is 
consistent with a causal relationship where ris-
ing HDI — or at least the income component 
— implies higher greenhouse gas emissions in 
the future.

What  about  inequality?  Using  quasi-
experimental methods, we explored the causal 
relationship between inequality (measured in 
terms of HDI and gender disparities) and sus-
tainability.  Although  country  differences  in 
environmental performance are driven by mul-
tiple contextual and other factors, it is possible 
to  establish  causality  where  sources  of  what 
economists call “exogenous variation” can be 
identified.11  We  used  climate-related  shocks 
and  changes  in  institutional  arrangements, 
such as the year women received full electoral 
rights, as sources of exogenous variation. The 
results are striking.
•	 Poor  sustainability  performance — as 
measured by net forest depletion and espe-
cially air pollution — raised inequality in 
the HDI.12

•	 Higher levels of gender inequality (as meas-
ured by the Gender Inequality Index) led 
to lower levels of sustainability — a theme 
explored in chapter 3.13
These  findings  lend  empirical  weight  to 
our argument that inequality is bad not just 
intrinsically but also for the environment. And 
weak environmental performance can worsen 
disparities in the HDI. We now examine these 
disparities in more detail.

Equity trends
To explore what has happened to equity over 
time we use a multidimensional approach that 
goes  beyond  incomes.  This  analysis  builds 
on  the  innovation  in  the  2010  HDR,  the 
Inequality- adjusted HDI (IHDI), which dis-
counts human development achievements by 
the inequality in each dimension, and so the 
IHDI falls farther below the HDI as inequal-
ity rises.14 The basic idea is intuitive. School-
ing and longevity (like income) are necessary 
to lead fulfilling lives; therefore, we care about 
how they are distributed between those with 
more  and  those  with  less.  Although  incom-
plete,  especially  in  the  neglect  of  empower-
ment, the approach provides a fuller picture 
than a focus on income inequality alone.

This Report takes an important step for-
ward by presenting trends in the IHDI since 
1990 for 66 countries (see statistical table 3 for 
the 2011 values; Technical note 2 explains the 
methodology).15
•	 Worsening  income  inequality  has  offset 
large improvements in health and educa-
tion inequality, such that the aggregate loss 
in human development due to inequality 
sums to 24 percent.16

•	 The global trends conceal widening educa-
tional inequality in South Asia and deep 
health inequality in Africa.

•	 Latin America remains the most unequal 
region in income, but not in health and 
education.

•	 Sub-Saharan Africa has the greatest ine-

quality in the HDI.

Narrowing health inequalities
Health affects people’s capability to function 
and  flourish.  The  evidence  shows  a  positive 

28

Human Development RepoRt 2011

correlation between health and socioeconomic 
status.  This  has  led  researchers  to  focus  on 
income and social inequalities as determinants 
of health, with recent investigations using new 
household data to examine trends.17

Our analysis suggests that the rising lon-
gevity around the world — investigated in the 
2010 HDR — has been associated with greater 
equity:  health  inequality,  measured  by  life 
expectancy, declined across the board.18 Very 
high HDI countries led the way, closely fol-
lowed by improvements in East Asia and the 
Pacific and Latin America and the Caribbean, 
with  the  Arab  States  not  far  behind.  Gains 
were  most  modest  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa, 
from the lowest starting levels, due mainly to 
the HIV/AIDS pandemic, especially in South-
ern Africa, where adult HIV/AIDS prevalence 
rates still exceed 15 percent (figure 2.4).19

Improving equity in education
Progress in expanding education opportunities 
has been substantial and widespread, reflecting 
improvements in the quantity of schooling and 
greater gender equity and access. Not only are 
more children going to school, more finish.20

As with health, trends in the distribution 
of  education  opportunities  show  narrowing 
inequalities around the world as overall enrol-
ments  and  attainment  rise.  For  example,  a 
study of 29 developing countries and 13 devel-
oped countries found that the power of par-
ents’ education as a predictor of their children’s 
schooling fell substantially in most countries 
over the last 50 years, indicating reduced inter-
generational inequality in education.21

Our analysis of national trends in educa-
tion inequality (measured by average years of 
schooling)  since  1970  shows  improvements 
in  most  countries.  In  contrast  with  trends 
in  income  inequality,  education  inequality 
declined  most  in  Europe  and  Central  Asia 
(almost 76 percent), followed by East Asia and 
the Pacific (52 percent) and Latin America and 
the Caribbean (48 percent).

Though rising average levels of education 
and  health  attainments  have  generally  been 
accompanied  by  narrowing  inequality,  the 
effect is not automatic. Average attainments 
and inequality can move in different directions 

FIGURE 2.4
high hiv/AidS prevalence rates in Southern Africa stall 
improvements in health inequality
Loss in the health component of the HDI due to inequality, 1970–2010 

Botswana
Lesotho
South Africa
Zimbabwe

Atkinson inequality index
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Note: See Technical note 2 for definition of the Atkinson inequality index. Each observation represents a five-year average.
Source: HDRO calculations based on life expectancy data from the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division, Population Estimates and Projections Section, and Fuchs and Jayadev (2011).

and at different speeds.22 Education inequality 
worsened about 8 percent in South Asia, for 
instance, despite a massive average increase in 
education attainment of 180 percent.

Widening income disparities
Income  inequality  has  deteriorated  in  most 
countries  and  regions — with  some  notable 
exceptions in Latin America and Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Some highlights:
•	 Detailed studies show a striking increase in 
the income share of the wealthiest groups 
in much of Europe, North America, Aus-
tralia and New Zealand.23 From 1990 to 
2005  within-country  income  inequal-
ity, measured by the Atkinson inequality 
index, increased 23.3 percent in very high 
HDI countries.24 The gap between the rich 
and  the  poor  widened  over  the  last  two 
decades  in  more  than  three-quarters  of 
Organisation for Economic Co- operation 
and Development countries and in many 
emerging market economies.25
Income  has  also  become  more  concen-
trated among top earners in China, India 
and South Africa.26 In China, for exam-
ple, the top quintile of income earners had 
41 percent of total income in 2008, and 
the Gini coefficient for income inequality 
rose from 0.31 in 1981 to 0.42 in 2005.

•	

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

29

Using the same Atkinson inequality index 
applied to health and education and the over-
all  IHDI,  our  own  analysis  confirms  this 
picture  and  finds  that  average  country-level 
income  inequality  increased  around  20  per-
cent over 1990–2005. The worst deterioration 
was in Europe and Central Asia (more than 
100 percent).

Over the last decade or so, much of Latin 
America and the Caribbean has bucked this 
trend:  within-country  inequality  has  been 
falling, especially in Argentina, Brazil, Hon-
duras, Mexico and Peru, with some exceptions, 
including Jamaica.27 Some trace Latin Amer-
ica’s  performance  to  the  shrinking  earnings 
gap  between  high-  and  low-skilled  workers 
and to the increase in targeted social transfer 
payments.28 The shrinking earnings gap fol-
lows expanding coverage in basic education in 
recent decades, but it may run into headwinds 
when the poor are turned away from university 

BOX 2.4
Sustainability, crises and inequality

Background research commissioned for this Report considered income inequality and two 
types of economic crisis — banking crises and collapses in consumption or gross domestic 
product — over the century to 2010. The analysis focused on 25 countries — some experiencing 
the crisis, others not — 14 in North America and Europe and 11 elsewhere.

Does inequality make crises more likely? There is some support for the hypothesis that 
a rise in inequality is associated with subsequent crises, but high inequality is not always 
linked to crisis. Rising inequality preceded crises in Sweden in 1991 and in Indonesia in 1997 
but not in India in 1993. Where rising inequality did precede a crisis, it could be attributed to 
overconsumption among some groups or underconsumption among others and to the effects 
of such patterns on the broader economy.

Who bears the brunt of a crisis? For 31 banking crises for which inequality data are avail-
able, there are a few cases of rising overall inequality followed by crises and then a fall in 
inequality, notably the 2007 Icelandic crisis — but such cases do not predominate. Inequality 
rose in about 40 percent of the cases, fell in just over a quarter and showed no change in the 
remainder.

Overall, the analysis suggests no systematic relationship between crises and income in-
equality, even for countries simultaneously experiencing banking crisis and economic collapse. 
Inequality rose in the Republic of Korea, Malaysia and Singapore as a result of the 1997 Asian 
financial crises but remained steady in Indonesia. While data are not yet available to allow 
rigorous analysis of the effects of the 2008 financial crisis, some evidence affirms the lack of a 
clear pattern across countries — with inequality rising in some countries and falling in others.
The effects of inequality and of crisis also reflect policy responses. For example, following 
crises, compensatory transfers or progressive taxation can mitigate inequality, while cutting 
transfers to reduce budget deficits can do the opposite. Crises have often prompted institu-
tional change, for instance the introduction of social security in the United States in the 1930s. 
Following the Nordic crises of the 1990s, the welfare state and fiscal provisions seem to have 
been a powerful moderating force on any increase in inequality.

Source: Atkinson and Morelli 2011.

30

Human Development RepoRt 2011

education because of the low quality of their 
primary and secondary schooling.

Why has declining inequality in health and 
education not been accompanied by improved 
income distribution? Increased access to edu-
cation may be part of the story. The returns to 
basic education fall as more people gain access. 
Completion of primary school brought smaller 
income gains than before, while the relative 
value of education to those at the top of the 
distribution  increased.  This  increase  in  the 
“skill premium” resulted from a combination 
of skill-biased technical change and changes in 
policy — though country institutions and poli-
cies strongly influenced country-level effects.29
We might also expect financial crises to 
affect trends in inequality. To what extent do 
crises increase income inequality? Does income 
inequality make crises more likely? Can gov-
ernment policy make a difference? This Report 
focuses on the effects of environmental shocks, 
but recent research on the causes and effects of 
financial crises offers some parallels (box 2.4).

Prospects — and environmental 
threats
The global HDI has risen strongly in recent 
decades, but what does the future hold? How 
might HDI values change for developed and 
developing countries through 2050? And how 
severely might environmental and inequality 
constraints affect that advance? Given inher-
ent uncertainties, we compare three scenarios 
through 2050, produced by the University of 
Denver’s Frederick S. Pardee Center for Inter-
national Futures (figure 2.5).30
•	 A base case scenario, which assumes lim-
ited changes in inequality, environmental 
threats  and  risks,  anticipates  for  2050  a 
global HDI that is 19 percent higher than 
today’s (44 percent higher for Sub-Saharan 
Africa). The increase is less than a simple 
extrapolation  of  past  trends  would  yield 
because progress in the HDI tends to slow 
at very high levels.31

•	 The environmental challenge scenario envi-
sions  intensified  environmental  risks  at 
the household (indoor solid fuel use), local 
(water and sanitation), urban and regional 
(outdoor  air  pollution)  and  global  levels 

(especially  increasing  impacts  of  climate 
change  on  agricultural  production)  and 
inequality  and  insecurity.32  The  global 
HDI in 2050 is 8 percent lower than in the 
base case and 12 percent lower for South 
Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa.

•	 Under an environmental disaster scenario 
most early 21st century gains have eroded 
by  2050  as  biophysical  and  human  sys-
tems are stressed by overuse of fossil fuels 
and  falling  water  tables,  glacial  melting, 
progressive  deforestation  and  land  deg-
radation,  dramatic  declines  in  biodiver-
sity, greater frequency of extreme weather 
events, peaking production of oil and gas, 
increased civil conflict and other disrup-
tions.  The  model  does  not  exhaustively 
consider  the  potential  for  associated 
vicious feedback loops, which would exac-
erbate  these  trends.  Under  this  scenario 
the global HDI in 2050 would be some 
15 percent below the baseline scenario.
Both  the  environmental  challenge  and 
environmental disaster scenarios would lead to 
breaks in the pattern of convergence in human 
development  across  countries  observed  over 
the past 40 years. And longer term projections 
suggest that divergence would widen further 
after 2050.

This is illustrated by projections of cross-
country  inequality  in  the  HDI,  using  the 
Atkinson inequality index, which has fallen 
more than two-thirds over the past 40 years, 
reflecting the convergence trends. Under the 
base case, inequality among countries is pro-
jected to continue to fall over the next 40 years. 
But under the disaster scenario, future conver-
gence, as measured by changes in the Atkinson 
inequality index, would be on the order of only 
24 percent by 2050, compared with 57 percent 
under the baseline (figure 2.6).

threats to sustaining progress

Past patterns suggest that, in the absence of 
reform, the links between economic growth 
and  rising  greenhouse  gas  emissions  could 
jeopardize the extraordinary progress in the 
HDI  in  recent  decades.  But  climate  change 
— with effects on temperatures, precipitation, 

FIGURE 2.5
Scenarios projecting impacts of environmental risks on human 
development through 2050
HDI
1.0

Very high HDI
countries

Low, medium
and high HDI
countries

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

Base case
Environmental challenge
Environmental disaster

Base case

Environmental challenge

Environmental disaster

0.3

2000

1980

1990

2010
Note: See text for explanation of scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from the HDRO database and Hughes, Irfan and others (2011), who draw on forecasts from 
International Futures, Version 6.42.

2040

2020

2030

2050

FIGURE 2.6
Scenarios projecting slowdown and reversals of convergence in 
human development due to environmental risks through 2050
Atkinson inequality index
(loss in the HDI due to inequality)
.07

.06

.05

.04

.03

.02

.01

0

World
median

Environmental disaster

Environmental challenge
Base case

1990

2000

1980

2010
Note: See text for explanation of scenarios.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from the HDRO database and Hughes, Irfan and others (2011), who draw on forecasts from 
International Futures, Version 6.42.

2030

2020

2040

2050

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

31

sea levels and natural disasters — is not the only 
environmental problem.

Degraded land, forests and marine ecosys-
tems pose chronic threats to well-being, while 
pollution has substantial costs that appear to 
rise and then fall with development levels. We 
discuss  these  threats  in  turn,  then  consider 
which countries have performed better than 
their regions and the world.

Climate change
Global  temperatures  now  average  0.75°C 
higher than at the beginning of the 20th cen-
tury,  and  the  rate  of  change  has  accelerated 
(figure 2.7). The main cause is human activity, 
particularly burning fossil fuels, cutting forests 

FIGURE 2.7
Average world temperatures have risen since 1900

Variation from 1951–1980 mean (degrees Celsius)
1.0 

Annual mean 
Five-year mean 

0.8 

0.6 

0.4 

0.2 

0 

–0.2 

–0.4 

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2008

Note: Calculated using average temperatures in 173 countries, weighted by average population in 1950–2008.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from the University of Delaware.

TABlE 2.1
growth in carbon dioxide emissions and its drivers, 1970–2007 
(percent)

Growth

Percentage share of total growtha

Per capita

Total

Population

GDP per capita Carbon intensity

HDI group
Very high
High
Medium
Low
World
a. Based on an accounting decomposition of the effects on carbon growth that simplifies the Kaya identity presented in Raupach 
and others (2007) from four drivers to three. Values may not sum to 100 percent because of rounding.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from World Bank (2011b).

–213
–111
–15
7
–70

233
116
82
21
91

7
3
276
49
17

42
73
609
304
112

81
94
32
72
79

and  manufacturing  cement,  which  increase 
carbon dioxide emissions. Other greenhouse 
gases,  such  as  those  regulated  by  the  Mon-
treal Protocol, also pose serious threats. The 
100-year global warming potential of nitrous 
oxide is nearly 300 times that of carbon diox-
ide and 25 times that of methane.33 That cli-
mate change is caused by human activities is 
scientifically accepted,34 though public aware-
ness still lags, with less than two-thirds of the 
population worldwide aware of climate change 
and its causes (box 2.5).

Key drivers
Global carbon dioxide emissions have increased 
since 1970 — 248 percent in low, medium and 
high  HDI  countries  and  42  percent  in  very 
high HDI countries. The global growth of 112 
percent can be broken down into three drivers: 
population  growth,  rising  consumption  and 
carbon-intensive  production.35  Rising  con-
sumption  (as  reflected  by  GDP  growth)  has 
been the main driver, accounting for 91 per-
cent of the change in emissions, while popula-
tion growth contributed 79 percent. The con-
tribution of carbon intensity, in contrast, was 
–70 percent, reflecting technological advances 
(table 2.1). In other words, the principal driver 
of increases in emissions is that more people are 
consuming  more  goods — even  if  production 
itself has become more efficient, on average.

Although  the  carbon  efficiency  of  pro-
duction  (units  of  carbon  to  produce  a  unit 
of GDP) has improved 40 percent, total car-
bon dioxide emissions continue to rise. Aver-
age carbon dioxide emissions per capita have 
grown 17 percent over 1970–2007.

Patterns of carbon dioxide emissions vary 
widely  across  regions  and  stages  of  develop-
ment. Some highlights:
•	

In  very  high  HDI  countries  the  carbon 
intensity of production has fallen 52 per-
cent,  but  total  emissions  and  emissions 
per capita have more than doubled and are 
112 percent higher now than 40 years ago. 
Improvements  in  carbon  efficiency  have 
not kept up with economic growth.

•	 Emissions are more than 10 times higher 
in East Asia and the Pacific than in Sub-
Saharan Africa.

32

Human Development RepoRt 2011

•	 Emissions  per  capita  vary  from  a  low  of 
0.04  tonnes  in  Burundi  to  a  high  of  53 
tonnes in Qatar.
Trade enables countries to shift the carbon 
content of the goods they consume to the trad-
ing  partners  that  produce  them.  The  carbon 
dioxide  emitted  in  the  production  of  goods 
traded internationally increased by half from 
1995  to  2005.36  Several  countries  that  have 
committed to cutting their own emissions are 
net carbon importers, including Germany and 
Japan, as are countries that have not signed or 
ratified global treaties, such as the United States.
While very high HDI countries account 
for the largest share of world carbon dioxide 
emissions, low, medium and high HDI coun-
tries account for more than three-fourths of the 
growth in carbon dioxide emissions since 1970. 
East Asia and the Pacific is the largest contrib-
utor by far to the increase in these emissions 
(45  percent),  while  Sub-Saharan  Africa  con-
tributed only 3 percent, and Europe and Cen-
tral Asia, 2 percent (figure 2.8). For methane 
and nitrous oxide, we have data for a shorter 
period, but here too, the contribution of the 
East Asia and the Pacific region is pronounced.
The stock of carbon dioxide trapped in the 
atmosphere is a product of historical emissions — 
“carbon is forever.”37 Today’s concentrations are 
largely the accumulation of developed countries’ 
past emissions. With about a sixth of the world’s 
population, very high HDI countries emitted 
almost two-thirds (64 percent) of carbon diox-
ide emissions between 1850 and 2005.38 Since 
1850  about  30  percent  of  total  accumulated 
emissions have come from the United States. 
The  next  highest  emitters  are  China  (9  per-
cent), the Russian Federation (8 percent) and 
Germany (7 percent). Very high HDI countries 
have  generated  cumulatively  more  than  nine 
times more carbon dioxide per capita than low, 
medium  and  high  HDI  countries  combined 
— hence  the  Kyoto  Protocol’s  “common  but 
differentiated  responsibilities”  for  address-
ing climate change, explored in detail below.

Repercussions for temperature, rainfall, 
sea level and disaster risk
Climate change affects not only temperature 
but also rainfall, sea level and natural disasters.

BOX 2.5
Are people aware of climate change and its causes?

Despite overwhelming scientific evidence of the seriousness of the climate change threat and 
growing evidence around the world that we are already experiencing many of the effects, 
public awareness remains limited. The Gallup World Poll, a representative survey carried out 
regularly in nearly 150 countries since 2007, reveals some major gaps in public knowledge of 
the seriousness of the problem, its causes and even its existence (see table).

Less than two-thirds of people in the world have heard of climate change. Awareness is 
associated with level of development. Some 92 percent of respondents in very high Human 
Development Index (HDI) countries reported at least some knowledge of climate change, com-
pared with 52 percent in medium HDI countries and 40 percent in low HDI countries.

Perceptions of other environmental issues also differ. Overall, 69 percent of people are 
satisfied with water quality while 29 percent are not, and 76 percent of people are satisfied 
with air quality while 22 percent are not. Not surprising, there is wide disparity across coun-
tries. For example, only 2.5 percent of people are dissatisfied with water quality in Denmark, 
compared with 78 percent in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Public opinions on climate change (percent agreeing)

Country group
Regions
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
HDI groups
Very high
High
Medium
Low
World

Aware of 

climate change 

(n = 147)

serious threat 

(n = 135)

Climate change is a 

Human activity causes 

climate change 

(n = 145)

42.1
62.6
77.7
76.5
38.0
43.4

91.7
76.1
51.6
40.2
60.0

28.7
27.7
48.2
72.7
31.3
35.5

60.2
61.2
29.3
32.8
39.7

30.3
48.3
55.0
64.8
26.9
30.6

65.3
60.7
38.8
26.7
44.5

Note: n refers to the number of countries surveyed. Data are population-weighted averages and 
refer to the most recent year available since 2007. For details on the Gallup sample and method, see 
https://worldview.gallup.com/content/methodology.aspx.

Source: HDRO calculations based on Gallup World Poll data (www.gallup.com/se/126848/worldview.aspx).

Temperature and precipitation
The past half century’s most dramatic changes 
in temperature have been in the polar regions 
and at higher latitudes (map 2.1).39 Does this 
mean that climate change harms high HDI 
countries  more?  Not  necessarily.  Countries 
with  lower  initial  temperatures  can  better 
withstand  temperature  rises — whereas  in 
climate-sensitive tropical areas a small rise in 
temperature can severely disrupt natural con-
ditions, with adverse repercussions for water 
availability and crop productivity.40

In recent decades precipitation has fallen 
more  than  2  millimetres  (almost  3  percent) 

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

33

Carbon dioxide (1970–2007)
Methane (1990–2005)
Nitrous oxide (1990–2005)

175

China
and India

China

Europe and 
Central Asia

India

Sub-Saharan

Africa

Very high

HDI

Arab States

East Asia and
the Paciﬁc

Latin America

and the
Caribbean

South Asia

High
HDI

Medium

HDI

Low
HDI

FIGURE 2.8
Sources of greenhouse gas growth
Share of the increase in total emissions (percent)

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

–20

–40

–60

–80

Source: HDRO calculations based on data from World Bank (2011b).

MAP 2.1
temperature changes are greatest in polar regions and higher latitudes

Change from 
1951–1980 average 
to 2000–2008 average
More than –1°C
–1°C to 0°C
0°C to 1°C
1°C to 2°C
More than 2°C

Source: HDRO calculations based on data from the University of Delaware.

34

Human Development RepoRt 2011

from a 1951–1980 baseline. The largest decline 
has  been  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (7  milli-
metres,  or  more  than  7  percent)  and  in  low 
HDI countries (4 millimetres, or more than 
4 percent), followed by medium HDI coun-
tries (figure 2.9).41 Low HDI countries have 
also experienced the sharpest increases in rain-
fall variability.

What to expect going forward? There is 
no  scientific  consensus  on  the  net  effects  of 
climate  change  on  precipitation,  given  dif-
ferent  patterns  around  the  world.42  How-
ever, some broad regional trends emerge from 
the climate models. Africa is expected to see 
higher than average warming — with less rain 
in North Africa and the southern and western 
parts of the continent but more rain in East 
Africa. Western Europe is expected to become 
warmer and wetter, while the Mediterranean 
will experience less rainfall. In Asia the num-
ber of hot days will increase, and the number of 
cold days will decrease. In Latin America and 
the Caribbean temperatures are likely to rise 
while precipitation falls. Small island develop-
ing states are expected to have lower than aver-
age temperature increases, but they will likely 
be hard hit by changes in the sea level, as we see 
further below.43

Sea level rise
Since 1870 the average sea level has risen 20 
centimetres, and the rate of change has accel-
erated. If this accelerated rate holds, the sea 
level  will  be  31  centimetres  higher  in  2100 
than  in  1990,44  with  devastating  impacts, 
especially for small island developing states, 
which are particularly exposed (box 2.6, table 
2.2).  Many  face  high  mitigation  costs  rela-
tive to income, and their vulnerability risks 
discouraging private investors, affecting their 
ability to adapt.45

These sea-related increases will affect all 
coastal regions. A half-metre sea level rise by 
2050  would  flood  almost  a  million  square 
kilometres — an  area  the  size  of  France  and 
Italy combined — and affect some 170 million 
people.46

The share of people likely to be affected is 
largest in very high HDI countries and small 
island developing states, but very high HDI 

FIGURE 2.9
rising temperatures and reduced rainfall
Levels and changes in climate variability by HDI group

Levels

0.74

Average
value,
2000s

Temperature
(degrees Celsius)
0.84

0.66

0.64

Average
value,
1951–1980

Very high

HDI

High
HDI

Medium

HDI

Low
HDI

Precipitation

(millimetres per month)

Very high

HDI

High
HDI

–0.07

Medium

HDI

Low
HDI

–1.49

–2.89

Change in variability (percentage points)

Temperature
(degrees Celsius)

Precipitation

(millimetres per month)

Average
value,
1951–1980

Very high

HDI

High
HDI

Medium

HDI

–0.17

–0.08

Low
HDI

–0.15

Very high

HDI

High
HDI

Medium

HDI

–4.16

1.38

Low
HDI

Average
value,
2000s

–1.35

–0.65

–0.98

–1.38

Note: Change in variability is the difference in the coefficients of variation between 1951–1980 and the 2000s, weighted by average 
population for 1950–2008.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from the University of Delaware.

countries have the resources and technology 
to reduce the risk of losses. The Netherlands, 
with  large,  densely  populated  areas  of  low-
lying land, has abated the risk of flooding and 
reclaimed  inundated  land  with  innovative 
technology and infrastructure investments.47
Among regions, the impact will be larg-
est in East Asia and the Pacific, where more 
than 63 million people are likely to be affected 
(see table 2.2). The greatest economic impacts 
will be felt in East Asia and the Pacific and 
in  medium  HDI  countries  (both  around 

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

35

BOX 2.6
Impacts of climate change on small island developing states

Small island and low-lying coastal countries share similar challenges, includ-
ing small populations, lack of resources, remoteness, susceptibility to natu-
ral disasters, dependence on international trade and vulnerability to global 
developments. Their temperatures are predicted to increase 1˚–4˚C by 2100 
(relative to 1960–1990), with adverse effects on people, including displace-
ment and poorer health.

Rising sea levels will displace people and inundate cultivable low-lying 
lands. Island countries with a low mean elevation — such as Tuvalu (1.83 
metres), Kiribati (2.0 metres) and the Marshall Islands (2.13 metres) — are 
seriously threatened by the possibility of a 0.18–0.59 metre sea level rise by 
the end of 21st century. In low-elevation coastal zones the entire population 
of the Maldives and 85 percent of the population of the Bahamas are at risk.
Health effects may be severe as well. Kiribati can expect a 10 percent 
drop in rainfall by 2050 — reducing fresh water 20 percent. Moreover, salt 
water intrusions are increasing due to sea level rise and frequent coastal 
flooding, further contaminating ground water wells, the primary fresh wa-
ter source for its rapidly growing population. About 19 percent of potable 
water in Trinidad and Tobago following heavy rainfall tested positive for 

cryptosporidium, a diarrhoea-causing parasite. Similarly, dengue fever has a 
clear association with rainfall and temperature in the Caribbean.

Small island developing states are vulnerable not only to climate change 
but also to natural disasters, including storm surges, floods, droughts, tsu-
namis and cyclones. Natural disasters are particularly frequent on small is-
lands. Of the 10 countries suffering the greatest number of natural disasters 
per capita from 1970 to 2010, 6 were small island developing states. And a 
single disaster can cause huge economic losses. Hurricane Gilbert in 1988 
cost Saint Lucia almost four times its GDP, while Hurricane Ivan in 2004 
was responsible for losses in Grenada that were twice its GDP. The 2004 
Indian Ocean tsunami that hit the Maldives killed more than 100 people and 
affected more than 27,000. By 2100, 90 percent of coral reefs that protect 
islands from ocean waves and storms could disappear, making natural dis-
asters more likely still.

Constraints extend to data and statistics. We have improved coverage 
of the HDI in these states, from 23 last year to 32 out of 49 this year. These 
states have an average HDI of 0.617, compared with the global average of 
0.649.

Source: www.sidsnet.org/2.html; Elisara 2008; UNDESA 2010a; Kelman and West 2009; Mimura and others 2007; Elbi and others 2006; Amarakoon and others 2008; Noy 2009; Heger, Julca and 
Paddison 2009; www.climate.gov.ki/Climate_change_effects_in_Kiribati.html; www.emdat.be/result-country-profile; http://pdf.wri.org/reefs_at_risk_revisited.pdf.

TABlE 2.2
projected impacts of a half-metre rise in sea level by 2050

Number of 
countries

20
22
17
31
6
30
35

Country group
Regions
Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Small island developing states
HDI groups
Very high
High
Medium
Low
World
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from Wheeler 2011.

41
42
38
32
153

Population likely 
to be affected by 

sea level rise 

(millions)

8.9
63.1
4.4
7.0
38.9
10.2
1.7

41.0
15.0
84.6
30.8
171.4

Share of total 
population likely 
to be affected 

(percent)

2.6
3.3
1.2
1.3
2.4
1.9
3.4

16.0
4.5
0.4
9.4
2.7

2 percent of GDP). Low HDI countries, many 
landlocked,  will  lose  proportionately  less 
(0.5 percent).48

Natural disasters
Climate  change  is  increasing  the  likelihood 
of extreme weather events, such as droughts, 
storms and floods. The average number of such 

36

Human Development RepoRt 2011

natural disasters more than doubled from 132 
a  year  over  1980–1985  to  357  over  2005–
2009.49 Although it is hard to link any single 
disaster directly to climate change — given the 
inherent randomness in what generates these 
events — science links global warming to their 
increased incidence.50 The frequency of high 
intensity tropical cyclones and associated pre-
cipitation  is  predicted  to  rise  20  percent  by 
2100.51

The growing incidence of reported natural 
disasters  does  not  affect  everyone  equally — 
not only because the damage wrought by the 
average natural disaster may change but also 
because the capacity of societies to respond and 
protect themselves also varies.52

Most  countries  do  not  experience  natu-
ral disasters, so patterns differ markedly by 
country  and  region.  In  recent  years  South 
Asia experienced the largest number, an aver-
age of almost six a year per country. Low HDI 
countries, while often vulnerable to drought, 
tend  to  have  fewer  disasters  than  medium 
HDI countries, partly because many are land-
locked.  Small  island  developing  states  are 
also highly exposed to natural disasters (see 
box 2.6).

These  numbers,  which  are  affected 
by  extreme  cases  and  may  differ  from  the 

average, can reveal how societies are marked 
by  most  natural  disasters  and  demonstrate 
their  resilience.  The  good  news  is  that  the 
median costs of these events (whether num-
ber of deaths, people affected or economic 
losses) have fallen over the past four decades 
globally and for all HDI groups (table 2.3). 
Highlights  include  the  significant  drop  in 
the median number of deaths due to natural 
disasters, with the steepest declines in low 
HDI  countries  (down  almost  72  percent). 
Natural  disasters  afflict  many  more  people 
and are much more costly in low and medium 
HDI countries than in high and very high 
HDI  countries.  Medium  HDI  countries 
are particularly affected: the typical natural 
disaster in a medium HDI country takes 11 
percent more lives and affects nearly twice 
as many people as a typical natural disaster 
in a low HDI country. Economic losses have 
also declined over time as a share of income, 
though the estimates depend on underlying 
assumptions.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

In sum, the poorest countries bear many of 
the  costs  of  climate  change,  and  the  pros-
pect  of  worsening  global  inequality  is  very 
real.  Low  HDI  countries  are  experiencing 
the  steepest  declines  in  precipitation  and 
the sharpest increases in its variability. Some 
of  the  largest  temperature  increases  are  in 
already-hot  parts  of  developing  countries. 
The frequency of natural disasters is highest 
in low and medium HDI countries, though 
the  good  news  is  that  the  human  develop-
ment cost of the typical natural disaster has 
declined. Sea level rise has the largest direct 
effects on coastal developed countries, which 
are often better prepared to deal with them, 
and on small island developing states, which 
are far more vulnerable.

Chronic environmental threats
Climate change is not the only environmental 
threat. Deforestation and overexploitation of 
soil and waterways can threaten long-term live-
lihoods, fresh water availability and essential 
renewable  resources,  such  as  fisheries.  These 
problems  sometimes  reflect  imbalances  in 

Low HDI countries 
are experiencing the 
steepest declines in 
precipitation and the 
sharpest increases 
in its variability

opportunities and power, as chapter 3 shows, 
and carry further implications such as loss of 
biodiversity (box 2.7).

Soil erosion, desertification and water 
scarcity
Agricultural output has doubled over the past 
50 years, with only a 10 percent increase in cul-
tivated land. But degradation of soil and water 
resources is increasing: soil erosion, reduced 
fertility and overgrazing are affecting as much 
as 40 percent of croplands.53

At the extreme, overexploitation can turn 
arable  land  into  desert — though  the  overall 
extent of degradation is hard to quantify.54 It 
affects an estimated 31 percent of total land 
area in low, medium and high HDI countries 
and about 51 percent in very high HDI coun-
tries.  The  lowest  shares  of  severely  and  very 
severely degraded land in developing regions 
are in Latin America and the Caribbean and 
Europe and Central Asia, and the highest are 
in South Asia. Nonetheless the highest shares 
of people living on degraded land are in the 
Arab States (25 percent of the population) and 
Sub-Saharan Africa (22 percent) (see statistical 
table 7).

Water  is  vital  for  natural  systems  and 
human development. Irrigated lands produce 
two to three times as much as rainfed agricul-
ture. Agriculture accounts for 70–85 percent 
of water use — and an estimated 20 percent of 
global grain production uses water unsustain-
ably. And demand for water for food produc-
tion is projected to double by 2050.55

TABlE 2.3
disaster-related casualties and costs, median annual values by 
hdi group, 1971–1990 and 1991–2010

Deaths 

(per million people)

Affected population 
(per million people)

Cost 

(percent of GNI)

1971–1990

1991–2010

1971–1990

1991–2010

1971–1990

1991–2010

Country group
HDI group
1.0
Very high
1.3
High
3.3
Medium
7.6
Low
1.7
World
Note: Values are for median impacts of climatological, hydrological and meteorological natural disasters.
Source: HDRO calculations based on Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters Emergency Events Database: 
International Disaster Database.

196
1,437
11,700
12,385
3,232

145
1,157
7,813
4,102
1,822

0.9
2.1
2.7
6.9
2.1

0.5
1.1
2.1
1.9
1.3

0.7
0.7
2.1
2.8
1.0

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

37

BOX 2.7
Biodiversity — the accelerating loss of our ecosystems

Healthy  and  resilient  ecosystems — and  the  life-supporting  services  that  they  provide — 
depend on the biodiversity they contain. But rapid loss of biodiversity is accelerating globally, 
with serious declines experienced in the last decade in fresh water wetlands, sea ice habitats, 
salt marshes and coral reefs. The Convention on Biological Diversity’s Global Biodiversity Out-
look 3 points to “multiple indications of continuing decline in biodiversity in all three of its main 
components — genes, species and ecosystems.” According to the report, natural habitats in 
most parts of the world are shrinking, and nearly a quarter of plant species are estimated to 
be threatened with extinction.

Environmental scientists believe that we are witnessing what may be the fastest mass 
extinction of species, with about half the Earth’s estimated 10 million species expected to 
disappear this century. The biggest cause of this loss is the conversion of natural areas to 
agriculture and urban development; other causes include the introduction of invasive alien 
species; overexploitation of natural resources; pollution; and, increasingly, the effects of cli-
mate change.

Some 10–30 percent of mammal, bird and amphibian species are threatened by extinc-
tion, with more in poorer countries. This partly reflects the location of “biodiversity hotspots” 
(areas with the richest and most threatened resources of animal and plant life) in tropical 
areas.

The impact of biodiversity loss on human development is severe in tropical developing 
countries, where poor communities rely heavily on natural resources. For example, wild foods 
are an important source of vitamins and minerals in the diets of many African communities. 
Use of wild foods can also reduce disease transmission in complex tropical ecosystems.

Source: Klein and others 2009; Myers and Knoll 2001; Rockström and others 2009; Roscher and others 2007; Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity 2010.

FIGURE 2.10
Some regions deforest, others reforest and afforest
Forest cover shares and rates of change by region, 1990–2010 (millions of square kilometres)

Forest area, 2010

Change in forest area, 1990–2010

Arab States

0.88

–0.07

East Asia and
the Paciﬁc
Europe and
Central Asia
Latin America
and the
Caribbean

4.70

9.00

9.47

South Asia

0.93

Sub-Saharan
Africa

5.85

Very high HDI

10.10

High HDI

Medium HDI

Low HDI

6.72

6.58

–0.93

–0.70

16.80

–0.71

–0.81

Source: HDRO calculations based on data from World Bank (2011b).

38

Human Development RepoRt 2011

0.10

0.06

0.02

0.11

0.03

Water withdrawals have tripled over the 
last 50 years.56 Pumping from aquifers exceeds 
natural replenishment, so water tables are fall-
ing. The main causes: destruction of wetlands, 
watersheds and natural water towers to make 
way  for  industrial  and  agricultural  use.  The 
2006 HDR documented how power, poverty 
and inequality contribute to water scarcity.

Deforestation
One way the demands of development appear 
at odds with environmental sustainability is in 
the loss of forest cover. This has been occur-
ring for a long time: Earth’s forest cover today 
is only three-fifths of what it was in prehistoric 
times.57  While  deforestation  has  often  been 
linked to development, trends today are asso-
ciated more with underdevelopment.

The average forest share is similar in very 
high and low HDI countries (28–29 percent), 
and around 23 percent in medium HDI coun-
tries.58  And  while  very  high  HDI  countries 
have increased total forest cover about 1 per-
cent since 1990, low HDI countries have aver-
aged 11 percent loss and high HDI countries 
4 percent loss, while medium HDI countries 
have  had  almost  no  change.  Latin  America 
and  the  Caribbean  and  Sub-Saharan  Africa 
had  the  greatest  loss,  followed  by  the  Arab 
States; the other regions have seen minor gains 
(figure 2.10).59

Seven  developing  countries  (Bhutan, 
China, Costa Rica, Chile, El Salvador, India, 
and  Viet  Nam)  have  recently  transitioned 
from  deforesting  to  reforesting  with  sup-
port  from  domestic  and  international  pro-
grammes. However, there are indications that 
some of these countries have, in effect, shifted 
deforestation to other developing countries, 
so that for every 100 hectares of reforestation 
they import the equivalent of 74 hectares in 
wood  products.60  Simulations  suggest  that 
the  European  Union  transfers  75  of  every 
100 cubic metres of reduced timber harvest to 
developing countries, mainly to the tropics; 
Australia and New Zealand, 70 cubic metres; 
and  the  United  States,  46  cubic  metres.61 
Understanding  trends  in  global  forestation 
thus  requires  examining  consumption  and 
trade  as  well  as  production.62  Switzerland, 

for example, consumes agricultural products 
equivalent to more than 150 percent of its cul-
tivated land.63

A  related  concern  is  the  rise  of  interna-
tional “land grabs,” as governments and corpo-
rations acquire large tracts in land- abundant 
and poorer countries (box 2.8).

Degradation of marine ecosystems
Fish  are  an  important  source  of  protein  for 
hundreds  of  millions  of  people:  on  aver-
age, people eat 24 kilograms of fish a year in 
North America, 18.5 in Asia and 9.2 in Latin 
America  and  the  Caribbean.64  But  fishing 
that exceeds the natural rate of regeneration, 
coupled with dredging, dumping, discharge of 
pollutants, coastal infrastructure and coastal 
tourism undermines the conditions required 
for healthy marine ecosystems, thereby threat-
ening their sustainability.

The current annual fish catch of 145 mil-
lion tonnes far exceeds the maximum annual 
sustainable yield of 80–100 million tonnes.65 
In 2008 the Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion estimated that 53 percent of known fish 
stocks were fully exploited, 28 percent were 
overexploited,  3  percent  were  depleted  and 
only 15 percent were moderately exploited.66 
Although total output has not yet fallen, yields 
for  some  species,  especially  larger  fish,  have 
declined considerably since the 1980s. 

Here again we see considerable disparity. 
Some 10 percent of fishing activities account 
for an estimated 90 percent of the total catch 
— mostly  developed  country  fishers  using 
capital- intensive methods such as technologi-
cally advanced fishing vessels with long-term 
storage facilities and mechanized trawls suit-
able for fishing in deep waters. Average annual 
production  by  fish  farmers  is  172  tonnes  in 
Norway,  72  in  Chile,  6  in  China  and  2  in 
India. Although 85 percent of people in the 
fish industry work in Asia, annual production 
in the region is 2.4 tonnes per ocean fisher, 
compared with amounts as high as 23.9 tonnes 
in developed regions such as Europe.67 Large 
commercial fishing companies not only catch 
more fish but also engage in damaging prac-
tices, using high bycatch methods and bottom 
trawling.

BOX 2.8
land grabbing — a growing phenomenon?

Private, government and public-private joint ventures, usually from capital-rich countries, 
are acquiring long-term leases or ownership rights to large portions of land (often more than 
1,000 hectares) in developing countries. Economically powerful developing countries, such as 
China, India and Saudi Arabia, as well as developed countries, are joining the land grab. While 
sources differ, all suggest a recent acceleration, with estimates of more than 20–30 million 
hectares transacted between 2005 and mid-2009 and about 45 million hectares between 2008 
and 2010. The rise in commodity prices appears to be motivating both government and private 
purchases.

Some see this phenomenon as an opportunity for long-awaited investments in agricul-
tural modernization that will provide access to better technology, create more jobs for farm-
ers and reduce poverty in rural areas. But others consider it a threat to local populations. A 
recent World Bank study supports the latter view, finding that expected benefits were not 
achieved. Several studies have reported human rights violations, with local populations forci-
bly displaced and access to local natural resources restricted. Hurt most were smallholders, 
indigenous people and women, who often lack formal title to the lands on which they live and 
farm. Environmental organizations have criticized negative impacts, including deforestation, 
loss of biodiversity and threats to wildlife.

Recent international initiatives seek to provide a regulatory framework to spread out the 
benefits and balance opportunities with risks. The challenge is to implement multilevel insti-
tutional arrangements, including effective local participation, to promote sustainability and 
equity in this major change in land use.

Source: Borras and Franco 2010; Deiniger and others 2011; IFAD 2011; Da Vià 2011.

Catch rates are still rising, most rapidly in 
some developing regions, despite government 
initiatives to reduce overfishing.68 Rates more 
than quadrupled in East Asia and the Pacific, 
for example, between 1980 and 2005. Once 
again, this increase partly reflects high produc-
tion for export to developed countries, where 
consumption per capita is greater.

Pollution
Recent  studies  suggest  that  pollution  tran-
sitions  may  be  more  complex  than  those 
described  by  the  environmental  Kuznets 
curve, which asserts that pollution first rises 
and then falls with economic development.69 
For  example,  low-income  cities  have  local, 
immediate and poverty-related environmental 
problems; middle-income cities have citywide 
problems related to rapid growth; and high-
income cities experience the consequences of 
wealthy lifestyles.70 So, while affluence reduces 
the “brown” pollution problems of low-income 
cities, such as poor water supply, sanitation and 
solid waste management, it replaces them with 
“green” ecological issues such as waste reduc-
tion, high emissions and inefficient transport 
systems.

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

39

Cities can foster 
sustainability, 

especially when urban 
planning integrates 

environmental 

considerations. High 
population density 
fosters economies 
of scale and skill 
and enterprise 

specialization, but the 
downside from waste 
generation and outdoor 
air pollution can be huge

Cities are at once sources of major pollu-
tion and opportunities for fostering sustain-
ability. People in cities consume 60–80 per-
cent  of  energy  produced  worldwide  and 
account  for  roughly  similar  proportions  of 
carbon emissions.71 Cities can foster sustain-
ability, especially when urban planning inte-
grates  environmental  considerations.  High 
population density fosters economies of scale 
and skill and enterprise specialization. These 
features make most infrastructure and public 
goods, such as water, sanitation and drainage, 
and public transportation systems, more cost 
efficient and provide more options for mate-
rial reuse and recycling. It has been estimated 
that when a city doubles in population, the 
associated increase in infrastructure require-
ments is only 85 percent.72 Per capita emis-
sions in New York City are only 30 percent 
of the US average; the same holds for Rio de 
Janeiro and Brazil.73 The average Manhattan 
resident  accounts  for  14,127  fewer  pounds 
of carbon emissions annually than a subur-
ban New Yorker, in part due to lower vehicle 
use.74 The pattern appears in all US metro-
politan areas.

But the downside of cities from waste gen-
eration and outdoor air pollution can be huge. 
Air  pollution,  which  tends  to  be  worse  in 
urban areas, is a major cause of respiratory and 
cardiovascular diseases globally, while limited 
access to safe drinking water and proper sani-
tation accounts for 1.6 million deaths a year.75 
Urbanites also produce enormous quantities of 
waste, too often poorly managed. Areas near 
New Delhi and Kathmandu, for example, suf-
fer from severe river pollution.76 Some richer 
countries are exporting their waste to poorer 
countries,  with  harmful  effects,  despite  the 
1992 Basel Convention restricting such trade 
(box 2.9). Outdoor air pollution is generally 
worse  in  cities,  as  are  related  health  effects 
(chapter  3).  The  high  density  of  pollutants 
also increases cloud concentration, affecting 
precipitation.

High population density means that even 
small  declines  in  per  capita  pollution  emis-
sions, water use or energy use can bring major 
absolute  improvements.  With  around  half 
the world’s population living in urban areas, 

these potential improvements present an enor-
mous opportunity. The relationship between 
equity and the density of cities is complex. But 
more  compact  neighbourhoods  and  afford-
able transport systems can enhance equity by 
increasing  accessibility,  and  some  evidence 
suggests that higher density is correlated with 
less social segregation.

Natural  disasters  affecting  cities  can  be 
especially devastating, as with Hurricane Kat-
rina  in  New  Orleans  in  the  United  States. 
Cities need investments in infrastructure and 
systems to manage these vulnerabilities. Rio 
de Janeiro uses sophisticated modelling tech-
niques  to  predict  natural  disasters  and  take 
pre-emptive measures.

Global trends tell a more optimistic story. 
Pollution measurement has been a subject of 
vigorous debate, but outdoor concentrations 
of particulate matter suggest declines around 
the world over the past two decades.77 Sub- 
Saharan Africa has seen more rapid decline, 
though from a higher level. In very high HDI 
countries  pollution  has  fallen  almost  one-
third. Even so, average concentrations of par-
ticulate matter in urban areas are 2.3 times 
higher in low, medium and high HDI coun-
tries than in very high HDI countries.78 Richer 
countries have tougher air quality regulations 
and measures targeting air pollution, such as 
control systems on power plants and industrial 
facilities, catalytic converters on vehicles and 
cleaner fuels.79

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

This section on trends in key environmental 
indicators and their threats to human devel-
opment has shown deterioration on several 
fronts, but not on all. Remarkable progress 
in  curbing  air  pollution,  for  example,  sug-
gests that some dimensions of the environ-
ment  can  improve  with  development.  Of 
greatest concern is that the poorest countries 
experience the most serious consequences of 
environmental degradation. The next chapter 
confirms that this pattern also holds within 
countries.  We  now  explore  how  countries 
have  broken  these  patterns  to  achieve  sus-
tainable  and  equitable  progress  in  human 
development.

40

Human Development RepoRt 2011

BOX 2.9
Hazardous waste and the Basel Convention

As public concern about hazardous waste mounted in developed countries in 
the 1970s and 1980s, many governments passed restrictive legislation. An 
unexpected result was a massive increase in exports of hazardous waste — 
including asbestos, mercury, ash, heavy metals, clinical waste and pesticides 
— to  developing  countries.  Economic  inequalities  made  the  prospect  of 
accepting hazardous waste attractive to some countries. In the 1980s a 
coalition of European and US companies offered Guinea-Bissau $600 million 
— about five times its gross national product — to accept shipments of toxic 
waste, an offer it ultimately refused because of international pressure.

The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements 
of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal regulates such exports, requiring 
informed consent about the nature of the waste. Today, 175 countries are 
parties to the Basel Convention; the United States is among those that are 
not. A 1995 amendment prohibits all exports of hazardous waste, but it has 
not yet been ratified by the necessary three-quarters of participants. The 
convention recognizes the urgency of the problem, but an adequate interna-
tional regulatory framework has not yet been established.

Exposure to hazardous waste in developing countries remains serious. 
In 2006 a Dutch company dumped 500 tonnes of toxic waste in 16 sites in 
Abidjan, contaminating the city’s drinking water, soil and fisheries; killing at 

least 10 people; and affecting more than 100,000 people. Such cases reflect 
not only weaknesses in the Basel Convention but also the economic real-
ity in many developing countries. The convention assumes that developing 
countries have the technical and administrative capacity to assess the risk 
of accepting waste shipments and the good governance necessary to resist 
monetary inducements, not always the case.

Electronic waste (e-waste), the fastest growing sector of global waste, 
is hazardous to human health and the environment. E-waste from China, In-
dia, Thailand, the United States and the European Union over 2004–2008 to-
talled 17 million tonnes a year; the United Nations Environment Programme 
estimates global e-waste at 20–50 million tonnes a year. Only a small share 
of e-waste is recycled. For example, in 2007 the United States recycled 
less than 20 percent of e-waste from obsolete televisions, cell phones and 
computer products. The rest was disposed in landfills, mostly in developing 
countries such as China, India and Nigeria. Nevertheless, e-waste recycling 
has become a dynamic economic sector, particularly in China and India, 
where recovering, repairing, and trading materials from discarded electronic 
devices provide an important livelihood for poor people. But the lead, mer-
cury and cadmium in these products are highly toxic. While precautions can 
be taken, many people are unaware of the risks.

Source: Andrews 2009; Sonak, Sonak, and Giriyan 2008; Widmer and others 2005; Robinson 2009; UNEP/GRID-Europe 2005; GreenPeace 2009; UNEP and UNU 2009; www.epa.gov/international/toxics/
ewaste.html; http://toxipedia.org/display/toxipedia/Electronic+Waste+%28E-Waste%29.

Success in promoting 
sustainable and equitable 
human development

How can we best interpret these contrasting 
patterns? Can we identify the better perform-
ing countries in human development, sustain-
ability  and  equity?  The  task  is  difficult,  not 
least because no single indicator captures sus-
tainability well. But we illustrate a potentially 
useful  approach  to  assessing  joint  progress 
towards  these  objectives  and  review  a  range 
of indicators that provide interesting insights 
into promising policy approaches. The find-
ings synthesize much of the evidence we have 
accumulated so far and provide a bridge to the 
community and household analysis in the next 
chapter. We propose a method, identify some 
instances of positive synergies, where countries 
have  promoted  sustainable  human  develop-
ment with equity, and discuss the main policy 
implications.

How  can  we  identify  positive  syner-
gies? Our framework reflects both local and 
global  dimensions  of  sustainability  that  we 
highlighted  in  figure  2.3.  The  local  aspects, 
which we will explore in greater depth in the 

next chapter, relate to the immediate human 
impacts  of  household-level  deprivation  in 
terms of access to water and indoor air pol-
lution. These variables are gauged relative to 
regional medians of achievement. We need to 
account  for  regional  differences — otherwise 
only  very  high  HDI  countries  would  be 
deemed  successful,  which  would  shed  little 
light on the range of circumstances facing peo-
ple around the world.

The  global  environmental  aspects  of 
sustainability — those  that  pose  wide-rang-
ing threats — are measured by greenhouse gas 
emissions,  deforestation  and  water  use,  in 
a  normative  manner,  each  relative  to  global 
norms reflecting good practice. Following the 
same logic, we identify countries with a bet-
ter record on the HDI and inequality than the 
median of their region. Applying this multi-
dimensional  filter  enables  us  to  identify  a 
shortlist of countries with relatively better per-
formance in responding to both localized and 
global environmental threats, as well as with 
respect to the HDI and equity. The results are 
illustrative,  owing  to  patchy  data  and  other 
issues relating to comparability. Nonetheless, 
for the indicators that we are able to assemble, 

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

41

they suggest some promising approaches that 
have the potential to promote relatively equi-
table and environmentally sustainable policy 
as well as human development more broadly.

Table 2.4 illustrates the application of the 
joint lens described above to identify countries 
that  have  performed  better  than  the  global 

BOX 2.10
Positive synergies in Sweden and Costa Rica

The performance of countries identified as doing well on environmental, human development 
and equity fronts can offer insights and development lessons. Here we focus on environmental 
performance in Sweden and Costa Rica.

Sweden is currently seventh in the Human Development Index (HDI), sixth best in human 
development loss due to inequality and first in the Gender Inequality Index. Its per capita emis-
sions were the sixth lowest for very high HDI countries, and air pollution rates were the lowest 
for very high HDI countries and the fourth lowest globally. Sweden’s performance appears to 
be rooted in its strong environmental awareness and a tradition of egalitarian and democratic 
policy. For example, the Committee for Research into the Preservation and Utilization of Natu-
ral Resources, established in 1957, worked to raise public awareness of environmental issues 
and served as a powerful pressure group. Other early clues include a 1969 survey indicating 
majority support for both slower economic growth to prevent environmental deterioration and 
for higher local taxes to fight water pollution, reflecting a willingness to pay for better environ-
ment quality. The right to common access is rooted deeply in the Swedish social psyche and 
in centuries-old customs. Contemporary awareness is reflected in Gallup Poll results showing 
that 96 percent of Swedes are aware of climate change and almost half regard it as a serious 
threat. Sweden’s achievements in equity and education might translate into stronger political 
voice, partly explaining why popular environmental awareness and sensitivity are reflected in 
environmentally friendly policies.

Successive governments in Costa Rica have implemented policies and built institutions 
with environmental objectives in mind. In 1955 Costa Rica established the Institute for Tourism 
to protect the country’s natural resources. But it was the forestry legislation of the late 1980s 
that really launched its environmental policy. The law defines the environmental services of 
forests as carbon sequestration, biodiversity protection, water flow regulation and scenery. 
It was also the foundation for introducing payments for environmental services as a financial 
mechanism to protect forests. By the mid-1990s environmental rights were enshrined in the 
Constitution, and Costa Rica had become a pioneer in selling carbon reduction credits (to Nor-
way). Active participation by civil society, the population’s pride in the country’s beauty, biodi-
versity and natural resources, and investment opportunities related to sustainable practices in 
sectors such as tourism have also contributed.

Source: UNDP Costa Rica Country Office, Observatorio del Desarrollo and Universidad de Costa Rica 2011; Kristrom and Wibe 
1997; Lundqvist 1972.

threshold (for global threats) and better than 
the regional median (for local impacts, HDI 
and  HDI  losses  due  to  inequality).80  A  few 
countries perform well on at least four of the 
five  environmental  fronts  considered.  Costa 
Rica stands out for good performance on all 
five criteria. Germany and Sweden, two very 
high HDI countries, perform well in defor-
estation, water use, water access and indoor 
air pollution but less well in greenhouse gas 
emissions.  The  Philippines  is  an  interesting 
case particularly with respect to afforestation, 
because  the  increase  in  forest  area  has  been 
supported by community-based social forestry 
programs.  Also,  indoor  air  pollution  in  the 
Philippines is only 48 percent of the regional 
median,  and  broad  access  to  schooling  and 
healthcare  offsets  traditionally  high  income 
inequality. Box 2.10 highlights the experiences 
of Costa Rica and Sweden.

Of course, this picture is incomplete. Data 
limitations have already been hinted at. And, 
an obvious shortcoming, it does not include 
any indicators of political freedom and empow-
erment  or  performance  on  gender  equality 
and  women’s  empowerment  (as  captured  by 
the GII, for example, which is explored in the 
next chapter). All four countries are democra-
cies and do well relative to their HDI group in 
terms of gender equality.

Exploring  trends  over  time  also  gives  a 
more  mixed  picture.  Of  the  four  countries 
we identify here as relatively strong perform-
ers,  only  Germany  and  Sweden  improved 
on all dimensions. Since the 1990s all coun-
tries  on  the  list  have  reduced  air  pollution 
and maintained or improved the share of the 
population with access to water, and all but 

TABlE 2.4
good performers on the environment, equity and human development, most recent year available

Global threats

Local impacts

Equity and human development
Overall loss 

HDI 

(percent of regional 

(percent of regional 

Greenhouse gas 

emissions

Water use

Deforestation

Country
Costa Rica
Germany
Philippines
Sweden
Note: These countries all pass the criteria of absolute thresholds for global threats as defined in note 80, perform better than the median of their respective regional peers both in the human development and 
inequality dimensions and perform better than the regional median for local impacts.

104
103
103
102

Water access

77
91
89
70

Air pollution

median)

median)

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

42

Human Development RepoRt 2011

the Philippines have reduced greenhouse gas 
emissions.81 Multidimensional inequality also 
fell in these top countries except in Costa Rica, 
which nevertheless still has lower inequality 
than its regional median.82

Many  developing  countries  also  demon-
strate successful, scalable, sectoral models for 
transition to a green economy. Some examples:83
•	 The city of Curitiba in Brazil has success-
fully implemented innovative approaches 
to urban planning, city management and 
transport to address the challenge of rapid 
population growth. The city now has the 
highest rate of public transport use in Bra-
zil (45 percent of all journeys) and one of 
the country’s lowest rates of air pollution.
•	 Kenya’s  Ministry  of  Energy  adopted  a 
feed-in tariff in 2008 to supply and diver-
sify electricity generation sources, gener-
ate  income  and  employment  and  reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. The tariff covers 
biomass, geothermal, small hydroelectric, 
solar and wind power.
In sum, it is possible to identify countries 
that have promoted sustainable and equitable 
human development through a higher HDI, 
lower inequality and performance on a set of 
environmental indicators that reflect global 

sustainability and local threats. While data 
constraints  preclude  presenting  a  complete 
ranking  of  countries,  we  offer  some  illus-
trative  results  and  suggest  that  the  method 
offers a valuable means of demonstrating that 
countries in different regions, with very dif-
ferent structural characteristics and levels of 
development,  can  adopt  policies  consistent 
with more sustainable and equitable human 
development.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

This chapter has considered key patterns and 
trends in human development and the envi-
ronment  and  provided  evidence  of  major 
cross-country disparities as well as new find-
ings about positive synergies. In many cases 
the poorest countries bear the brunt of envi-
ronmental  deterioration,  even  though  they 
contribute only a small share to the problem. 
But greater equality — both across and within 
countries — is consistent with better environ-
mental performance.

The  analysis  underlines  the  potential 
pay-offs from development models that both 
promote  equity  and  less  lopsidedly  favour 
economic growth, themes that we explore in 
subsequent chapters.

CHapteR 2  pAtternS And trendS in huMAn develOpMent, equity And envirOnMentAl indiCAtOrS

43

r
e
t
p
a
h
c

3

tracing the effects—
understanding the relations

We  have  seen  major  intersections  between 
equity and the environment. In this chapter 
we focus on how environmental unsustaina-
bility affects people and how inequality medi-
ates this relationship. We also draw attention 
to countries and groups that have broken the 
pattern, emphasizing transformations in gen-
der roles and empowerment.

Poor  and  disadvantaged  people  suffer 
most from environmental degradation. That 
fact surprises no one. Almost every week the 
media report catastrophes that shatter lives in 
the poorest parts of the world — lives of people 
who already face major disadvantages.

While extreme events are disequalizing, so 
too are activities that harm the environment. 
Studies  for  the  United  States,  for  example, 
show that toxic waste facilities are located dis-
proportionately in working class and minority 
neighbourhoods, harming health and educa-
tion as well as property values.1 Whether these 
outcomes arose because land and housing in 
those areas lost value after the facilities were 
built or because residents were less able to resist 
location decisions, it is clear that environmen-
tally harmful practices accentuate racial and 
social inequalities. These location decisions do 
not happen only in market economies: in the 
former Soviet Union the Mayak nuclear facil-
ity was built in a region settled mostly by Mus-
lim Tatar and Bashkir people and descendants 
of people repressed and exiled under Stalin.2 
This chapter aims to understand why and how 
these patterns come about today.

Which  factors  condition  the  relation-
ship between environmental degradation and 
human development? Both the absolute level 
and the distribution of individual, household 
and community capabilities matter. Absolute 
deprivations can hurt the environment, and 
bad environmental conditions erode people’s 
capabilities.  Many  examples  illustrate  these 

links — educated girls have lower fertility rates, 
and more em powered communities suffer less 
pollution.

Through the lens of multidimensional pov-
erty, this chapter first documents deprivations 
in the immediate environments of the poor 
and how such deprivations can intersect with 
adverse repercussions of climate change. Next 
the related environmental threats to people’s 
health, education and livelihoods are explored, 
followed by how chronic disadvantage inter-
acts with acute risks to make extreme events 
more disequalizing. The chapter closes with 
a focus on gender and power inequalities and 
on how greater equality in these areas can have 
positive effects on the environment, laying the 
ground for the investigation of policy options 
in the chapters that follow.

A poverty lens

A key theme of this Report is that the world’s 
most  disadvantaged  people  carry  a  “double 
burden.”  More  vulnerable  to  environmental 
degradation, they must also cope with imme-
diate environmental threats from indoor air 
pollution, dirty water and unimproved sani-
tation.3 Our Multidimensional Poverty Index 
(MPI), introduced in the 2010 Human Devel-
opment Report (HDR), gives us a closer look at 
these household-level deprivations (figure 3.1).
The MPI measures deficits in health, educa-
tion and living standards, combining both the 
number of deprived people and the intensity of 
their deprivations. This year we explore the per-
vasiveness of environmental deprivations among 
the multidimensionally poor — focusing on the 
lack of improved cooking fuel, drinking water 
and sanitation — and the extent of their overlap 
at the household level, an innovation of the MPI.
These are absolute deprivations that both 
matter in themselves and are violations of basic 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

45

FIGURE 3.1
Multidimensional poverty index— 
a focus on the most deprived

Multidimensional
poverty

Living
standard

MPI

Health

Education

FIGURE 3.2
environmental deprivations in the Mpi

• Arab States

East Asia and the Paciﬁc
✖ Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia

•
✖ Sub-Saharan Africa

17

10

20

30

40

Environmental deprivation contribution to the MPI (percent)

MPI
0.7 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0 

0

MPI
0.7 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Share of multidimensionally poor with three environmental deprivations (percent)

Note: The dashed line in the top panel denotes what the average contribution of environmental deprivations would be if their 
contribution to total poverty were equal to their weight in the MPI. Countries to the right have disproportionate environmental 
poverty, and countries to the left, less than expected. Survey years vary by country; see statistical table 5 for details.
Source: HDRO staff estimates based on data in statistical table 5.

46

Human Development RepoRt 2011

human rights. Ensuring access— including to 
modern  cooking  fuel,  safe  water  and  basic 
sanitation — also  creates  the  potential  to 
expand  higher  order  capabilities,  thereby 
enlarging  people’s  choices  and  furthering 
human  development.  The  lens  of  the  MPI 
highlights joint deprivations in access .

Deprivations facing the poor
Multidimensional  poverty  is  estimated  for 
109 countries (see statistical table 5),4 and the 
results are striking.
•	 Globally, at least 6 in 10 people experience 
one environmental deprivation, and 4 in 
10 experience two or more.5 These depri-
vations are more acute among the multi-
dimensionally poor. More than 9 in 10 face 
at least one deprivation: nearly 90 percent 
do not use modern cooking fuels, 80 per-
cent lack adequate sanitation and 35 per-
cent lack clean water.

•	 Most  suffer  overlapping  deprivations:  8 
in 10 poor people experience two or more 
environmental deficits, and 29 percent face 
all three.

•	 The rural poor are more afflicted. A strik-
ing 97 percent face at least one environ-
mental deprivation, and about a third suf-
fer all three. Comparable data for urban 
areas are 75 percent and 13 percent.

•	 State-  and  provincial-level  MPIs  show 
wide disparities in environmental depri-
vations. Within Haiti the proportion of 
people who are both multidimensionally 
poor and deprived of clean water in Aire 
 Métropolitaine/Ouest is 19 percent, while 
in the Centre it is 70 percent. Similarly, 
in Senegal the proportion of people who 
are  both  multidimensionally  poor  and 
deprived in cooking fuel is about 4 percent 
in Dakar and about 88 percent in Kolda. 
And  in  India  deprivations  in  sanitation 
among  multidimensionally  poor  people 
range from 3.5 percent in Kerala to more 
than 70 percent in Bihar.
Environmental deprivations typically rise 
with the MPI, but the composition of multi-
dimensional poverty varies, even for countries 
with  similar  poverty  levels.  Overall,  envi-
ronmental  deprivations  disproportionately 

FIGURE 3.3
environmental deprivations 
are greatest for access to 
modern cooking fuel
Share of multidimensionally poor 
with environmental deprivations, by 
region (percent)

22.6
19.5

26.8

Water
Sanitation
Cooking fuel

Europe and Central Asia

24.1

41.5

54.3

Latin America and the Caribbean

30.5

62.6

75.1

East Asia and the Paciﬁc

19.4

South Asia

65.2

86.4

94.1

86.7

98.3

Sub-Saharan Africa

Note: Survey years vary by country; see statistical 
table 5 for details. Data are not shown for the 
Arab States because low poverty levels render the 
results potentially unreliable.
Source: Calculated based on data in statistical 
table 5.

contribute  to  multidimensional  poverty, 
accounting for 20 percent of the MPI — above 
their 17 percent weight in the index (figure 
3.2, top panel).6 In rural areas the average is 
22 percent of poverty, compared with 13 per-
cent in urban areas. In Mongolia, Peru, Swa-
ziland and Uganda such deprivations account 
for more than 30 percent of multidimensional 
poverty.

But  there  are  some  good  performers  as 
well,  with  lower  shares  of  environmental 
deprivation.7 In several Arab States (Jordan, 
Occupied  Palestinian  Territory,  the  Syrian 
Arab  Republic  and  the  United  Arab  Emir-
ates) and European and Central Asian coun-
tries (Croatia, Estonia, Russian Federation and 
Ukraine) such deprivations are less than half 
their weight in the index. Brazil has also per-
formed well.

Regional patterns show that environmen-
tal deprivations are most acute in Sub-Saharan 
Africa: 99 percent of the multidimensionally 
poor face at least one environmental depriva-
tion, and nearly 60 percent face all three (figure 
3.2,  bottom  panel).  Environmental  depriva-
tions are also severe, if less pervasive, in South 
Asia: 97 percent of the poor suffer at least one 
deficit, and 18 percent face all three. By con-
trast, in Europe and Central Asia 39 percent 
of the poor have one or more environmental 
deprivations (excluding Tajikistan, where the 
poor population is large and the share with one 
deprivation or more is an unusually high 82 
percent). Few have all three — just over 1 per-
cent, excluding Tajikistan.

Deprivations  are  most  widespread  for 
access to cooking fuel (figure 3.3). In South 
Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, the two poor-
est  regions,  more  than  90  percent  of  the 
multidimensionally  poor  lack  access  to 
modern  cooking  fuel.  More  than  85  per-
cent  of  poor  people  in  both  regions  lack 
access  to  improved  sanitation.  In  several 
Arab States water problems are paramount, 
affecting more than 60 percent of the multi-
dimensionally poor.

The extent of environmental deprivation 
is also associated with the country’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) value. More than 
4 in 10 multidimensionally poor people in low 

HDI countries face all three environmental 
deprivations.  And  these  countries  typically 
have above average environmental poverty — 
about 6 percentage points higher than if the 
environmental deprivations they face equalled 
their weight in the MPI. For example, 65 per-
cent  of  the  population  in  Madagascar  lack 
access  to  clean  water.  The  repercussions  are 
extensive. Most schools in Madagascar have 
no  running  water  for  adequate  hygiene  and 
sanitation, so pupils fall sick regularly, miss-
ing classes and underperforming. Diarrhoea 
causes an estimated annual loss of 3.5 million 
school days in Madagascar.8

There is also good news, sometimes reflect-
ing successful outreach by governments and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). For 
example, South Asia stands out for having a 
relatively low share of its population (less than 
15 percent) deprived in access to water.

Understanding the relations
To better understand environmental depriva-
tions, we analysed the data holding poverty 
levels  constant.9  Countries  were  ordered  by 
their share of multidimensionally poor people 
facing one or more environmental deprivations 
and the share facing all three. In both cases the 
share of the population with environmental 
deprivations rises with the MPI but with much 
variation around the trend (figure 3.4).

Countries above the trend line have higher 
than average environmental poverty, and those 
below perform better. The countries with the 
lowest shares of their population facing at least 
one deprivation are concentrated in the Arab 
States and Latin America and the Caribbean 
(7 of the top 10), while those with the lowest 
share of the population with all three are con-
centrated in South Asia (5 of the leading 10; 
table 3.1).

Brazil,  Djibouti,  Guyana,  Morocco  and 
Pakistan are in both top 10 lists. They perform 
well in having a low share of the population 
with at least one environmental deprivation 
and with all three.
Some examples:

•	 The  Brazilian  government  has  been 
expanding access to water and sanitation 
for  several  decades,  investing  in  water 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

47

FIGURE 3.4
the share of the population with environmental deprivations rises with the Mpi but with much variation 
around the trend

Share of multidimensionally poor with at least one deprivation (percent)

Share of multidimensionally poor with three deprivations (percent)

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

•• ••
•

•

•••• ••
•
•

•

•
•

•••••••
• •••
•

•

•

••••
•

• ••

••

•

•
•

SENEGAL

•

PAKISTAN

•

YEMEN

••
••••
•
•
•

••
•

•
•

MOROCCO

DJIBOUTI

••

•

• ••
•
•
•
•
•
•

IRAQ
•

•

GUYANA
•

BRAZIL

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

•
••
•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•
• •
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•

•

•
•
••
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•
•
MOROCCO
DJIBOUTI

•
•
•
BHUTAN

TAJIKISTAN
•
•
BRAZIL

•

•

•

INDIA
•

• •

NEPAL

GAMBIA

PAKISTAN
•

BANGLADESH

•

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

MPI

MPI

Note: Survey years vary by country; see statistical table 5 for details. The figures depict deviations from the trend for the regression exercises described in the text.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data in statistical table 5.

TABlE 3.1
ten countries with the lowest share of environmental deprivations 
among the multidimensionally poor, most recent year available for 
2000–2010

Lowest share of multidimensionally 
poor with at least one deprivation

Lowest share of multidimensionally 

poor with all three deprivations

•	

Brazil
Guyana
Djibouti
Yemen
Iraq

Morocco
Pakistan
Senegal
Colombia
Angola

Note: Countries in bold are on both lists.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data in statistical table 5.

Bangladesh
Pakistan
Gambia
Nepal
India
Bhutan
Djibouti
Brazil

Morocco
Guyana

supply  and  using  cross-subsidies  to  ben-
efit  low-income  households.10  Innova-
tion has also been important. Brasilia has 
developed condominial sewerage systems 
that  use  narrow  pipes  installed  at  shal-
low  depths  instead  of  more  expensive 
conventional  construction.11  Almost  all 
Brazilian households (98 percent) use liq-
uefied petroleum gas (LPG) fuel, thanks 
to policies beginning in the late 1960s for 

48

Human Development RepoRt 2011

a national LPG delivery system and cross-
subsidies for LPG through taxes on other 
fuels.12
In Bangladesh only 4 percent of the multi-
dimensionally  poor  lack  access  to  clean 
water, thanks to the country’s thousands of 
hand tubewells. But there are caveats. Cov-
erage rates include access to a public stand-
pipe, and wait times can be long. Dhaka 
has only one public tap for every 500 slum 
dwellers.13 Moreover, arsenic levels exceed 
World Health Organization (WHO) rec-
ommendations in about a third of hand 
tubewells, jeopardizing the health of tens 
of millions of Bangladeshis.14

•	 The Djibouti government made water and 
sanitation  a  priority  in  the  mid-1990s.15 
Reforms  included  priority  funding  and 
new  construction.16  More  than  8  in  10 
Djibouti households use modern sources 
of cooking fuel, though use of wood and 
charcoal is now reportedly rising because 
of higher kerosene costs.17
In  Nepal  water  access  is  also  fairly  high 
among  the  multidimensionally  poor 
(around 78 percent). This has been attrib-
uted to the lead role local communities and 
women, empowered through NGOs, have 

•	

the MPI sheds light 

on the patterns 
of environmental 
deprivations facing 
households, showing 

the prevalence 
of overlapping 

deprivations but also, 
more optimistically, 
highlighting countries 

that have done 
relatively well

•	

played in planning, designing and imple-
menting small subprojects for water sup-
ply, sanitation, health and hygiene.18
The worst performers by share of the multi-
dimensionally poor with environmental dep-
rivations  are  located  across  several  regions, 
with Sub-Saharan African countries featuring 
prominently. Among the countries perform-
ing relatively poorly in this respect, weak insti-
tutional capacity emerges as one explanation. 
Some examples:
•	 The share of Peru’s population with access 
to water and sanitation is among the lowest 
in Latin America.19 Institutional capacity, 
planning and quality control have impeded 
progress.20 Low rural electrification rates 
mean that more than 80 percent of rural 
households rely on fuelwood for cooking. 
The availability of modern fuel is limited in 
many rural areas because of poor transpor-
tation networks and high upfront costs.21
In Mongolia large rural–urban disparities 
in access to clean water and sanitation are 
exacerbated by weak institutional capacity 
and lack of investment. In theory the gov-
ernment gives priority to the water needs 
of the poor, but in practice lack of regula-
tions has resulted in price structures that 
provide water at low cost to business and 
industry while dis regarding the poor. Per 
litre, rural consumers and small businesses 
pay 84 times more for clean water than do 
industrial and mining companies.22
The  MPI  sheds  light  on  the  patterns  of 
environmental deprivations facing households 
(box 3.1). It shows the prevalence of overlap-
ping  deprivations  but  also,  more  optimisti-
cally, highlights countries that have done rela-
tively well, including through programmes we 
explore in the next chapter. In addition to how 
countries perform relative to each other, this 
year we also explore how some have fared over 
time.

These findings should be interpreted with 
care, however. Last year’s HDR recognized sev-
eral limitations of the MPI as a measurement 
tool. The datasets cover different years, limit-
ing comparability. In some cases the surveys 
may  not  reflect  recent  improvements.  Addi-
tional caveats apply to the analysis here. The 

three environmental deprivations were selected 
as the best comparable measures across coun-
tries, but other environmental threats may be 
equally or more acute at the local or national 
level. Flooding may be a more pressing concern 
for poor households in Bangladesh, for exam-
ple, than access to water.

And it is important to underline that good 
performance  (or  bad)  with  respect  to  these 
specific indicators is not necessarily indicative 
of environmental degradation more broadly. 
Some countries, such as Syria, have a very low 
MPI (and low contribution of environmental 
deprivation)  but  still  face  pressing  environ-
mental stresses relating to water availability, 
land deterioration and agricultural productiv-
ity. And, as we explore in chapter 4, addressing 
household-level deprivations needs to be done 
in a way that minimizes environmental degra-
dation more broadly.

Chapter 2 argues that as countries develop, 
the nature and severity of their environmental 
problems tend to evolve. The types of direct 
environmental threats experienced at the indi-
vidual and household levels — those we explore 
here — tend to be more severe and widespread 
in countries at low HDI levels, and they are 
experienced  even  more  acutely  by  the  poor. 
We have also highlighted a double burden of 
the multidimensionally poor: that they may 
be more exposed not only to these localized, 
household-level  threats  but  also  to  environ-
mental degradation writ large.

We  investigate  this  pattern  further  by 
looking at the relationship between the MPI 
and  changes  in  climate.  For  130  nationally 
defined  administrative  regions  in  15  coun-
tries, we are able to compare area-specific MPIs 
with changes in temperature and precipitation 
— the “anomalies” discussed in chapter 2 (see 
map 2.1). The results are thought provoking.
•	

In our sample, on average, temperature was 
0.5°C higher in 2000–2008 than in 1951–
1980,  while  rainfall  increased  nearly  9 
millimetres (4.6 millimetres, if we exclude 
some extreme changes in Indonesia). The 
temperature rose in 106 of 110 cases, and 
rainfall rose in nearly 85 cases (80 percent).
•	 Overall,  a  strong  positive  association 
emerges between MPI levels and warming, 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

49

BOX 3.1
Trends in multidimensional poverty

Our concern with equity leads us to focus on the most disadvantaged. This year we use the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) to reveal trends in the mul-
tiple deprivations that batter poor people at the same time for seven countries — Bolivia, Colombia, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar and Nigeria — and 
find that poverty declined in all of them (see figure). The decline was fastest in absolute terms in Bolivia, Nigeria and Lesotho, while annualized percentage 
reductions were greater in Bolivia, Colombia and Jordan, where low poverty means that small reductions translate into large relative declines.

Capturing reductions in both the incidence and intensity of poverty is one of the MPI’s key strengths, creating useful incentives to reduce both the num-
ber of people in poverty and the number of deprivations that they jointly face. The index thus overcomes a well known problem associated with traditional 
(“headcount only”) poverty measures, which can lead to a focus on moving people from just below to just above the poverty line.

In our seven countries poverty has fallen by reducing both the number of multidimensionally poor people and the intensity of their poverty. Madagas-
car’s improvement, for example, was driven mainly by reducing poverty intensity, while in the other countries the biggest change was in the number of poor 
people.

Reduction in the MPI and in the multidimensional poverty headcount and intensity in seven countries, various years
(average annual percent change)

MPI Headcount

Intensity

0.008

0.022

0.089

0.156

0.229

0.310

0.357

–1.6

–1.1

–1.9

–0.7

–0.5

–3.8

–3.4

–3.1

–3.0

–0.2

–2.2

–0.7

–1.6

–5.4

–6.9

–5.5

–5.0

–9.1

–8.4

Jordan
2007–2009

Colombia
2005–2010

–9.8

–8.7

Bolivia
2003–2008

Lesotho
2004–2009

Kenya
2003–2009

Nigeria
2003–2008

Madagascar

2004–2009

Note: Values in bold are MPI levels for the most recent year available. Headcount refers to the percentage of the population that is multidimensionally poor; intensity refers to the average percentage of 
deprivations experienced by people in multidimensional poverty.
Source: Alkire and others forthcoming.

Underlying the overall drops in poverty, different patterns emerge. For example, multidimensional poverty fell at a similar rate in Kenya and Nigeria, 
but Kenya’s progress was driven by improvements across all standard of living indicators, whereas Nigeria progressed most in water, sanitation and child 
mortality. Poverty reduction was widely distributed across Kenya. In Nigeria, by contrast, poverty worsened in the northeast, the poorest region, while the 
south saw the most substantial reduction.

Source: Alkire, Roche and Santos forthcoming; Demographic and Health Surveys (www.measuredhs.com).

suggesting that localities that have had the 
largest increases in temperature tend to be 
poorer than those that have had smaller 
changes.23
But for rainfall there is no strong pattern,24 
and within countries, overall tendencies mask 
considerable variation. Nonetheless, the rela-
tionship is consistent with research exploring 
the effects of climate change on income pov-
erty.25 Further study is needed to extend this 
work to a multidimensional setting.

Where poverty and the effects of climate 
change intersect to constrain possibilities, the 
poor are especially vulnerable. But more gen-
erally, disadvantaged people and groups face 

particular threats from environmental degra-
dation because their coping options are more 
limited. We go on to examine particular ways 
in which environmental degradation threat-
ens human development and how it may harm 
already deprived groups the most.

environmental threats 
to people’s well-being

To  better  understand  the  channels  through 
which environmental degradation impedes and 
damages capabilities, especially those of poor 
and disadvantaged groups, we look at adverse 
effects on health, education, livelihoods and 

50

Human Development RepoRt 2011

other aspects of well-being, including choices 
on how to spend time, where to live and free-
dom from conflict.

Harming health
This section reviews the adverse health impacts 
of  indoor  and  outdoor  air  pollution,  dirty 
water and unimproved sanitation, and climate 
change.  Environmental  degradation  affects 
people’s  health  through  impacts  on  physical 
and social environments as well as through the 
knowledge, assets and behaviours of individuals 
and households. Interactions between dimen-
sions of disadvantage also affect health — for 
instance, health risks are greatest where water 
and sanitation are inadequate. Our  analysis of 
multidimensional poverty suggests that such 
deprivations  often  coincide  with  deaths  due 
to environmental causes: 6 of the 10 countries 
with the highest rates of death attributable to 
environmental causes are among the 10 coun-
tries with the highest MPI (figure 3.5).26 The 
economic costs of the health impacts of envi-
ronmental factors, including malnutrition, are 
also large. The World Bank recently estimated 
them at close to 6 percent of GDP in Ghana 
and  more  than  4  percent  in  Pakistan.  Add-
ing the longer term effects on education and 
income boosts the annual cost for each coun-
try to as much as 9 percent of GDP.27

The  WHO’s  study  of  the  global  burden 
of disease underlines the importance of envi-
ronmental factors. Unsafe water, inadequate 
sanitation and insufficient hygiene are among 
the top 10 leading causes of disease worldwide. 
Each  year  at  least  3  million  children  under 
age 5 die from environment-related diseases, 
including  acute  respiratory  infection  and 
diarrhoea — more  than  the  entire  under-five 
population of Austria, Belgium, the Nether-
lands, Portugal and Switzerland combined.28 
And in low HDI countries about 14 percent of 
the disease burden has environmental causes, 
notably indoor air pollution.

Indoor air pollution
Half the people in the world still use traditional 
biomass for heating and cooking. In low HDI 
countries 94 percent of the multidimension-
ally poor rely on such fuels, producing smoke 

FIGURE 3.5
deaths attributable to environmental risks are associated with 
high Mpi levels
MPI
0.7

MALI
•
•

SOMALIA

RWANDA

•

•

•

NIGER

•

ANGOLA
•
•
SIERRA LEONE

MOZAMBIQUE

•

•

•

ETHIOPIA
•

•

•
LIBERIA

•

•

•
•
•
•
•
CAMEROON

•

•

CHAD

•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•
•

•

•
GHANA
•

TAJIKISTAN

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

COMOROS
•

•
•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•• •
•
•
CHINA
••
•••
•
••
•
• •
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
0

•
•
•

•

•
•

4,000
1,000
Deaths due to environmental causes (per million people)

2,000

3,000

5,000

Note: Excludes very high HDI countries. Survey years vary by country; see statistical table 5 for details.
Source: Calculations based on data from statistical table 5 and Prüss-Üstün and others 2008.

associated  with  acute  respiratory  infections, 
lung  cancer,  reduced  lung  function,  carbon 
monoxide  poisoning  and  immune  system 
impairment. Indoor smoke from solid fuel is 
linked to some 2 million deaths a year. About 
36  percent  of  these  deaths  are  in  low  HDI 
countries, with a further 28 percent in China 
and 25 percent in India.29 Deaths related to 
indoor air pollution are concentrated among 
the rural poor, who rely on coal for cooking 
and heating. The uptake of modern cooking 
fuel has been faster in urban areas — in China, 
for instance, 82 percent of urban households 
use gas.30

Indoor pollution kills 11 times more people 
in low HDI countries than in other countries 
and 20 times more people than in very high 
HDI countries. It accounts for 5.4 percent of 
the disease burden in low HDI countries — as 
much as 10 percent in Afghanistan, the coun-
try most afflicted in absolute terms.31

Women and children in rural areas, who 
spend more time in houses that use fuelwood, 
suffer  most.32  Burning  wood  contributes  to 
deforestation, which in turn forces households 
to burn dung and crop residues instead, inten-
sifying the exposure to indoor air pollution 
because  these  fires  require  constant  tending 
and their smoke is more toxic.33

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

51

Background  research  shows  that  deaths 
related  to  indoor  air  pollution  are  strongly 
related  to  the  national  MPI,34  showing  how 
deprivations  in  cooking  fuel  contribute  to 
multidimensional poverty and to the ill health 
of the poor. Poor households know that burn-
ing wood irritates the eyes and damages the 
respiratory system. An older Bhutanese woman 
observed that burning wood caused eye prob-
lems and coughs for many elderly women in 
her village.35 In India Rabiya Khatun of Bihar 
commented: “We have always used twigs and 
branches  from  nearby  trees  as  cooking  fuel. 
Everyone here does that. It burns our eyes, but 
it has to be done”; in West Bengal Faizul Haque 
observed that his wife, who is not yet 30, has 
been “sick for the last few years . . . she is hardly 
able to breathe, because of all the fumes.”36

Improved  stoves,  better  ventilation  and 
clean  fuel  are  expected  to  reduce  indoor 

BOX 3.2
Air pollution and its health consequences in China

Outdoor air pollution is high in China, especially in urban areas and the north. A recent of-
ficial environmental assessment finds that almost one city in five does not meet government 
standards; far more would likely fail to reach World Health Organization (WHO) air quality 
standards. Outdoor air pollution is associated with some 300,000 deaths and 20 million cases 
of respiratory illness in China each year, with estimated health costs of about 3 percent of 
GDP annually.

Among the many sources of outdoor air pollution in China are residential and industrial 
coal combustion and motor vehicle exhaust. About 70 percent of the country’s electricity is 
generated from coal, most of it high in sulphur. High sulphur dioxide emissions contribute to 
smog and acid rain, which affect more than half of China’s cities.

Outdoor air pollution patterns suggest major challenges, particularly in cities. Vehicle 
emissions may be the fastest growing source of urban air pollution, with China’s Environmen-
tal Protection Agency estimating that vehicles account for 70 percent of sulphur in the air. 
With rising incomes and better roads, the country has seen its vehicular fleet jump 20 percent 
a year since 1990. And since in 2009 only 3 percent of people in China owned a car, the trend is 
likely to continue. In Beijing more than 1,000 new cars are added to the total each day.

Air pollution in China has caused a dramatic rise in asthma. From 1990 to 2000 its preva-
lence among urban children rose 64 percent, affecting almost 2 percent of children. In Chong-
qing, one of the country’s fastest growing cities, nearly 5 percent of children under age 14 
suffered from asthma in 2000.

China’s efforts to reduce outdoor air pollution are closely integrated with its policies 
aimed at climate change, energy efficiency and renewable energy use. In 2000 the govern-
ment began requiring lead-free petrol, which reduced the lead content of urban air, and has 
made developing new clean energy vehicles the priority of the country’s auto industry for the 
next five years. The country has pledged to reduce energy consumption and carbon emissions 
18 percent per unit of industrial value added by 2015 and to increase consumption of non–fos-
sil fuel energy to 15 percent by 2020, up from the current 8 percent, which should also reduce 
outdoor air pollution.

Source: China National People’s Congress 2011; Fang and Chan 2008; Liu and Raven 2010: 8329; Millman, Tang and Perera 
2008; Watts 2006, 2011; Zhan and others 2010.

52

Human Development RepoRt 2011

pollution and mitigate health risks, alongside 
efforts  to  expand  access  to  modern  energy 
sources, as we explore in the next chapter.

Outdoor air pollution
Long-term exposure to outdoor air pollution 
causes respiratory disorders, immune system 
damage  and  carbon  monoxide  poisoning, 
among other deleterious effects.37 In Mexico 
City studies have found a significant impact 
from outdoor pollution on the mortality of the 
high-risk population,38 and in Linfen, China, 
and  Norilsk,  Russian  Federation,  industries 
produce levels of air pollution that seriously 
threaten the health of their populations.39 Dis-
advantaged groups are both more exposed and 
more vulnerable to the effects: in Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region of China and 
Shanghai mortality due to outdoor air pollu-
tion is higher among the economically disad-
vantaged and the least educated.40

The  pattern  holds  across  the  globe.  In 
England  half  of  municipal  incinerators  are 
in  the  most  deprived  tenth  of  municipali-
ties.41 People in the poorest households and 
ethnic  minorities  are  most  likely  to  breathe 
polluted air, while areas with the highest rate 
of car ownership enjoy the cleanest air.42 In 
Rijnmond,  Netherlands,  poorer  and  minor-
ity households endure more air pollution and 
live closer to waste disposal sites.43 In Kassel, 
Germany, the air is more polluted in neigh-
bourhoods where the foreign-born population 
lives.44 And French communities with higher 
proportions of immigrants host more indus-
trial and nuclear waste sites, incinerators and 
waste management facilities.45

The good news, as reviewed in chapter 2, is 
that air pollution is declining, though on aver-
age it remains much higher in cities in poorer 
countries. China again emerges as an important 
case: rising energy consumption, based largely 
on coal and other solid fuels, and vehicle pollu-
tion have taken a toll on air quality (box 3.2).

Dirty water and unimproved sanitation
Lack of adequate sanitation and clean water 
compromises  the  life  chances  of  many  peo-
ple, mainly in poorer countries. In medium 
HDI countries half the people lack access to 

Indigenous peoples may 
be especially susceptible 

to the adverse health 

effects of environmental 

degradation

improved  sanitation,  and  one  in  eight  lacks 
access to improved water . In low HDI coun-
tries the figures are 65 percent for sanitation 
and 38 percent for water. Nearly 4 in 10 people 
worldwide lack sanitary toilets, but as many as 
8  in  10  of  the  multidimensionally  poor  do. 
Urban and rural disparities are large: less than 
half the rural population had improved sanita-
tion facilities in 2008, compared with almost 
three-quarters of the urban population.46

These  deprivations  exact  a  high  toll  on 
health. For children under age 5 environmen-
tal factors account for more than a third of 
the  global  disease  burden.47  Diarrhoeal  dis-
eases  account  for  some  2  million  deaths  of 
children under age 5 each year, and the most 
recent estimates indicate that improved sanita-
tion and drinking water could save 2.2 million 
children a year, or some 5,500 a day.48 Half of 
all malnutrition is attributable to environmen-
tal factors, particularly poor water, sanitation 
and hygiene.49 Malnutrition from these causes 
is responsible for some 70,000 child deaths a 
year, while underweight children are more vul-
nerable to infectious disease and less likely to 
recover fully when they do fall sick.50 Child-
hood malnourishment also impairs cognitive 
development  and  education  performance, 
reducing opportunities over a lifetime.

Inadequate water and sanitation are linked 
to an even broader array of health problems, 
as the 2006 HDR exposed. Today, billions of 
people  are  affected  by  parasitic  diseases:  1.5 
billion with ascaris, 740 million with hook-
worm, 200 million with schistosomiasis and 
40–70 million with liverfluke. Many millions 
are likely affected by tropical enteropathy, an 
intestinal  disease  caused  by  faecal  bacteria 
that reduces nutrient absorption. These infec-
tions as well as hepatitis, typhoid and polio 
can be avoided through safe excreta disposal 
and other hygienic behaviours, as we discuss in 
chapter 4. Beyond the human costs, the finan-
cial repercussions are large. For instance, the 
economic costs of poor sanitation and hygiene 
in Cambodia (7.2 percent of GDP), Indonesia 
(2.3 percent), the Philippines (1.5 percent) and 
Viet Nam (1.3 percent) in 2007 amounted to 
around $9 billion (in 2005 prices) or 2 percent 
of their combined GDP.51 And access to basic 

sanitation services is especially important for 
women, not only for the health gains52 but also 
for privacy, time savings and reduced risk of 
sexual violence.53

Climate change
The health risks posed by climate change are 
immense  and  diverse — from  increased  risks 
of extreme weather events to salinization of 
land and fresh water from rising sea levels and 
the changing dynamics of infectious disease 
caused by higher temperatures. Higher tem-
peratures will broaden the spread and increase 
the transmission rates of vector- and rodent-
borne diseases, expanding endemic areas for 
malaria,  tick-borne  encephalitis  and  dengue 
fever.54 Estimates suggest that 260–320 mil-
lion more people will be affected by malaria 
by 2080.55 And many more will be at risk of 
contracting dengue fever.56 A recent study of 
19 African countries found that weather vari-
ations increased the prevalence of diarrhoea, 
acute respiratory infections and undernutri-
tion in children under age 5.

Heat  stress  will  rise  with  temperatures, 
and more people will die from heatstroke — 
particularly urban residents and people with 
respiratory conditions. The incidence of diar-
rhoea  will  also  rise  with  temperatures.57  By 
2050 sea level rise, droughts, heat waves, floods 
and rainfall variation could increase the num-
ber of malnourished children by 25 million. 
Land  and  ecosystem  degradation  will  also 
add to malnutrition.58 These projections are 
based  on  a  business-as-usual  scenario.  More 
sustainable behaviours and practices, outlined 
in chapter 4, could deflect these trajectories in 
positive ways.

Indigenous peoples may be especially sus-
ceptible to the adverse health effects of envi-
ronmental degradation. In northern Australia, 
for  example,  higher  temperatures  and  more 
frequent heat waves will assail indigenous peo-
ples in remote areas, where cardiovascular and 
respiratory disease rates are already high. The 
health effects may be especially severe where 
indigenous peoples’ connection to ecosystems 
— as  a  place  of  ancestry,  identity,  language, 
livelihood and community — is a key determi-
nant of health.59

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

53

Environmental 
degradation can 

endanger the livelihoods 
of the millions of people 

around the world 
who depend directly 
on environmental 
resources for work

Impeding education
As highlighted in the 2010 HDR, the expan-
sion of primary education is one of the great 
successes of the past 40 years. The share of chil-
dren  attending  school  rose  from  57  percent 
to 85 percent, with near universal enrolment 
in many parts of the world. Yet gaps remain. 
Nearly  3  in  10  children  of  primary  school 
age in low HDI countries are not enrolled in 
school.60  And  a  range  of  other  constraints, 
some related to environmental factors, persist.
Electricity access can improve schooling. 
Better  lighting  allows  for  more  study  time, 
and electricity at home and school increases 
the  time  children  and  adults  spend  read-
ing and keeps children in school longer.61 In 
northwestern Madagascar electricity made it 
easier for girls to do their homework and for 
their  mothers  to  help  them  in  the  evening 
after household tasks were done.62 In Bang-
ladesh the time children spent in school was 
correlated with access to electricity, even after 
controlling for family wealth (landholdings).63 
And  in  Viet  Nam  communes  connected  to 
the electric grid between 2002 and 2005 saw 
school enrolment increase 17 percent for boys 
and 15 percent for girls.64

Having  access  to  electricity  and  other 
modern fuels can reduce the time spent col-
lecting  biomass  fuel.65  In  Malawi  children 
often  collect  fuelwood  and  other  resources, 
and their likelihood of attending school falls 
as time allocated to this work rises.66 In rural 
Ethiopia the probability of schooling as the 
main activity, especially for boys, falls as the 
time to reach a water source rises.67

A negative relationship was found between 
children’s resource collection and their likeli-
hood of attending school, though not the per-
formance of those attending school. In Kenya’s 
Central  Province  district  of  Kiambu,  fuel-
wood collection averages more than 4 hours a 
day, ranging from half an hour to 10 hours.68 
Girls were more likely to combine resource col-
lection and schooling.

In the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat,  Rajasthan  and  Maharashtra,  for 
example,  the  United  Nations  Children’s 
Fund and others are providing solar-powered 
lamps to schools and women’s literacy groups 

to promote education for girls. In the words 
of  13-year-old  Manasha,  “When  there  is  no 
light, we go to bed very early after dinner and 
get up early. Now at night I can study.”69 Inter-
ventions  to  improve  access  to  electricity  are 
explored in chapter 4.

Endangering livelihoods
Environmental degradation can endanger the 
livelihoods of the millions of people around 
the  world  who  depend  directly  on  environ-
mental resources for work. About 1.3 billion 
people,  or  40  percent  of  the  economically 
active people worldwide, work in agriculture, 
fishing,  forestry,  and  hunting  or  gathering.
Almost  6  in  10  of  the  economically  active 
people engaged in these activities live in low 
HDI countries, while just 3 percent live in very 
high HDI countries. In Bhutan, Burkina Faso 
and Nepal, 92 percent of economically active 
people depend directly on natural resources 
for their livelihoods; less than 1 percent do in 
Bahrain, Qatar, Singapore and Slovenia.70

The  rural  poor  depend  overwhelmingly 
on natural resources for their income.71 Even 
those who do not normally engage in natural 
resource–related  activity  may  do  so  during 
times  of  hardship.72  The  effects  of  environ-
mental degradation on crop production, fish 
supply, extraction of forest goods, and hunting 
and gathering vary, hurting some groups more 
than others. How it affects people depends on 
whether they are net producers or consumers 
of natural resources and whether they produce 
for subsistence or the market (and how read-
ily they can shift between the two). Women 
in poor countries engage disproportionately 
in subsistence farming and water collection, 
exposing them more to adverse repercussions.73
Indigenous peoples deserve special men-
tion (box 3.3). While they make up about 5 
percent  of  the  world’s  people,74  they  own, 
occupy or use (generally by customary rights) 
up to 22 percent of the world’s land, which 
holds 80 percent of the planet’s biodiversity.75 
Indigenous peoples and communities legally 
own around 11 percent of global forests,76 and 
an estimated 60 million of them depend totally 
on forest resources for their livelihoods.77 They 
often live in ecosystems particularly vulnerable 

54

Human Development RepoRt 2011

to the effects of climate change, such as small 
island developing states, arctic regions, on the 
coast or at high altitude, and depend on fish-
ing, hunting and farming to survive.78

We turn now to the differentiated impacts 
of environmental trends on people engaged in 
agriculture, forestry and fishing.

Threatening agriculture
Agriculture is the main source of livelihood for 
most of the world’s poor.79 The natural envi-
ronment  delivers  support  functions  to  agri-
cultural  production,  such  as  regulating  the 
nutrient and water cycles. And as agriculture 
intensifies to meet the food needs of growing 
populations,  healthy  ecosystems  remain  an 
important  foundation.  Environmental  deg-
radation thus threatens livelihoods and food 
security.  Among  the  many  complex  interac-
tions, the focus here is on the effects of land 
degradation, water stress and climate change.
Land degradation reduces arable land and 
crop  yields  and  increases  the  frequency  of 
flooding. Specifically:
•	 Loss  of  fertile  topsoil  is  reducing  land 
productivity,  with  estimated  yield  losses 
as high as 50 percent in the most adverse 
scenarios.80 Sub-Saharan Africa (especially 
Angola, Gabon and Swaziland) and East 
Asia  and  the  Pacific  (especially  China, 
Indonesia, Malaysia and Myanmar) are hit 
hardest.

•	 Drylands,  home  to  about  a  third  of  the 
world’s  population,  are  threatened  by 
desertification.81 Some areas are especially 
vulnerable, such as Sub-Saharan Africa’s 
drylands, where adaptive capacity is low.82 
Other parts of the world have also been 
affected.  Land  degradation  in  northern 
China’s Minqin County led to the aban-
donment of more than 80 percent of its 
farmland.83
By 2025 water scarcity is expected to affect 
more than 1.8 billion people.84 Field research 
suggests that the direct impacts of water deple-
tion on crop cultivation can be worse for poor 
farmers.  For  example,  in  rural  Mexico  poor 
farmers without the capital to adapt to fall-
ing  water  tables  cannot  buy  more  drought- 
resistant seeds or piped water. And government 

BOX 3.3
Indigenous peoples, land rights and livelihoods

Unusual weather patterns and storms hurt indigenous communities that rely on natural resourc-
es for their livelihoods. In northern Canada global warming has shortened the period when sea-
ice access routes to hunting areas are open, reducing food security and safety among the Inuit 
in Nunavik, Quebec, and in Nunatsiavut, Labrador. In Peru freak cold spells have increased, with 
temperatures falling to an unprecedented –35°C in the high Andes. In 2004, 50 children and up 
to 70 percent of livestock died, and as many as 13,000 people became severely ill.

Indigenous peoples’ relationship with their lands often has cultural and spiritual dimensions, 
which land management practices can disrupt. As outsiders increasingly seek indigenous peo-
ples’ lands for conservation and resource extraction, decisions are being made about the use of 
these lands without meaningful participation by the affected peoples. Indigenous communities 
may want to keep their environment and resources intact, leading to tension and conflict.

As chapter 4 shows, governments are increasingly recognizing the special nature of indig-
enous peoples’ relationships with their land and environment. In 2004 the Canadian Supreme 
Court recognized the government’s obligation to honour the environment-related rights of two 
native tribes in British Columbia. Most Latin American constitutions include a provision gov-
erning indigenous peoples’ lands, territories and natural resources. The 2009 Bolivian consti-
tution recognizes the rights of indigenous peoples to their original communal lands, guarantee-
ing the use and improvement of sustainable natural resources — in line with an alternative 
vision of development (vivir bien) that seeks the spiritual and collective well-being of people as 
well as greater harmony with nature.

Source: Furgal and Seguin 2006; Simms, Maldonado and Reid 2006; World Bank 2008c; Colchester 2010; Green, King and 
Morrison 2009; Manus 2006; Aguilar and others 2010.

financing programmes do not help the poor 
when the technical requirements and match-
ing contributions are too onerous.85

The  effects  of  climate  change  on  farmer 
livelihoods  vary  with  the  crop,  region  and 
season. Researchers have studied the relation 
between  climate  change  and  crop  and  pas-
ture yields using simulation models, statistical 
studies and hedonic approaches. Some results 
suggest that moderate temperature increases 
(no more than 2°C) might benefit yields in the 
short run in temperate regions but will have 
adverse effects in tropical and semiarid regions. 
Globally, maize production has decreased 3.8 
percent  and  wheat  production  5.1  percent 
since 1980 due to climate change, with consid-
erable regional variation (and some countries 
even benefitting from a changing climate). For 
rice and soy, countries benefitting and losing 
largely  balanced  out.86  Projections  through 
2030 suggest that maize and wheat produc-
tion in Southern Africa will fall sharply, while 
rice yields are expected to be positively affected 
by climate change.87 Rainfed maize yields are 
predicted to increase in China’s northeast but 
to fall in its southern regions. Across the world 
the biophysical impacts of climate change on 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

55

Because different types 
of environmental change 

have different effects 
on land, labour and 
food production, it is 
important to examine 
the joint effects, through 
detailed, local analysis

both irrigated and rainfed crops are likely to 
be negative by 2050.88

The  variability  of  effects  underlines  the 
need for detailed, local analysis. So does the 
variability in household production and con-
sumption patterns, access to resources, poverty 
levels and ability to cope.89 For instance, agri-
culture is the most common source of work for 
rural women in most developing regions, yet 
they have less access than men to assets, inputs 
and  complementary  services.  Disparities  in 
landholdings are particularly acute — just 20 
percent of landholders in developing countries 
are women, and their landholdings are smaller 
than those of men.90

Food  production  must  rise  to  meet  the 
demands of growing populations, but the com-
bined environmental effects of land degrada-
tion, water scarcity and climate change will 
restrict supply. Adverse environmental factors 
are expected to drive up world food prices in 
real terms 30–50 percent in the coming dec-
ades  and  increase  price  volatility.91  Income 
poverty  and  malnutrition  could  worsen  if 
the prices of key staples rise — as vividly dem-
onstrated during the 2007–2008 food price 
spike.92 The poor spend a large share of their 
income on staple foods, and to survive, they 
sacrifice nutrition and eat less.93

The effects of food price hikes depend on 
household consumption and production. Peo-
ple in urban areas and nonfarm rural house-
holds, who are net food consumers, tend to be 
relatively worse off. But the research results are 
mixed:
•	 One modelling exercise covering 15 coun-
tries found that the effects on income pov-
erty depend on a household’s location and 
whether it engages in agriculture.94 Price 
hikes were predicted to hurt nonagricul-
tural  households  most,  with  20–50  per-
cent falling into poverty in parts of Africa 
and Asia. But households specializing in 
agriculture  benefit,  and  many  in  Latin 
America and the Caribbean and elsewhere 
in Asia are lifted from poverty.

•	 Another  recent  study  of  nine  countries 
(Bolivia, Cambodia, Madagascar, Malawi, 
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Viet Nam and 
Zambia)  found  that  rising  food  prices 

increased income poverty overall, even if 
rural  food  producers  did  better.95  Simi-
larly, food price hikes increased the inci-
dence and intensity of poverty in Indone-
sia, the Philippines and Thailand.96
Because different types of environmental 
change have different effects on land, labour 
and food production, it is important to exam-
ine the joint effects. In India climate change 
could lead to a sharp drop in land productiv-
ity for some 17 percent of farmers, through the 
effect on cereal prices, but effects on consump-
tion would be muted, as most rural households 
derive their income largely from wage employ-
ment. Costs would fall disproportionally on 
the poor in urban areas, who would pay more 
for food, and on wage earners and net consum-
ers of food in rural areas.97

Pressuring forests
Around 350 million people living in or near 
forests depend on forest wood and nonwood 
resources for subsistence and income.98 Many 
people in developing countries rely on forests 
for  fuelwood:  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific  more 
than 70 percent of wood removed from forests 
is for fuel; in Africa the share may be as high 
as 90 percent.99

Women  are  responsible  for  most  fuel-
wood collection in many parts of the world. 
Though global data are lacking on the number 
of women working in forestry, evidence sug-
gests  that  women,  with  fewer  occupational 
options and less mobility, rely on forests more 
than men do.100

Forest  resources  also  generate  income, 
through  employment  and  the  sale  of  goods 
and services. Nonwood forest products — such 
as food, fuel for cooking and heating, animal 
fodder, wild game, medicinal herbs and shelter 
— provide local communities with subsistence 
and marketable goods. They also provide cash 
to pay for school, medicine, equipment, sup-
plies and food.

Poor people typically depend more on for-
ests  for  cash  and  noncash  incomes — and  as 
safety nets.101 A review of case studies of rural 
communities living in or on the fringes of trop-
ical forests found that poor households derived 
more  than  a  fourth  of  their  incomes  from 

56

Human Development RepoRt 2011

•	

•	

forest resources, compared with 17 percent for 
nonpoor households.102 Some examples:
•	

In Arunachal Pradesh, India, poor house-
holds depended on community forests for 
basic survival, and households that had less 
land and less education and that were far-
ther from markets depended more on for-
est products.103
In southern Ethiopia forest income kept a 
fifth of the population above the poverty 
line, reducing income inequality some 15 
percent.104
In Viet Nam forest products provided rural 
households with a safety net when other 
sources of income failed. People stricken by 
illness and health shocks were more likely 
than others to extract forest products.105
It follows that poor people are more vul-
nerable to forest degradation and exclusion.106 
In South Asia households relying on fuel col-
lection responded to reduced access by increas-
ing collection time, purchasing fuelwood and 
cooking less often. Wealthier households, by 
contrast, shifted to alternative fuels.107

Damaging fisheries
An  estimated  45  million  people  directly 
engage in capture fisheries or aquaculture, at 
least 6 million of them women.108 More than 
95  percent  of  small-scale  fishers  and  post-
harvest workers live in developing countries 
and face precarious living and working condi-
tions. Countries most at risk from over fishing 
and climate change are also among those rely-
ing  most  on  fish  for  dietary  protein,  liveli-
hoods and exports.109

More than 80 percent of the world’s poor 
fishers are in South and Southeast Asia. But 
two-thirds of the countries whose capture fish-
eries are most vulnerable to climate change are 
in tropical Africa.110

Climate  change  is  predicted  to  reduce 
fishery resources in the Pacific Islands by as 
much as half by 2100 and to drastically reduce 
mangrove forests and coral reefs.111 Research 
commissioned by the United Nations Devel-
opment Programme Pacific Centre emphasizes 
the centrality of fishing to livelihoods in the 
Pacific region for both subsistence and cash.112 
Rising sea temperatures will adversely affect 

Countries most at 
risk from over fishing 
and climate change 
are also among those 
relying most on fish 
for dietary protein, 
livelihoods and exports

more men, who typically engage in deep-ocean 
fisheries and commercial fishing, while coastal 
erosion will hurt more women, who typically 
gather invertebrates closer to the shore.

How people respond to the impacts of cli-
mate change on fisheries is likely to vary. In 
Kenya, for example, even with catch declines 
of up to 50 percent, subsistence fishers from 
poor households and with less diverse income 
sources were more likely to continue fishing 
than were fishers from households with more 
assets and diversified livelihoods.113

But not all the expected effects are nega-
tive. For countries near the Equator fresh water 
aquaculture of fish such as tilapia may benefit 
from greater fresh water availability and higher 
temperatures.114 And ocean warming and the 
retreat of sea ice at high latitudes are predicted 
to increase the potential catch in the long term 
— with the greatest benefits likely to accrue in 
Alaska, Greenland, Norway and the Russian 
Federation.115

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

People  can  adjust  their  production  and 
consumption  strategies  to  environmental 
conditions — for instance, they may grow crops 
more suited to poorer soils or warmer tempera-
tures or eat food that requires less cooking and 
thus uses less fuelwood. People often react to 
environmental degradation by pursuing alter-
native livelihood strategies in the same area or 
by moving.116 We now consider other adverse 
repercussions on well-being.

Other adverse repercussions
Environmental  degradation  has  additional, 
interacting  repercussions  on  disadvantaged 
groups. Here, we explore the links with time 
use,  migration  and  conflict.  Environmental 
stress can increase the difficulties in making a 
living from natural resources — forcing people 
to go farther to collect them, to work more to 
obtain a similar livelihood or even to migrate. 
In some cases environmental stresses have been 
linked with greater likelihood of conflict.117

Time use
For people who lack access to modern fuels and 
safe water, collecting fuelwood and water takes 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

57

widespread 

environmental stress 
increases time burdens 
for households, with 
adverse implications 
for their well-being

considerable time. Nearly half the households 
in low HDI countries, mostly in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, spend more than 30 minutes a day col-
lecting water. The burden is especially high in 
rural areas. Trips average 82 minutes in Soma-
lia, 71 minutes in Mauritania and 65 minutes 
in Yemen.118

Widespread environmental stress increases 
time  burdens  for  households,  with  adverse 
implications  for  their  well-being.  Time-use 
surveys illuminate this burden, showing how 
tasks are allocated within households and how 
they can be affected by environmental degrada-
tion.119 Studies in India have found that fuel-
wood collection time has increased markedly 
in recent decades: in Kumaon, Uttar Pradesh, 
women and children travelled on average 1.6 
hours and 1.6 kilometres to collect wood in the 
early 1970s and 3–4 hours and 4.5 kilometres 
in the 1990s.120

Women and children have primary respon-
sibility for fetching wood and water. A recent 
study of seven low HDI countries found that 
56–86 percent of rural women fetched water, 
compared with 8–40 percent of rural men.121 
In rural Malawi, for instance, women spend 
more than eight times what men do fetching 
wood and water, and girls spend about three 
times what boys do on these chores (table 3.2).
Collecting fuelwood and water has been 
linked in women to spinal damage, compli-
cations during pregnancy and maternal mor-
tality.122 The demands on time can also have 
a high opportunity cost in forgone schooling 
or leisure time for children and labour market 
activity for adults. In rural Pakistan, for exam-
ple, difficult access to water increases women’s 

Guinea 
(2002–03)

Madagascar 

Sierra Leone 
(2003–04)

TABlE 3.2
Average time per week spent fetching wood and water, rural 
areas of selected Sub-Saharan African countries (hours)
Gender 
and ratio
Women
Men
Girls
Boys
Women/men
Girls/boys
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from Bardasi and Wodon (2009) (Guinea); Blackden and Wodon (2006) (Madagascar); 
Beegle and Wodon (2006) (Malawi); and Wodon and Ying (2010) (Sierra Leone).

Malawi 
(2004)
9.1
1.1
4.3
1.4
8.3
3.1

(2001)
4.7
4.1
5.1
4.7
1.1
1.1

7.3
4.5
7.7
7.1
1.6
1.1

5.7
2.3
4.1
4.0
2.5
1.0

total work burden and reduces the time they 
devote to market-oriented activities.123

Thus, the gains from secure and sustain-
able access to these resources and more mod-
ern alternatives could be large. In Sierra Leone 
improved  access  to  water  and  electricity 
reduced domestic work time about 10 hours 
a week.124 A study in the 1990s found that if 
all households in the Mbale district of East-
ern  Uganda  had  secure  access  to  water  and 
fuel — living 400 metres or less from potable 
water and no more than 30 minutes from a 
fuelwood source — they would gain more than 
900 hours a year.125 And a recent study esti-
mated that 63 percent of the economic ben-
efits from reaching the Millennium Develop-
ment Goal target for water supply would come 
from time savings.126

Migration
Environmental stress can also drive people to 
relocate, especially where families and commu-
nities are deprived in multiple dimensions and 
see better opportunities elsewhere. It is diffi-
cult to quantify how many people move due to 
environmental stresses, because other factors 
also constrain people’s freedoms.

Some prominent estimates have been very 
high — the 1994 Almeria Statement observed 
that 135 million people might be at risk of dis-
placement due to desertification.127 And the 
Stern Review suggested that 200 million peo-
ple might be displaced by 2050.128 But other 
estimates are far lower. The UN High Com-
missioner for Refugees found that 24 million 
people had been displaced by floods, famine 
and other environmental factors.129 A recent 
detailed  estimate  suggests  that  temperature 
and  rainfall  variation  drove  some  2.35  mil-
lion  people  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  to  move 
between 1960 and 2000.130

As  argued  in  the  2009  HDR,  expand-
ing  people’s  opportunities  to  choose  where 
they live is an important way to expand their 
freedoms.  Mobility  can  be  associated  with 
improved income-earning opportunities and 
better opportunities for children. The prob-
lems,  of  course,  are  that  a  degraded  envi-
ronment  constrains  choices — especially  for 
those whose livelihoods depend on a healthy 

58

Human Development RepoRt 2011

People living in urban 

slums in low and medium 

HDI countries face 

the greatest risk from 
extreme weather events 

and rising sea levels, 

caused by a combination 

of high exposure and 
inadequate protective 

infrastructure 
and services

environment — and that legal constraints on 
movement make migration riskier.131

Conflict
Finally,  climate  change  and  limited  natural 
resources  have  been  linked  to  an  increased 
likelihood of conflict, one of the most perni-
cious  threats  to  human  development.  They 
may also undermine the prospects for peace. 
Most  resource-related  conflicts  are  domes-
tic,  but  increasing  scarcity  of  land,  water 
and  energy  could  spark  international  strife. 
An  estimated  40  percent  of  civil  wars  over 
the past 60 years are associated with natural 
resources, and since 1990 at least 18 violent 
conflicts have been fuelled by the exploitation 
of  natural  resources  and  other  environmen-
tal factors.132 Some cross-country evidence is 
illustrative. For example, greater variability in 
rainfall increases the risk of civil conflict, par-
ticularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, where a 1°C 
rise in temperature is associated with a greater 
than 10 percent increase in the likelihood of 
civil war the same year.133

Recent  episodes  support  the  link.  Com-
petition over land contributed to postelection 
violence in Kenya in 2008 and to tensions lead-
ing to the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. Water, 
land and desertification are major factors in the 
war in Darfur, Sudan. In Afghanistan conflict 
and the environment are caught up in a vicious 
cycle — environmental degradation fuels con-
flict, and conflict degrades the environment.134 
Policy responses, when they are badly designed 
or fail to consider all parties’ interests, can also 
exacerbate the risk of conflict.

Global and local resource scarcity may be 
key  causes  of  conflict — a  well  known  early 
study highlights the interplay between envi-
ronmental  degradation,  population  growth 
and unequal resource distributions in stirring 
up strife.135 And countries with high depend-
ence on primary commodity exports may be at 
increased risk — an abundance of resources is a 
powerful incentive for conflict.136

But  natural  resources  are  rarely,  if  ever, 
the  sole  driver  of  violent  conflict.  They  are 
threat  multipliers  that  interact  with  other 
risks and vulnerabilities.137 The evidence does 
not suggest that there are direct links between 

environmental scarcity and conflict but that 
resource scarcity has to be embedded in the 
context of the broader political economy: sep-
arating the processes and elements associated 
with environmental conflict from the struc-
tures within which they are embedded is “both 
difficult and a distortion of reality.”138

disequalizing effects 
of extreme events

People  living  in  urban  slums  in  low  and 
medium HDI countries face the greatest risk 
from  extreme  weather  events  and  rising  sea 
levels, caused by a combination of high expo-
sure and inadequate protective infrastructure 
and services.139 By 2050, with a projected 0.5 
metre rise in sea level, Bangladesh is likely to 
lose about 11 percent of its land, affecting an 
estimated 15 million people.140 Over the same 
period  rising  sea  levels  could  displace  more 
than 14 million Egyptians as increased sali-
nization of the Nile reduces the irrigated land 
available for agriculture.141

The United Nations estimates that 29 per-
cent of the world’s slum dwellers live in low 
HDI countries — with an additional 24 per-
cent in China and 15 percent in India (both 
medium HDI countries).142 Vulnerable groups 
in megacities are particularly exposed to natu-
ral disasters, because of both their precarious 
living conditions and the absence of public ser-
vices and formal social security systems. But, 
as shown below, some substitution with social 
capital,  which  builds  resilience,  can  reduce 
risk.

Our own analysis suggests that a 10 per-
cent increase in the number of people affected 
by an extreme weather event typically reduces 
a country’s HDI by almost 2 percent, with par-
ticularly strong effects on the income compo-
nent of HDI and in medium HDI countries. 
In some countries poorer regions suffer most. 
In Ha Giang Province, Viet Nam, one of the 
country’s  poorest  regions  and  home  to  22 
ethnic minorities, irregular rainfall, massive 
flooding and unpredictable storms have sub-
merged land and crops, drowned livestock and 
destroyed infrastructure.143 In Mexico natural 
disasters, particularly droughts and floods, set 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

59

the strikingly unequal 
gender effects of natural 
disasters suggest that 
inequality in exposure 
and sensitivity to risk 
— as well as disparities 
in access to resources, 

capabilities and 

opportunities — overlap 

and systematically 

disadvantage 
some groups

the  HDI  back  in  affected  municipalities  by 
about two years and increased extreme poverty 
almost 4 percentage points.144

The risk of injury and death from floods, 
high  winds  and  landslides  has  been  system-
atically  higher  among  children,  women  and 
the elderly, especially the poor. In Bangladesh 
poorer groups tend to live closer to rivers and 
thus face a greater risk of flooding.145 Local case 
studies of a 1991 Bangladeshi cyclone, the 2003 
European heat wave and the 2004 Asian tsu-
nami affirm the greater vulnerability of women 
and children, as does broader cross-country evi-
dence. Sri Lanka’s tsunami killed nearly 1 in 5 
displaced women and almost 1 in 3 displaced 
children under age 5— more than two times 
and four times the mortality of displaced men 
(about 1 in 12), respectively.146 And in rural 
India the mortality differential between girls 
and boys increases during droughts.147

The  strikingly  unequal  gender  effects  of 
natural  disasters  suggest  that  inequality  in 
exposure and sensitivity to risk — as well as dis-
parities in access to resources, capabilities and 
opportunities — overlap and systematically dis-
advantage some groups. In 141 countries over 
22 years, higher female mortality from natu-
ral disasters and their aftermaths cannot be 
explained by biology and physiology.148 And 
major  catastrophes,  as  approximated  by  the 
number of people killed relative to population 
size,  have  more  severe  impacts  than  smaller 
disasters on women’s life expectancy relative 
to that of men.

The explanations lie in social norms and 
roles and, more generally, in the socioeconomic 
status of women in the specific context. The 
higher women’s socioeconomic status (meas-
ured by such factors as freedom of choice of 
employment, nondiscrimination at work and 
equal rights to marriage and education), the 
smaller the gender-differentiated impacts on 
life expectancy. In other words, it is the socially 
constructed vulnerability of women that leads 
to the higher mortality rates due to natural 
disasters.149 Along similar lines, countries that 
focused on female education suffered far fewer 
losses from extreme weather events than less 
progressive countries with equivalent income 
and weather conditions.150

The risks and impacts are largest overall 
in  developing  countries — but  the  patterns 
of  structural  disadvantage  are  not  confined 
to  them.  Witness  Hurricane  Katrina  in  the 
United  States.  New  Orleans’s  poorest  dis-
tricts, composed mainly of black communities, 
bore the brunt of the 2005 hurricane — three-
quarters of people in flooded neighbourhoods 
were  black.151  In  the  2003  European  heat 
wave, more women than men died, as did more 
elderly people than young people.

Shocks can have longer term adverse effects 
that extend beyond the destruction of life and 
immediate damage to health and livelihoods. 
Children may suffer disproportionately from 
weather shocks through the lasting effects of 
reduced  schooling  and  malnourishment.  In 
response to transitory income shocks, families 
without assets or other income opportunities, 
such as wage labour, may pull children out of 
school. The perceived risk of income loss con-
tributes  in  its  own  right.  Further,  schooling 
infrastructure  may  be  affected,  and  teachers 
may be injured or killed.152 The relationship 
is  not  always  straightforward,  however.  In 
Mexico, high-impact disasters were linked to 
increased school attendance and reduced drop-
out rates for primary school, and in Mozam-
bique, to better school performance,153 possibly 
because the opportunity cost of sending chil-
dren to school fell along with market wages.

Weather shocks can also affect child health, 
notably  through  increases  in  malnutrition. 
One study in Zimbabwe found that children 
who were exposed to shocks (civil war and the 
1982–1984  drought)  at  ages  12–24  months 
completed  0.85  grade  of  schooling  less  and 
were on average 3.4 centimetres shorter than 
those who were not. This stunting was shown 
to reduce lifetime earnings by 14 percent.154 In 
Nicaragua infant malnutrition more than tri-
pled among households most exposed to rain-
fall during Hurricane Mitch.155 And Bangla-
desh experienced a resurgence of child poverty 
after 2000 in the low-lying coastal regions of 
the country most vulnerable to flooding.156

In  Viet  Nam  evidence  suggests  that 
household  responses  vary  by  type  of  shock. 
Households  exposed  frequently  to  shocks 
such as drought or moderate flooding learn to 

60

Human Development RepoRt 2011

women’s ability to make 

reproductive choices 
carries ramifications for 
the environment and for 
women’s empowerment, 
and women’s political 
empowerment has 
consequences for 
proenvironment 
policy and practice

adapt.157 But survey analysis suggests no adap-
tation to less frequent storms and hurricanes 
— hurricanes can halve consumption in house-
holds near large cities, especially since disaster 
relief largely neglects those areas.

disempowerment and 
environmental degradation

Inequality,  as  manifested  in  unequal  access 
to resources and decision-making, can harm 
human  development  and  the  environment. 
We assess the implications of gender dispari-
ties, focusing on reproductive health and par-
ticipation in decision-making. We then focus 
on empowerment as a driver of environmental 
challenges to inform the policy discussions in 
chapters 4 and 5.

Gender equality
Women’s economic opportunities and empow-
erment remain severely constrained. Access to 
reproductive healthcare has been improving in 
most regions, but not fast enough to achieve 
Millennium Development Goal 5 (to improve 
maternal health).158 Indicators under the tar-
get of universal access to reproductive health-
care include the adolescent birth rate, antena-
tal care and unmet need for family planning.
Last year’s HDR introduced the Gender 
Inequality Index (GII) for 138 countries. This 
year it covers 145 countries, and our updated 
estimates confirm that the largest losses due to 
gender inequality are in Sub-Saharan Africa, 
followed by South Asia and the Arab States. 
In Sub-Saharan Africa the biggest losses arise 
from gender disparities in education and from 
high maternal mortality and adolescent fertil-
ity rates. In South Asia women lag behind men 
in each dimension of the GII, most notably in 
education, national parliamentary representa-
tion and labour force participation. Women 
in Arab States are affected by unequal labour 
force  participation  (around  half  the  global 
average) and low educational attainment. All 
the low HDI countries have high gender ine-
quality across multiple dimensions. Of the 34 
low HDI countries included in the 2011 GII, 
all but four also have a GII score in the worst 
quartile. By contrast, only one very high HDI 

country and one high HDI country included 
in the GII perform as badly.

We  focus  on  two  intersections  between 
gender equity and environmental sustainabil-
ity: reproductive choice and participation in 
decision-making.  Contraceptive  prevalence 
and the ability to make reproductive choices 
carry ramifications for the environment and 
for women’s empowerment. And, as we show, 
women’s  political  empowerment  is  not  only 
intrinsically  important,  but  it  also  has  con-
sequences  for  proenvironment  policy  and 
practice.

Reproductive choice
Poor reproductive health is a major contribu-
tor  to  gender  inequality  around  the  world. 
Lack of access to reproductive health services 
results  in  debilitating  outcomes  for  women 
and  children — and  to  fatalities  in  excess  of 
those caused by the most devastating natural 
disasters. An estimated 48 million women give 
birth without skilled assistance, and 2 million 
give birth alone. An estimated 150,000 women 
and 1.6 million children die each year between 
the onset of labour and 48 hours after birth.159
For the bottom 20 countries in the GII the 
population-weighted maternal mortality ratio 
averages  about  327  deaths  per  100,000  live 
births, and the adolescent fertility rate aver-
ages 95 births per 1,000 women ages 15–19, 
both roughly double the global averages of 157 
deaths and 49 births. In these countries con-
traceptive use is low, averaging only 46.4 per-
cent. More broadly, an estimated 215 million 
women  in  developing  countries  have  unmet 
need for family planning.160

Every  country,  developed  or  developing, 
that offers women a full range of reproductive 
health options has fertility rates at or below 
replacement.161 Cuba, Iran, Mauritius, Thai-
land and Tunisia have fertility rates of less than 
two births per woman.162 And Addis Ababa’s 
is also less than two births per woman, while 
Ethiopia’s rural fertility rate remains above six. 
In  much  of  rural  Bangladesh,  despite  wide-
spread poverty, fertility is now at the replace-
ment rate.163 And family sizes have fallen as 
rapidly in Iran as they have in China, but with-
out government limits on family size.164

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

61

As table 2.1 in chapter 2 illustrates, popula-
tion growth seriously strains the limits of world 
resources. A range of studies suggest that lower 
population growth could offset at least some of 
the higher greenhouse gas emissions associated 
with rising incomes. One early estimate was 
that by 2020 carbon dioxide emissions would 
be about 15 percent lower than they would be 
without  family  planning.165  A  more  recent 
study of 34 developed and developing coun-
tries with 61 percent of the world’s population 
finds that halving 2010’s population growth 
could  provide  16–29  percent  of  the  carbon 
dioxide emissions reductions needed by 2050 
and 37–41 percent needed by the end of the 
century to avoid dangerous climate change.166 
Another study estimated that meeting unmet 
need for family planning would avert 53 mil-
lion  unintended  pregnancies  a  year  and  cut 
carbon emissions by 34 gigatonnes, or about 
17 percent of the world’s current yearly total, 
as of 2050.167 The environmental pay-offs are 
thus clearly enormous, over and above the ben-
efits to women’s empowerment.

Gender inequality and contraceptive prev-
alence are closely linked (figure 3.6). Where 
women have greater standing, as in Japan, the 
Netherlands  and  Norway,  most  couples  use 
some form of contraception. But where gender 

FIGURE 3.6
gender equality and contraceptive prevalence are closely linked
Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent)

IRELAND
•
••
•
•

CHINA
•

•

•

NORWAY
•
•
•
••
••
•
••
•
•
•
•
JAPAN
•
•

•

•

•

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

•

•
•

•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
••
•
•

•

•
•

•
••
••
•
•
•

•

BRAZIL
•
••
•
•
• •
••••
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•

•

•
•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•••

•

THE FORMER YUGOSLAV
REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA

100

80

•
NETHERLANDS
60

40

20

0

0

NICARAGUA

•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
IRAQ KENYA
•

INDIA
•
•

•

•

•

•
•
MAURITANIA
•
•
SUDAN
BURUNDI

•

•

•
•
• •
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
SIERRA LEONE

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

•

YEMEN

•
NIGER
••
•
MALI
•

CHAD

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

1.0

Gender Inequality Index

Note: Contraceptive prevalence rates are for the most recent year available from the World Health Organization for each country 
during 2000–2008; see statistical table 4 for details. The Gender Inequality Index is for 2011.
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from the World Health Organization.

62

Human Development RepoRt 2011

inequality is high, as in Mali, Mauritania and 
Sierra Leone, contraceptive prevalence is below 
10 percent. Data collected between 2000 and 
2009 show that fewer than 3 in 10 women of 
reproductive  age  in  low  HDI  countries  use 
modern contraception, compared with 88 per-
cent in Norway and 84 percent in the United 
Kingdom.

Further  analysis  highlights  the  impor-
tance of national HDI levels, especially edu-
cation and health achievements, in explaining 
the  relationship  between  gender  inequality 
and  contraceptive  prevalence.  However,  the 
same does not apply for income — if we control 
for income alone, gender inequality and con-
traceptive prevalence continue to be strongly 
linked.  This  underlines  the  importance  of 
investments  in  health  and  education  in  fur-
thering reproductive health choices.

The  reported  unmet  demand  for  family 
planning is very low in Chad, the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo and Niger (below 5 per-
cent), alongside very high average fertility.168 
This can happen because of cultural or reli-
gious  objections  by  women,  their  husbands 
or other family members; a lack of knowledge 
of contraceptive methods or fear of their side 
effects; or preference for larger families.169 Low 
unmet need can be associated with low contra-
ceptive prevalence at low levels of development 
(where fertility preferences are high) and with 
high contraceptive prevalence at high levels of 
development  (where  fertility  preferences  are 
low).  This  means  that  family  planning  pro-
grammes must go beyond supplying contracep-
tion at affordable prices to raising awareness 
of its use and health effects and addressing the 
structural constraints facing poor women (see 
chapter 4). Some studies link fertility decisions 
to deforestation and difficult access to water, 
which require women and children to spend 
more time collecting fuelwood and water.170

Unmet need is often high — more than 30 
percent of people in some countries, including 
Haiti, Liberia, Mali and Uganda, would like 
to use family planning but do not.171 Multi-
dimensional poverty is correlated with unmet 
need for contraception. The incidence of peo-
ple  living  in  households  with  unmet  fam-
ily  planning  needs  is  always  higher  among 

the multidimensionally poor (figure 3.7). In 
Bolivia 27 percent of the multidimensionally 
poor  have  unmet  need  for  family  planning, 
more than twice the share among the nonpoor 
(12  percent),  and  in  Ethiopia  unmet  need 
among the multidimensionally poor (29 per-
cent) is almost three times the share among 
the nonpoor (11 percent).

Fertility is also affected by women’s edu-
cation.  A  recent  study  covering  more  than 
90 percent of the world’s people found that 
women who have never gone to school average 
4.5 children, those with even a few years of pri-
mary school average just 3, and those with one 
or two years of secondary school average 1.9. 
And when women enter the workforce, start 
businesses or inherit assets, their desire for a 
large family also tends to diminish.172

The principles and routes — removing bar-
riers to the use of family planning and rights-
based population policies — are not new. They 
were directly envisioned by conferees in Cairo 
in 1994 and committed to by nearly all gov-
ernments. Chapter 4 argues that progress has 
been too slow and highlights some promising 
avenues to consider.

Women’s participation in decision-making
Gender  inequalities  are  also  reflected  in 
women’s  low  participation  in  national  and 
local political fora. This has ramifications for 
sustainability  if,  as  some  research  suggests, 
women express more concern for the environ-
ment, support more pro environmental policy 
and vote for proenvironmental leaders.
•	 Countries with higher female parliamen-
tary representation are more likely to set 
aside  protected  land  areas,  as  a  study  of 
25 developed and 65 developing countries 
reveals.173

•	 Countries with higher female parliamen-
tary representation are more likely to rat-
ify  international  environmental  treaties, 
according to a study of 130 countries with 
about 92 percent of the world’s people.174
•	 Of the 49 countries that reduced carbon 
dioxide emissions between 1990 and 2007, 
14  were very high HDI countries, 10 of 
which had higher than average female par-
liamentary representation.

FIGURE 3.7
unmet contraceptive need is higher among the multidimensionally poor

Population with unmet contraceptive need (percent)

MALDIVES
LIBERIA
MALI
UGANDA
GABON
HAITI
PAKISTAN
BENIN
ETHIOPIA
GUINEA
SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE
TIMOR-LESTE
NEPAL
PHILIPPINES
AZERBAIJAN
RWANDA
BOLIVIA
KENYA
CAMBODIA
CAMEROON
NIGERIA
CONGO, DEM. REP. OF THE
ZAMBIA
MALAWI
SWAZILAND
LESOTHO
NIGER
CONGO
GHANA
MADAGASCAR
EGYPT
MOZAMBIQUE
NAMIBIA
NICARAGUA
ARMENIA
INDIA
TURKEY
JORDAN
UKRAINE
COLOMBIA
ZIMBABWE
INDONESIA
MOROCCO
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
PERU
VIET NAM
BANGLADESH
MOLDOVA

0

10

20

30

◆

40

50

—

◆

—

◆

—

Among the
nonpoor

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

—

—

—

—

—

Among
the poor

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

—

—

◆
—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

◆

◆

◆

◆

—

◆

—

—

—

—

—

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆
—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

◆

—

◆

—

◆

—

◆

—

◆
—

Note: Data are for most recent year available during 2000–2010 and are based on the Demographic and Health Survey second 
definition of unmet need (DHS 2008).
Source: Calculated based on data on MPI from statistical table 5 and from Demographic and Health Surveys.

But  women  continue  to  be  underrepre-
sented in national parliaments, on average occu-
pying only 19 percent of seats and accounting 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

63

Disempowerment and 

power imbalances 

add to environmental 

challenges

for just 18 percent of ministers.175 Higher posi-
tions are even more elusive: only 7 of 150 elected 
heads of state and only 11 of 192 heads of gov-
ernment are women. The situation is similar in 
local government.176

Other  evidence  suggests  that  gender 
empowerment and environmental awareness 
may be related. The number of women’s and 
environmental  NGOs  per  capita  was  nega-
tively correlated with deforestation in a study 
of 61 countries between 1990 and 2005. That 
may be partly because of women’s incentives 
to avert the negative effects of deforestation 
on their workload, income and health.177 In 
developed  countries  survey  data  show  that 
women are more likely than men to engage in 
environmentally sensitive behaviours, such as 
recycling, conserving water and avoiding envi-
ronmentally harmful products.178

But the relationship, far from straightfor-
ward, varies with development. As we saw in 
box 2.5 in chapter 2, analysis of Gallup World 
Poll data on environmental attitudes suggests 
that concerns about environmental problems 
are not very high. On average, the attitudes of 
men and women differ little,179 but some vari-
ation appears across HDI groups (table 3.3). 
In very high HDI countries women express 
more  concern  for  environmental  issues  (cli-
mate change, water and air quality) than do 
men, while men express more concern in low 
HDI countries. The medium and high HDI 
countries (and most developing regions) fall in 
between.

TABlE 3.3
Attitudes towards the environment, by gender, low and very high 
hdi countries, 2010 (percent, unless otherwise noted)

Low HDI countries

Very high HDI countries

Difference 
(percentage 

points)

47.76

46.05

1.71

Male

27.18

Male

Female

Attitude
Climate change is 
a serious threat
Dissatisfied with:
Air quality
Water quality
Government 
environmental policy
Government 
emissions policy
Source: HDRO calculations based on data from Gallup World Poll (http://worldview.gallup.com).

17.95
13.56

21.27
47.32

22.81
50.48

1.55
3.16

2.70

46.36

53.13

52.12

49.16

54.82

61.46

12.30

Difference 
(percentage 

points)

Female

31.46

21.36
16.28

48.38

60.83

4.29

3.41
2.72

2.02

7.70

While overall levels of education influence 
attitudes, the ratio of the share of women to 
men in secondary and tertiary education does 
not. The implication: women’s greater concern 
for the environment in rich countries is not a 
function of their having more education, nor is 
the converse true in very poor countries.

Some  evidence  suggests  that  women’s 
involvement  is  associated  with  better  local 
environmental  management.  Yet  women’s 
mere presence in institutions is not enough to 
overcome entrenched disparities — additional 
changes and flexibility in institutional forms 
are needed to ensure that women can partici-
pate effectively in  decision-making. In some 
cases  including  women  and  other  marginal 
groups is perceived as a way of maintaining the 
status quo rather than achieving any specific 
outcomes or questioning inequalities.180

What matters, then, is not simply women’s 
presence but the nature of their participation. 
Consider forestry management (box 3.4). A 
recently published study of community for-
estry institutions in India and Nepal found 
that women’s proportional strength in forest 
management  committees  affects  the  effec-
tiveness  of  their  participation.181  The  more 
women on the management committee, the 
greater is the likelihood that they will attend 
committee  meetings,  speak  up  and  become 
office holders.

The arguments here are not new. But they 
point to an important part of a reform pack-
age to address inequality and environmental 
degradation — with major expansions of wom-
en’s freedoms.

Power inequalities
As a critical dimension of people’s freedoms, 
empowerment is an important end in itself. 
But disempowerment and power imbalances 
add  to  environmental  challenges.  We  build 
on the 2010 HDR, where we addressed several 
components of empowerment: agency, politi-
cal freedoms, civil liberties and accountabil-
ity. Box 2.1 in chapter 2 already highlighted 
some  recent  changes.  Here  we  focus  on  the 
political arena — on national and local govern-
ments, accountability and democracy, and civil 
society.

64

Human Development RepoRt 2011

History,  power  relations  and  context  all 
affect the links between democracy and envi-
ronmental  public  goods.  State  activity  can 
usefully  be  seen  as  a  continuum  from  “oli-
garchic, extractive, exploitive and divisive” to 
“inclusive, innovative, accountable, responsive 
and effective at mediating distributional con-
flict.”182 Where state activity falls along the 
continuum is determined by the underlying 
social  contract —historically  shaped  interac-
tions  between  political  and  economic  elites 
and other social groups — as manifest in for-
mal and informal institutions. As economic 
processes,  both  state  action  and  capitalism 
are often weak in sustaining the environment 
— capitalism, intrinsically so, given the short 
time  horizon  of  most  firms  and  the  impor-
tance of externalities. The state, despite its role 
in providing public goods and managing exter-
nalities, can often be limited by short political 
and electoral time horizons. These factors can 
interact with political and social structures to 
have harmful effects on the environment, espe-
cially where the adverse impacts affect mainly 
disempowered groups.

Studies have shown that democracies are 
typically more accountable to voters and more 
likely  to  allow  civil  liberties,  enabling  peo-
ple  to  be  more  informed  on  environmental 
problems  (thanks  to  a  free  press),  to  organ-
ize and to express concerns. At the national 
level the extent of democracy has been associ-
ated with environmental quality.183 But even 
in democratic systems, the people and groups 
most adversely affected are those who are less 
well-off and less empowered. Policy priorities 
may not reflect their interests and needs. In 
many countries and contexts power inequali-
ties affect environmental outcomes, mediated 
through political and social institutions.

State-level  evidence  across  the  United 
States  suggests  that  greater  inequality  in 
power (measured by lower voter participation 
and educational attainment and weaker fiscal 
policies) leads to weaker environmental poli-
cies and more environmental degradation.184 
Cross-country evidence supports this view. In 
180 countries variables such as literacy, politi-
cal  rights  and  civil  liberties  improve  envi-
ronmental  quality  in  high-  and  low-income 

BOX 3.4
Women’s participation in community forest management

Participation of women in community decision-making is important for resource conservation 
and regeneration, particularly for community forest management. However, preexisting and 
structural gender inequalities (in income, assets and political endowments) often weaken 
women’s ability to participate. Even in communities where women are not formally excluded 
from decision-making bodies, their ability to participate in policy-making may be limited by so-
cial inequalities. Requiring female representation on committees and ensuring that women are 
consulted are necessary but insufficient conditions — ultimately the issue is one of challenging 
and changing power relations.

In villages where women are not actively involved in decision-making, they are more ad-
versely affected by forest management decisions  such as forest closures   than in communities 
where they are more involved.

Prior equality is not necessary for women to assert themselves in committee meetings. 
In fact, women from disadvantaged households are more outspoken in public forums than 
women from better-off households, a finding attributable to their opportunity to gain more if 
decisions go in their favour. This outcome was found to be more likely where a large number of 
women were present or where women had already been exposed to women’s empowerment 
programmes. Other studies affirm that allowing women to participate, even in a limited role, 
changes cultural perceptions as to women’s capacity to make decisions, in turn prompting the 
formation of other initiatives and cooperatives for women, allowing them to become more 
active outside the home.

Source: Agarwal 2001, 2009; see also Tole (2010), Gupte (2004) and Timsina (2003).

countries185  and  positively  influence  clean 
water and improved sanitation.186

New cross-national analyses of more than 
100 countries commissioned for this Report 
confirmed  the  strong  correlation  between 
proxies for the distribution of power and envi-
ronmental quality.187 Empowerment is linked 
with access to improved water, less land deg-
radation and fewer deaths due to indoor and 
outdoor  air  pollution  and  dirty  water.  And 
empowerment variables are even more impor-
tant  than  income  in  explaining  many  key 
dimensions of environmental quality, includ-
ing  access  to  improved  water,  deaths  due  to 
pollution  and  mortality  in  children  under 
age 5. The implication is that while powerful 
economic interests can distort policies, socie-
ties can do much to limit that power.

Investigations of environmental data over 
time  for  a  large  number  of  countries  have 
found  this  relation  to  hold.  Most  studies 
focus on pollution, a public bad from which 
the  state  is  expected  to  protect  its  popula-
tion.188 The general finding is that literacy and 
political rights are associated with less air and 
water pollution. A recent contribution high-
lights  the  importance  of  long-term  democ-
racy in lowering sulphur and carbon dioxide 

CHapteR 3  trACing the eFFeCtS—underStAnding the relAtiOnS

65

greater equality 
between men and 
women and within 
populations may 

have transformative 
potential in advancing 

environmental 
sustainability

emissions.189 This makes sense: it takes time 
for democracy to yield tangible instrumental 
gains. Other work in more than 100 countries 
links a higher level of democracy to less defor-
estation, less land degradation and less air and 
water pollution.190

Various  studies  suggest  that  democracy 
increases  the  likelihood  of  state  commit-
ment  to  goals  to  address  climate  change, 
transboundary  air  pollution  and  river  man-
agement,  if  not  policy  implementation.  But 
while democracies tend to be more commit-
ted to positive outcomes for climate change, 
the relationship is not very strong — given that 
the benefits are perceived to be external and 
beyond the time horizon of current voters (and 
politicians).191 This widens the gaps between 
words and deeds.

Even within democracies, political institu-
tions vary widely. Some are centralized, and 
others decentralized. Likewise, political rep-
resentation is affected by the role of political 
parties, the existence of quotas for particular 
groups,  the  duration  of  electoral  cycles  and 
other  factors.  Some  countries  have  a  strong 
independent agency charged with protecting 
the environment; others may have only a weak 
line ministry. The strength of labour unions 
contributes to lower environmental air qual-
ity; the strength of green parties has the oppo-
site effect.192

Civil society groups can organize and exert 
real impact on the decisions of policy-makers, 
offsetting the often disproportionate influence 
of  powerful  economic  interests  and  lobbies. 
The possibility of developing this “countervail-
ing power”193 depends on whether institutions 
in a society allow for open and free participa-
tion. As Sweden’s environmental policies show, 
strong democratic participation can translate 
into policies that reflect popular concern. But 
such concerns may be countervailed by other 
vested interests — as reported for the Russian 
Federation in the problems civil society faces 
in mobilizing public support around greening 

industry.194 Where civil society is active, it has 
been shown to bring about significant change:
•	 A recent study modelling environmental 
NGO impact in a framework of interest 
group participation and influence in 104 
countries found that the number of envi-
ronmental advocacy groups in a country 
had a statistically significant negative rela-
tion with the lead content in gasoline.195

•	 A study using cross-country panel data for 
1977–1988  found  a  statistically  signifi-
cant negative relation between the num-
ber of environmental NGOs and air pol-
lution levels and weaker relations between 
democracy and pollution and between lit-
eracy rates and pollution.196
Civil society, in turn, can thrive only with 
popular support. Where civil society groups 
are active, power imbalances can be overcome. 
In the 1990s activists in poor, racial minority 
neighbourhoods  in  Chicago,  United  States, 
succeeded  in  getting  the  national  Environ-
mental Protection Agency to act against illegal 
waste dumping in their communities. Com-
munity policing programmes were established, 
and city regulations and enforcement of ille-
gal dumping were also strengthened, includ-
ing  new  harsher  penalties.197  Civil  society 
groups in a range of contexts have successfully 
opposed activities likely to be a detriment to 
the environment and the livelihoods of people 
who directly rely on it.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

We  have  outlined  the  ways  environmental 
deprivations and environmental degradation 
can constrain choices — showing how they seri-
ously jeopardize health, education, livelihoods 
and other aspects of well-being and at times 
worsen prevailing inequalities. We have also 
suggested that greater equality between men 
and women and within populations may have 
transformative potential in advancing sustain-
ability. We go on to explore this possibility and 
promising approaches and policies.

66

Human Development RepoRt 2011

positive synergies—winning 
strategies for the environment, 
equity and human development

r
e
t
p
a
h
c

4

In facing the challenges laid out in chapters 
2 and 3, a host of governments, civil society, 
private  sector  and  development  actors  have 
sought to integrate environmental and equity 
concerns  and  promote  human  development 
— win-win-win  strategies.  An  example  at 
the global level is the 1987 Montreal Proto-
col,  which  bans  ozone-depleting  chemicals, 
thereby  benefiting  sustainability  (through 
protection of the ozone layer), equity (through 
technology transfer to developing countries) 
and  human  development  (through  positive 
impacts on health).1

This chapter showcases local and national 
strategies to address environmental depriva-
tions and build resilience, thereby demonstrat-
ing positive synergies. An important backdrop 
to this discussion is the need for healthy eco-
systems  and  the  services  they  provide,  espe-
cially for the poor. Ecosystems build the foun-
dation for water quality, food security, flood 
protection and natural climate regulation.2

Scaling up successful community and local 
initiatives is a prime focus. Key elements at the 
national level are policies that bring together 
social,  economic  and  environmental  con-
cerns; coordination mechanisms aligned with 
budget frameworks; a culture of innovation; 
and strong institutions, alongside mechanisms 
that  ensure  accountability.  Some  countries 
have overcome siloed arrangements through 
medium-term  plans  that  allow  cross-secto-
ral coordination across government agencies 
and with development partners. Senior core 
ministries — such as finance and planning — 
are often critical, as are line agencies, especially 
working with other ministries. In Malawi the 
Ministry of Agriculture helped create demand 
for  measures  to  reduce  poverty  and  protect 
the  environment,  and  in  Rwanda  the  Min-
istry  of  State,  Lands  and  the  Environment 
garnered presidential and cabinet support for 

integrating environmental concerns into the 
country’s  Economic  Development  and  Pov-
erty Strategy. And crucial at the local level are 
strong institutions, particularly those that pay 
attention  to  disadvantaged  groups  and  pro-
mote community management.

The policy agenda is vast. This Report can-
not do it full justice or cover all the challenges 
raised in the preceding chapters. Several recent 
global reports provide important details.3 The 
value  added  here  is  in  identifying  win-win-
win  strategies  that  successfully  address  the 
world’s  social,  economic  and  environmental 
challenges  by  managing,  or  even  bypassing, 
trade-offs so that the approaches are good not 
only for the environment but also for equity 
and human development more broadly. This 
effort provides concrete experience and impor-
tant motivation for the forward-looking final 
chapter.

Scaling up to address 
environmental deprivations 
and build resilience

We  begin  by  highlighting  promising  win-
win-win  routes  in  energy  and  in  water  and 
sanitation.

Energy
Energy is central to a range of services support-
ing human development, from modern medi-
cal care, transportation, information and com-
munications to lighting, heating, cooking and 
mechanical power for agriculture. Equitable 
and sustainable development requires making 
energy available for all, controlling emissions 
and shifting to new and cleaner energy sources.

Addressing energy deprivations
Some 1.5 billion people, more than one in five, 
lack access to electricity, and 2.6 billion cook 

CHapteR 4  pOSitive SynergieS—winning StrAtegieS FOr the envirOnMent, equity And huMAn develOpMent

67

FIGURE 4.1
large regional 
differences in the share 
of multidimensionally poor 
people lacking electricity
Percent

Europe and Central Asia

0.4

3.3

East Asia and the Paciﬁc

11.1
Latin America and the Caribbean

27.7

South Asia

62.3
Sub-Saharan Africa

Note: Excludes very high HDI countries.
Source: HDRO staff calculations based on data 
from the Oxford Poverty and Human Development 
Initiative.

with wood, straw, charcoal or dung.4 Major 
energy  inequalities  persist  across  regions, 
countries, gender and classes. Acknowledging 
that energy distribution cannot be considered 
apart from political and social exclusion,5 the 
65th United Nations General Assembly pro-
claimed 2012 as the International Year of Sus-
tainable Energy for All.6

One  multidimensionally  poor  person  in 
three (32 percent) lacks electricity, and there 
is a strong regional pattern to this deprivation 
(figure 4.1). More than 60 percent of the multi-
dimensionally  poor  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa 
lack electricity, compared with less than 1 per-
cent in Europe and Central Asia. Progress in 
electrification has been slow in Africa. Elec-
tricity generation capacity per person in Sub-
Saharan Africa today is similar to levels in the 
1980s but just a tenth that in South and East 
Asia. And rural electrification has stagnated at 
below 10 percent — while growing to 50 per-
cent for developing countries as a whole.7

Electrification  can  reduce  poverty  by 
increasing productivity, employment and time 
spent  in  school  and  reducing  environmen-
tal  pressures.  For  instance,  in  South  Africa 
electrification is associated with a 13 percent 
greater  likelihood  of  women  participating 
in the labour market,8 while in Viet Nam it 
increased income, consumption and schooling 
outcomes.9 Bhutanese villagers attest enthusi-
astically to the difference electricity makes in 
their lives, citing the ability to work in the eve-
nings and cook without wood, which reduced 
respiratory problems and time spent fetching 
fuel.10

Expanding  energy  access  and  mitigating 
climate change can be presented as trade-offs. 
For instance, the World Bank’s recent $3.75 
billion loan to South Africa to build one of 
the world’s largest coal-fired plants will expand 
access, but the project raised concerns about 
greenhouse gas emissions and environmental 
degradation as well as carbon lock-in when the 
longevity of infrastructure prolongs the use of 
obsolete technologies.11

But the prospect of win-win-win options 
enables  us  to  go  beyond  trade-offs.  Recent 
World Energy Outlook estimates indicate that 
providing everyone with basic modern energy 

services would increase carbon dioxide emis-
sions only 0.8 percent by 2030.12 Off-grid and 
decentralized options are important and tech-
nically  feasible.  While  difficult  to  quantify, 
the number of rural households already served 
by renewable energy is estimated in the tens 
of millions, through such schemes as micro-
hydropower in villages and county-scale mini-
grids, an important source of energy in Brazil, 
China and India.13

There have been some successes in extend-
ing  energy  access  to  the  poor,  including 
through  decentralized  energy  systems.  The 
challenge  is  to  make  such  innovations  hap-
pen at a scale and speed that will improve the 
lives of poor women and men now and in the 
future.14  Governments  can  do  more  to  sup-
port entrepreneurship and capital acquisition 
for alternative energy startups.15 As Latvia and 
other  countries  have  shown,  the  right  legal 
framework can boost growth in the nonrenew-
able  energy  sector  and  limit  emissions  from 
traditional energy sources.

Increasing efficiency is important too. And 
innovations  are  proceeding,  from  improved 
stoves — which have reduced fuelwood require-
ments some 40 percent in parts of Kenya and 
dramatically cut pollution levels and improved 
child health in Guatemala16 — to more energy-
efficient buildings — which can reduce heating 
and cooling loads.17

Making energy cleaner
Any long-run strategy for broadening energy 
access must include actions to promote cleaner 
energy.18 There are encouraging signs. By 2010 
more than 100 countries — up from 55 in 2005 
— had enacted some policy target or promo-
tion  policy  for  renewable  energy,  including 
all 27 EU members. Many countries specify 
a target share of renewables in electricity pro-
duction, typically 5–30 percent, but within a 
range of 2 percent to 90 percent.

In several countries renewables constitute 
a rapidly growing share of total energy supply. 
The share is 44 percent of energy in Sweden, 
one of the better performers identified in chap-
ter 2. As of 2008 Brazil produced almost 85 
percent of its electricity from renewables, and 
Austria 62 percent. And hydropower accounts 

68

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Developing countries 
are adopting renewable 
energy and now have 

more than half of 
global renewable 
power capacity

for  close  to  70  percent  of  electricity  gener-
ated in Sub-Saharan Africa (excluding South 
Africa).19

According to the Renewable Energy Policy 
Network for the 21st Century, global energy 
supply  reached  a  tipping  point  in  2010,  as 
renewables accounted for a quarter of global 
power  capacity  and  delivered  almost  a  fifth 
of electricity supply20 (see statistical table 6). 
Virtually every renewable technology has seen 
consistently strong growth. Some highlights:
•	 Wind. Despite the 2008 global economic 
crisis,  new  wind  power  installations 
reached a record 38 gigawatts in 2009, a 
41 percent increase over 2008 and equiv-
alent  to  nearly  a  quarter  of  total  global 
installations.

•	 Solar. Grid-connected solar photovoltaic 
systems have grown at an annual average of 
60 percent over the past decade, increasing 
100-fold  since  2000,  with  major  expan-
sions in the Czech Republic, Germany and 
Spain. Unit prices have declined sharply — 
some dropping 50–60 percent, to less than 
$2 a watt. Generous feed-in tariffs are one 
reason. An estimated 3 million households 
in rural areas get power from small solar 
photovoltaic systems, and an estimated 70 
million households worldwide have solar 
hot water heating.
Since 2004 global renewable energy capac-
ity for many technologies has grown 4–60 per-
cent a year, spurred by new technology, high 
and  volatile  oil  prices,  climate  change  con-
cerns,  and  local,  national  and  global  policy 
developments.21

Developing countries are adopting renew-
able energy and now have more than half of 
global renewable power capacity. China leads 
the  world  in  several  indicators  of  market 
growth, including wind power capacity and 
biomass  power,  while  India  stands  fifth  in 
wind and is fast expanding such rural renewa-
bles as biogas and solar. Brazil produces much 
of the world’s sugar-derived ethanol and is add-
ing new biomass and wind power plants.

The  continuing  roll-out  of  renewable 
energy  sources  will  require  large  private 
investments, but corruption and lack of reg-
ulation  can  slow  the  momentum.  A  recent 

Transparency International study, for exam-
ple, reported that almost 70 percent of poten-
tial energy investors in North Africa consider 
regulatory risk, including corruption, a serious 
impediment to investment.22 Technical limi-
tations must also be overcome. For example, 
intermittency raises capital costs for wind and 
solar power and requires supplementation by 
other sources. Improved storage technologies 
are also needed.

Currently, more than 90 percent of clean 
energy  investments  are  in  the  G-20  coun-
tries.23  To  expand  equity  and  sustainability 
in clean energy globally, concerted efforts are 
needed to improve conditions in other coun-
tries that would enable future investments.24 
In the next chapter we call for addressing per-
verse incentives and market distortions, reduc-
ing risks and increasing rewards, and increas-
ing  accountability  in  global  environmental 
governance. Beyond facilitating greater access 
and lowering emissions, clean energy can create 
new industries and jobs. Installing 1 megawatt 
of wind turbine capacity creates an estimated 
0.7–2.8 times the permanent employment of a 
comparable natural gas combined-cycle power 
plant; installing 1 megawatt of solar capacity 
creates up to 11 times more.25 An estimated 
3 million people worldwide already work in 
renewable  energy  industries,  about  half  of 
them in biofuels.26

Reining in global emissions
Policies  to  cut  emissions  nationally  entail 
both potential advantages and concerns about 
equity and capacity.

Table  4.1  lists  illustrative  policy  instru-
ments  to  cut  carbon  dioxide  emissions  and 
their key equity effects. Typically, instruments 
must be combined to deal with the broad range 
of market failures.

Pricing  can  powerfully  affect  behaviour. 
An obvious candidate is the reduction of fossil 
fuel subsidies, which are expensive (amounting 
to about $312 billion in 2009 in 37 developing 
countries)27 and encourage consumption. The 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development estimates that phasing out the 
subsidies could free fiscal resources and reduce 
global greenhouse gas emissions 10 percent by 

CHapteR 4  pOSitive SynergieS—winning StrAtegieS FOr the envirOnMent, equity And huMAn develOpMent

69

2050 — more than 20 percent in oil- exporting 
countries.28  Similarly,  subsidized  electric-
ity  prices  for  agriculture  often  encourage 
greater groundwater extraction, risking over-
exploitation.29 These types of perverse subsi-
dies favour medium and large producers over 
smaller farmers because smaller farmers rarely 
pump water and instead use wheels, surface 
water or rainfall.30

TABlE 4.1
Key equity aspects of a menu of instruments to reduce carbon 
dioxide emissions
Policy instrument
Cap-and-trade permits

Examples
•	 EU trading scheme

Key equity aspects
•	 If permits are given 
away, this favours 
incumbent firms 
and does not raise 
revenue

Other considerations
•	 Potentially high 
monitoring and 
enforcement costs

•	 Carbon permit prices 

can be volatile.
•	 If electricity is 

generated with fossil 
fuels, targets will 
cause prices to rise
•	 Poor people spend 
a larger proportion 
of their income on 
energy

•	 Fiscal revenue 

potentially as high 
as 1–3 percent of 
GDP in Organisation 
for Economic 
Co-operation and 
Development 
countries by 2020a

•	 Potentially expensive; 
more than $7,000 per 
vehicle in Belgium, 
Canada, China, the 
Netherlands, the 
United Kingdom and 
the United States

•	 Fossil fuel subsidies 

cost around $558 
billion in 2008 and 
$312 billion in 2009
•	 Complete phase-out 
by 2020 could reduce 
emissions 20 percent 
in non-European 
countries, the Russian 
Federation and the 
Arab States

•	 Does not allow firms 
to reduce emissions 
at the lowest possible 
cost

•	 Importance of 

appropriate 
technology

•	 Group identity of 

users matters

Emissions targets

•	 Voluntary targets 

of European Union, 
Indonesia and the 
Russian Federation to 
reduce emissions

•	 Depends on pattern 
of consumption and 
production

Taxes or charges

•	 Fuel and coal taxes
•	 Motor vehicle taxes

•	 Depends on pattern 
of consumption and 
production

Subsidies for renewables •	 Hybrid cars

•	 Subsidies for electric 

vehicles

Subsidy cuts

•	 Fossil fuels
•	 Electricity for 

irrigation

Performance standards

•	 Limits on car 

emissions

•	 Energy efficiency 

standards

Technology standards

•	 Building and zoning 

codes

Better information

•	 Public awareness 

campaign

•	 Emission and energy 

use disclosure 
requirements

•	 Depends on purchase 
patterns, but unlikely 
to be progressive; 
could be targeted 
(means tested)

•	 Eliminating subsidies 

would create 
substantial fiscal 
and environmental 
benefits

•	 May raise costs and 

limit access of the 
poor

•	 Care needed to avoid 

cost increases that 
are prohibitive for 
the poor

•	 Ensure outreach 

and accessibility to 
disadvantaged groups

a. At $50 per tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent greenhouse gas emissions.
Source: Based on OECD (2010c).

70

Human Development RepoRt 2011

But the optimal policy here, as elsewhere, 
depends on context. Careful investigation and 
targeted compensation are needed where the 
affected goods and services account for a large 
share of family spending. Redistribution can 
be  implemented  through  social  transfers  or, 
if the tax base is broad enough, through tax 
cuts  for  the  poor.  To  compensate  for  lower 
oil  subsidies,  Indonesia  implemented  a  cash 
transfer  scheme  in  late  2005  targeting  15.5 
million poor and near-poor households (some 
28 percent of the population). To offset higher 
energy prices, Mexico supplemented its con-
ditional  cash  transfer  programme  in  2007. 
And Iran replaced oil-based subsidies on fuel, 
food and other essentials with a transitional 
monthly $40 cash grant to 90 percent of the 
population in 2010, leading to a drop of 4.5 
percent in gas consumption and 28 percent in 
diesel consumption.31

Several  large  developing  countries  have 
committed to deep carbon cuts. For example, 
in 2009 China set a goal of lowering carbon 
intensity 40–45 percent from 2005 levels over 
the next decade, later announced further short-
term targets and is supporting renewable energy 
through subsidies, targets and tax incentives.32 
In 2010 India announced voluntary targeted 
reductions of 20–25 percent in carbon intensity.
These  new  commitments  are  important 
steps in the transition to a lower carbon econ-
omy. As we saw in table 2.1 in chapter 2, falling 
carbon intensity of production globally lowered 
total emissions growth between 1970 and 2007 
well below what it would have been otherwise.
But  the  announcements  must  be  put  in 
perspective.  Reduced  carbon  intensity  can 
run alongside rising greenhouse gas emissions 
if economic growth continues apace. Despite 
increased  energy  efficiency,  US  emissions 
have  continued  to  grow — more  than  7  per-
cent from 1990 to 2009.33 China was already 
reducing carbon intensity at 1.4 percent a year 
over 1970–2007, but rapid economic growth 
meant that total emissions still grew 5.9 per-
cent a year. The new target would more than 
double the rate of carbon intensity reduction 
to 3.8 percent a year, but again that does not 
mean that China’s total emissions will decline. 
In fact, if China’s economic growth through 

Expanding access to 
modern energy for 
all and developing 
renewable energy 
sources are gaining 
traction, but involving 

the state, donors 
and international 

organizations is critical 
for reducing disparities

2020  exceeds  3.9  percent  (as  predicted),  its 
total emissions would continue to rise; if the 
economy continues to grow at the 9.2 percent 
annual rate of the past decade, total emissions 
would increase 2.8 percent a year.

Other  countries  have  committed  to 
reducing  absolute  emissions.  Indonesia  has 
announced a target of reducing carbon diox-
ide emissions 26 percent.34 Similarly, the Euro-
pean Union, as part of its 20/20/20 plan to be 
met  by  2020,  committed  to  cutting  green-
house gas emissions 20 percent from 1990 lev-
els, increasing renewable energy use 20 percent 
and reducing energy consumption 20 percent 
through improved energy efficiency.35

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

In sum, expanding access to modern energy for 
all and developing renewable energy sources 
are gaining traction, but involving the state, 
donors and international organizations is criti-
cal for investing in research and development 
and  reducing  disparities  within  and  across 
countries. Moreover, strong efforts are needed 
to include the poor: if current trends continue, 
more people will lack access to modern energy 
in 2030 than today.36

Water access, water security and 
sanitation
Chapter 3 told of the devastating impacts of 
lack of access to potable water. Addressing this 
inequity  calls  for  managing  water  resources 
differently to serve a growing world popula-
tion.  Water  security,  defined  as  a  country’s 
ability to secure enough clean water to meet 
needs  for  household  uses,  irrigation,  hydro-
power and other ends, has win-win-win possi-
bilities. In poorer countries the greatest needs 
are for household and agricultural uses. While 
the two uses are closely linked, particularly for 
rural  communities,  the  policy  implications 
differ.

Household water
A first step in increasing access to potable water 
is recognizing equal rights to water, regardless 
of  ability  to  pay.  Right-to-water  legislation 
exists in 15 countries in Latin America, 13 in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, 4 in South Asia, 2 in East 

Asia and the Pacific and 2 in the Arab States.37 
In July 2010 the UN General Assembly rec-
ognized the right to water and sanitation and 
acknowledged that clean drinking water and 
improved sanitation are integral to the reali-
zation of all human rights. In all countries, 
improving access to these facilities can be a key 
driver in poverty reduction.

And there is cause for optimism. Innova-
tive approaches are under way in many coun-
tries.38 Some highlights:
•	 Providing  affordable  access.  Small-scale, 
needs-driven  technologies  can  provide 
households  with  low-cost  potable  water. 
In Cameroon cheap biosand filters, devel-
oped  in  South  Africa,  are  used  to  make 
water safe to drink.39 In India the inter-
national  nongovernmental  organization 
(NGO) Water for People partnered with 
a local university to develop simple, locally 
manufactured  filters  that  remove  arse-
nic  from  the  water  at  public  wellheads 
in West Bengal.40 Governments have the 
obligation to connect their populations to 
modern waterworks through public, pri-
vate or civil society service provision, but 
encouraging these types of local innova-
tions  can  relieve  water  deprivation  even 
before larger water infrastructure projects 
can be implemented.

•	 Supporting local communities. Small grants 
can  support  local  community  efforts 
to  manage  water  resources.  The  United 
Nations Development Programme’s Com-
munity Water Initiative and other small 
grant programmes have worked with gov-
ernments in Guatemala, Kenya, Maurita-
nia and Tanzania to support community 
water projects.41

Agricultural water
Agricultural water problems range from lack 
of access to overexploitation. But again there 
is cause for optimism — in efficiency gains and 
real-cost pricing that moves away from often 
regressive subsidies. Even in a water-abundant 
country such as the United States farmers use 
15 percent less water now than 30 years ago to 
grow 70 percent more food; the country has 
doubled its water productivity since 1980.42

CHapteR 4  pOSitive SynergieS—winning StrAtegieS FOr the envirOnMent, equity And huMAn develOpMent

71

Better access to safe 
water and sanitation 
can improve health 

directly and productivity 

indirectly and 

contributes to human 
dignity, self-respect 
and physical safety, 
particularly for women

Recognizing the problems of overexploita-
tion of water and the need to ensure equita-
ble access has led to promising new schemes. 
Several  countries  in  the  Arab  States  have 
water user associations that now operate and 
manage  irrigation  systems,  establishing  ser-
vice levels and charges. In Yemen water-sav-
ing  technologies  and  regulatory  systems  are 
designed in consultation with users to ensure 
that the technologies meet farmers’ needs and 
that regulatory systems are equitable. And in 
Egypt  pilot  programmes  have  reduced  pub-
lic subsidies; increased the efficiency of water 
use, operations and maintenance; and reduced 
pollution.43

Analysis of the distributional impacts of 
water  investments  is  important.  For  exam-
ple, irrigation investments can buffer weather 
shocks to smooth consumption over time, but 
the effects can be uneven. Recent analysis of 
large irrigation dams in India found that peo-
ple living downstream were likely to benefit, 
while  those  living  upstream  were  likely  to 
lose.44

Healthy,  intact  ecosystems,  such  as  for-
est  headwaters,  are  vital  for  sustaining  the 
flow and quality of water for human use. An 
estimated one-third of the world’s largest cit-
ies depend on intact protected forest areas for 
their water supply.45 In Venezuela water from 
18 national parks meets the fresh water needs 
of 19 million people, or 83 percent of the urban 
population, and about 20 percent of irrigated 
lands depend on protected areas for water.46 
This is also critical for rural areas. Indonesia’s 
Lore Lindu National Park provides water for 
irrigation and fish to support rural livelihoods.

Sanitation
Almost half the people in developing coun-
tries lack access to basic sanitation services.47 
Expanding access can improve health directly 
and productivity indirectly and, as discussed 
in chapter 3, contributes to human dignity, 
self-respect and physical safety, particularly 
for women. Our own analysis confirms that 
better  access  to  safe  water  and  sanitation 
are  also  positively  associated  with  women’s 
health  outcomes  relative  to  men — in  other 
words,  women  benefit  disproportionately 

from access to safe water and sanitation, all 
else equal.

Several  innovative  approaches  have  pro-

vided small-scale access to sanitation:
•	 Manaus,  Brazil,  recently  used  a  $5  mil-
lion grant to connect 15,000 mainly poor 
households  to  a  modern  sewage  system, 
by  subsidizing  services  to  poor  house-
holds that otherwise could not afford the 
service. To encourage take-up, the project 
worked to raise awareness of the benefits, 
since the failure of even a small number of 
households to adopt modern sewage sys-
tems can result in contamination of water 
sources.48

•	 SaniMarts  (Sanitation  Markets)  in  east-
ern Nepal help households buy materials 
to construct or upgrade latrines. Piloted in 
Southern India, SaniMarts are local shops 
staffed  by  trained  sanitation  promoters 
who sell latrine construction materials at 
affordable prices.49

•	 The Sanitation Marketing Pilot Project in 
Cambodia sought to enhance the adoption 
of latrines in the provinces of Kandal and 
Svay Rieng by demonstrating that selling 
them could be a profitable business enter-
prise. The “easy latrine” was sold as a com-
plete package that households could easily 
install themselves. The commercial viabil-
ity  of  the  product  led  private  businesses 
to  invest  their  own  resources  to  address 
demand.50
Despite some regional successes, most such 
programmes have not been scaled up, largely 
because  they  lack  strong  local  leadership  or 
interest, because skills are weak and because 
monitoring and evaluation are insufficient.51 
One exception is an initiative known as the 
Global  Scaling  up  Rural  Sanitation  Project, 
supported by the World Bank in rural India, 
Indonesia and Tanzania, which has reached an 
estimated 8.2 million people over four years. 
Its success is traceable, at least in part, to bet-
ter performance monitoring, which shifts the 
focus to outcomes.52

While  most  approaches  focus  on  sup-
ply, Community-led Total Sanitation targets 
demand (box 4.1). Along with increasing the 
use of toilets, other behavioural interventions, 

72

Human Development RepoRt 2011

such as promoting hand washing,53 are reduc-
ing faecal bacterial contamination in Africa 
and Asia.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

In sum, greater public policy efforts are needed 
to increase investments in water and sanitation 
to improve access. Current patterns of natural 
resource exploitation are creating huge envi-
ronmental  hardships  for  the  poor,  who  are 
often  excluded  from  even  minimal  levels  of 
service. Access can be increased by building on 
the successes of a range of countries, many at 
the local and community levels, and by involv-
ing  national  governments  and  development 
partners.

Averting degradation

We turn now to three keys to reducing deg-
radation  pressures:  expanding  reproductive 
choice, supporting community management 
of natural resources and conserving biodiver-
sity while promoting equity.

Expanding reproductive choice
Reproductive rights, including access to repro-
ductive health services, are a precondition for 
women’s health and empowerment and essen-
tial  to  the  enjoyment  of  other  fundamental 
rights.  They  form  a  foundation  for  satisfy-
ing relationships, harmonious family life and 
opportunities for a better future. Moreover, 
they are important for achieving international 
development goals, including the Millennium 
Development Goals. Important in themselves, 
fully realized reproductive rights can also have 
positive spillover effects on the environment if 
they slow population growth and reduce envi-
ronmental pressures.

Recent projections put the world’s popula-
tion at 9.3 billion by 2050 and 10 billion by 
2100, assuming that fertility in all countries 
converges  to  replacement  levels.54  However, 
calculations also suggest that simply address-
ing unmet family planning need in 100 coun-
tries could shift global fertility below replace-
ment levels, putting the world on a path to an 
earlier peak in population and then a gradual 
decline.55 This can be done through initiatives 

BOX 4.1
From subsidy to self-respect — the revolution of Community-led 
Total Sanitation

Chapter 3 reviewed how faecal-related infections, now rare in richer countries, are stubbornly 
endemic in others. Some 2.6 billion people lack sanitary toilets, and 1.1 billion people defecate 
in the open.

That the Millennium Development Goal for sanitation is the farthest off track results 
partly from a failed reliance on hardware subsidies. The top-down approach, with subsidized 
standard designs and materials, has provided inadequate toilets that cost too much, delivered 
them to people who are not the most poor, achieved only partial coverage and use, and engen-
dered dependence.

Community-led Total Sanitation (CLTS) turns all this on its head. There is no hardware 
subsidy, no standard design, no targeting the poor from outside. Collective action is key. Pio-
neered by Kamal Kar and the Village Education Resource Centre in partnership with WaterAid 
in Bangladesh in 2000, CLTS teaches communities to map and inspect their defecation areas, 
calculate how much they deposit and identify pathways between excreta and mouth. It helps 
communities “face the shit” (the crude local word is always used). Disgust, dignity and self-
respect trigger self-help through digging pits and adopting hygienic behaviours. With follow-
up encouragement, community members also address equity. Children and schools are often 
involved.

Sustainability is enhanced by social pressures to end open defecation. There are chal-
lenges, and few communities have done away with it completely. Sandy pit walls can collapse 
— and floods devastate — but households and communities have bounced back and moved 
themselves up the sanitation ladder, installing better, more durable toilets.

Where governments and communities have endorsed CLTS and enabled quality training 
and well led campaigns, outcomes have been remarkable. In Himachal Pradesh, India, the num-
ber of people in rural areas who had toilets rose from 2.4 million in 2006 to 5.6 million in 2010 
out of a total population of 6 million. CLTS has spread to more than 40 countries: more than 10 
million people in Africa and Asia already live in open defecation–free communities, and many 
more have benefited from toilets. In some countries CLTS is making the sanitation Millennium 
Development Goal look not just achievable but surpassable.

In a 2007 British Medical Journal poll sanitation was voted the most important medical 
advance of the past 150 years. And CLTS won the journal’s competition in 2011 for the idea 
most likely to have the greatest impact on healthcare by 2020. The quality of training, facili-
tation and follow-up are all critical as CLTS is scaled up. CLTS expansion could reduce the 
suffering and enhance the health, dignity and well-being of hundreds of millions of deprived 
people.

Source: Chambers 2009; Mehta and Movik 2011.

that empower women and increase their access 
to  contraceptives  and  other  reproductive 
health services.

It follows that greater worldwide availabil-
ity and adoption of reproductive health and 
family planning services raise the prospect of 
a win-win-win for sustainability, equity and 
human development. Of course the environ-
mental  gains  depend  on  carbon  footprints 
at the individual level. For instance, an aver-
age citizen in Australia or the United States 
accounts for as much carbon dioxide emissions 
in two days as an average citizen of Malawi or 
Rwanda  in  a  year.  Reproductive  health  and 
family  planning  are  critical  in  Malawi  and 

CHapteR 4  pOSitive SynergieS—winning StrAtegieS FOr the envirOnMent, equity And huMAn develOpMent

73

greater worldwide 

availability and adoption 
of reproductive health 
and family planning 
services raise the 

prospect of a win-win-
win for sustainability, 

equity and human 

development

Rwanda — where women still have an average 
of  five  children — but  will  not  significantly 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions. By contrast, 
innovative programmes such as Family PACT 
in  California,  which  reimburses  physicians 
for providing reproductive healthcare to low-
income women and prevents almost 100,000 
unintended births each year, not only improve 
the lives and health of women and their fami-
lies but also reduce the future carbon footprint 
by some 156 million tonnes a year.56

Reproductive rights include choosing the 
number, timing and spacing of one’s children 
and having the information and means to do 
so.  A  rights-based  approach  means  address-
ing  demand — by  informing,  educating  and 
empowering — and  ensuring  access  to  the 
supply of reproductive health services. Many 
reproductive choice initiatives are under way 
worldwide — though most focus more on the 
supply side.57

The  incremental  infrastructure  require-
ments  of  reproductive  services  are  typically 
modest because service delivery can often pig-
gyback on other health programmes. Several 
initiatives  exploit  synergies  among  popula-
tion, health and environment programmes at 
the community level. These include a United 
States Agency for International Development 
pilot  programme  in  Nepal  covering  some 
14,000 community forest user groups58 and 
the  PATH  Foundation’s  Integrated  Popula-
tion and Coastal Resource Management Ini-
tiative in the Philippines, which show how to 
bring reproductive health services into existing 
community-run programmes. Cambodia and 
Uganda have similar initiatives.59 ProPeten, an 
organization devoted to preventing deforesta-
tion in Guatemala, augmented its deforesta-
tion prevention initiatives with an integrated 
approach to population, health and environ-
ment that was associated with a decline in aver-
age fertility in the region from 6.8 births per 
woman to 4.3 over a decade.60

Better  management  and  more  effective 
targeting of resources often bring large gains, 
even in resource-poor areas. A local sustained 
leadership development programme for health 
workers  in  Aswan,  Egypt,  led  to  more  fre-
quent prenatal and childcare visits by health 

workers, with large benefits in reduced mater-
nal mortality.61

A number of governments have reformed 
policy  frameworks  and  programmes  to 
improve reproductive health. In Bangladesh 
the fertility rate fell from 6.6 births per woman 
in 1975 to 2.4 in 2009, a huge drop attributed 
to the introduction of a major policy initia-
tive in 1976 that emphasized population and 
family planning as integral to national devel-
opment. Measures included community out-
reach  and  subsidies  to  make  contraceptives 
more easily available, efforts to influence social 
norms through discussions with the commu-
nity (religious leaders, teachers, NGOs), educa-
tion of both men and women and development 
of reproductive health research and training 
activities.62

In many cases partnerships across differ-
ent groups and with a range of service pro-
viders have brought gains. In three rural dis-
tricts and two urban slums in Kenya, poor 
families were given vouchers to pay for repro-
ductive  health  and  gender-based  violence 
recovery services.63 In Viet Nam a long-term 
collaboration of the government, provincial 
health  institutions  and  several  NGOs  has 
led to dramatic improvements in the quality 
of reproductive health services, provision of 
new services and establishment of a sustain-
able clinical training network in reproductive 
health.64

Similarly,  in  Iran  efforts  to  introduce 
reproductive health services began in the late 
1980s,  when  rapid  population  growth  was 
recognized  as  an  obstacle  to  development. 
Today, nearly 80 percent of married women 
use  contraception65 — the  country  also  has 
a  maternal  mortality  ratio  that  is  less  than 
8 percent of that in South Africa, which has 
a similar per capita income. In 2009 Mongo-
lia endorsed a national strategy for reproduc-
tive health, included the services in the mid-
term  budget  framework  and  committed  to 
fully  funding  contraceptive  supply  by  2015. 
Lao PDR’s Ministry of Health implemented a 
community-based distribution model for pro-
viding family planning services in three poor 
southern provinces. The programme sharply 
increased  contraceptive  prevalence,  in  some 

74

Human Development RepoRt 2011

as an alternative to 
centralized control, 
community-conserved 

areas help ensure 
equitable access to 

resources, sustain human 

development through 
essential ecosystem 
services and maintain 
ecosystem integrity

regions from less than 1 percent in 2006 to 
over 60 percent in 2009.66

Several initiatives show encouraging evi-
dence  of  the  effect  of  raising  awareness  of 
reproductive healthcare. Pro Peten sponsored 
a  radio  soap  opera  to  disseminate  informa-
tion  on  the  environment,  gender  issues  and 
reproductive  health.67  Using  the  extensive 
mobile  phone  networks  now  common  in 
developing countries — more than 76 percent 
of  the  world’s  population68  and  more  than 
1 billion women in low- and middle-income 
countries  currently  have  access69 — multiple 
initiatives, including the Mobile Alliance for 
Maternal Action, provide customized health 
information to expectant and new mothers in 
Bangladesh, India and South Africa.70 These 
approaches have enormous potential, though 
their  widespread  effectiveness  has  yet  to  be 
demonstrated.

Concerted government efforts are needed 
to  achieve  universal  access  to  reproductive 
healthcare,  which  yields  rich  dividends  in 
lower fertility rates and better health and edu-
cation  outcomes.  Bangladesh’s  success  sug-
gests that the bottleneck is not resources but 
priorities and political will. The incremental 
infrastructure requirements are low, but just 
increasing provision is not enough. Informa-
tion and training are needed to boost uptake of 
these programmes in ways that respect tradi-
tion and social mores. Community-based pro-
grammes have great potential, as do new forms 
of communications and connectivity.

Supporting community 
management of natural resources
Support is growing for community manage-
ment of natural resources as an alternative to 
centralized control, especially where commu-
nities depend on local natural resources and 
ecosystems  for  their  livelihoods.  Increasing 
interest in reforestation in countries as diverse 
as Costa Rica, Estonia and India reflects the 
potential for success.71

While participatory management of com-
mon resources has been widely embraced as a 
promising concept, a detailed review commis-
sioned for this Report shows that the reality 
is  more  nuanced.72  Local  structural  factors 

affect who benefits from community manage-
ment.  The  distribution  of  wealth  (including 
land  tenure  rights)  and  knowledge  and  par-
ticipation  in  decision-making  are  especially 
important.  For  example,  when  influential 
stakeholders benefit from a common resource, 
they might invest heavily in restricting access, 
thus enhancing sustainability but at a cost to 
equity. As we discuss below, evidence suggests 
that more equal and socially cohesive commu-
nities are more likely to organize and agree on 
how to deal with collective action problems.73
A major threat to equity is women’s exclu-
sion from decision- making. With no commu-
nity voice, women are often excluded from the 
benefits of common resources while bearing a 
disproportionate share of the costs, as in some 
parts of India.74 For example, deciding to close 
forests  without  considering  women’s  needs 
can deprive women of fuelwood, increase the 
time they spend finding alternative sources of 
fuelwood and fodder and reduce their income 
from livestock products. More generally, our 
analysis  suggests  a  causal  link  between  our 
Gender Inequality Index and deforestation in 
more than 100 countries between 1990 and 
2010. And as chapter 3 notes, empirical evi-
dence  stresses  the  importance  of  the  nature 
and extent of women’s participation in man-
agement decisions.75

One of the most successful and equitable 
models of community management of natural 
resources  is  the  community-conserved  area 
— land  or  water  protected  by  legal  or  other 
means and owned and managed by a commu-
nity. Around 11 percent of the world’s forests 
are known to be under community ownership 
or administration,76 but this is likely a severe 
underestimate.77 Community-conserved areas 
help ensure equitable access to resources, sus-
tain  human  development  through  essential 
ecosystem  services  and  maintain  ecosystem 
integrity.

Locally managed marine areas — areas of 
near-shore waters and their associated coastal 
and marine resources — also provide win-win-
win  solutions.  Pacific  Island  communities, 
such as Fiji, have dozens of such areas where 
island  communities  have  long  practiced  tra-
ditional  management  systems  that  include 

CHapteR 4  pOSitive SynergieS—winning StrAtegieS FOr the envirOnMent, equity And huMAn develOpMent

75

BOX 4.2
Culture, norms and environmental protection

The values and beliefs that shape people’s relationships with their natural environment are 
central to environmental sustainability, as are accumulated traditional knowledge and commu-
nity practices of environmental management. The environmental management skills of local 
people may include multiuse strategies of appropriation, small-scale production with little sur-
plus and low energy use, and a variety of custodial approaches to land and natural resources 
that avoid waste and resource depletion.

Case studies suggest that traditional values can protect natural resources. Over three 
decades in the Zambezi Valley of Zimbabwe, for instance, forests considered sacred lost less 
than half the cover of those that were not. In Ghana conservative traditions and practices 
led to the designation of sacred areas and to periodic restrictions on farming, harvesting and 
fishing. Local knowledge also informs natural disaster responses. Chile reported only 8 fisher 
victims out of an estimated population of about 80,000 following the February 2010 tsunami, 
thanks mostly to lessons from previous tsunamis passed down through elders’ stories and 
neighbours’ evacuation alerts.

Though such knowledge is often downplayed and overlooked, traditional values have 
also informed policy. In Andavadoaka, a small fishing village in Madagascar, the community 
initiated a sustainable octopus fishing initiative that inspired other villages and became the 
country’s first locally managed marine area, involving 24 villages. And in Afghanistan the gov-
ernment is drawing on elements of long-standing mirab systems — in which locally elected 
leaders manage water rights — in creating water use associations.

Source: Byers and others 2001; Marín and others 2010; Thomas and Ahmad 2009; Sarfo-Mensah and Oduro 2007; UN 2008.

seasonal fishing bans and temporary no-take 
areas.  Community-conserved  marine  areas 
provide enormous value to local communities 
in  the  forms  of  fish  protein  and  sustainable 
livelihoods.78

Communities  can  manage  natural 
resources  using  a  variety  of  mechanisms, 
including payments for ecosystem services and 
community-conserved areas. Cultural or tra-
ditional norms emerge as important (box 4.2). 
Success requires broad stakeholder inclusion in 
returns — from the resources themselves as well 
as  from  their  management.  Local  processes 
and national commitment are also important. 
Sweden’s  experience  in  the  1960s,  reviewed 
in box 2.10 in chapter 2, shows that national 
environmental protection mandates can sup-
port community management.

Where the livelihoods of multiple stake-
holders are closely tied to natural resources, 
community-based management is susceptible 
to conflict. As discussed in chapter 3, scarcity 
of natural resources and environmental stresses 
can contribute to the eruption and escalation 
of conflict. In some cases public policies exac-
erbate the sources of conflict, especially when 
policies worsen horizontal inequality79 or neg-
atively affect people living within particular 

ecosystems. In some cases — including Costa 
Rica and the Philippines — greater decentrali-
zation and comanagement of natural resources 
have helped alleviate tensions.

Conserving biodiversity while 
promoting equity
In recent years perceived trade-offs between 
preserving livelihoods and maintaining bio-
diversity  have  been  replaced  by  a  clearer 
understanding of the potential synergies. For 
instance,  preserving  natural  ecosystems  and 
biodiversity can help secure livelihoods, food, 
water and health. Many countries (including 
Botswana, Brazil and Namibia) and interna-
tional  organizations  (including  the  United 
Nations  Development  Programme)  are  call-
ing  for  investments  to  preserve  biodiversity 
for  its  potential  development  benefits.  One 
instrument is to assign and enforce protected 
area  status  to  ecosystems,  putting  in  place 
measures to avert or reverse land degradation 
and eco tourism. Ecotourism in particular is 
a promising route to protecting biodiversity 
while enhancing livelihood opportunities for 
the local community. The primary challenge 
is to ensure equitable participation, including 
by women.80

A recent survey found that nature-based 
tourism is one of several conservation mecha-
nisms that can reduce poverty.81 In Namibia, 
for  example,  an  ecotourism  programme  has 
protected nearly 3 million hectares of land and 
marine areas housing great biodiversity. Espe-
cially  important  for  equity,  the  programme 
has  improved  livelihoods  immensely.  And 
with roughly 29 percent of the wealth gener-
ated by these protected areas going to labour 
and another 5 percent to traditional agricul-
ture, the programme shows the potential of 
protected  areas  to  reduce  poverty  as  well.82 
Similarly,  an  initiative  to  conserve  biodiver-
sity at the level of landholders in the island 
state of Vanuatu led to the establishment of 
20 conservation sites, which reduced poach-
ing and enhanced fishstocks and incomes for 
local communities. And in Ecuador the gov-
ernment entered into an agreement with the 
United Nations Development Programme in 
2010 to establish an international trust fund to 

76

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Poor rural communities 
are disproportionately 
affected by ecosystem 

degradation and 
disproportionately 
benefit from their 
protection and 

restoration

protect Yasuní National Park, an area rich in 
biodiversity and home to the indigenous Taga-
eri and Taromenane people, from oil drilling. 
Though too early to assess the results, the ini-
tiative offers a model for preserving such eco-
systems through developed country compensa-
tion of poorer countries.83

Another  example  of  promoting  liveli-
hoods while maintaining biodiversity is agro- 
forestry, which entails an integrated approach 
of  combining  trees,  shrubs  and  plants  with 
crops  and  livestock  to  create  more  diverse, 
productive,  profitable,  healthy  and  sustain-
able land-use systems. Agro-forestry produc-
tion can be seen in the Yungas region on the 
eastern slope of Peru’s Central Andes, among 
an indigenous community of around 32,000 
inhabitants. This enables the community to 
conserve genetically important species while 
providing for a range of nutritional, medicinal 
and commercial purposes.84

Integrated conservation and development 
projects  aim  to  conserve  biodiversity  while 
promoting  rural  development.  For  example, 
in  Nepal’s  western  Terai  Complex  commu-
nities reduce pressures on natural forests by 
focusing on biodiversity-friendly and sustain-
able land and resource use practices. Such pro-
jects  ensure  that  communities,  particularly 
women and the poor, have viable alternatives 
for income, while reducing pressures on natu-
ral ecosystems.85

Addressing climate change— 
risks and realities

Finally in this review of promising approaches, 
we consider two key policy directions to off-
set the impacts of climate change on people: 
equitable and adaptive disaster responses and 
innovative social protection.

Equitable and adaptive disaster 
responses
As chapters 2 and 3 show, natural disasters are 
disequalizing, reflecting economic and power 
relations at the local, national and global lev-
els. But planning and targeted responses can 
reduce the disparities. Two promising avenues 
are  community-based  disaster  risk  mapping 

and progressive distribution of reconstructed 
public assets.

Experience has led to a shift from top-down 
models of disaster recovery to decentralized 
approaches.  Community-based  disaster  risk 
programmes are generally better than central-
ized programmes at tapping local knowledge of 
capacities and constraints for emergency relief 
and longer term recovery and reconstruction. 
Local organizations are also often better able 
to reach remote and restricted areas — as dem-
onstrated in Aceh, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka, 
where periods of armed conflict made it diffi-
cult for international aid workers to operate.86 
Some attention is needed to avoid depending 
exclusively on local organizations, which could 
intensify disparities and exclusion.

Community-led vulnerability and resource 

mapping has demonstrated effectiveness:87
•	

In Mount Vernon, one of the poorest com-
munities in Jamaica, community-led dis-
aster mapping highlighted flooding prob-
lems and led to agreement on the need for 
footbridges.

•	 A  community-led  mapping  of  women’s 
access  to  resources  and  services  in  Jinja, 
Uganda, identified corrupt land distribu-
tion and denial of women’s rights to land 
as impediments to women’s access. Grass-
roots leaders responded by setting up sav-
ings clubs and rotating loan schemes, which 
improved women’s access to land titles and 
helped them develop their property.
Community  involvement  can  be  enor-
mously empowering for poorer communities, 
as  shown  by  disaster  training  programmes 
in 176 districts in the 17 most hazard-prone 
Indian states. Female master trainers reached 
out to women in their communities and served 
as role models. Engaging women in commu-
nity risk-mapping involved them in decision-
making,  giving  them  greater  voice  and  con-
trol  over  their  lives.  In  the  words  of  Mitali 
Goswami of Ngoan District in Assam, “We 
feel very useful and are filled with pride when 
we see ourselves fulfilling our responsibilities 
towards the family and community.”88

Poor  rural  communities  are  dispropor-
tionately  affected  by  ecosystem  degradation 
and  disproportionately  benefit  from  their 

CHapteR 4  pOSitive SynergieS—winning StrAtegieS FOr the envirOnMent, equity And huMAn develOpMent

77

protection  and  restoration.  Sometimes  the 
most efficient and equitable ways to avoid and 
mitigate disasters are to manage, restore and 
protect the ecosystems that buffer the com-
munity.  For  example,  villages  with  healthy 
mangroves,  coral  reefs  and  lowland  forests 
were better protected from the 2004 tsunami 
in India, Indonesia, Malaysia and Sri Lanka.89
Structural inequalities are often embedded 
in patterns of infrastructure and social invest-
ments and reflected in the outcomes. Rebuild-
ing after environmental disasters can address 
past biases and other factors that perpetuate 
poverty and inequality. When Northern Cali-
fornia  was  recovering  from  the  1989  Loma 
Pietra  earthquake,  the  community  opposed 
rebuilding the freeway along the original route, 
which divided neighbourhoods and exposed 
them to vehicular pollution. The freeway was 
rerouted through nearby industrial land, and 

TABlE 4.2
Social protection for adaptation and disaster risk reduction: 
benefits and challenges
Programme and example
Targeted cash transfers
Ethiopia: Productive Safety Net 
Programme

Benefits
•	 Targets the most vulnerable
•	 Stabilizes consumption
•	 Allows adaptive risk-taking 

Challenges
•	 Ensuring adequate size and 

•	 Reducing risk through 

predictability of transfers

and investment

•	 Enhances flexibility to cope 

with climate shocks

Employment schemes
India: Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act

Weather-based crop insurance
Government of Malawi and 
partners: weather-indexed 
crop insurance for groundnut 
production

•	 Provides 100 days of 

employment on demand in 
rural areas

•	 Constructs infrastructure, 

including projects that enhance 
community resilience against 
climate change impacts

•	 Provides a guaranteed income 
to combat seasonal variations 
in income

•	 Guards against risk-taking 
associated with insurance

•	 Frees up assets for investment 

in adaptive capacity

•	 Can be linked to trends and 

projections for climate change

•	 Supports adaptive flexibility

Asset transfers
Bangladesh: Reducing 
Vulnerability to Climate Change 
project

•	 Targets the most vulnerable
•	 Can be integrated into 
livelihood programmes

Source: Adapted from Davies and others in OECD (2009).

78

Human Development RepoRt 2011

long-term focus

•	 Demonstrating the economic 

case for cash transfers 
associated with climate shocks

•	 Using socioeconomic 

vulnerability indices for 
targeting

•	 Ensuring adequate benefits
•	 Accountability and 

transparency

•	 Increasing awareness to 
ensure high participation

•	 Controlling costs and avoiding 

the risk of exclusion

•	 Targeting marginal farmers
•	 Tackling differentiated gender 

•	 Keeping premiums affordable 

impacts

for the poor

•	 Subsidizing capital costs
•	 Integrating climate projections 

into financial risk assessment

•	 Establishing guarantee 

mechanisms for reinsurance

•	 Ensuring provision 

commensurate with the threats 
faced

•	 Ensuring local appropriateness 

of assets

•	 Integrating changing natural 

environmental stresses in 
asset selection

agreements were reached to promote local hir-
ing and contracting on reconstruction.90

Innovative social protection
Growing  evidence  shows  that  social  protec-
tion programmes — assistance and transfers to 
enhance the capacity of poor and vulnerable 
people  to  escape  poverty  and  manage  risks 
and shocks — can help families maintain stable 
consumption  and  meet  broader  distributive 
goals.91 As many as 1 billion people in devel-
oping countries live in households that receive 
some form of social transfer.92

Table 4.2 shows four types of social protec-
tion measures that, appropriately combined, 
can promote both equity and environmental 
objectives.  We  highlight  both  the  potential 
benefits  and  the  challenges  of  targeted  cash 
transfers, employment schemes, weather-based 
crop insurance and asset transfers.

Social  protection  programmes  can  help 
people  access  modern  energy  sources,  clean 
water and adequate sanitation. A recent study 
illuminates  the  impacts  of  cash  transfers  to 
poor  households  under  Mexico’s  Oportuni-
dades  programme  that  go  beyond  the  well 
studied effects on health and education. The 
transfers have affected both short-run spend-
ing on energy services and long-run spending 
on new appliances (refrigerators, gas stoves). 
They  have  enabled  families  to  switch  from 
wood or charcoal to the cleaner, more expen-
sive electricity and liquefied petroleum gas.93
Countries  should  consider  more  inte-
grated  approaches  to  social  protection — 
approaches  that  address  environmental  sus-
tainability, equity and human development. 
A recent survey of social protection, disaster 
risk  reduction  and  climate  change  adapta-
tion schemes in South Asia revealed that few 
countries integrate such programmes. Of the 
124  programmes  surveyed,  just  16  percent 
combined  all  three  elements.94  One  exam-
ple is South Africa’s Working for Water, part 
of  an  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme 
launched in 2004. The project, the first of its 
kind to include an environmental component, 
increased stream flows and water availability, 
improved land productivity and biodiversity in 
some ecologically sensitive areas and inspired 

similar initiatives for wetlands, coastal areas 
and  waste  management.95  When  reviews  of 
the first phase (2004–2009) found that public 
works programmes were too short and wages 
too  low  to  substantially  reduce  poverty,  the 
government set a new minimum wage for the 
next phase of the programme.

Public works programmes need to provide 
options for women and for people unable to 
work. South Africa’s Working for Water has 
quotas for women (60 percent) and for people 
with disabilities (2 percent).96 In India women 
and members of scheduled castes and sched-
uled  tribes  account  for  (an  overlapping)  50 
percent of participants in the National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act.

Involving  the  community  in  designing 
and managing adaptive social protection pro-
grammes is important. A review of the India 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
illustrates how villagers have been empowered 
to identify projects and negotiate with local 
authorities.97 How widespread participation 
in governance and decision-making contrib-
utes to strong and accountable institutions and 
equitable outcomes is discussed further in the 
following chapter.

Ultimately,  how  adaptive  social  protec-
tion is implemented turns largely on political 
preferences  for  equity  and  the  environment 
and on how well society is mobilized behind 
programmes  for  building  long-term  resil-
ience as part of social protection and poverty 
reduction.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

This review of promising approaches provides 
strong grounds for optimism. It is possible to 
identify and implement strategies that improve 
both sustainability and equity — strategies that 
fall in quadrant 1 of figure 1.1 in chapter 1 — to 
address  many  of  the  challenges  outlined  in 
chapters 2 and 3. And we have seen successes in 
such approaches around the world, with tan-
gible benefits for poor and disadvantaged peo-
ple and the environment. But such outcomes 
are not automatic. More concerted efforts are 
needed to integrate equity into policy and pro-
gramme design and engage people in discus-
sions and decisions that affect their lives. Such 
approaches must be resourced appropriately, in 
ways that ensure a progressive distribution of 
responsibilities. It is to these challenges that we 
turn in chapter 5.

we have seen successes 
around the world with 
strategies that improve 

both sustainability 

and equity 

CHapteR 4  pOSitive SynergieS—winning StrAtegieS FOr the envirOnMent, equity And huMAn develOpMent

79

r
e
t
p
a
h
c

5

rising to the 
policy challenges

This Report has focused on the large dispari-
ties  across  people,  groups  and  countries — 
disparities that coexist with and worsen envi-
ronmental degradation and loss of ecosystem 
services  that  the  world’s  poor  depend  on. 
Yes, the challenges are massive. But in several 
respects conditions today are more conducive 
to  progress  than  ever.  Global  public  aware-
ness is higher, and the new calls for democracy 
sweeping  parts  of  the  world  augur  well  for 
reform.

Taking  the  debate  further  entails  bold 
thinking,  especially  on  the  eve  of  the  2012 
UN Conference on Sustainable Development 
(Rio+20). This Report advances a new vision 
for promoting human development through 
the joint lens of sustainability and equity. For 
that  vision  to  become  a  reality,  institutions 
must  be  strengthened,  capacities  enhanced, 
policies reformed and democratic governance 
fortified.

The vision calls for an expansive rethink-
ing of the role of the state and communities 
— and their capacity to identify and exploit 
emerging  opportunities.  Building  on  the 
insights of Amartya Sen and the key princi-
ples of the human development approach, this 
vision  stresses  an  approach  to  sustainability 
and equity rooted in inclusion, participation 
and reasoned public debate, while recognizing 
diverse values, conditions and objectives.

Beyond  the  Millennium  Development 
Goals  the  world  needs  a  post-2015  develop-
ment  framework  that  reflects  equity  and 
sustainability:  Rio+20  stands  out  as  a  great 
opportunity to reach a shared understanding 
about how to move forward.

This chapter proposes key reforms at the 

national and global levels:
•	 At the national level it stresses the need 
to bring equity to the forefront of policy 
and programme design, and the potential 

multiplier effects of greater empowerment 
in the legal and political arenas.

•	 At  the  global  level  it  calls  for  greater 
resources to be devoted to pressing envi-
ronmental threats and for more equitable 
representation of disadvantaged countries 
and groups in accessing finance.
Concerted  actions  can  bring  equity  and 
sustainability closer to the centre of human 
development.  Too  often  development  plans 
invoke  unnecessary  trade-offs — sacrificing  a 
healthy environment or equitable distribution 
of  wealth  for  the  sake  of  economic  growth. 
Implicit is the notion that one aim is a luxury, 
less important than the other. Power imbal-
ances  and  political  constraints  loom  large. 
And too often the plans are incomplete, not 
designed to promote equity. But policies can 
maximize the synergies among healthy com-
munities,  healthy  economies  and  a  healthy 
environment.

The  chapter  reinforces  the  central  con-
tention  of  this  Report:  that  integrating  the 
approaches  to  sustainability  and  equity  can 
produce  innovative  solutions  and  concrete 
guidelines to promote human development.

Business-as-usual is neither 
equitable nor sustainable

The conventional focus on maximizing growth 
has been associated with a model that ignores 
the environmental impacts and externalities of 
economic activity. This is true in a command 
and control system (the former Soviet Union), 
in a liberalizing socialist economy (China in 
the 1990s) and in fairly free market economies 
(Australia and the United States over much of 
the 20th century). Especially since the Second 
World War, accelerations in economic growth 
have  been  carbon-intensive,  and  economic 
regulation has been scaled back. As chapter 2 

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

81

worsening 

environmental 

degradation could 

soon break the 40-year 
pattern of convergence 
in human development 

across countries

shows, untrammelled growth without regard 
for the environment has brought the world to 
the point where the concentration of carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere already exceeds 350 
parts per million and is heading to levels that 
risk multiple catastrophes.

In  the  face  of  daunting  environmental 
challenges  that  endanger  prospects  for  con-
tinuing progress in human development, con-
certed global action too often falls far short of 
what is needed. This chapter reviews the scale 
of the challenges and points to a fundamental 
contradiction: business-as-usual is neither sus-
tainable nor equitable, but attempts to move 
forward are beset by political economy con-
straints. It proposes key principles for coun-
tries  to  promote  change  and  then  addresses 
key elements at the global level.

Worsening  environmental  degradation 
could soon break the 40-year pattern of conver-
gence in human development across countries. 
Consider the potential trade-offs between eco-
nomic costs and environmental damage given 
today’s  technology  and  carbon  intensity  of 
production. Simulations for this report sug-
gest that if no country or region is prepared 
to bear a loss of more than 1 percent in total 
future income, or more than 5 percent of its 
income in any five-year period, carbon dioxide 
levels will trigger a temperature increase of 3°C 
above preindustrial levels by 2100.1 But a tem-
perature rise above the 2°C threshold would be 
catastrophic for many developing countries,2 
as  chapter  2  describes.  So,  we  highlight  the 
potential outcomes of alternative paths and a 
framework to induce global cooperation. Sys-
tematic thinking about how to share the costs 
of  adjustment  and  promote  greener  growth 
is critical, alongside concerted public action 
to  support  innovations  in  technology  and 
enhance voice and accountability.

A  fundamental  rethinking  of  the  con-
ventional  growth  model  is  well  under  way. 
The 2008 global financial crisis and its after-
math reinforced the growing consensus that 
de regulation went too far and that the pendu-
lum should swing back.3 Indeed, compound-
ing  the  economic  failures  of  conventional 
policies are the other costs they can introduce 
— such as greater inequality and environmental 

degradation. As chapter 1 argues, lessons from 
the recent financial crisis can be applied to the 
potential  effects  of  climate  change  (see  box 
1.1). More active public policy is critical, not 
least because development must be decoupled 
from carbon emissions and the true value of 
ecosystem services should be incorporated into 
national development plans. The good news is 
that there is growing recognition, or rediscov-
ery, of industrial policy — of proactive policies 
and interventions to restructure an economy 
towards  more  dynamic  activities — even  at 
such institutions as the World Bank, long a 
proponent of free market approaches.4

Overcoming  pervasive  market  imperfec-
tions requires, among other things, internaliz-
ing the externalities in decision-making and in 
some cases creating markets where none exist 
— as for some ecosystem services. Because of 
the costs and risks created by greenhouse gas 
emissions, the loss of ecosystem services due to 
environmental degradation and underinvest-
ment in innovations, more support should go to 
promoting innovative renewable energy tech-
nologies. If firms underestimate the long-term 
benefits of investing in new technologies or if 
they cannot appropriate the benefits, they will 
invest less than is optimal socially and globally.
As  chapter  4  shows,  well  designed,  well 
implemented incentives can elicit change. For 
example, Japan’s 2009 buy-back system for resi-
dential rooftop photovoltaics promoted invest-
ment and provided incentives for customers to 
reduce electricity use. Similarly, tax incentives 
have encouraged renewable energy investments 
in Canada, Denmark, India, Sweden and the 
United  States.5  But  price-based  incentives, 
especially for scarce resources, need careful cal-
ibration to avoid impoverishing or excluding 
already disadvantaged groups.

A key constraint to public action on envi-
ronmental problems is lack of awareness. About 
a third of the world’s people seem unaware of 
climate change, and only about half consider it 
a serious threat or know that it is caused at least 
partly by human activity (see box 2.5 in chap-
ter 2). But even with raised awareness, serious 
political constraints would remain — in other 
words, our collective failure to act also reflects 
the complexity of the politics and the power 

82

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Equity issues go well 

beyond developed versus 
developing countries — 
and beyond mitigation 
costs alone — to the 
burden of adjustment

of groups opposing change. Chapters 2 and 3 
show how many countries and communities 
most affected by climate change lack power 
and  influence.  So  understanding  these  con-
straints is a vital first step in framing strategies 
with a real chance of meaningful change.

As chapter 4 discusses, national planning 
processes are critical, but capacity constraints 
and siloed approaches can limit effectiveness. 
In the western Balkan countries, for example, 
a major barrier impeding implementation of 
climate change mitigation policies is the lack 
of national coordination mechanisms.6

It is clear that equity issues go well beyond 
developed versus developing countries — and 
beyond mitigation costs alone — to the burden 
of adjustment. Procedural justice requires that 
all  parties  be  able  to  participate  effectively7 
— some of the groups that lobby nationally, 
including  those  pushing  for  more  equitable 
policies  for  women  and  indigenous  peoples, 
also merit a voice on the global stage. Similarly, 
global environmental finance and governance 
mechanisms must be informed by principles of 
equity and fair representation that go beyond 
country governments.

rethinking our development 
model — levers for change

The required transformations involve a pro-
gressive approach that integrates the pillars of 
sustainable human development. Due consid-
eration must be given to differences in coun-
try contexts: one-size-fits-all thinking is rarely 
effective  when  formulating  policy  or  imple-
menting programmes. Proposed here are two 
major avenues to guide such efforts — one is the 
integration of equity concerns into policy and 
programme design and evaluation, the other is 
empowerment in the legal and political arenas. 
For each avenue the chapter sets forth basic 
principles  and  highlights  the  experiences  of 
selected countries.

Integrating equity concerns into 
green economy policies
The  need  to  integrate  equity  concerns 
more  fully  into  environmental  policy  is  a 
major  theme  of  this  Report.  Conventional 

assessments  are  often  silent  on  the  winners 
and  losers  of  a  policy  or  programme.8  But 
distributional aspects require explicit consid-
eration because effects on the poor or the rich 
might differ from average effects — and some-
times from intended outcomes. It is important 
to consider differences between the rich and 
the  poor,  between  men  and  women,  among 
indigenous peoples and across regions. Such 
considerations are consistent with the stated 
objectives of green economy policies, but they 
warrant a sharper focus in practice.

Integrating  distributional  aspects  into 
cost–benefit analysis has long been recognized 
as important9 but has rarely been practiced, 
resulting in neglect of equity in project and 
policy  analysis.  In  the  absence  of  transfers, 
policies  and  projects  that  pass  cost–benefit 
tests  might  not  make  everyone  better  off — 
and  might  even  reduce  the  welfare  of  some 
groups   (box  5.1).  But  appropriately  valuing 
environmental and resilience-promoting ben-
efits is difficult. This is true especially of the 
eco systems for which the value of services is 
not fully known.

The  distributional  analysis  of  economic 
policy reforms has advanced in the past decade 
— examining effects on the well-being of dif-
ferent groups, especially the poor and vulner-
able.  The  World  Bank  has  supported  many 
such  analyses,  though  sometimes  the  tim-
ing is too late to inform decision-making or 
policy- makers fail to adequately incorporate 
the results of such assessments.10 And distri-
butional analyses still tend to be restricted to 
income,  using  conventional  economic  tools 
and  focusing  on  such  transmission  mecha-
nisms  as  prices  and  employment.  Because 
such  analyses  can  miss  important  parts  of 
the picture, we propose that the approach be 
expanded and deepened.

Key principles
Environmental  regulations  and  subsidies 
can affect people’s capabilities as individuals, 
family members, workers, entrepreneurs and 
farmers (figure 5.1). Policy can affect people’s 
endowments, opportunities and agency — and 
through them the distribution of a range of 
assets.

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

83

FIGURE 5.1
integrating equity into policy design

PEOPLE’S 

CAPABILITIES

Endowments
Opportunities

Agency

KEY DISTRIBUTIONAL

ASPECTS

Sources of livelihoods,

assets, land, skills, social capital,

opportunities

Farms

Firms

Communities

Institutional
framework

Monitoring outcomes

and distributional

impacts

Environmental

policy instruments

DESIGN
ASPECTS

Coverage, costs, source of ﬁnancing,
beneﬁts, incidence, compensation

Both  vertical  and  horizontal  equity  are 
important. Vertical equity looks at the treat-
ment of individuals across the distribution — 
for example, how a tax on gasoline would affect 
people at the bottom of the distribution differ-
ently from those at the top. Horizontal equity 
relates to differences across groups or areas.

BOX 5.1
Distributional impacts of policies to cut pollution

Current discussions often raise concerns that policies to reduce pollution can be regressive, 
but rarely is systematic impact analysis brought to bear. The type of analysis needed can 
be illustrated for a carbon permit system such as cap-and-trade — which raises the price of 
products that use fossil fuels intensively, such as electricity. It draws attention to first- and 
second-round effects:
1. 

Everyone faces real income losses, but the effect is regressive if low-income households 
spend a higher fraction of their income on these goods.
If technologies are capital-intensive, a mandate to abate pollution can induce firms to 
substitute capital for polluting inputs, depressing demand for labour and relative wages. 
Low-income households receive a larger share of their income from wages, so they may 
again be more affected.

2. 

3.  Unemployment may be concentrated among certain regions, industries and groups, such 
as coal miners. When the industry shrinks, workers with industry-specific human capi-
tal lose that investment, while premiums go to skilled workers in renewables and other 
energy-efficient technologies.
These effects raise important empirical questions to be investigated case by case. Re-
search in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries points 
to few truly “green” skills and suggests that most green jobs resemble familiar occupations. 
This is good news for displaced workers in developed countries, but it warrants investigation 
elsewhere.

Low-skilled workers are more likely to be displaced by carbon taxes. In OECD countries 
these workers stay unemployed for longer after job losses than do higher skilled workers and 
are less likely to find employment that pays as well. So, governments need to watch out for 
adversely affected groups when implementing environmental regulations, particularly when 
regulations will affect already disadvantaged groups. Policies must include redistributive and 
backstop mechanisms to avoid these problems.

Source: Fullerton 2011.

84

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Key priorities for integrating equity into 

green economy policy design include:
•	 Mainstreaming  the  nonincome  dimen-
sions of well-being. Building on the Multi-
dimensional Poverty Index could broaden 
understanding  of  disadvantage  and 
highlight  the  impacts  of  policy  changes 
across all dimensions of deprivation. For 
instance,  higher  charges  for  water  could 
reduce access, harming health, while more 
expensive kerosene could push households 
back to using biomass for cooking, bad for 
health and the environment.

•	 Understanding direct and indirect effects. 
Direct effects can be followed by a second 
round of indirect changes (see box 5.1).

•	 Considering  compensation  mechanisms. 
Countries  with  well  developed  tax-and-
transfer systems can use income tax sched-
ules  or  social  benefits  to  offset  negative 
effects. For example, South Africa provides 
an  income  tax  deduction  for  communal 
and private landowners who set aside land 
with high biodiversity value and manage it 
as a protected area.11 But where such sys-
tems are less feasible, alternative compen-
sation or exemptions are needed.

•	 Understanding the risk of extreme events. 
However small the probability, it is essen-
tial  to  consider  the  huge  adverse  conse-
quences of extreme weather events, espe-
cially  for  the  most  vulnerable — and  to 
reduce the risks.12 Such analysis may reveal 
that  investing  in  land  use  planning  and 
ecosystems can be a cost-effective buffer for 

Countries need 
industrial policies 

that support inclusive 
green growth while 
being mindful of the 
pitfalls and challenges 

of state promotion 
of selected types of 
economic activity

vulnerable groups against climate risks, as 
demonstrated by mangrove restoration in 
Viet Nam.13
So, rather than accept or reject an individ-
ual policy, it is important to consider a range of 
designs and to determine which can improve 
outcomes  for  equity.  There  are  always  con-
straints in data, analysis, capacity and time, so 
flexibility is needed in meeting the main goals.
Stakeholder  analysis  is  critical.  Political 
economy factors and the influence of various 
actors can affect both design and implemen-
tation of policy. For instance, the oil industry 
in the United States spent almost $1.5 billion 
on federal lobbying in 2010.14 And in Tanza-
nia the proposed reform of charcoal produc-
tion, trade and use highlights the needs and 
influence  of  dealer-transporter-wholesaler 
networks.15 Policy design and implementation 
must address such influences and their likely 
impacts.

Institutional  arrangements  must  guard 
against rent-seeking and official corruption — 
and more than this, against distortions of sci-
entific facts, breaches of principles of fair rep-
resentation and false claims about the green 
credentials of consumer products.16 Countries 
need  industrial  policies  that  support  inclu-
sive green growth while being mindful of the 
pitfalls and challenges of state promotion of 
selected types of economic activity. The fea-
tures of a new industrial policy are relevant 
for policies to reduce the carbon intensity of 
development — limited incentives to new activ-
ities, automatic sunset provisions (so that the 
subsidies are temporary) and clear benchmarks 
for success. This requires the right institutions, 
a political champion and systematic delibera-
tions that engage the private sector.17

Country experience
More countries are using distributional anal-
ysis  to  inform  environmental  policy  design. 
South  Africa’s  plans  to  introduce  environ-
mental taxes as part of its fiscal reforms were 
informed  by  stakeholder  analyses  of  likely 
quantitative  and  qualitative  effects.18  Viet 
Nam announced new taxes following impact 
assessments  simulating  price  and  sectoral 
effects.19

Policies to drive structural change, such as 
pollution pricing, will inevitably have winners 
and losers. Some companies will claim unfair 
adverse impacts. Policy measures to respond 
to  such  concerns,  such  as  exemptions  and 
compensation, can be costly, and the distribu-
tional impacts need to be understood. Alter-
natives, such as more effective consultations 
and  public  communications,  should  also  be 
contemplated.20

Consumption and production profiles can 
shape  distributional  effects.  Two  examples 
from the energy sector:
•	 Ghana’s electricity sector was draining the 
government budget. In 2002 public utility 
company  deficits  approached  11  percent 
of government spending, or 4 percent of 
GDP. Distributional analysis found that 
subsidies  benefited  mainly  middle-class 
urban  customers:  only  7  percent  of  the 
rural poor used electric light. The lack of 
rural electrification in the poorest north-
ern regions warranted reducing subsidies, 
raising  public  awareness  of  energy  effi-
ciency  and  increasing  efforts  to  improve 
market efficiency.21
In  Lao  PDR,  which  experienced  rapid 
expansion  of  access  to  modern  energy 
services  after  the  late  1980s,  key  equity 
aspects were incorporated in programme 
design. A “power to the poor” component 
provides  interest-free  credits  to  connect 
poor  households  to  the  grid,  benefiting 
female-headed  households  in  particular. 
Local communities and rural households 
also receive support for electricity use for 
income-generating activities.22

•	

While some insights can be drawn from such 
interventions, the effects are always context-
specific and require local analysis.

Data  constraints  can  limit  understand-
ing. The joint analysis of human development 
and  equity  impacts  requires  individual  and 
household information, as well as qualitative 
data, to build statistical capacity. This under-
lines the importance of continuing to improve 
disaggregated data, especially in developing 
countries.

Ex ante assessments need to be followed by 
results monitoring. In rural Bangladesh home 

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

85

Constitutionally 
recognizing equal 
rights to a healthy 

environment promotes 
equity because such 
access is no longer 
limited to those 
who can afford it

solar power systems were estimated to displace 
kerosene use equivalent to 4 percent of total 
annual  carbon  emissions.23  Surveys  showed 
that  solar  subsidies — amounting  to  almost 
$400 million and allocated through a private 
microcredit  agency — were  progressive  when 
accurately targeted, because the bottom two 
income groups spent about three times more 
on kerosene than the top two. Benefits also 
included better lighting, good for children’s 
education, and reduced indoor air pollution, 
with benefits for health.

Empowering people to bring 
about change
This  Report  argues  for  empowerment  to 
bring about greater equity and environmen-
tal  benefits — and  as  an  important  outcome 
in  itself.  What  does  this  mean  in  practice? 
Consider two spheres where enhancing voice 
and  representation  has  important  links  to 
sustainability — the legal, with enabling insti-
tutions and rights to a clean and safe environ-
ment, and the political, with more participa-
tion and accountability.

A clean and safe environment — 
 a right, not a privilege
That all people, born and yet to be born, have 
the right to a clean and safe environment is a 
powerful idea, grounded in the framework in 
chapter 1. Despite the slow progress in securing 
such rights globally,24 constitutions in at least 
120 countries address environmental norms 
or  the  state’s  obligation  to  prevent  environ-
mental harm.25 And many countries without 
explicit environmental rights interpret general 
constitutional provisions for personal rights as 
including a fundamental right to a clean, safe 
and healthy environment. That right derives 
from people’s rights to bodily health and integ-
rity and to enjoyment of the natural world.

Amartya Sen, Martha Nussbaum and oth-
ers  have  noted  a  close  relationship  between 
the  capabilities  approach  and  rights-based 
approaches  to  human  development.26  But 
unlike  the  idea  of  freedom  or  capability  in 
itself,  an  acknowledged  human  right  also 
incorporates corresponding obligations. Not-
withstanding such obligations, human rights 

are  not  equivalent  to  legal  rights,  although 
they  can  motivate  legislation  and  thus  pro-
vide the basis for legal action. Some rights are 
procedural — as with the right to information 
discussed below — and must encompass both 
opportunity and process aspects.27

Constitutionally recognizing equal rights 
to  a  healthy  environment  promotes  equity 
because  such  access  is  no  longer  limited  to 
those  who  can  afford  it.28  And  embodying 
such rights in the legal framework can influ-
ence  government  priorities  and  resource 
allocations.

Growing country experience
Many  EU  countries  recognize  fundamen-
tal environmental rights as a matter of natu-
ral law —as inherent universal rights. In the 
United  Kingdom  the  Human  Rights  Act 
includes the right to a healthy environment.29 
And although the European Convention on 
Human Rights does not mention environmen-
tal rights, it establishes that serious environ-
mental damage may violate the right to respect 
for private life and family life.30 Sweden rec-
ognizes the right of public access through its 
constitutional “Don’t disturb; don’t destroy” 
policy: people have the right to roam freely in 
the countryside as long as they do not incon-
venience others.31

Kenya’s 2010 Constitution grants the right 
to a clean environment and requires the gov-
ernment to maintain its natural resources.32 At 
least 31 other African countries express envi-
ronmental rights in their constitutions, and 
some — such as Ethiopia and Namibia — also 
stress that economic development should not 
harm the environment.33

The enforceability of environmental rights 
in Africa is largely untested, however, except 
in South Africa. Some countries have struc-
tural impediments. In Cameroon citizens do 
not have the right to appeal to the country’s 
constitutional council, which limits enforce-
ability.34  And  in  Namibia  environmental 
rights can be enforced only by someone with 
a private interest, barring claims in the public 
interest.35

Several Latin American countries, includ-
ing Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Peru, have 

86

Human Development RepoRt 2011

alongside legal 

recognition of equal 
rights to a healthy, 
well functioning 

environment, enabling 

institutions are 

needed, including a 
fair and independent 

judiciary and the 

right to information 
from governments

enforceable environmental rights. The Chilean 
Supreme  Court  voided  a  government-issued 
timber licence because it had been approved 
without  sufficient  evidence  of  environmen-
tal  viability,  thus  violating  the  right  of  all 
Chileans — not just those directly affected — to 
live free of environmental contamination.36

Many Latin American constitutions rec-
ognize  environmental  rights  for  indigenous 
peoples.37 Paraguay guarantees that the state 
will defend them against habitat degradation 
and environmental contamination.38 In Guy-
ana environmental rights exist alongside rec-
ognition of the rights of indigenous peoples.39 
Bolivia’s  proposed  Law  of  Mother  Nature 
takes  this  recognition  a  step  further,  giving 
the natural world equal rights with people. The 
proposal is heavily influenced by a resurgent 
indigenous Andean spiritual world view that 
places  the  environment  and  the  earth  deity 
Pachamama at the centre of life.40

Among Asian countries India is notable 
for allowing aggrieved individuals to challenge 
state action or inaction related to the environ-
ment.41 The Indian judiciary has broadly inter-
preted environmental rights in the constitution 
to protect public health as well. For example, 
environmental advocates successfully argued 
that environmental laws obliged the govern-
ment to reduce air pollution in New Delhi in 
the interests of public health, resulting in an 
order mandating conversion of city buses from 
diesel to compressed natural gas.42

Bhutan  has  pioneered  placing  environ-
mental conservation at the centre of its devel-
opment strategy, reflecting traditional norms 
and culture.43 Article 5 of the 2008 Constitu-
tion emphasizes the responsibility of all Bhu-
tanese to protect the environment, conserve 
its biodiversity and prevent ecological degra-
dation. It also stipulates that at least 60 percent 
of the country remain forested in perpetuity.

Even if rights provide only what Immanuel 
Kant  called  imperfect  obligations,  they  can 
still empower groups and individuals to take 
public action to protect their environment. As 
Amartya  Sen  wrote,  “because  of  the  impor-
tance  of  communication,  advocacy,  expo-
sure and informed public discussion, human 
rights can have influence without necessarily 

depending on coercive legislation.”44 Indeed, 
procedural human rights linked to environ-
mental protection often receive more attention 
than substantive environmental rights.45

Enabling institutions
Alongside legal recognition of equal rights to 
a healthy, well functioning environment, ena-
bling institutions are needed, including a fair 
and  independent  judiciary  and  the  right  to 
information from governments. For example:
In the United States conservation groups 
•	
have used information on emissions levels 
to  bring  public  nuisance  actions  against 
private companies.46

•	 One Million Acts of Green, launched by 
Cisco in partnership with the Canadian 
Broadcasting  Corporation  and  Green-
Nexxus in Canada in 2008, uses television, 
Facebook®,  Twitter™  and  other  Internet 
resources to engage Canadians in conversa-
tions on environmental issues and encour-
age  “green  acts.”  The  initiative  elicited 
nearly 2 million green acts within a year.47
An institutional context conducive to civil 
liberties is a necessary backdrop. But recent 
Gallup data suggest that a majority of the peo-
ple in close to half of nearly 140 countries sur-
veyed lack confidence in their judicial system 
and courts.48 This underlines the importance 
of implementing broader reforms and improv-
ing the context for enforcing rights.

Rights  to  government  information  are 
spreading. At least 49 national constitutions 
recognize  them,  and  at  least  80  legislatures 
have enacted right-to-information laws. South 
Africa’s 1996 Constitution guarantees all “the 
right  of  access  to  any  information  held  by 
the state and held by another person that is 
required for the exercise or protection of any 
rights.” In Argentina, Canada, France, India, 
Israel and the Republic of Korea higher courts 
have  held  that  constitutional  guarantees  of 
free expression implicitly recognize a constitu-
tional right of access to information.49

But legislation is just a first step. Imple-
mentation and enforcement are equally criti-
cal.  Civil  society  organizations  are  impor-
tant  for  implementation  by  helping  citizens 
understand  and  use  legal  rights  of  access  to 

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

87

Democracy is important, 
but  to enable civil society 

and foster popular 

access to information, 
national institutions 
need to be accountable 

and inclusive— 

especially with respect 
to women and other 

affected groups

information,  by  training  public  officials  in 
information  disclosure  and  by  monitoring 
implementation.  In  Bulgaria  a  nongovern-
mental organization, the Access to Informa-
tion Programme, provided legal assistance and 
disseminated information to the wider public 
about  the  right-to-information  law  and  the 
scope of citizens’ rights.50

Information  disclosure  is  very  impor-
tant to environmental protection and citizen 
empowerment. Ensuring that polluters disclose 
information on emissions and discharges can 
reduce violations and complement regulation. 
British Columbia’s public disclosure strategy 
had a larger impact on emissions and compli-
ance than the sanctions traditionally imposed 
by  Canada’s  Ministry  of  the  Environment. 
Stricter standards and larger penalties were also 
influential — suggesting that both information 
and regulation can reduce emissions.51 And in 
China programmes to rate and publicly dis-
close companies’ environmental performance 
have prompted facilities to reduce air and water 
pollution, improving firms’ market competi-
tiveness and relationships with communities 
and other stakeholders.52 The Czech Republic, 
Egypt, Indonesia and Mexico recorded simi-
lar results with the new mandated Pollutant 
Release and Transfer Registers.53

The international community is increas-
ingly recognizing a right of access to environ-
mental information.54 This in turn supports a 
broad interpretation of national constitutional 
rights to information.

The  complex  cross-sectoral  challenges  of 
sustainable  human  development  have  a  long 
time  horizon  and  require  long-term  com-
mitments.55  Changing  decisions,  mobilizing 
investment and developing new strategic plans 
can take years if not decades. This may involve 
major  institutional  reforms  to  mainstream 
environmental considerations in government 
planning. The government of Rwanda recog-
nized the need to integrate environmental and 
natural resource management plans into the 
country’s  development  strategy.  Its  Environ-
mental Management Authority works closely 
with the national and local governments as well 
as civil society to promote sustainable devel-
opment  and  the  right  to  live  in  a  clean  and 

productive environment by requiring that all 
sectors of society manage the environment effi-
ciently and use natural resources rationally.56

Participation and accountability
Process  freedoms,  which  enable  people  to 
advance  goals  that  matter  to  them,  are  cen-
tral to human development and — as discussed 
in last year’s HDR — have both intrinsic and 
instrumental value. Major disparities in power 
are reflected in unsustainable outcomes, but 
the converse is that greater empowerment can 
bring  about  positive  environmental  change 
equitably, as chapter 3 argues. Democracy is 
important, but  to enable civil society and foster 
popular access to information, national insti-
tutions need to be accountable and inclusive— 
especially  with  respect  to  women  and  other 
affected groups.

Forums to facilitate participation
A prerequisite for participation is open, trans-
parent  and  inclusive  deliberative  processes. 
Consider energy. As work commissioned for 
this Report demonstrates, most energy deci-
sions are made behind closed doors and rarely 
in democratic fora.57 Because of concerns for 
commercial confidentiality or geostrategic sen-
sitivities about energy supplies, the public has 
participated little in negotiating energy policy 
decisions. “Consultations” can provide limited 
or incomplete information, neglect equity and 
impact assessments, and fail to report results 
effectively. Even where public participation or 
comment is formally invited, its role is often to 
legitimize prior policy choices and decisions, 
not to shape them.58 In Australia, for exam-
ple,  cases  have  demonstrated  a  lack  of  open 
exchanges among local government, polluting 
industries and local communities and a failure 
to inform citizens of the risks of living and 
working near toxic sites.59

Where  governments  are  responsive  to 
popular  concerns,  change  is  more  likely.  In 
the United States, for example, 23 states allow 
citizens to petition for a direct vote on a pol-
icy  initiative,  a  mechanism  that  some  states 
have used to adopt environmental and energy 
policies  (such  as  Washington  in  2006).60 
Some groups have pursued accountability of 

88

Human Development RepoRt 2011

For climate change 
and other global 
environmental 

problems, procedural 

justice implies an 
equal opportunity 
for all countries to 
affect international 

negotiations, but weak 
capacity often means 
that few developing 
country governments 

are represented

private corporations in emissions and climate 
change.61 But such concerns may be offset by 
other  vested  interests — as  reported  for  the 
Russian Federation in the problems civil soci-
ety faced in mobilizing public support around 
greening industry.62 And where civil society is 
active, as chapter 3 shows, it can bring about 
positive outcomes.

An active press raises awareness and facili-
tates public participation. In Rwanda the gov-
ernment  launched  radio  and  television  pro-
motions highlighting national environmental 
issues and targeting all levels of society. Media 
coverage increased support from the Environ-
mental Management Agency and other gov-
ernment ministries to jointly explore ways to 
integrate environmental concerns into plan-
ning and to enhance cooperation for environ-
mental protection.63

For climate change and other global envi-
ronmental problems, procedural justice implies 
an equal opportunity for all countries to affect 
the  direction  and  content  of  international 
negotiations. But weak capacity often means 
that few developing country governments are 
represented, let alone able to represent their 
citizens’  interests  adequately  in  arenas  with 
high demands for legal and scientific exper-
tise. Although 194 countries attended the UN 
Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen 
in 2010, only a powerful handful negotiated 
the terms of the Copenhagen Accord. In inter-
national summits the top five polluting coun-
tries usually field more than three times the 
delegates of the five countries most affected by 
climate change.64

The  news  is  not  all  bad,  however.  Gov-
ernance of the Climate Investment Funds is 
already moving towards more equitable voice 
and participation — with an equal number of 
representatives  from  donor  and  developing 
country governments on the governing com-
mittees for each of the trust funds and with 
decisions  made  by  consensus.  The  Climate 
Investment  Funds  have  also  institutional-
ized formal observer roles for civil society, the 
private  sector  and  in  some  cases  indigenous 
peoples,  while  making  the  role  of  observers 
more meaningful by enabling them to suggest 
agenda items and contribute to discussions.65 

The United Nations Collaborative Programme 
on  Reducing  Emissions  from  Deforestation 
and Forest Degradation in Developing Coun-
tries goes even farther, since its board, which 
decides on strategic directions and budget allo-
cations, includes representatives of indigenous 
peoples and civil society as full members, not 
just as observers.66

Still, barriers to effective participation per-
sist in many national and local contexts. Some 
groups,  such  as  women,  have  traditionally 
been excluded from governance institutions. 
But here again, there have been changes, with 
documented  results  not  only  on  equity  but 
on  sustainable  management  of  environmen-
tal resources.67 For example, in Europe local 
authorities  in  jurisdictions  with  the  highest 
recycling rates had a higher than average per-
centage of female managers.68 And extensive 
fieldwork in India has documented that active 
participation  by  women  in  community  for-
est management significantly improved forest 
protection.69

Community management
Chapter  4  illustrates  the  growing  recogni-
tion  of  the  benefits  of  community  manage-
ment  of  natural  resources.  To  ensure  that 
such approaches do not exclude poor people, 
women,  the  elderly  and  other  marginalized 
groups, governments and other organizations 
that sponsor community-based projects need 
to involve all groups in decision-making and 
implementation.  For  example,  initiatives  to 
mentor  community  forest  groups  in  Nepal 
sensitized them to issues of equity and partici-
pation, ultimately increasing the participation 
and influence of women and the poor.70

Where  women  and  other  marginalized 
groups are included in community decision-
making,  the  benefits  can  be  substantial.  For 
example,  Bhutanese  community  forests  have 
the dual purpose of engaging locals in man-
aging  forests  and  regulating  access  to  forest 
resources for sustainable livelihood activities. 
Enabling  access  to  fuelwood,  which  benefits 
women more than men, is one benefit of this 
approach.  Household  surveys  of  Bhutanese 
communities  have  found  that  poorer  house-
holds  and  female-headed  households  were 

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

89

Development assistance 
reaches only 1.6 percent 
of even the lower bound 
estimate of needs for 
low-carbon energy 

and around 11 percent 

for climate change

usually  assigned  a  larger  share  of  trees  than 
richer households, and women were able to col-
lect more fuelwood from community forests.71

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

In sum, implementing a joint equity–sustain-
ability approach at the national level involves 
integrating equity into policy and programme 
design  and  evaluation,  bolstering  empower-
ment through legal rights and corresponding 
institutions, and promoting greater participa-
tion and accountability.

Financing investment and 
the reform agenda

Policy debates about sustainability raise major 
questions  about  investment  and  financing, 
particularly  on  how  much  is  needed,  who 
should have access and who should be respon-
sible for financing what.

Development finance constrains the equi-
table  transition  to  a  global  green  economy 
in two ways. First, it falls far short of global 
requirements. Second, countries and sectors 
have  unequal  access,  so  they  do  not  always 
receive the financing they need to address envi-
ronmental deprivations; the poorest countries 
often miss out.

Global  capital  markets,  with  some 
$178 trillion in financial assets, have the size 
and depth to step up to the challenge.72 Over 
the medium to long term, and with sufficient 
public  sector  support,  the  United  Nations 
Environment Programme estimates that pri-
vate  investment  in  clean  energy  technolo-
gies  could  reach  $450  billion  by  2012  and 
$600 billion by 2020.73 The Global Environ-
ment Facility’s experience suggests that private 
investment can be substantial: public funding 
for  climate  mitigation  has  leveraged  private 
investment by 7 to 1 or more.74 This leveraging 
requires public efforts to catalyse investment 
flows, by developing an appropriate investment 
environment and building local capacity.

These issues are covered in depth in a recent 
UNDP report that highlights policies for build-
ing developing country capacity to mobilize the 
public and private investment flows needed to 
finance the transition towards a low-emission, 

climate-resilient society.75 Medium-term plans, 
budgets and investments can be a foundation 
for consolidating good intentions and providing 
cross-sectoral mechanisms for effective coordi-
nation across donors and government agencies.
Lively debates about the future of official 
development assistance continue. While recog-
nizing the growing importance of private flows 
and the likelihood that aid will shrink as a share 
of development finance for most countries, rich 
countries must not shirk their responsibilities. 
Strong equity arguments warrant substantial 
transfers  of  resources  from  rich  countries  to 
poor to meet equity goals and guarantee equal 
access to financing. And strong economic argu-
ments support measures to solve global collec-
tive action problems, such as climate change.

Where does the world stand?
Although  evidence  on  global  needs76  and 
official  aid  commitments  and  disbursements 
is  patchy  and  magnitudes  are  uncertain,  the 
overall picture is clear. Development assistance 
reaches  only  1.6  percent  of  even  the  lower 
bound estimate of needs for low-carbon energy 
and around 11 percent for climate change (fig-
ure 5.2). These numbers are slightly better for 
water and sanitation, where aid commitments 
are more than twice the lower estimate of needs 
and close to 20 percent of the upper estimate.

Access to financing is uneven and generally 
correlated  with  a  country’s  level  of  develop-
ment. Many resources go to the countries devel-
oping fastest. Low-income countries account 
for a third of the 161 countries receiving Global 
Environment  Facility  allocations,  but  they 
receive  only  25  percent  of  the  funding  (and 
least developed countries, only 9 percent).77 In 
2010,  under  the  Climate  Investment  Funds, 
Mexico and Turkey accounted for about half 
the approved project funding in clean technol-
ogy.78 Evidence also suggests that the resources 
have been allocated less equally over time.79

What development assistance can do
Official development assistance is a vital source of 
external finance for many developing countries. 
Recent years have seen much progress in increas-
ing the quality and quantity of official aid, which 
rose some 23 percent from 2005 to 2009.

90

Human Development RepoRt 2011

But the contributions still do not meet the 
world’s development challenges. The $129 bil-
lion committed in 2010 was 76 percent of the 
estimated  cost  of  achieving  the  Millennium 
Development  Goals — and  not  all  aid  goes  to 
achieving the goals.80 Rich countries have con-
sistently  failed  to  meet  their  stated  pledges, 
including that of the G-8 at Gleneagles in 2005 
(to increase aid by $50 billion a year by 2010), 
the European Union (to increase aid from 0.43 
percent of gross national income to 0.56 percent) 
and the United Nations (the long-standing tar-
get of 0.7 percent of gross national income).

Developed  countries  have  pledged  $100 
billion a year by 2020 to finance climate change 
mitigation  and  adaptation  in  developing 

countries. It is unclear, however, whether the 
funding would really be additional — one con-
cern is that current aid will simply be diverted 
to meet the new targets.81

Access to energy and climate change 
investments
As this Report has already noted, providing 
clean energy to the 1.5 billion people who lack 
electricity and the 2.6 billion who rely on tra-
ditional biomass for cooking is a major win-
win-win. Clean energy offers the potential to 
alleviate poverty, reduce health impacts from 
indoor air pollution and drive social and eco-
nomic development, while mitigating energy’s 
impact on the climate.

FIGURE 5.2
Official development assistance falls far short of needs
Estimated future needs and existing 
ofﬁcial development assistance (ODA)
Annual expenditures ($ billions)

1,500

High
estimate
of need

1,000

500

Low
estimate
of need

ODA

50
0

ODA commitments and disbursements, 2010
($ billions)

50

40

30

20

10

0

ODA
commitments

ODA
disbursements

Climate
change
2010–2030

Low-carbon

energy
2010–2035

Water and
sanitation

by 2015

Climate
change

Low-carbon

energy

Water and
sanitation

Source: Based on data from IEA (2010), UN Water (2010a), UNDESA (2010a) and OECD Development Database on Aid Activities: CRS online.

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

91

though large, the 
amounts needed to 

address climate change 

are below current 

spending on defence, 
on recent financial 

sector bailouts and on 
perverse subsidies, 

indicating the scope for 
reassessing priorities

International  financial  institutions  have 
overseen sweeping reforms of the energy sec-
tor in many parts of the world, with a view to 
opening markets and guaranteeing equitable 
access to funds. And countries have positioned 
themselves  to  mobilize  and  attract  private 
investments to the energy sector. But policy-
makers have yet to steer energy finance towards 
tackling energy poverty82 or climate change on 
a larger scale, especially in places less attractive 
to the private sector.

Redirecting  energy  finance  will  require 
greater political will and exceptional leader-
ship.  Moreover,  addressing  energy  poverty 
needs to stay at the head of the agenda because 
doing so is central to maintaining public sup-
port  and  development  assistance  for  achiev-
ing the Millennium Development Goals and 
beyond.

A key dimension of climate policy discus-
sions relates to the size, direction and source of 
financing. The World Bank recently outlined 
the difficulties in tracking such investments, 
including limited and inconsistent informa-
tion in reporting systems, the ambiguous pur-
pose  of  some  flows,  the  confidential  nature 
of some transactions and double counting.83 
Costing is difficult, in both theory and prac-
tice,  and  the  scope  of  the  estimates  differs 
along with the methods. Underlying assump-
tions matter — especially those regarding the 
discount  rate.  So  do  assumed  consumption 
and production elasticities to changing prices. 
With  these  caveats  in  mind,  we  review  the 
available evidence and find:
•	 Recent estimates of the investments needed 
to reduce the concentration of greenhouse 
gases (mitigation costs) range widely, from 
0.2 percent of annual global GDP to 1.2 
percent by 2030.84

•	 Estimating adaptation costs is even harder, 
and  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  them 
from  related  development  investments. 
This Report’s updated estimates of annual 
investment requirements for adaptation are 
of the order of $105 billion,85 within the 
$49–$171  billion  range  proposed  by  the 
United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change by 2030. Other estimates, 
which account for the costs of adaptating to 

the impact of climate change on ecosystems, 
are two to three times higher.86

•	 Estimates of total annual mitigation and 
adaptation costs to address climate change 
by 2030 range from $249 billion to $1,371 
billion. Why the large difference? Because 
the costs of integrating renewable energies 
are context- and site-specific and thus dif-
ficult to estimate globally.
The  amounts  needed  are  clearly  large,  if 
uncertain. But they are below current spend-
ing on defence, on recent financial sector bail-
outs and on perverse subsidies, indicating the 
scope for reassessing priorities. In 2009 global 
military expenditure neared 3 percent of world 
GDP, while some countries spent much more, 
including  the  United  States  (4.7  percent  of 
GDP)  and  the  Russian  Federation  (4.3  per-
cent of GDP).87 The bailouts in the wake of the 
recent financial crisis were close to $700 bil-
lion in the United States under the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program, while EU commitments 
were close to $1 trillion (about 6 percent of 
annual GDP in both cases).

As  the  previous  chapter  shows,  there  is 
enormous scope for reducing environmentally 
harmful subsidies. Uzbekistan, for example, 
spends over 10 times more on fossil fuel con-
sumption subsidies than on health (32 percent 
of  GDP,  compared  with  2.5  percent),  while 
Iran spends 20 percent of GDP on fossil fuel 
consumption  subsidies,  compared  with  less 
than 5 percent on education.88

Are developed countries meeting the financ-
ing  commitment  implied  by  their  “common 
but differentiated responsibilities” under the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change? 
No. Almost $32 billion has been pledged for 
climate  change  actions  (about  19  percent  of 
total official development assistance).89 But the 
pledges fall well short of estimated needs, and 
disbursements fall well short of pledges: most 
of the “new and additional” funds pledged at 
the 2009 UN Climate Change Conference in 
Copenhagen have not been delivered, and less 
than 8 percent of pledges for climate change 
were disbursed in 2010. Governments have yet 
to agree how to track spending or determine 
whether funding is truly additional — accurate 
monitoring requires an aid baseline.

92

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Some  24  special  climate  change  funds 
already  exist,  ranging  from  international 
sources of funding such as the Hatoyama Ini-
tiative (which has received 48 percent of total 
pledges to date — 35 percent from public sources 
and 13 percent from private sources) to national 
trust funds that can receive donor funds, such 
as the Indonesia Climate Change Trust Fund 
(0.06 percent of pledges). The funds differ in 
structure and include both bilateral and multi-
lateral arrangements, making reliable monitor-
ing of spending very difficult.

Given this fragmentation, climate finance 
must  incorporate  the  lessons  of  aid  delivery 
to  improve  how  assistance  is  organized  and 
delivered. The 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid 
Effectiveness and the 2008 Accra Agenda for 
Action agreed on principles to promote coun-
try ownership, aid alignment and harmoniza-
tion, results, and mutual accountability. The 
2007 Bali Action Plan shows how these prin-
ciples can be incorporated into climate change 
finance . This state of affairs does not imply that 
there should be one global superfund, which is 
neither feasible nor desirable, but it did show 
the scope for reducing complexity and enhanc-
ing access and transparency. Equally impor-
tant is avoiding parallelism in funding, as far as 
possible, instead integrating provisions for cli-
mate change in national planning and budgets.

Water supply and sanitation
How much will it cost to meet the Millennium 
Development  Goal  targets  for  safe  drinking 
water and basic sanitation? Assessments depend 
on baseline and demographic assumptions and 
on whether they include maintenance costs and 
use low-technology options. Moreover, defini-
tions of “water supply” and “basic sanitation” 
differ, and consistent data are often lacking.

The  2010  Global  Annual  Assessment  of 
Sanitation and Drinking Water (GLAAS) esti-
mates for achieving the Millennium Develop-
ment Goal water and sanitation targets, which 
take several earlier cost estimates into account, 
range from $6.7 billion to $75 billion a year.90 
Much more would be needed to achieve uni-
versal access.

The amounts now being spent from domes-
tic and international sources are much lower. 

For 20 developing countries reporting drink-
ing water and sanitation expenditures, GLAAS 
2010 estimates median government domestic 
spending at $65 million in 2008 (0.48 percent 
of GDP). For 2009, the most recent year with 
data, aid commitments totalled $14.3 billion 
and disbursements $7.8 billion.

Investor belief that the water and sanita-
tion sector in developing countries is a high-
risk,  low-return  investment  makes  market-
based  financing  difficult  to  mobilize.  And 
while reforms in governance, institutions and 
tariffs are critical to the sector’s financial sus-
tainability,  innovative  schemes  are  bridging 
the financing gaps in the interim (box 5.2).91
Again,  greater  efforts  are  needed.  Gov-
ernment clearly is important, but reliance on 
financial aid is high, covering much national 
spending  on  sanitation  and  drinking-water 
— in  some  countries,  near  90  percent.  And 
even with cost-effective innovative approaches , 
 as in community sanitation ,  public commit-
ment is too low. Refocusing assistance is called 
for, alongside mobilizing more domestic and 
private resources for scaling up investments. 
Although the gap in aid allocations between 
high HDI and low HDI countries is smaller 
for water and sanitation than for low-carbon 
energy, the disparities are still large. Part of 
the constraint relates to capacity, though more 
predictable donor funding would help.92

BOX 5.2
Innovative financing schemes for water and sanitation

A review of financing schemes to promote investment in water and sanitation reveals some 
promising new avenues. Some schemes supported by donors encourage private investment. 
Indonesia’s Master Meter Scheme uses microcredit to connect the urban poor to water, and 
the Coca-Cola Company and the United States Agency for International Development spon-
sored the installation of locally made rope pumps in Zinder, Niger. In Kenya an innovative 
combination of commercial finance (through a microcredit institution) and a subsidy that ties 
public funding to achieving specified goals has improved water supply and connected poor 
households to piped water.

Other financing schemes include blended grants and repayable financing (as funded by the 
World Bank in Senegal and the European Investment Bank in Mozambique), revolving funds for 
water and sanitation (as funded by the World Bank, Denmark and Finland in Viet Nam and by 
UFUNDIKO, a small nongovernmental organization, in Tanzania) and pooled funds (as in Tamil 
Nadu, India), which disbursed bond-issue funds to municipalities as subloans. Market-based 
finance is also becoming more common. For instance, several US cities and Johannesburg, 
South Africa, have used municipal bonds to fund water infrastructure.

Source: Nelson 2011; Coca-Cola Company 2010; World Bank 2010a; International Water and Sanitation Centre and 
Netherlands Water Partnership (2009); OECD 2010c.

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

93

the prime candidate 
to close the financing 

gap is a currency 
transaction tax

Social protection
Estimates put global allocations to social pro-
tection at a sizeable 17 percent of GDP.93 But 
much of this spending bypasses the most dis-
advantaged  groups.  High-income  countries 
spend on average nearly 20 percent of GDP, 
while low-income countries spend around 4 
percent.94  Clearly,  there  is  enormous  scope 
for  increasing  the  coverage  of  social  protec-
tion schemes in the poorest countries, as part 
of national and global efforts. It makes sense, 
then, to take these needs into account in dis-
cussions on financing the sustainability and 
equity agenda.

Setting a social protection floor — a set of 
essential social transfers, in cash and in kind, 
to  provide  a  minimum  income  and  secure 
livelihood — is  promising.  Such  programmes 
need not be expensive. Brazil’s Bolsa Familia 
and Mexico’s Oportunidades cost their gov-
ernments about 0.4 percent of GDP and cover 
about  a  fifth  of  their  populations.  India’s 
Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Rural  Employ-
ment Guarantee Act cost about 0.5 percent of 
GDP in 2009 and benefited 45 million house-
holds, about a tenth of the labour force.95 For 
several African and Asian countries the Inter-
national  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  esti-
mated  in  2008  that  a  scheme  guaranteeing 
workers 100 days of employment a year could 
cost less than 1 percent of GDP on average.96

The ILO estimates that less than 2 percent 
of global GDP would provide all the world’s 
poor with a minimum package of social ben-
efits and services — defined as access to basic 
healthcare, basic education and basic income 
transfers  in  case  of  need.97  Broadening  the 
scope to include adaptation to climate change 
by bolstering local resilience and supporting 
livelihood diversification strategies would cost 
more.98 Based on admittedly heroic assump-
tions,  this  could  increase  the  cost  to  a  still 
manageable 2.5 percent of global GDP.99

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

In sum, the financing challenges loom large, 
but there is cause for optimism. The priorities 
for governments around the world are clear:
•	 Ensure that appropriate institutional and 
regulatory features are in place to enable 

scaling up private investments, especially 
in  poorer  countries,  which  have  largely 
missed out on private finance.

•	 Have  all  governments  re-examine  their 
spending priorities so that sustainability 
and equity objectives are well reflected in 
budget allocations.

•	 Mobilize additional resources to narrow 
the large gaps in addressing the environ-
mental deprivations facing billions of poor 
people around the world and to solve the 
major global collective action problem pre-
sented by climate change.

•	 Ensure that national and community part-
ners have the capability to define policies 
and budgets and implement programmes 
that promote and support sustainability, 
equity and inclusiveness.

innovations at the global level

Environmental sustainability and equity chal-
lenges have major implications at the global 
level, including for financing and governance, 
the two key areas addressed here.

Innovative new sources to meet the 
financing gap
As outlined above, massive new investments 
are needed to avoid business-as-usual trajecto-
ries, but sufficient funding has not been forth-
coming,  especially  for  poor  countries.  And 
the  fiscal  outlook  is  difficult.  Many  govern-
ment budgets are under pressure in the wake 
of the 2008 global financial crisis and given 
longer  term  structural  problems,  while  cli-
mate change is intensifying the development 
challenges  facing  poor  countries.  Domestic 
commitments are important, though the scale 
of the investments needed suggests that more 
international public funds will be required to 
attract large additional private funds. It fol-
lows that innovative sources of financing are 
vital,  alongside  stronger  commitments  and 
concrete actions from developed countries.

The prime candidate to close the financ-
ing gap is a currency transaction tax. Origi-
nally  proposed  and  promoted  in  the  1994 
Human Development Report (HDR), the idea 
is  increasingly  being  accepted  as  a  practical 

94

Human Development RepoRt 2011

policy option. What is new today is its greater 
feasibility. The infrastructure for global real-
time  settlements,  introduced  after  the  most 
recent global financial crisis, makes it straight-
forward to implement. The foreign exchange 
settlement infrastructure is now more organ-
ized, centralized and standardized (box 5.3). 
Recent innovations — notably real-time gross 
settlement and measures to reduce settlement 
risk — mean that existing systems now capture 
individual transactions.

The tax can be a simple proportional levy 
on  individual  foreign  exchange  transactions 
assessed on foreign exchange dealers and col-
lected through existing financial clearing or 
settlement systems. Because the financial infra-
structure is now in place, a currency transac-
tion tax can be implemented relatively quickly 
and  easily.  The  tax  has  high-level  endorse-
ment from the Leading Group on Innovative 
Financing for Development.100 Belgium and 
France already have legislative frameworks in 
place for instituting a currency transaction tax. 
And Brazil, Chile, Japan, Norway and Spain 
have  started  to  move  in  that  direction.  The 
tax also enjoys broader support from nongov-
ernmental stakeholders, such as the Bill and 
Melinda Gates Foundation and the Citizen’s 
Coalition for Economic Justice.

Such a tax could address a major anomaly 
in the financial sector: many of its transactions 
are not taxed.101 That, along with the large scale 
of financial activity, makes a strong case for a 
small levy on foreign exchange transactions to 
fund global public goods, such as mitigating 
and adapting to climate change in poor coun-
tries. The incidence of the tax would be pro-
gressive, as the countries with larger currency 
transactions tend to be more developed. The 
allocation of revenues should also be progres-
sive, as discussed below. Distributional issues, 
such as a potential minimum tax threshold, 
need  to  be  considered,  so  as  not  to  unduly 
burden individual remittance transfers. Such 
details need to be examined during design and 
monitoring.

The  tax  could  also  substantially  reduce 
the  macroeconomic  volatility  caused  by  the 
high volume of short-term speculative funds 
flowing  through  world  financial  markets. 

Appropriately  designed  and  monitored,  the 
tax would allow those who benefit most from 
globalization to help those who benefit least — 
and help finance the global public goods that 
can sustain globalization.

The tax rate should not impose too heavy 
a burden but should reduce speculative flows. 
Estimates  of  revenue  generation  depend 
on,  among  other  things,  assumptions  about 
the effect of the tax on trading volumes. In 
updated analysis prepared for this Report, the 
North–South Institute estimates that a tax of 
0.005 percent would yield around $40 billion 
a year.102 The revenue potential is thus huge. 
The  Center  for  Global  Development  esti-
mates donor spending on global public goods 
at around $11.7 billion in 2009. The bulk of 
the spending is on UN peacekeeping; exclud-
ing this important function lowers global pub-
lic good expenditure to about $2.7 billion.103 
The currency transaction tax would mobilize 
nearly 15 times as much each year. Even a uni-
lateral  currency  transaction  tax  (limited  to 
the  Euro)  could  mobilize  $4.2–$9.3  billion 
in additional financing. Clearly, then, a cur-
rency transaction tax could, even under very 

BOX 5.3
The currency transaction tax: newfound feasibility

Today, there are many ways to trade foreign currency in the wholesale market: on an ex-
change, online, through a human or electronic broker or by phone or fax. But there are just two 
ways to make the payments to settle a deal. One is by sending both payments to a continu-
ous linked settlement bank, which matches and exchanges them simultaneously. The other is 
by sending them to the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Communication (SWIFT), 
where they are matched and then forwarded to the correspondent banks in the two currency-
issuing countries. These two highly organized clearing and settlement systems are the core 
infrastructure of today’s foreign exchange industry. They keep detailed records of nearly every 
foreign exchange transaction around the world.

How would a tax work? SWIFT keeps itemized records of the details of global foreign 
exchange trading activity in the world’s frequently traded currencies as it clears or settles 
foreign exchange transactions. A copy of the transaction details would be sent to the usual 
tax authority or its agent. The authority would calculate the tax due from each trader and add 
it to a running tally. Traders would pay their currency transaction tax obligations to the tax 
authority periodically.

Incentive and compliance issues are surmountable. It is unlikely that trading banks would 
opt out of SWIFT’s communications platform to avoid paying the tax. Doing so would cost 
more than the tax. Further, there are only a few large traders in the wholesale market for 
foreign exchange, so they could easily be audited for tax purposes. There would be no intru-
sion on individual privacy, because the currency tax would be assessed on the large banks, 
investment funds and corporations participating in the wholesale foreign exchange market.

Source: Schmidt and Bhushan 2011.

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

95

any truly 

transformational effort 

to scale up climate 
change mitigation 
and adaptation will 
require blending 

resources—domestic 
and international, 
private and public, 
and grant and loan

conservative assumptions, dramatically scale 
up global public good expenditure.

This  is  also  an  occasion  to  reconsider  a 
broader financial transaction tax. The Interna-
tional Monetary Fund (IMF) recently pointed 
out  that  many  G-20  countries  have  already 
implemented  some  form  of  financial  trans-
action  tax.104  While  the  revenue  potential 
depends on the tax’s design and the response of 
traders, a broad-based, low-rate financial trans-
actions tax of 0.01–0.05 percent could generate 
nearly €200 billion a year at the European level 
and $650 billion at the global level.105 Other 
estimates suggest that in the United States alone 
the tax could raise more than 1 percent of GDP 
(about $150 billion in 2011), even with very sub-
stantial reductions in trading volume.106

Taxes on currency and financial transactions 
would not have prevented the recent financial 
crisis, which originated in the United States and 
spread to the rest of the world. But in addition 
to the revenue potential, such taxes are tools for 
discouraging the short-term reckless behaviour 
that drove the global economy into crisis.

Transaction  taxes  need  not  be  the  only 
instrument to close the financing gap. Using the 
IMF’s Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) for inno-
vative financing and climate change adaptation 
is another avenue worth exploring.107 Monetiz-
ing part of the IMF’s surplus could raise up to 
$75  billion  at  little  or  no  budgetary  cost  for 
contributing governments.108 IMF analysis of 
the possible role of SDRs as seed finance for 
a new global green fund suggests that issuing 
additional SDRs and other reserve assets could 
mobilize $100 billion a year by 2020. The SDRs 
have the added appeal of acting as a monetary 
rebalancing instrument; demand is expected to 
come from emerging market economies looking 
to diversify their reserve holdings. Because the 
SDR is not a sovereign currency, it would not 
be subject to the currency transaction tax, thus 
avoiding double taxation.

Several  public  and  private  sources  could 
also  be  tapped  to  close  the  financing  gap. 
Already, innovative financing instruments — 
such as the Clean Technology Fund and the 
Strategic Climate Fund — are blending fund-
ing from multilateral development banks, gov-
ernments, climate finance instruments and the 

private sector. They have raised an additional 
$3.7 billion for development and can leverage 
substantial additional funds.109 Considerable 
private funding has also been leveraged.

Ensuring equity and voice in 
governing and in access to finance
Bridging  the  gap  separating  policy-makers, 
negotiators and decision-makers from the peo-
ple most vulnerable to environmental degra-
dation requires closing the accountability gap 
in global environmental governance. Account-
ability alone cannot meet the challenge, but 
it is fundamental for building a socially and 
environmentally  effective  global  governance 
system that delivers for people.

Private resources are critical, but because 
most  financial  flows  into  the  energy  sector, 
for example, are private, the greater risks and 
lower  returns  of  some  regions  of  the  world 
affect the patterns of flows. In the absence of 
reform,  access  to  financing  across  countries 
will remain unevenly distributed, and indeed 
add to existing inequalities.110 This underlines 
the importance of ensuring that flows of pub-
lic investments are equitable and create condi-
tions to attract future private flows.

Failing  to  ensure  equitable  access  to  cli-
mate finance would also constrain the capac-
ity  of  industries  to  capitalize  on  low-cost 
opportunities to improve efficiency and reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions cost-effectively. The 
building sector, for example, could not take 
advantage  of  cost-effective  energy  efficiency 
improvements. This is particularly important 
over the next 5–10 years as low-income coun-
tries invest in long-lived power generation and 
urban  infrastructure.  Limited  access  to  cli-
mate financing would lock these countries into 
high-emission development paths, constrain-
ing the world’s capacity to limit increases in 
global temperature.

The  implications  are  clear.  Principles  of 
equity  should  guide  and  encourage  interna-
tional financial flows. Support for institution 
building  should  help  developing  countries 
establish appropriate policies and incentives. 
And  the  associated  governance  mechanisms 
for international public financing must allow 
for voice and social accountability.

96

Human Development RepoRt 2011

FIGURE 5.3
Key elements in 
transforming climate 
financing efforts

Low-emission,
climate-resilient

development strategies

Market-making
public-private
partnerships

Climate deal-flow

facility

Implementation
and reporting
instruments

Source: Adapted from Glemarec and others 2010.

Any truly transformational effort to scale up 
climate change mitigation and adaptation will 
require blending resources—domestic and inter-
national, private and public, and grant and loan. 
To facilitate both equitable access and efficient 
use of international financial flows, this Report 
advocates empowering national stakeholders to 
blend climate finance at the country level.

Bringing about long-term, efficient results 
and  accountability  to  local  populations 
and  partners  will  require  four  sets  of  tools 
(figure 5.3):
•	 Low-emission, climate-resilient strategies 
— to  align  human  development,  equity 
and climate change goals.

•	 Public-private  partnerships — to  catalyse 

capital from businesses and households.

•	 Climate deal-flow facilities — for equitable 

access to international public finance.

•	 Coordinated implementation and moni-
toring, reporting and verification systems.
Most climate control activities today are 
discrete and incremental mitigation or adapta-
tion projects. But broader strategic approaches 
are  also  needed.  Low-emission,  climate- 
resilient development strategies could prove a 
critical institutional innovation for incorpo-
rating equity and climate change into devel-
opment planning. Involving all stakeholders, 
such strategies can help manage uncertainty by 
identifying development trajectories resilient 
to a range of climate outcomes. These strategies 
can incorporate priorities for win-win mitiga-
tion and adaptation initiatives. And they can 
assess the policy changes and capacity develop-
ment required to implement them.111 A com-
prehensive strategy to attract investments in 
green and equitable development must come 
to grips with the large distortions in energy 
markets — in favourable tax treatment, regu-
latory privileges and legacy monopolies. The 
investment climate can be improved by reduc-
ing risks (say, through greater policy predict-
ability or guarantee instruments) and increas-
ing rewards (say, through tax credits).112

Strategies need to involve municipalities: 
since cities account for the majority of green-
house  gas  emissions,  actions  by  subnational 
governments  will  be  key  to  reining  in  tem-
perature  change.  This  calls  for  coordinated 

planning and robust collaboration with a vari-
ety of traditional and new development actors, 
including national and regional technical cen-
tres of expertise, the private sector, communi-
ties and civil society organizations.

A  second  key  institutional  innovation 
could be market-making public-private part-
nerships.  These  partnerships  aim  at  market 
transformation  and  apply  to  both  climate 
change  mitigation  (renewable  energy  tech-
nologies, energy efficiency appliances and the 
like) and adaptation (weather indices, climate-
resilient  agricultural  commodities,  climate-
resilient buildings and the like). They would 
build on recent experience but go beyond tra-
ditional service delivery and infrastructure to 
bring together the potentially diverging inter-
ests of a wide range of stakeholders and blend 
various sources of finance. The public policies 
and  measures  underlying  such  partnerships 
will need to provide incentives and support to 
improve the risk and reward profile of climate 
investments, consistent with national develop-
ment goals.

The  third  set  of  tools  involves  establish-
ing climate deal-flow facilities to help national 
and subnational project proponents assemble 
bankable projects and tap international pub-
lic climate finance. Carbon finance, as in the 
Clean Development Mechanism, has shown 
that limited capacity to prepare bankable pro-
jects can be a major barrier to catalysing private 
climate finance in many locations. Similarly, 
the complexity of application and reporting 
requirements  for  international  public  funds 
makes it difficult to determine eligibility and 
appropriateness, posing obstacles to use, moni-
toring and evaluation. So, the climate deal-flow 
facilities should enhance the capacity of coun-
tries to gain access to international sources of 
both private and public finance.

The  fourth  set  of  tools  in  the  proposed 
framework  for  equitable  and  efficient  cli-
mate  finance  addresses  the  need  for  coordi-
nated implementation and reporting. Climate 
finance on a scale sufficient to rein in tempera-
ture changes to 2°C demands unprecedented 
efforts  to  implement,  monitor,  verify  and 
report— over  several  decades,  with  multiple 
actors, diverse sets of actions and a variety of 

CHapteR 5  riSing tO the pOliCy ChAllengeS

97

It is time to launch a 
high-profile global 

initiative for universal 

access to energy in 
developing countries

financing sources. National climate funds can 
facilitate the operational blending and moni-
toring of domestic and international, private 
and  public,  and  grant  and  loan  resources — 
essential to ensuring domestic accountability 
and positive distributional effects.

Enabling universal access to energy
Central to moving to universal access in energy 
is addressing the barriers to investing in clean 
energy. While potentially earning an attrac-
tive return, most technologies for renewable 
energy and energy efficiency require substan-
tial upfront investment. Even if offset by lower 
operational costs, these upfront capital costs 
can be prohibitive. The financial constraints 
that businesses and consumers face are often 
more  severe  than  those  implied  by  national 
discount rates or long-term interest rates. And 
they are usually compounded by behavioural, 
technical, regulatory or administrative barri-
ers. Take wind power: no country will attract 
private investment if independent power pro-
ducers face barriers in access to grids, uncer-
tain licensing processes, limited local expertise 
or lack of long-term price guarantees.

Achieving universal energy access requires 
a  response  strategy  on  multiple  levels  from 
various partners — here again, there is no one-
size-fits-all solution. National and local gov-
ernments must set the stage for other players 
ranging from civil society and the private sec-
tor at the national and subnational levels to 
global finance and energy companies.

It is time to launch a high-profile global 
initiative  for  universal  access  to  energy  in 
developing countries. It could have two parts: 
first,  a  global  advocacy  and  awareness-rais-
ing  campaign;  second,  investments  on  the 
ground through dedicated support to sectoral 
approaches in clean energy. Together, they can 
kick-start a shift from incremental to trans-
formative change.

A global campaign to promote a participa-
tory and informed initiative, key in both donor 
and developing countries, can harness existing 
capacities  for  advocacy,  analysis,  planning, 
knowledge management and communications. 

The time is right for such a campaign. The UN 
General Assembly has designated 2012 as the 
International Year of Sustainable Energy For 
All  while  the  Rio+20  conference  will  pro-
vide a unique opportunity to define a global 
approach for universal access to energy, bring-
ing together the energy, green economy and 
climate agendas. This global approach can then 
be developed through regional and national 
energy dialogues.

Complementing  the  campaign,  support 
to  developing  countries  for  climate-resilient 
development  strategies  could  identify  barri-
ers,  benefits  and  impacts  for  disadvantaged 
groups — and  create  favourable  investment 
conditions.  Major  market  failures  heighten 
the  importance  of  public  policies  to  attract 
private  finance.  Such  policies  can  improve 
clean energy investment risk-reward profiles by 
reducing risks (stable regulatory context, local 
supply of expertise, streamlined administra-
tive arrangements, guarantee instruments and 
the like) and by increasing rewards (premium 
prices, tax credits and the like). For example, 
a commercially unattractive renewable energy 
investment could become profitable by guaran-
teeing independent power producers access to 
the grid and a price premium.

Support from the Universal Energy Access 
Initiative  could  include  assistance  for  deter-
mining  priority  energy  access  technologies, 
ideally  in  the  context  of  formulating  a  low-
emission, climate-resilient strategy; identify-
ing key barriers to technology diffusion; select-
ing an appropriate mix of policy instruments 
to  remove  barriers;  and  accessing  funding 
options to deploy the selected mix of policies.

* 

 

 

* 

 

 

*

This Report calls for a new vision that jointly 
considers equity and environmental sustain-
ability. It elaborates ways to attain synergies 
between the two objectives that are crucial for 
shaping  our  understanding  of  how  to  move 
forward  and  guide  policy.  Taking  up  this 
challenge will expand choices for people today 
and  in  the  future — the  hallmark  of  human 
development.

98

Human Development RepoRt 2011

notes

Chapter 1

UN 2002, 2010.
Sen 2003: 330.

1  
2  
3   Weikard (1999) as cited in Scholtes (2011).
4  
5  

Scholtes 2011.
1990 HDR: 38 (UNDP–HDRO 1990; see inside back 
cover for a list of HDRs).
1994 HDR: 19 (UNDP–HDRO 1994; see inside back 
cover for a list of HDRs).
2010 HDR: 2; emphasis added (UNDP–HDRO 2010; 
see inside back cover for a list of HDRs).

6  

7  

8   WCED 1987: 57–59; emphasis added.
9  
Solow 1973.
10   USEIA 2008.
11   Commission on Sustainable Development 1997, 

paragraph 12.

FAO 1996.

12   Baumol, Litan and Schramm 2007.
13  
14   UNDESA 2011a.
15   Brown and others 2001.
16   On strong sustainability, see Barbier, Markandya and 

Pearce (1990) and Ross (2009).

17   Daly 2005.
18   UNEP 2011; OECD 2010a.
19   UNDESA 2011a.
20  

Perrings and Pearce 1994; Barbier, Burgess and 
Folke 1994.

21   See Nordhaus (2004), who estimates a slowdown 

of 0.86 percent a year.

22   Babbage 2010.
23   See Weitzman (2009a), Stern and Taylor (2007), IPCC 

(1997), and Dietz and Neumayer (2007).

24   Weitzman 2009b.
25  

This stands in contrast to the Stern Review’s proposal 
of a long-term discount rate of 1–2 percent (Stern 
2007), itself much lower than commonly used rates 
of 4–5 percent.

26   Solow 1993: 168.
27  

Economists have defined sustainability in terms of 
living standards, consumption or utility. Consumption-
based definitions are favoured by advocates of weak 
sustainability, such as Dasgupta and Heal (1974), 
Hartwick (1977) and Solow (1974). Utility- based 
definitions, such as that offered by Neumayer 
(2010a), consider a path to be sustainable if people 
become progressively more efficient at attaining 
greater utility.

28   Anand and Sen 1994, 2000; Sen 2010.
29  

The concept originated in the work of Adams (1965), 
Homans (1961) and Blau (1964).

30   Rawls 1971.
31  

The priority of poverty eradication in the search 
for sustainable development has been reaffirmed 
in several UN declarations, including the 1992 Rio 
Declaration on Environment and Development (UN 
1992), the resolution on the Programme for the Further 

Implementation of Agenda 21 (UN 1997) and the 2002 
Johannesburg Declaration (UN 2002).

32   Anand and Sen (2000: 2,038), emphasis in original.
33   Of course, some policies can be neutral in impacts, 

but these are omitted for simplicity.

34   See Brown (2003).
35   A caveat arises for solutions not in quadrant 1 
because major improvements in one dimension 
cause small deteriorations in the other. Would any 
solution that improves both dimensions slightly 
be preferred? It can be argued that a policy that 
improves both dimensions should be preferred only 
if it benefits groups that are objectively worse off. In 
other words, a policy that enhances sustainability 
but worsens equity should be preferred only if the 
most disadvantaged future generations that will 
benefit from the change would have been worse 
off than the poorest today.

Chapter 2

1  

2  
3  

4  

5  

6  
7  
8  

9  

2010 HDR: chapter 2 (UNDP–HDRO 2010; see inside 
back cover for a list of HDRs).
On this issue, see UNECE (2011) for a recent review.
The ratio of per capita greenhouse gas emissions 
in very high to those in low, medium and high HDI 
countries was 3.7 in 1990 and 3.3 in 2005. Underlying 
the small drop in the ratio, total greenhouse gas 
emissions have grown much faster in developing 
countries, partly because of their faster population 
growth.
The differences are 4.4 times for carbon dioxide 
emissions, 1.3 times for methane and 2.1 times for 
nitrous oxide.
The strong correlations between both the levels 
and changes in environmental impacts and the 
HDI also suggest that the link between these two 
phenomena has not changed much over time. This 
contrasts, for example, with life expectancy and 
income, where levels but not changes are cor-
related, indicating changes over time in the under-
lying processes. See 2010 HDR (UNDP–HDRO 
2010; see inside back cover for a list of HDRs) 
and Georgiadis, Pineda and Rodríguez (2010).
Grossman and Krueger 1995.
Hughes, Kuhn and others 2011.
Grossman and Kruger (1995) suggested a peak, in 
most cases, before a country reached a per capita 
income of $8,000 (in 1985 dollars). Other studies 
have identified different thresholds.
See statistical table 6. Gross national income (GNI) 
per capita data are from the World Bank (http://
data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.PP.CD).

10   See statistical table 6.
11   An exogenous variable is independent of the state of 
other variables in a causal model — that is, its value 

is determined by factors outside the causal system 
examined (Wooldridge 2003).

13  

12   Doubling net forest depletion as a percentage of 
GNI increases overall inequality 2 percent (or 0.42 
percentage point), while doubling particulate emission 
damage as a percentage of GNI increases overall 
inequality by a massive 26 percent (or 5.6 percent-
age points).
The number of years since women received the for-
mal right to vote and the contraceptive prevalence 
rate are instruments for the Gender Inequality Index 
(GII). In particular, a 10 percent increase in gender 
inequality (measured by the GII) leads to a 1.13 point 
(or 150 percent) increase in net forest depletion as 
a percentage of GNI. For details on the method and 
results, see Fuchs and Kehayova (2011).
The IHDI is a measure of the average level of human 
development in a society once inequality is taken into 
account. It captures the HDI of the average person in 
society, which is less than the aggregate HDI when 
there is inequality in the distribution of health, educa-
tion and income. Under perfect equality, the HDI and 
IHDI are equal; the greater the difference between 
the two, the greater the inequality. See Alkire and 
Foster (2010).

14  

15   As we reviewed in last year’s report, global inequal-
ity across people is an important measure, but most 
studies are limited to income. Almost all agree that 
inequality is high, though there is no consensus on 
recent trends (Anand and Segal 2008). Sala-i-Martin 
(2006), providing estimates for 1970–2000 by inte-
grating the income distributions of 138 countries, 
found that mean per capita incomes had risen, but 
inequality had not. Other studies — such as Milanovic 
(2009) — concluded the opposite. Still others — such as 
Bourguignon and Morrisson (2002) — found no change.
Pradhan, Sahn and Younger 2003.

16  
17   O’Donnell and others 2008.
18  

This is consistent with earlier studies (for example, 
Neumayer 2003 and Becker, Philipson and Soares 
2003). Becker, Philipson and Soares monetize life 
expectancy and create a measure of “full” income — 
which rose 140 percent in developed countries from 
1965 to 1995 and 192 percent in developing countries.
2010 HDR: 32 (UNDP–HDRO 2010; see inside 
back cover for a list of HDRs). Other studies 
have highlighted similar points; see, for example, 
 McGillivray (2011).

19  

20   According to the 2010 HDR (UNDP–HDRO 2010; 
see inside back cover for a list of HDRs), primary 
completion rates have risen from 84 percent 
in 1991 to 94 percent today. Expected years of 
schooling have also risen — from 9 years in 1980 
to 11 years today.

21   Hertz and others 2007.
22  

For example, in a study over 1960–1995, Checchi 
(2001) found that inequality in years of schooling 

nOteS

99

remained almost constant at low levels in Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development 
countries, despite increases in average education 
attainment.

44  

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 
2007) projects increases of 0.18–0.59 metre under 
six scenarios, while other studies suggest that the 
increase could be as much as 2 metres. Ice thin-
ning is expected to ultimately break up ice shelves, 
which is likely to accelerate sea level rise (Gregory 
and Huybrechts 2006; Jevrejeva and others 2006; 
Thomas and others 2004).

23   Atkinson, Piketty and Saez 2011.
24   HDRO calculations based on data from Milanovic 
(2011). We include a group of 29 developed countries 
for which we have income inequality observations 
for 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005.

25   OECD 2011a.
26   OECD 2010a.
27   HDRO calculations based on data from Milanovic 

(2011) and Lopez-Calva and Lustig (2010: 10).
Lopez-Calva and Lustig 2010.

28  
29   OECD 2010a.
30   Hughes, Irfan and others 2011.
31   Not only does the logarithmic term on income con-
tribute mechanically to such slowing, so does the 
inevitable slowing of rising years of formal education, 
of advances in life expectancy in better off countries, 
and of convergence of low- and middle-income coun-
tries as their health and education gaps with rich 
countries narrow.
Environmental risks are modeled with the Environ-
mental Risks Scenario, developed by Hughes, Irfan 
and others (2011). Inequality and insecurity factors are 
modeled with the Security First Scenario, developed 
by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP 
2007). This involves socioeconomic and environmental 
stresses, economic and personal insecurity, significant 
domestic and global inequality, high levels of protec-
tionism, barriers to migration, and more militarism 
and conflict.

32  

33   Global warming potential measures the relative 
radioactive effect of a given substance. For the lat-
est estimates, see IPCC (2007: chapter 2).

34   Of the scientists publishing most actively in the field, 
98 percent support the idea that climate change is 
caused by human activity (Anderegg and others 2010). 
While some studies have pointed to mistakes in the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports 
(Khilyuk and Chilingar 2006; Church and others 2008), 
none has seriously questioned its key conclusions.

35   Raupach and others 2007.
36   Aichele and Felbermayr 2010; Grether and Mathys 

2009.

37   Carbon dioxide can remain in the atmosphere for 
thousands of years, unlike methane, which lasts 
about 12 years, and nitrous oxide, which lasts 
about 114 years. See Archer and Broikin (2008) and 
IPCC (2007).

38   See the Climate Analysis Indicators Tool of the World 

Resources Institute (http://cait.wri.org).

39   Areas above the 45th parallel north and below the 
45th parallel south experienced a 2.66°C increase in 
average temperature for November–April during the 
2000s over that during 1951–1980; areas between 
the coordinates saw a 0.66°C increase.

40   Cooper 2008.
41   Very high HDI countries had a more than 2 percent 

42  

decline in precipitation.
For example, estimates show that rainfall is very likely 
(90 percent probability) to increase in high latitude 
areas and likely (66 percent probability) to fall in most 
subtropical regions and to increase in variability in 
equatorial areas (IPCC 2007; Dore 2005).

43   Christensen and others 2007.

100

Human Development RepoRt 2011

45   Anthoff 2010.
46   Wheeler 2011.
47   Vankoningsveld and others 2008.
48   Dasgupta and others 2009.
49  

These figures refer to climatological, hydrological 
and meteorological natural disasters, as estimated 
from the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology 
of Disasters Emergency Events Database: Interna-
tional Disaster Database. An event is classified as 
a disaster if it meets at least one of the following 
criteria: 10 or more people died, 100 or more people 
were affected, a state of emergency was declared or 
international assistance was requested. But data may 
not be fully consistent across countries. Population 
growth increases the number of people affected and 
thus the number of the events classified as disasters. 
See also Neumayer and Barthel (2011) on the effects 
of awareness and reporting bias.
IPCC 2007. Changes in atmospheric moisture affect 
moisture absorption capacity, leading to a greater 
probability of intense precipitation and associated 
natural disasters.

50  

51   Knutson and others 2010.
52  

The numbers could also reflect people’s greater 
exposure to natural hazards (for example, settle-
ment in previously uninhabited areas) and increased 
vulnerability.

53   Wood, Sebastian and Scherr 2000.
54  

Two UN bodies — the Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation and the Secretariat of the United Nations 
Convention to Combat Desertification — produce 
estimates, but their approach has been criticized in 
academic circles; see Veron, Paruelo and Oesterheld 
(2006).

55   Hanasaki and others (2008); UNEP (2009).
56   World Water Assessment Programme 2009.
57   Ball 2001.
58  

These shares are the total land area–weighted aver-
age for each HDI group.
Estimates differ by method and data coverage: assess-
ments based on satellite images in 2002 indicate 
23 percent lower deforestation rates than those 
reported in FAO (2001). Source data from official or 
informal institutions are often inaccurate and incom-
plete, and detailed information is lacking on forest 
composition, maturity, disturbance, canopy cover 
and quality. See Grainger (2010). Some countries, 
such as Brazil, have made major achievements in 
reducing deforestation (www.undp.org/latinamerica/
biodiversity-superpower/).

59  

60   See Meyfroidt, Rudel and Lambin (2010). Bhutan and 
El Salvador have reportedly used more land abroad 
than they have reforested within their boundaries.

61   Gan and McCarl 2007.
62   Mayer and others 2005, 2006.
63   Würtenberger, Koellner and Binder 2005.
64  

In 2007 annual average per capita consumption 
was 28.7 kilograms in developed countries and 9.5 
kilograms in least developed countries (FAO 2010a).

65   Data on current catch are from FAO Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Information and Statistics Service 2009; 
sustainable yield is from FAO (2005).
FAO 2010a.
FAO 2010a.
For instance, Peru’s introduction of individual fishing 
rights over its anchovy fishery, the anchoveta, is cited 
as key to improving the sustainability of its fishing 
stock (Fréon and others 2008; Schreiber forthcoming).

66  
67  
68  

69   Grossman and Krueger 1995.
70   McGranahan and others 2001.
71   OECD 2010b.
72   Bettencourt and others 2007.
73   Dodman 2009.
74  
75   See www.unesco.org/water/wwap/facts_figures/

Lehrer 2010.

basic_needs.shtml.
Tachamo and others 2009; Pepper 2007.

76  
77   Urban pollution is defined as suspended particulates 
less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10), expressed 
in micrograms per cubic metre (World Bank 2011a).
78   Calculations are based on urban population-weighted 

averages.

79   See UNDESA (2006).
80  

The thresholds for greenhouse gases are total accu-
mulated emissions over the next 50 years likely to 
keep temperature change within 2°C (1,678 giga-
tonnes), no deforestation and global fresh water with-
drawals of 5,000 cubic kilometres a year, which we 
expressed in per capita terms for our analysis. There 
is considerable uncertainty and estimated variance 
around these thresholds in the scientific community. 
For more information on global environmental thresh-
olds, see, for example Rockström and others (2009) 
and Meinshausen and others (2009). Greenhouse 
gas emissions combine 2005–2007 averages for 
carbon dioxide and 2005 data, the latest available, 
for methane, nitrous oxide and other greenhouse 
gases. Forest data from 2000 and 2010 are used to 
calculate deforestation. Total water withdrawals 
are based on averages from the 2000s, and data 
on improved water access are for 2008. Data on air 
pollution are averages over 2006–2008. Thresholds for 
the local impacts are regional medians. See statistical 
table 6 for data sources.
The earliest observation from the 1990s and latest 
from the 2000s were used to calculate changes 
over time.

81  

82   However, Costa Rica is among the few countries in 
Latin America that has experienced an increase in 
income inequality during the last decade despite 
the growth boom that preceded the global economic 
crisis of 2008. Inequality in health and education fell 
over the same period.

83   UNEP 2010.

Chapter 3

1  

Ash and others 2010; Brulle and Pellow 2006; Pas-
tor 2007; Sze and London 2008; United Church of 
Christ 1987.

2   When the plant exploded in 1957, nearby ethnic 
Russians were evacuated and resettled, but the 
Tatar people were left to suffer the effects of con-
tamination (Agyeman, Ogneva-Himmelberger and 
Campbell 2009).

3  

4  

5  

6  

The shares of the population with access to an 
improved water source and improved sanitation are 
Millennium Development Goal indicators relating to 
environmental sustainability (goal 7). A household 
is considered deprived if it relies on dung, wood or 
charcoal for cooking; if it lacks access to clean drinking 
water (or if the water is more than 30 minutes away); 
and if it lacks improved sanitation (or shares it with 
other households). See Alkire and Santos (2010).
Since last year’s HDR, these estimates were updated 
for 19 countries and presented for the first time for 
an additional 5. Countries with MPI data include 11 
in the Arab States, 9 in East Asia and the Pacific, 23 
in Europe and Central Asia, 18 in Latin America and 
the Caribbean, 5 in South Asia and 37 in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. There are 103 countries that have complete 
data on environmental deprivations — the descriptive 
analysis focuses on these countries. Data for the 
Arab States are not given because low poverty levels 
render the results potentially unreliable.
These aggregates are for the 2000s; the survey dates 
span 2000–2010. Population data correspond to 
each country’s survey year here and in the follow-
ing analysis.
The MPI reflects deprivations across three dimen-
sions, each weighted equally, and 10 indicators. For 
more details, see Technical note 4.
However, low poverty may conceal poverty that exists 
subnationally. In Ghana, for instance, poverty is 10 
times higher in Greater Accra than in Northern Ghana, 
and other countries also exhibit sharp area-based 
differences. And in Europe and Central Asia, groups 
such as Roma are likely to be much more deprived 
than national poverty measures would suggest.
UNICEF Madagascar Water Sanitation and Hygiene 
2007.
The exercise was also carried out with controls for 
HDI group and regional fixed effects, but they were 
not jointly significant and thus were dropped. The total 
sample consisted of 73 country-year observations. 
Fifty-two country-year observations were not included 
in the exercise: those whose poverty was based on 
lower or upper bounds (see Alkire and Santos 2010), 
those missing an environmental indicator and those 
whose MPI value was less than 0.032 because the 
small number of poor people in these countries (less 
than 8.5 percent) makes the results potentially unreli-
able. The 30 countries missing nonenvironmental 
indicators were retained, but the analysis controlled 
for their absence.
10   De Oliveira 2008.
11   Hall and Lobina 2008.
12   Da Costa, Cohen and Schaeffer 2007; De Oliveira 

7  

8  

9  

and Laan 2010.
13   UN Habitat 2003
14   Milton and others 2010; UNICEF 2010; Argos and 

others 2010.

15   UNDP Water Governance Programme 2010.
16   UNDP Water Governance Programme 2010.
17  

IMF 2004; statistical table 5; see also Djibouti on the 
Austro-Arab Chamber of Commerce’s Arab Countries 
Profile (www.aacc.at).

18   See IDA at work: Nepal (http://go.worldbank.org/

TXVG8IJ8L0).
Peru Ministry of Housing, Construction and Santia-
tion 2006.
IADB 2008.

19  

20  

21   Meier and others 2010.
22   World Water Assessment Programme 2006.
23  

The Spearman correlation is .6 for temperature 
anomalies (1951–1980, compared with 2000–2008). 
When we consider only those statistically significant 
changes, which could be interpreted as suggestive 
of climate change, the result is nearly unchanged.
24   A weak negative correlation disappears altogether 
when we exclude Indonesia from the sample and 
when we consider only statistically significant 
changes over time for the full sample.
For a recent review, see Skoufias, Rabassa and 
Olivieri (2011).
Environmental risk factors include indoor smoke from 
solid fuel use; outdoor air pollution; inadequate water, 
sanitation and hygiene; solar ultraviolet radiation; 
climate change; lead; mercury; occupational car-
cinogens; occupational airborne particulates; and 
second-hand smoke (Prüss-Üstün and others 2008).

26  

25  

27   World Bank 2008a.
28  
29  

Prüss-Üstün and others 2008.
Prüss-Üstün and others 2008. Estimates are based 
on 2004 WHO country health statistics. The use of 
solid fuels is a reliable indicator of exposure to indoor 
air pollution, but over time, as improved stoves and 
decent ventilation come into widespread use, the 
two will not be as closely correlated.

30   Between 1990 and 2005 the percentage of urban 
households with access to gas increased from 19 
percent to 82 percent (Vennemo and others 2009).
31   Data based on 2004 WHO burden of disease data.
32   Smith, Mehta and Maeusezahl-Feuz 2004.
33   Shandra, Shandra and London 2008.
34   Correlation = .82, p < .05.
35  

Fieldwork  by  the  Oxford  Poverty  and  Human 
Development Initiative (www.ophi.org.uk/policy/
multidimensional-poverty-index/mpi-case-studies/).
Fieldwork by Indrajit Roy (www.ophi.org.uk/policy/
multidimensional- poverty-index/mpi-case-studies/).

36  

37   Kjellstrom and others 2006.
38   Riojas-Rodríguez and others 2006.
39   Blacksmith Institute 2007.
40   On Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, 
see Wong and others (2008, 2010); on Shanghai, 
see Kan and others (2008), as cited in HEI (2010).
Friends of the Earth 2004.

41  
42   Mitchell and Dorling 2003; Brainard and others 2002.
43   Kruize and Bouwman 2004.
44   Kockler 2005.
45   Viel and others 2010; Laurian 2008.
46   UN Water 2010a. Data are from Prüss-Üstün and 

others (2008).
Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006.

47  
48   UN Water 2010a. Data are from Prüss-Üstün and 

others (2008).
Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006.
Prüss-Üstün and others 2008.

49  
50  
51   World Bank 2008b.
52   UN Water 2010a.
53  

For example, sexual violence can result when women 
have to relieve themselves in the open after nightfall 
(UN Water 2006).

54   Costello and others 2009.
55  
Lindsay and Martens 1998.
56   Hales and others 2002.
57   Checkley and others 2000, 2004; Speelmon and others 

2000; Lama and others 2004.

58   Nelson and others 2009.
59   Green, King and Morrison 2009; Galloway McLean 2010. 
King, Smith and Gracey (2009) review the literature.
2010 HDR: statistical table 13 (UNDP–HDRO 2010; 
see inside back cover for a list of HDRs).
Independent Evaluation Group 2008.

60  

Flora and Findis 2007.

61  
62   Daka and Ballet 2011.
63   Khandker and others 2009a.
64   Khandker and others 2009b.
65  
66   Nankhuni and Findeis 2004.
67   Senbet 2010.
68   Ndiritu and Nyangena 2010.
69   Walker 2010.
70  

FAO (2010b) data. “Economically active popula-
tion” refers to the number of people constituting 
the labour supply and refers to all employed and 
unemployed people (including those seeking work 
for the first time).

71   World Resources Institute 2005. Aside from small-
scale agriculture, the collection of wild foods, 
materials and medicines are the main sources of 
environmental income.
72  
Pattanayak and Sills 2001.
73   Vincent 2011; UNFPA 2009.
74  
75   Sobrevila 2008.
76   Sobrevila 2008.
77   World Bank 2008c.
78   Galloway McLean 2010.
79   Hertel and Rosch 2010. For a review, see Nellemann 

IWGIA 2008.

and others (2009).

80   Nellemann and others 2009.
81   Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2005.
82  
83   Yonghuan and others 2007.
84   2007/2008 HDR (UNDP–HDRO 2008; see inside 

Fraser and others 2010.

back cover for a list of HDRs).

85   World Bank 2009.
86  
Lobell, Schlenker and Costa-Roberts 2011.
87  
Lobell and others 2008.
88   Nelson and others 2010.
89  
90  

Thornton and others 2009.
The Food and Agriculture Organization estimates that 
if gender access to productive resources were equal, 
yields would increase 20–30 percent and agricultural 
output would rise 2.5–4 percent on average (FAO 
2010b: 5).

FAO 2010b.

Ivanic and Martin 2008.

91   Nellemann and others 2009.
92  
93   Ulimwengu and Ramadan 2009.
94   Hertel, Burke and Lobell 2010.
95  
96   Cranfield, Preckel and Hertel 2007.
97  
98   See www.fao.org/forestry/28811/en/.
99  
100   Agarwal 2010b: 37; FAO 2010b: 16.
101   Mayers 2007.
102   Vedeld and others 2004: meta-study examining 54 

Jacoby, Rabassa and Skoufias forthcoming.

FAO 2011.

case studies (33 in Africa).

103   Mitra and Mishra 2011.
104   Yemiru and others 2010.
105   Based on surveys covering 2002–2008 (Volker and Wai-
ble 2010). Similar findings are reached by Pattanayak 
and Sills (2001) for Brazil and McSweeney (2004) and 
Takasaki, Barham and Coomes (2004) for Honduras.

nOteS

101

106   Agarwal 2010b.
107   Arnold, Kohlin and Persson 2006.
108   FAO 2010a.
109   Allison and others 2009.
110   Allison and others 2005. See also Allison and others 

(2009).

111   Secretariat of the Pacific Community 2011.
112   AUSAid and UNDP Pacific Centre 2008.
113   Cinner, Daw and McClanahan (2009), a small scale 
study of 434 households, from 9 coastal villages, 
from which there were 141 fishers.

114   Secretariat of the Pacific Community 2011.
115   Cheung and others 2009.
116  

Iftikhar 2003. Afifi and Warner 2008; Boano, Zetter 
and Morris 2008.

117   See, for instance, Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti 
(2004), Hendrix and Glaser (2005), Boano, Zetter and 
Morris (2008) and Burke and others (2010).

118   Calculated on the basis of Demographic and Health 
Survey and Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey data, 
most recent year available since 2000.

119   These surveys are available for only a small number 
of countries because they are expensive and dif-
ficult to conduct. The questionnaires differ, so the 
resulting data are illustrative rather than strictly 
comparable.

120   Agarwal 2010b: 36, table 2.1.
121   Koolwal and Van de Walle 2010.
122   Kramarae and Spender 2000.
123  
Ilahi and Grimard 2000.
124   Wodon and Ying 2010.
125   Blackden and Wodon 2006.
126   To estimate the economic benefits of improvements 
in water supply, Hutton, Haller and Bartram (2006) 
assume that expanding access to water supply would 
save 30 minutes for each household per day.

127   See www.sidym2006.com/eng/eng_doc_interes.asp.
128   Boano and others 2008.
129   UNHCR 2002: 12.
130   Marchiori and others 2011.
131   2009 HDR: chapter 4 (UNDP–HDRO 2009; see 

inside back cover for a list of HDRs).

132   UNEP 2009.
133   Miguel and others 2004; Hendrix and Glaser 2005; 
Raleigh and Urdal 2008; Fiola 2009; Burke and oth-
ers 2010.

134   Evans 2010.
135   Homer-Dixon 1994.
136   Collier 2006.
137   Evans 2008; Collier 2007.
138   Boano and others 2008: 22.
139   Bartlett 2008.
140   Wheeler 2011
141   Boano and others 2008.
142   UN HABITAT Global Urban Indicators database (www.
unhabitat.org/stats/). Slum households are defined 
as lacking in any of the following elements: access 
to improved water, access to improved sanitation, 
secure tenure, durable housing or sufficient living 
area.

143   Asia Summit on Climate Change and Indigenous 
Peoples 2009; see also the Asia Summit on Climate 
Change and Indigenous People (www.tebtebba.org/
index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=
47&Itemid=58).

144   Rodriguez-Oreggia and others 2010.
145   Brouwer, Akter and Brander 2007.

146   Nishikiori and others 2006. Oxfam International’s 
2005 report on the 2004 Asian tsunami’s impact on 
women finds a similar pattern for floods.

147   Rose 1999.
148   Neumayer and Plumper 2007.
149   Neumayer and Plumper 2007.
150   Blankespoor and others 2010.
151   The probability of dying as a result of Hurricane 
Katrina was higher for people who were black 
and poor (Price 2008; 2007/2008 HDR: 81, box 
2.3 [UNDP–HDRO 2008; see inside back cover 
for a list of HDRs]).

152   Baez, de la Fuente and Santos 2010.
153   Seballos and others 2011.
154   Alderman, Hoddinott and Kinsey (2006). Jensen (2000) 

found similar results in Côte d’Ivoire.

155   Baez and Santos (2007).
156   Alkire and Roche forthcoming.
157   Christiaensen, Do and Trung 2010.
158   UN 2010.
159   See the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (www.

mobilemamaalliance.org/issue.html).

160   Engelman 2011.
161   Engelman 2009: 5.
162   UNDESA 2011b.
163   We note, however, that even after the large decline 
in fertility during the 1970s and 1980s, population-
related problems in Bangladesh remain serious, and a 
sense of complacency has led to less rigorous policy 
implementation and programme performance in 
recent years (Khan and Khan 2010).

164   Potts and Marsh 2010: p. 5.
165   United States National Academy of Sciences 1992: 26.
166   O’Neill and others 2010.
167   Wire 2009.
168   Of 6.2 births per woman for Chad, 4.4 for the 
Democratic Republic of Congo and 7.1 for Niger; 
see statistical table 4.

169   Mills, Bos and Suzuki 2010.
170   Filmer and Pritchett (2002) find a partial correlation 
between indicators of fuelwood scarcity and fertility in 
Pakistan, and Biddlecom, Axinn and Barber (2005) link 
poorer environmental quality and a greater reliance 
on public natural resources with higher fertility in 
Western Chitwan Valley, Nepal. National data for 
Nepal, however, indicate that environmental scarcity 
is associated with less demand for children (Loughran 
and Pritchett 1997).

171   Based on the most recent Demographic and Health 
Survey data (www.measuredhs.com/accesssurveys/).

172   Engelman 2009.
173   Nugent and Shandra 2009. However, why this result 

came about was not clear.
174   Norgaard and York 2005.
175   See www.ipu.org/wmn-e/world.htm (accessed 
14 July 2011). See statistical table 4 for country 
and regional data.

176   UNDESA 2010b.
177   Shandra, Shandra and London 2008.
178   Gallup World Poll data (www.gallup.com/se/126848/
worldview.aspx) for the most recent year available 
since 2007.

179   Differences between men and women are significant 
for perceived severity of climate change and govern-
ment environmental efforts (at the 95 percent level) 
and for air quality and emissions policy (99 percent 
level) but not for satisfaction with water quality.

102

Human Development RepoRt 2011

180   Arora-Jonsson 2011.
181   Agarwal 2009.
182   Walton 2010: 36.
183   Gallagher and Thacker 2008; Bernauer and Koubi 2009.
184   Boyce and others 1999.
185   Torras and Boyce 1998.
186   Torras 2006. Power is assessed using the Gini index, 
political rights and civil liberties, literacy rate, higher 
education, population density, Internet user density 
and female representation in government.

187   The principal components method was used to create 
an index of power equality using data on income 
inequality, adult literacy, Internet access, political 
rights and civil liberties, and political stability. The 
results are similar to those of Boyce and Torras (2002).
188   All these studies tend to test a variety of outcomes 
and to use a variety of datasets and specifications.
189   Gallagher and Thacker 2008; see also Torras and 

Boyce 1998.

190   Li and Reuveny 2006.
191   Neumayer 2002. Battig and Bernauer (2009) found 
similar results for 1990–2004 in 185 countries: democ-
racy had a positive effect on political commitment 
to climate change mitigation, but the effects on 
policy outcomes — emissions levels and trends — 
were ambiguous.

192   Bernauer and Koubi 2009.
193   The term “countervailing power” was coined by 

Galbraith (1952).

194   Crotty and Rodgers forthcoming.
195   Fredrikkson and others 2005.
196   Specifically, the results suggest that a 10 percent 
increase in the strength of NGOs (measured by number 
of environmental NGOs per capita) lowers sulphur 
dioxide levels 5.1–9.3 percent, smoke 5.7 percent 
and heavy particulates 0.8–1.5 percent. Additional 
estimates suggest an even greater impact after con-
trolling for potential endogeneity and measurement 
error (Binder and Neumayer 2005).

197   Pellow 2004.

Chapter 4

1  
2  
3  

Barrett 2009.
Ervin and others 2010.
UNDESA 2009; OECD 2010c; IEA 2010; UN Rio 
Preparatory Committee Meeting 2011 publications 
(www.uncsd2012.org/rio20/index.php?page=view
&type=13&nr=28&menu=24).
REN21 2010: 47.
Newell, Phillips and Mulvaney 2011.
UN 2011.
Bernard 2010: 1–2.
Dinkelman 2008.
Khandker and others 2009b.

4  
5  
6  
7  
8  
9  
10   www.ophi.org.uk/policy/multidimensional-poverty 

11  
12  

-index/mpi-case-studies/.
Zacune 2011.
This is compared with the New Policies Scenario, 
which takes into account countries’ broad policy 
commitments and plans, even where not yet imple-
mented. Under this scenario, through 2035, carbon 
dioxide emissions rise over 21 percent relative to 
2008. Fossil fuels — mainly coal and natural gas — 
remain dominant in this scenario, but their share of 
total generation drops from 68 percent to 55 percent, 

as nuclear and renewable sources expand and the 
amount of carbon dioxide emitted per unit of electric-
ity generated falls by a third (see IEA and others 2010).
13   Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st 

Century 2011.

14   Under the New Policies Scenario world primary energy 
demand increases some 36 percent between 2008 
and 2035, or 1.2 percent a year. More than 80 percent 
of electricity demand is from non– Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
countries (IEA and others 2010: 4 and 8).

15   OECD 2010c.
16   On Kenya, Okello (2005); on Guatemala, Bruce and 

others (2004).
17   AGECC 2010.
18   Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st 

Century 2010.
Eberhard and others 2008.

19  
20   Around 80 percent of renewable power generated in 
2010 came from hydropower, which also accounted 
for around a third of new renewable capacity added 
between 2010 and 2011. Renewable Energy Policy 
Network for the 21st Century 2010.

21   Geothermal power grew at an annual rate of 4 per-
cent, ethanol production 23 percent, wind power 
27 percent and solar photovoltaic 60 percent (Renew-
able Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century 2011: 
figure 2).
Transparency International 2011.
The Pew Charitable Trusts 2010.

22  
23  
24   Glemarec 2011.
25   Kammen, Kapadia and Fripp 2004.
26   Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st 

Century 2010: 9.
27  
IEA, UNDP and UNIDO 2010.
28   Burniaux and Chateau 2011.
29   Badiani and Jessoe 2011.
30   World Bank 2009.
31   On Indonesia, Kojima and Bacon (2006); on Iran, 

Global Subsidies Initiative (2011).

34  

32   Norton Rose Group 2011.
33   United States Environmental Protection Agency 2011. 
Emissions fell about 6 percent in 2008–2009, due 
mainly to the economic recession, which led to fuel 
switching as the price of coal rose and the price of 
natural gas fell.
India Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change 
2008; Stern and Taylor 2010.
ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/package/index_en.htm.
IEA, UNDP and UNIDO 2010.

35  
36  
37   See www.righttowater.info/progress-so-far/. Such 
legislation exists also in Kazakhstan and in four 
Western European countries.
Leonhardt 2011.

38  
39   Klopfenstein and others 2011.
40   Sarkar and others 2010.
41   See  www.undp.org/water/community-water-

initiative.shtml.
Fishman 2011.

42  
43   World Bank 2007.
44   Duflo and Pande 2007.
45   Dudley and Stolton 2003.
46   Mulongoy and Gidda 2008.
47   www.unicef.org/wash/.
48  
49   Nepal Water for Health 2004.
50   Baker and others 2011.

Inter-American Development Bank 2010.

51   Roseinweig 2008.
52   World Bank 2011a.
53   See Perez and others (2011); www.stanford.edu/
group/jennadavis/index.html; Lwin Oo 2010; Wilkin-
son, Moilwa and Taylor 2004.

54   UNDESA 2010b.
55  
Engelman 2011.
56  
Potts and Marsh 2010.
57   www.unfpa.org/stronger_voices.
58   www.ehproject.org/phe/adra-nepalfinal.html.
59   www.ehproject.org/phe/phe.html.
60   Grandia 2005; Guatemala Instituto Nacional de 

Estadistica 1999, 2009.

61   Mansour, Mansour and Swesy 2010.
62   Bangladesh Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 

2004; UNDESA 2009.

63   Kenya National Coordinating Agency for Population 

and Development 2008.

64   www.pathfind.org/site/PageServer?pagename= 
Programs_Vietnam_Projects_HIV_RH_Integration.

65   Roudi 2009.
66   UNFPA 2010.
67  
68  
69  

Lopez Carr and Grandia 2011.
ITU 2011.
The GSMA Development Fund, the Cherie Blaire Foun-
dation for Women and Vital Wave Consulting 2010.
70   www.mobilemamaalliance.org/opportunity.html.
71  

For example, Costa Rica went from a deforestation 
rate of 0.8 percent a year between 1990 and 2000 to 
a reforestation rate of 0.9 percent in the subsequent 
decade, and India increased its reforestation rate from 
of 0.2 percent a year between 1990 and 2000 to 0.5 
percent a year between 2000 and 2010 (FAO 2011).

72   Nagendra 2011.
73   Ostrom 1992.
74   Agarwal 2001; Gupte 2004.
75   Agarwal 2010a.
76   Molnar and others 2004.
77   Corrigan and Granziera 2010.
78   UNDP, UNEP, World Bank and WRI 2005.
79  

http://us.macmillan.com/horizontalinequalities 
andconflict.
Leisher and others 2010.
Leisher and others 2010.

80  
81  
82   UNDP and GEF 2010.
83   Baud and others 2011; Martin 2011.
84  
85  
86   Roper, Utz and Harvey 2006.
87   Gupta and Leung 2011.
88   Government of India and UNDP Disaster Risk Manage-

Ervin and others 2010.
Ervin and others 2010.

ment Programme 2008.
89   Chung and others 2002.
90   Duval-Diop and Rose 2008.
91   See Grosh and others (2008) and Tucker (2010).
92   UKaid–DFID 2011.
93  
94   See Arnall and others (2010).
95  
96   South Africa Department of Environmental Affairs 

Lieuw-Kie-Song 2009.

Fuchs 2011.

and UNEP 2011.

97   UNDP 2011c.

Chapter 5

2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7  
8  

IPCC 2007.
Chang and Grabel 2004; Rodrik 2006.
See Aghion (2009); Rodrik (2005); Lin 2010.
IPCC 2011.
UNDP 2011a.
Grasso 2004.
Even if the importance of distributional aspects is 
increasingly recognized; see, for example, OECD 
(2010a).
9  
Atkinson and Stiglitz 1980.
10   Oxfam International 2007.
11   Cadman and others 2010.
12   Weitzman 2009a, 2009b; Torras 2011.
13  
http://go.worldbank.org/5JP4U774N0.
14   See www.opensecrets.org/influence/index.php.
15   World Bank 2010c.
16  
17   Rodrik, Subramanian and Trebbi 2004; Iyigun and 

Transparency International 2011.

25  

Rodrik 2004.
18   Speck 2010.
19   Willenbockel 2011.
20   OECD 2010c.
21   Ghana Ministry of Energy and World Bank 2004.
22   World Bank 2008b.
23   Wang and others 2011.
24   Gearty 2010. No such right has been recognized in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights or the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights.
Earthjustice 2004, 2008. Debate over the recognition 
of environmental human rights is ongoing within 
the human rights community. Some argue that rec-
ognizing a third generation of rights (one in which 
the protection of humans is not the central focus) 
would devalue the concept of human rights and divert 
attention from the need to implement existing civil, 
political, economic and social rights fully. Others 
assert the inherent value of recognizing a right to 
have the environment protected. See Boyle (2010).
Fukuda-Parr 2007; Nussbaum 1998, 2006; Sen 2009; 
Vizard, Fukuda-Parr and Elson 2011.

26  

27   Sen 2009
28   Boyce 2011.
29   However, the legislation preserves Parliament’s 
discretion to authorize any interference with envi-
ronmental rights: May (2006).

32  

30   See Pedersen (2008).
31   See the Swedish Environment Protection Agency 
(www.naturvardsverket.se/en/In-English/Start/
Enjoying-nature/The-right-of-public-access/).
Every person has the right to a clean and healthy 
environment, which includes the right to have the 
environment protected for the benefit of present and 
future generations through legislative and other meas-
ures (Constitution of Kenya 2010, Chapter 5, Part 
2). Since 1972 more than half of UN member states 
have added constitutional guarantees concerning 
the environment (Earthjustice 2007).

33   Article 44 of the 1994 Constitution of the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia says that “govern-
ment shall endeavor to ensure that all Ethiopians live 
in a clean and healthy environment” and Article 92 
that “the design and implementation of programmes 
and of development shall not damage or destroy the 
environment.”

34   Constitution of the Republic of Cameroon 1996, 

1  

Frankel and Bosetti 2011.

Article 47(2).

nOteS

103

35   Constitution of the Republic of Namibia 1990, Article 

25(2).

36   Bruch, Coker and VanArsdale 2007.
37   Costa Rica, El Salvador and Honduras do not recognize 
environmental rights for indigenous peoples, and the 
constitutions of Guatemala, Panama, Paraguay and 
Peru refer to land but not natural resources (Aguilar 
and others 2010).
Political Constitution of 1992, Republic of Paraguay, 
Article 66.

38  

39   According to the Constitution of the Co-operative 
Republic of Guyana Act 1980: “The state shall protect 
the environment for the benefits of present and future 
generations” (Article 149J.2); “Everyone has a right 
to an environment that is not harmful to his or her 
health or well-being” (Aricle 149J.1); and “Indigenous 
Peoples shall have the right to the protection and 
promulgation of their languages, cultural heritage 
and way of life” (Article 149G).

40   Vidal 2011.
41   May 2006. Other countries whose national courts have 
explicitly recognized the enforceability of such rights 
include Argentina, Columbia, Costa Rica and Portugal.
Jackson and Rosencranz 2003.

42  
43   UNDP Bhutan 2008.
44   Sen 2006.
45   Shelton 2010.
46   American Electric Power Co. v. Connecticut, 10-174. 

For discussion, see New York Times (2011).

47   Biggar and Middleton 2010.
48  

Fifty percent or more of people in 61 of 137 countries 
surveyed do not have confidence in the judicial system 
and the courts (https://worldview.gallup.com).

49   See Constitutional Protections of the Right to Informa-

tion (http://right2info.org).
Puddephatt 2009.
Foulon, Lanoie and Laplante 2002.
Jin, Wang and Wheeler 2010.

50  
51  
52  
53   Wang and others 2002; Bennear and Olmstead 
(2006) also confirmed this in the context of water 
utility suppliers in Massachusetts (United States) 
over 1990–2003.
For example, the 1998 United Nations Economic Com-
mission for Europe Convention on Access to Informa-
tion, Public Participation in Decision-Making and 
Access to Justice in Environmental Matters (Aarhus 
Convention) and the Inter-American Strategy for the 
Promotion of Public Participation in Decision Making 
for Sustainable Development.

54  

Lloyd-Smith and Bell 2003.

55   UNEP 2007, chapter 8.
56   See www.rema.gov.rw.
57   Newell and others 2011.
58   Newell and others 2011.
59  
60   Byrne and others 2007.
61   Newell 2008.
62   Crotty and Rodgers forthcoming.
63   UNDP–UNEP Poverty-Environment Initiative 2008.
64  
Transparency International calculations based on 
the Conference of Parties documentation, pollution 
data from 2006 (UN Stats Division 2010) and Climate 
Risk Index 2010 by Germanwatch (Transparency 
International 2011).

65   Ballesteros and others 2009.
66   www.un-redd.org/Home/tabid/565/Default.aspx.
67  
In Eastern Cameroon, for example, a United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) initiative gave the 
Baka people access to video cameras to document 

104

Human Development RepoRt 2011

how climate change is damaging the forests where 
they live, and the resulting documentary was used in 
advocacy work at the 2009 Global Indigenous Summit 
on Climate Change (UNDP 2010).

68   Buckingham 2010.
69   Agarwal (2009, 2010b) found that the overall forest 
condition was significantly higher where executive 
committees had more than two women than where 
they had two women or fewer and that the higher the 
percentage of women on the executive committee, 
the lower the percentage of degraded forest area.

70   Schreckenberg and Luttrell (2009).
71   Buffum, Lawrence and Temphel 2010.
72   Glemarec 2011.
73   Bloomberg New Energy Finance and UNEP 2010.
74   Kim and others 2009.
75   Glemarec 2011.
76  

The global estimated needs exclude payments for 
ecosystem services. See Glemarec (2011).
For the Global Environment Facility over 2007–2010 
China attracted 12 percent of funds approved, India 10 
percent and the Russian Federation 6 percent. But China 
and India have a per capita allocation of only $0.10 and 
$0.09, far below the median of $0.43, while the Russian 
Federation receives $0.51. See www.gefonline.org.

77  

78   See CIF 2011.
79   GEF 2009.
80   OECD  2011a;  www.oecd.org/document/35/0, 
3746,en_2649_34447_47515235_1_1_1_1,00.html. 
Percentage calculated based on UN Millennium Pro-
ject (2005) table 7.
There is not even a consensus on a working definition 
of new and additional finance. The European Com-
mission has requested that all EU member states 
declare their own working definitions, with the goal 
of having a common and unified definition by 2013. 
See Bird, Brown and Schalatek (2011).

81  

82   Sanchez 2010.
83   World Bank 2010b.
84   At the lower end is the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change estimate of about 
$200 billion in additional financial flows by 2030. The 
McKinsey & Company (2009) estimate of $800 billion 
to stabilize carbon dioxide at 450 parts per million is 
in the middle of the range. The numbers reported by 
the Stern Review ranged from $600 billion to $1,200 
billion a year, depending on the emission targets 
(see UNDESA 2009). A recent Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (2011) report estimated 
the annual infrastructure and technology investment 
costs of moving to a low greenhouse gas economy at 
$136–$510 billion a year for the next decade and at 
$149–$718 billion a year for 2021–2030. The higher 
cost scenario would stabilize atmospheric carbon 
dioxide concentration at 450 parts per million.
This is an update of the $86 billion figure, equivalent to 
0.2 percent of Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) GDP, in UNDP–HDRO 
2007/08, using the latest information available.
86  
Parry, Lowe and Hanson 2009.
87  
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 2010.
88   See IEA (2010); calculations based on UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (www.uis.unesco.org) and 
World Bank 2011b.

85  

89   Climate Funds Update 2011 (www.climatefundsupdate 
.org/graphs-statistics/pledged-deposited-disbursed).
90   Not all these estimates can be broken out separately 
into water and sanitation, but those that can range 

from $4.5 billion to $13 billion for water and from 
$2.2 billion to $17 billion for sanitation (Fonesca 
and Cardone 2005).

ILO 2010.

91   On innovative financing, see OECD (2010c).
92   See UN Water 2010a.
93  
94   Although worldwide nearly 40 percent of the working-
age population is legally covered by contributory 
old-age pension schemes, only 26 percent have 
effective coverage. And while 75 percent of peo-
ple over age 64 receive some kind of pension in 
high-income countries, less than 20 percent do in 
low-income countries, with a median of just over 
7 percent (see ILO 2010).

95   OECD 2010b.
96  

The ILO (2008) estimates the cost would not exceed 
0.5 percent of GDP in Bangladesh, Cameroon, Guinea, 
India, Pakistan, Senegal and Viet Nam, for example; 
while for Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Kenya, Nepal and 
Tanzania the costs are 0.7–0.8 percent of GDP.

97   See Cichon and Hagemejer (2006).
98  

“Adaptive social protection” is a term coined by 
researchers at the Institute of Development Stud-
ies, Sussex, to bring together thinking about social 
protection, disaster risk reduction and climate change 
adaptation (Davies, Oswald and Mitchell 2009).

99   Our  calculations  indicate  that  an  additional 
$15–$28 billion is needed to incorporate adaptation 
into the Millennium Development Goals. Calcula-
tions based on Frankhauser and Schmidt-Traub (2010) 
and the UN Millennium Project: Estimated Costs of 
meeting the Millennium Development Goals in all 
countries (www.unmillenniumproject.org/reports/
costs_benefits2.htm) (table 7).

100   Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Develop-

ment 2010.

101   Griffith-Jones, Ocampo and Stiglitz 2010.
102   This estimate is slightly higher than Schmidt’s (2008) 
estimate for a tax of 0.005 percent of $34 billion 
a year.

103   Other areas included are the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative, Consultative Group on Agri-
culture, 3ie Evaluation Initiative, Global Environment 
Facility, UN Adaptation Fund, advanced market com-
mitments, Montreal Protocol, International Finance 
Facility for Immunisation, Climate Investment Funds 
and International Monetary Fund surveillance. See 
Birdsall and Leo (2011).
IMF 2010.

104  
105   European Parliament Committee on Economic and 

Monetary Affairs 2011.

106   Baker 2011.
107   SDR surpluses occur when a country’s holdings exceed 
allocations. The largest SDR surplus countries include 
the United States, China, Japan, Libya, Saudi Arabia, 
Kuwait and Botswana.

108   Birdsall and Leo (2011). Willing governments would 
use a small portion of their SDR allocation to capitalize 
a third-party financing entity that would offer bonds on 
international capital markets backed by SDR reserves.
109   Climate Funds Update 2011 (www.climatefundsupdate 
.org/graphs-statistics/pledged-deposited-disbursed).

110   Newell and others 2011.
111   UNDP, and others, have developed a series of meth-
odologies to assist such efforts: see www.undp.org/
climatestrategies.

112   Glemarec 2011.

references

Adams, J. S. 1965. “Inequity in Social Exchange.” Advances 

in Experimental Social Psychology 62: 335–43.

Afifi, T., and K. Warner. 2008. The Impact of Environmen-
tal Degradation on Migration Flows across Countries. 
Working Paper 5. United Nations University, Institute 
for Environment and Human Security, Bonn, Germany.

Agarwal, B. 2001. “Participatory Exclusions, Community 
Forestry and Gender: An Analysis for South Asia and a 
Conceptual Framework.” World Development 29 (10): 
1623–48.

———. 2009. “Gender and Forest Conservation: The 
Impact of Women’s Participation in Community Forest 
Governance.” Ecological Economics 68 (11): 2785–99.
———. 2010a. “Does Women’s Proportional Strength 
Affect Their Participation? Governing Local Forests in 
South Asia.” World Development 38 (1): 98–112.

———. 2010b. Gender and Green Governance: The Politi-
cal Economy of Women’s Presence within and beyond 
Community Forestry. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
AGECC (The Secretary-General’s Advisory Group 
on Energy and Climate Change). 2010. Energy for 
a Sustainable Future: Summary Report and Recom-
mendations. New York: United Nations.

Aghion, P. 2009. “Some Thoughts on Industrial Policy and 
Growth.” Working Paper 2009-09. Sciences Po, Obser-
vatoire Français des Conjonctures Economiques, Paris. 
www.ofce.sciences-po.fr/pdf/dtravail/WP2009-09.pdf. 
Accessed 30 May 2011.

Aguilar, G., S. Lafoss, H. Rojas, and R. Steward. 
2010. “South/North Exchange of 2009: The Consti-
tutional Recognition of Indigenous Peoples in Latin 
America.” Pace International Law Review Online 
Companion 2 (2): 44–96.

Agyeman, J., Y. Ogneva-Himmelberger, and C. Campbell. 
2009. “Introduction.” In Environmental Justice and Sus-
tainability in the Former Soviet Union, eds. Agyeman, J. 
and Y. Ogneva-Himmelberger. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Aichele, R., and G. Felbermayr. 2010. “Kyoto and the 
Carbon Content of Trade.” Climate Change Econom-
ics Discussion Paper 10-2010. Hohenheim University, 
Hohenheim, Germany.

Alderman, H., J. Hoddinott, and B. Kinsey. 2006. “Long 
Term Consequences of Early Childhood Malnutrition.” 
Oxford Economic Papers 58: 450–74.

Alkire, S. and J. Foster. 2010. “Designing the Inequality-
Adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI).” Human 
Development Research Paper 2010/28. UNDP–HDRO, 
New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/
hdr2010/papers/HDRP_2010_28.pdf.  Accessed 
18 May 2011. 

———. 2011. “Counting and Multidimensional Poverty 
Measurement.” Journal of Public Economics 95 (7–8): 
476–87.

Alkire, S., and J. M. Roche. Forthcoming. “Beyond 
Headcount: Measures That Reflect the Breadth and 
Components of Child Poverty.” In Global Changes in 
Child Poverty at the End of the 20th Century, eds. Alberto 
Minujin and Shailen Nandy. Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.

Alkire, S., J. M. Roche, and M. E. Santos. Forthcoming. 
“Multidimensional Poverty Index: An In-Depth Analysis 
of the New Country Results, Changes over Time and 
Geographical and Ethnical Decompositions.” Working 
Paper. University of Oxford, Oxford Poverty and Human 
Development Initiative, Oxford, UK.

Alkire, S., and M. E. Santos. 2010. “Acute Multidimen-
sional Poverty: A New Index for Developing Countries.” 
Human Development Research Paper 2010/11. United 
Nations Development Programme, New York. http://
hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2010/papers/
HDRP_2010_11.pdf. Accessed 5 June 2011.

Allison, E.H., W. N. Adger, M.-C. Badjeck, K. Brown, 
D. Conway, N. K. Dulvy, A. Halls, A. Perry, and J. 
D. Reynolds. 2005. “Effects of Climate Change on the 
Sustainability of Capture and Enhancement Fisheries 
Important to the Poor: Analysis of the Vulnerability 
and Adaptability of Fisherfolk Living in Poverty.” Final 
Technical Report. UK Department for International 
Development, Fisheries Management Science Pro-
gramme, London.

Allison, E. H., M. Badjeck, W. Adger, K. Brown, D. 
Conway, A. Halls, G. Pilling, J. Reynolds, N. Andrew, 
and N. Dulvy. 2009. “Vulnerability of National Econo-
mies to the Impacts of Climate Change on Fisheries.” 
Fish and Fisheries 10 (2): 173–96. 

Amarakoon, D., A. Chen, S. Rawlins, and D. D. Chadee, 
M. Taylor and R. Stennett. 2008. “Dengue Epidemics 
in the Caribbean Temperature Indices to Gauge the 
Potential for Onset of Dengue.” Mitigation Adaptation 
Strategies for Global Change 13 (4): 341–57.

Amon,  B.,  V.  Kryvoruchko,  T.  Amon,  and  S. 
Zechmeister- Boltenstern. 2006. “Methane, Nitrous 
Oxide and Ammonia Emissions during Storage and after 
Application of Dairy Cattle Slurry and Influence of Slurry 
Treatment.” Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 
112 (2–3): 153–62. 

Anand, S., and P. Segal. 2008. “What Do We Know 
about Global Income Inequality?” Journal of Economic 
Literature 46: 57–94.

Anand, S., and A. Sen. 1994. “Human Development Index: 
Methodology and Measurement.” HDRO Occasional 
Papers. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

———. 2000. “Human Development and Economic 
Sustainability.” World Development 28 (12): 2029–49. 
Anderegg, W. R., J. W. Prall, J. Harold, and S. H. 
Schneider. 2010. “Expert Credibility in Climate Change.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 107 (27): 12107–09.

Andrews, A. 2009. “Beyond the Ban: Can the Basel 
Convention Adequately Safeguard the Interests of the 
World’s Poor in the International Trade of Hazardous 
Waste?” Law Environment and Development Journal 
5(2): 169–84.

Anthoff, D. 2010. “The Economic Impact of Substantial 
Sea Level Rise.” Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies 
for Global Change 15: 321–35.

Archer, D., and V. Brovkin. 2008. “The Millennial 
Atmospheric Lifetime of Anthropogenic CO2.” Climatic 
Change 90: 283–97.

Argos, M., T. Kalra, P. J. Rathouz, Y. Chen, B. Pierce, 
F. Parvez, T. Islam, A. Ahmed, M. Rakibuz-Zaman, 
R. Hasan, G. Sarwar, V. Slavkovich, A. van Geen, 
J. Graziano, and H. Ahsan. 2010. “Arsenic Exposure 
from Drinking Water, and All-Cause and Chronic-Disease 
Mortalities in Bangladesh (HEALS): A Prospective Cohort 
Study.” Lancet 376 (9737): 252–58.

Arnall, A., K. Oswald, M. Davies, T. Mitchell, and C. 
Coirolo. 2010. “Adaptive Social Protection: Mapping 
the Evidence and Policy Context in the Agriculture 
Sector in South Asia.” Working Paper 345. Institute 
of Development Studies, Brighton, UK. 

Arnold, J. E. M., G. Kohlin, and R. Persson. 2006. “Wood-
fuels, Livelihoods, and Policy Interventions: Changing 
Perspectives.” World Development 34 (3): 596–611.
Arora-Jonsson, S. 2011. “Virtue and Vulnerability: 
Discourses on Women, Gender and Climate Change.” 
Global Environmental Change 21 (2): 744–51.

Ash, M., J. K. Boyce, G. Chang, and H. Scharber. 
2010. “Is Environmental Justice Good for White Folks?” 
University of Massachusetts, Political Economy Research 
Institute, Amherst, MA. http://works.bepress.com/
james_boyce/33. Accessed 19 May 19 2011.

Asia Summit on Climate Change and Indigenous 
Peoples. 2009. “Report of the Summit.” Tebtebba 
Indigenous Peoples’ International Centre for Policy 
Research and Education, 24–27 February, Bali, Indonesia.

Atkinson, A. B., and S. Morelli. 2011. “Economic Crises 
and Inequality.” Human Development Research Paper 6. 
UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Atkinson, A. B., T. Piketty, and E. Saez, 2011. “Top 
Incomes in the Long Run History.” Journal of Economic 
Literature 49 (1): 3–71.

reFerenCeS

105

Atkinson, A. B., and J. E. Stiglitz. 1980. Lectures in Public 

Economics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

AusAID (Australian Agency for International Develop-
ment) and UNDP (United Nations Development 
Programme) Pacific Center. 2008. The Gendered 
Dimension of Disaster-Risk Management and Adap-
tation to Climate Change: Stories from the Pacific. 
Suva, Fiji. www.undppc.org.fj/_resources/article/files/
UNDP%20PC%20Climate%20Change.pdf. Accessed 
14 July 2011.

Babbage. 2010. “Helping Hands.” Babbage (blog), The 
Economist, 27 May. www.economist.com/blogs/
babbage/2010/05/techview_robot_every_home. 
Accessed 10 May 2011.

Badiani, R., and K. Jessoe, 2011. “Elections at What 
Cost? The Impact of Electricity Subsidies on Groundwater 
Extraction and Agricultural Production.” UC Davis Work-
ing Paper. University of California–Davis, Department of 
Agriculture and Resource Economics, Berkley, CA. http://
areweb.berkeley.edu/documents/seminar/JessoeDraft.
pdf. Accessed 20 June 2011.

Baez, J. E., de la Fuente, A., and I. V. Santos. 2010. Do 
Natural Disasters Affect Human Capital? An Assess-
ment Based on Existing Empirical Evidence. Discus-
sion Paper 5164. Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, 
Germany.

Baez, J. E., and I. V. Santos. 2007. “Children’s Vulner-
ability to Weather Shocks: A Natural Disaster as a 
Natural Experiment.” Working Paper. World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 

Bain & Company. 2011. “Bain & Company Predicts 
Eight Percent Growth in Global Luxury Goods Sales 
in 2011; Five-to-Six Percent Annual Growth through 
2014.” Press Release, 3 May 2011. www.reuters.
com/article/2011/05/03/idUS167455+03-May-2011
+BW20110503. Accessed 14 July 2011.

Baker, D. 2011. “The Deficit-Reducing Potential of a Finan-
cial Speculation Tax.” Issue Brief. Center for Economic 
and Policy Research, Washington, DC. www.cepr.net/
documents/publications/fst-2011-01.pdf. Accessed 
1 June 2011.

Baker T., M. Roberts, B. Cole, and C. Jacks. 2011. “The 
Sanitation Marketing Pilot Project: End of Project Report.” 
Water and Sanitation Program, Washington, DC.

Ball, J. B. 2001. “Global Forest Resources: History and 
Dynamics.” In The Forests Handbook. Vol. 1, ed. J. 
Evans. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science.

Ballesteros, A., S. Nakhooda, J. Werksman, and K. 
Hurlburt. 2010. Power, Responsibility, and Account-
ability: Re-Thinking the Legitimacy of Institutions for 
Climate Finance. Washington, DC: World Resources 
Institute. www.wri.org/publication/power-responsibility-
accountability. Accessed 1 August 2011.

Bangladesh Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
2004. Bangladesh Population Policy. Dhaka. www.
dgfp.gov.bd/population_policy_eng.pdf. Accessed 
15 July 2011.

Barbier, E. B., J. Burgess, and C. Folke. 1994. Paradise 
Lost? The Ecological Economics of Biodiversity. London: 
Earthscan.

Barbier, E. B., A. Markandya, and D. W. Pearce. 1990. 
“Sustainable Agricultural Development and Project 
Appraisal.” European Review of Agricultural Economics 
17 (2): 181–96.

Bardasi, E., and Q. Wodon. 2009. “Working Long Hours 
and Having No Choice: Time Poverty in Guinea.” Policy 
Research Working Paper 4961. World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC.

Barrett, S. 2009. “Rethinking Global Climate Change Gov-
ernance.” Economics 3 (5). www.economics-ejournal.
org/economics/journalarticles/2009-5. Accessed 15 July 
2011.

Biggar, J., and C. Middleton. 2010. “Broadband and 
Network Environmentalism.” Telecommunications 
Journal of Australia 60 (1): 9.1–9.17. 

Binder, S., and E. Neumayer. 2005. “Environmental Pres-
sure Group Strength and Air Pollution: An Empirical 
Analysis.” Ecological Economics 55: 527–38.

Bird, N., J. Brown, and L. Schalatek. 2011. “Design 
Challenges for the Green Climate Fund.” Climate Finance 
Policy Brief 4. Heinrich Böell Foundation and Overseas 
Development Institute, Berlin and London. www.odi.
org.uk/resources/download/5256.pdf. Accessed 15 May 
2011.

Bartlett, S. 2008. “Climate Change and Urban Children: 
Impacts and Implications for Adaptation in Low- and 
Middle-Income Countries.” Environment and Urbaniza-
tion 20 (2): 501–19.

Birdsall, N., and B. Leo. 2011. “Find Me the Money: 
Financing Climate and Other Global Public Goods.” 
Working Paper 248. Center for Global Development, 
Washington, DC.

Bättig, M. B., and T. Bernauer. 2009. “National Institu-
tions and Global Public Goods: Are Democracies More 
Cooperative in Climate Change Policy?” International 
Organization 63 (2): 281–308.

Baud, M., F. de Castro, and B. Hogenboom. 2011. 
“Environmental Governance in Latin America: Towards 
an Integrative Research Agenda.” European Review 
of Latin American and Caribbean Studies 90: 79–88.
Baumol, W. J., R. E. Litan, and C. J. Schramm. 2007. 
Good Capitalism, Bad Capitalism, and the Econom-
ics of Growth and Prosperity. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.

Becker, G. S., T. J. Philipson, and R. R. Soares. 2003. 
“The Quantity and Quality of Life and the Evolution 
of World Inequality.” American Economic Review 95 
(1): 277–79.

Blackden, C. M., and Wodon, Q., eds. 2006. Gender, Time 
Use and Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa. Working Paper 
73. World Bank, Washington, DC http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTAFRREGTOPGENDER/Resources/
gender_time_use_pov.pdf. Accessed 15 April 2011.

Blacksmith Institute. 2007. The World’s Worst Polluted 
Places.: The Top Ten of the Dirty Thirty. New York: 
The Blacksmith Institute. www.blacksmithinstitute.org/
wwpp2007/finalReport2007.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Blankespoor, B., S. Dasgupta, B. Laplante, and D. 
Wheeler. 2010. “The Economics of Adaptation to 
Extreme Weather Events in Developing Countries.” 
Working Paper 199. Center for Global Development, 
Washington, DC.

Blau, P. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. New 

York: Wiley.

Beegle, K., and Q. Wodon. 2006. “Labor Shortages 
Despite Under-Employment. Seasonality in Time Use 
in Malawi.” In Gender, Time Use, and Poverty in Sub-
Saharan Africa, eds. M. Blackden and Q. Wodon. Work-
ing Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://mpra.
ub.uni-muenchen.de/11083/. Accessed 26 April 2011. 

Bloomberg New Energy Finance and UNEP (United 
Nations Environment Programme). 2010. Global 
Trends in Sustainable Energy Investment 2010: Analysis 
of Trends and Issues in the Financing of Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency. Nairobi: United Nations 
Environment Programme.

Bennear, L. S., and S. M. Olmstead. 2006. “The Impacts 
of the “Right to Know”: Information Disclosure and 
the Violation of Drinking Water Standards.” Journal 
of Economic Literature. http://cbey.research.yale.edu/
uploads/File/olmstead.pdf. Accessed 3 May 2011.

Bernard, T. 2010. “Impact Analysis of Rural Electrification 
Projects in Sub-Saharan Africa.” World Bank Research 
Observer. September. http://wbro.oxfordjournals.org/
content/early/2010/09/01/wbro.lkq008.abstract. 
Accessed 5 July 2011.

Bernauer, T., and V. Koubi. 2009. “Political Determinants 
of Environmental Quality.” Ecological Economics 68 
(5): 1355–65.

Bettencourt, L. M. A., J. Lobo, D. Helbing, and C. 
Kühnert, G. B. West. 2007. “Growth, Innovation, 
Scaling and the Pace of Life in Cities.” Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America 104 (17): 7301–06.

Biddlecom, A. E., W. G. Axinn, and J. S. Barber. 2005. 
“Environmental Effects of Family Size Preferences and 
Subsequent Reproductive Behavior in Nepal.” Population 
and Environment 26 (3): 183–206.

Boano, C., R. Zetter, and T. Morris. 2008. “Environmen-
tally Displaced People: Understanding the Linkages 
between Environmental Change, Livelihoods and Forced 
Migration.” Forced Migration Policy Briefing 1. University 
of Oxford Refugee Studies Centre, Oxford Department 
of International Development, Oxford, UK.

Borras, S., and J. Franco. 2010. Towards a Broader View 
of the Politics of Global Land Grab: Rethinking Land 
Issues, Reframing Resistance. Initiatives in Critical 
Agrarian Studies Working Paper Series 1. www.tni.
org/sites/www.tni.org/files/Borras%20Franco%20
Politics%20of%20Land%20Grab%20v3.pdf. Accessed 
20 June 2011.

Bourguignon, F., and C. Morrisson. 2002. “Inequality 
among World Citizens: 1820–1992.” American Economic 
Review 92: 727–44.

Boyce, J. K. 2011. “The-Environment as our-Common-
Heritage.” Triple Crisis (blog), 10 February. http://triplec-
risis.com/the-environment-as-our-common-heritage/. 
Accessed 20 May 2011.

Boyce, J. K., A. R. Klemer, P. H. Templet, and C. E. 
Willis. 1999. “Power Distribution, the Environment, 

106

Human Development RepoRt 2011

and Public Health: A state-level analysis.” Ecological 
Economics 29: 127–40. 

Boyce, J. K., and M. Torras. 2002. “Rethinking the Envi-
ronmental Kuznets Curve” in The Political Economy of 
the Environment, ed. J. K. Boyce. Northampton, MA: 
Edward Elgar.

Boyle, A. 2010. “Human Rights and the Environment: 
A Reassessment.” United Nations Environment Pro-
gramme, New York.

Brainard, J. S., A. P. Jones, I. J. Bateman, and A. A. 
Lovett, and P. J. Fallon. 2002. “Modelling Environ-
mental Equity: Access to Air Quality in Birmingham, 
England.” Environment and Planning A 34: 695–716.
Brouwer, R., S. Akter, and L. Brander. 2007. “Socio-
economic Vulnerability and Adaptation to Environmental 
Risk: A Case Study of Climate Change and Flooding in 
Bangladesh.” Poverty Reduction and Environmental 
Management Working Paper 06/01. Institute for Envi-
ronmental Studies, Amsterdam.

Brown, L. 2003. Plan B: Rescuing a Planet under Stress 
and a Civilization in Trouble. New York and London : 
W.W. Norton & Company. 

Brown, L., C. Flavin, H. French, J. N. Abramovitz, S. 
Dunn, G. Gardner, L. Mastny, A. Mattoon, D. Rood-
man, P. Sampat, M. O. Sheehan, and L. Starke. 2001. 
State of the World 2001: A Worldwatch Institute Report 
on Progress towards a Sustainable Society. New York 
and London: W. W. Norton and Company.

Bruce, C. J. McCracken, R. Albalak, M. Schei, K. 
R. Smith, V. Lopez, and C. West. 2004. “Impact of 
Improved Stoves, House Construction and Child Location 
on Levels of Indoor Air Pollution Exposure in Young 
Guatemalan Children.” Journal of Exposure Analysis 
and Environmental Epidemiology 14: S26–S33.

Bruch, C., W. Coker, and C. VanArsdale. 2007. Constitu-
tional Environmental Law: Giving Force to Fundamental 
Principles in Africa. Washington, DC: Environmental 
Law Institute.

Brulle, R. J., and D. N. Pellow. 2006. “Environmental 
Justice: Human Health and Environmental Inequalities.” 
Annual Review of Public Health 27: 3.1–3.22

Buckingham, S. 2010. “Call in the Women.” Nature 

468: 502.

Buffum, B., A. Lawrence, and K. J. Temphel. 2010. 
“Equity in Community Forests in Bhutan.” International 
Forestry Review 12 (3): 187–99.

Burke, M., J. Dykema, D. Lobell, E. Miguel, and S. 
Satyanath. 2010. “Climate and Civil War: Is the Rela-
tionship Robust?” Working Paper 16440. National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. www.nber.org/
papers/w16440. Accessed 25 May 2011.

Burniaux, J. M., and J. Chateau. 2011. “Mitigation 
Potential of Removing Fossil Fuel Subsidies: A Gen-
eral Equilibrium Assessment.” Economics Department 
Working Paper 853. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development.

Byers, B. A., R. N. Cunliffe, and A. T. Hudak. 2001. 
“Linking the Conservation of Culture and Nature: A 
Case Study of Sacred Forests in Zimbabwe.” Human 
Ecology 29 (2): 187–218.

Byrne, J., K. Hughes, W. Rickerson, and L. Kurdgelas-
hvili. 2007. “American Policy Conflict in the Greenhouse: 
Divergent Trends in Federal, Regional, State, and Local 
Green Energy and Climate Change Policy.” Energy Policy 
35 (9): 4555–73.

Cadman, M., C. Petersen, A. Driver, N. Sekhran, K. 
Maze, and S. Munzhedzi. 2010. Biodiversity for 
Development: South Africa’s Landscape Approach 
to Conserving Biodiversity and Promoting Ecosystem 
Resilience. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity 
Institute.

Chambers, R. 2009. “Going to Scale with Community-led 
Total Sanitation: Reflections on Experience, Issues and 
Ways Forward.” IDS Practice Paper 2009–1. Institute 
of Development Studies, Brighton, UK. 

Chang, H. J., and I. Grabel. 2004. “Reclaiming Develop-
ment from the Washington Consensus.” Journal of Post 
Keynesian Economics 27 (2): 273–91. www.jstor.org/
stable/4538924. Accessed 20 April 2011.

Changa, S. E., M. Eeri, B. J. Adams, J. Alder, P. R. Berke, 
R. Chuenpagdee, S. Ghosh, and C. Wabnitz. 2006. 
“Coastal Ecosystems and Tsunami Protection after the 
December 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami.” Earthquake 
Spectra 22 (S3): 863–87.

Checchi, D. 2001. “Education, Inequality and Income 
Inequality.” STICERD Distributional Analysis Research 
Programme Papers 52. Suntory and Toyota International 
Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines, London 
School of Economics, London, UK.

Checkley W., L. D. Epstein, R. H. Gilman, D. Figueroa, 
R. I. Cama, J. A. Patz, and R. E. Black. 2000. “Effects 
of EI Niño and Ambient Temperature on Hospital Admis-
sions for Diarrhoeal Diseases in Peruvian Children.” 
The Lancet 355 (9202): 442–50.

Checkley, W., R. H. Gilman, R. E. Black, L. D. Epstein, 
L. Cabrera, C. R. Sterling, and L. H. Moulton. 2004. 
“Effect of Water and Sanitation on Childhood Health 
in a Poor Peruvian Peri-urban Community.” The Lancet 
363 (9403): 112–18.

Cheung, W. L., V. W. Y. Lam, J. L. Sarmiento, K. Kearney, 
R. Watson, D. Zeller, and D. Pauly. 2009. “Large-Scale 
Redistribution of Maximum Fisheries Catch Potential 
in the Global Ocean under Climate Change.” Global 
Change Biology 16 (1): 24–35.

China National People’s Congress. 2011. 12th Five-Year 

Plan. Beijing. 

Chineke, T. C., S. S. Jagtap, and O. Nwofor. 2009. “West 
African Monsoon: Is the August Break “Breaking” in 
the Eastern Humid Zone of Southern Nigeria?” Climatic 
Change 103 (3–4): 555–70.

Christensen, J. H., B. Hewitson, A. Busuioc, A. Chen, 
X. Gao, I. Held, R. Jones, R. K. Kolli, W.-T. K., R. 
Laprise, V. M. Rueda, L. Mearns, C. G. Menéndez, 
J. Räisänen, A. Rinke, A. Sarr, and P. Whetton. 2007. 
“Regional Climate Projections.” Climate Change 2007: 
The Physical Science Basis, eds. S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. 
Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, 
and H. L. Miller. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK and New 
York: Cambridge University Press.

Christiaensen, T. T. L., Q. T. Do, and L. D. Trung. 2010. 
“Natural Disasters and Household Welfare: Evidence 
from Vietnam.” Policy Research Working Paper 5491. 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chung, E. C., V. Ramanathan, and J. T. Kiehl. 2002. 
“Effects of the South Asian Absorbing Haze on the 
Northeast Monsoon and Surface: Air Heat Exchange.” 
Journal of Climate 15 (17): 2462–76.

Church, J. A., N. J. White, J. R. Hunter, and Kurt 
Lambeck. 2008. “Briefing a Post-IPCC AR4 Update on 
Sea-level Rise.” The Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems 
Cooperative Research Centre, Hobart, Australia.

Cichon, M., and K. Hagemejer. 2006. “Social Security 
for All: Investing in Global Social and Economic Devel-
opment: A Consultation.” Issues in Social Protection 
Discussion Paper 16. International Labour Organization, 
Geneva.

Cinner, J. E., T. Daw, and T. R. McClanahan. 2009. 
“Socioeconomic Factors that Affect Artisanal Fishers’ 
Readiness to Exit a Declining Fishery.” Conservation 
Biology 23 (1): 124–30. 

Climate Investment Funds. 2011. “The Clean Technology 
Fund (CTF) Disbursement Report.” Washington, DC: 
Climate Investment Funds. www.climateinvestment-
funds.org/cif/sites/climateinvestmentfunds.org/files/
Disbursement%20Report%20-%20CTF%20Dec%20
2010.pdf. Accessed 19 August 2011.

The Coca-Cola Company. 2010. “Rain Increases Access 
to Water Resources in Niger.” News Release, 2 June 
2010. www.thecoca-colacompany.com/citizenship/
news_rain.html. Accessed 20 May 2011.

Colchester, Marcus. 2010. “Free, Prior and Informed 
Consent: Making FPIC Work for Forests and Peoples.” 
Research Paper 11. The Forests Dialogue, New Haven, 
CT.

Collier, P. 2006. “Economic Causes of Civil Conflict and 
their Implications for Policy.” International Network for 
Economics and Conflict. http://users.ox.ac.uk/~econpco/
research/pdfs/EconomicCausesofCivilConflict-Implica-
tionsforPolicy.pdf. Accessed 15 June 2011.

———. 2007. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Coun-
tries Are Failing and What Can Be Done about It. New 
York and London: Oxford University Press. 

Commission on Sustainable Development. 1997. 
Global Change and Sustainable Development: Criti-
cal Trends. New York: United Nations Economic and 
Social Council. www.un.org/esa/documents/ecosoc/
cn17/1997/ecn171997-3.htm. Accessed 14 June 2011. 

Cooper, R. 2008. “The Case for Charges on Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions.” Discussion Paper 08-10. Harvard Project 
on International Climate Agreements, Cambridge, MA. 

Corrigan, C., and A. Granziera. 2010. A Handbook for the 
Indigenous and Community Conserved Areas Registry. 
Cambridge, UK: United Nations Environment Programme 
and World Conservation Monitoring Center. www.
unep-wcmc.org/medialibrary/2010/09/13/f2ef7b9b/
ICCA%20Handbook%201.2%20English.pdf. Accessed 
29 May 2011.

Costello, A., M. Abbas, A. Allen, S. Ball, S. Bell, R. 
Bellamy, S. Friel, N. Groce, A. Johnson, M. Kett, 

reFerenCeS

107

M. Lee, C. Levy, M. Maslin, D. McCoy, B. McGuire, 
H. Montgomery, D. Napier, C. Pagel, J. Patel, J. A. 
Puppim de Oliveira, N. Redclift, H. Rees, D. Rogger, 
J. Scott, J. Stephenson, J. Twigg, J. Wolff, and 
C. Patterson. 2009. “Managing the Health Effects of 
Climate Change.” The Lancet 373: 1697–1723. 

Deiniger, K., D. Beyerlee, J. Lindsay, A. Norton, H. 
Selod, and M. Stickler. 2011. Rising Global Inter-
est in Farmland: Can it Yield Sustainable and Equi-
table Benefits? Washington, DC: World Bank. http://
siteresources.worldbank.org/INTARD/Resources/
ESW_Sept7_final_final.pdf. Accessed 10 June 2011.

Cranfield, J. A. L., P. V. Preckel, and T. W. Hertel. 2007. 
“Poverty Analysis Using an International Cross-Country 
Demand System.” Policy Research Working Paper 4285. 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

DFID (UK Department for International Development). 
2011. “Cash Transfers.” Evidence Paper. London. www.
dfid.gov.uk/r4d/PDF/Articles/Evidence_Paper-FINAL 
-CLEARAcknowledgement.pdf. Accessed May 1 2011.

Crotty, J., and P. Rodgers. Forthcoming. “Sustainable 
Development in the Russian Federation: The Limits 
of Greening within Industrial Firms.” www.business.
salford.ac.uk/research/marketing-strategy/projects/
environmental-sustainability-in-russian-federation/
docs/The%20Limits%20of%20Greening%20in%20
Russian%20Firms.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Da Costa, M. M., C. Cohen, and R. Schaeffer. 2007. 
“Social Features of Energy Production and Use in Bra-
zil: Goals for a Sustainable Energy Future.” Natural 
Resources Forum 31: 11–20.

Da Vià, E. 2011. “The Politics of ‘Win-Win’ Narratives: Land 
Grab as Development Opportunity.” Paper presented 
at the University of Sussex: Institute of Development 
Studies Conference on Global Land Grabbing, 6–8 April, 
Sussex, UK.

Daka, K. R., and J. Ballet. 2011. “Children’s Education 
and Home Electrification: A Case Study in Northwestern 
Madagascar.” Energy Policy 39 (5): 2866–74.

Daly, H. 2005. “Economics in a Full World.” Policy Issue 
Briefs: Economic Growth and Development. United 
States Society for Ecological Economics, Burlington, VT.

Dasgupta, P. 1995. “Population, Poverty, and the Local 

Environment.” Scientific American 272 (2): 26–31.

———. 2007. “Commentary: The Stern Review’s Econom-
ics of Climate Change.” National Institute Economic 
Review 199: 4–7.

Dasgupta, P., and G. Heal. 1974. “The Optimal Depletion 
of Exhaustible Resources.” Review of Economic Stud-
ies 41 (Symposium on the Economics of Exhaustible 
Resources): 3–28.

Dasgupta, S., B. Laplante, C. Meisner, D. Wheeler, 
and J. Yan. 2009. “The Impact of Sea Level Rise on 
Developing Countries: A Comparative Analysis.” Climatic 
Change 93: 379–88.

Davies, M., K. Oswald, and T. Mitchell. 2009. “Climate 
Change Adaptation, Disaster Risk Reduction and Social 
Protection.” In Promoting Pro-Poor Growth: Social Pro-
tection, ed., Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development.

De Oliveira, A. 2008. “Private Provision of Water Service 
in Brazil: Impacts and Affordability.” MPRA Paper 11149. 
University Library of Munich, Germany.

Dietz, S., and Neumayer, E. 2007. “Weak and Strong 
Sustainability in the SEEA: Concepts and Measurement.” 
Ecological Economics 61 (4): 617–26.

Dinkelman, T. 2008. “The Effects of Rural Electrification on 
Employment: New Evidence from South Africa.” Working 
Paper 1255. Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson 
School of Public and International Affairs, Research 
Program in Development Studies, Princeton, NJ.

Dodman, D. 2009.” Urban Density and Climate Change.” 
Analytical Review of the Interaction between Urban 
Growth Trends and Environmental Changes Paper 1. 
United Nations Population Fund, New York.

Dore, M. H. I. 2005. “Climate Change and Changes in 
Global Precipitation Patterns: What Do We Know?” 
Environment International 31 (8): 1167–81.

Dudley, N., and S. Stolton, eds. 2003. Running Pure: The 
Importance of Forest Protected Areas to Drinking Water. 
World Bank/WWF Alliance for Forest Conservation and 
Sustainable Use, Washington, DC.

Duflo, E., and R. Pande. 2007. “Dams.” Quarterly Journal 

of Economics 122 (2): 601–46.

Duval-Diop, D., and K. Rose. 2008. Delivering Equitable 
Development to a Recovering Louisiana: A State Policy 
Guide for 2008 and Beyond. New Orleans, LA: Policy 
Link and Louisiana Disaster Recovery Foundation. www.
policylink.org/atf/cf/%7B97c6d565-bb43-406d-a6d5 
-eca3bbf35af0%7D/DELIVERINGEQUITABLERECOVERY 
-LOUISIANA_FINAL.PDF. Accessed 15 June 2011.

Dye, C. 2008. “Health and Urban Living.” Science 319 

(5864): 766–69.

Earthjustice. 2004. “Human Rights and the Environ-
ment.” Issue paper presented at the 60th Session of 
the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, 15 
March–23 April, Geneva. www.earthjustice.org/library/
references/2004UNreport.pdf. Accessed 29 April 2011.

———. 2007. “Environmental Rights Report 2007: 
Human Rights and the Environment.” Oakland, CA. 
http://earthjustice.org/sites/default/files/library/
references/2007-environmental-rights-report.pdf. 
Accessed 20 May 2011.

———. 2008. “Environmental Rights Report 2008: Human 
Rights and the Environment.” Oakland, CA. http://
earthjustice.org/sites/default/files/library/reports/2008 
-environmental-rights-report.pdf. Accessed 20 May 2011.

De Oliveira, A., and T. Laan. 2010. “Lessons Learned 
from Brazil’s Experience with Fossil Fuel Subsidies 
and their Reform.” International Institute for Sustain-
able Development, Geneva. www.hedon.info/docs/
IISD_GSI_lessons_brazil_fuel_subsidies.pdf. Accessed 
20 May 2011.

Eberhard, A., V. Foster, C. Briceño-Garmendia, F. 
Ouedraogo D. Camos, and M. Shkaratan. 2008. 
“Underpowered: The State of the Power Sector in 
Sub-Saharan Africa.” Summary of Africa Infrastructure 
Country Diagnostic Background Paper 6. World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Ebi, K. 2008. “Adaptation Cost for Climate Change-Related 
Cases of Diarrheal Diseases, Malnutrition, and Malaria 
in 2030.” Globalization and Health 4 (9).

The Economist. 2008. “A Global Love Affair: A Special 
Report on Cars in Emerging Markets.” 13 November. 
www.economist.com/node/12544933/print. Accessed 
24 June 2011.

El Araby, M. 2002. “Urban Growth and Environmental 
Degradation: The Case of Cairo, Egypt.” Cities 19 (6): 
389–400.

Elbi, K. L., N. D. Lewis, and C. Corvalan. 2006. “Climate 
Variability and Change and Their Potential Health Effects 
in Small Islands States: Information for Adaptation Plan-
ning in Health Sector.” Environmental health Perspec-
tives 114 (12): 1957–63.

Elisara, F. M. 2008. “Effects of Climate Change on Indig-
enous Peoples: A Pacific Presentation.” Paper presented 
at the International Expert Group Meeting on Indig-
enous Peoples and Climate Change, 2–4 April, Darwin, 
Australia. www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/
EGM_cs08_Elisara.doc. Accessed 11 May 2011.

Engelman, R. 2009. “Population and Sustainability: Can 
We Avoid Limiting the Number of People.” Scientific 
American, 10 June.

———. 2011. “An End to Population Growth: Why Family 
Planning is Key to a Sustainable Future.” Solutions 
for a Sustainable and Desirable Future 2 (3). www.
thesolutionsjournal.com/node/919. Accessed 15 July 
2011.

Ervin, J., N. Sekhran, A. Dinu. S. Gidda, M. Vergeichik, 
and J. Mee. 2010. Protected Areas for the 21st Century: 
Lessons from UNDP/GEF’s Portfolio. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme.

European Communities. 2010. European Commission, 
Annual Environment Policy Review. http://ec.europa.eu/
environment/policyreview.htm. Accessed 12 May 2011.

European Parliament Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs. 2011. “Report on Innovative Financ-
ing at Global and European Level.” European Parliament, 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. Brus-
sels. www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type= 
REPORT&reference=A7-2011-0036&language=EN. 
Accessed 15 May 2011.

Evans, A. 2010. “Resource Scarcity, Climate Change and 
the Risk of Violent Conflict.” Background paper for World 
Development Report 2011. World Bank, Washington, 
DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTWDR2011/
Resources/6406082-1283882418764/WDR_Background_
Paper_Evans.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Evans, G. 2008. “Conflict Potential in a World of Climate 
Change.” Address to Bucerius Summer School on Global 
Governance 2008, 29 August, Berlin.

Fang, M., and C. K. Chan. 2008. “Managing Air Quality 
in a Rapidly Developing Nation: China.” Atmospheric 
Environment 43 (1): 79–86.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 1996. Les-
sons from the Green Revolution: Towards a New Green 
Revolution. World Food Summit Technical Paper. Rome. 
www.fao.org/docrep/003/w2612e/w2612e06a.htm#. 
Accessed 5 July 2011. 

108

Human Development RepoRt 2011

———. 2001. State of the World’s Forests. Rome. www.
fao.org/docrep/003/y0900e/y0900e00.htm. Accessed 
5 June 2011.

———. 2005. Review of the State of World Marine Fishery 
Resources. Technical Paper 457. Rome. ftp://ftp.fao.
org/docrep/fao/007/y5852e/Y5852E00.pdf. Accessed 
12 June 2011.

———. 2010a. The State of the World Fisheries and 

Aquaculture. Rome. 

———. 2010b.  The State of Food and Agriculture 
2010–2011. Rome. www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/
i2050e.pdf. Accessed 9 July 2011.

———. 2011. The State of the World’s Forests. Rome. 
www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2000e/i2000e00.pdf. 
Accessed 30 April 2011.

Filmer, D., and L. Pritchett. 2002. “Environmental 
Degradation and the Demand for Children: Searching 
for the Vicious Circle in Pakistan.” Environment and 
Development Economics 7: 123–46.

Fiola, N. 2009. “Where More is Too Much: The Effect of 
Rainfall Shocks on Economic Growth and Civil Conflict.” 
www.nathanfiala.com/When%20More%20is%20
Too%20Much.pdf. Accessed 10 June 2011. 

Fishman, C. 2011. The Big Thirst. New York: Free Press.
Flora, J. N., and J. L. Findis. 2007. “Natural Resource 
Collection Work and Children’s Schooling in Malawi.” 
Agricultural Economics 31 (2–3): 123–34.

Fonesca, C., and R. Cardone. 2005. “Analysis of Cost 
Estimates and Funding Available for Achieving the MDG 
Targets for Water and Sanitation.” Background report for 
WELL Briefing Note 9. Water, Engineering and Develop-
ment Center, Loughborough University, London School 
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and IRC International 
Water and Sanitation Center, Leicestershire, London 
and Delft, the Netherlands. www.lboro.ac.uk/well/
resources/Publications/Briefing%20Notes/BN9%20
Fonseca.pdf. Accessed 20 July 2011.

Foulon, J., P. Lanoie, B. Laplante. 2002. “Incentives for 
Pollution Control: Regulation or Information?” Journal 
of Environmental Economics and Management 44(1): 
169–87.

Frankel, J., and V. Bosetti. 2011. “Sustainable Coopera-
tion in Global Climate Policy: Specific Formulas and 
Emission Targets to Build on Copenhagen and Cancun.” 
Human Development Research Paper 7. UNDP–HDRO, 
New York.

Frankhauser, S., and G. Schmidt-Traub. 2010. “From 
Adaptation to Climate-Resilient Development: The Costs 
of Climate-Proofing the Millennium Development Goals 
in Africa.” Policy Paper. Centre for Climate Change 
Economics and Policy Grantham Research Institute 
on Climate Change and the Environment in collabora-
tion with the Africa Progress Panel. www.cccep.ac.uk/
Publications/Policy/docs/PPFankhauseretal_costs 
-climate-proofing.pdf. Accessed 20 July 2011.

Fraser E. D. G., M. Termansen, K. Hubacek, A. J. Dou-
gill, J. Sendzimir, and C. Quinn. 2010. Assessing 
Vulnerability to Climate Change in Dryland Livelihood 
Systems: Conceptual Challenges and Interdisciplin-
ary Solutions. Centre for Climate Change Economics 

and Policy Working Paper 24. University of Leeds, UK. 
www.cccep.ac.uk/Publications/Working%20Papers/
Papers/20-29/WP24_dryland-livelihood-systems.pdf. 
Accessed 27 June 27.

Fredriksson, P. G., E. Neumayer, R. Damania, S. Gates. 
2005. “Environmentalism, Democracy, and Pollution 
Control.” Journal of Environmental Economics and 
Management 49 (2): 343–65.

Fréon, P., M. Bouchon, C. Mullon, C. Garcia, and M. 
Ñiquen. 2008. “Interdecadal Variability of Anchoveta 
Abundance and Overcapacity of the Fishery in Peru.” 
Progress in Oceanography 79: 401–12.

Friends of the Earth. 2004. “Incinerators and Deprivation.” 

Briefing. London

Fuchs, A. 2011. “Conditional Cash Transfer Schemes and 
Households’ Energy Responses in Mexico,” UC Berkeley 
Working Paper. University of California–Berkeley, CA.

Fuchs, A., and A. Jayadev. 2011. Creating an Inequality 
Adjusted HDI Panel. UNDP-HDRO Working Paper. United 
Nations Development Programme, New York.

Fuchs, A., and V. Kehayova. 2011. “Identifying Causal 
Relations between Inequality in Human Development 
and Sustainability: Use of Quasi-Experimental Design.” 
Internal Research. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Fukuda-Parr, S. 2007. “Human Rights and Human Develop-
ment.” Economic Rights Working Paper 4. University of 
Connecticut, Human Rights Institute, Storrs, CT.

Fullerton, D. 2011. “Six Distributional Effects of Environ-
mental Policy.” Working Paper 16703. National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Furgal, C., and J. Seguin. 2006. “Climate Change, Health, 
and Vulnerability in Canadian Northern Aboriginal Com-
munities.” Environmental Health Perspective 114 (12): 
1964–70.

Galbraith, J. K. 1952. American Capitalism: The Concept 

of Countervailing Power. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

———.1954. The Great Crash, 1929. New York: Houghton 

Mifflin. 

Gallagher K., and S. Thacker. 2008. Democracy, Income, 
and Environmental Quality. Working Paper 164. Uni-
versity of Massachusetts, Amherst, Political Economy 
Research Institute, Amherst, MA.

Galloway McLean, K. 2010. Advance Guard: Climate 
Change Impacts, Adaptation, Mitigation and Indigenous 
Peoples—A Compendium of Case Studies. Darwin, 
Australia: United Nations University Traditional Knowl-
edge Initiative.

Gan, J., and McCarl, B. A. 2007. “Measuring Trans-
national Leakage of Forest Conservation.” Ecological 
Economics 64 (2): 423–32.

Garcia, C., and J. Pineda. 2011. “Measuring the Sus-
tainability of Countries: An Uncertainty and Sensitiv-
ity Analysis of the Adjusted Net Savings Measure.” 
Human Development Research Paper 12. UNDP–HDRO, 
New York.

Gearty, C. 2010. “Do Human Rights Help or Hinder Envi-
ronmental Protection.” Journal of Human Rights and 
the Environment 1 (1): 7–22.

Georgioadis, G., J. Pineda, and F. Rodriguez. 2010. “Has 
the Preston Curve Broken Down?” Human Development 
Research Paper 2010/32. United Nations Development 
Programme, New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/
global/hdr2010/papers/HDRP_2010_32.pdf. Accessed 
15 March 2011.

Ghana Ministry of Energy and World Bank. 2004. 
“Ghana Poverty and Social Impact Analysis Electricity 
Tariffs: Phase I.” World Bank, Africa Region, Environ-
mentally and Socially Sustainable Development Depart-
ment, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.
org/INTPSIA/Resources/490023-1120841262639/
psia_ghana_electricity.pdf. Accessed 30 May 2011.

Glemarec, Y. 2011.  Catalysing Climate Finance: A 
Guidebook on Policy and Financing Options to Sup-
port Green, Low-Emission and Climate-Resilient 
Development. New York: United Nations Develop-
ment Programme.

Glemarec, Y., O. Weissbein, and H. Bayraktar. 2010. 
“Human Development in a Changing Climate: A Frame-
work for Climate Finance.” Discussion Paper. United 
Nations Development Programme, New York.

Global Environment Facility. 2009. “Midterm Review 
of the Resource Allocation Framework.” Evaluation 
Report 47. United Nations Development Programme, 
Global Environment Fund, Evaluation Office, New York. 
www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/
RAF_MTR-Report_0.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Global Subsidies Initiative. 2011. Subsidy Watch 42. 
www.globalsubsidies.org/files/assets/subsidy_watch/
sw42_feb_11.pdf. Accessed 28 June 2011.

Grainger, A. 2010. “Uncertainty in the Construction of 
Global Knowledge of Tropical Forests.” Progress in 
Physical Geography 34 (6): 811–44.

Grandia, L. 2005. “Appreciating the Complexity and Dig-
nity of People’s Lives: Integrating Population-Health-
Environment Research in Peten, Guatemala.” Focus on 
Population, Environment and Security 10. 

Grasso, M. 2004. “A Normative Framework of Justice 
in Climate Change.” Working Paper Series 79. Univer-
sity of Milan, Department of Economics, Italy. http://
dipeco.economia.unimib.it/repec/pdf/mibwpaper79.
pdf. Accessed 25 May 2011.

Green, D., U. King, and J. Morrison. 2009. “Disproportion-
ate Burdens: The Multidimensional Impacts of Climate 
Change on the Health of Indigenous Australians.” Medi-
cal Journal of Australia 190 (1): 4–5.

GreenPeace. 2009. “Where Does E-Waste End Up?” 
www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/
toxics/electronics/the-e-waste-problem/where-does 
-e-waste-end-up/. Accessed 10 July 2011.

Gregory, J. M., P. Huybrechts, S. C. B. Raper. 2004. 
“Climatology: Threatened Loss of the Greenland Ice 
Sheet.” Nature 428 (6983): 616. 

Gregory, J., and P. Huybrechts 2006. “Ice-Sheet Contribu-
tions to Future Sea-Level Change.” Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society of London A 364: 1709–31. 
Grether, J.-M., and N. Mathys. 2009. “Is the World’s 
Economic Centre of Gravity Already in Asia?” Area 
42 (1): 47–50.

reFerenCeS

109

Griffith-Jones, S., J. A. Ocampo, and J. E. Stiglitz. 2010. 
Time for a Visible Hand: Lessons from the 2008 World 
Financial Crisis. New York: Oxford University Press.

Grosh, M., C. del Ninno, E. Tesliuc, and A. Ouerghi. 
2008. For Protection and Promotion: The Design and 
Implementation of Effective Safety Nets. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.

Grossman, G., and A. Krueger. 1995. “Economic Growth 
and the Environment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
110 (2): 353–77.

The GSMA Development Fund, the Cherie Blaire 
Foundation for Women and Vital Wave Consult-
ing. 2010. Women and Mobile: A Global Opportunity: 
A Study on the Mobile Phone Gender Gap in Low and 
Middle-Income Countries. London: GSM Association.
Guatemala, Instituto Nacional de Estadistica. 1999. 
Encuesta Nacional de Salud Materno Infantil 1998-
1999. Calverton, Md.: Macro International.

———. 2009. Informe Preliminar: ENSMI 2008/2009. 
Guatemala City: Guatemala Ministerio de Salud Pública 
y Asistencia Social.

Gupta, S. And I. Leung. 2011. “Turning Good Practice 
into Institutional Mechanisms: Investing in Grassroots 
Women’s Leadership to Scale Up Local Implementation 
of the Hyogo Framework for Action.” An in-depth study 
for the HFA Mid-Term Review. United Nations Strategy 
for Disaster Reduction, Geneva.

Gupte, M. 2004. “Participation in a Gendered Environ-
ment: The Case of Community Forestry in India.” Human 
Ecology 32 (3): 365–82.

Hales, S., N. de Wet, J. Maindonald, and A. Wood-
ward. 2002. “Potential Effect of Population and Climate 
Changes on Global Distribution of Dengue Fever: An 
Empirical Model.” The Lancet 360 (9336): 830–34.

Hall, D., and E. Lobina. 2008. Sewerage Works: Public 
Investment in Sewerage Saves Lives. Greenwich, UK: 
University of Greenwich, Public Services International 
Research Unit. www.psiru.org/reports/2008-03-W 
-sewers.pdf. Accessed 3 May 2011.

Hanasaki, N., S. Kanae, T. Oki, Masuda, K. Motoya, 
N. Shirakawa, Y. Shen, and K. Tanaka. 2008. “An 
Integrated Model for the Assessment of Global Water 
Resources Part 1: Model Description and Input Meteoro-
logical Forcing.” Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 
12 (4): 1007–37.

Hartwick, J. M. 1977. “Intergenerational Equity and Invest-
ing of Rents from Exhaustible Resources.” American 
Economic Review 67 (5): 972–74.

The Health Effects Institute (HEI). 2010. Outdoor Air 
Pollution and Health in the Developing Countries of Asia: 
A Comprehensive Review. Special Report 18. Boston, 
MA: HEI International Scientific Oversight Committee.

Heger, M., A. Julca, and O. Paddison. 2009. “Vulnerabil-
ity in Small-Island Economies: The Impact of “Natural” 
Disasters in the Caribbean.” In Vulnerability in Develop-
ing Countries, eds. W. Naude, A. U. Santos-Paulino, and 
M. McGillivray. New York: United Nations University.

Hendrix, C., and S. M. Glaser. 2005. “Trends and Trig-
gers: Climate Change and Civil Conflict in Sub-Saharan 
Africa.” Political Geography 26 (6): 695–715.

Hertel, T. W. , M. Burke, and D. Lobell. 2010. “The Poverty 
Implications of Climate-Induced Crop Yield Changes by 
2030.” Global Environmental Change 20 (4): 577–85.
Hertel, T. W., and S. Rosch. 2010. “Climate Change, 
Agriculture and Poverty.” Applied Economic Perspectives 
and Policy 32 (3): 355–85.

Hertz, T., T. Jayasundera, P. Pirano, S. Selcuk, N. Smith, 
and A. Verashchagina. 2007. “The Inheritance of 
Educational Inequality: International Comparisons 
and Fifty-Year Trends.” The B.E. Journal of Economic 
Analysis and Policy 7 (2): 1–48.

Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten. 2009. “Penn 
World Table Version 6.3.” University of Pennsylvania, 
Center for International Comparisons of Production, 
Income and Prices, Philadelphia, PA. 

Homans, G. C. 1961. Social Behavior: Its Elementary 

Forms. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

Homer-Dixon, T. 1994. Environment, Scarcities and Vio-
lent Conflict: Evidence from Cases. Toronto, Canada: 
University of Toronto.

Hughes, B., M. Irfan, J. Moyer, D. Rothman, and 
J. Solórzano. 2011. “Forecasting the Impacts of 
Environmental Constraints on Human Development.” 
Human Development Research Paper 8. UNDP–HDRO, 
New York. 

Hughes, B., R. Kuhn, C. Mosca Peterson, D. Rothman, 
and J. Solórzano. 2011. Improving Global Health: 
Third Volume of Patterns of Potential Human Progress. 
Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers.

Iftikhar, U. A. 2003. “Population, Poverty and Environment.” 
Background Paper. International Union for Conservation 
of Nature Pakistan Programme, Northern Area Strategy 
for Sustainable Development. http://cmsdata.iucn.org/
downloads/bp_po_pov_env.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011. 

Ilahi, N., and F. Grimard. 2000. “Public Infrastructure 
and Private Costs: Water Supply and Time Allocation 
of Women in Rural Pakistan.” Economic Development 
and Cultural Change 49 (1): 45–75.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2006. Social 
Security for All: Investing in Global Social and Eco-
nomic Development. Discussion Paper 16. Geneva: 
International Labour Office.

———. 2008. Can Low-Income Countries Afford Basic 
Social Security? Social Security Policy Briefings Paper 
3. Geneva: International Labour Office. www.ilo.org/
public/libdoc/ilo/2008/108B09_73_engl.pdf. Accessed 
3 May 2011.

———. 2010. “Employment and Social Protection Poli-
cies from Crisis to Recovery and Beyond: A Review of 
Experience.” Report to the G20 Labour and Employ-
ment Ministers Meeting, 20–21 April, Washington, 
DC. www.ilo.org/public/libdoc/jobcrisis/download/
g20_report_employment_and_social_protection_
policies.pdf. Accessed 14 July 2011.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2004. “Djibouti: 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.” IMF Country Report 
04/152. International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2004/cr04152.pdf. 
Accessed 10 May 2011.

Hutton, G., L. Haller, and J. Bartram. 2006. “Economic 
and Health Effects of Increasing Coverage of Low Cost 
Water and Sanitation Interventions.” Occasional Paper 
2006/33. UNDP–HDRO, New York. 

———. 2010. “A Fair and Substantial Contribution by the 
Financial Sector: Final Report for the G20.” International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. www.imf.org/external/
np/g20/pdf/062710b.pdf. Accessed 5 June 2011.

IADB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2008. 
“Improved Access to Water and Sanitation Services 
in Small Municipios.” Donors Memorandum PE-M1049. 
Inter-American  Development  Bank,  Washington, 
DC. http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.
aspx?docnum=1645546. Accessed 5 May 2011.

———. 2010. “Brazilian City of Manaus Expands Access 
to Sanitation for Low-Income Families with Help from 
Spain.” News Release, 28 May. www.iadb.org/en/
news/news-releases/2010-05-28/manaus-extends-low 
-income-sanitation,7200.html. Accessed 15 May 2011.

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2008. World Energy 
Outlook. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development.

———. 2010. World Energy Outlook. Paris: Organisation 

for Economic Co-operation and Development.

IEA (International Energy Agency), UNDP (United 
Nations Development Programme) and UNIDO 
(United Nations Industrial Development Orgniza-
tion). 2010. Energy Poverty: How to Make Modern 
Access Universal? Special early excerpt of World 
Energy Outlook 2010 for the UN General Assembly. 
Paris: International Energy Agency.

IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Develop-
ment). 2011. Rural Poverty Report 2011. Rome. www.
ifad.org/rpr2011/report/e/rpr2011.pdf.  Accessed 
10 June 2011.

Independent Evaluation Group. 2008. The Welfare 
Impact of Rural Electrification: A Reassessment of the 
Costs and Benefits. IEG Impact Evaluation. Washington 
DC: World Bank. 

India, Government of, and UNDP (United Nations 
Development Programme) Disaster Risk Manage-
ment Programme. 2008. Women as Equal Partners 
Gender Dimensions of Disaster Risk Management 
Programme Compliation of Good Practices. Delhi: 
United Nations Development Programme India. 

India Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change. 
2008. National Action Plan on Climate Change. New 
Delhi. http://pmindia.nic.in/Pg01-52.pdf. Accessed 
1 July 2011.

International Water and Sanitation Centre and Nether-
lands Water Partnership. 2009. Smart Finance Solu-
tions: Examples of Innovative Financial Mechanisms for 
Water and Sanitation. Amsterdam: KIT Publishers. www.
irc.nl/redir/content/download/142154/446902/file/
Smart_Finance_Solutions.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 
1997. The Regional Impacts of Climate Change: An 
Assessment of Vulnerability, eds. R. T. Watson, M. C. 
Zinyowera, R. H. Moss, and D. J. Dokken. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.

———. 2007. Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 
2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups 

110

Human Development RepoRt 2011

I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, 
Switzerland.

———. 2011. “Summary for Policymakers.” In IPCC Spe-
cial Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate 
Change Mitigation, ed. O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, 
Y. Sokona, and K. Seyboth. Cambridge, UK and New 
York: Cambridge University Press.

ITU (International Telecommunications Union). 2011. 
World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database. 
Geneva: International Telecommunications Union.

Ivanic, M., and W. Martin. 2008. “Implications of Higher 
Global Food Prices for Poverty in Low-Income Coun-
tries.” Policy Research Working Paper 4594. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

IWGIA (International Work Group for Indigenous 
Affairs). 2008. The Indigenous World 2008. Edison, 
NJ: Transaction Publishers.

Iyigun, M., and D. Rodrik. 2004. “On the Efficacy of 
Reforms: Policy Tinkering, Institutional Change and 
Entrepreneurship.” Discussion Paper 4399. Centre for 
Economic Policy Research, London.

Jackson, M., and A. Rosencranz. 2003. “The Delhi 
Pollution Case: Can the Supreme Court Manage the 
Environment?” Environment Policy and Law 33 (2): 
88–91.

Jacoby H., M. Rabassa, and E. Skoufias. Forthcoming. 
“On the Distributional Implications of Climate Change: 
The Case of India.” Policy Research Working Paper. 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Jensen, R. 2000. “Agricultural Volatility and Investments in 
Children.” American Economic Review 90 (2): 399–404.
Jevrejeva, S., A. Grinsted, J. C. Moore, and S. Holgate. 
2006. “Nonlinear Trends and Multiyear Cycles in Sea Level 
Records.” Journal of Geophysical Research 111: 1–11.
Jha, S., and I. Pereira. 2011. “Existing Measures of Sus-
tainability: A Review.” Background Paper for the 2011 
Human Development Report. UNDP–HDRO, New York.
Jin, Y., H. Wang, and D. Wheeler. 2010. “Environmen-
tal Performance Rating and Disclosure. An Empirical 
Investigation of China’s Green Watch Program.” Policy 
Research Working Paper 5420. World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/servlet/
WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2010/09/16/000158349 
_20100916105353/Rendered/PDF/WPS5420.pdf. 
Accessed 15 June 2011.

Kammen, D. M., K. Kapadia, and M. Fripp. 2004. “Putting 
Renewables to Work: How Many Jobs Can the Clean 
Energy Industry Generate?” Renewable and Appropriate 
Energy Lab Report. University of California–Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

Kan, H., S. J. London, G Chen, Y. Zhang, G. Song, N. 
Zhao, L. Jiang, and B. Chen. 2008. “Season, Sex, Age, 
and Education as Modifiers of the Effects of Outdoor 
Air Pollution on Daily Mortality in Shanghai, China: 
The Public Health and Air Pollution in Asia Study.” 
Environmental Health Perspectives 116 (9): 1183–88.
Kelman, I., and J. J. West. 2009. “Climate Change and 
Small Island Developing States: A Critical Review.” 
Ecological and Environmental Anthropology 5 (1): 1–16. 

Kenya National Coordinating Agency for Population 
and Development. 2008. “An Output-Based Approach 
to Reproductive Health: Vouchers for Health in Kenya.” 
Policy Brief 2. Nairobi. 

Khan, A., and M. Khan. 2010. “Population Programs 
in  Bangladesh:  Problems,  Prospects  And  Policy 
Issues.” Gillespie Foundation, Pasadena, CA. http://
gillespiefoundation.org/uploads/Population_Problems_
in_Bangladesh_Problem__Prospects_and_Policy_
Issues.pdf. Accessed 4 April 2011.

Khandker, S. R., D. F. Barnes, and H. A. Samad. 2009. 
“Welfare Impacts of Rural Electrification: A Case Study 
from Bangladesh.” Policy Research Working Paper 
4859, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1368068. Accessed 6 May 2011.

Khandker, S. R., D. F. Barnes, H. A. Samad, and N. H. 
Minh. 2009. “Welfare Impacts of Rural Electrification: 
Evidence from Vietnam.” Policy Research Working Paper 
5057. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Khilyuk, L. F., and G. V. Chilingar. 2006. “On Global Forces 
of Nature Driving the Earth’s Climate. Are Humans 
Involved?” Environmental Geology 50: 899–910.

Kim, J., J. Corfee-Morlot, and P. T. Serclaes. 2009. “Link-
ing Mitigation Actions in Developing Countries with Miti-
gation Support: A Conceptual Framework.” Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development, Environ-
ment Directorate, and International Energy Agency, 
Paris. www.oecd.org/dataoecd/27/24/42474721.pdf. 
Accessed 5 May 2011.

Kimenyi, M. S. 2011. “The Arab Democracy Paradox.” The 
Brookings Institution, 4 March 04 2011. www.brookings.
edu/opinions/2011/0304_arab_democracy_kimenyi.
aspx. Accessed 15 May 2011.

King, M., A. Smith and M. Gracey. 2009. “Indigenous 
Health Part 2: The Underlying Causes of the Health 
Gap.” The Lancet 374 (9683): 76–85.

Kjellstrom, T. M. Lodh, T. McMichael,G. Ranmuthugala, 
R. Shrestha, and S. Kingsland. 2006. “Air and Water 
Pollution: Burden and Strategies for Control.” In Disease 
Control Priorities in Developing Countries, ed. D. T. 
Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. 
Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove. 
Washington, DC and New York: World Bank and Oxford 
University Press.

Klein, A.-M., C. Müller, P. Hoehn, and C. Kremen. 2009. 
“Understanding the Role of Species Richness for Crop 
Pollination Services.” In Biodiversity, Ecosystem Func-
tioning, and Human Wellbeing, ed. N. Shahid, D. E. 
Bunker, A. Hector, M. Loreau, and C. Perrings. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.

Klopfenstein, L., L. Petrasky, V. Winton, and J. Brown. 
2011. “Addressing Water Quality Issues in Rural Cam-
eroon and Household Biosand Filters.” International 
Journal for Service Learning in Engineering 6 (1): 64–80.
Klugman, J., F. Rodriguez, and H. J. Choi. 2011. “The HDI 
2010: New Controversies, Old Critiques.” Human Devel-
opment Research Paper 1. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Kockler, H. 2005. Coping Strategies of Households 
Exposed to Unequal Environmental Quality in Germany. 
Paper for the 4th Global Conference Environmental 
Justice and Global Citizenship: Environment, Sustain-
ability and Technologies, 5–7 July, Oxford, UK. www.
inter-disciplinary.net/ptb/ejgc/ejgc4/paper_koeckler1.
pdf. Accessed 25 May 2011.

Kojima, M., and R. Bacon. 2006. “Coping with Higher 
Oil Prices.” World Bank, Energy Sector Management 
Assistance Program, Washington, DC.

Koolwal, G., and D. van de Walle. 2010. “Access to Water, 
Women’s Work and Child Outcomes.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 5302. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kramarae, C., and D. Spender, eds. 2000. Routledge 
International Encyclopedia of Women: Global Women’s 
Issues and Knowledge. Education: Health to Hyperten-
sion Vol. 2. New York: Routledge. 

Kriström, B., and S. Wibe. 1997. “Environmental Policy 
in Sweden.” In Comparative Environmental Policy and 
Politics, ed. U. Desai. New York: State University of 
New York Press.

Kruize, H., and A. A. Bouwman. 2004. “Environmental (In)
equity in the Netherlands: A Case Study on the Distribu-
tion of Environmental Quality in the Rijnmond Region.” 
RIVM Report 550012003. Dutch National Institute for 
Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Neth-
erlands. www.rivm.nl/bibliotheek/rapporten/550012003.
pdf. Accessed 5 June 2011.

Kumar, S. K., and D. Hotchkiss. 1989. “Consequences 
of Deforestation for Women’s Time Allocation, Agricul-
tural Production and Nutrition in Hill Areas of Nepal.” 
Research Report 69. International Food Policy Research 
Institute, Washington, DC.

Lama, J. R., C. R. Seas, R. León-Barúa, E. Gotuzzo, and 
R. B. Sack. 2004. “Environmental Temperature, Cholera, 
and Acute Diarrohea in Adults in Lima, Peru.” Journal 
of Health Population and Nutrition 22 (4): 399–403.

Laurian, L. 2008. “Environmental Justice in France.” Jour-
nal of Environmental Planning Management 51: 55–79.
Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Devel-
opment. 2010. Globalizing Solidarity: The Case for 
Financial Levies. Report of the Committee of Experts 
to the Taskforce on International Financial Transac-
tions and Development. Paris: Permanent Leading 
Group Secretariat, French Ministry of Foreign and 
International Affairs.

Lehrer, J. 2010. “A Physicist Solves the City.” New 
York Times Magazine, 19 December. www.nytimes.
com/2010/12/19/magazine/19Urban_West-t.html. 
Accessed 15 June 2011.

Leisher, C., M. Sanjayan, J. Blockhus, A. Kontoleon, 
S. N. Larsen. 2010. Does Conserving Biodiversity Work 
To Reduce Poverty? A State of Knowledge Review. 
Cambridge, UK: The Nature Conservancy, University 
of Cambridge, International Institution for Environment 
and Development, and Poverty and Conservation Learn-
ing Group.

Knutson, T. R., J. L. McBride, J. Chan, K. Emanuel, 
G. Holland, C. Landsea, I. Held, J. P. Kossin, A. K. 
Srivastava, and M. Sugi. 2010. “Tropical Cyclones 
and Climate Change.” Nature Geoscience 3: 157–63.

Leonhardt, D. 2011. “The Big Thirst: The Future of Water.” 
Economix (blog), New York Times, 3 May. http://econo-
mix.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/05/03/the-big-thirst-the 
-future-of-water/. Accessed 5 May 2011.

reFerenCeS

111

Li, Q., and R. Reuveny. 2006. “Democracy and Environ-
mental Degradation.” International Studies Quarterly 
50: 935–56.

Lieuw-Kie-Song, M. R. 2009. “Green Jobs for the Poor: 
A Public Employment Approach.” Poverty Reduction 
Discussion Paper 2009/02. United Nations Development 
Programme, New York.

Lin, J. 2010. “New Structural Economics: A Framework 
for Rethinking Development.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 5197. World Bank, Washington, DC. 

Lindsay S. W., and Martens W. J. M. 1998. “Malaria 
in the African highlands: Past, Present and Future.” 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization 76: 33–45.
Liu, J., and P. Raven. 2010. “China’s Environmental Chal-
lenges and Implications for the World.” Environmental 
Science and Technology 40: 823–51.

Llavador, H., J. Roemer, and J. Silvestre. 2011. “Sus-
tainability in the Presence of Global Warming: Theory 
and Empirics.” Human Development Research Paper 5. 
UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Lloyd-Smith, M., and L. Bell. 2003. “Toxic Disputes and the 
Rise of Environmental Justice in Australia.” International 
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health 9: 
14–23. http://ntn.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/
envjusticeinaust.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Lobell, D. B., M. B. Burke, C. Tebaldi, M. D. Mastran-
drea, W. P. Falcon, and R. L. Naylor. 2008. “Prioritizing 
Climate Change Adaptation Needs for Food Security in 
2030.” Science 319: 607–10.

Lobell, D. B., W. Schlenker, and J. Costa-Roberts. 
2011. “Climate Trends and Global Crop Production since 
1980.” Science 333 (6402): 616–20. 

Lopez-Calva, L., and N. Lustig, eds. 2010. Declining 
Inequality in Latin America: A Decade of Progress? 
Brookings Institution Press and the United Nations 
Development Programme: Washington, DC, and New 
York.

Lopez Carr, D., and L. Grandia. 2011. “Implications of 
Urban vs. Rural Fertility Rates: The Case of Guatemala.” 
The New Security Beat (blog), The Woodrow Wilson 
Center Environmental Change and Security Program, 
22 March. www.newsecuritybeat.org/2011/03/watch 
-david-lopez-carr-and-liza-grandia.html. Accessed 
18 May 2011.

Loughran, D., and L. Pritchett. 1997. “Environmental Scar-
city, Resource Collection, and the Demand for Children 
in Nepal.” Working Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Lundqvist, L. 1972. “Sweden’s Environmental Policy.” 
Ambio 1 (3): 90–101. www.jstor.org/stable/4311956. 
Accessed 13 May 2011.

Lwin Oo, Y. 2010. “Global Hand-Washing Day Inspires 
Children of Myanmar to Regular Hand-Washing.” 
UNICEF Myanmar. www.unicef.org/myanmar/water_ 
sanitation_14579.html. Accessed 23 May 2011.

Mansour, M., J. B. Mansour, and A. H. El Swesy. 2010. 
“Scaling up Proven Public Health Interventions through a 
Locally Owned and Sustained Leadership Development 
Programme in Rural Upper Egypt.” Human Resources 
for Health 8 (1). www.human-resources-health.com/
content/8/1/1. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Manus, P. 2006. “Indigenous People, Environmental Rights 
and Evolving Common Law Perspectives in Canada, 
Australia and the United States.” Boston College 
Environmental Affairs Law Review 33 (1). http://law-
digitalcommons.bc.edu/ealr/vol33/iss1/2. Accessed 
19 April 2011.

Marchiori , L., J.-F. Maystadt, and I. Schumacher. 
2011. “The Impact of Climate Variations on Migration 
in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Presentation at the Confer-
ence on Adaptation to Climate Change, 18–19 May, 
Washington, DC. www.gwu.edu/~iiep/adaptation/
docs/Maystadt,%20the%20Impact%20of%20 
Climate%20Variations%20on%20Migration%20in%20
sub-Saharan%20Africa.pdf. Accessed 15  July 2011. 

Marín, A., S. Gelchich, G. Araya, G. Olea, M. Espíndola, 
and J. C. Castilla. 2010. “The 2010 Tsunami in Chile: 
Devastation and Survival of Coastal Mall-Scale Fishing 
Communities.” Marine Policy 34 (6): 1381–84.

Martin, P. L. 2011. “Pay to Preserve: The Global Politics of 
Ecuador’s Yasuní-ITT Proposal.” Revue internationale 
de politique de développement 2 http://poldev.revues.
org/770. Accessed 25 July 2011.

May, J. R. 2006. “Constituting Fundamental Environmental 
Rights Worldwide.” Pace Environmental Law Review 23 
(1). http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1075&context=pelr. Accessed 5 June 2011.

Mayer, A. L., P. E. Kauppi, P. K. Angelstam, Y. Shang, 
and P. M. Tikka. 2005. “Importing Timber, Exporting 
Ecological Impact.” Science 308 (5720): 359–60.

Mayer, A. L., P. E. Kauppi, P. M. Tikka, and P. K. Angel-
stam. 2006. “Conservation Implications of Exporting 
Domestic Wood Harvest to Neighboring Countries.” 
Environmental Science and Policy 9 (3): 228–36.

Mayer-Foulkes, D. 2011. “A Cross-Country Causal Pan-
orama of Human Development and Sustainability.” 
Background Paper for the 2011 Human Development 
Report. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Mayers, J. 2007. “Trees, Poverty and Targets: Forests 
and the Millennium Development Goals,” Briefing. 
International Institute for Environment and Develop-
ment, London.

McGillivray, M. 2011. “Global Inequality in Health: 
Disparities in Human Longevity.” In Health Inequality 
and Development, ed. M. McGillivray, I. Dutta, and D. 
Lawson. New York and Helsinki: Palgrave McMillan in 
association with the United Nations University World 
Institute for Development Economics Research.

McGranahan, G., P. Jacobi, J. Songsor, C. Surjadi, 
and M. Kjellen. 2001. The Citizens at Risk, from Urban 
Sanitation to Sustainable Cities. London: Earthscan. 
McKinsey and Company. 2009. “Pathways to a Low-
Carbon Economy: Version 2 of the Global Greenhouse 
Gas  Abatement  Cost  Curve.”  https://solutions.
mckinsey.com/ClimateDesk/default.aspx. Accessed 
15 July 2011.

McSweeney, K.. 2004. “Forest Product Sale as Natural 
Insurance.” Society and Natural Resources, 17 (1): 
39–56.

Measure DHS. 2008. “Description of the Demographic and 
Health Surveys: Individual Recode: Data File.” Version 

1.0. Calverton, MD. www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pdf/
DHSG4/Recode4DHS.pdf. Accessed 10 June 2011.

Mehta, L., and S. Movik, eds. 2011. Shit Matters: The 
Potential of Community-Led Total Sanitation. Warwick-
shire, UK: Practical Action Publishing. 

Meier, P., V. Tuntivate, D. F. Barnes, S. V. Bogach, and D. 
Farchy. 2010. “Peru: National Survey of Rural Household 
Energy Use.” Special Report 007/10. World Bank, Energy 
Sector Management Assistance Program, World Bank, 
Washington, DC. www.esmap.org/esmap/sites/esmap.
org/files/ESMAP_PeruNationalSurvey_Web_0.pdf. 
Accessed 5 May 2011.

Meinshausen, M., N. Meinshausen, W. Hare, S. C. B. 
Raper, J. Frieler, R. Knutti, D. J. Frame, and M. R. 
Allen. 2009. “Greenhouse-Gas Emission Targets for Limit-
ing Global Warming to 2°C.” Nature 458 (30): 1158–63. 
Meyfroidt, P., T. K. Rudel, and E. F. Lambin. 2010. “Forest 
Transitions, Trade, and the Global Displacement of Land 
Use.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America 107 (49): 20917–22.
Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti. 2004 . “Eco-
nomic Shocks and Civil Convict: An Instrumental Variables 
Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (4): 725–53.
Milanovic, B. 2009. “Global Inequality and the Global 
Inequality Extraction Ratio.” Policy Research Working 
Paper 5044. World Bank, Washington, DC. 

———. 2011.“Global Income Inequality.” Household 
Survey Data for 1998–2002. World Bank, Washington, 
DC. http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/
EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:22261771~ 
pagePK:64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK: 
469382,00.html. Accessed 23 May 2011.

Milinksi, M., R. D. Sommerfeld, H.-J. Krambeck, F. A. 
Reed, and J. Marotzke. 2008. “The Collective-Risk 
Social Dilemma and the Prevention of Simulated Dan-
gerous Climate Change.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
105 (7): 2291–94.

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems 
and Human Well-Being: Desertification Synthesis. 
Washington, DC: World Resources Institute. www.
maweb.org/documents/document.355.aspx.pdf. 
Accessed 15 May 2011.

Millman, A., D. Tang, and F. P. Perera. 2008. “Air Pollution 
Threatens the Health of Children in China.” Pediatrics 
122 (3): 620–28.

Mills, S., E. Bos, E. Suzuki. 2010. “Unmet Need for 

Contraception.” Washington, DC: World Bank.

Milly, P. C. D., K. A. Dunne, and A. V. Vecchia. 2005. 
“Global Pattern of Trends in Stream Flow and Water Avail-
ability in a Changing Climate.” Nature 438 (17): 347–50. 
Milton, A. H., S. M. Shahidullah, W. Smith, K. S. Hos-
sain, Z. Hasan, and K. T. Ahmed. 2010. “Association 
between Chronic Arsenic Exposure and Nutritional Sta-
tus among the Women of Child Bearing Age: A Case-
Control Study in Bangladesh.” International Journal 
for Environmental Research and Public Health 7 (7): 
2811–21.

Mimura, N., L. Nurse, R. McLean, J. Agard, L. Brigug-
lio, P. Lefale, R. Payet, and G. Sem. 2007. “Small 

112

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Islands.” In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to 
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, ed. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, 
J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. www.ipcc.
ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-chapter16.
pdf. Accessed 19 May 2011.

Mitchell, G., and D. Dorling. 2003. “An Environmental 
Justice Analysis of British Air Quality.” Environment 
and Planning A 35 (5): 909–29. 

Mitra, A. 2011. “Environmental Resource Consumption 
Pattern in Rural Arunachal Pradesh.” Forest Policy and 
Economics 13 (3): 166–70.

Mitra, A., and D. K. Mishra. 2011. “Environmental 
Resource Consumption Pattern in Rural Arunachal 
Pradesh.” Forest Policy and Economics 13 (3): 166–170.
Molnar, A., S. J. Scherr, and A. Khare. 2004. Who 
Conserves the World’s Forests? Community Driven 
Strategies to Protect Forests and Respect Rights. Wash-
ington, DC: Forest Trends and Ecoagriculture Partners.

Mulongoy, K. J., and S. B. Gidda. 2008. The Value of 
Nature: Ecological, Economic, Cultural and Social Ben-
efits of Protected Areas. Montreal, Canada: Secretariat 
of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

Myers, N., and A. H. Knoll. 2001. “The Biotic Crisis and 
the Future of Evolution.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
98 (10): 5389–92.

Nagendra, H. 2011. “Heterogeneity and Collective Action 
for Forest Management.” Human Development Research 
Paper 2. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Namibia  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Tourism, 
Directorate of Parks and Wildlife Management. 
2010. Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptation 
Assessment for Namibia’s Biodiversity and Protected 
Area System. Windhoek.

Nankhuni, F., and J. L. Findeis. 2004. “Natural Resource 
Collection Work and Children’s Schooling in Malawi.” 
Agricultural Economics 31 (2–3): 123–34. 

Ndiritu, S. W., and W. Nyangena. 2010. “Environmental 
Goods Collection and Children’s Schooling: Evidence 
from Kenya.” Regional Environmental Change. www.
springerlink.com/content/470430708568p4qj/. Accessed 
22 May 2011. 

Nellemann, C., M. MacDevette, T. Manders, B. Eick-
hout, B. Svihus, a. G. Prins, B. P. Kaltenborn, eds. 
2009. The Environmental Food Crisis: The Environment’s 
Role in Averting Future Food Crises. A UNEP Rapid 
Response Assessment. United Nations Environment 
Programme, GRID-Arendal, Norway.

Nelson, G. C., M. W. Rosegrant, J. Koo, R. Robertson, 
T. Sulser, T. Zhu, C. Ringler, S. Msangi, A. Palazzo, 
M. Batka, M. Magalhaes, R. Valmonte-Santos, M. 
Ewing, and D. Lee. 2009. Climate Change: Impact 
on Agriculture and Costs of Adaptation. Food Policy 
Report. International Food Policy Research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Nelson, G. C., M. W. Rosegrant, A. Palazzo, I. Gray, 
C. Ingersoll, R. Robertson, S. Tokgoz, T. Zhu, T. 

B. Sulser, C. Ringler, S. Msangi, and L. You. 2010. 
Food Security, Farming, and Climate Change to 2050: 
Scenarios, Results, amd Policy Options. Washington, 
DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

Nelson, S. 2011. “Environmental Services Program Spurs 
Water Innovation for the Urban Poor.” Global Waters, 
March.  www.usaid.gov/our_work/cross-cutting_ 
programs/water/globalwaters/mar2011/3_mar11.html. 
Accessed 3 May 2011.

Nepal Water for Health. 2004. “Easy Access to Sanitation 
Materials in Rural Nepal: An Evaluation of a SaniMart 
Pilot Project.” Water for Health, Panchawati, Nepal.

Neubert, S. 2009. “Wastewater Reuse: How “Integrated” 
and Sustainable is the Strategy?” Water Policy 11: 
37–53.

Neumayer, E. 2002. “Do Democracies Exhibit Stronger 
International Environmental Commitment? A Cross-
Country Analysis.” Journal of Peace Research 39 (2): 
139–64. 

———. 2003. “Beyond Income: Convergence in Living 
Standards, Big Time.” Structural Change and Economic 
Dynamics 14 (3): 275–96.

———. 2004. “Sustainability and Well-Being Indicators.” 
Research Paper 2004/23. United Nations University 
World Institute for Development Economics Research, 
Helsinki. 

———. 2010a. Weak versus Strong Sustainability: Explor-
ing the Limits of Two Opposing Paradigms. Cheltenham, 
UK: Edward Elgar Publishing

———. 2010b. “Human Development and Sustainabil-
ity.” Human Development Research Paper 210/05. 
UNDP–HDRO, New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/
reports/global/hdr2010/papers/HDRP_2010_05.pdf. 
Accessed 10 June 2011.

———. 2011. “Sustainability and Inequality in Human 
Development.” Human Development Research Paper 
4. UNDP–HDRO, New York. 

Neumayer, E., and F. Barthel. 2011. “Normalizing Eco-
nomic Loss from Natural Disasters: A Global Analysis.” 
Global Environmental Change 21: 13–24.

Neumayer, E., and T. Plumper. 2007. “The Gendered 
Nature of Natural Disasters: The Impact of Cata-
strophic Events on the Gender Gap in Life Expectancy, 
1981–2002.” Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers 97 (3): 551–66.

Newell, P. 2008. “Civil Society, Corporate Accountability 
and the Politics of Climate Change.” Global Environ-
mental Politics 8 (3): 122–153.

Newell, P., J. Phillips, and D. Mulvaney. 2011. “Pursuing 
Clean Energy Equitably.” Human Development Research 
Paper 3. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

New York Times. 2011. “The Court and Global Warm-
ing.”  18  April.  www.nytimes.com/2011/04/19/
opinion/19tue1.html . Accessed 15 July 2011.

Nishikiori, N., T. Abe, D. G. Costa, S. D. Dharmaratne, 
O. Kunii, and K. Moji. 2006. “Who Died as a Result of 
the Tsunami? Risk Factors of Mortality among Internally 
Displaced Persons in Sri Lanka: A Retrospective Cohort 
Analysis.” BMC Public Health: 6–73.

Nordhaus, W. 2004. Retrospective on the 1970s Productiv-
ity Slowdown. Working Paper 10950. Cambridge, MA: 
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Norgaard, K., and R. York. 2005. “Gender Equality and 
State Environmentalism.” Gender and Society 19 (4): 
506–22.

Norton Rose Group. 2011. “Asia Pacific Climate Change 
Series: China.” Issue 2. Sydney, Australia. www.
nortonrose.com/files/asia-pacific-climate-change 
-policy-series-china-52306.pdf. Accessed 1 July 2011.

Noy, I. 2009. “The Macroeconomic Consequences of Disas-
ters.” Journal of Development Economics 88: 221–31.
Nugent, C., and J. M. Shandra. 2009. “State Environmen-
tal Protection Efforts, Women’s Status, and World Polity: 
A Cross-National Analysis.” Organization Environment 
22 (2): 208–29.

Nussbaum, M. 1998. Plato’s Republic: The Good Society 
and the Deformation of Desire. Washington, DC: Library 
of Congress.

———. 2006. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, National-
ity, Species Membership. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.

O’Donnell, O., E. van Doorslaer, A. Wagstaff, and 
M. Lindelow. 2008. Analyzing Health Equity Using 
Household Survey Data. WBI Learning Resources Series. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.

O’Neill, B. C., M. Dalton, R. Fuchs, L. Jiang, S. Pachauri, 
and K. Zigova. 2010. “Global Demographic Trends and 
Future Carbon Emissions.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science of the United States of America 
107 (41): 17521–26.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development. 2010a. Tackling Inequalities in Brazil, 
China, India and South Africa: The Role of Labour 
Markets and Social Policies. Paris: Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264088368-en. Accessed 
10 April 2011.

———. 2010b. Cities and Climate change. Paris.
———. 2010c. “Green Growth Strategy Interim Report: 
Implementing Our Commitment For A Sustainable 
Future.” Meeting of the OECD Council at Ministerial 
Level, 27–28 May, Paris. 

———. 2010d. Innovative Financing Mechanisms for 

the Water Sector. Paris.

———. 2011a. Tackling Inequality. Issues Paper. Paris. 
www.oecd.org/dataoecd/32/20/47723414.pdf. 
Accessed 10 May 2011.

———. 2011b. “Development Aid Reaches an Historic 
High in 2010.” OECD, Development Co-operation 
Directorate, Paris. www.oecd.org/document/35/0,3
746,en_2649_34447_47515235_1_1_1_1,00.html. 
Accessed 15 July 2011.

Okello, V. 2005. “The Upesi Rural Stoves Project.” Boiling 

Point 51: 2-5. 

Ostrom, E. 1992. Governing the Commons: The Evolution 
of Institutions for Collective Action. Natural Resources 
32. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

reFerenCeS

113

Oxfam International. 2005. “The Tsunami’s Impact on 
Women.” Briefing Note. Oxfam International, Oxford, UK. 
www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/women.
pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

———. 2007. “Blind Spot: The Continued Failure of the 
World Bank and the IMF to Fully Assess the Impact 
of Their Advice.” Joint NGO Briefing Note. Oxfam 
International, Oxford, UK.

Parry, M. L., O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, J. van der 
Linden, and C. E. Hanson, eds. 2007. Climate Change 
2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribu-
tion of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Parry, M. L., J. Lowe, and C. Hanson. 2009. “Overshoot, 

Adapt and Recover.” Nature 458: 1102–03.

Pastor, M. 2007. “Environmental Justice: Reflections from 
the United States.” In Reclaiming Nature: Environmental 
Justice and Ecological Restoration, ed. J. K. Boyce, 
S. Narain, and E. A. Stanton. London and New York: 
Anthem Press.

Pattanayak, S. K., and E. Sills. 2001. “Do Tropical Forests 
Provide Natural Insurance? The Microeconomics of 
Non-Timber Forest Products Collection in the Brazilian 
Amazon.” Land Economics 77 (4): 595–612.

Pedersen, O. W. 2008. “European Environmental Human 
Rights and Environmental Rights: A Long Time Com-
ing?” Georgetown International Environmental Law 
Review 21 (1).

Pellow, D. 2004. “The Politics of Illegal Dumping: An 
Environmental Justice Framework.” Qualitative Soci-
ology 27 (4).

Pepper, D. 2007. “India’s Rivers are Drowning in Pollution.” 
CNN Money, 11 June. http://money.cnn.com/magazines/
fortune/fortune_archive/2007/06/11/100083453/index.
htm. Accessed 15 May 2011.

Perez, E., C. Amelink, B. Briceno, J. Cardosi, J. Devine, 
A. Grossman, A. Kamasan, C. Kullman, C. A. Kumar, 
I. Moise, K. Mwambuli, A. Orsola-Vidal, and D. 
Wartono. 2011. Global Scaling Up Rural Sanitation 
Project: Progress Report. Washington, DC: Water and 
Sanitation Program.

Perrings, C., and D. W. Pearce. 1994. “Threshold Effects 
and Incentives for the Conservation of Biodiversity.” 
Environment and Resource Economics 4 (1): 13–28.
Peru Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanita-
tion. 2006. 2006–2015 National Sanitation Plan. Lima. 
The PEW Charitables Trusts. 2010. “Who’s Win-
ning the Clean Energy Race? Growth, Competition 
and Opportunity in the World’s Largest Economies.” 
Washington, DC. www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/
wwwpewtrustsorg/Reports/Global_warming/G-20%20
Report.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Potts, M., and L. Marsh. 2010. The Population Factor: 
How Does it Relate to Climate Change? Climate Adapta-
tion, February.

Pradhan, M., D. Sahn, and S. Younger. 2003. “Decom-
posing World Health Inequality.” Journal of Health 
Economics 22 (2): 271–93.

Price, G. N. 2008. “Hurricane Katrina: Was There a Politi-
cal Economy of Death.” Review of the Black Political 
Economy 35 (4): 163–80. 

Rodrik, D. 2005. “Feasible Globalizations.” In Globalization: 
What’s New?, ed. M. Weinstein. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 

Prüss-Üstün A., R. Bos, F. Gore, and J. Bartram. 2008. 
Safer Water, Better Health: Costs, Benefits and Sustain-
ability of Interventions to Protect and Promote Health. 
Geneva: World Health Organization.

Prüss-Üstün, A., and C. Corvalán. 2006. Preventing 
Disease through Healthy Environments. Towards an 
Estimate of the Environmental Burden of Disease. 
Geneva: World Health Organization.

Puddephatt, A. 2009. “Exploring the Role of Civil Society in 
the Formulation and Adoption of Access to Information 
Laws: The Cases of Bulgaria, India, Mexico, South Africa 
and the United Kingdom.” Access to Information Work-
ing Paper Series. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGOVACC/Resources/
atICivSocietyFinalWeb.pdf. Accessed 10 May 2011.

Raleigh, C., and H. Urdal. 2008. “Climate Change, 
Demography, Environmental Degradation, and Armed 
Conflict.” New Directions in Demographic Security 
Series. Woodrow Wilson International Center for 
Scholars, Environmental Change and Security Program, 
Washington, DC.

Raupach, M. R., G. Marland, P. Ciais, C. Le Quéré, J. G. 
Canadell, G. Klepper, and C. B. Field. 2007. “Global 
and Regional Drivers of Accelerating CO2 Emissions.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America 104 (24): 10288–93.

Rawls, J. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press.

Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century. 
2010. Renewables 2010 Global Status Report. Paris.
———. 2011. Renewables 2011 Global Status Report. 

Paris.

Riojas-Rodríguez, H., J. A. Escamailla-Cejudo, J. 
A. González-Hermosillo, M. M. Téllez-Rojo, M. 
Vallejo, C. Santos-Burgoa, and L. Rojas-Bracho. 
2006. “Personal PM2.5 and CO Exposures and Heart 
Rate Variability in Subjects with Known Schemic heart 
Disease in Mexico City.” Journal of Exposure Science 
and Environmental Epidemiology 16: 131–37.

Robinson, B. H. 2009. “E-Waste: An Assessment of Global 
Production and Environmental Impact.” Science of Total 
Environment 408: 183–91.

Rockström, J., W. Steffen, K. Noone, Å. Persson, F. S. 
Chapin, III, E. Lambin, T. M. Lenton, M. Scheffer, C. 
Folke, H. Schellnhuber, B. Nykvist, C. A. De Wit, T. 
Hughes, S. van der Leeuw, H. Rodhe, S. Sörlin, P. 
K. Snyder, R. Costanza, U. Svedin, M. Falkenmark, 
L. Karlberg, R. W. Corell, V. J. Fabry, J. Hansen, 
B. Walker, D. Liverman, K. Richardson, P. Crutzen, 
and J. Foley. 2009. “Planetary Boundaries: Exploring 
the Safe Operating Space for Humanity.” Ecology and 
Society 14(2).

Rodriguez-Oreggia, E., A. de la Fuente, R. de la Torre, 
H. Moreno, and C. Rodriguez. 2010. The Impact of 
Natural Disasters on Human Development and Poverty 
at the Municipal Level in Mexico. Working Paper 43. 
Harvard University, Center for International Develop-
ment, Cambridge, MA. 

———. 2006. “Goodbye Washington Consensus, Hello 
Washington Confusion? A Review of the World Bank’s 
Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning from a Decade 
of Reform.” Journal of Economic Literature 64: 973–87.
Rodrik, D., A. Subramanian, and F. Trebbi. 2004. “Institu-
tions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography 
and Integration in Economic Development.” Journal of 
Economic Growth 9 (2): 131–65.

Roper, L., E. Utz, and J. Harvey. 2006. “The Tsunami 
learning project, Lessons for Grantmakers in Natural 
Disaster Response.” Grantmakers without Borders, 
San Francisco, CA.

Roscher, C., J. Schumacher, O. Foitzik, and E. D. 
Schulze. 2007. “Resistance to Rust Fungi in Lolium 
Perenne Depends on Within Species Variation and Per-
formance of the Host Species in Grasslands of Different 
Plant Diversity.” Community Ecology 153 (1): 173–83. 
Rose, E. 1999. “Consumption Smoothing and Excess Female 
Mortality in Rural India.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 8 (1): 41–49.

Roseinweig, F. 2008. “Synthesis of Four Country Enabling 
Environment Assessments for Scaling Up Sanitation Pro-
grams.” Water and Sanitation Program, Washington, DC.

Ross, A. 2009. “Modern Interpretations of Sustainable 
Development.” Journal of Law and Society 36 (1): 32–54.
Roudi, F. 2009. “A Perspective of Fertility Behavior of 
Iranian Women.” Research paper presented at the Inter-
national Union for the Scientific Study of Population’s 
International Population Conference, 27 September–2 
October, Marrakech.

Sala-i-Martin, X. 2006. “The World Distribution of Income: 
Falling Poverty and… Convergence, Period.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics CXXI (2): 351–97.

Sanchez, T. 2010. The Hidden Energy Crisis: How Policies 
Are Failing the World’s Poor. Rugby, UK: Practical Action.
Sarfo-Mensah, P., and W. Oduro. 2007. “Traditional Natu-
ral Resources Management Practices and Biodiversity 
Conservation in Ghana: A Review of Local Concepts and 
Issues on Change and Sustainability.” Working Paper 
90.2007. Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, Milan. http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1017238. 
Accessed 15 July 2011.

Sarkar, S., J. E. Greenleaf, A. Gupta, D. Ghosh, L. 
M. Blaney, P. Bandyopadhyay, R. K. Biswas, A. 
K. Dutta, and A. K. SenGupta. 2010. “Evolution of 
Community-Based Arsenic Removal Systems in Remote 
Villages in West Bengal, India: Assessment of Decade-
long Operation.” Water Research 44 (2010): 5813−22.
Schmidt, R. 2008. The Currency Transaction Tax, Rate and 
Revenue Estimates. Tokyo: United Nations University 
Press, War on Want and the North-South Institute.

Schmidt, R., and A. Bhushan. 2011. “The Currency 
Transactions Tax: Feasibility, Revenue Estimates, and 
Potential Use of Revenues.” Human Development 
Research Paper 9. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

114

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Scholtes, F. 2011. “Environmental Sustainability in a 
Perspective of the Human Development and Capabil-
ity Approach.” Background Paper for the 2011 Human 
Development Report. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Schreckenberg, K., and C. Luttrell. 2009. “Participatory 
Forest Management: A Route to Poverty Reduction?” 
International Forestry Review 11: 221–38.

Schreiber, M. A. Forthcoming. “The Evolution of Legal 
Instruments and the Sustainability of the Peruvian 
Anchovy Fishery.” Marine Policy.

Seballos, T. T., M. Tarazona, and J. Gallegos. 2011. Chil-
dren and Disasters: Understanding Impact and Enabling 
Agency. Brighton, UK: Children in a Changing Climate. 
www.childreninachangingclimate.org/database/CCC/
Publications/IMPACTS%20and%20AGENCY_FINAL.
pdf. Accessed 15 June 2011.

Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 
2010. Global Biodiversity Outlook 3. Montreal, Canada. 
www.cbd.int/doc/publications/gbo/gbo3-final-en.pdf. 
Accessed 20 June 2011.

Secretariat of the Pacific Community. 2011. “Climate 
Change May Halve Pacific Islands’ Coastal Fish Catches.” 
4  March.  www.spc.int/en/component/content/
article/216-about-spc-news/683-climate-change-may 
-halve-paci. Accessed 15 May 2011. 

Development. The Third Report from the Working Group 
on Climate Change and Development. London: New 
Economics Foundation.

Skoufias, E., B. Essama-Nssah, and R. Katayama . 2010. 
“Too Little Too Late: Welfare Impacts of Rainfall Shocks 
in Rural Indonesia.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Skoufias, E., M. Rabassa, and S. Olivieri. 2011. “The 
Poverty Impacts of Climate Change: A Review of the 
Evidence.” Policy Research Working Paper 5622. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.

Smith, K. R., S. Mehta, and M. Maeusezahl-Feuz. 
2004. “Indoor Air Pollution from Household Use of Solid 
Fuels.” In Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: 
Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable 
to Selected Major Risk Factors, eds. M. Ezzati, A. D. 
Lopez, A. Rodgers, and C. J. L. Murray. Geneva: World 
Health Organization.

Sobrevila, C. 2008. The Role of Indigenous Peoples in Bio-
diversity Conservation: The Natural but Often Forgotten 
Partners. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://sitere-
sources.worldbank.org/INTBIODIVERSITY/Resources/
RoleofIndigenousPeoplesinBiodiversityConservation.
pdf. Accessed 15 June 2011.

Solow, R. M. 1973. “Is the End of the World at Hand?” 

Challenge 16 (1): 39–50.

Sen, A. 1979. “Equality of What?” Stanford University. The 
Tanner Lecture on Human Values, 22 May, Palo Alto, CA. 
http://culturability.fondazioneunipolis.org/wp-content/
blogs.dir/1/files_mf/1270288635equalityofwhat.pdf. 
Accessed 15 June 2011. 

———. 1974. “The Economics of Resources or the 
Resources of Economics.” Papers and Proceedings 
of the Eighty-Sixth Annual Meeting of the American 
Economic Association. The American Economic Review 
64 (2): 1–14

———. 2003. “Continuing the Conversation: Amartya 
Sen Talks with Bina Agarwal, Jane Humphries, and 
Ingrid Robeyns.” Feminist Economist 9 (2–3): 319–32.
———. 2006. “Human Rights and the Limits of the Law.” 

Cardozo Law Review 27 (6): 2913–27.

———. 2009. The Idea of Justice. Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press.

———. 2010. “The Place of Capability in a Theory of 
Justice.” In Measuring Justice: Primary Goods and 
Capabilities, ed. H. Brighouse and I. Robeyns. Cam-
bridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

Senbet, D. 2010. “Determinants of Child Labor Versus 
Schooling in Rural Ethiopia.” European Journal of Social 
Sciences 17 (3). www.eurojournals.com/ejss_17_3_10.
pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Shafik, N. 2011. “The Future of Development Finance.” 
Working Paper 250. Center for Global Development, 
Washington, DC. www.cgdev.org/content/publications/
detail/1425068. Accessed 15 July 2011.

Shandra, J. M., C. L. Shandra, and B. London. 2008. 
“Women,  Non-Governmental  Organizations,  and 
Deforestation: A Cross-National Study.” Population 
and Environment 30(1–2): 48–72.

Shelton, D. L. 2010. “Developing Substantive Environ-
mental Rights.” Journal of Human Rights and the 
Environment 1 (1): 89–120.

Simms, A., J. M. Maldonado, and H. Reid. 2006. Up in 
Smoke? Latin America and the Caribbean: The Threat 
from Climate Change to the Environment and Human 

———. 1993. “An Almost Practical Step toward Sustain-

ability.” Resources Policy 19 (3): 162–72. 

Sonak, S., M. Sonak, and A. Giriyan. 2008. “Shipping 
Hazardous Waste: Implications for Economically 
Developing Countries.” International Environmental 
Agreements 8: 143–59.

South Africa Department of Environmental Affairs and 
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 
2011. Working for the Environment. Pretoria: South 
Africa Department of Environmental Affairs. www.
grida.no/files/publications/savg_ebook.pdf. Accessed 
20 June 2011.

Speck, S. 2010. “Options for Promoting Environmental Fis-
cal Reform in EC Development Cooperation: South Africa 
Country Case Study.” UNEP-UNDP Poverty-Environment 
Initiative, Nairobi. www.unpei.org/PDF/budgetingfinanc-
ing/southafrica-case-study-fiscalreforms.pdf. Accessed 
20 July 2011.

Speelmon E. C., W. Checkley, R. H. Gilman, J. Patz, M. 
Calderon, and S. Manga. 2000. “Cholera Incidence and 
El Niño–Related Higher Ambient Temperature.” Journal 
of American Medical Association 283 (23): 3072–74.
Speth, J. G. 2008. The Bridge at the Edge of the World: 
Capitalism, the Environment, and Crossing from Crisis 
to Sustainability. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Stern, N. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change. The 
Stern Review. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stern, N., and C. Taylor. 2007. “Climate Change: Risk, 
Ethics and the Stern Review.” Science 317: 203–04.

———. 2010. “What Do the Appendices to the Copen-
hagen Accord Tell Us about Global Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions and the Prospects for Avoiding a Rise in 
Global Average Temperature of More Than 2°C?” Policy 
Paper. Center for Climate Change Economics and Policy, 
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and 
the Environment and United Nations Environment 
Programme, London and New York.

Stiglitz, J. E. 2011. “Gambling with the Planet.” Project 
Syndicate, 6 April 2011. www.project-syndicate.org/
commentary/stiglitz137/English. Accessed 16 May 2011.

Stiglitz, J. E., A. Sen, and J.-P. Fitoussi. 2009. Report 
of the Commission on the Measurement of Economic 
Performance and Social Progress. Paris.

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 

(SIPRI). 2010. Yearbook 2010. Stockholm.

Sze, J., and J. K. London. 2008. “Environmental Justice 
at the Crossroads.” Sociology Compass 2/4: 1331–54
Tachamo, R. D., O. Moog, D. N. Shah, and S. Sharma. 
2009. “The Cause and Implications of Urban River 
Pollution: Mitigative Measures and Benthic Macro-
invertebrates as River Monitoring Tool.” In Water and 
Urban Development Paradigms towards an Integration 
of Engineering, Design and Management Approaches, 
ed. J. Feyen, K. Shannon, and M. Neville. London: Taylor 
and Francis Group.

Takasaki, Y., B. L. Barham, and O. T. Coomes. 2004. 
“Risk Coping Strategies in Tropical Forests: Floods, 
Illnesses and Resource Extraction.” Environment and 
Development Economics 9 (2): 203–24.

Thomas, R., E. Rignot, G. Casassa, P. Kanagaratnam, 
C. Acuña, T. Akins, H. Brecher, E. Frederick, P. 
Gogineni, W. Krabill, S. Manizde, H. Ramamoorthy, 
A. Rivera, R. Russell, J. Sonntag, R. Swift, J. Yungel, 
and J. Zwally. 2004. “Accelerated Sea Level Rise from 
West Antarctica.” Science 306 (5694): 255–58. 

Thomas,  V.,  and  M.  Ahmad.  2009.  “A  Historical 
Perspective on the Mirab System: A Case Study of 
the Jangharoq Canal, Baghlan.” Case Study Series. 
Afghanistan Research and Evaluation Unit. www.areu.
org.af/Uploads/EditionPdfs/908E-The%20Mirab%20
System-CS-web.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2011.

Thornton, P. K., P. G. Jones, G. Alagarswamy, and 
J. Andresen. 2009. “Spatial Variation of Crop Yield 
Response to Climate Change in East Africa.” Global 
Environmental Change 19: 54–65. 

Timsina, N. P. 2003. “Promoting Social Justice and Con-
serving Mountain Forest Environments: A Case Study of 
Nepal’s Community Forestry Programme.” Geographical 
Journal 169 (3): 236–42.

Tole, L. 2010. “Reforms from the Ground Up: A Review 
of Community-Based Forest Management in Tropical 
Developing Countries.” Environmental Management 
45 (6): 1312–31.

Torras, M. 2006. “The Impact of Power Equality, Income, 
and the Environment on Human Health: Some Inter-
Country Comparisons.” International Review of Applied 
Economics 20 (1): 1–20.

———. 2011. “A Survey of the Effects of Inequality on the 
Environment and Sustainability.” Background Paper for 

reFerenCeS

115

the 2011 Human Development Report. UNDP–HDRO, 
New York.

Torras, M., and J. K. Boyce 1998. “Income, Inequality, 
and Pollution: A Reassessment of the Environmental 
Kuznets Curve.” Ecological Economics 25: 147–60. 
Transparency International. 2011. The Global Corrup-
tion Report: Climate Change. London and Washington, 
DC: Earthscan.

Tucker, J. 2010. “Are Mexico’s Conditional Cash Transfers 

missing the target?” Policy Matters 7 (2): 4-9. 

Ulimwengu, J. M., and R. Ramadan. 2009. “How Does 
Food Price Increase Affect Ugandan Households? An 
Augmented Market Approach.” Discussion Paper 
00884. International Food Policy Research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

UN (United Nations). 1992. “1992 Rio Declaration on 
Environment and Development.” Conference on Environ-
ment and Development, 3–14 June, Rio de Janeiro.

———. 1997. “Programme for the Further Implementation 
of Agenda 21.” Agenda Item 8, A/RES/S-19/2. United 
Nations General Assembly, New York.

———. 2002. “United Nations Declaration on Sustainable 
Development.” Adopted at the World Summit on Sus-
tainable Development. 2–4 September, Johannesburg.

———. 2008. Innovation for Sustainable Development: 

Local Case Studies from Africa. New York.

———. 2010. The Millennium Development Goals Report 

2010. New York: United Nations.

———. 2011. “International Year of Sustainable Energy 
for All.” Sixty-fifth Session, Agenda item 20 and 151, 
A/65/151. UN General Assembly, New York. http://
daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N10/521/60/
PDF/N1052160.pdf?OpenElement. Accessed 14 July 
2011.

UN Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Pro-
gramme). 2003. Water and Sanitation in the World’s 
Cities: Local Action for Global Goals. London and New 
York: Earthscan.

UN Millennium Project. 2005. Investing in Development: 
A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals. Overview. New York.

UN Water. 2006. “Gender, Water and Sanitation: A Policy 
Brief.” UN Water, Inter-Agency Task Force on Gender 
and Water, New York.

———.2010a. Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation 
and Drinking-Water: Targeting Resources for Better 
Results. Geneva: World Health Organization.

———. 2010b. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking-
Water. Geneva: World Health Organization and United 
Nations Children’s Fund. www.unwater.org/downloads/
JMP_report_2010.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2011.

UNDESA (United Nations Department for Economic 
and Social Affairs). 2006. Trends in Sustainable 
Development. New York: United Nations. www.un.org/
esa/sustdev/publications/trends2008/fullreport.pdf. 
Accessed 15 June 2011.

———. 2008. World Population Prospects: 2008 Revision, 

New York: United Nations.

———. 2009. World Economic and Social Survey 2009: 
Promoting Development, Saving the Planet. New York: 
United Nations. 

Human Development Reports 1990–2010. New York: 
Oxford University Press through 2005; and Palgrave 
Macmillan since 2006.

———. 2010a. Promoting Development, Saving the 

Planet. New York: United Nations.

———. 2010b. The World’s Women 2010: Trends and 

Statistics. New York: United Nations.

———. 2011a. World Economic and Social Survey 2011: 
The Great Green Technological Transformation. New 
York: United Nations.

———. 2011b. World Population Prospects: The 2010 
Revision. CD-ROM Edition. New York: United Nations.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme).  
2002. Arab Human Development Report 2002: Creating 
Opportunities for Future Generations. New York: United 
Nations Development Programme.

———. 2008. “Mid-Term Review of the Global Environ-
ment Facility: Resource Allocation Framework.” Techni-
cal Paper 3. United Nations Development Programme, 
Global Environment Facility, New York. 

———. 2009. Arab Human Development Report 2009: 
Challenges to Human Security in Arab Countries. New 
York: United Nations Development Programme.

———. 2010. “Fostering Social Accountability: From 
Principle to Practice.” Guidance Note. Oslo Gover-
nance Centre, Democratic Governance Group, Bureau 
for Development Policy, Oslo.

———. 2011a. “Western Balkans: Assessment of Capaci-
ties for Low-Carbon and Climate Resilient Development —
Presentation  Transcript.”  www.slideshare.net/
undpeuropeandcis/undp-survey-results-assessment 
-of-capacities-for-lowcarbon-and-climate-resilient 
-development. Accessed 28 July 2011. 

———. 2011b. Energy for People-Centered Sustainable 
Development. New York: United Nations Development 
Programme. 

———. 2011c. Sharing Innovative Experiences: Suc-
cessful Social Protection Floor Experiences. Vol. 18. 
New York.

———. n.d. “Community Water Initiative.” www.undp.
org/water/community-water-initiative.shtml. Accessed 
15 May 2011.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) 
Bhutan. 2008. Bhutan’s Progress: Midway to the Mil-
lennium Development Goals. Thiampu: United Nations 
Development Programme. 

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) 
Costa  Rica  Country  Office,  Observatorio  del 
Desarrollo, and Universidad de Costa Rica. 2011. 
“Sustainability and Equity: Challenges for Human 
Development.” Human Development Report 2011 
Case Study. San José.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) and 
GEF (Global Environment Facility). 2010. “Annual 
Performance Report: Project Implementation Report. 
PIMS 3121: Strengthening the Protected Area Network.” 
Unpublished internal document, New York.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme)–
Human Development Report Office. 1990–2010. 

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme)−
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) 
Poverty-Environment Initiative. 2008. “Environment, 
Climate Change and the MDGs: Reshaping the Devel-
opment Agenda.” A Poverty Environment Partnership 
Event in Support of the UN High Level Event on MDGs.” 
Nairobi.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme), 
World Bank and WRI (World Resources Institute). 
2005. World Resources 2005: The Wealth of the Poor: 
Managing Ecosystems to Fight Poverty. Washington, 
DC: World Resources Institute.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) 
Water Governance Programme. 2010. “Djibouti.” 
Country Sector Assessments Volume 2. United Nations 
Development Programme, Governance, Advocacy and 
Leadership for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, New York.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) 
and WHO (World Health Organization). 2009. The 
Energy Access Situation in Developing Countries: A 
Review Focusing on the Least Developed Countries 
and Sub-Saharan Africa. New York: United Nations 
Development Programme.

———. 2011. Sharing Innovative Experiences: Successful 
Social Protection Floor Experiences (vol. 18). United 
Nations Development Programme, Special Unit for the 
South-South Cooperation, New York.

UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for 
Europe). 2011. “Summary of the Report on Measuring 
Sustainable Development Proposed Indicators, and 
Results of Electronic Consultation.” ESA/STAT/AC.238, 
UNCEEA/6/14. Sixth Meeting of the UN Committee of 
Experts on Environmental-Economic Accounting, 15–17 
June, New York.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 
2007. “Interlinkages: Governance for Sustainability.” 
In Global Environment Outlook (GEO 4). Nairobi: United 
Nations Environment Programme.

———. 2009. From Conflict to Peacebuilding: The Role 
of Natural Resources and the Environment. Nairobi: 
United Nations Environment Programme.

———. 2010. Green Economy: Developing Countries 
Success Stories. Nairobi: United Nations Environment 
Programme.

———. 2011. Towards a Green Economy; Pathways to 
Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication. 
Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) and 
GRID Europe. 2009. “E-Waste, the Hidden Side of IT 
Equipment’s Manufacturing and Use.” United Nations 
Environment Programme, Geneva. www.grid.unep.ch/
product/publication/download/ew_ewaste.en.pdf. 
Accessed 18 June 2011.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) and 
UNU (United Nations University). 2009. “Recycling 
from E-Waste to Resources.” United Nations Environ-
ment Programme, Division of Technology, Industry and 

116

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Economics, and the StEP Initiative (Solving the E-waste 
Problem Initiative), Paris and Bonn. www.uneptie.org/
shared/publications/pdf/DTIx1192xPA-Recycling%20
from%20ewaste%20to%20Resources.pdf. Accessed 
30 May 2011.

UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund). 2009. State 
of the World Population 2009: Financing a Changing 
World, Women, Population and Climate. New York.

———. 2010. Recent Success Stories in Reproductive 

Health. New York.

UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refu-
gees). 2002. “A Critical Time for the Environment.” 
Refugees 12 (127). Geneva.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2010. “Water, 
Sanitation and Hygiene.” New York. www.unicef.org/
wash/. Accessed 1 May 2011.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund) Madagascar 
Water Sanitation and Hygiene. 2007. “UNICEF WASH 
in Schools Madagascar: An Assessment Report.” www.
scribd.com/doc/48617354/UNICEF-WASH-in-Schools 
-Madagascar-2007. Accessed 5 May 2011.

United Church of Christ. 1987. Toxic Wastes and Race in the 
United States. New York: Commission for Racial Justice.
United Nations Statistics Division. 2010. “UNSD 
Environmental Indicators.” www.unstats.un.org/unsd/
ENVIRONMENT/qindicators.htm. Accessed 15 July 2011.

United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2011. 
“Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 
1990−2009: Executive Summary.” Washington, DC.

United States National Academy of Sciences. 1992. 
Policy Implications of Greenhouse Warming: Mitigation, 
Adaptation, and the Science Base. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press.

USAID (United States Agency for International 
Development. 2008. “Environmental Health at USAID. 
What’s New?” Arlington, VA. www.ehproject.org/phe/
phe_projects.html. Accessed 15 May 2011.

USEIA (United States Energy Information Adminis-
tration). 2008. “World Nominal Oil Price Chronology 
1970–2007.” Washington, DC. www.eia.doe.gov/cabs/
AOMC/Overview.html. Accessed 28 June 2011.

Vankoningsveld, M., J. P. M. Mulder, M. J. F. Stive, L. 
VanDerValk, and A. W. VanDerWeck. 2008. “Living 
with Sea-Level Rise and Climate Change: A Case Study 
of the Netherlands.” Journal of Coastal Research 24 
(2): 367–79.

Vedeld, P., A. Angelsen, E. Sjaastad, and G. Kobugabe-
Berg. 2004. “Counting on the Environment: Forest 
Incomes and the Rural Poor.” Environment Department 
Paper 98. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Vennemo, H., K. Aunan, H. Lindhjem, and H. M. Seip. 
2009. “Environmental Pollution in China: Status and 
Trends.” Review of Environmental Economics and 
Policy 3 (2): 209–30.

Veron, S. R., J. M. Paruelo, and M. Oesterheld. 2006. 
“Assessing Desertification.” Journal of Arid Environ-
ments 66: 751–63.

Vidal, J. 2011. “Bolivia Enshrines Natural World’s Rights 
with Equal Status for Mother Earth.” 10 April. www.

guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/apr/10/bolivia 
-enshrines-natural-worlds-rights. Accessed 16 June 
2011.

Economics and Statistics 91 (1): 1–19. www.economics.
harvard.edu/faculty/weitzman/files/REStatModeling.
pdf. Accessed 23 May 2011.

Vié, J.-C., C. Hilton-Taylor, and S. N. Stuart, eds. 2009. 
Wildlife in a Changing World—An Analysis of the 2008 
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Gland, Switzer-
land: International Union for Conservation of Nature. 

Viel, J.-F., M. Hägi, E. Upegui, and L. Laurian. 2010. 
“Environmental Justice in a French Industrial Region: 
Are Polluting Industrial Facilities Equally Distributed?” 
Health and Place 17 (1): 257–62.

Wheeler, D. 2009. “Country Profile of Environmental Burden 
of Disease: China, based on 2004 WHO Statistics.” 
Geneva. 

———. 2011. “Quantifying Vulnerability to Climate 
Change: Implications for Adaptation Assistance.” 
Working Paper 240. Center for Global Development, 
Washington, DC. www.cgdev.org/content/publications/
detail/1424759. Accessed 29 May 2011.

Vincent, K. 2011. “Sustaining Equitable Progress: Gender 
Equality in the Context of Climate Change.” Background 
Paper for the 2011 Human Development Report. UNDP–
HDRO, New York. 

Widmer, R., H. Oswald-Krapf, D. Sinha-Khetriwal, M. 
Schnellmann, and H. Böni. 2005. “Global Perspec-
tives on E-Waste.” Environmental Impact Assessment 
Review 25 (5): 436–58

Vizard, P., S. Fukuda-Parr, and D. Elson. 2011. “Intro-
duction: The Capability Approach and Human Rights.” 
Journal of Human Development and Capabilities 12 
(1): 1–22.

Volker, M., and H. Waible. 2010. “Do Rural Households 
Extract More Forest Products in Times of Crisis? Evidence 
from the Mountainous Uplands of Vietnam.” Forest 
Policy and Economics 12 (6): 407–14.

Walker, A. 2010. “In Rural India, IKEA Solar-Powered Lamps 
Light a Path for Girl Students.” IKEA Social Initiative 
projects. www.unicef.org/infobycountry/india_53698.
html. Accessed 28 May 2011.

Walton, M. 2010. “Capitalism, the State and the Underlying 
Drivers of Human Development.” Human Development 
Research Paper 9. United Nations Development Pro-
gramme, Human Development Report Office, New York.

Wang, H., J. Bi, D. Wheeler, J. Wang, D. Cao, G. Lu, 
and Y. Wang. 2002. “Environmental Performance Rat-
ing and Disclosure: China’s Green-Watch Program.” 
Policy Research Working Paper 2889. World Bank, 
Washington, DC.

Wang, L., S. Bandyopadhyay, M. Cosgrove-Davies, 
and H. Samad. 2011. “Quantifying Carbon and Dis-
tributional Benefits of Solar Home System Programs 
in Bangladesh.” Policy Research Working Paper 5545. 
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Watts, J. 2006. “Doctors Blame Air Pollution for China’s 

Asthma Increases.” The Lancet 368 (9537): 719–20.
———. 2011. “A Report Card for China’s Environment.” Envi-
ronmental Blog, The Guardian, 3 June. www.guardian.
co.uk/environment/blog/2011/jun/03/report-card-for 
-china-environment. Accessed 16 June 2011.

WCED (United Nations World Commission on Environ-
ment and Development). 1987. Our Common Future. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Weikard, H. -P. 1999. Wahlfreiheit für zukünftige Genera-
tionen. Neue Grundlagen für eine Ressourcenökonomik. 
Marburg, Germany: Metropolis Press.

Weitzman, M. L. 2009a. “Some Basic Economics of 
Extreme Climate Change.” In Changing Climate, Chang-
ing Economy, ed. Jean-Philippe Touffut. Northampton, 
MA : Edward Elgar.

———. 2009b. “On Modelling and Interpreting the Eco-
nomics of Catastrophic Climate Change.” Review of 

Wilkinson, M., N. Moilwa, and B. Taylor. 2004. “The 
Design and Development of a Sanitation Hand Washing 
Dispenser: A South African Case Study.” 30th Water, 
Engineering and Development Centre International 
Conference, 25–29 October, Vientiane, Lao PDR. 

Willenbockel, D. 2011. “Environmental Tax Reform in 
Vietnam: An Ex Ante General Equilibrium Assessment.” 
Paper presented at EcoMod conference, 29 June–1 July, 
University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal.

Wire, T. 2009. “Fewer Emitters, Lower Emissions, Less 
Cost Reducing Future Carbon Emissions by Investing 
in Family Planning a Cost/Benefit Analysis.” M.Sc. dis-
sertation. London, UK: London School of Economics 
and Political Science. www.optimumpopulation.org/
reducingemissions.pdf. Accessed 3 July 2011.

Wodon, Q., and Y. Ying. 2010. “Domestic Work Time in 
Sierra Leone.” Working Paper 27736. Munich Personal 
RePEc Archive, Munich. http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.
de/27736/1/MPRA_paper_27736.pdf. Accessed 19 April 
2011.

Wong, C. -M., C. Q. Ou, K. P. Chan, Y.K. Chau, T.Q. 
Thach, L. Yang, R. Yat-Nork Chung, G. N. Thomas, 
J. S. M. Peiris, T.W. Wong, A. J. Hedley, and T.-H. 
Lam. 2008. “The Effects of Air Pollution on Mortality in 
Socially Deprived Urban Areas in Hong Kong, China.” 
Environmental Health Perspectives 116 (9): 1189–94.
Wong, C.-M., T. Q. Thach, P. Y. K. Chau, E. K. Chan, R. Y. 
Chung, C. Q. Ou, L. Yang, J. S. Peiris, G. N. Thomas, 
T. H. Lam, T. W. Wong, A. J. Hedley, and HEI Health 
Review Committee. 2010. “Interaction between Air 
Pollution and Respiratory Viruses: Time-Series Study of 
Daily Mortality and Hospital Admissions in Hong Kong.” 
In Public Health and Air Pollution in Asia: Coordinated 
Studies of Short-Term Exposure to Air Pollution and 
Daily Mortality in Four Cities, Part 4. Research Report 
154. Boston, MA: Health Effects Institute.

Wood, S., K. Sebastian, and S. J. Scherr. 2000. Pilot 
Analysis of Global Ecosystems: Agro Ecosystems. 
Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research 
Institute and World Resources Institute.

Wooldridge, J. M. 2003. Introductory Econometrics: A 
Modern Approach. Berkeley, CA: South Western Col-
lege Publications.

World Bank. 2007. Making the Most of Scarcity: Account-
ability for Better Water Management Results in the Mid-
dle East and North Africa. World Bank: Washington, DC.

reFerenCeS

117

———. 2008a. Environmental Health and Child Survival. 

Washington, DC: World Bank. 

———. 2008b. “Project Performance Assessment Report 
Lao People’s Democratic Republic Southern Provinces 
Rural Electrification Project.” Credit 3047-LA. World 
Bank, Independent Evaluation Group, Sector Thematic 
and Global Evaluation Division, Washington, DC.

———. 2008c. “Economic Impacts of Sanitation in 
Southeast Asia: A Four-Country Study Conducted in 
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam 
under the Economics of Sanitation Initiative (ESI).” 
World Bank, Jakarta.

———. 2008d. Forests Sourcebook: Practical Guidance 
for Sustaining Forests in Development Cooperation. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 

———. 2009. “Poverty and Social Impact Analysis of 
Groundwater Over-exploitation in Mexico.” World Bank, 
Latin America and Caribbean Region, Washington, DC.

———. 2010a. “Maji ni Maisha: Innovative Finance for 
Community Water Schemes in Kenya.” 3 May. Wash-
ington, DC. http://go.worldbank.org/HX72K0KP00. 
Accessed 20 May 2011.

———. 2010b. “Monitoring Climate Finance and ODA.” 
Issues Brief 1. World Bank, Sustainable Development Vice 
Presidency, Environment Department, Washington, DC.

———. 2010c. “Enabling Reforms: A Stakeholder-Based 
Analysis of the Political Economy of Tanzania’s Charcoal 
Sector and the Poverty and Social Impacts of Proposed 
Reforms.” World Bank, Sustainable Development Vice 
Presidency, Environment Department, Washington, DC. 

———. 2011a. “Applying Innovative Approaches to 
Improve Rural Sanitation at Large Scale.” http://
water.worldbank.org/water/news/applying-innovative 
-approaches-improve-rural-sanitation-large-scale. 
Accessed 20 June 2011.

———. 2011b. World Development Indicators. Wash-

ington, DC: World Bank.

World Resources Institute. 2005. World Resources 2005: 
The Wealth of the Poor, Managing Ecosystems to Fight 
Poverty. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.
World Water Assessment Programme. 2006. The 
United Nations World Water Development Report 2: 
Water a Shared Responsibility. Paris: United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

———. 2009. The United Nations World Water Devel-
opment Report 3: Water in a Changing World. Paris: 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization.

Würtenberger, L., T. Koellner, and C. R. Binder. 2005. 
“Virtual Land Use and Agricultural Trade: Estimating 

Environmental and Socio-Economic Impacts.” Ecological 
Economics 57 (4): 679–97.

Yemiru, T., A. Roos, B. M. Campbell, and F. Bohlin. 2010. 
“Forest Incomes and Poverty Alleviation under Participa-
tory Forest Management in the Bale Highlands, Southern 
Ethiopia.” International Forestry Review 12 (1): 66–77.
Yonghuan, M., S. Fan, L. Zhou, Z. Dong, K. Zhang, 
and J. Feng. 2007. “The Temporal Change of Driving 
Factors during the Course of Land Desertification in Arid 
Region of North China: The Case of Minqin County.” 
Environmental Geology 51: 999–1008.

Zacune, J. 2011. “World Bank: Catalyzing Catastrophic 
Climate Change: The World Bank’s Role in Dirty Energy 
Investment and Carbon Markets.” Issue 122. Friends 
of the Earth International, Amsterdam,.

Zambrano, E. 2011a. “An Axiomatization of the Human 
Development Index.” Human Development Research 
Paper 10. UNDP–HDRO, New York. 

———. 2011b. “Functionings, Capabilities and the 2010 
Human Development Index.” Human Development 
Research Paper 11. UNDP–HDRO, New York. 

Zhan, J., D. L. Mauzerall, T. Zhu, S. Liang, M. Ezzati, 
and J.V. Remais. 2010. “Environmental Health in China: 
Progress towards Clean Air and Safe Water.” The Lancet 
375 (9720): 1110–19.

118

Human Development RepoRt 2011

Statistical

Annex

Human development 
statistical annex

Readers guide 

 

  123

Key to HDI countries and ranks, 2011 

 

  126

Statistical tables 

 

  127

Technical notes

Calculating the human development indices—graphical presentation 

 

  167

Technical note 1 

Technical note 2 

Technical note 3 

Technical note 4 

 

 

 

 

  168

  169

  171

  172

Regions 

 

  174

Statistical references 

 

  175

Human development statistical annex

121

Readers guide

The 10 statistical tables provide an overview of 
key aspects of human development at the coun-
try and regional levels as well as for key country 
groupings. The tables include composite indices 
estimated by the Human Development Report 
Office  (HDRO),  using  the  methods  detailed 
in Technical notes 1–4. Data in the tables are 
those available to the HDRO as of 15 May 2011, 
unless otherwise noted. 

The tables include data for as many of the 
192  UN  member  states  as  possible  as  well  as 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of 
China and the Occupied Palestinian Territory. 
Data availability determines Human Develop-
ment  Index  (HDI)  country  coverage.  Where 
reliable data are unavailable or there is signifi-
cant uncertainty about the validity of the data, 
countries are excluded from calculations in order 
to ensure the statistical credibility of the HDR.
Countries  and  areas  are  ranked  by  their 
2011 HDI value. The Key to countries on the 
inside back cover of the Report lists countries 
alphabetically with their HDI ranks. 

All  the  indicators  are  available  online  in 
several  formats  at  http://hdr.undp.org/en/
statistics,  which  includes  interactive  tools, 
maps of all the human development indices and 
selected animations, descriptive materials such 
as country factsheets, and guidance on how to 
calculate the indices. These materials are also 
available in French and Spanish.

sources and definitions 

The HDRO is primarily a user, not a producer, 
of statistics. It relies on international data agen-
cies with the mandate, resources and expertise 
to collect and compile national data on specific 
indicators. Where data are not available from 
international  data  suppliers,  data  from  other 
credible sources are used.

Definitions  of  indicators  and  sources  for 
original data components are given at the end 
of each table, with full references in the Statisti-
cal references. For more detailed technical infor-
mation about the indicators, the websites of the 
respective source agencies should be consulted; 
links to these sources are at http://hdr.undp.
org/en/statistics.

comparisons over time and 
across editions of the Report 

Because international data agencies continu-
ally  improve  their  data  series,  the  data— 
including  the  HDI  values  and  ranks— 
presented in this Report are not comparable 
to those published in earlier editions. For the 
HDI, trends using consistent data— calculated 
at five-year intervals for 1980–2011—are pre-
sented in table 2. 

discrepancies between national 
and international estimates 

When compiling data series, international agen-
cies apply international standards and harmoni-
zation procedures to make national data compa-
rable across countries. When data for a country 
are missing, an international agency may pro-
duce an estimate if other relevant information is 
available. In some cases international data series 
may not incorporate the most recent national 
data. All these factors can lead to discrepancies 
between national and international estimates. 
When HDRO becomes aware of discrep-
ancies,  these  are  brought  to  the  attention  of 
national and international data authorities. The 
HDRO  continues  to  advocate  for  improving 
international data and actively supports efforts 
to enhance data quality. 

ReadeRs guide

123

country groupings and aggregates 

country notes

In addition to country-level data, several pop-
ulation-weighted  aggregates  are  presented.  In 
general,  an  aggregate  is  shown  for  a  country 
grouping only when the relevant data are avail-
able for at least half the countries and represent 
at least two-thirds of the available population in 
that classification. Aggregates for each classifica-
tion represent only the countries for which data 
are available, unless otherwise noted. Occasion-
ally aggregates are those from the original source 
rather than weighted averages; these values are 
indicated with a superscript “T”. 

Human development classification 
HDI classifications are relative—based on quar-
tiles of HDI distribution across countries and 
denoted very high, high, medium and low HDI. 
Because there are 187 countries, the four groups 
do not have the same number of countries: the 
very high, high and medium HDI groups have 
47 countries each, and the low HDI group has 
46 countries.

Country groupings 
Countries are grouped based on UNDP regional 
classification.  Other  groupings  are  based  on 
UN  classifications  such  as  Least  Developed 
Countries and Small Island Developing States. 
The composition of each region is presented in 
Regions.

Data  for  China  do  not  include  Hong  Kong  
Special Administrative Region of China, Macao 
Special  Administrative  Region  of  China  or  
Taiwan  Province  of  China,  unless  otherwise 
noted.  Data  for  Sudan  include  South  Sudan 
unless otherwise noted but are often based on 
information collected from the northern part of 
the country only. 

symbols 

A  dash  between  two  years,  as  in  2005–2011, 
indicates that the data are the most recent year 
available in the period specified, unless other-
wise  noted.  Growth  rates  are  usually  average 
annual rates of growth between the first and last 
years of the period shown.

A  slash  between  years  such  as  2005/2011 
indicates  average  for  the  years  shown,  unless 
otherwise noted.

The following symbols are used in the tables: 

Not available

.. 
0 or 0.0  Nil or negligible
Not applicable
— 
< 
Less than

124

Human development report 2011

statistical tables

composite measures

1  Human Development Index and its components

2  Human Development Index trends, 1980–2011

3 

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index

4  Gender Inequality Index and related indicators

5  Multidimensional Poverty Index 

dimensions of human development

6  Environmental sustainability

7  Human development effects of environmental threats

8  Perceptions about well-being and the environment

9  Education and health

10  Population and economy

statistical tables

125

Key to Hdi countries and ranks, 2011
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia, Plurinational State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
France
Gabon
Gambia

Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

172
70
96
32
148
60
45
86
2
19
91
53
42
146
47
65
18
93
167
141
108
74
118
84
33
55
181
185
139
150
6
133
179
183
44
101
87
163
137
187
69
170
46
51
31
27
16
165
81
98
83
113
105
136
177
34
174
100
22
78
20
106
168

126

Human development report 2011

Occupied Palestinian Territory
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania, United Republic of
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

75
9
135
29
67
131
178
176
117
158
121
13
38
14
134
124
88
132
7
17
24
79
12
95
68
143
122
15
63
126
138
43
71
160
182
64
8
40
25
151
171
61
109
175
36
159
77
57
116
111
110
54
130
184
149
120
157
3
5
129
186
156
1

114
89
145
49
58
153
107
80
112
39
41
37
50
66
166
72
82
85
99
144
56
155
59
52
180
26
35
21
142
123
23
97
169
104
140
10
11
119
127
152
103
147
162
90
62
94
92
102
161
76
30
28
4
48
115
125
73
128
154
164
173

e1

l
b
a
t

Human Development Index and its components

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria
56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011

0.943
0.929
0.910
0.910
0.908
0.908
0.908
0.905
0.905
0.904
0.903
0.901
0.898
0.898
0.897
0.895
0.888
0.886
0.885
0.884
0.884
0.882
0.878
0.874
0.867
0.866
0.865
0.863
0.861
0.846
0.840
0.838
0.838
0.835
0.834
0.832
0.831
0.816
0.813
0.810
0.809
0.806
0.805
0.805
0.797
0.796
0.793

0.783
0.782
0.781
0.776
0.773
0.771
0.771
0.771
0.770
0.770

Life expectancy 

at birth
(years)
2011

81.1
81.9
80.7
78.5
80.7
81.0
80.6
79.6
80.4
81.4
82.3
83.4
82.8
81.8
80.6
78.8
81.6
80.0
80.9
81.5
79.3
80.0
81.4
81.9
80.0
81.1
77.7
80.2
79.9
76.5
79.6
80.9
78.0
74.8
75.4
79.6
78.4
74.4
76.1
72.2
79.5
75.1
73.3
79.1
75.9
76.6
76.8

77.0
71.8
74.0
79.1
73.6
75.6
74.6
73.4
73.9
77.0

Mean years of 

schooling

(years)
2011a

Expected years 

of schooling

(years)
2011a

Gross national 
income (GNI) 

per capita

(constant 2005  

PPP $)
2011

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

2011

Nonincome 

HDI
Value
2011

12.6
12.0
11.6 b
12.4
12.5
12.1 b
11.6
10.3 c
12.2 b
11.7 b
11.0 b
11.6 b
10.0
10.4
11.6 b
11.4 b
11.9
10.9 b
10.8 b
10.6 b
11.6 b
10.3
10.4 b
10.1 b
10.1
8.8 b
12.3
9.3
10.1 b
9.3
9.8
10.4 f
8.6
12.0
11.6
9.9
7.3
11.1 b
10.0 b
10.9
7.7
9.4
11.5 b
9.7
9.3
9.8 b
9.3

8.5 b
12.1 i
10.4
9.9
9.4 m
8.5 m
10.6
10.6 b
7.8
8.5

17.3
18.0
16.8
16.0
18.0
16.0
18.0
14.7
15.9
15.7
15.6
15.1
15.7
18.0
16.9
16.9
15.5
16.1
15.3
16.1
16.9
16.8
16.6
16.3
13.3
14.4 e
15.6
16.1
16.5
13.3
14.7
11.5
14.1
15.7
14.9
14.4
12.0
15.3
15.3
16.1
15.9
13.4
15.0
14.7
15.8
13.9
13.4 h

15.5
14.7
14.9
17.5
13.3
12.0
13.7 h
13.7
13.7
13.9

47,557
34,431
36,402
43,017
23,737
35,166
29,322
83,717 d
34,854
35,837
39,924
32,295
44,805
29,354
28,230
34,347
25,849
33,357
35,719
30,462
24,914
32,438
26,508
26,484
50,557
52,569
21,405
33,296
23,747
59,993
24,841
36,095 g
45,753
16,799
19,998
21,460
107,721
16,581
17,451
16,234
20,573
28,169
14,293
13,329
14,527
15,729
17,966

13,242
9,744 j,k
11,046
5,416 l
16,729
23,029 n
10,361 o
11,412
23,274
13,245

6
16
9
6
30
10
19
–6
8
4
0
11
–4
11
12
3
14
2
–4
4
11
0
6
6
–20
–22
14
–7
5
–27
2
–19
–25
13
8
4
–36
11
7
10
1
–14
12
14
9
5
–3

12
29
20
52
–4
–15
20
14
–19
2

0.975
0.979
0.944
0.931
0.978
0.944
0.959
0.877
0.940
0.936
0.926
0.940
0.910
0.943
0.945
0.926
0.939
0.914
0.908
0.919
0.935
0.911
0.920
0.914
0.854
0.851
0.917
0.879
0.902
0.813
0.866
0.836
0.819
0.890
0.875
0.866
0.757
0.862
0.853
0.853
0.833
0.806
0.857
0.862
0.843
0.834
0.818

0.828
0.853
0.841
0.904
0.794
0.768
0.831
0.822
0.765
0.808

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

127

human development Index and its components

table

1

HDI rank

58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of
117 Guyana
118 Botswana

128

human development report 2011

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011
0.768
0.766
0.764
0.761
0.760
0.760
0.760
0.756
0.755
0.748
0.745
0.744
0.739
0.739
0.735
0.735
0.733
0.733
0.729
0.728
0.728
0.727
0.725
0.724
0.723
0.720
0.718
0.717
0.716
0.710
0.707
0.705
0.704
0.700
0.699
0.699
0.698

0.698
0.698
0.691
0.689
0.688
0.688
0.687
0.686
0.682
0.680
0.674
0.674
0.665
0.663
0.661
0.653
0.649
0.644
0.644
0.641
0.641
0.636
0.633
0.633

Life expectancy 

at birth
(years)
2011
76.1
74.5
72.6
74.2
70.1
74.6
74.8
70.3
68.8
76.0
67.0
79.3
76.9
72.6
73.1
74.4
75.7
73.7
68.5
73.4
74.8
73.1
74.0
77.5
74.6
75.6
73.5
72.3
74.2
73.7
73.0
73.0
72.3
70.7
74.0
76.1
74.5

73.4
73.1
74.9
73.4
72.4
69.2
73.5
65.0
74.1
70.6
72.2
62.7
72.5
66.6
76.8
68.5
69.3
68.7
73.2
72.8
68.3
69.0
69.9
53.2

Mean years of 

schooling

(years)
2011a
9.4
10.2 b
8.9 h
9.5
9.2
6.1
7.3
9.3 r
9.8
8.6
10.4
8.3
10.4
7.9 m
8.4
7.6 b
8.7 r
12.1 r
11.3
7.2
8.2 r
9.6
8.7
7.7 m
8.3
7.6
7.2
8.6
10.8
7.3
7.3
5.5 m
10.3 b
8.6 m
6.5
8.0 b
6.5

Expected years 

of schooling

(years)
2011a
13.2
13.7
14.0
12.6
12.3
12.3
16.6
14.6
14.1
16.0
15.1
11.7
11.3
13.8
12.9
14.2
13.6
13.1
14.7
13.6
13.3
13.8
12.9
13.2
13.1
14.0
13.8
13.2
12.0
13.6
12.7
11.8
13.7
11.8
11.8
12.4
14.5

Gross national 
income (GNI) 

per capita

(constant 2005  

PPP $)
2011
12,335
10,236
15,521
13,685
23,439 p
47,926
12,637 q
13,439
14,561
6,982
10,585
10,497
7,803
13,076
11,897
10,656
7,664
4,780
6,175
12,918
8,804
6,487
8,389
7,889
8,273
7,589
10,162
8,013
5,188
8,315
10,164
22,841
4,186
8,666
12,246
5,812
7,281

8.6
7.0
8.2
7.2 b
10.3 m
10.7 b
7.5
9.9 i
6.6
7.2 r
7.5
7.5
7.7
9.2
5.8 b
8.3
9.7
8.9 b
6.4
8.0 m
10.0 r
8.8 i
8.0
8.9

13.1
13.6
12.7
11.9
12.3
13.0
11.6
12.5 h
12.3
12.6
12.1
13.1
12.1
13.7
12.4
14.1
11.9
11.9
11.0
12.7
11.4
12.1 u
11.9
12.2

5,300
7,658
4,943
8,087
3,931 s
4,145
7,476
7,306
7,694
7,538
5,925
12,249
4,727
4,054
5,276
3,391
3,058
3,478
5,269
2,656 k,t
2,967
2,935 v
3,192
13,049

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

2011
7
16
–8
–5
–26
–57
0
–8
–13
30
4
4
18
–10
–4
–2
16
36
24
–14
2
19
2
6
2
9
–7
1
22
–4
–12
–50
26
–10
–25
9
2

9
–5
12
–13
22
18
–7
–7
–14
–11
–4
–40
5
11
–3
17
21
11
–6
23
19
19
11
–56

Nonincome 

HDI
Value
2011
0.811
0.824
0.786
0.790
0.750
0.705
0.795
0.785
0.777
0.829
0.786
0.785
0.804
0.760
0.762
0.771
0.797
0.843
0.810
0.745
0.776
0.802
0.775
0.779
0.773
0.776
0.748
0.766
0.806
0.752
0.731
0.671
0.808
0.733
0.704
0.766
0.745

0.773
0.739
0.768
0.720
0.788
0.781
0.725
0.724
0.714
0.712
0.724
0.667
0.729
0.742
0.714
0.743
0.746
0.725
0.686
0.750
0.736
0.729
0.715
0.602

human development Index and its components

HDI rank

119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011
0.632
0.625
0.625
0.624
0.619
0.617
0.617
0.615
0.607
0.593
0.589
0.582
0.574
0.573
0.568
0.547
0.541
0.537
0.533
0.524
0.523
0.522
0.522

0.510
0.509
0.509
0.504
0.500
0.495
0.486
0.483
0.482
0.480
0.466
0.466
0.462
0.459
0.459
0.458
0.454
0.453
0.450
0.446
0.435
0.433
0.430
0.430
0.429
0.427
0.420
0.408
0.400
0.400
0.398
0.376
0.363
0.359
0.353
0.349
0.344
0.343

Life expectancy 

at birth
(years)
2011
75.9
62.5
73.1
68.1
52.8
69.4
71.0
67.7
67.5
75.2
74.0
72.2
71.2
69.0
74.2
65.4
64.2
51.1
57.4
67.5
63.1
48.7
67.2

67.9
57.1
64.7
65.4
68.9
62.5
51.1
65.2
51.6
66.7
58.2
62.8
65.5
59.3
51.9
68.8
62.1
58.6
48.2
54.1
57.1
61.1
49.0
57.9
55.4
56.1
58.5
61.5
55.4
54.2
48.7
51.4
59.3
51.4
48.1
61.6
54.1
48.4

Mean years of 

schooling

(years)
2011a
5.7 b
7.4
6.5
7.8
8.5 b
5.8
6.7
9.3
9.8
5.5
5.8
4.4
4.1
5.6
3.5 i
4.4
7.1
5.4 r
5.9
4.6
5.8
7.1
2.3 r

Expected years 

of schooling

(years)
2011a
11.3
11.6
11.4
12.1
13.1
13.2
10.4
12.5
11.4
10.4
10.8
10.3
10.6
9.8
11.6
10.3
10.5
7.7
10.5
9.2
9.8
10.6
11.0

Gross national 
income (GNI) 

per capita

(constant 2005  

PPP $)
2011
4,243
6,206
3,443
3,140
9,469
3,716
3,950
2,036
1,937
2,805
2,430
4,196
4,167
3,177
3,402
3,468
1,584
17,608
3,066
2,242
1,848
4,484
5,293

4.5 i
7.0
4.2 i
4.9
4.8
2.8 i
4.4 r
4.0
5.9
5.2 i
5.1
4.3
2.5
4.5
5.0 r
3.2
4.9
3.7
5.9 b
4.7
5.3
2.8 i
6.5
3.8 r
3.3
3.3
2.8
3.1
3.3
4.2
3.3
7.2
1.5 i
2.0 b
2.3 r
3.4
1.6 w
3.5

9.1
11.0
10.8
6.9
8.1
11.2
9.1
9.2
10.3
10.7
9.1
5.8
8.6
7.5
8.9
8.8
7.6 u
8.1
9.9
10.8
9.6
10.7
7.9
5.1
11.1
9.2
9.0
4.4
6.3
8.9
9.1
9.9
8.5
8.3
9.1
4.8
8.6
6.6

1,782
1,492
1,792
2,550
1,529
3,005
4,874
1,535
2,031
824
1,328
2,271
2,213
1,708
2,069
1,160
1,123
1,859
1,664
1,124
798
1,079
1,254
2,335
1,133
1,364
1,282
1,894
1,387 p
753
1,416
376 n
971
1,123
994
536
863
707

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

2011
–5
–21
4
8
–44
–2
–5
19
20
8
10
–15
–14
–3
–7
–10
20
–91
–6
4
11
–27
–36

10
15
7
–7
11
–14
–38
7
–4
26
10
–12
–11
–2
–12
8
12
–10
–6
7
16
9
0
–25
1
–6
–5
–21
–10
8
–13
11
0
–6
–3
6
–2
2

table

1

Nonincome 

HDI
Value
2011
0.686
0.643
0.694
0.701
0.604
0.674
0.668
0.734
0.726
0.662
0.669
0.606
0.595
0.616
0.603
0.568
0.633
0.458
0.555
0.569
0.584
0.512
0.500

0.567
0.584
0.564
0.526
0.566
0.499
0.455
0.536
0.509
0.605
0.523
0.475
0.471
0.488
0.471
0.524
0.520
0.472
0.475
0.506
0.526
0.488
0.469
0.420
0.477
0.456
0.450
0.402
0.412
0.470
0.407
0.529
0.383
0.366
0.366
0.421
0.364
0.379

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

129

human development Index and its components

table

1

HDI rank

180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011
0.336
0.331
0.329
0.328
0.322
0.316
0.295
0.286

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.889
0.741
0.630
0.456

0.641
0.671
0.751
0.731
0.548
0.463
0.439
0.640
0.682

Life expectancy 

at birth
(years)
2011
47.8
55.4
56.8
49.6
50.2
50.4
54.7
48.4

68.8
72.0
82.2
79.9
81.8
51.2
67.2

80.0
73.1
69.7
58.7

70.5
72.4
71.3
74.4
65.9
54.4
59.1
69.6
69.8

Mean years of 

schooling

(years)
2011a
2.9
1.3 r
3.9
1.5 i
1.2
2.7
1.4
3.5

Expected years 

of schooling

(years)
2011a
7.2
6.3
11.0
7.2
9.2
10.5
4.9
8.2

Gross national 
income (GNI) 

per capita

(constant 2005  

PPP $)
2011
737
1,141
265
1,105
898
368
641
280

..
9.8 i
..
..
..
..
..

11.3
8.5
6.3
4.2

5.9
7.2
9.7
7.8
4.6
4.5
3.7
7.3
7.4

..
10.8
17.5
9.3
..
2.4
10.8

15.9
13.6
11.2
8.3

10.2
11.7
13.4
13.6
9.8
9.2
8.3
10.8
11.3

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

33,352
11,579
5,276
1,585

8,554
6,466
12,004
10,119
3,435
1,966
1,327
5,200
10,082

GNI per capita rank 

minus HDI rank

2011
0
–15
5
–12
–9
0
–4
–1

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Nonincome 

HDI
Value
2011
0.365
0.323
0.504
0.320
0.325
0.412
0.311
0.399

..
0.752
..
..
..
..
..

0.918
0.769
0.658
0.478

0.643
0.709
0.785
0.767
0.569
0.467
0.467
0.675
0.683

NOTES
a.  Data refer to 2011 or the most recent year available.
b.  Updated by HDRO based on UNESCO (2011) data.
c.  Assumes the same adult mean years of schooling as Switzerland before the most recent update.
d.  Estimated using the purchasing power parity (PPP) and projected growth rate of Switzerland.
e.  Calculated by the Singapore Ministry of Education.
f.  Assumes the same adult mean years of schooling as Spain before the most recent update.
g.  Estimated using the PPP and projected growth rate of Spain.
h.  Based on cross-country regression.
i.  Based on data on years of schooling of adults from household surveys from World Bank (2010).
j.  Based on UNESCAP (2011) and UNDESA (2011) projected growth rates.
k.  Based on unpublished estimates from the World Bank.
l.  PPP estimate based on cross-country regression; projected growth rate based on ECLAC (2011) and 

Organization Institute for Statistics estimate.

v.  Based on ADB (2011) and UNDESA (2011) projected growth rates.
w. Based on data from ICF Macro (2011).

UNDESA (2011) projected growth rates.

m. Based on UNESCO (2011) estimates of education attainment distribution.
n.  Based on PPP data from IMF (2011).
o.  Based on EBRD (2011) and UNDESA (2011) projected growth rates.
p.  Based on World Bank (2011b).
q.  Based on OECD and others (2011) and UNDESA (2011) projected growth rates.
r.  Based on data from UNICEF (2000–2010).
s.  Based on ADB (2011) projected growth rate.
t.  Based on UNESCWA (2011) and UNDESA (2011) projected growth rates.
u.  Refers to primary and secondary education only. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 

DEFINITIONS
Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of living. 
See Technical note 1 for details on how the HDI is calculated.
Life expectancy at birth: Number of years a newborn infant could expect to live if prevailing patterns of 
age-specific mortality rates at the time of birth stay the same throughout the infant’s life.
Mean years of schooling: Average number of years of education received by people ages 25 and older, 
converted from education attainment levels using official durations of each level.
Expected years of schooling: Number of years of schooling that a child of school entrance age can 
expect to receive if prevailing patterns of age-specific enrolment rates persist throughout the child’s life.
Gross national income (GNI) per capita: Aggregate income of an economy generated by its production 
and its ownership of factors of production, less the incomes paid for the use of factors of production 
owned by the rest of the world, converted to international dollars using purchasing power parity (PPP) 
rates, divided by midyear population.
GNI per capita rank minus HDI rank: Difference in rankings by GNI per capita and by the HDI. A negative 
value means that the country is better ranked by GNI than by the HDI.
Nonincome HDI: Value of the HDI computed from the life expectancy and education indicators only.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data from UNDESA (2011), Barro and Lee (2010b), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2011), World Bank (2011a), UNSD (2011) and IMF (2011).
Column 2: UNDESA (2011).
Column 3: HDRO updates of Barro and Lee (2010b) estimates based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics 
data on education attainment (2011) and Barro and Lee (2010a) methodology.
Column 4: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2011).
Column 5: HDRO calculations based on data from World Bank (2011a), IMF (2011) and UNSD (2011).
Column 6: Calculated based on data in columns 1 and 5.
Column 7: Calculated based on data in columns 2, 3 and 4.

130

human development report 2011

e2

l
b
a
t

Human Development Index trends, 1980–2011

Human Development Index (HDI)

HDI rank
Changea

Average annual 

HDI growth

(%)

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1980

1990

2000

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria
56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico

0.796
0.850
0.792
0.837
0.800
0.817
0.735
..
0.730
0.785
0.810
0.778
0.708
0.762
0.634
0.783
0.763
0.757
0.740
0.722
..
0.759
0.691
0.717
0.728
..
..
0.744
0.720
0.629
..
..
0.750
..
..
0.703
0.703
0.700
..
..
0.639
0.651
..
0.630
0.669
..
..

0.658
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.651
0.593

0.844
0.873
0.835
0.870
0.828
0.857
0.782
..
0.795
0.816
0.833
0.827
0.786
0.807
0.742
0.809
0.802
0.811
0.790
0.777
..
0.794
0.749
0.764
0.788
..
..
0.778
0.766
0.690
0.747
..
0.784
0.717
0.747
0.753
0.743
0.706
..
..
0.708
0.721
0.693
0.698
0.697
..
..

0.686
..
0.700
0.677
..
..
..
0.698
0.693
0.649

0.913
0.906
0.882
0.897
0.878
0.879
0.869
..
0.864
0.894
0.873
0.868
0.824
0.863
0.830
0.861
0.856
0.876
0.839
0.846
0.805
0.837
0.839
0.825
0.854
0.801
0.816
0.833
0.802
0.753
0.800
..
0.818
0.776
0.779
0.799
0.784
0.775
0.770
0.749
0.778
0.773
0.732
0.749
0.749
0.748
..

0.736
0.774
0.704
0.681
0.764
0.752
..
0.715
0.726
0.718

Value
2005

0.938
0.918
0.890
0.902
0.899
0.892
0.898
..
0.895
0.896
0.890
0.886
0.850
0.893
0.866
0.885
0.874
0.873
0.860
0.869
0.848
0.875
0.857
0.861
0.865
0.835
0.854
0.855
0.856
0.807
0.809
..
0.830
0.821
0.810
0.825
0.818
0.803
0.791
0.793
0.789
0.795
0.784
0.779
0.765
0.780
0.787

0.748
0.788
0.748
0.725
0.766
0.766
0.757
0.749
0.746
0.741

2009

2010

2011

2006–2011 2010–2011 1980–2011 1990–2011 2000–2011

0.941
0.926
0.905
0.906
0.906
0.903
0.905
..
0.900
0.898
0.899
0.895
0.888
0.897
0.889
0.891
0.884
0.883
0.879
0.880
0.876
0.877
0.874
0.870
0.863
0.856
0.863
0.860
0.863
0.841
0.837
..
0.835
0.828
0.829
0.827
0.818
0.811
0.807
0.802
0.805
0.805
0.798
0.798
0.788
0.793
0.790

0.773
0.777
0.778
0.770
0.767
0.769
0.768
0.766
0.763
0.762

0.941
0.927
0.909
0.908
0.908
0.907
0.907
0.904
0.903
0.901
0.901
0.899
0.894
0.896
0.894
0.893
0.886
0.885
0.883
0.883
0.882
0.880
0.876
0.873
0.865
0.864
0.863
0.862
0.862
0.845
0.839
0.838
0.837
0.832
0.832
0.830
0.825
0.814
0.811
0.805
0.808
0.805
0.802
0.802
0.794
0.794
0.791

0.780
0.779
0.779
0.773
0.771
0.770
0.769
0.768
0.767
0.767

0.943
0.929
0.910
0.910
0.908
0.908
0.908
0.905
0.905
0.904
0.903
0.901
0.898
0.898
0.897
0.895
0.888
0.886
0.885
0.884
0.884
0.882
0.878
0.874
0.867
0.866
0.865
0.863
0.861
0.846
0.840
0.838
0.838
0.835
0.834
0.832
0.831
0.816
0.813
0.810
0.809
0.806
0.805
0.805
0.797
0.796
0.793

0.783
0.782
0.781
0.776
0.773
0.771
0.771
0.771
0.770
0.770

0
0
5
–1
0
3
–3
..
–2
–2
1
1
14
–3
3
–2
–1
–1
1
–1
4
–7
0
–3
–3
3
–1
0
–5
3
5
..
–2
–2
0
–3
–1
0
2
0
2
–3
–1
3
3
0
–2

5
–5
2
10
–3
–3
–3
0
0
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
0
0
1
–1
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
0

0.55
0.29
0.45
0.27
0.41
0.34
0.68
..
0.69
0.45
0.35
0.47
0.77
0.53
1.13
0.43
0.49
0.51
0.58
0.66
..
0.49
0.77
0.64
0.56
..
..
0.48
0.58
0.96
..
..
0.36
..
..
0.54
0.54
0.50
..
..
0.76
0.69
..
0.79
0.57
..
..

0.56
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.55
0.85

0.53
0.30
0.41
0.21
0.44
0.28
0.71
..
0.62
0.49
0.38
0.41
0.64
0.51
0.91
0.48
0.49
0.42
0.55
0.62
..
0.51
0.76
0.64
0.45
..
..
0.50
0.56
0.97
0.56
..
0.32
0.73
0.53
0.48
0.54
0.70
..
..
0.64
0.54
0.72
0.68
0.64
..
..

0.63
..
0.52
0.65
..
..
..
0.48
0.50
0.82

0.29
0.23
0.29
0.13
0.31
0.30
0.40
..
0.43
0.09
0.30
0.33
0.78
0.36
0.72
0.35
0.34
0.10
0.48
0.40
0.85
0.48
0.42
0.52
0.13
0.71
0.53
0.33
0.64
1.06
0.44
..
0.22
0.66
0.62
0.37
0.53
0.48
0.50
0.70
0.35
0.38
0.87
0.65
0.57
0.57
..

0.56
0.09
0.95
1.19
0.11
0.23
..
0.68
0.55
0.64

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

131

table

2

human development Index trends, 1980–2011

Human Development Index (HDI)

HDI rank

58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of
117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia

1980
0.628
..
..
0.559
0.673
0.688
..
..
..
..
..
0.614
..
..
..
0.623
..
..
..
0.546
..
0.607
0.574
..
..
0.591
0.549
..
..
0.550
0.437
..
..
..
0.463
0.619
0.450

0.541
0.454
0.539
0.532
..
0.566
0.404
..
0.486
..
0.466
0.522
0.544
0.507
..
..
..
0.550
0.406
..
..
..
0.501
0.446
0.497
..

1990
0.660
..
..
0.631
0.676
0.712
..
..
..
..
..
0.656
0.656
..
..
0.629
..
..
0.707
0.618
..
0.637
0.612
..
..
0.636
0.600
..
..
0.594
0.534
..
0.649
..
0.558
0.651
0.542

0.591
0.551
0.583
0.577
..
0.624
0.490
..
0.566
..
0.524
0.605
0.572
0.560
..
0.540
..
0.571
0.497
..
..
..
0.489
0.594
0.548
0.564

2000
0.718
0.719
..
0.705
0.701
0.754
..
..
0.691
..
0.657
0.703
0.691
..
..
0.656
..
..
0.669
0.672
..
0.680
0.674
0.699
..
0.668
0.665
..
0.643
0.652
0.636
..
0.681
..
0.634
0.668
0.630

0.646
0.624
0.633
0.640
0.657
0.668
0.588
..
0.626
..
0.619
0.621
0.612
0.612
0.576
0.555
0.586
0.602
0.585
..
..
..
0.579
0.585
0.583
0.577

Value
2005
0.740
0.744
..
0.738
0.728
0.752
0.741
0.723
0.725
..
0.714
0.723
0.721
0.711
..
0.692
0.717
0.707
0.712
0.703
0.704
0.702
0.691
0.709
..
0.695
0.692
..
0.689
0.675
0.671
0.694
0.696
..
0.671
0.689
0.667

0.673
0.667
0.662
0.658
0.676
0.678
0.633
0.654
0.656
0.659
0.652
0.648
0.635
0.649
0.619
0.611
0.631
0.622
0.611
..
0.611
0.633
0.606
0.601
0.621
0.593

2009
0.760
0.761
..
0.752
0.755
0.757
0.763
0.746
0.747
..
0.733
0.738
0.734
0.733
..
0.732
0.730
0.724
0.720
0.722
0.725
0.724
0.714
0.722
..
0.716
0.708
..
0.712
0.702
0.703
0.703
0.701
..
0.690
0.696
0.692

0.694
0.691
0.680
0.680
0.685
0.685
0.674
0.677
0.673
0.674
0.669
0.664
0.651
0.656
0.650
0.642
0.638
0.636
0.638
..
0.631
0.635
0.624
0.626
0.630
0.617

2010
0.765
0.764
0.763
0.758
0.758
0.758
0.770
0.751
0.751
0.746
0.740
0.742
0.737
0.737
0.735
0.734
0.731
0.729
0.725
0.726
0.726
0.726
0.721
0.723
0.720
0.718
0.715
0.715
0.714
0.707
0.707
0.704
0.703
0.699
0.696
0.698
0.698

0.697
0.696
0.686
0.686
0.686
0.687
0.682
0.681
0.680
0.677
0.672
0.670
0.662
0.660
0.658
0.647
0.644
0.641
0.644
0.640
0.636
0.635
0.629
0.631
0.631
0.622

2011
0.768
0.766
0.764
0.761
0.760
0.760
0.760
0.756
0.755
0.748
0.745
0.744
0.739
0.739
0.735
0.735
0.733
0.733
0.729
0.728
0.728
0.727
0.725
0.724
0.723
0.720
0.718
0.717
0.716
0.710
0.707
0.705
0.704
0.700
0.699
0.699
0.698

0.698
0.698
0.691
0.689
0.688
0.688
0.687
0.686
0.682
0.680
0.674
0.674
0.665
0.663
0.661
0.653
0.649
0.644
0.644
0.641
0.641
0.636
0.633
0.633
0.632
0.625

132

human development report 2011

HDI rank
Changea

Average annual 

HDI growth

(%)

2006–2011 2010–2011 1980–2011 1990–2011 2000–2011

2
–2
..
2
2
–8
–5
1
–1
..
2
–1
–1
3
..
7
–2
1
–3
1
1
–2
4
–7
..
0
3
..
–3
4
2
–2
–5
..
2
–3
3

1
2
2
2
–6
–5
6
1
–1
–3
–1
0
1
–3
2
4
–2
1
2
..
2
–5
1
1
–6
2

1
1
1
3
1
–1
–10
0
0
0
1
–1
1
–1
0
0
0
0
3
0
–2
–1
1
–1
0
0
1
–1
0
1
–1
0
0
0
3
–1
–1

–1
0
1
2
0
–3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
0
0
2
–1
–1
1

0.65
..
..
1.00
0.40
0.32
..
..
..
..
..
0.62
..
..
..
0.54
..
..
..
0.93
..
0.59
0.75
..
..
0.64
0.87
..
..
0.83
1.57
..
..
..
1.34
0.39
1.43

0.83
1.40
0.80
0.83
..
0.63
1.73
..
1.10
..
1.20
0.83
0.65
0.87
..
..
..
0.51
1.50
..
..
..
0.76
1.14
0.78
..

0.73
..
..
0.90
0.56
0.31
..
..
..
..
..
0.60
0.57
..
..
0.74
..
..
0.15
0.78
..
0.64
0.81
..
..
0.59
0.86
..
..
0.85
1.35
..
0.39
..
1.08
0.34
1.21

0.80
1.13
0.81
0.84
..
0.47
1.62
..
0.89
..
1.21
0.52
0.71
0.81
..
0.91
..
0.58
1.24
..
..
..
1.23
0.30
0.68
0.49

0.62
0.58
..
0.69
0.74
0.07
..
..
0.81
..
1.15
0.51
0.61
..
..
1.04
..
..
0.78
0.73
..
0.62
0.67
0.33
..
0.69
0.69
..
0.99
0.77
0.97
..
0.30
..
0.90
0.42
0.94

0.70
1.03
0.80
0.67
0.43
0.27
1.43
..
0.78
..
0.79
0.75
0.76
0.73
1.27
1.49
0.92
0.62
0.88
..
..
..
0.81
0.71
0.73
0.72

table

2

human development Index trends, 1980–2011

Human Development Index (HDI)

HDI rank

121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad

1980
0.451
..
0.564
0.423
..
..
..
..
0.457
0.364
0.428
..
..
0.344
0.385
..
0.465
..
..
..
..

..
0.420
..
0.359
0.303
..
..
0.279
0.370
..
..
0.313
..
0.317
..
0.242
0.332
0.332
0.418
..
0.347
..
0.401
..
0.275
0.252
0.272
0.264
0.347
0.270
0.198
0.366
..
0.174
..
..
..
0.283
0.248
..
0.335
..

1990
0.513
..
0.615
0.481
..
..
..
0.435
0.473
0.435
0.462
..
..
0.410
0.418
..
0.502
0.376
..
0.526
..

..
0.456
..
0.399
0.352
..
..
0.298
0.427
..
0.352
0.368
..
0.365
..
0.340
0.397
0.353
0.470
0.299
0.368
..
0.394
..
0.232
0.316
0.317
0.298
0.361
0.291
0.246
0.425
..
0.204
..
..
..
0.310
0.241
..
..
..

2000
0.569
..
0.616
0.543
..
0.577
0.527
0.528
0.533
0.507
0.525
..
0.523
0.461
0.451
0.488
0.478
0.448
0.438
0.492
..

0.479
0.443
..
0.436
0.422
0.404
0.384
0.380
0.427
0.427
0.364
0.423
0.374
0.399
..
0.398
0.421
0.410
0.427
0.372
0.408
..
0.371
..
0.313
0.378
0.360
0.357
0.374
0.343
0.230
0.372
0.274
0.275
..
..
..
0.306
0.252
..
0.306
0.286

Value
2005
0.597
..
0.599
0.572
..
0.595
0.575
0.561
0.566
0.552
0.550
0.552
0.543
0.504
0.484
0.516
0.506
0.484
0.491
0.493
..

0.502
0.467
0.483
0.480
0.462
0.448
0.445
0.436
0.449
0.465
0.420
0.435
0.422
0.432
0.429
0.424
0.429
0.432
0.417
0.401
0.419
0.428
0.394
0.402
0.376
0.409
0.384
0.383
0.383
0.351
0.340
0.347
0.313
0.319
0.340
..
0.326
0.311
0.306
0.302
0.300
0.312

2009
0.619
..
0.610
0.607
..
0.611
0.600
0.584
0.582
0.575
0.569
0.565
0.564
0.535
0.527
0.534
0.523
0.514
0.513
0.515
..

0.504
0.499
0.503
0.499
0.491
0.487
0.481
0.474
0.475
0.483
0.454
0.457
0.452
0.453
0.449
0.449
0.449
0.447
0.440
0.438
0.429
0.430
0.419
0.425
0.419
0.422
0.413
0.403
0.397
0.387
0.387
0.349
0.353
0.352
0.348
..
0.341
0.334
0.329
0.326
0.320
0.323

2010
0.623
0.621
0.615
0.613
0.615
0.611
0.604
0.590
0.587
0.579
0.573
0.567
0.566
0.542
0.533
0.534
0.528
0.520
0.518
0.520
0.518

0.507
0.505
0.506
0.503
0.496
0.491
0.482
0.479
0.479
0.481
0.461
0.462
0.460
0.457
0.454
0.455
0.449
0.451
0.446
0.442
0.433
0.431
0.425
0.427
0.425
0.425
0.418
0.406
0.401
0.395
0.394
0.364
0.358
0.356
0.351
0.345
0.342
0.339
0.334
0.329
0.325
0.326

2011
0.625
0.624
0.619
0.617
0.617
0.615
0.607
0.593
0.589
0.582
0.574
0.573
0.568
0.547
0.541
0.537
0.533
0.524
0.523
0.522
0.522

0.510
0.509
0.509
0.504
0.500
0.495
0.486
0.483
0.482
0.480
0.466
0.466
0.462
0.459
0.459
0.458
0.454
0.453
0.450
0.446
0.435
0.433
0.430
0.430
0.429
0.427
0.420
0.408
0.400
0.400
0.398
0.376
0.363
0.359
0.353
0.349
0.344
0.343
0.336
0.331
0.329
0.328

HDI rank
Changea

Average annual 

HDI growth

(%)

2006–2011 2010–2011 1980–2011 1990–2011 2000–2011

–1
..
–1
2
..
–1
–1
1
–1
0
2
–1
–1
1
5
–2
0
3
–1
–1
..

–5
2
–1
–1
1
1
1
2
0
–5
7
1
4
–2
–4
0
–2
–4
1
3
0
–3
2
0
2
–4
–1
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
–2
..
–2
0
0
1
1
–2

–1
0
1
1
–2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
1
2
–2
–1

0
1
–1
0
0
0
0
1
1
–2
1
–1
0
0
1
–1
1
–1
0
0
0
0
1
–1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
–1

1.06
..
0.30
1.23
..
..
..
..
0.83
1.52
0.95
..
..
1.51
1.10
..
0.44
..
..
..
..

..
0.62
..
1.10
1.63
..
..
1.78
0.85
..
..
1.29
..
1.20
..
2.08
1.02
1.01
0.24
..
0.73
..
0.23
..
1.44
1.71
1.41
1.41
0.45
1.27
2.28
0.09
..
2.37
..
..
..
0.62
0.99
..
–0.06
..

0.94
..
0.03
1.19
..
..
..
1.50
1.05
1.39
1.04
..
..
1.38
1.23
..
0.28
1.59
..
–0.03
..

..
0.52
..
1.12
1.69
..
..
2.32
0.58
..
1.35
1.12
..
1.10
..
1.43
0.64
1.20
–0.22
1.93
0.80
..
0.42
..
2.97
1.44
1.35
1.52
0.50
1.52
2.32
–0.58
..
2.74
..
..
..
0.48
1.61
..
..
..

0.86
..
0.05
1.17
..
0.59
1.30
1.06
0.92
1.26
0.81
..
0.75
1.56
1.66
0.88
0.99
1.44
1.62
0.54
..

0.58
1.27
..
1.33
1.55
1.86
2.18
2.21
1.11
1.07
2.27
0.87
1.93
1.28
..
1.30
0.68
0.92
0.47
1.65
0.58
..
1.37
..
2.92
1.10
1.41
1.23
0.61
1.41
5.10
0.11
2.57
2.47
..
..
..
1.05
2.65
..
0.64
1.26

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

133

human development Index trends, 1980–2011

Human Development Index (HDI)

HDI rank

table

2

184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

1980
..
0.200
0.177
0.282

0.766
0.614 b
0.420 b
0.316

0.444
0.428 b
0.644 b
0.582
0.356
0.365
0.288 b
0.529 b
0.558 b

1990
0.200
0.250
0.193
0.289

0.810
0.648 b
0.480
0.347

0.516
0.498 b
0.680 b
0.624
0.418
0.383
0.320 b
0.565 b
0.594

2000
0.245
0.245
0.229
0.224

0.858
0.687
0.548
0.383

0.578
0.581
0.695
0.680
0.468
0.401
0.363
0.596 b
0.634

Value
2005
0.285
0.267
0.265
0.260

0.876
0.716
0.587
0.422

0.609
0.622
0.728
0.703
0.510
0.431
0.401
0.616
0.660

2009
0.312
0.308
0.285
0.277

0.885
0.734
0.618
0.448

0.634
0.658
0.744
0.722
0.538
0.456
0.431
0.635
0.676

2010
0.317
0.313
0.293
0.282

0.888
0.739
0.625
0.453

0.639
0.666
0.748
0.728
0.545
0.460
0.435
0.638
0.679

2011
0.322
0.316
0.295
0.286

0.889
0.741
0.630
0.456

0.641
0.671
0.751
0.731
0.548
0.463
0.439
0.640
0.682

HDI rank
Changea

Average annual 

HDI growth

(%)

2006–2011 2010–2011 1980–2011 1990–2011 2000–2011

0
0
0
0

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

0
0
0
0

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

..
1.49
1.67
0.05

0.48
0.61
1.31
1.19

1.19
1.46
0.50
0.73
1.40
0.77
1.37
0.62
0.65

2.28
1.12
2.05
–0.04

0.44
0.64
1.30
1.31

1.04
1.43
0.47
0.76
1.31
0.90
1.51
0.59
0.66

2.49
2.33
2.33
2.25

0.33
0.70
1.28
1.59

0.94
1.31
0.71
0.66
1.45
1.31
1.73
0.65
0.66

NOTES 
a. A positive value indicates improvement in rank. 
b. Based on less than half the countries in the group or region.

DEFINITION
Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of living. 
See Technical note 1 for details on how the HDI is calculated.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1–7: HDRO calculations based on data from UNDESA (2011), Barro and Lee (2010b), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2011), World Bank (2011a), UNSD (2011) and IMF (2011).
Columns 8–12: Calculated based on Human Development Index values in the relevant year.

134

human development report 2011

e3 Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index

l
b
a
t

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria
56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011

0.943
0.929
0.910
0.910
0.908
0.908
0.908
0.905
0.905
0.904
0.903
0.901
0.898
0.898
0.897
0.895
0.888
0.886
0.885
0.884
0.884
0.882
0.878
0.874
0.867
0.866
0.865
0.863
0.861
0.846
0.840
0.838
0.838
0.835
0.834
0.832
0.831
0.816
0.813
0.810
0.809
0.806
0.805
0.805
0.797
0.796
0.793

0.783
0.782
0.781
0.776
0.773
0.771
0.771
0.771
0.770
0.770

Inequality-adjusted HDI

Value
2011

0.890
0.856
0.846
0.771
..
0.829
0.843
..
0.842
0.851
0.840
..
..
0.845
0.749
0.842
0.779
0.819
0.820
0.804
0.837
0.833
0.799
0.779
0.799
..
0.821
0.791
0.756
..
0.755
..
..
0.769
0.787
..
..
0.759
0.734
0.730
0.726
..
0.717
0.652
0.641
0.675
..

0.654
..
0.683
..
..
0.658
0.718
0.683
..
0.589

Overall 
loss (%)
2011

Change 
in ranka
2011

5.6
7.9
7.0
15.3
..
8.7
7.2
..
6.9
5.9
7.0
..
..
5.9
16.5
6.0
12.3
7.6
7.4
9.1
5.3
5.6
8.9
10.9
7.8
..
5.0
8.4
12.2
..
10.1
..
..
7.9
5.7
..
..
7.0
9.7
9.8
10.2
..
10.9
19.0
19.5
15.1
..

16.4
..
12.6
..
..
14.7
6.9
11.4
..
23.5

0
0
–1
–19
..
–7
0
..
0
5
0
..
..
5
–17
4
–8
–1
1
0
7
7
2
–2
3
..
9
4
–2
..
–2
..
..
2
7
..
..
3
0
0
0
..
–1
–11
–13
–3
..

–7
..
1
..
..
–3
7
3
..
–15

Inequality-adjusted 

life expectancy 

index

Value
2011

0.928
0.931
0.917
0.863
0.907
0.914
0.915
..
0.915
0.937
0.943
0.965
0.961
0.945
0.916
0.887
0.934
0.905
0.920
0.930
0.898
0.909
0.929
0.938
0.913
0.936
0.874
0.903
0.900
0.836
0.901
..
0.862
0.813
0.825
0.892
0.854
0.809
0.834
0.765
0.893
0.815
0.782
0.871
0.796
0.844
0.814

0.815
..
0.770
0.883
..
0.782
0.803
0.776
0.753
0.801

Loss (%)

2011

3.7
4.7
4.3
6.6
5.2
5.0
4.3
..
4.0
3.3
4.1
3.5
2.9
3.0
4.3
4.4
3.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.1
3.9
4.1
3.9
3.5
2.9
3.9
4.8
4.8
6.3
4.1
..
5.8
6.0
5.7
5.1
7.2
5.7
5.8
7.2
4.9
6.2
7.1
6.6
9.7
5.5
9.2

9.3
..
9.6
5.4
..
10.9
6.8
7.8
11.5
10.9

Inequality-adjusted 

education index
Value
2011

2011

Loss (%)

0.964
0.964
0.895
0.905
..
0.897
0.933
..
0.911
0.869
0.854
..
..
0.888
0.696
0.895
0.835
0.825
0.838
0.791
0.904
0.858
0.826
0.758
0.724
..
0.912
0.797
0.738
..
0.678
..
..
0.891
0.861
..
..
0.831
0.768
0.847
0.697
..
0.840
0.688
0.708
0.697
..

0.681
..
0.789
..
..
0.618
0.782
0.754
..
0.567

2.2
1.7
3.9
3.7
..
3.2
3.2
..
1.8
3.9
2.0
..
..
2.6
25.5
3.1
7.9
6.5
2.4
9.1
3.1
2.1
5.5
11.4
6.2
..
1.3
2.2
14.3
..
15.0
..
..
2.7
1.6
..
..
4.0
6.6
4.1
5.6
..
3.8
13.7
12.1
10.4
..

10.8
..
5.0
..
..
7.9
2.5
5.9
..
21.9

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Value
2011

0.789
0.698
0.739
0.587
..
0.696
0.701
..
0.717
0.756
0.735
..
..
0.718
0.659
0.751
0.607
0.735
0.715
0.705
0.723
0.740
0.666
0.665
0.771
..
0.695
0.688
0.649
..
0.704
..
..
0.627
0.686
..
..
0.650
0.619
0.601
0.616
..
0.561
0.462
0.468
0.523
..

0.505
..
0.524
..
..
0.588
0.589
0.543
..
0.451

Loss (%)

2011

10.6
16.6
12.5
32.4
..
17.1
13.8
..
14.5
10.3
14.3
..
..
11.8
18.4
10.2
23.7
11.7
15.1
13.9
8.5
10.6
16.7
16.8
13.5
..
9.6
17.3
17.1
..
10.9
..
..
14.5
9.6
..
..
11.2
16.3
17.5
19.3
..
21.0
34.1
34.4
27.8
..

27.8
..
22.2
..
..
24.5
11.3
19.9
..
35.6

Income 

Gini 

Quintile 
income 
ratio

coefficient
2000–2011b 2000–2011b

3.9
7.0
5.1
8.5
6.8
5.5
5.7
..
4.3
4.0
5.4
3.4
9.6
..
4.7
4.3
7.9
4.9
4.4
5.6
4.8
3.8
6.0
6.5
..
9.8
3.5
7.2
6.2
..
..
..
..
6.3
4.0
..
13.3
4.8
5.6
6.7
7.9
..
6.3
3.6
12.3
5.2
..

8.7
..
4.9
..
2.7
..
4.6
10.2
..
14.4

25.8
..
..
40.8
..
32.6
34.3
..
28.3
25.0
33.7
..
43.4
..
..
..
39.2
33.0
29.1
..
31.2
26.9
34.7
36.0
..
..
..
..
34.3
..
..
..
..
36.0
..
..
41.1
31.2
34.2
37.6
..
..
35.7
52.1
45.8
33.7
..

42.4
..
31.2
..
19.0
..
30.0
45.3
..
51.7

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

135

Inequality-adjusted human development Index

table

3

HDI rank

58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of
117 Guyana
118 Botswana

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011
0.768
0.766
0.764
0.761
0.760
0.760
0.760
0.756
0.755
0.748
0.745
0.744
0.739
0.739
0.735
0.735
0.733
0.733
0.729
0.728
0.728
0.727
0.725
0.724
0.723
0.720
0.718
0.717
0.716
0.710
0.707
0.705
0.704
0.700
0.699
0.699
0.698

0.698
0.698
0.691
0.689
0.688
0.688
0.687
0.686
0.682
0.680
0.674
0.674
0.665
0.663
0.661
0.653
0.649
0.644
0.644
0.641
0.641
0.636
0.633
0.633

136

human development report 2011

Inequality-adjusted HDI

Value
2011
0.579
0.694
..
..
0.644
..
..
0.693
0.670
..
0.656
0.591
0.637
0.570
..
0.540
0.649
0.630
0.662
0.631
0.609
0.610
0.557
..
..
0.535
0.519
..
0.639
0.479
..
..
..
0.620
0.542
..
0.523

0.565
..
0.579
0.510
..
..
0.534
..
0.537
0.518
0.495
0.543
0.505
0.437
0.495
0.563
0.569
0.516
0.489
..
0.544
0.390
0.492
..

Overall 
loss (%)
2011
24.6
9.5
..
..
15.3
..
..
8.3
11.3
..
11.9
20.5
13.9
22.8
..
26.6
11.6
14.1
9.2
13.3
16.4
16.2
23.2
..
..
25.8
27.7
..
10.8
32.5
..
..
..
11.4
22.5
..
25.2

19.0
..
16.2
25.9
..
..
22.3
..
21.3
23.8
26.6
19.5
24.0
34.1
25.2
13.8
12.2
19.9
24.1
..
15.1
38.6
22.3
..

Change 
in ranka
2011
–15
9
..
..
–2
..
..
10
7
..
5
–7
0
–9
..
–16
7
2
14
5
2
4
–5
..
..
–10
–13
..
13
–24
..
..
..
11
–2
..
–7

5
..
9
–9
..
..
–1
..
2
–3
–11
8
–4
–12
–6
15
18
4
–5
..
17
–12
–1
..

Inequality-adjusted 

life expectancy 

index

Value
2011
0.776
0.788
..
0.798
0.659
0.803
0.781
0.736
0.687
0.798
0.621
0.863
0.797
0.718
..
0.753
0.794
0.720
0.684
0.760
0.784
0.710
0.726
..
0.773
0.753
0.723
0.710
0.728
0.731
0.701
0.776
0.712
0.636
0.742
0.776
0.751

0.732
0.716
0.785
0.707
0.717
0.676
0.730
0.520
0.768
0.678
0.698
0.486
0.680
0.550
0.832
0.622
0.691
0.652
0.723
0.725
0.577
0.624
0.616
0.396

Loss (%)

2011
12.4
8.3
..
6.7
16.6
6.7
9.7
7.4
10.8
9.6
16.2
7.8
11.2
13.5
..
12.2
9.6
15.1
10.5
9.8
9.4
15.3
14.8
..
10.4
14.1
14.4
14.0
14.9
13.7
16.1
7.2
13.8
20.6
12.8
12.2
12.6

13.1
14.5
9.4
16.0
13.4
13.0
13.5
26.7
10.1
15.0
15.2
27.8
17.8
25.1
7.3
18.8
11.2
15.2
13.9
13.1
24.3
19.2
21.7
24.3

Inequality-adjusted 

Loss (%)

education index
Value
2011
0.611
0.712
..
..
0.665
..
..
0.735
0.696
..
0.790
0.543
0.635
0.528
..
0.567
0.685
0.812
0.806
0.570
0.574
0.704
0.535
..
..
0.535
0.492
..
0.710
0.515
..
..
..
0.615
0.423
..
0.396

2011
17.8
9.9
..
..
6.6
..
..
5.4
11.2
..
5.3
17.7
11.9
24.1
..
18.1
5.2
3.3
6.1
13.5
17.5
8.3
24.0
..
..
22.1
25.7
..
6.5
22.8
..
..
..
8.3
27.4
..
38.7

0.551
..
0.558
0.451
..
..
0.478
..
0.490
0.508
0.431
0.612
0.515
0.542
0.334
0.680
0.673
0.592
0.331
..
0.701
0.534
0.574
..

22.4
..
17.9
26.8
..
..
23.2
..
18.0
20.1
32.4
7.3
19.8
27.6
41.2
5.8
6.1
13.5
40.9
..
1.4
22.4
11.7
..

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Value
2011
0.410
0.595
..
..
0.610
..
..
0.617
0.628
..
0.576
0.442
0.510
0.489
..
0.368
0.502
0.428
0.526
0.581
0.502
0.454
0.444
..
..
0.379
0.392
..
0.504
0.292
..
..
..
0.610
0.506
..
0.480

0.449
..
0.442
0.417
..
..
0.436
..
0.411
0.403
0.403
0.536
0.368
0.280
0.436
0.422
0.397
0.356
0.487
..
0.399
0.179
0.337
..

Loss (%)

2011
40.5
10.3
..
0.0
21.9
..
..
12.1
11.9
..
13.8
33.7
18.3
30.0
..
44.9
19.3
22.7
10.9
16.6
21.8
24.1
30.0
..
..
38.8
40.7
..
10.8
53.9
..
..
..
4.5
26.5
..
21.8

21.1
..
20.8
33.8
..
..
29.5
..
34.0
34.9
31.1
22.1
33.4
47.2
23.2
16.4
18.9
30.0
14.2
..
17.9
63.1
32.1
..

Income 

Gini 

Quintile 
income 
ratio

coefficient
2000–2011b 2000–2011b

15.8
4.1
..
11.4
8.3
..
..
4.0
8.2
..
4.6
13.2
5.3
..
..
10.0
6.4
8.9
3.9
..
9.3
9.8
13.5
..
..
12.8
17.6
..
4.5
24.8
7.0
..
..
5.3
8.0
17.2
8.0

6.3
6.1
6.9
12.2
..
..
8.4
7.9
15.0
..
12.1
7.9
14.9
21.8
6.8
6.2
6.7
9.0
4.6
..
6.2
..
..
21.0

52.3
28.2
..
46.2
..
..
..
27.2
42.3
..
30.9
50.3
34.5
..
..
43.5
36.2
41.3
27.5
..
44.2
45.5
48.0
..
42.6
49.0
53.9
..
30.9
58.5
38.3
..
..
33.7
39.7
..
40.8

37.7
..
40.3
48.4
..
..
41.5
..
53.6
52.8
46.9
41.5
52.0
57.3
37.4
36.5
38.0
44.0
32.1
..
36.7
..
43.2
..

Inequality-adjusted human development Index

HDI rank

119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011
0.632
0.625
0.625
0.624
0.619
0.617
0.617
0.615
0.607
0.593
0.589
0.582
0.574
0.573
0.568
0.547
0.541
0.537
0.533
0.524
0.523
0.522
0.522

0.510
0.509
0.509
0.504
0.500
0.495
0.486
0.483
0.482
0.480
0.466
0.466
0.462
0.459
0.459
0.458
0.454
0.453
0.450
0.446
0.435
0.433
0.430
0.430
0.429
0.427
0.420
0.408
0.400
0.400
0.398
0.376
0.363
0.359
0.353
0.349
0.344
0.343

Inequality-adjusted HDI

Value
2011
0.503
0.353
0.427
..
..
0.504
..
0.526
0.500
0.510
0.427
0.409
0.393
..
..
0.392
0.367
..
0.367
0.405
0.380
0.338
..

..
0.338
0.348
0.346
0.363
0.332
..
..
0.321
0.332
0.332
..
0.312
0.304
0.278
0.301
0.271
0.298
0.288
0.296
0.289
..
0.303
0.275
0.276
0.274
..
..
0.246
0.272
..
0.268
0.247
..
0.207
..
0.211
0.204

Overall 
loss (%)
2011
20.4
43.5
31.7
..
..
18.3
..
14.4
17.6
14.0
27.5
29.7
31.6
..
..
28.3
32.2
..
31.1
22.8
27.2
35.4
..

Change 
in ranka
2011
4
–14
–3
..
..
8
..
17
8
14
3
2
1
..
..
1
–1
..
–1
6
3
–4
..

..
33.6
31.5
31.4
27.4
32.9
..
..
33.4
30.7
28.8
..
32.3
33.8
39.3
34.3
40.2
34.2
35.9
33.6
33.5
..
29.5
35.9
35.7
35.8
..
..
38.6
32.0
..
28.7
31.9
..
41.4
..
38.8
40.6

..
–2
1
1
5
–1
..
..
–2
2
1
..
0
0
–6
0
–9
1
–1
2
2
..
7
0
2
1
..
..
–3
2
..
1
1
..
–4
..
–2
–3

Inequality-adjusted 

life expectancy 

index

Value
2011
0.793
0.528
0.693
..
0.370
0.648
0.679
0.604
0.546
0.754
0.734
0.685
0.657
0.617
0.746
0.522
0.506
0.268
0.371
0.586
0.484
0.295
0.565

0.599
0.386
0.502
0.485
0.593
0.468
0.264
0.533
0.284
0.548
0.407
0.505
0.537
0.430
0.283
0.620
0.459
0.389
0.292
0.328
0.367
0.437
0.266
0.377
0.328
0.340
0.402
0.438
0.347
0.324
0.222
0.343
0.400
0.266
0.221
0.481
0.308
0.242

Loss (%)

2011
10.0
21.1
17.4
..
28.4
16.8
15.6
19.8
27.2
13.4
13.9
16.7
18.6
20.3
12.7
27.1
27.5
45.4
37.0
21.7
28.8
35.0
24.1

20.7
34.1
28.8
32.3
23.2
30.2
46.1
25.3
43.0
25.6
32.4
25.2
25.1
30.7
43.8
19.5
30.9
36.2
34.3
39.1
37.2
32.6
41.9
36.9
41.3
40.3
33.9
33.0
37.8
39.9
50.9
30.6
35.4
46.3
50.1
26.6
42.7
46.0

Inequality-adjusted 

Loss (%)

education index
Value
2011
0.366
0.445
0.392
..
0.558
0.465
..
0.637
0.638
0.417
0.350
0.242
0.280
..
0.295
0.267
0.339
0.303
0.390
0.300
0.346
0.406
0.185

2011
31.5
27.8
31.8
..
20.8
20.4
..
11.1
9.4
17.1
33.3
45.8
36.1
..
30.7
40.6
40.9
29.2
25.4
30.5
31.1
29.8
44.8

..
0.403
0.365
0.207
0.252
0.195
..
..
0.336
0.347
0.305
..
0.155
0.211
0.247
0.201
0.241
0.208
0.384
0.322
0.277
0.193
0.366
0.156
0.282
0.212
..
..
0.173
0.267
0.223
0.452
0.146
0.170
0.181
..
0.143
0.174

..
30.7
19.1
46.4
39.4
47.4
..
..
35.3
30.1
32.8
..
49.8
45.1
44.2
43.6
40.7
43.2
24.3
32.2
41.5
47.4
23.8
47.0
30.7
42.0
..
..
43.2
34.7
39.3
20.1
38.2
36.9
40.3
..
42.0
45.9

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Value
2011
0.439
0.187
0.287
..
..
0.426
..
0.379
0.360
0.423
0.303
0.412
0.329
..
..
0.433
0.288
..
0.342
0.376
0.328
0.322
..

..
0.248
0.231
0.413
0.321
0.401
0.278
..
0.345
0.193
0.294
..
0.365
0.309
0.309
0.220
0.180
0.329
0.213
0.246
0.238
..
0.287
0.355
0.228
0.286
..
..
0.247
0.232
..
0.124
0.258
..
0.222
..
0.213
0.201

Loss (%)

2011
18.3
68.3
43.4
..
..
17.7
..
12.2
15.3
11.4
33.6
23.0
38.5
..
..
14.7
27.2
..
30.3
15.5
21.4
40.9
..

..
36.0
44.2
11.0
17.7
17.8
50.0
..
19.9
36.1
20.6
..
17.6
23.9
28.8
37.4
47.9
21.5
47.0
29.1
20.0
..
20.8
21.3
34.5
23.6
..
..
34.4
19.7
..
34.5
20.8
..
32.5
..
31.1
28.1

Income 

Gini 

Quintile 
income 
ratio

coefficient
2000–2011b 2000–2011b

table

3

5.7
52.2
30.4
..
20.2
5.9
..
4.9
4.2
6.2
15.0
7.4
17.0
..
..
5.6
9.3
..
10.6
5.9
7.8
12.4
..

..
11.3
10.8
4.7
4.3
4.6
31.0
..
9.1
8.6
6.6
12.5
6.3
7.4
9.5
8.9
25.2
7.4
18.8
8.7
8.7
..
15.3
..
13.9
6.7
11.0
..
11.0
6.6
..
12.1
4.2
7.1
6.0
..
7.2
9.5

35.8
..
57.7
..
57.8
36.8
..
33.4
29.4
37.6
52.3
40.9
53.7
..
50.4
36.8
42.8
..
47.3
36.7
44.4
50.7
46.7

..
47.7
50.8
32.7
31.0
31.9
58.6
..
44.6
47.2
37.6
..
37.7
39.2
42.9
47.3
59.5
39.0
52.5
44.3
34.4
64.3
50.7
39.9
53.1
38.6
47.3
..
46.1
39.0
..
..
29.8
39.0
35.5
..
39.4
43.6

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

137

Inequality-adjusted human development Index

table

3

HDI rank

180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Human 

Development 
Index (HDI)

Value
2011
0.336
0.331
0.329
0.328
0.322
0.316
0.295
0.286

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.889
0.741
0.630
0.456

0.641
0.671
0.751
0.731
0.548
0.463
0.439
0.640
0.682

Inequality-adjusted HDI

Value
2011
0.196
0.215
0.213
0.196
0.229
..
0.195
0.172

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.787
0.590 c
0.480
0.304

0.472 c
0.528 c
0.655
0.540
0.393
0.303
0.296
0.458 c
0.525

Overall 
loss (%)
2011
41.6
35.1
35.3
40.1
28.9
..
34.2
39.9

Change 
in ranka
2011
–3
3
3
–1
7
..
0
0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

11.5
—
20.5 c —
—
23.7
33.3
—

26.4 c —
21.3 c —
—
12.7
—
26.1
—
28.4
34.5
—
32.4
—
28.4 c —
23.0
—

Inequality-adjusted 

life expectancy 

index

Value
2011
0.240
0.326
0.362
0.224
0.282
0.261
0.314
0.224

0.640
..
..
..
..
0.260
..

0.897
0.734
0.633
0.393

0.654
0.709
0.715
0.743
0.529
0.331
0.403
0.633
0.637

Loss (%)

2011
45.3
41.7
37.6
52.0
40.8
45.6
42.6
50.0

16.9
..
..
..
..
47.1
..

5.2
12.4
19.2
35.6

18.0
14.3
11.7
13.4
26.9
39.0
34.7
19.1
19.0

Inequality-adjusted 

Loss (%)

education index
Value
2011
0.160
0.117
0.235
0.124
0.181
..
0.107
0.245

2011
47.4
37.3
46.4
43.4
18.2
..
39.5
31.2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.838
0.580 c
0.396
0.238

0.307 c
0.477 c
0.681
0.528
0.266
0.276
0.233
0.417 c
0.450

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.2
18.9 c
29.4
39.2

40.8 c
21.9 c
10.7
23.2
40.9
35.6
36.8
29.6 c
26.2

Inequality-adjusted 

income index

Value
2011
0.197
0.260
0.113
0.272
0.233
..
0.218
0.093

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.648
0.482
0.441
0.300

0.524 c
0.435 c
0.578
0.401
0.430
0.306
0.277
0.364 c
0.506

Loss (%)

2011
31.0
25.3
19.0
21.0
25.8
..
17.9
36.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

22.2
28.2 c
22.3
24.2

17.8 c
26.8 c
15.7
39.3
15.1
28.4
25.3
35.6 c
23.4

Income 

Gini 

Quintile 
income 
ratio

coefficient
2000–2011b 2000–2011b

8.1
6.7
7.0
7.4
9.9
4.8
5.2
9.2

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

42.5
39.6
52.6
39.8
45.6
33.3
34.0
44.4

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

—
—
—
—

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Income Gini coefficient: Measure of the deviation of the distribution of income (or consumption) among 
individuals or households within a country from a perfectly equal distribution. A value of 0 represents 
absolute equality, a value of 100 absolute inequality.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data from UNDESA (2011), Barro and Lee (2010b), UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics (2011), World Bank (2011a) and IMF (2011).
Column 2: Calculated as the geometric mean of the values in columns 5, 7 and 9 using the methodology 
in Technical note 2.
Column 3: Calculated based on data in columns 1 and 2.
Column 4: Calculated based on HDI rank and data in column 2.
Columns 5, 7 and 9: HDRO calculations based on data from United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs life tables, the Luxembourg Income Study, Eurostat’s European Union Survey of Income 
and Living Conditions, the World Bank’s International Income Distribution Database, the United Nations 
Children’s Fund’s Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys, ICF Macro Demographic and Health Surveys, the 
World Health Organization’s World Health Survey and the United Nations University’s World Institute for 
Development Economics Research’s World Income Inequality Database using the methodology in Techni-
cal note 2. The list of surveys and years of surveys used for each index are available at http://hdr.undp.org.
Column 6: Calculated based on data in column 5 and the unadjusted life expectancy index.
Column 8: Calculated based on data in column 7 and the unadjusted education index.
Column 10: Calculated based on data in column 9 and the unadjusted income index.
Columns 11 and 12: World Bank (2011a).

NOTES
a.  Change in rank is based on countries for which the Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index 

is calculated.

b.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
c.  Based on less than half the countries in the group or region.

DEFINITIONS
Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index measuring average achievement in three basic 
dimensions of human development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and a decent standard of living. 
See Technical note 1 for details on how the HDI is calculated.
Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI): HDI value adjusted for inequalities in the three basic dimensions of 
human development. See Technical note 2 for details on how the IHDI is calculated.
Overall loss: The loss in potential human development due to inequality, calculated as the percentage 
difference between the HDI and the IHDI.
Inequality-adjusted life expectancy index: The HDI life expectancy index adjusted for inequality in 
distribution of expected length of life based on data from life tables listed in Main data sources.
Inequality-adjusted education index: The HDI education index adjusted for inequality in distribution of 
years of schooling based on data from household surveys listed in Main data sources.
Inequality-adjusted income index: The HDI income index adjusted for inequality in income distribution 
based on data from household surveys listed in Main data sources.
Quintile income ratio: Ratio of the average income of the richest 20 percent of the population to the 
average income of the poorest 20 percent of the population.

138

human development report 2011

e4

l
b
a
t

Gender Inequality Index and related indicators

Gender 
Inequality 

Index

Rank Value
2011
2011

Maternal 
mortality 

ratio
2008

Adolescent 
fertility rate

2011a

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria

6
18
2
47
32
20
33
..
7
1
4
14
..
9
11
3
22
12
16
10
28
5
13
15
26
8
17
34
24
38
21
..
..
30
31
42
111
39
25
29
19
44
36
68
67
27
65

62
..
55
58
..
54
..
40

0.075
0.136
0.052
0.299
0.195
0.140
0.203
..
0.085
0.049
0.067
0.123
..
0.099
0.111
0.060
0.145
0.114
0.131
0.106
0.175
0.075
0.117
0.124
0.169
0.086
0.136
0.209
0.162
0.234
0.141
..
..
0.194
0.194
0.272
0.549
0.237
0.164
0.192
0.140
0.288
0.216
0.374
0.372
0.170
0.364

0.352
..
0.333
0.337
..
0.332
..
0.245

7
8
9
24
14
12
3
..
7
5
10
6
..
5
18
5
7
5
5
8
18
8
6
5
17
9
8
12
2
10
10
..
21
12
6
8
8
13
6
13
7
19
20
26
70
14
64

27
..
27
53
..
49
15
13

9.0
16.5
5.1
41.2
30.9
14.0
17.5
7.0
7.9
6.0
4.6
5.0
3.2
14.6
2.3
6.0
14.0
14.2
12.8
7.2
5.0
9.3
12.7
6.7
10.1
4.8
11.1
29.6
11.6
26.7
6.6
8.4
25.1
22.7
20.2
17.3
16.2
16.5
14.8
19.7
16.8
14.9
18.0
58.3
56.9
13.5
42.6

61.1
13.8
32.0
45.2
51.3
31.8
18.2
42.8

Seats in 
national 
parliament
(% female)

2011

39.6
28.3
37.8
16.8 c
33.6
24.9
11.1
24.0
31.7
45.0
27.6
13.6
..
42.9
14.7
38.0
19.2
38.5
28.3
20.0
10.8
42.5
34.7
20.3
20.0
23.4
21.0
21.0
17.3
22.5
12.5
53.6
..
19.8
16.0
8.7
0.0 f
9.1
17.9
19.1
27.4
15.0
20.0
13.9
37.8
23.5
19.6

14.6
6.9
9.8
43.2
23.5
17.9
11.1
20.8

Population 
with at least 
secondary 
education
(% ages 25 
and older)

Labour force 

participation rate

(%)

Female Male
2010
2010

Female Male
2009
2009

REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

Contraceptive 
prevalence 
rate, any 
method

(% of married 
women ages 

15–49)

At least 

one 

antenatal 

visit
(%)

Births 
attended 
by skilled 

health 
personnel

(%)

2005–2009b

2005–2009b 2005–2009b

99.1
97.2
89.2
94.5
73.5
92.7
81.5
..
92.8
87.1
73.8
82.3
71.0
57.7
91.7
65.6
77.2
79.8
85.9
84.6
81.9 d,e
70.1
75.7
78.9
73.9
64.7
87.6
67.8
72.0
77.3
73.2

99.3
95.1
86.3
95.3
71.6
92.3
82.3
..
91.3
87.9
63.6
80.0
67.3
66.3
79.4
59.0
78.9
75.7
67.3
79.6
60.6 d,e
70.1
70.9
67.8
66.4
57.3
85.5
68.8
64.4
76.9
61.8
49.3 d,e 49.5 d,e
66.6
94.4
80.8
64.4
62.1
93.2
79.7
91.9
40.4
74.4
94.8
67.3
57.0
57.4
89.5

61.2
94.6
87.1
73.5
54.7
96.7
83.9
95.7
41.9
80.4
96.2
69.8
54.9
72.3
87.6

51.7
..
90.5
80.4

56.6
..
83.8
73.9
41.2 d,e 45.4 d,e
48.5 d,e 54.5 d,e
79.7 d,e 69.5 d,e
69.1

70.6

63.0
58.4
59.5
58.4
61.8
62.7
54.4
..
53.1
60.6
60.6
47.9
52.2
71.7
50.1
60.3
51.9
46.7
53.2
50.5
52.8
57.0
49.1
38.4
48.0
53.7
48.8
55.3
42.9
41.9
54.3
..
59.7
54.8
51.2
31.6
49.9
42.5
46.2
50.2
56.2
32.4
54.3
41.8
52.4
46.3
65.8

53.8
..
45.4
40.9
..
68.3
..
48.2

71.0
72.2
72.9
71.9
75.7
73.0
73.0
..
66.8
69.2
73.7
71.8
68.9
83.1
72.0
70.6
62.5
60.8
68.1
62.2
65.4
64.9
68.5
60.6
63.3
75.6
67.6
69.5
65.0
92.1
70.8
..
74.8
69.0
68.5
67.5
93.0
58.8
61.9
62.1
69.4
85.0
70.2
73.4
78.4
60.3
78.0

75.5
..
60.0
66.9
..
78.7
..
61.2

88.0
71.0
69.0
73.0
75.0
74.0
89.0
..
75.0
..
82.0
54.0
84.0
..
80.0
..
..
75.0
51.0
71.0
74.0
..
66.0
60.0
..
62.0
72.0
84.0
61.0
28.0
..
..
..
70.0
80.0
86.0
43.0
77.0
49.0
47.0
67.0
62.0
48.0
58.0
78.0
..
55.0

78.0
21.0
70.0
78.0
..
45.0
39.0
63.0

..
100.0
..
..
95.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
100.0
99.0
98.0
100.0
..
..
..
..
99.0
..
..
97.0
..
..
100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
97.0
..
95.0
99.0
..
100.0

96.0
100.0
94.0
100.0
..
98.0
97.0
..

..
100.0
100.0
99.0
100.0
98.0
100.0
..
..
..
..
100.0
..
..
100.0
..
..
..
100.0
99.0
100.0
100.0
..
..
100.0
100.0
100.0
99.0
..
99.0
..
..
99.0
100.0
100.0
98.0
99.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
98.0
100.0
100.0
95.0
100.0
100.0

100.0
100.0
99.0
100.0
..
99.0
99.0 g
100.0

Total 
fertility 

rate
2011a

2.0
2.0
1.8
2.1
2.1
1.7
2.1
..
1.5
1.9
1.5
1.4
1.1
2.1
1.4
1.9
2.9
1.8
1.4
2.0
1.5
1.9
1.5
1.5
1.7
1.4
1.5
1.9
1.5
1.7
1.5
..
2.0
1.7
1.4
1.3
2.2
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.3
2.4
1.5
1.8
2.2
1.5
1.6

2.0
..
1.4
1.5
..
1.9
1.6
1.6

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

139

Gender Inequality Index and related indicators

table

4

HDI rank

56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico
58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory

Gender 
Inequality 

Index

Rank Value
2011
2011
135
0.646
0.448
79
0.492
95
..
..
..
..
43
0.286
0.331
53
0.229
37
0.314
51
..
..
59
0.338
..
..
0.334
56
0.361
64
0.271
41
76
0.440
..
..
0.447
78
..
..
0.418
73
57
0.335
0.353
63
0.151
23
0.450
81
0.415
72
..
..
..
..
0.469
85
0.449
80
..
..
60
0.343
0.482
91
0.485
92
0.309
49
..
..
50
0.314
0.443
77
0.493
97
45
0.293

83
71
74
90
..
..
35
..
69
..
93
103
87
88
52
70
46
75
..
..

0.456
0.412
0.419
0.480
..
..
0.209
..
0.382
..
0.487
0.509
0.476
0.476
0.320
0.410
0.298
0.427
..
..

Maternal 
mortality 

ratio
2008
24
85
71
8
..
31
55
9
64
15
39
..
45
44
31
26
..
68
9
48
26
36
9
89
98
..
..
140
58
..
29
85
30
20
..
38
23
94
60

59
120
39
100
..
26
38
77
48
100
110
260
95
180
37
65
32
94
82
..

Seats in 
national 
parliament
(% female)

Adolescent 
fertility rate

2011a
11.6
70.6
82.6
22.1
55.5
14.2
34.7
13.8
3.2
22.1
30.0
42.4
30.0
65.6
17.9
16.2
42.6
89.9
16.4
44.7
30.8
35.4
22.0
77.3
54.7
20.0
61.7
82.8
75.6
58.9
35.7
74.3
29.5
9.2
22.3
33.8
39.2
78.7
5.7

26.5
7.3
23.6
108.7
28.3
45.2
8.4
19.5
43.3
39.5
82.7
89.9
72.3
78.2
12.2
20.8
33.8
54.1
46.6
53.5

2011
0.0 f
25.5
8.5
21.6
19.4
14.0
27.4
7.7
7.7
32.1
11.5
21.4
13.6
38.6
16.4
3.1
6.7
17.0
15.8
6.5
8.0
18.8
32.5
16.0
27.5 h
12.5
20.7
32.3
9.6
14.3
9.2
13.8
2.8
9.0
3.6 i
16.0
9.1
11.1
23.3

12.2
7.0
5.3
19.1
4.1
..
21.3
16.8
14.0
9.8
19.0
16.1
13.6
30.1
6.5
3.9
18.8
21.5
.. j
..

140

human development report 2011

Population 
with at least 
secondary 
education
(% ages 25 
and older)

Female Male
2010
2010
50.3
57.9
61.9
55.8
60.7
63.5
70.7
61.7
..
..
66.0
72.8
66.6
67.6
43.9
52.2
44.0
55.6
..
..
90.6
95.6
..
..
95.0
92.2
52.8
54.4
89.2
83.2
32.4
33.3
..
..
29.6
33.4
..
..

63.8 d,e 58.9 d,e
91.5
45.2
55.6 d
74.0
57.6
11.2 d,e 10.3 d,e

96.1
52.9
40.2 d
71.1
76.1

..
44.2
48.8
..
94.1
48.0
39.0
26.7
84.0
65.4 d,e
27.1
35.2
33.5

..
45.8
46.3
..
94.8
47.6
57.2
28.1
87.8
61.9 d,e
46.7
32.8
48.0

74.2
49.3
57.6
41.8

57.1
36.3
56.0
49.7
64.2 d,e 60.0 d,e
86.6
54.8
..
25.6
..
40.5
53.8
45.4
55.1
31.3
83.0
85.8
65.9
43.4
36.5 d,e 29.0 d,e

88.6
70.4
..
33.7
..
47.5
34.7
50.4
67.9
37.3
81.8
92.3
63.7
59.3

Labour force 

participation rate

(%)

Female Male
2009
2009
21.2
79.8
80.6
43.2
80.7
48.4
..
..
..
..
44.4
79.2
78.1
55.1
82.5
45.4
78.9
24.7
66.5
54.8
57.5
69.2
..
..
76.3
65.7
79.9
45.1
70.4
49.3
22.3
71.5
..
..
80.3
51.7
68.3
54.9
73.8
55.1
52.0
65.4
74.8
40.8
65.2
42.9
74.0
56.1
76.0
58.2
..
..
75.8
51.0
77.7
47.1
81.9
60.1
78.8
56.0
59.6
74.6
77.6
40.7
73.0
31.9
76.9
25.4
74.7
54.6
59.5
66.8
69.6
24.0
80.6
47.4
25.6
70.6

23.3
37.2
34.2
50.5
37.9
38.7
67.4
62.4
65.5
38.5
45.9
70.0
57.0
62.1
57.1
67.8
46.5
49.2
22.4
16.5

73.9
79.6
75.1
79.8
75.4
78.4
79.7
74.0
80.7
66.0
76.7
81.1
86.6
82.0
77.0
78.2
53.1
78.5
75.3
68.4

REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

Contraceptive 
prevalence 
rate, any 
method

(% of married 
women ages 

15–49)

At least 

one 

antenatal 

visit
(%)

Births 
attended 
by skilled 

health 
personnel

(%)

2005–2009b

2005–2009b 2005–2009b

24.0
73.0
..
41.0
53.0
55.0
43.0
52.0
45.0
73.0
80.0
54.0
51.0
80.0
69.0
58.0
54.0
77.0
36.0
47.0
67.0
76.0
14.0
69.0
73.0
50.0
47.0
73.0
81.0
48.0
53.0
78.0
79.0
32.0
23.0
51.0
73.0
34.0
60.0

59.0
61.0
68.0
73.0
25.0
35.0
85.0
48.0
77.0
46.0
73.0
33.0
79.0
61.0
39.0
55.0
68.0
51.0
60.0
50.0

90.0
94.0
72.0
98.0
100.0
79.0
96.0
95.0
81.0
99.0
..
100.0
100.0
90.0
97.0
96.0
100.0
94.0
99.0
96.0
99.0
..
94.0
91.0
94.0
100.0
99.0
84.0
97.0
100.0
93.0
94.0
98.0
100.0
..
77.0
92.0
94.0
96.0

99.0
89.0
99.0
99.0
..
..
91.0
99.0
98.0
90.0
94.0
94.0
96.0
86.0
81.0
100.0
98.0
91.0
74.0
99.0

91.0
93.0
92.0
99.0 g
100.0
99.0
98.0
98.0
94.0 g
100.0 g
100.0
99.0
100.0 g
99.0
99.0
98.0
100.0
95.0
100.0 g
98.0
99.0
98.0
100.0 g
97.0 g
83.0 g
100.0
100.0
98.0 g
97.0
99.0
100.0
96.0 g
97.0
99.0
95.0
88.0 g
91.0
95.0 g
95.0

99.0
95.0
99.0
98.0
100.0
99.0
99.0
100.0
97.0
90.0 g
96.0
86.0
82.0
71.0
84.0
99.0
100.0 g
62.0
79.0
99.0

Total 
fertility 

rate
2011a
2.6
2.2
2.4
1.6
..
2.6
1.6
2.3
2.4
1.5
1.5
2.2
2.5
1.8
1.5
1.8
..
2.4
1.1
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.4
2.3
2.4
..
1.9
2.4
1.8
2.0
1.7
2.3
1.6
2.2
3.8
2.2
2.0
2.7
1.9

2.9
2.1
2.2
2.5
3.8
2.6
1.6
2.3
1.5
2.3
2.2
3.2
2.9
3.2
1.7
2.5
1.5
3.1
2.6
4.3

Gender Inequality Index and related indicators

HDI rank

115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of
117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe

Gender 
Inequality 

Index

Rank Value
2011
2011
..
..
..
..
0.511
106
0.507
102
0.474
86
84
0.466
0.511
105
..
..
0.490
94
0.505
100
..
..
0.370
66
0.347
61
0.305
48
0.506
101
104
0.510
0.542
109
0.579
117
..
..
0.617
129
122
0.598
..
..
0.628
132
0.513
107
0.500
99
110
0.546
0.495
98

..
130
..
115
112
..
..
96
134
..
119
140
146
114
..
113
123
126
108
116
124
..
131
..
82
133
127
128
136
120
141
118

..
0.627
..
0.573
0.550
..
..
0.492
0.639
..
0.590
0.674
0.769
0.566
..
0.558
0.599
0.605
0.532
0.577
0.602
..
0.627
..
0.453
0.634
0.610
0.611
0.655
0.594
0.707
0.583

Maternal 
mortality 

ratio
2008
30
..
270
190
46
180
110
..
410
240
..
81
64
56
100
110
110
75
94
230
350
280
580
580
290
420
200

100
530
..
260
340
370
610
240
600
440
790
250
210
410
840
380
300
550
530
430
350
340
470
300
540
410
400
750
470
510
1,400
790

Seats in 
national 
parliament
(% female)

Adolescent 
fertility rate

2011a
13.8
25.4
68.3
52.1
42.8
74.4
93.1
22.2
59.2
45.1
54.0
34.1
28.4
26.8
112.7
15.1
107.2
98.0
81.6
86.3
71.1
122.9
118.7
39.0
41.8
83.9
50.2

70.3
100.2
66.1
31.6
78.9
65.8
171.1
16.3
127.8
134.3
130.4
66.9
78.8
105.9
118.3
103.4
46.4
79.2
73.5
149.9
65.3
58.0
146.8
22.9
38.7
111.7
76.6
61.9
129.4
119.2
118.7
64.6

2011
19.2
0.0
30.0
7.9
12.4
25.0
18.0
4.3
42.7
18.0
3.8
23.3
17.5
25.8
20.7
6.7
12.0
25.2
20.8
10.7
8.3
10.0
9.2
25.0
19.0
21.9
13.9

0.0
9.8
18.2
21.0
18.6
29.2
38.6
4.0
13.9
12.1
36.0
0.9
0.7
29.6
7.3
33.2
4.2
19.2
22.9
37.2
11.1
3.0
14.0
13.8
50.9
8.4
7.5
24.2
8.9
20.8
27.6
17.9

Population 
with at least 
secondary 
education
(% ages 25 
and older)

Labour force 

participation rate

(%)

Female Male
2010
2010
..
..
..
..
43.7
42.6
77.5
73.6
24.1
24.7
49.6
46.1
36.3
31.9
..
..
68.0
66.3
31.1
24.2
..
..
81.2
81.0
85.8
93.2
28.0
24.7
44.7
30.8
20.1
36.3
21.0
15.6
42.7
22.0
..
..
50.4
26.6
33.9
83.1
..
..
48.7
43.8
36.8
22.9
20.6
11.6
49.9
46.1
19.4 d,e
16.2 d,e

Female Male
2009
2009
58.4
71.0
..
..
81.2
44.7
80.9
72.3
79.5
21.1
51.8
62.6
80.2
40.1
..
..
63.4
47.0
86.0
52.0
79.3
88.3
79.1
54.8
77.7
57.0
76.0
68.0
78.4
47.1
26.2
80.1
87.9
48.1
68.9
13.8
81.3
53.5
81.1
32.8
73.8
75.2
92.0
39.7
82.6
62.9
78.9
77.7
85.6
73.6
53.1
74.9
70.6
53.4

..
20.1
..
23.5
30.8
..
..
18.0
21.1
..
5.6
12.4
7.6
10.9
..
17.9
22.5
8.0
24.3
9.1
15.3
..
25.7
..
7.4
11.3
16.9
12.8
13.6
10.4
5.8
48.8

..
38.6
..
46.8
39.3
..
..
17.6
34.9
..
9.2
24.4
24.4
19.4
..
39.9
36.3
20.8
20.3
20.8
45.1
..
44.2
..
8.0
25.9
31.4
18.2
25.2
20.4
34.0
62.0

24.2
76.4
44.5
21.7
58.7
58.9
74.5
63.1
53.5
84.2
86.3
71.6
19.9
64.8
39.2
63.3
57.5
59.0
70.8
78.3
63.6
73.7
59.5
61.5
86.7
67.4
70.6
30.8
50.8
75.0
33.1
60.0

50.0
88.1
76.0
84.9
82.5
82.8
88.4
85.1
80.7
88.7
90.6
74.2
73.5
88.6
73.4
80.3
82.9
81.0
77.7
90.6
85.7
85.4
79.2
78.7
85.1
77.9
85.2
73.9
82.1
78.8
84.5
74.3

REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

Contraceptive 
prevalence 
rate, any 
method

(% of married 
women ages 

15–49)

At least 

one 

antenatal 

visit
(%)

Births 
attended 
by skilled 

health 
personnel

(%)

2005–2009b

2005–2009b 2005–2009b

65.0
45.0
43.0
53.0
58.0
55.0
65.0
22.0
60.0
57.0
38.0
48.0
37.0
80.0
72.0
63.0
54.0
50.0
61.0
54.0
24.0
..
44.0
38.0
40.0
51.0
35.0

27.0
46.0
38.0
30.0
53.0
22.0
6.0
41.0
29.0
40.0
26.0
32.0
28.0
12.0
15.0
48.0
32.0
9.0
47.0
24.0
17.0
26.0
41.0
23.0
36.0
17.0
18.0
8.0
13.0
41.0
10.0
65.0

99.0
..
92.0
94.0
84.0
95.0
92.0
88.0
92.0
93.0
84.0
97.0
89.0
91.0
90.0
68.0
93.0
84.0
98.0
75.0
90.0
86.0
86.0
35.0
69.0
85.0
88.0

74.0
92.0
98.0
61.0
51.0
61.0
80.0
80.0
82.0
86.0
76.0
79.0
47.0
87.0
58.0
44.0
85.0
75.0
92.0
94.0
84.0
75.0
94.0
92.0
96.0
84.0
98.0
64.0
85.0
92.0
16.0
93.0

100.0 g
88.0
92.0 g
95.0 g
93.0 g
81.0
67.0 g
63.0
91.0
75.0 g
74.0
98.0 g
88.0 g
88.0 g
74.0
63.0
51.0
80.0
78.0 g
53.0 g
57.0
65.0 g
83.0
20.0 g
44.0
69.0 g
71.0

70.0
44.0
82.0
39.0 g
24.0 g
18.0
47.0 g
64.0
63.0
44.0 g
43.0 g
53.0
36.0
52.0 g
39.0 g
19.0
26.0 g
61.0 g
62.0 g
42.0
62.0 g
62.0 g
47.0 g
93.0 g
52.0 g
74.0 g
57.0 g
49.0 g
57.0
54.0
14.0
60.0

table

4

Total 
fertility 

rate
2011a
2.3
3.3
2.2
2.6
2.8
3.1
3.0
..
2.4
2.1
3.8
2.6
3.2
1.8
2.5
2.2
3.8
4.5
2.3
2.5
4.0
5.0
4.4
2.5
2.4
3.2
2.3

4.0
4.6
3.5
3.2
2.2
5.9
5.1
1.9
4.3
4.5
5.5
3.8
4.9
4.6
5.4
2.6
3.2
4.4
3.1
5.9
3.9
4.7
6.3
3.6
5.3
5.1
4.7
4.2
4.2
6.0
6.0
3.1

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

141

Gender Inequality Index and related indicators

table

4

HDI rank

174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Gender 
Inequality 

Index

Rank Value
2011
2011
..
..
0.712
143
..
..
..
..
..
..
138
0.669
0.662
137
0.596
121
0.671
139
0.735
145
125
0.602
0.478
89
0.724
144
142
0.710

Maternal 
mortality 

ratio
2008
470
830
1,000
280
680
850
970
560
990
1,200
550
970
820
670

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

250
..
..
..
..
1,200
..

0.224
0.409
0.475
0.606

0.563
..
0.311
0.445
0.601
0.610
0.594
..
0.492

16
51
135
532

192
79
29
80
252
619
537
..
176

Seats in 
national 
parliament
(% female)

Adolescent 
fertility rate

2011a
72.4
186.3
111.1
66.6
157.4
106.6
143.7
124.8
142.6
164.5
149.2
18.6
207.1
201.4

0.7
53.5
1.6
31.2
2.5
70.1
23.3

23.8
51.6
50.1
98.2

44.4
19.8
28.0
73.7
77.4
119.7
106.1
66.4
58.1

2011
25.5
10.2
10.0
22.0
.. k
9.6 h
13.2
15.3
13.8
14.3
39.2
36.1
13.1
9.4

15.6
3.0
26.1
0.0
16.7
6.8
0.0

21.5
13.5
17.3
18.2

12.0
20.2
13.4
18.7
12.5
19.8
20.3
20.6
17.7

Population 
with at least 
secondary 
education
(% ages 25 
and older)

Labour force 

participation rate

(%)

Female Male
2010
2010
..
..
8.4
3.2
..
..
..
..
..
..
10.3
26.2
20.4
9.5
35.1 d,e
34.7 d,e
39.2
15.7
9.9 d,e
0.9 d,e
1.5
6.0
9.2
5.2
7.6
2.5
10.7
36.2

Female Male
2009
2009
80.7
90.3
67.0
37.6
83.8
59.6
83.4
62.5
89.2
79.2
71.6
86.7
67.5
65.4
90.8
78.2
75.8
66.6
78.2
62.7
84.8
86.9
87.5
91.0
87.5
38.9
56.5
85.6

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

82.0
61.0
41.2
18.7

32.9
48.1
78.0
50.5
27.3
22.2
16.8
50.3
50.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

84.6
64.6
57.7
32.4

46.2
61.3
83.3
52.2
49.2
34.9
27.4
54.9
61.7

55.1
..
..
..
..
56.5
..

52.8
47.8
51.1
54.6

26.0
64.2
49.7
51.7
34.6
62.9
64.4
52.6
51.5

77.5
..
..
..
..
84.7
..

69.8
75.0
80.0
82.7

77.1
80.3
67.8
79.9
81.2
81.2
84.0
75.8
78.0

REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

Contraceptive 
prevalence 
rate, any 
method

(% of married 
women ages 

15–49)

At least 

one 

antenatal 

visit
(%)

Births 
attended 
by skilled 

health 
personnel

(%)

2005–2009b

2005–2009b 2005–2009b

15.0
8.0
10.0
8.0
9.0
19.0
8.0
17.0
11.0
3.0
16.0
9.0
11.0
21.0

69.0
45.0
..
36.0
..
15.0
31.0

69.5
72.4
67.7
27.8

46.1
76.9
67.7
74.8
52.1
24.3
28.7
53.3
61.6

28.0
70.0
78.0
70.0
88.0
69.0
87.0
85.0
79.0
39.0
92.0
92.0
46.0
85.0

97.0
81.0
..
95.0
..
26.0
97.0

98.6
94.4
85.1
64.9

76.4
90.7
95.3
94.8
71.3
73.6
63.7
90.8
82.7

6.0
49.0 g
39.0 g
28.0 g
46.0 g
44.0 g
42.0 g
54.0
46.0
14.0
55.0 g
34.0
33.0
74.0 g

97.0
86.0
..
97.0
..
33.0 g
98.0

99.2
96.1
78.1
39.6

76.1
91.9
97.9
92.0
50.5
47.7
38.2
74.3
76.4

Total 
fertility 

rate
2011a
3.9
6.1
4.9
4.2
5.0
4.4
4.7
5.8
5.0
5.7
4.7
4.1
6.9
5.5

2.0
..
..
..
..
6.3
..

1.8
1.9
2.1
4.2

3.1
1.8
1.7
2.2
2.6
4.8
4.1
2.7
2.4

NOTES
a.  Annual average for 2010–2015.
b.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
c.  The denominator of the calculation refers to voting members of the House of Representatives only.
d.  UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2011).  
e.  Refers to an earlier year than that specified.
f.  For purposes of calculating the Gender Inequality Index, a value of 0.1 percent was used.
g.  Includes deliveries by cadres of health workers other than doctors, nurses and midwives.
h.  Data are for 2010.
i.  No women were elected in 2010; however, one woman was appointed to the cabinet.
j.  The People’s Assembly and the Shoura Assembly were dissolved by the Egypt Supreme Council of 

Armed Forces on 13 February 2011.

k.  The parliament was dissolved following the December 2008 coup.

DEFINITIONS
Gender Inequality Index: A composite measure reflecting inequality in achievements between women 
and men in three dimensions: reproductive health, empowerment and the labour market. See Technical 
note 3 for details on how the Gender Inequality Index is calculated.
Maternal mortality ratio: Ratio of the number of maternal deaths to the number of live births in a given 
year, expressed per 100,000 live births.
Adolescent fertility rate: Number of births to women ages 15–19 per 1,000 women ages 15–19.
Seats in national parliament: Proportion of seats held by women in a lower or single house or an upper 
house or senate, expressed as percentage of total seats.
Population with at least secondary education: Percentage of the population ages 25 and older that 
have reached secondary education.

142

human development report 2011

Labour force participation rate: Proportion of a country’s working-age population that engages in 
the labour market, either by working or actively looking for work, expressed as a percentage of the 
working-age population.
Contraceptive prevalence rate, any method: Percentage of women of reproductive age (ages 15–49) 
who are using, or whose partners are using, any modern or traditional form of contraception.
At least one antenatal visit: Percentage of women who used antenatal care provided by skilled health 
personnel for reasons related to pregnancy at least once during pregnancy, as a percentage of live births.
Births attended by skilled health personnel: Percentage of deliveries attended by personnel (including 
doctors, nurses and midwives) trained to give the necessary care, supervision and advice to women 
during pregnancy, labour and postpartum; to conduct deliveries on their own; and to care for newborns.
Total fertility rate: Number of children that would be born to each woman if she were to live to the end 
of her child-bearing years and bear children at each age in accordance with prevailing age-specific 
fertility rates.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1 and 2: HDRO calculations based on UNICEF (2011), UNDESA (2011), IPU (2011), Barro and Lee 
(2010b), UNESCO (2011) and ILO (2011).
Column 3: WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and World Bank (2010).
Columns 4 and 13: UNDESA (2011).
Column 5: IPU (2011).
Columns 6 and 7: HDRO updates of Barro and Lee (2010b) estimates based on UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics data on education attainment (2011) and Barro and Lee (2010a) methodology.
Columns 8 and 9: ILO (2011).
Columns 10–12: UNICEF (2011).

e5 Multidimensional Poverty Index

l
b
a
t

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
21 Slovenia
27 Czech Republic
30 United Arab Emirates
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
50 Romania
52 Seychelles
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria
57 Mexico
58 Panama
59 Serbia
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
100 Fiji
101 China
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives

Population in 

multidimensional povertya

Share of multidimensional 
poor with deprivations in 
environmental services

Multidimensional 

Poverty Index

Headcount

Yearb

Valuea

(%)

(thousands)

Intensity of 
deprivation

(%)

Population 
vulnerable 
to poverty

(%)

Population 
in severe 
poverty

(%)

Clean 
water
(%)

Improved 
sanitation

(%)

Modern 
fuels
(%)

Population below 
income poverty line
National 
poverty 

PPP $1.25 

a day
(%)

line
(%)

2003 (W)
2003 (W)
2003 (W)
2003 (W)
2003 (W)
2003 (W)

..
..

2003 (W)

..

2005 (N)
2003 (W)

2003 (W)

..
..

2005 (M)

..

2006 (N)

..

2005 (M)

..

2006 (M)
2005 (M)
2003 (W)
2006 (M)

..

2009 (D)

..

2006 (M)
2005 (M)
2007 (D)
2005 (M)

..

2004 (D)
2003 (W)
2006 (N)
2005 (D)
2010 (D)

..

2006 (D)
2003 (D)
2006 (M)
2003 (W)

2009 (D)
2003 (W)
2007 (D)

..

2003 (W)
2005 (M)
2006 (M)

..

2000 (D)
2003 (W)
2008 (D)
2009 (D)

0.000 d
0.010
0.002
0.026
0.000 d
0.016
..
..
0.006 e
..
0.011 f
0.016

0.006
..
..
0.006
..
0.015
..
0.003
..
0.020
0.000
0.005 e
0.002
..
0.005
..
0.003
0.003
0.008
0.008
..
0.086
0.009
0.011
0.004
0.022
..
0.021
0.028
0.024
0.010 e

0.008
0.021 e
0.018
..
0.056
0.006
0.039
..
0.161 d
0.064
0.089
0.018

0.0 d
3.1
0.6
7.2
0.0 d
4.6
..
..
1.6 e
..
3.0 f
4.4

1.7
..
..
1.5
..
4.0
..
0.8
..
5.6
0.0
1.3 e
0.6
..
1.4
..
0.8
0.8
2.2
1.9
..
19.9
2.2
2.7
1.1
5.4
..
5.3
6.6
5.6
2.8 e

2.4
5.3 e
4.6
..
12.5
1.6
8.2
..
35.4 d
13.3
20.5
5.2

0 d
316
20
97
0 d
466
..
..
37 e
..
1,160 f
196

56
..
..
9
..
4,313
..
79
..
74
0
1,883 e
92
..
45
..
30
36
1,018
39
..
5,421
286
5,075
34
2,500
..
461
4,378
16
272 e

145
1,027 e
438
..
161,675
1,067
41
..
437 d
755
1,972
16

0.0 d
33.4
35.3
36.5
0.0 d
34.3
..
..
37.9 e
..
37.7 f
36.3

34.7
..
..
41.6
..
38.9
..
40.0
..
35.1
35.1
38.9 e
36.9
..
37.7
..
37.2
35.2
35.5
40.9
..
43.2
41.6
39.3
36.2
40.9
..
39.4
42.0
42.6
37.1 e

34.4
38.7 e
39.4
..
44.9
38.5
47.2
..
45.5 d
48.5
43.7
35.6

2000–2009c 2000–2009c

0.4 d
0.0
2.0
1.3
0.0 d
0.0
..
..
0.0 e
..
5.7 f
0.1

0.1
..
..
1.9
..
5.8
..
3.6
..
0.4
0.8
0.8 e
5.0
..
7.4
..
7.0
5.3
1.0
6.7
..
16.9
2.1
7.0
3.9
6.4
..
12.5
7.3
7.6
4.9 e

1.3
14.4 e
8.6
..
6.3
9.9
6.7
..
22.4 d
15.0
18.7
4.8

0.0 d
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0 d
0.0
..
..
0.0 e
..
0.2 f
0.3

0.0
..
..
0.3
..
0.5
..
0.1
..
0.3
0.0
0.2 e
0.0
..
0.1
..
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.3
..
6.0
0.6
0.2
0.0
1.1
..
0.6
1.3
1.1
0.2 e

0.1
0.6 e
0.7
..
4.5
0.2
3.3
..
13.2 d
6.1
5.8
0.3

0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.0
0.0
..
..
0.0
..
0.2 f
0.1

0.0
..
..
0.2
..
0.6
..
0.1
..
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.3
..
0.3
..
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.4
..
14.1
0.7
1.0
0.2
2.4
..
3.1
2.0
1.9
1.2

0.2
3.0
1.5
..
3.0
0.5
5.2
..
19.4
8.8
8.2
0.2

0.0
0.0
0.1
0.6
0.0
0.0
..
..
0.8
..
2.2 f
0.3

0.0
..
..
0.4
..
2.1
..
0.2
..
0.5
0.0
0.4
0.1
..
0.4
..
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.8
..
19.4
0.6
1.1
0.4
2.6
..
2.4
3.2
2.5
1.4

0.0
2.6
2.7
..
7.7
0.5
6.5
..
32.6
11.2
19.8
0.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
2.4
0.0
0.0
..
..
0.1
..
2.2 f
1.2

0.3
..
..
0.9
..
2.8
..
0.7
..
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.5
..
1.1
..
0.5
0.8
0.3
1.5
..
19.2
0.3
..
0.3
3.6
..
1.6
..
4.1
0.5

0.0
5.3
2.9
..
9.1
1.2
5.3
..
26.9
12.4
17.7
0.9

0.0
..
..
0.0
..
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.8
0.9
0.0

0.0
0.5
0.3
0.0
1.0
3.4
9.5
0.1
0.0
..
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.7
0.6
3.5
0.0
14.7
0.1
0.3
0.2
5.9
5.1
3.8
1.3
16.0
1.5
1.0
2.7
..
2.6

0.4
7.0
4.3
..
15.9
10.8
..
5.1
4.8
5.1
14.0
1.5

..
..
..
..
..
..
16.6
..
5.9
15.1
..
11.1

20.5
13.8
..
4.9
12.8
47.4
32.7
6.6
3.8
..
5.4
11.1
15.4
21.7
12.4
29.0
14.0
23.6
7.9
19.0
9.9
34.8
36.0
21.4
26.5
45.5
..
15.8
18.1
33.5
3.8

13.3
15.2
50.5
31.0
2.8
8.1
..
37.8
32.7
35.1
60.1
..

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

143

multidimensional poverty Index

table

5

HDI rank

110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia

Population in 

multidimensional povertya

Share of multidimensional 
poor with deprivations in 
environmental services

Multidimensional 

Poverty Index

Headcount

Yearb

Valuea

(%)

(thousands)

Intensity of 
deprivation

(%)

Population 
vulnerable 
to poverty

(%)

Population 
in severe 
poverty

(%)

Clean 
water
(%)

Improved 
sanitation

(%)

Modern 
fuels
(%)

Population below 
income poverty line
National 
poverty 

PPP $1.25 

a day
(%)

line
(%)

2005 (M)
2005 (D)
2008 (D)
2008 (D)
2007 (N)
2006 (M)
2005 (D)

..

2006 (M)
2007 (D)
2006 (D)
2008 (N)
2007 (D)
2007 (M)
2006 (M)
2005 (M)
2002 (D)
2006 (D)
2007 (N)
2003 (W)
2006 (M)

..

2005 (D)
2008 (D)
2009 (D)
2006 (M)
2005 (D)
2007 (D)
2010 (M)

2009 (D)
2009 (D)
2007 (D)
2007 (D)
2009 (D)
2001 (M)
2000 (M)
2004 (D)
2009 (D)
2008 (D)
2006 (M)
2005 (D)
2008 (D)
2006 (D)
2006 (D)
2007 (M)
2009 (D)
2006 (D)
2006 (M)
2000 (M)
2007 (D)
2006 (M)
2005 (D)
2006 (D)
2006 (M)
2005 (D)
2004 (D)

..

2006 (D)
2005 (D)

0.065
0.007
0.064
0.024
0.005
0.008
0.053
..
0.021 d
0.187
0.159
0.057
0.095
0.129
0.019
0.068
0.084
0.128
0.048 e
0.127 e
0.059
..
0.283
0.144
0.208
0.267
0.251
0.184
0.119

0.229
0.154
0.264 e
0.292
0.360
0.452
0.154 e
0.287
0.357
0.367
0.283
0.384
0.310
0.350
0.299
0.352 e
0.156
0.367
0.284
0.408 d
0.328
0.139
0.426
0.412
0.324
0.353
0.381
..
0.180
0.562

15.8
1.9
13.4
6.0
0.4
2.3
13.4
..
5.5 d
39.6
32.5
13.4
20.8
30.1
4.9
17.1
17.7
28.0
10.6 e
25.9 e
14.2
..
53.7
31.2
40.6
47.2
52.0
41.4
27.2

47.8
34.5
49.4 e
57.8
68.1
77.4
31.8 e
53.3
66.9
65.2
52.5
66.9
54.1
64.7
56.4
61.7 e
35.3
72.3
54.3
73.9 d
64.2
29.3
80.2
71.8
60.4
61.5
72.1
..
39.7
88.6

402
72
12,083
4,699
52
603
100
..
1,041 d
855
2,281
6,609
48,352
67
249
1,104
14,249
1,538
3,287 e
3,134 e
3,996
..
612,203
7,258
1,600
2,757
6,946
469
197

18,863
56
81,236 e
83,207
749
11,137
14,297 e
9,149
13,463
27,559
11,176
7,273
81,510
18,008
5,346
1,982 e
759
21,235
3,003
416 d
7,740
241
7,380
5,652
935
11,083
8,993
..
4,974
65,798

41.0
36.7
47.4
40.7
37.3
36.2
39.5
..
37.5 d
47.2
48.9
42.3
45.9
42.7
38.8
40.0
47.2
45.7
45.3 e
49.1 e
41.3
..
52.7
46.2
51.2
56.5
48.4
44.5
43.9

48.0
44.7
53.4 e
50.4
52.9
58.4
48.3 e
53.9
53.3
56.3
53.9
57.4
57.3
54.0
53.0
57.1 e
44.1
50.7
52.4
55.2 d
51.2
47.3
53.2
57.4
53.6
57.4
52.8
..
45.3
63.5

2000–2009c 2000–2009c

20.6
6.4
9.1
7.2
8.8
8.1
6.7
..
7.1 d
23.6
22.0
22.2
12.2
33.5
9.2
23.0
18.5
17.4
12.3 e
9.8 e
14.3
..
16.4
21.6
17.7
14.1
21.3
24.4
17.2

27.4
24.3
11.0 e
21.2
18.2
10.7
13.4 e
19.3
17.9
23.0
13.0
11.6
17.8
15.6
18.8
15.1 e
26.7
19.4
21.6
16.0 d
17.2
16.1
14.9
13.2
17.6
15.3
20.0
..
24.0
6.1

3.2
0.1
5.7
1.0
0.1
0.1
2.1
..
0.5 d
14.7
11.3
2.4
7.6
6.5
0.9
3.1
6.0
11.2
3.3 e
14.5 e
3.1
..
28.6
11.4
22.9
28.1
22.0
13.0
8.5

19.8
10.7
27.4 e
26.2
38.7
54.8
9.4 e
30.4
35.4
43.7
31.9
44.4
33.9
37.1
32.3
40.7 e
11.1
39.7
28.7
43.8 d
34.8
12.5
50.6
47.2
35.5
39.3
40.4
..
14.8
72.3

11.6
0.5
2.9
0.3
0.6
0.6
1.6
..
1.7
14.7
11.9
4.6
10.2
7.9
1.6
10.5
15.3
20.4
4.4
3.7
6.4
..
11.9
12.2
17.2
27.8
28.6
24.0
2.6

30.8
9.4
6.9
2.5
35.7
51.3
25.2
32.5
49.4
47.3
31.9
31.7
35.7
14.4
35.6
45.4
18.4
60.3
33.4
45.0
49.8
6.7
63.5
33.2
20.8
25.0
44.0
..
24.2
53.8

13.7
1.0
6.1
1.0
0.2
0.1
4.6
..
1.0
36.4
23.0
9.6
13.2
20.1
1.0
3.4
10.0
27.7
6.5
6.6
5.1
..
48.2
29.9
38.9
38.6
48.3
37.8
16.9

42.6
29.6
32.1
48.2
47.6
68.5
19.1
48.5
66.5
64.1
25.7
51.4
39.6
56.3
52.2
54.5
31.2
69.1
52.9
72.8
57.4
16.3
65.7
69.5
32.1
51.9
71.6
..
31.6
83.7

15.7
1.5
11.0
..
0.1
0.9
2.5
..
0.1
37.5
29.6
8.0
15.5
29.5
2.8
10.1
..
27.4
4.9
23.0
2.7
..
51.1
31.0
35.9
47.1
51.6
37.8
22.1

47.6
31.3
40.5
56.7
67.6
71.0
..
52.5
66.9
65.0
28.4
53.2
52.8
63.4
56.2
53.4
32.8
72.3
54.2
72.3
63.0
8.8
80.2
71.3
60.3
..
72.0
..
39.0
88.3

22.4
1.9
22.6
2.0
..
46.3
..
..
1.7
..
23.3
17.4
18.7
..
1.9
21.5
13.1
15.8
2.5
16.9
4.0
21.0
41.6
30.0
54.1
33.9
28.3
62.9
26.2

19.7
28.6
22.6
49.6
37.4
54.3
..
9.6
67.8
67.9
17.5
33.5
64.4
55.1
54.9
21.2
43.4
28.7
38.7
46.1
64.3
18.8
76.8
47.3
34.3
23.8
73.9
..
..
39.0

35.2
29.0
26.5
22.0
21.9
..
..
30.6
..
38.0
60.0
23.0
13.3
..
43.1
47.2
14.5
46.2
9.0
51.0
22.9
26.6
27.5
28.5
50.1
27.6
30.1
69.2
23.2

45.9
53.8
22.3
40.0
49.9
..
..
39.9
68.7
33.4
34.8
50.8
54.7
30.9
77.0
46.3
56.6
24.5
61.7
44.8
59.3
..
58.5
39.0
58.0
42.7
52.4
36.0
72.0
38.9

144

human development report 2011

HDI rank

175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES

2006 (D)

..

2005 (D)
2000 (M)
2008 (D)
2006 (M)
2007 (D)
2003 (W)
2009 (D)
2005 (M)
2006 (D)
2007 (D)

0.558
..
0.506
0.512
0.439
0.536
0.485
0.344
0.512
0.530
0.642
0.393

86.6
..
82.5
86.4
77.0
82.6
83.9
62.9
79.3
84.5
92.4
73.2

81.2

11,771
..
7,459
3,198
4,321
12,078
2,917
5,758
18,127
6,127
12,437
44,485

6,941

64.4
..
61.3
59.3
57.0
64.9
57.7
54.7
64.6
62.7
69.4
53.7

63.3

7.6
..
9.3
11.8
13.1
8.6
9.7
28.2
9.5
12.2
4.0
16.1

9.5

68.4
..
62.3
55.4
53.2
65.8
57.5
44.1
60.7
61.9
81.8
46.5

65.6

2000–2009c 2000–2009c

43.7
..
37.7
53.6
50.3
43.0
33.5
42.9
44.1
51.6
64.1
55.5

70.0

79.5
..
75.6
53.3
71.1
69.6
78.9
58.4
63.2
63.1
89.3
62.0

69.1

86.5
..
82.5
86.1
76.9
82.4
83.9
61.3
78.7
84.3
92.3
72.8

81.0

51.4
48.8
43.3
62.8
53.4
56.5
83.7
61.9
60.0
81.3
43.1
59.2

..

47.4
64.7
53.0
62.0
66.4
46.4
63.8
55.0
54.7
66.9
59.5
71.3

..

table

5

multidimensional poverty Index

Population in 

multidimensional povertya

Share of multidimensional 
poor with deprivations in 
environmental services

Multidimensional 

Poverty Index

Headcount

Yearb

Valuea

(%)

(thousands)

Intensity of 
deprivation

(%)

Population 
vulnerable 
to poverty

(%)

Population 
in severe 
poverty

(%)

Clean 
water
(%)

Improved 
sanitation

(%)

Modern 
fuels
(%)

Population below 
income poverty line
National 
poverty 

PPP $1.25 

a day
(%)

line
(%)

Somalia

2006 (M)

0.514

NOTES
a.  Not all indicators were available for all countries; caution should thus be used in cross-country com-
parisons. Where data are missing, indicator weights are adjusted to total 100 percent. For details on 
countries missing data, see Alkire and others (2011).

b.  D indicates data are from Demographic and Health Surveys, M indicates data are from Multiple 
Indicator Cluster Surveys, W indicates data are from World Health Surveys and N indicates data 
are from national surveys.

c.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
d.  Upper bound estimate.
e.  Lower bound estimate.
f.  Refers to only part of the country.

DEFINITIONS
Multidimensional Poverty Index: Percentage of the population that is multidimensionally poor adjusted 
by the intensity of the deprivations. See Technical note 4 for details on how the Multidimensional Poverty 
Index is calculated.
Multidimensional poverty headcount: Percentage of the population with a weighted deprivation score 
of at least 33 percent.
Intensity of deprivation of multidimensional poverty: Average percentage of deprivation experienced 
by people in multidimensional poverty.
Population  vulnerable  to  poverty:  Percentage  of  the  population  at  risk  of  suffering  multiple 
deprivations —that is, those with a deprivation score of 20–33 percent.
Population in severe poverty: Percentage of the population in severe multidimensional poverty—that 
is, those with a deprivation score of 50 percent or more.
Share of multidimensional poor with deprivations in clean water: Percentage of the multidimensionally 
poor population without access to clean water that is less than a 30 minute walk from home. Clean water 
is defined using the Millennium Development Goal definition and includes piped water into dwelling, plot 

or yard; public tap/standpipe; borehole/tube well; protected dug well; protected spring; rainwater collec-
tion; and bottled water (if a secondary available source is also improved). It does not include unprotected 
well, unprotected spring, water provided by carts with small tanks/drums, tanker truck-provided water 
and bottled water (if secondary source is not an improved source); or surface water taken directly from 
rivers, ponds, streams, lakes, dams or irrigation channels.
Share of multidimensional poor with deprivations in improved sanitation: Percentage of the multidi-
mensionally poor population without access to an improved sanitation facility. Improved sanitation facili-
ties are defined using the Millennium Development Goal definition and include flush or pour-flush to piped 
sewer system or septic tank, ventilated improved pit latrine, pit latrine with slab and composting toilet. 
Facilities are not considered improved when they are shared with other households or open to the public.
Share of multidimensional poor with deprivations in modern fuels: Percentage of the multidimension-
ally poor population without access to modern fuels. Households are considered deprived of modern 
fuels if they cook with wood, charcoal or dung.
Population below PPP $1.25 a day: Percentage of the population living below the international poverty 
line $1.25 (in purchasing power parity terms) a day.
Population below national poverty line: Percentage of the population living below the national poverty 
line, which is the poverty line deemed appropriate for a country by its authorities. National estimates 
are based on population-weighted subgroup estimates from household surveys.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1 and 2: Calculated from various household surveys, including ICF Macro Demographic and 
Health Surveys, United Nations Children’s Fund Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys and World Health 
Organization World Health Surveys conducted between 2000 and 2010.
Columns 3–10: Calculated based on data on household deprivations in education, health and living 
standards from various household surveys as listed in column 1.
Columns 11 and 12: World Bank (2011a).

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

145

e6 environmental sustainability

l
b
a
t

COMPOSITE MEASURES 

OF SUSTAINABILITY

PRIMARY 
ENERGY 
SUPPLYa

CARBON DIOxIDE 

EMISSIONS

POLLUTION

NATURAL RESOURCE DEPLETION 

AND BIODIVERSITY

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

Adjusted 
net savings
(% of GNI)
2005–2009b

Ecological 
footprint
(hectares 
per capita)

2007

Per capita

Fossil 
fuels
(% of 
total)
2007

Renew-
ables
(% of 
total)
2007

(average 
annual % 
growth)
1970/2008

(tonnes)
2008

Green-

house gas 
emissions 
per capita
(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

2005

Urban 
pollution
(micro-
grams 
per cubic 
metre)
2008

Natural 
resource 
depletion
(% of GNI)

2009

Fresh water 

with-
drawals
(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)
2003–2010b

Change 
in forest 

Forest 
area
(% of 
land 
area)
2008 1990–2008

area
(%)

Endan-
gered 
species
(% of all 
species)
2010

Environ-
mental 

performance 

index
(0–100)
2010

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria

12.8
1.7
11.6
–0.8
8.0
5.8
–1.1
..
11.4
16.0
21.6
12.1
..
4.1
20.0
10.7
12.2
13.2
15.0
7.0
13.6
8.1
9.7
6.1
7.6
33.0
11.3
2.2
–7.9
..
0.4
..
–1.8
14.4
19.8
..
..
4.5
9.7
6.0
–1.8
10.6
20.4
3.2
10.6
12.3
..

6.1
..
18.8
..
..
..
..
6.1

5.6
6.8
6.2
8.0
4.9
7.0
6.3
..
5.1
5.9
5.0
4.7
..
..
4.9
8.3
4.8
8.0
5.3
5.0
5.3
6.2
5.4
5.0
9.4
5.3
5.7
4.9
5.4
10.7
..
..
..
7.9
4.1
..
10.5
3.0
4.3
4.7
4.5
..
5.6
3.2
2.6
3.7
..

5.1
..
2.7
1.9
..
..
..
4.1

81.1
65.7
66.4
63.5
73.4
66.4
67.1
..
73.2
86.0
89.1
72.5
..
93.5
57.0
69.2
62.4
58.1
78.1
78.2
65.0
74.7
70.6
73.1
67.8
69.6
71.6
74.2
60.9
40.7
56.3
..
60.8
63.8
74.5
76.3
48.9
69.1
63.1
68.3
73.0
42.0
72.5
73.3
61.0
68.7
..

59.1
..
67.0
78.1
..
..
..
62.5

58.6
94.6
92.5
85.0
66.7
74.9
90.2
..
80.1
33.1
52.7
83.0
94.9
17.1
81.2
80.4
96.6
73.8
71.6
51.0
69.4
48.0
81.7
89.9
88.0
100.0
81.2
90.2
92.8
100.0
96.0
..
100.0
88.3
70.0
99.9
100.0
77.8
93.8
60.8
78.3
100.3
64.3
77.6
89.8
85.1
..

64.9
..
79.4
89.9
..
..
..
76.2

45.3
5.4
4.4
5.4
33.1
17.0
3.8
..
8.9
32.4
20.6
3.4
0.4
82.9
1.5
18.9
4.9
4.2
27.1
7.6
11.2
26.1
7.9
8.2
3.0
0.0
5.4
2.8
5.6
0.0
4.0
..
0.0
12.0
5.7
0.1
0.0
6.3
6.3
9.3
18.3
0.0
30.8
22.1
7.1
8.7
..

33.2
..
14.1
10.1
..
..
..
5.3

10.5
19.0
10.5
17.3
7.8
16.4
9.8
..
9.6
5.3
5.3
9.5
5.5
7.1
10.6
8.4
5.4
9.9
8.1
6.1
8.5
10.7
7.4
7.5
21.9
7.0
11.3
8.5
8.8
34.6
9.9
6.4
27.0
13.6
7.0
6.3
53.5
5.5
8.3
4.5
5.3
29.0
3.4
4.4
4.8
5.3
5.3

2.5
10.4
4.4
2.8
8.1
6.4
3.1
6.7

1.0
1.3
–0.1
–0.6
1.2
0.1
1.1
..
..
–2.0
–0.5
0.7
2.6
0.1
5.0
–1.1
–0.1
–0.7
0.5
–0.9
..
0.5
2.0
0.8
–1.6
–0.6
..
–0.8
3.1
–1.8
3.4
..
–2.2
..
..
3.0
–0.6
–0.6
–0.3
..
3.1
2.4
..
1.4
0.9
..
2.9

0.5
..
–0.8
0.7
7.4
–2.3
..
–0.2

5.8
9.6
2.4
3.7
10.0
4.7
5.8
..
1.9
2.1
1.2
1.0
0.5
3.3
1.2
2.9
1.1
1.8
1.9
2.3
2.6
3.4
1.7
1.4
3.5
1.4
2.1
1.8
1.4
6.2
1.3
..
17.9
2.3
1.4
0.9
18.0
1.6
2.7
2.5
1.8
4.3
2.3
1.6
3.9
1.5
..

8.1
..
1.7
1.4
..
..
..
2.0

16
14
31
19
12
15
13
17
16
11
22
27
..
14
31
16
28
21
29
13
29
15
28
23
13
31
18
13
32
89
34
17
51
13
13
..
35
16
35
17
21
49
13
62
68
27
38

160
..
12
21
..
..
..
51

10.6
5.1
0.8
0.7
0.9
2.3
0.1
..
0.1
0.2
..
0.0
..
..
0.0
1.5
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
..
..
0.3
1.2
0.2
..
..
..
..
0.7
0.3
..
..
0.2
1.0
0.2
0.1
..
0.3
10.0
4.9
0.8
..

0.4
..
1.3
..
..
..
..
1.1

0.8
..
11.7
15.6
..
..
..
..
21.0
1.5
..
..
..
0.1
..
10.8
101.9
34.0
..
15.0
3.0
1.5
29.0
..
..
..
14.8
8.8
12.7
2,032.0
19.3
..
..
14.0
1.4
..
455.2
5.4
19.4
9.6
..
219.8
..
..
..
0.6
..

..
..
3.2
..
..
..
..
28.7

32.4
19.7
10.8
33.2
31.5
34.1
10.5
43.1
31.8
68.7
30.8
68.5
..
0.3 c
64.3
12.7
7.1
22.3
47.0
29.0
62.0
72.9
35.7
30.6
33.5
3.3
34.3
11.8
29.8
3.8
18.7
34.0
72.8
52.6
40.2
0.9
0.0
22.4
30.5
34.2
37.7
0.6
53.6
21.7
10.9
34.2
19.4

9.5
87.6
28.3
26.3
88.5
51.4
40.4
35.1

8.6
–2.2
5.8
2.3
7.3
0.0
55.1
6.2
3.1
3.4
6.9
0.0
..
223.0
–2.1
21.3
17.0
..
2.7
9.1
..
1.2
29.0
18.5
..
0.0
..
9.8
16.5
28.7
7.4
0.0
–7.1
..
..
0.0
0.0
11.6
4.5
..
3.6
145.0
..
5.8
–14.1
..
0.0

79.8
..
2.0
36.1
0.0
0.0
..
14.7

7
22
5
21
25
7
7
1
9
5
6
15
9
9
10
6
12
5
11
14
13
4
16
14
2
17
5
10
16
9
8
3
9
3
5
7
8
8
5
4
19
8
4
10
9
13
8

12
13
9
18
18
10
11
9

146

human development report 2011

environmental sustainability

COMPOSITE MEASURES 

OF SUSTAINABILITY

PRIMARY 
ENERGY 
SUPPLYa

CARBON DIOxIDE 

EMISSIONS

POLLUTION

NATURAL RESOURCE DEPLETION 

AND BIODIVERSITY

HDI rank

56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico
58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of

Adjusted 
net savings
(% of GNI)
2005–2009b

–3.9
9.1
28.4
..
..
15.4
–32.4
15.7
..
16.9
–0.8
..
–1.2
15.2
8.2
2.7
..
2.9
..
–7.1
5.6
8.0
11.6
6.9
8.6
..
..
4.4
4.6
–8.8
9.6
5.4
..
–7.9
..
5.4
2.9
9.2
14.6

3.0
..
16.4
0.4
..
3.4
39.7
..
20.5
..
3.7
1.8
5.2
6.2
31.4
24.9
16.2
28.0
3.1
..
..
..

Ecological 
footprint
(hectares 
per capita)

2007
5.1
3.0
2.9
2.4
..
4.9
3.1
6.3
3.1
3.8
4.4
..
4.5
2.7
1.9
2.9
..
2.9
2.7
1.8
2.9
4.3
5.7
1.9
1.5
..
..
1.9
2.9
..
1.8
1.9
2.7
5.0
..
1.9
2.7
..
1.9

2.1
1.6
1.2
1.5
..
..
2.2
3.9
2.4
..
2.0
1.4
3.2
2.6
..
..
1.4
1.3
1.7
..
1.7
..

Per capita

Fossil 
fuels
(% of 
total)
2007
100.0
88.8
75.7
89.5
..
95.1
99.9
100.0
99.1
92.1
90.9
..
98.8
45.6
63.7
95.4
..
87.6
92.8
66.6
81.8
..
84.2
88.5
76.1
..
..
83.9
52.6
..
73.5
72.7
99.4
100.0
..
98.9
90.6
..
86.3

Renew-
ables
(% of 
total)
2007
0.0
9.9
24.1
10.5
..
5.0
0.1
0.0
0.9
5.5
3.0
..
1.1
54.5
26.2
3.7
..
12.5
9.6
33.7
1.4
..
8.2
11.5
23.9
..
..
15.7
44.5
..
5.2
27.7
0.7
0.0
..
1.5
9.5
..
13.7

(tonnes)
2008
17.2
4.4
2.0
5.1
5.2
7.7
37.3
26.3
9.3
6.5
12.1
2.4
15.3
1.8
1.3
4.1
4.9
6.0
8.3
1.2
7.0
3.1
5.8
4.5
1.4
1.9
2.3
2.0
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.5
7.3
16.4
1.7
5.4
3.9
1.4
2.5

98.0
99.8
43.4
79.2
..
..
86.9
100.7
80.6
..
38.4
43.8
28.2
82.1
..
96.2
89.1
56.9
96.1
..
98.1
..

1.7
0.2
56.6
20.8
..
..
12.3
0.0
19.3
..
61.6
56.2
163.1
17.9
..
3.3
2.8
43.1
4.0
..
1.9
..

3.5
3.2
0.6
2.2
0.9
1.5
5.2
9.5
4.3
4.7
1.0
1.7
0.7
1.3
3.0
4.1
1.3
0.9
2.6
0.5
4.6
0.6

(average 
annual % 
growth)
1970/2008

2.1
1.8
0.9
..
–0.7
4.7
3.7
–0.6
–1.5
..
..
4.4
..
2.5
–0.7
2.5
..
–0.4
..
..
..
4.4
..
1.4
0.1
4.4
3.4
2.7
2.0
4.7
..
0.3
2.2
11.0
5.0
..
3.2
0.9
3.2

3.3
2.9
1.9
3.1
3.9
1.1
4.6
..
6.3
0.2
2.5
–2.1
2.1
2.1
..
1.6
..
0.8
3.9
..
..
..

Green-

house gas 
emissions 
per capita
(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

2005
2.5
1.7
1.4
2.3
..
2.4
7.8
6.3
2.7
2.4
4.9
..
4.3
0.9
1.1
0.4
..
3.0
1.2
1.4
2.1
..
1.0
0.7
0.9
..
..
1.7
4.0
..
1.3
1.8
2.1
7.1
..
4.7
1.4
..
1.0

0.5
1.8
0.6
0.9
..
..
1.5
6.7
1.6
..
0.8
6.4
4.1
4.9
..
3.7
1.1
0.8
0.9
..
1.9
..

Urban 
pollution
(micro-
grams 
per cubic 
metre)
2008
104
33
34
..
13
20
105
95
76
7
16
21
15
32
46
36
17
9
19
49
18
18
20
37
51
22
34
20
21
24
69
20
55
94
..
33
37
13
26

33
69
74
16
..
19
66
65
55
24
28
7
67
74
29
111
36
19
97
..
40
..

Natural 
resource 
depletion
(% of GNI)

2009
28.9
5.4
..
0.4
..
7.9
28.2
..
30.5
0.9
14.5
..
22.0
0.2
1.3
..
..
9.8
1.6
0.1
3.8
0.0
0.1
0.7
5.9
0.0
..
9.9
3.1
..
0.5
6.2
17.9
..
0.0
32.7
0.2
..
4.6

1.1
16.9
0.5
0.5
0.3
..
3.1
30.4
3.2
..
0.5
29.2
..
11.2
..
11.1
0.2
1.0
7.3
..
17.8
..

Environ-
mental 

performance 

index
(0–100)
2010
55.3
67.3
71.4
..
69.8
65.0
54.2
51.1
50.1
65.4
61.2
..
57.3
86.4
71.4
57.9
..
62.9
55.9
63.6
58.2
80.6
60.6
58.0
69.3
..
..
69.3
63.4
..
60.4
76.8
60.0
45.9
..
59.1
60.4
69.9
60.6

56.1
67.4
63.7
68.4
..
65.9
49.0
38.4
62.2
68.2
69.1
56.4
63.5
44.3
65.9
42.8
58.8
65.7
62.0
..
42.3
..

943.3
17.5
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
28.1
..
..
0.9
2.6
..
26.4
16.1
..
..
..
..
..
0.7
..
36.4
..
67.7
86.6
..
35.2
18.8
..
..

99.4
..
24.5
..
..
..
19.5
..
13.1
..
..
..
..
..
15.7
..
..
17.0
..
49.9
..
..

Fresh water 

with-
drawals
(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)
2003–2010b

area
(%)

Change 
in forest 

Forest 
area
(% of 
land 
area)
2008 1990–2008
0.5 c
33.5
44.0
29.6
22.3
62.8
44.4
0.3 c
0.1 c
42.2
49.4
50.0
1.2
50.1
28.4
13.4
42.3
53.1
42.7
39.5
16.7
17.2
39.2
31.2
53.4
60.3
77.0
41.3
61.9
68.1
9.5
54.7
6.8
0.0 c
12.5
11.3
14.4
61.9
6.3

0.0
–7.4
–13.6
..
–4.9
–7.8
–5.3
70.6
0.0
..
..
0.0
..
–0.2
–1.3
4.4
0.0
–9.9
..
..
..
–9.9
..
–1.9
–2.7
–9.6
7.3
–25.7
–8.9
4.9
..
–2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
14.6
–11.0
51.4

table

6

Endan-
gered 
species
(% of all 
species)
2010
9
17
6
7
8
18
6
9
9
4
9
10
8
7
15
10
8
8
10
9
8
18
14
15
8
9
9
12
10 d
8
7
11
9
9
10
8
15
6
11

1.1
0.6
30.1
40.8
60.4
55.1
21.6
8.8
37.1
94.6
14.3
85.4
45.2
53.4
3.0
7.1
11.5
25.3
0.1 c
1.5
7.7
91.5

0.0
–9.4
–19.6
43.3
31.5
5.7
28.1
..
–3.1
–0.1
–21.5
0.0
–15.2
–7.9
0.0
–11.8
..
15.0
56.4
1.0
..
..

10
13
19
17
12
15
12
8
14
3
3
6
4
4
10
7
6
19
10
..
7
15

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

147

environmental sustainability

COMPOSITE MEASURES 

OF SUSTAINABILITY

PRIMARY 
ENERGY 
SUPPLYa

CARBON DIOxIDE 

EMISSIONS

POLLUTION

NATURAL RESOURCE DEPLETION 

AND BIODIVERSITY

table

6

HDI rank

117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea

Adjusted 
net savings
(% of GNI)
2005–2009b

–0.4
9.6
–14.1
21.9
9.5
..
0.4
11.0
12.4
9.4
6.2
16.6
3.4
25.0
4.0
..
..
24.1
–4.7
..
–44.7
17.8
13.0
–0.9
..

–3.7
13.1
..
10.7
27.1
..
–29.2
..
6.8
3.9
13.5
..
..
7.8
..
29.1
..
..
24.4
8.6
..
..
1.4
..
8.8
4.1
12.9
–7.1
7.3
..
..
..
8.3
13.5
..
..

Ecological 
footprint
(hectares 
per capita)

2007
..
2.7
1.5
2.2
1.9
..
2.3
1.2
..
1.2
1.0
1.4
1.6
1.2
1.8
1.3
..
0.9
1.8
..
1.0
1.3
1.0
1.5
..

..
1.1
..
0.8
0.6
0.4
1.0
1.8
1.0
1.8
1.2
2.1
0.9
1.1
1.4
3.6
0.7
2.6
1.1
1.5
1.0
..
0.9
..
1.0
1.2
3.4
1.7
1.0
0.7
0.6
1.2
1.1
1.9
1.0
0.9

148

human development report 2011

Per capita

Fossil 
fuels
(% of 
total)
2007
..
67.2
98.7
71.6
54.1
..
87.2
65.6
..
69.2
42.3
54.0
38.5
93.6
42.9
99.4
..
71.1
27.8
..
43.5
..
29.7
..
..

Renew-
ables
(% of 
total)
2007
..
22.3
1.3
18.1
45.9
..
10.5
34.4
..
32.4
54.7
45.6
61.5
3.9
57.2
0.2
..
28.1
72.5
..
53.7
..
69.7
..
..

(tonnes)
2008
2.0
2.5
3.4
1.9
1.2
0.3
8.8
1.8
0.4
1.1
0.5
1.5
0.8
1.5
0.9
3.4
0.6
1.5
0.4
7.3
0.6
0.3
0.3
1.0
1.1

..
16.2
..
61.8
68.4
..
33.5
31.0
23.9
..
10.6
..
99.0
57.3
18.3
10.9
28.3
..
..
..
14.3
..
7.5
..
..
37.1
..
31.2
25.0
..
..
26.1
6.7
..
..
19.9

..
83.8
..
37.7
31.6
..
66.5
69.0
76.1
..
89.4
..
1.0
42.4
81.7
89.1
71.7
..
..
..
83.4
..
92.3
..
..
61.0
..
68.8
75.5
..
..
69.1
93.3
..
..
80.1

0.4
0.3
0.8
0.9
0.3
0.2
1.4
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.3
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.1
0.3
0.6
..
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.6
0.1
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.7
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1

(average 
annual % 
growth)
1970/2008

–0.3
..
3.1
..
2.2
–0.8
0.7
4.8
–0.4
..
..
2.1
0.7
3.1
1.9
1.0
4.1
3.8
0.5
11.3
0.7
0.5
1.8
0.4
12.5

1.0
–0.2
3.8
2.2
..
..
2.2
1.0
3.1
–0.8
0.3
0.5
..
0.7
1.3
4.7
3.1
1.4
..
–0.9
1.4
..
–4.7
–0.8
4.2
4.1
2.2
0.1
–0.9
–0.8
–3.5
–2.0
0.7
0.2
1.2
..

Green-

house gas 
emissions 
per capita
(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

2005
..
4.1
0.9
4.4
1.2
..
1.9
1.5
..
1.0
0.9
1.3
1.7
0.5
1.1
0.7
..
0.7
0.6
..
2.7
..
1.9
..
..

..
0.9
..
1.1
0.7
..
5.1
2.2
1.6
..
1.4
..
0.5
1.0
1.1
1.0
0.6
..
..
..
0.8
..
3.8
..
..
0.9
..
3.0
1.0
..
..
1.3
1.1
..
..
0.8

Urban 
pollution
(micro-
grams 
per cubic 
metre)
2008
22
69
69
48
42
..
22
72
15
26
43
53
23
27
60
138
..
59
24
7
68
39
41
35
22

26
30
29
109
134
..
55
46
47
33
22
18
67
81
46
32
35
68
46
12
29
34
..
49
26
45
62
159
32
35
37
..
59
112
47
71

Natural 
resource 
depletion
(% of GNI)

2009
3.4
2.8
10.2
0.3
0.4
..
5.4
6.5
..
0.5
0.2
7.2
0.8
1.4
1.2
45.7
..
4.2
6.9
66.0
50.6
..
0.2
0.1
5.3

10.9
1.2
1.0
3.1
2.6
..
29.1
..
4.8
0.2
2.5
19.9
13.2
0.3
15.0
4.2
..
18.8
1.4
4.7
3.6
1.0
11.5
0.3
2.4
1.2
1.0
11.1
3.1
0.9
..
3.5
4.5
..
..
0.8

Fresh water 

with-
drawals
(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)
2003–2010b

..
..
99.8
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
9.3
..
..
..
..
..
40.1
..
..
..
..
0.5
..
0.4

..
8.9
..
81.5
3.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
9.2

area
(%)

Change 
in forest 

Forest 
area
(% of 
land 
area)
2008 1990–2008
77.2
20.4
2.6
9.0
48.5
15.0
7.6
52.9
36.1
4.8
2.9
43.6
27.0
11.5
35.2
1.9
21.0
22.9
22.7
58.8
65.7
68.9
58.6
32.2
84.1

0.0
–15.5
28.8
–15.1
–33.2
0.0
0.0
–19.2
0.0
..
..
44.3
–27.9
1.2
–20.6
2.6
46.1
6.6
–30.6
–11.3
–1.3
–8.1
–20.0
17.4
6.3

Endan-
gered 
species
(% of all 
species)
2010
3
2
13
5
7
14
15
16
14
6
6
12
4
16
8
9
13
13
5
6
4
9
13
2
7

–4.3
79.5
–5.9
6.1
0.0
28.1
–29.8
2.3
–3.1
11.1
–20.9
51.4
–3.7
47.1
–17.4
49.6
–16.3
43.1
–7.5
21.8
–17.5
38.6
–8.0
64.1
0.0
1.0
–8.5
44.4
–42.8
10.8
–24.5
25.4
3.7
–11.6
0.2 c –39.3
1.4
9.0
–33.4
16.1
–52.3
6.0
–68.3
2.0
–5.7
67.0
0.2 c
0.0
16.8
30.5
–19.1
42.1
7.8
47.6
–8.3
29.5
32.7
1.8
–15.2
35.1
2.1
0.0
–26.6
42.1
12.6
..
–10.1
10.4
–7.9
72.6
15.3
..

17
8
..
9
9
5
4
8
11
23
12
12
10
6
7
6
19
7
3
7
4
13
3
9
6
4
4
5
7
9
5
3
7
2
5
8

Environ-
mental 

performance 

index
(0–100)
2010
59.2
41.3
64.6
59.3
49.9
..
50.8
44.6
..
59.7
51.3
59.0
57.1
65.6
54.0
41.0
..
48.3
51.3
41.9
54.0
59.6
41.7
54.4
68.0

51.1
51.4
57.3
48.0
44.0
..
36.3
51.3
44.6
49.2
47.9
44.3
48.3
42.3
40.2
68.2
39.5
33.7
..
49.8
36.4
..
47.0
60.5
44.6
39.6
50.3
47.1
54.3
51.4
..
47.8
43.1
39.4
44.7
54.6

environmental sustainability

COMPOSITE MEASURES 

OF SUSTAINABILITY

PRIMARY 
ENERGY 
SUPPLYa

CARBON DIOxIDE 

EMISSIONS

POLLUTION

NATURAL RESOURCE DEPLETION 

AND BIODIVERSITY

HDI rank

178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Adjusted 
net savings
(% of GNI)
2005–2009b

–4.2
..
1.2
2.3
–18.3
..
2.0
–6.8
16.2
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

6.6
5.0
27.2
..

..
..
4.7
6.2
22.9
4.7
..
..
18.3

Ecological 
footprint
(hectares 
per capita)

2007
1.7
1.3
1.1
1.3
1.3
1.7
0.8
0.9
2.3
0.8

1.3
..
..
..
..
1.4
..

5.9
3.1
1.6
1.2

2.1
..
3.5
2.6
1.0
1.3
1.2
..
2.4

Per capita

Fossil 
fuels
(% of 
total)
2007
..
..
..
..
..
..
7.3
..
..
4.0

Renew-
ables
(% of 
total)
2007
..
..
..
..
..
..
95.9
..
..
96.2

(tonnes)
2008
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0

88.9
..
..
..
..
..
..

81.9
81.2
77.3
..

88.9
..
87.7
69.2
69.8
..
..
..
72.3

11.1
..
..
..
..
..
..

7.2
15.9
22.2
..

10.9
..
6.7
30.4
29.7
..
..
..
25.1

3.3
1.6
..
14.2
..
0.1
..

11.3
5.9
3.2
0.4

4.6
4.2
7.8
2.9
1.5
0.9
0.2
2.6
4.4

(average 
annual % 
growth)
1970/2008

–0.9
–1.2
–0.6
3.9
–5.0
0.2
–2.7
1.9
1.0
–3.3

–1.2
..
..
..
..
0.5
..

0.3
1.8
3.9
0.6

2.3
4.2
..
1.5
3.4
0.2
0.1
1.9
2.5

Green-

house gas 
emissions 
per capita
(tonnes 
of carbon 
dioxide 
equivalent)

2005
..
..
..
..
..
..
1.1
..
..
1.9

1.0
..
..
..
..
..
..

2.7
2.9
1.2
..

1.5
..
2.9
2.7
0.8
..
..
..
1.7

Urban 
pollution
(micro-
grams 
per cubic 
metre)
2008
53
34
38
64
31
81
26
31
96
40

59
..
..
..
8
31
..

24
30
61
69

89
..
25
33
70
43
68
..
52

Natural 
resource 
depletion
(% of GNI)

2009
6.6
0.0
2.1
1.6
11.0
25.2
3.8
10.6
1.2
10.7

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.8
8.7
4.4
8.7

..
..
6.8
..
6.2
9.8
10.0
..
2.4

Fresh water 

with-
drawals
(% of total 
renewable 

water 
resources)
2003–2010b

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
22.4
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
30.1
..
..
..
..

area
(%)

Change 
in forest 

Forest 
area
(% of 
land 
area)
2008 1990–2008
26.9
36.4
38.6
21.1
45.6
9.3
50.2
6.8
1.0
68.3

–8.9
–2.3
–11.3
–15.7
–11.0
–10.9
–9.1
–39.2
–36.8
–3.5

Endan-
gered 
species
(% of all 
species)
2010
8
1
7
3
8
3
7
5
3
6

table

6

49.2
70.2
..
0.0
0.0
11.0
33.3

5.8
10.2
2.9
1.6

1.1
8.5
24.3
12.2
5.5
1.6
2.0
14.2
1.7

–27.8
..
..
0.0
0.0
–16.7
0.0

1.2
–3.4
8.3
–13.9

1.8
12.6
..
–7.5
–1.3
–13.8
–12.2
1.1
–1.2

9
12
8
14
0
7
15

14
11
13
8

10
13
9
11
12
7
8
15
12

Environ-
mental 

performance 

index
(0–100)
2010
44.4
33.3
32.1
47.3
..
40.8
51.2
43.9
37.6
51.6

41.8
..
..
..
..
..
..

68.2
63.5
50.3
46.3

56.4
..
60.4
65.2
49.0
45.7
46.7
..
54.4

NOTES
a.  The sum of the shares of fossil fuels and renewable energy resources may be greater than 100 
percent because some countries generate more electricity than they consume and export the excess. 

b.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
c.  Less than 1 percent.
d.  For certain amphibian species endemic to Brazil, there was not time for the Global Amphibian As-
sessment (GAA) Coordinating Team and the experts on the species in Brazil to reach agreement on 
the Red List Categories. The data for amphibians included in the data displayed here are those that 
were agreed at the GAA Brazil workshop in April 2003. However, a subsequent GAA check found 
that many of the assessments were inconsistent with the approach adopted elsewhere in the world, 
and a “consistent Red List Category” was also assigned to these species. Therefore, data displayed 
here may not match data in the Global Species Assessment.

DEFINITIONS
Adjusted net savings: Rate of savings in an economy that takes into account investments in human 
capital, depletion of natural resources and damage caused by pollution (including particulate emissions), 
expressed as a percentage of gross national income (GNI). A negative value implies an unsustainable path.
Ecological footprint: Amount of biologically productive land and sea area that a country requires to 
produce the resources it consumes and to absorb the waste it generates.
Environmental performance index: Index comprising 25 performance indicators across 10 policy cat-
egories covering both environmental public health and ecosystem vitality.
Primary energy supply, fossil fuels: Percentage of total energy supply that comes from natural resources 
formed from biomass in the geological past (such as coal, oil and natural gas).
Primary energy supply, renewables: Percentage of total energy supply that comes from constantly 
replenished natural processes, including solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, hydropower and ocean re-
sources and some waste. Nuclear energy is not included.
Carbon dioxide emissions, per capita: Human-originated carbon dioxide emissions stemming from 
the burning of fossil fuels, gas flaring and the production of cement, divided by midyear population.
Greenhouse gas emissions per capita: Emissions from methane, nitrous oxide and other greenhouse 
gases, including hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride, divided by midyear popula-
tion. Carbon dioxide emissions are not included.

Urban pollution: Particulate matter concentrations in terms of fine suspended particulates of human-
made or natural origin less than 10 microns (PM10) in diameter that are capable of penetrating deep into 
the respiratory tract. Data are urban population–weighted PM10 levels in residential areas of cities with 
more than 100,000 residents. The estimates represent the average annual exposure level of an urban 
resident to outdoor particulate matter.
Natural resource depletion: Monetary expression of energy, mineral and forest depletion, expressed 
as a percentage of total gross national income (GNI).
Fresh water withdrawals: Total fresh water withdrawn in a given year, expressed as a percentage of 
total renewable water resources.
Forest area: Percentage of total land area spanning more than 0.5 hectares with trees higher than 5 
metres and a canopy cover of more than 10 percent, or trees able to reach these thresholds, unless under 
agricultural or urban land use.
Change in forest area: Percentage change in area under forest cover.
Endangered species: Percentage of animal species (including mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish 
and invertebrates) classified as either critically endangered, endangered or vulnerable by the International 
Union for the Conservation of Nature.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1 and 9: World Bank (2011a).
Column 2: Global Footprint Network (2010).
Column 3: Emerson and others (2010).
Columns 4 and 5: HDRO calculations based on data on total primary energy supply from IEA (2011).
Columns 6 and 7: HDRO calculations based on data from Boden, Marland and Andres (2009).
Column 8: HDRO calculations based on data from World Bank (2011a) and UNDESA (2011).
Column 10: HDRO calculations based on World Bank (2011a).
Column 11: FAO (2011a).
Columns 12 and 13: HDRO calculations based on data on forest and total land area from FAO (2011a).
Column 14: IUCN (2010).

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

149

e7 Human development effects of environmental threats

l
b
a
t

IMPACT OF NATURAL 

DISASTERS

Number of 

deaths
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population 
affected
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population under 
age 5 suffering from
Wasting
Stunting

(%)

(%)

2000–2009a

2000–2009a

2001/2010

2001/2010

Water 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004

Indoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004

Deaths due to

Outdoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004

Malaria
(per million 

people)
2009

Dengue
(per million 

people)

2001–2010a

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land
(%)
2010

..
..
..
3.9
..
..
..
..
1.3
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
4.4
2.6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
2.0
8.2
..
..

13.9
..
12.8
4.6
..
..

..
..
..
1.3
..
..
..
..
1.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
3.3
2.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.5
2.3
..
..

6.0
..
3.5
3.9
..
..

0
3
12
1
0
0
0 b
..
12
0
14
1
0
..
1
0
1
20
4
34
15
0
33
33
34
..
5
1
1
..
0
..
..
0
2
..
..
7
3
1
26
..
3
1
0
18
0

1
..
3
0
0
4

33
1,378
0 b
6,689
175
54
11
..
404
0
77
709
271
..
1,158
0
270
31
735
891
52
7
14
29
0
..
2,098
617
112
..
4
..
..
7
212
..
..
467
318
0
1,418
..
0
3,051
1,790
59
1,968

4,548
..
764
87,392
7,860
5,979

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
12
8
..
..

..
..
..
18
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0 b
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0 b
..

0 b
..
18
53
..
..

65
35
203
138
0 b
85
0 b
..
124
56
109
196
..
0 b
152
111
216
203
147
81
150
19
136
137
..
264
167
189
224
55
197
..
..
74
74
..
0 b
208
162
204
190
0 b
0 b
149
342
225
..

422
..
439
160
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.0
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
0.0

..
0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
5
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
0
..
0

0
49
..
0
..
0

0.2 b
9.0
5.4
1.1
5.3
2.7
0.5 b
..
8.1
0.3 b
0.5 b
0.3 b
..
..
2.9
8.5
12.9
10.5
2.7
3.9
8.4
0.0 b
1.4
2.2
..
..
4.2
2.7
1.1
1.9
11.4
..
..
5.0
9.1
..
0.1 b
17.1
13.2
4.8
2.3
..
1.8
1.1
1.7
17.5
..

5.7
..
13.5
17.0
..
..

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas

150

human development report 2011

human development effects of environmental threats

IMPACT OF NATURAL 

DISASTERS

Number of 

deaths
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population 
affected
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population under 
age 5 suffering from
Stunting
Wasting

(%)

(%)

2000–2009a

2000–2009a

2001/2010

7.9
8.8
9.3
15.5
19.1
8.1
..
..
5.3
..
21.0
4.5
..
..
17.5
..
27.0
16.5
..
15.6
11.8
14.7
22.9
..
11.5
3.7
29.8
..
..
29.0
7.1
..
18.2
16.2
..
..
..
26.8
15.6
22.2
9.0

12.0
15.9
17.3
10.1
..
..
21.8
..
15.7
..
24.6
26.3
..
27.1
31.9
27.5
11.3
33.8

2.2
1.6
5.3
3.4
3.9
1.8
..
..
4.4
..
5.6
1.3
..
..
4.9
..
6.6
4.2
..
3.7
1.6
2.3
4.1
..
1.8
2.2
5.4
..
..
6.2
2.2
..
4.2
5.1
..
..
..
8.4
3.5
4.9
3.3

3.6
3.7
21.1
3.4
..
..
6.8
..
7.0
..
6.1
8.8
..
4.3
25.7
5.3
3.2
20.7

0
1
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
..
..
0
40
38
1
2
0
0 b
..
1
0
0 b
2
0
2
3
6
7
6
1
1
4
0
4
1
5
0
0
0
13
0

0
4
2
9
5
8
1
..
2
1
7
0
0
5
0
4
1
10

2001/2010
1,249
179
86
7,097
3,612
213
34,720
1,573
131
..
..
19
1,332
59,003
442
7,367
19,215
414
..
704
10,673
94
1,421
81
53,874
15,757
20,752
11,372
1,721
3,769
3,440
918
0
14,482
2,156
722
15,857
1,159
224
28,239
320

0
564
22,652
3,480
0
10,511
93,151
..
58,220
6,013
9,436
149
7,307
18,429
522
59,135
6,532
48,370

HDI rank

54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria
56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico
58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines

table

7

Deaths due to

Outdoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
..
437
108
88
63
..
..
23
0 b
137
318
..
231
..
159
47
64
100
..
..
79
288
305
80
148
75
117
..
..
38
74
0 b
882
61
132
126
..
177
299
..
82

134
65
51
88
..
..
230
170
61
..
50
..
86
111
0 b
..
261
54

Indoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
..
0 b
..
41
63
..
..
0 b
0 b
..
0 b
10
4
..
7
47
0 b
..
..
8
0 b
44
6
..
0 b
188
37
..
..
0 b
58
..
131
57
4
..
..
130
51
..
10

..
12
219
33
0 b
0 b
422
..
159
..
50
74
52
145
0 b
119
78
86

Malaria
(per million 

people)
2009
..
..
0.0
0.0
0.0
..
..
0.0
..
..
..
..
0.0 c
..
..
0.2
..
..
..
0.0
..
0.0
..
..
..
0.0
0.1
..
..
0.0
0.4
..
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.7
..
0.0
0.0 c
0.0
..

..
0.0
0.0
1.4
..
..
0.0 c
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
133.3
0.0
0.0
..
..
..
0.3

Water 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
..
..
..
43
63
..
0
35
..
..
..
..
5
..
193
24
32
50
..
61
..
89
2
..
..
75
92
..
..
83
137
..
33
50
..
..
..
212
97
..
82

77
247
41
142
..
0 b
42
532
121
0 b
116
298
86
378
0 b
199
0 b
182

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land
(%)
2010
8.0
7.8
4.3
3.8
4.1
18.5
..
1.2
..
0.6
8.5
4.7
3.1
..
23.5
1.3
5.7
1.2
..
1.9
6.1
1.9
6.2
..
7.1
3.3
0.7
..
..
1.6
7.9
..
9.6
2.0
25.1
5.8
..
3.8
5.5
1.1
36.7

22.0
28.8
21.1
7.0
..
..
8.6
11.1
17.0
..
6.3
..
1.3
2.0
..
31.5
21.8
2.2

Dengue
(per million 

people)

2001–2010a

..
..
..
0
0
..
0
4
9
..
..
..
..
0
..
0
..
..
0
0
..
..
..
..
..
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
..
0
..
..
..
..
..
0
..

..
..
2
1
..
0
0
..
1
0
0
..
1
0
0
..
..
5

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

151

human development effects of environmental threats

IMPACT OF NATURAL 

DISASTERS

Number of 

deaths
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population 
affected
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population under 
age 5 suffering from
Stunting
Wasting

(%)

(%)

2000–2009a

2000–2009a

2001/2010

30.7
..
19.6
..
18.2
29.1
28.6
29.6
29.9
..
..
40.1
..
18.1
33.1
30.5
18.8
23.1
54.3
27.5
..
47.9
28.6
35.0
31.2
47.6
39.5
29.5
37.5

32.8
35.8
29.3
41.5
43.2
55.7
50.8
40.6
36.4
52.8
44.4
43.9
57.7
20.1
41.0
49.3
29.7
24.2
45.2
38.7
26.9
46.9
45.8
32.6
51.7
44.7
27.6
37.9
40.1
53.2

6.8
..
4.4
..
10.8
10.7
10.0
17.5
8.6
..
..
19.6
..
2.7
14.9
20.2
4.3
9.9
17.7
7.1
..
43.5
14.3
10.6
11.8
31.6
28.8
6.1
12.0

11.5
16.5
13.1
31.3
41.3
40.6
27.5
29.6
16.6
36.8
16.7
18.1
43.1
14.5
26.7
38.8
18.9
16.7
16.6
16.4
20.5
25.0
14.9
29.6
18.0
20.2
15.8
31.7
16.7
15.5

0
0
0
43
5
0
1
7
4
0
1
2
2
2
3
3
7
1
14
0
1
2
1
..
0
1
1
0
2

4
2
..
3
6
0
2
290
0
5
0
4
2
0
0
7
66
1
0
2
1
0
1
6
1
1
1
1
0
4

2001/2010
5
12
5
7,771
54,311
499
6,371
40,481
13,628
85
30,398
1,364
24,519
37,899
47,642
19,794
11,487
419
26,888
226
6,048
41,245
2,925
..
2,102
15,096
34,829
117,337
0

4,672
27,446
..
18,218
47,203
1,177
4,989
6,551
204
17,121
13,270
3,987
135
7,377
1,295
9,738
12,565
41,693
45,203
9,460
4,972
381
32,196
82,450
9,919
12,662
4,106
13,909
96
64,924

Deaths due to

Outdoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
213
..
148
..
..
0 b
100
0 b
89
..
23
144
..
80
47
81
19
30
40
387
0 b
107
33
..
145
0 b
23
0 b
..

..
17
..
192
68
..
169
96
128
35
32
..
55
170
136
30
65
67
0 b
4
38
0 b
98
252
33
54
137
141
51
48

Indoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
8
..
241
..
0 b
270
39
49
119
..
68
202
0 b
418
516
289
131
17
113
23
0 b
435
308
..
290
459
500
274
311

219
412
0 b
360
356
..
2,099
393
664
732
500
269
335
595
699
326
402
405
98
716
605
160
777
0 b
1,387
770
411
371
705
1,042

Water 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
137
..
335
0 b
269
486
89
98
178
..
260
141
0 b
259
751
72
168
140
314
879
214
405
961
1,187
435
406
826
456
467

219
683
665
380
469
308
3,014
432
1,066
1,175
865
471
734
1,219
1,304
520
619
776
195
988
908
479
1,135
630
1,854
1,271
753
477
1,246
1,459

Malaria
(per million 

people)
2009

Dengue
(per million 

people)

2001–2010a

0.0 c
..
0.0
..
0.0
3.0
0.0
20.5
0.1
..
0.9
3.8
8.6
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0 c
0.0
0.0
4.1
0.9
141.8
33.8
29.4
0.8
20.0
11.1
5.6

101.1
0.0
141.5
0.0
0.3
48.2
567.5
20.4
257.8
8.6
18.8
90.1
1.6
47.4
48.7
0.3
0.0
26.9
..
194.5
263.6
0.0
303.5
0.0
78.5
159.9
142.7
32.9
938.3
451.9

..
..
..
..
0
..
..
..
1
..
..
5
..
..
..
1
2
..
0
..
..
0
..
..
..
1
1
..
0

..
..
..
..
0
35
..
3
..
..
..
0
..
..
..
0
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land
(%)
2010
25.3
..
27.0
..
..
22.0
33.3
28.5
15.0
..
17.5
3.1
..
9.7
10.5
8.0
13.9
39.1
9.1
4.5
..
9.6
1.4
..
0.1 b
4.1
39.3
..
0.1 b

..
31.0
..
4.5
11.3
..
3.3
19.2
15.3
0.0 b
25.0
..
32.4
16.2
11.5
2.3
15.2
23.8
63.6
23.5
5.1
..
4.6
7.5
10.1
1.6
17.9
39.9
1.3
19.4

table

7

HDI rank

113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of
117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi

152

human development report 2011

human development effects of environmental threats

IMPACT OF NATURAL 

DISASTERS

Number of 

deaths
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population 
affected
(average 
annual per 
million people)

Population under 
age 5 suffering from
Stunting
Wasting

(%)

(%)

2000–2009a

2000–2009a

2001/2010

59.3
35.8
50.7
38.5
28.1
43.7
40.0
44.6
37.4
44.5
39.4
44.8
47.0
63.1
54.8
45.8

43.1
..
..
..
..
42.1
10.0

..
..
35.7
43.8

29.8
..
..
15.8
46.8
42.9
45.5
..
..

32.9
14.0
34.6
27.9
17.2
34.5
20.8
21.8
21.3
37.4
20.4
33.9
21.2
38.9
39.9
28.2

20.6
..
..
..
..
32.8
1.6

..
..
24.7
28.3

15.2
..
..
4.4
41.2
24.5
29.6
..
..

11
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
3
1
0
2
1
2
0
0

5
0
..
..
..
2
..

8
7
2
14

1
9
13
3
2
1
20
16
6

2001/2010
9,799
78,319
35,049
11,678
12,575
32,492
3,355
1,696
361
2,723
924
33,141
25,059
29,916
96,596
325

7,513
1,110
..
..
..
69,471
..

2,331
4,890
54,444
19,221

4,529
69,648
2,357
8,741
36,336
16,966
23,357
25,300
32,575

Water 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
2,499
532
1,546
1,769
2,088
741
1,080
1,088
3,271
1,733
2,134
1,509
840
2,088
3,212
1,924

Indoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
2,023
302
998 b
1,198
1,268
440
641
759
2,181
1,197
1,261
1,013
548
1,449
2,192
1,356

Deaths due to

Outdoor air 
pollution
(per million 

people)
2004
15
48
34
78
149
46
67
0 b
141
87
32
84
44
43
80
72

Malaria
(per million 

people)
2009
1.0
1.1
13.8
156.3
248.6
4.5
60.0
154.5
302.1
499.4
444.7
20.2
163.9
87.4
144.2
329.7

191
..
..
..
..
2,068
..

..
..
212
1,035

..
84
..
104
443
1,286
1,151
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
1,383
..

..
..
357
696

..
..
..
..
424
798
794
..
..

242
..
..
..
..
36
..

150
159
156
91

146
..
240
103
109
70
63
..
145

0.0
..
..
..
..
4.9
..

..
..
1.8
92.5

..
..
..
0.2
0.7
143.7
99.0
..
..

Population 
living on 
degraded 

land
(%)
2010
11.0
29.4
72.3
59.5
1.0
58.8
0.8
..
..
73.2
..
45.4
1.9
18.5
25.0
0.1 b

2.9
..
..
..
..
26.3
..

3.2
7.4
10.0
18.8

24.9
..
8.6
5.3
9.9
22.1
23.3
..
10.1

Dengue
(per million 

people)

2001–2010a

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
0
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
0
0
..
..
..
..

table

7

HDI rank

172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

NOTES
a.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
b.  Less than 1.
c.  Less than 0.05.

DEFINITIONS
Population under age 5 suffering from stunting: Percentage of children under age 5 falling two standard 
deviations or more below the median height-for-age of the reference population.
Population under age 5 suffering from wasting: Percentage of children under age 5 falling two standard 
deviations or more below the median weight-for-height of the reference population.
Number of deaths due to natural disasters: People confirmed as dead, or missing and presumed dead, 
as a result of natural disasters, which include drought, extreme temperature, flood, mass movement, 
wet storm and wildfire.
Population affected by natural disasters: People requiring immediate assistance during a period of 
emergency as a result of a natural disaster (as defined above), including displaced, evacuated, homeless 
and injured people.
Deaths due to water pollution: Deaths due to diarrhoea attributable to poor water, sanitation or hygiene.
Deaths due to indoor air pollution: Deaths due to acute respiratory infections (children under age 5), 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (adults over age 30) and lung cancer (adults over age 30) attribut-
able to indoor smoke from solid fuels.

Deaths due to outdoor air pollution: Deaths due to respiratory infections and diseases, lung cancer and 
selected cardiovascular diseases attributable to outdoor air pollution.
Deaths due to malaria: Deaths due to malaria.
Deaths due to dengue: Deaths due to dengue fever, dengue haemorrhagic fever and dengue shock 
syndrome.
Population living on degraded land: Percentage of the population living on severely and very severely 
degraded land. Land degradation estimates consider biomass, soil health, water quantity and biodiversity, 
and range in severity.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1 and 2: WHO (2010b).
Columns 3 and 4: WHO Collaborating Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (2011)  
and UNDESA (2011).
Columns 5–7: HDRO calculations based on WHO (2009) and UNDESA (2011).
Column 8: WHO (2010c).
Column 9: HDRO calculations based on WHO (2011) and UNDESA (2011).
Column 10: FAO (2011b).

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

153

e8 Perceptions about well-being and the environment

l
b
a
t

Global warming 

environmental 

Active in 

threat

(% seriousa)
2006–2010b

WELL-BEING

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least satisfied; 
10, most satisfied)

Humans 
cause 

global warming

(% yes)

2006–2010b

2006–2010b

7.6
7.5
7.5
7.2
7.2
7.7
7.3
..
6.7
7.5
7.5
6.1
5.6
6.9
6.1
7.8
7.4
6.9
7.3
6.8
6.1
7.4
6.2
6.4
7.1
6.5
6.2
7.0
5.8
7.1
6.4
..
..
5.1
6.1
5.8
6.8
4.7
5.8
5.1
4.9
5.9
4.7
6.6
6.4
5.6
..

6.1
..
4.9
5.4
..
..
5.5
4.2

46.8
45.1
43.6
35.9
41.1
55.8
47.6
..
59.7
50.1
..
83.7
80.0
37.9
85.3
45.3
40.9
42.6
52.7
58.6
65.1
55.1
63.2
57.0
53.7
57.2
45.2
38.5
81.3
29.2
79.4
..
..
44.3
56.9
66.8
39.3
51.0
43.2
51.4
61.5
35.4
49.2
68.5
80.4
61.5
..

72.9
..
44.9
..
..
..
59.9
49.3

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria

154

human development report 2011

43.7
70.5
52.6
54.7
59.0
73.9
58.7
..
60.4
48.6
..
77.3
68.6
34.4
82.8
32.8
67.4
63.1
60.4
65.5
69.2
41.7
70.9
87.0
62.1
72.7
35.5
58.8
95.5
71.0
89.4
..
..
36.0
54.7
85.8
67.4
74.5
55.1
49.7
90.7
74.3
39.6
93.1
97.4
..
..

85.6
..
74.3
..
..
..
..
66.0

ENVIRONMENT
Satisfaction 

with government 

to reduce 
emissions
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 
with actions 
to preserve 

the environment

(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

air quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

water quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

..
..
..
43.9
..
34.0
..
..
49.1
47.6
54.4
33.0
21.6
..
29.3
33.5
..
..
41.3
..
..
..
..
..
..
69.8
26.6
..
16.0
..
..
..
..
16.8
..
..
..
..
17.5
11.0
28.5
..
21.2
26.8
7.0
..
..

32.7
..
17.4
..
..
..
..
10.9

51.5
63.8
66.1
57.8
74.8
61.7
58.9
..
61.8
62.9
63.9
46.8
41.4
56.0
36.4
64.3
37.7
56.0
63.9
57.5
55.9
57.3
46.0
29.7
76.8
80.5
56.6
66.8
19.8
89.7
45.7
..
..
45.2
42.8
53.8
87.1
32.7
43.6
29.9
37.2
65.3
38.9
42.1
33.9
38.1
..

70.5
..
14.3
54.5
..
..
50.1
19.4

89.3
93.1
81.5
87.8
93.0
84.5
94.8
..
86.3
89.3
83.7
78.2
27.8
85.2
72.0
91.6
58.4
74.0
88.0
76.6
80.2
89.7
82.0
69.8
85.7
91.1
69.0
88.8
68.7
81.5
63.0
..
..
75.0
70.4
44.4
80.6
83.5
80.3
70.2
85.7
85.6
75.1
69.5
75.0
75.0
..

85.6
..
71.4
52.8
..
..
66.2
69.3

95.3
93.4
94.2
89.5
89.0
91.3
90.6
..
95.0
96.7
96.1
87.8
78.4
96.9
81.6
97.4
55.7
84.7
97.1
83.9
90.0
95.0
83.6
80.6
92.3
92.9
89.2
94.8
64.7
84.4
67.4
..
..
66.8
86.0
64.0
79.6
86.2
79.6
69.7
90.0
85.0
65.3
84.5
73.8
81.2
..

92.9
..
69.5
59.3
..
..
78.2
60.8

group
(% yes)

2006–2010b

11.6
19.5
15.5
17.6
24.6
19.3
..
..
12.8
11.4
..
14.1
..
12.5
9.4
18.1
14.3
21.4
..
10.0
..
..
10.4
14.6
15.5
19.8
13.0
17.2
6.0
..
..
..
..
6.8
..
13.0
..
6.1
6.2
4.3
10.0
..
3.9
7.6
4.2
..
..

4.1
..
3.5
..
..
..
..
..

perceptions about well-being and the environment

Global warming 

environmental 

Active in 

threat

(% seriousa)
2006–2010b

WELL-BEING

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least satisfied; 
10, most satisfied)

Humans 
cause 

global warming

(% yes)

2006–2010b

2006–2010b

6.3
6.8
7.3
4.5
..
5.6
6.7
6.8
4.9
5.5
5.4
..
5.5
7.3
5.3
5.0
..
7.5
4.7
4.1
5.1
..
4.2
6.2
5.6
..
..
5.8
6.8
..
4.4
6.4
5.1
..
..
4.2
5.5
6.5
5.1

5.6
5.3
4.0
4.7
..
..
4.7
6.6
6.2
..
6.7
..
5.8
5.8
..
4.6
5.6
4.9
4.7
4.7
5.1
..

34.6
70.9
66.6
64.1
..
65.5
75.8
33.3
22.8
48.7
48.0
..
43.8
80.5
30.7
68.2
..
61.4
66.4
40.8
60.9
..
54.8
..
66.5
..
..
58.6
81.3
..
31.6
73.1
61.7
..
..
37.3
55.1
59.0
33.0

60.2
39.4
56.5
54.6
..
..
47.5
29.4
74.9
..
72.0
..
72.4
72.5
..
58.6
48.6
76.2
45.1
47.4
16.9
..

HDI rank

56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico
58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of

78.6
94.5
97.0
..
..
71.1
98.2
58.8
64.3
48.6
48.9
..
57.2
92.2
..
79.7
..
97.9
..
78.2
68.2
..
..
..
96.0
..
..
97.7
94.9
..
80.0
96.1
77.6
..
..
85.2
86.0
85.7
58.6

68.7
59.6
76.3
92.0
..
..
31.7
..
66.7
..
92.8
..
95.2
95.6
..
65.5
83.2
92.9
66.7
58.0
67.0
..

group
(% yes)

2006–2010b

10.6
6.1
9.2
..
..
27.3
6.2
..
..
5.0
5.7
..
8.7
13.0
..
..
..
5.8
..
3.6
5.1
..
..
..
10.7
..
..
9.1
7.2
..
9.8
12.5
9.2
..
..
13.0
12.4
20.3
..

2.9
..
10.0
15.8
..
..
11.6
..
43.8
..
12.9
..
8.6
11.6
..
11.4
11.3
30.4
4.1
11.8
6.2
..

ENVIRONMENT
Satisfaction 

with government 

to reduce 
emissions
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 
with actions 
to preserve 

the environment

(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

air quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

water quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

table

8

..
22.7
16.5
..
..
17.1
..
..
..
20.0
9.4
..
14.3
33.2
..
..
..
27.2
..
15.2
3.2
..
..
..
15.5
..
..
33.0
29.6
..
12.4
30.6
..
..
..
21.1
12.9
..
..

..
..
40.1
14.7
..
..
33.4
..
28.7
..
23.3
..
13.5
20.1
..
..
4.5
26.8
..
..
44.5
..

53.3
46.8
44.1
28.1
..
64.2
26.3
69.2
..
50.6
18.3
..
37.4
59.6
27.4
23.7
..
59.8
22.1
38.0
8.8
..
39.8
32.9
35.5
..
..
39.1
48.2
..
27.8
53.5
55.2
..
..
28.1
41.9
30.3
66.7

59.4
42.4
61.7
53.1
..
..
73.0
..
75.5
..
39.7
..
45.5
45.5
..
16.7
15.5
86.2
25.7
28.4
71.4
..

55.5
78.0
85.2
61.9
..
82.3
75.8
55.7
65.0
65.1
57.6
..
61.6
86.3
54.5
50.5
..
77.1
71.2
67.4
55.4
..
73.0
85.8
64.7
..
..
60.7
68.2
..
58.9
73.7
66.6
..
..
65.4
72.3
70.7
66.7

71.1
57.1
91.7
69.2
..
..
75.1
80.8
83.0
..
74.0
..
87.7
72.8
..
55.4
62.8
82.4
83.2
62.3
86.5
..

60.4
67.7
75.9
60.2
..
82.9
74.0
67.8
69.9
62.6
52.8
..
55.7
88.7
50.2
47.3
..
67.9
71.7
66.4
51.0
..
69.7
88.8
67.8
..
..
62.4
83.1
..
61.3
80.2
58.4
..
..
51.0
64.1
63.3
50.3

59.0
60.7
88.0
69.7
..
..
73.3
71.2
82.8
..
70.4
..
83.9
74.4
..
59.7
60.1
83.4
76.1
58.4
82.1
..

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

155

perceptions about well-being and the environment

WELL-BEING

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least satisfied; 
10, most satisfied)

Humans 
cause 

global warming

(% yes)

2006–2010b

2006–2010b

threat

(% seriousa)
2006–2010b

Global warming 

environmental 

Active in 

ENVIRONMENT
Satisfaction 

with government 

to reduce 
emissions
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 
with actions 
to preserve 

the environment

(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

air quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

water quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

..
..
..
..
12.2
..
34.5
28.7
..
5.7
31.4
14.9
21.5
..
14.7
..
..
41.6
33.9
..
..
..
42.8
..
..

..
17.9
..
24.9
45.2
..
..
..
15.7
..
30.6
..
..
15.3
10.9
19.3
..
..
..
33.7
..
..
22.1
..
76.8
..
..
..
5.8
60.8
14.2
10.2
..
26.2
..
..

34.1
76.1
50.4
57.9
39.3
..
55.7
48.2
..
27.7
42.8
67.6
56.2
32.6
39.1
15.8
..
45.4
59.9
..
27.8
72.5
85.5
..
..

..
63.2
..
21.1
47.3
..
69.9
..
44.2
43.8
51.3
..
30.1
30.8
32.2
42.4
24.9
32.1
..
47.9
23.4
36.6
45.0
54.0
90.3
34.6
..
38.9
32.1
82.3
45.5
50.1
36.6
44.7
..
..

78.7
70.1
55.7
76.4
74.4
..
85.7
82.1
..
87.3
84.0
62.9
82.4
57.9
82.4
61.5
..
79.1
89.1
..
65.5
88.6
83.1
..
..

..
86.0
..
77.6
83.1
..
59.9
88.4
82.9
81.0
61.7
..
80.0
77.9
73.9
87.9
38.8
64.2
..
81.4
52.4
76.7
82.4
69.0
78.5
78.1
..
80.3
74.8
91.1
67.1
73.1
72.0
79.5
..
..

53.8
72.4
49.8
81.6
69.7
..
53.4
86.9
..
82.9
65.0
62.3
68.5
63.9
66.8
44.4
..
62.7
72.0
..
33.5
82.7
73.0
..
..

..
51.8
..
55.0
69.5
..
47.4
..
51.4
52.6
34.7
..
56.4
67.3
46.8
81.8
26.0
57.4
..
59.6
33.8
55.8
53.9
63.5
54.5
55.6
..
62.4
52.1
61.8
60.7
62.3
29.2
57.0
..
..

group
(% yes)

2006–2010b

27.8
26.1
..
17.6
25.3
..
26.8
18.9
..
15.5
24.9
16.8
14.7
3.2
16.9
..
..
11.6
27.8
..
12.9
47.9
8.6
..
..

..
23.7
..
10.1
11.9
..
32.0
..
14.6
6.4
47.1
..
..
17.3
39.6
24.9
32.6
15.9
..
25.6
16.7
..
31.4
55.4
31.2
12.0
..
19.0
..
..
12.2
..
..
21.4
..
..

table

8

HDI rank

117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea

156

human development report 2011

6.0
3.6
4.5
4.9
5.9
..
4.7
5.5
..
5.0
4.4
5.3
5.7
4.7
6.3
5.1
..
5.0
4.6
..
3.8
5.0
4.1
..
..

..
4.3
..
5.8
4.9
..
4.2
5.3
4.6
4.6
3.2
..
4.4
4.4
4.8
4.3
3.8
4.8
..
4.2
2.8
3.8
5.3
5.0
4.0
3.7
..
4.4
4.2
5.1
4.8
4.7
4.4
3.8
..
..

36.2
25.6
53.2
48.6
54.1
..
37.2
75.5
..
46.4
16.7
71.3
70.6
67.4
74.9
40.1
..
49.4
58.6
..
58.3
71.6
41.4
..
..

..
62.8
..
32.4
66.7
..
70.0
..
57.2
66.8
52.9
..
65.7
41.0
37.5
59.7
12.6
51.2
..
52.8
43.1
34.4
63.0
51.9
48.1
45.7
..
58.5
79.8
46.9
31.2
36.5
..
64.6
..
..

83.3
79.9
50.0
75.4
88.9
..
70.4
88.1
..
68.9
66.7
68.8
94.8
89.0
94.6
62.3
..
83.4
69.0
..
75.4
63.3
89.6
..
..

..
82.9
..
71.6
92.1
..
89.2
..
68.2
94.0
83.5
..
65.8
72.0
67.5
88.6
79.6
74.2
..
73.1
77.3
82.1
66.5
82.4
74.4
71.3
..
80.1
..
..
75.6
53.5
..
93.9
..
..

perceptions about well-being and the environment

Global warming 

environmental 

Active in 

WELL-BEING

Overall life 
satisfaction

(0, least satisfied; 
10, most satisfied)

Humans 
cause 

global warming

(% yes)

2006–2010b

2006–2010b

4.3
3.6
4.1
4.0
4.2
3.7
4.7
3.8
4.1
4.0

6.7
5.9
4.9
4.7

5.0
..
5.3
6.5
5.0
4.4
4.4
..
5.3

39.8
67.2
52.1
52.5
32.1
55.0
53.0
45.8
..
47.7

54.4
62.3
52.1
49.6

48.2
..
47.6
72.8
49.7
49.5
..
..
53.5

HDI rank

178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

threat

(% seriousa)
2006–2010b

78.4
77.3
74.0
96.3
71.8
96.0
87.8
91.6
..
..

66.3
..
62.2
78.4

69.1
..
62.8
94.8
82.6
..
..
..
67.9

ENVIRONMENT
Satisfaction 

with government 

to reduce 
emissions
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 
with actions 
to preserve 

the environment

(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

air quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

Satisfaction 

with 

water quality
(% satisfied)
2006–2010b

..
..
..
..
..
12.9
..
28.1
25.9
16.3

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
39.2
..
..
..
..

22.7
63.5
29.8
48.5
34.4
56.8
53.6
55.7
58.3
31.0

52.4
40.9
58.2
39.9

37.3
..
30.8
46.3
43.6
44.5
45.5
..
51.6

54.9
87.0
72.7
73.8
79.4
57.1
79.1
84.9
90.9
70.5

81.7
67.5
77.2
76.7

69.7
..
67.1
71.8
78.8
75.7
76.8
..
76.5

38.3
41.2
36.6
39.4
50.7
34.9
71.4
52.1
63.0
22.1

87.2
67.0
69.8
51.8

62.8
..
63.2
74.6
62.9
46.6
52.6
..
69.2

table

8

group
(% yes)

2006–2010b

30.8
..
50.8
14.3
43.2
29.9
8.4
16.1
14.4
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
8.8
11.6
..
..
..
..

NOTES
 The typical World Poll survey includes at least 1,000 surveys of randomly selected individuals. In some 
countries oversamples are collected in major cities or areas of special interest. Additionally, in some 
large countries, such as China and the Russian Federation, sample sizes of at least 2,000 are collected. 
Although rare, in some instances the sample size is between 500 and 1,000. Quality control procedures 
are used to validate that correct samples are selected and that the correct person is randomly selected 
in each household. Gallup’s methodology ensures that the reported data are representative of 95 percent 
of the world’s adult population (ages 15 and older). For further information, see https://worldview.gallup.
com/content/methodology.aspx.
a.  Very serious and somewhat serious.
b.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.

SURVEY QUESTIONS
Overall life satisfaction: Please imagine a ladder, with steps numbered from zero at the bottom to ten at 
the top. Suppose we say that the top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you, and the bottom 
of the ladder represents the worst possible life for you. On which step of the ladder would you say you 
personally feel you stand at this time, assuming that the higher the step the better you feel about your 
life, and the lower the step the worse you feel about it? Which step comes closest to the way you feel?

Humans cause global warming: Temperature rise is a part of global warming or climate change. Do you 
think rising temperatures are a result of human activities? (Asked of those who said they know something 
or a great deal about global warming and climate change.)
Global warming threat: How serious of a threat is global warming to you and your family? (Asked of those 
who said they know something or a great deal about global warming and climate change.)
Active in environmental group: Which of these, if any, have you done in the past year? Been active in 
a group or organization that works to protect the environment.
Satisfaction with government to reduce emissions: Do you think the government of this country is doing 
enough to reduce emissions of gases released by motor vehicles and factories, or not?
Satisfaction with actions to preserve the environment: In this country, are you satisfied or dissatisfied 
with the efforts to preserve the environment?
Satisfaction with air quality: In the city or area where you live, are you satisfied or dissatisfied with 
the quality of air?
Satisfaction with water quality: In the city or area where you live, are you satisfied or dissatisfied with 
the quality of water?

MAIN DATA SOURCE
Columns 1–8: Gallup (2011).

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

157

e9 education and health

l
b
a
t

EDUCATION

Gross enrolment ratio

Primary education 

resources

One-year-olds 

lacking 

immunization against

HEALTH

Mortality

Adult 
literacy 

rate

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% ages 15 
and older)
2005–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2005–2010b 2005–2010b

(pupils per 
teacher)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

Pupil–
teacher 

ratio

School 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

Under 
five
(per 

1,000 live 
births)
2009

DTP
(%)
2009

Measles

(%)
2009

Adult

(per 1,000 
people)

Female Male Female Male
2009
2009

2009

2009

HIV

prevalence

Youth 

(% ages 15–24)

Health-

adjusted life 
expectancya

(years)
2007

HDI rank

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
99.7
..
97.7
98.9
..
94.7
..
..
97.2
90.0
97.9
..
95.3
99.8
..
92.4
94.7
99.4
99.5
99.7
94.9
91.4
99.8
98.6
97.7
98.8
..

98.3
..
97.7
99.8
91.8
..

98.7
106.4
106.9
98.2
101.2
98.4
104.6
108.9
103.6
96.2
103.4
102.3
104.0
98.3
104.3
98.6
111.1
103.4
98.7
108.7
98.4
97.4
107.2
103.3
100.4
..
103.5
106.4
101.2
105.4
105.4
89.0
106.5
100.2
102.1
98.6
105.9
99.7
97.1
97.2
112.3
106.6
98.7
106.4
116.7
95.3
..

113.6
101.4
99.3
103.6
106.2
103.4

110.4
132.7
120.8
93.6
126.3
102.2
118.1
105.0
101.7
102.6
96.0
101.0
82.1
108.3
97.2
118.4
89.1
107.5
100.4
113.0
96.8
109.0
120.8
100.5
96.0
..
95.1
99.0
101.8
95.2
98.4
80.8
98.2
99.3
92.0
100.3
85.2
98.8
98.9
99.2
106.8
96.4
92.7
90.4
85.9
95.2
..

87.9
95.7
93.5
89.6
105.0
93.3

73.5
82.3
61.6
85.9
83.5
62.3
60.6
34.7
..
71.5
51.2
58.6
56.6
74.3
100.0
77.0
62.5
66.3
59.3
55.3
87.6
90.9
73.4
67.2
10.0
..
60.9
59.0
90.8
30.4
52.0
10.3
17.1
63.7
55.8
32.2
10.2
62.5
71.4
79.5
61.2
51.2
67.3
54.8
69.4
48.9
..

64.9
37.9
67.1
117.8
..
..

..
..
..
13.9
14.6
..
15.8
6.5
13.0
9.3
..
18.1
15.9
..
22.4
..
13.1
11.1
11.4
18.7
17.2
13.6
12.6
10.3
11.9
17.4
18.5
18.3
10.3
15.6
14.2
10.3
11.9
12.2
15.7
10.5
11.2
10.5
9.6
12.8
11.2
..
10.4
24.6
16.3
14.8
14.1

15.0
12.5
15.8
9.4
13.8
15.8

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
95.1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
94.3
..
..
..
100.0
..
100.0
84.1
..
..
..
48.9
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
58.1

..
..
..
100.0
99.4
91.1

8
8
3
5
8
20
7
..
7
2
5
2
..
4
6
11
7
1
17
1
4
1
4
4
1
3
1
7
1
8
1
1
1
5
1
27
1
1
1
2
4
2
5
3
6
4
7

5
51
3
4
1
4

8
6
4
8
11
7
11
..
4
3
10
6
..
8
7
16
4
6
17
10
5
2
2
9
4
5
2
14
1
8
13
2
1
5
1
18
1
1
2
4
5
1
4
4
1
2
6

6
25
3
4
3
2

3
5
4
8
6
6
4
2
4
3
4
3
..
3
5
4
4
5
4
4
3
3
4
4
3
3
4
6
3
7
4
4
7
6
7
7
11
6
7
6
4
12
8
9
14
5
11

13
15
12
6
12
12

50
45
56
78
57
53
57
..
53
47
43
42
..
43
46
65
45
59
50
54
54
56
43
41
57
42
63
58
44
66
41
44
82
77
74
44
48
99
76
95
54
87
105
59
88
60
80

84
110
90
78
108
126

83
79
75
134
86
87
97
..
99
74
74
86
..
65
109
107
78
105
102
117
131
124
94
77
95
76
138
95
106
84
81
94
105
234
184
76
69
229
197
274
123
127
284
116
160
153
136

156
229
219
120
227
202

<0.1
0.1
<0.1
0.2
<0.1
0.1
0.1
..
<0.1
<0.1
0.1
<0.1
..
0.1
<0.1
0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.2
0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.1
<0.1
0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.1
0.1
..
..
..
..
0.2
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.2
..
0.1
0.1
0.2
<0.1
1.1

0.2
..
<0.1
0.1
..
3.1

<0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
<0.1
0.1
0.1
..
0.1
<0.1
0.2
<0.1
..
0.1
<0.1
0.1
0.1
<0.1
0.3
0.2
<0.1
0.1
0.2
<0.1
0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.2
0.1
..
..
..
..
0.3
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.3
..
0.2
0.2
0.3
<0.1
0.9

0.3
..
0.1
0.1
..
1.4

73
74
73
70
73
73
73
..
73
74
75
76
..
74
71
72
73
72
72
73
71
72
74
74
73
73
70
72
72
68
70
74
66
66
67
72
67
66
67
63
71
66
64
70
67
68
67

67
64
65
69
63
65

158

human development report 2011

Under 
five
(per 

1,000 live 
births)
2009
9
10
21
17
23
7
12
6
35
10
19
12
12
15
29
11
15
12
15
18
14
29
15
17
11
31
21
10
20
24
21
12
22
19
31
12
19
34
20
18
21

Measles

(%)
2009
14
4
2
5
15
5
1
5
6
3
2
1
2
1
1
19
3
47
1
17
7
17
6
1
4
12
9
1
1
34
1
1
4
5
1
3
1
33
3
3
2

HIV

prevalence

Youth 

(% ages 15–24)

Adult

(per 1,000 
people)

Female Male Female Male
2009
2009
..
85
<0.1
86
..
102
0.2
88
82
0.4
0.1
90
..
158
0.1
95
1
120
50
..
..
101
<0.1
117
0.2
144
..
143
185
0.1
0.2
69
..
88
0.1
85
..
90
92
..
..
67
<0.1
97
0.2
148
0.3
99
79
..
1
131
0.2
96
..
103
..
90
96
0.2
..
102
..
110
<0.1
103
0.2
80
90
<0.1
<0.1
85
..
233
<0.1
134
<0.1
73
129
0.7
<0.1
70

2009
..
<0.1
..
0.1
0.3
0.1
..
<0.1
0.7
..
..
0.1
0.3
..
0.2
0.1
..
<0.1
..
..
..
<0.1
0.3
0.2
..
0.7
0.1
..
..
0.2
..
..
<0.1
0.1
<0.1
<0.1
..
0.1
<0.1
1.8
<0.1

2009
161
205
186
157
145
184
197
175
225
66
175
324
391
248
432
115
126
166
185
196
145
235
395
219
144
224
123
192
188
173
205
204
246
166
144
157
135
221
134
202
129

HDI rank

54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria
56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico
58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines

Adult 
literacy 

rate

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% ages 15 
and older)
2005–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2005–2010b 2005–2010b

(pupils per 
teacher)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

Pupil–
teacher 

ratio

School 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

..
98.3
86.1
93.4
93.6
97.8
99.0
92.5
98.7
93.9
88.9
99.7
99.6
..
99.7
96.1
95.9
89.6
..
95.2
97.8
99.7
99.7
87.9
97.1
86.4
89.6
..
..
84.2
90.0
..
99.5
93.2
85.0
86.6
99.0
99.5
90.8
..
77.6

92.2
72.6
90.6
88.2
98.8
..
94.0
99.6
93.5
94.6
84.1
87.7
94.6
90.7
98.4
97.5
98.5
95.4

106.1
101.5
98.9
116.6
109.0
97.7
99.8
94.6
104.2
94.8
110.3
99.0
96.8
107.2
108.8
109.9
118.9
103.2
95.7
103.2
108.9
107.8
97.5
100.0
88.9
93.3
109.1
112.3
96.7
117.5
127.5
106.9
98.5
120.2
102.8
83.9
111.8
95.1
99.3
121.9
108.2

96.8
107.7
96.9
106.2
100.3
94.2
112.7
..
91.1
113.8
115.0
134.3
99.4
107.2
111.0
110.1
93.6
110.1

102.1
87.6
96.8
90.2
72.7
91.5
110.5
68.7
88.8
89.9
93.5
90.1
84.8
99.1
98.5
96.1
72.4
82.1
96.3
82.1
91.2
87.5
94.5
87.2
83.2
91.2
89.1
105.5
95.8
75.4
100.8
109.1
93.1
94.6
83.1
91.3
102.7
99.4
82.0
75.6
90.2

88.2
96.5
87.0
76.8
76.1
80.9
78.2
..
77.0
75.4
63.6
53.1
66.8
81.3
83.7
92.2
88.6
82.5

..
53.6
32.8
27.9
45.1
49.8
14.7
36.5
11.6
18.9
55.7
77.0
77.2
53.5
39.5
25.3
19.3
52.5
18.4
78.2
37.0
25.8
81.1
25.9
40.6
24.2
34.5
3.5
16.0
42.4
34.4
..
50.1
37.0
36.5
26.4
6.4
19.1
38.4
11.2
34.4

40.7
30.6
..
33.3
7.4
15.4
24.5
..
45.0
12.3
24.6
..
36.5
38.3
—
52.7
38.3
28.7

..
17.3
11.4
28.1
23.6
16.2
16.2
14.6
17.6
8.6
..
15.0
17.4
17.1
16.2
18.4
20.2
13.9
14.3
14.5
..
8.9
15.6
21.6
16.4
27.7
20.9
16.1
20.0
19.2
23.0
17.0
19.3
29.3
20.3
11.8
22.3
11.1
..
22.6
17.0

..
23.0
23.1
25.2
31.7
26.0
17.2
..
16.0
16.0
32.6
..
26.5
24.2
12.7
30.4
15.7
33.7

..
..
91.5
95.6
91.5
94.2
57.1
..
88.0
100.0
..
99.9
..
68.8
..
87.6
..
..
61.6
86.3
..
94.6
99.9
100.0
..
..
..
57.8
87.6
77.9
..
79.6
77.5
100.0
98.4
100.0
..
99.9
..
42.5
..

..
99.3
..
83.6
..
97.8
..
..
..
100.0
93.2
..
..
..
74.1
100.0
..
..

DTP
(%)
2009
8
6
2
11
16
5
1
5
10
2
2
4
2
1
2
14
2
26
1
17
10
12
10
1
4
10
7
1
5
25
1
1
7
8
1
2
1
27
4
3
1

2
7
3
18
28
1
3
4
1
13
9
55
8
15
2
5
15
13

education and health

EDUCATION

Gross enrolment ratio

Primary education 

resources

One-year-olds 

lacking 

immunization against

HEALTH

Mortality

Health-

adjusted life 
expectancya

(years)
2007
65
66
62
67
67
65
66
64
62
69
64
62
60
61
56
69
64
62
64
66
67
64
60
63
66
64
67
66
66
64
64
63
61
66
61
65
63
59
66
60
66

table

9

5
12
4
21
51
6
6
1
2
12
5
45
9
14
2
6
10
12

25
32
15
32
25
18
19
45
14
26
17
69
23
51
13
29
17
33

111
105
82
149
167
157
87
212
139
124
128
262
98
132
70
141
134
130

195
135
275
172
198
263
142
380
270
217
281
321
168
203
97
305
309
240

..
<0.1
<0.1
0.7
..
0.1
..
..
..
0.4
0.3
3.5
0.1
0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.1
<0.1

..
0.1
<0.1
0.3
..
0.1
..
..
..
0.6
0.4
1.4
0.2
0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.1
<0.1

63
62
63
63
61
62
66
55
62
61
61
52
64
58
64
58
61
62

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

159

education and health

EDUCATION

Gross enrolment ratio

Primary education 

resources

One-year-olds 

lacking 

immunization against

HEALTH

Mortality

Under 
five
(per 

1,000 live 
births)
2009
21
30
36
39
35
57
16
48
30
46
62
39
16
37
61
24
26
38
40
44
28
66
69
145
128
59
88
73
79

Measles

(%)
2009
5
..
5
14
3
6
19
24
1
18
38
18
48
1
11
3
1
2
8
31
4
29
7
49
24
41
8
5
2

table

9

HDI rank

113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of
117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi

Adult 
literacy 

rate

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% ages 15 
and older)
2005–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2005–2010b 2005–2010b

(pupils per 
teacher)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

Pupil–
teacher 

ratio

School 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

66.4
94.6
99.3
..
..
84.1
84.2
88.5
83.6
..
88.7
92.2
82.0
99.2
99.7
92.8
78.0
56.1
74.5
78.1
84.8
62.8
66.6
93.3
..
72.7
77.6
86.9
52.8

..
87.0
88.8
55.5
55.9
50.6
70.0
92.0
70.7
64.5
72.9
60.1
62.4
49.7
60.8
59.1
48.7
57.5
89.7
73.2
56.9
74.2
70.9
..
70.7
41.7
46.5
70.2
55.3
73.7

101.1
78.9
91.8
110.3
103.0
109.4
122.2
112.1
116.0
116.5
101.2
120.8
108.1
95.2
102.2
104.1
116.9
107.4
113.6
102.5
98.1
116.9
105.2
83.2
119.5
111.8
116.5
107.9
109.1

107.3
112.7
130.4
85.1
95.1
112.5
127.7
115.8
113.8
160.4
104.9
54.9
85.4
83.7
89.5
114.9
..
104.4
104.4
121.6
115.2
119.4
112.9
54.5
150.7
121.9
84.7
74.0
73.6
119.3

67.2
87.1
103.5
90.5
103.4
81.5
74.7
64.7
64.5
84.8
93.9
79.5
47.3
84.1
84.4
66.9
67.9
55.8
56.6
51.5
81.5
60.0
57.2
26.2
43.1
43.9
40.4
53.3
61.7

34.8
59.5
51.0
33.1
42.3
51.2
23.0
53.1
41.5
31.5
27.4
..
45.7
30.1
30.5
43.5
..
24.5
45.0
27.4
41.3
45.8
..
30.5
26.7
36.3
55.7
38.0
26.3
29.5

28.5
45.7
9.8
..
11.2
7.6
..
8.9
18.7
..
..
23.5
4.8
50.8
19.8
9.7
18.0
12.9
17.7
15.5
14.9
13.5
8.6
..
6.4
13.4
7.0
4.4
6.6

..
4.1
4.4
5.2
7.9
15.2
2.8
10.7
9.0
3.6
1.4
..
10.2
8.0
10.1
5.6
..
3.8
3.6
4.1
5.3
5.2
..
3.5
4.8
5.8
4.6
..
8.4
—

27.2
28.0
17.1
16.6
25.6
25.2
17.8
30.1
33.3
25.0
30.7
16.6
23.8
24.0
22.7
19.5
29.2
26.6
29.4
17.0
23.9
..
33.1
27.2
64.4
30.5
49.1
32.4
27.7

..
46.8
26.2
39.7
45.8
29.1
..
28.4
46.3
47.9
53.7
35.8
..
34.7
46.3
31.9
..
39.1
33.8
49.3
41.3
30.2
60.5
34.1
68.3
44.9
36.6
38.4
42.1
..

..
100.0
100.0
..
63.7
97.4
..
95.6
36.4
85.4
87.4
..
100.0
65.7
88.3
99.6
72.7
100.0
..
..
86.5
..
47.6
45.3
89.0
96.9
99.5
94.0
91.5

..
96.8
48.1
85.2
58.4
..
..
98.9
61.8
..
100.0
..
..
..
51.2
73.7
..
100.0
57.6
89.4
14.6
57.4
..
100.0
93.9
71.8
..
59.7
100.0
..

DTP
(%)
2009
3
..
2
9
2
4
20
17
2
14
31
18
32
5
7
4
2
1
8
35
1
34
6
67
9
43
6
5
4

19
25
2
15
6
28
27
10
20
22
15
36
34
14
58
18
41
36
17
36
11
17
19
11
3
17
2
16
19
7

160

human development report 2011

HIV

prevalence

Youth 

(% ages 15–24)

Adult

(per 1,000 
people)

Female Male Female Male
2009
2009
<0.1
130
..
..
<0.1
139
..
161
224
0.6
5.2
324
..
95
2.3
357
0.3
134
173
..
4.5
479
0.1
143
..
159
0.1
162
160
<0.1
0.1
107
0.1
122
0.1
87
0.5
151
145
..
..
111
0.1
169
0.5
253
1.9
355
320
1.2
0.1
251
0.1
190
6.5
560
194
0.1

2009
<0.1
..
<0.1
..
0.8
11.8
..
5.8
0.2
..
13.6
<0.1
..
0.1
<0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
..
..
0.1
1.3
5
2.6
0.2
0.1
15.6
<0.1

2009
215
..
220
183
286
372
159
540
237
325
521
234
200
327
183
173
210
126
280
292
272
250
402
373
409
289
350
674
256

Health-

adjusted life 
expectancya

(years)
2007
60
..
59
62
53
49
63
52
62
58
48
60
61
57
57
64
64
62
60
54
61
56
50
46
48
54
53
42
55

40
26
10
20
11
30
23
13
26
36
9
42
42
21
59
21
41
41
15
32
16
21
15
27
8
28
4
18
33
8

36
84
78
87
52
56
161
71
154
58
108
68
66
93
138
48
87
117
84
128
98
104
141
94
111
118
103
108
119
110

119
282
104
189
222
154
353
188
409
198
311
221
180
218
365
159
227
262
573
348
278
229
477
271
258
246
246
275
456
496

170
358
161
225
246
233
377
275
420
273
456
274
237
266
377
234
278
315
676
539
338
284
580
326
304
385
296
291
528
691

..
4.1
..
<0.1
<0.1
..
1.6
0.3
3.9
0.1
3.9
0.8
..
0.7
2.9
0.1
1.3
0.3
14.2
4.8
2.2
<0.1
8.9
1.9
1.9
0.7
2.4
1.3
1.5
6.8

..
1.8
..
0.1
<0.1
..
0.6
0.3
1.6
0.1
1.7
0.3
..
0.3
1.2
0.2
0.6
0.4
5.4
2.3
0.9
<0.1
4.2
0.8
1.3
0.3
0.9
0.5
0.7
3.1

59
48
53
55
56
53
45
50
45
52
45
56
54
51
42
55
54
51
40
42
51
56
40
48
43
50
51
50
47
44

education and health

EDUCATION

Gross enrolment ratio

Primary education 

resources

One-year-olds 

lacking 

immunization against

HEALTH

Mortality

Health-

adjusted life 
expectancya

(years)
2007
36
39
50
42
42
55
47
42
35
43
48
40
42
43
44
45

2
6
1
1
8
76
10

7
5
18
28

18
9
4
7
25
32
23
26
18

33
35
4
44
2
180
35

6
19
44
117

49
26
19
22
69
129
120
57
58

126
386
51
303
48
350
280

60
106
131
287

139
103
118
99
173
355
282
155
137

207
429
112
448
57
382
255

114
223
204
346

198
168
281
181
245
430
357
207
211

..
..
..
..
..
0.6
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
0.4
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

59
52
73
55
75
45
58

72
64
61
48

59
64
62
65
56
45
49
61
61

table

9

Under 
five
(per 

1,000 live 
births)
2009
199
90
104
191
193
55
142
171
192
166
112
209
142
166
160
199

Measles

(%)
2009
24
24
25
29
24
5
49
38
29
25
36
77
23
9
27
24

HIV

prevalence

Youth 

(% ages 15–24)

Adult

(per 1,000 
people)

Female Male Female Male
2009
2009
..
352
3.3
574
..
379
0.2
218
369
0.8
0.2
179
0.4
337
1
470
0.6
363
262
0.5
0.3
337
1
384
3.1
434
1
407
224
0.2
..
331

2009
440
672
445
357
431
249
474
461
414
443
389
412
557
424
229
442

2009
..
6.9
..
0.5
2
0.4
0.9
2.2
1.5
0.8
0.7
2.5
8.6
2.1
0.5
..

HDI rank

172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau
177 Eritrea
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Adult 
literacy 

rate

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

(% ages 15 
and older)
2005–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2001–2010b 2005–2010b 2005–2010b

(pupils per 
teacher)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

Pupil–
teacher 

ratio

School 
teachers 
trained 
to teach

..
91.9
29.8
26.2
52.2
66.6
39.5
55.2
40.9
28.7
59.1
33.6
55.1
66.6
28.7
66.8

100.0
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
93.2
81.9
59.8

72.9
93.5
98.0
91.0
62.8
61.6
59.2
..
80.9

103.9
..
102.5
97.2
119.7
48.3
89.8
91.3
85.1
79.2
90.6
89.7
115.7
146.6
66.6
90.3

..
90.3
127.7
93.0
92.9
32.6
100.1

102.7
110.3
113.3
96.5

95.0
112.3
98.5
116.8
109.8
100.2
99.6
95.1
106.9

43.8
..
34.4
41.6
35.9
31.8
37.0
12.4
26.5
21.4
..
24.1
25.5
21.2
13.3
36.7

..
78.2
153.4
62.9
95.6
7.7
79.5

99.7
90.4
69.7
35.0

66.5
76.9
90.7
90.7
55.9
35.3
35.6
76.9
68.4

3.6
..
3.6
6.0
2.9
2.0
9.2
2.5
2.0
3.4
..
2.0
1.5
2.7
1.4
6.0

..
15.9
..
..
..
—
..

72.9
49.3
20.5
6.2

25.8
24.9
57.1
42.7
13.1
5.9
5.7
51.6
27.6

42.8
..
57.9
50.1
62.2
38.5
43.7
84.3
..
47.8
24.3
60.9
58.5
51.4
38.6
37.3

..
..
..
22.4
6.2
35.5
..

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

..
..
84.6
50.0
..
92.2
73.1
..
..
86.1
40.2
34.6
75.9
91.2
96.7
93.4

..
..
..
74.2
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
91.7
77.1
76.0
..
..
..

DTP
(%)
2009
17
27
21
26
32
1
43
46
25
18
36
77
24
8
30
23

7
7
1
1
8
69
11

5
6
19
26

16
7
4
8
27
30
21
24
18

NOTES
a.  Based on methods described in the statistical annex of WHO (2007). Estimates for 2007 have been 
revised to take into account the Global Burden of Disease estimates for 2004 and may not be entirely 
comparable with those for 2002 published in WHO (2004).

b.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.

DEFINITIONS
Adult literacy rate: Percentage of the population ages 15 and older who can, with understanding, both 
read and write a short simple statement on their everyday life.
Gross enrolment ratio: Total enrolment in a given level of education (primary, secondary or tertiary), 
regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the official school-age population for the same level 
of education.
Pupil–teacher ratio: Average number of pupils (students) per teacher in primary education in a given 
school year.
School teachers trained to teach: Percentage of primary school teachers who have received the mini-
mum organized teacher training (pre-service or in-service) required for teaching at the primary level of 
education.

One-year-olds lacking immunization against DTP: Percentage of one-year-olds who have not received 
three doses of the combined diphtheria, tetanus toxoid and pertussis (DTP) vaccine.
One-year-olds lacking immunization against measles: Percentage of one-year-olds who have not 
received at least one dose of a measles vaccine.
Under-five mortality: Probability of dying between birth and exactly age 5, expressed per 1,000 live births.
Adult mortality: Probability that a 15-year-old person will die before reaching age 60, expressed per 
1,000 adults.
HIV prevalence: Percentage of the population ages 15–24 who are infected with HIV.
Health-adjusted life expectancy at birth: Average number of years that a person can expect to live in 
“full health” taking into account years lived in less than full health due to disease and injury.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1–6: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2011).
Columns 7, 8, 10, 11 and 14: WHO (2010a).
Columns 9, 12 and 13: UNICEF (2011).

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

161

e10

l
b
a
t

Population and economy

POPULATION

ECONOMY

HDI rank

Total

(millions)

Average annual 

growth

(%)

VERY HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

2011

2030

1990/1995 2010/2015

Urbana
(% of 
total)
2011

Median 

age
(years)
2010

Dependency 

ratio
(%)
2011

GDP 
per 
capita
(PPP $)
2009

1 Norway
2 Australia
3 Netherlands
4 United States
5 New Zealand
6 Canada
7 Ireland
8 Liechtenstein
9 Germany
10 Sweden
11 Switzerland
12 Japan
13 Hong Kong, China (SAR)
14 Iceland
15 Korea, Republic of
16 Denmark
17 Israel
18 Belgium
19 Austria
20 France
21 Slovenia
22 Finland
23 Spain
24 Italy
25 Luxembourg
26 Singapore
27 Czech Republic
28 United Kingdom
29 Greece
30 United Arab Emirates
31 Cyprus
32 Andorra
33 Brunei Darussalam
34 Estonia
35 Slovakia
36 Malta
37 Qatar
38 Hungary
39 Poland
40 Lithuania
41 Portugal
42 Bahrain
43 Latvia
44 Chile
45 Argentina
46 Croatia
47 Barbados
HIGH HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
48 Uruguay
49 Palau
50 Romania
51 Cuba
52 Seychelles
53 Bahamas
54 Montenegro
55 Bulgaria

4.9 c
22.6 d
16.7
313.1
4.4
34.3
4.5
0.0
82.2
9.4
7.7
126.5
7.1
0.3
48.4
5.6
7.6
10.8
8.4
63.1
2.0
5.4
46.5
60.8
0.5
5.2
10.5
62.4
11.4
7.9
1.1
0.1
0.4
1.3
5.5
0.4
1.9
10.0
38.3
3.3
10.7
1.3
2.2
17.3
40.8
4.4
0.3

3.4
0.0
21.4
11.3
0.1
0.3
0.6
7.4

5.6 c
27.8 d
17.3
361.7
5.2
39.8
5.4
0.0
79.5
10.4
8.1
120.2
8.5
0.4
50.3
5.9
9.8
11.2
8.6
68.5
2.1
5.6
50.0
60.9
0.6
6.0
10.8
69.3
11.6
10.5
1.3
0.1
0.5
1.3
5.5
0.4
2.4
9.6
37.8
3.1
10.3
1.7
2.1
19.5
46.8
4.2
0.3

3.6
0.0
20.3
11.0
0.1
0.4
0.6
6.5

0.5 c
1.2 d
0.7
1.0
1.6
1.1
0.4
1.3
0.7
0.6
1.0
0.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.4
3.4
0.3
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.3
0.0
1.3
2.9
0.0
0.3
1.0
5.2
2.2
4.1
2.8
–1.7
0.4
1.0
1.1
–0.1
0.2
–0.4
0.4
2.5
–1.3
1.8
1.3
0.7
0.3

0.7
2.7
–0.5
0.6
1.0
1.8
1.1
–1.1

0.7 c
1.3 d
0.3
0.9
1.0
0.9
1.1
0.8
–0.2
0.6
0.4
–0.1
1.0
1.2
0.4
0.3
1.7
0.3
0.2
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.6
0.2
1.4
1.1
0.3
0.6
0.2
2.2
1.1
1.5
1.7
–0.1
0.2
0.3
2.9
–0.2
0.0
–0.4
0.0
2.1
–0.4
0.9
0.9
–0.2
0.2

0.3
0.8
–0.2
0.0
0.3
1.1
0.1
–0.7

79.8 c
89.3 d
83.3
82.6
86.2
80.7
62.3
14.3
74.0
84.8
73.7
67.0
100.0
93.5
83.3
87.1
91.9
97.4
67.8
85.9
49.5
85.4 e
77.6
68.6
85.4
100.0
73.6
79.8
61.7
84.4
70.5
87.6
76.1
69.5
54.9
94.8
95.9
68.5
60.9
67.1
61.3
88.7
67.7
89.2
92.6
58.0
45.1

92.6
84.3
58.0
75.2
55.9
84.3
61.5
71.7

38.7
36.9
40.7
36.9
36.6
39.9
34.7
..
44.3
40.7
41.4
44.7
41.8
34.8
37.9
40.6
30.1
41.2
41.8
39.9
41.7
42.0
40.1
43.2
38.9
37.6
39.4
39.8
41.4
30.1
34.2
..
28.9
39.7
36.9
39.5
31.6
39.8
38.0
39.3
41.0
30.1
40.2
32.1
30.4
41.5
37.5

33.7
..
38.5
38.4
..
30.9
35.9
41.6

50.7
48.6
49.8
50.1
50.9
44.5
50.0
..
51.5
54.2
47.4
57.9
32.1
49.2
38.1
53.3
61.0
52.7
47.9
54.9
44.3
52.1
47.6
53.1
46.1
35.6
41.6
52.0
50.1
21.0
41.4
..
41.9
49.1
37.6
41.4
17.7
45.8
40.0
44.9
49.6
28.8
46.8
45.4
54.7
47.6
40.2

56.6
..
43.3
42.0
..
41.3
46.4
46.3

56,214
39,539
40,676
45,989
28,993
37,808
40,697
..
36,338
37,377
45,224
32,418
43,229
36,795
27,100
37,720
27,656
36,313
38,818
33,674
27,133
35,265
32,150
32,430
83,820
50,633
25,581
35,155
29,617
57,744
30,848
..
..
19,693
22,882
24,814
91,379
20,312
18,905
17,308
24,920
..
16,437
14,311
14,538
19,986
..

13,189
..
14,278
..
19,587
..
13,086
13,870

162

human development report 2011

Foreign 
direct 

investment 
net inflows
(% of GDP)

Net official 
development 
assistance 
received
(% of GDP)

2009

3.0
2.4
4.2
1.0
–1.0
1.5
11.1
..
1.2
2.8
5.6
0.2
24.9
0.5
0.2
0.9
2.0
–8.2
2.3
2.3
–1.2
0.0
0.4
1.4
372.6
9.2
1.4
3.4
0.7
..
23.6
..
..
9.2
0.0
11.2
..
2.2
3.2
0.6
1.2
1.2
0.4
7.8
1.3
4.7
8.3

4.0
..
3.9
..
32.5
..
32.0
9.4

2009

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0.3 f
..
..
..
..
..
0.5 f
..
0.1
0.0
0.3
–0.1

0.2
27.9
..
0.2 f
3.5
..
1.8
..

Remittance 

inflows
(% of GDP)

2009

0.2
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.5
..
0.3
..
0.3
0.2
0.5
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.6
2.2
0.9
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.7
0.1
3.0
..
0.6
0.3
0.6
..
0.6
..
..
1.7
1.9
0.6
..
1.7
1.9
3.1
1.5
..
2.3
0.0
0.2
2.3
3.2

0.3
..
3.1
..
1.6
..
..
3.2

Public 

expenditure 

on 

education
(% of GDP)
2006–2009b

9.7
8.5
10.8
16.2
9.7
10.9
9.7
..
11.3
9.9
11.3
8.3
..
8.2
6.5
11.2
7.6
11.8
11.0
11.7
9.1
9.7
9.7
9.5
7.8
3.9
7.6
9.3
10.6
2.8
6.0
7.5
3.0
7.0
8.5
7.5
2.5
7.3
7.1
6.6
11.3
4.5
6.5
8.2
9.5
7.8
6.8

7.4
11.2
5.4
11.8
4.0
7.2
9.3
7.4

Total 

expenditure 
on health
(% of GDP)

2009

9.7
8.5
10.8
16.2
9.7
10.9
9.7
..
11.3
9.9
11.3
8.3
..
8.2
6.5
11.2
7.6
11.8
11.0
11.7
9.1
9.7
9.7
9.5
7.8
3.9
7.6
9.3
10.6
2.8
6.0
7.5
3.0
7.0
8.5
7.5
2.5
7.3
7.1
6.6
11.3
4.5
6.5
8.2
9.5
7.8
6.8

7.4
11.2
5.4
11.8
4.0
7.2
9.3
7.4

POPULATION

HDI rank

Total

(millions)

Average annual 

growth

(%)

56 Saudi Arabia
57 Mexico
58 Panama
59 Serbia
60 Antigua and Barbuda
61 Malaysia
62 Trinidad and Tobago
63 Kuwait
64 Libya
65 Belarus
66 Russian Federation
67 Grenada
68 Kazakhstan
69 Costa Rica
70 Albania
71 Lebanon
72 Saint Kitts and Nevis
73 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
74 Bosnia and Herzegovina
75 Georgia
76 Ukraine
77 Mauritius
78 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
79 Jamaica
80 Peru
81 Dominica
82 Saint Lucia
83 Ecuador
84 Brazil
85 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
86 Armenia
87 Colombia
88 Iran, Islamic Republic of
89 Oman
90 Tonga
91 Azerbaijan
92 Turkey
93 Belize
94 Tunisia
MEDIUM HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
95 Jordan
96 Algeria
97 Sri Lanka
98 Dominican Republic
99 Samoa
100 Fiji
101 China
102 Turkmenistan
103 Thailand
104 Suriname
105 El Salvador
106 Gabon
107 Paraguay
108 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
109 Maldives
110 Mongolia
111 Moldova, Republic of
112 Philippines
113 Egypt
114 Occupied Palestinian Territory
115 Uzbekistan
116 Micronesia, Federated States of

2011
28.1
114.8
3.6
9.9
0.1
28.9
1.3
2.8
6.4
9.6
142.8
0.1
16.2
4.7
3.2
4.3
0.1
29.4
3.8
4.3
45.2
1.3
2.1
2.8
29.4
0.1
0.2
14.7
196.7
0.1
3.1
46.9
74.8
2.8
0.1
9.3
73.6
0.3
10.6

2030
38.5
135.4
4.5
9.5
0.1
37.3
1.4
4.0
7.8
8.9
136.4
0.1
18.9
5.7
3.3
4.7
0.1
37.0
3.5
3.8
40.5
1.4
2.0
2.8
35.5
0.1
0.2
17.9
220.5
0.1
3.1
56.9
84.4
3.6
0.1
10.8
86.7
0.4
12.2

6.3
36.0
21.0
10.1
0.2
0.9

8.4
43.5
23.1
12.1
0.2
1.0
1,347.6 h 1,393.1 h 
6.2
73.3
0.6
7.1
2.1
8.7
13.4
0.4
3.5
3.1
126.3
106.5
6.8
33.4
0.1

5.1
69.5
0.5
6.2
1.5
6.6
10.1
0.3
2.8
3.5
94.9
82.5
4.2
27.8
0.1

1990/1995 2010/2015

2.7
1.8
2.1
1.3
2.0
2.6
0.7
–5.0
1.9
0.0
0.1
0.8
–0.7
2.4
–0.9
3.2
1.1
2.3
–5.1
–1.5
–0.2
1.4
0.6
0.8
1.9
0.1
1.3
2.1
1.6
0.1
–1.9
1.9
1.7
3.6
0.2
1.5
1.7
2.9
1.7

5.0
2.2
1.0
1.9
0.8
1.3
1.2 h
2.7
0.9
1.4
1.4
3.1
2.4
2.3
2.5
1.0
–0.1
2.3
1.8
4.4
2.2
2.1

2.1
1.1
1.5
–0.1
1.0
1.6
0.3
2.4
0.8
–0.3
–0.1
0.4
1.0
1.4
0.3
0.7
1.2
1.5
–0.2
–0.6
–0.5
0.5
0.1
0.4
1.1
0.0
1.0
1.3
0.8
0.0
0.3
1.3
1.0
1.9
0.4
1.2
1.1
2.0
1.0

1.9
1.4
0.8
1.2
0.5
0.8
0.4 h
1.2
0.5
0.9
0.6
1.9
1.7
1.6
1.3
1.5
–0.7
1.7
1.7
2.8
1.1
0.5

Urbana
(% of 
total)
2011
82.3
78.1
75.5
56.4
30.4
73.0
14.2
98.4
78.1
75.2
73.2
39.7
58.8
64.9
52.9
87.4
32.6
93.6
49.2
52.8
69.1
41.9 g
59.4
52.1
77.3
67.4
28.1
67.6
86.9
49.8
64.3
75.4
71.3
73.3
23.5
52.1
70.1
52.7
67.7

78.6
67.1
14.3
69.8
20.1
52.3
47.8 h
50.0
34.4
69.8
64.8
86.4
62.1
67.0
41.3
62.5
47.7
49.1
43.5
74.4
36.3
22.8

Median 

age
(years)
2010
25.9
26.6
27.3
37.6
..
26.0
30.8
28.2
25.9
38.3
37.9
25.0
29.0
28.4
30.0
29.1
..
26.1
39.4
37.3
39.3
32.4
35.9
27.0
25.6
..
27.4
25.5
29.1
27.9
32.1
26.8
27.1
25.3
21.3
29.5
28.3
21.8
28.9

20.7
26.2
30.7
25.1
20.9
26.4
34.5
24.5
34.2
27.6
23.2
21.6
23.1
21.7
24.6
25.4
35.2
22.2
24.4
18.1
24.2
20.8

Dependency 

GDP 
per 
capita
(PPP $)
2009
23,480
14,258
13,057
11,893
18,778
14,012
25,572
..
16,502
13,040
18,932
8,362
11,510
11,106
8,716
13,070
14,527
12,323
8,578
4,774
6,318
12,838
11,159
7,633
8,629
8,883
9,605
8,268
10,367
9,154
5,279
8,959
11,558
..
4,466
9,638
13,668
6,628
8,273

ratio
(%)
2011
49.5
54.1
54.7
46.7
..
53.4
38.3
41.3
54.1
40.2
39.1
52.6
46.4
45.1
46.9
46.3
..
53.6
40.8
44.6
42.5
39.8
41.4
57.4
55.7
..
47.7
57.0
47.3
49.1
45.2
51.9
38.9
42.4
76.4
38.0
47.3
62.3
43.4

69.0
45.8
49.9
58.8
73.8
51.5
37.9
49.0
41.3
53.1
62.4
64.9
62.1
67.7
45.0
46.8
38.7
63.2
57.4
81.0
49.8
66.2

5,597
8,172
4,772
8,433
4,405
4,526
6,828
7,242
7,995
..
6,629
14,419
4,523
4,419
5,476
3,522
2,854
3,542
5,673
..
2,875
3,088

population and economy

ECONOMY

Foreign 
direct 

investment 
net inflows
(% of GDP)

Net official 
development 
assistance 
received
(% of GDP)

Remittance 

inflows
(% of GDP)

2009
2.8
1.7
7.2
4.5
11.4
0.7
3.3
..
2.7
3.8
3.0
14.5
11.8
4.6
8.1
13.9
24.5
–1.0
1.4
6.1
4.2
3.0
2.7
4.5
3.7
13.3
16.5
0.6
1.6
18.9
8.9
3.1
0.9
4.8
4.7
1.1
1.4
7.0
4.0

9.5
2.0
1.0
4.4
0.6
2.0
1.6
6.8
1.9
..
2.0
0.3
1.4
2.4
7.6
14.8
2.4
1.2
3.6
..
2.3
..

2009
0.0 f
0.0
0.3
1.4
0.6
0.1
0.0
..
0.1
0.2
..
8.3
0.3
0.4
3.0
1.8
1.1
0.0
2.4
8.6
0.6
1.8
2.2
1.3
0.4
10.1
4.7
0.4
0.0
5.5
5.9
0.5
0.0
0.1 f
12.4
0.6
0.2
2.0 f
1.3

3.0
0.2
1.7
0.3
16.1
2.5
0.0
0.2
0.0
3.7 f
1.4
0.8
1.1
4.4
2.4
9.4
4.3
0.2
0.5
25.3 f
0.6
42.0

2009
0.1
2.5
0.7
12.6
2.2
0.6
0.5
..
0.0
0.7
0.4
8.6
0.1
1.8
11.0
21.9
7.4
0.0
12.2
6.6
4.5
2.5
4.1
15.8
1.8
6.1
2.9
4.4
0.3
5.1
8.8
1.8
0.3
0.1 f
27.9
3.0
0.2
5.9
5.0

14.3
1.5
8.0
7.4
25.1
5.4
1.0
..
0.6
0.1
16.5
0.1
4.3
6.2
0.3
4.8
22.4
12.3
3.8
17.6
..
..

Public 

expenditure 

on 

education
(% of GDP)
2006–2009b

5.0
6.5
8.3
9.9
5.1
4.8
5.7
3.3
3.9
5.8
5.4
7.4
4.5
10.5
6.9
8.1
6.0
6.0
10.9
10.1
7.0
5.7
6.9
5.1
4.6
6.4
8.1
6.1
9.0
5.6
4.7
6.4
5.5
3.0
6.2
5.8
6.7
4.9
6.2

9.3
5.8
4.0
5.9
7.0
3.4
4.6
2.3
4.3
7.6
6.4
3.5
7.1
5.0
8.0
4.7
11.9
3.8
5.0
..
5.2
13.8

Total 

expenditure 
on health
(% of GDP)

2009
5.0
6.5
8.3
9.9
5.1
4.8
5.7
3.3
3.9
5.8
5.4
7.4
4.5
10.5
6.9
8.1
6.0
6.0
10.9
10.1
7.0
5.7
6.9
5.1
4.6
6.4
8.1
6.1
9.0
5.6
4.7
6.4
5.5
3.0
6.2
5.8
6.7
4.9
6.2

9.3
5.8
4.0
5.9
7.0
3.4
4.6
2.3
4.3
7.6
6.4
3.5
7.1
5.0
8.0
4.7
11.9
3.8
5.0
..
5.2
13.8

table

10

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

163

population and economy

POPULATION

HDI rank

Total

(millions)

Average annual 

growth

(%)

117 Guyana
118 Botswana
119 Syrian Arab Republic
120 Namibia
121 Honduras
122 Kiribati
123 South Africa
124 Indonesia
125 Vanuatu
126 Kyrgyzstan
127 Tajikistan
128 Viet Nam
129 Nicaragua
130 Morocco
131 Guatemala
132 Iraq
133 Cape Verde
134 India
135 Ghana
136 Equatorial Guinea
137 Congo
138 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
139 Cambodia
140 Swaziland
141 Bhutan
LOW HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
142 Solomon Islands
143 Kenya
144 São Tomé and Príncipe
145 Pakistan
146 Bangladesh
147 Timor-Leste
148 Angola
149 Myanmar
150 Cameroon
151 Madagascar
152 Tanzania, United Republic of
153 Papua New Guinea
154 Yemen
155 Senegal
156 Nigeria
157 Nepal
158 Haiti
159 Mauritania
160 Lesotho
161 Uganda
162 Togo
163 Comoros
164 Zambia
165 Djibouti
166 Rwanda
167 Benin
168 Gambia
169 Sudan
170 Côte d'Ivoire
171 Malawi
172 Afghanistan
173 Zimbabwe
174 Ethiopia
175 Mali
176 Guinea-Bissau

table

10

2011
0.8
2.0
20.8
2.3
7.8
0.1
50.5
242.3
0.2
5.4
7.0
88.8
5.9
32.3
14.8
32.7
0.5

2030
0.8
2.3
27.9
3.0
10.7
0.1
54.7
279.7
0.4
6.7
9.0
101.5
7.2
37.5
22.7
55.3
0.6
1,241.5 1,523.5
36.5
1.1
6.2
7.8
17.4
1.5
0.9

25.0
0.7
4.1
6.3
14.3
1.2
0.7

0.6
41.6
0.2
176.7
150.5
1.2
19.6
48.3
20.0
21.3
46.2
7.0
24.8
12.8
162.5
30.5
10.1
3.5
2.2
34.5
6.2
0.8
13.5
0.9
10.9
9.1
1.8
44.6
20.2
15.4
32.4
12.8
84.7
15.8
1.5

0.8
65.9
0.2
234.4
181.9
2.0
30.8
54.3
28.8
35.3
81.9
10.2
41.3
20.0
257.8
39.9
12.5
5.2
2.6
59.8
8.7
1.2
24.5
1.3
17.6
14.6
2.8
66.9
29.8
28.2
53.3
17.6
118.5
26.8
2.3

1990/1995 2010/2015

0.1
2.7
2.8
3.1
2.6
1.5
2.4
1.6
2.8
0.9
1.7
2.0
2.4
1.7
2.3
3.1
2.5
2.0
2.8
3.4
2.7
2.7
3.2
2.2
–1.5

2.8
3.1
1.9
2.6
2.2
2.8
3.2
1.4
2.7
3.0
3.2
2.5
4.7
2.9
2.4
2.5
2.0
2.8
1.8
3.3
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.2
–4.9
3.4
3.1
2.6
3.2
1.0
8.4
2.2
3.3
2.5
2.0

0.2
1.1
1.7
1.7
2.0
1.5
0.5
1.0
2.4
1.1
1.5
1.0
1.4
1.0
2.5
3.1
0.9
1.3
2.3
2.7
2.2
1.3
1.2
1.4
1.5

2.5
2.7
2.0
1.8
1.3
2.9
2.7
0.8
2.1
2.8
3.1
2.2
3.0
2.6
2.5
1.7
1.3
2.2
1.0
3.1
2.0
2.5
3.0
1.9
2.9
2.7
2.7
2.4
2.2
3.2
3.1
2.2
2.1
3.0
2.1

164

human development report 2011

Urbana
(% of 
total)
2011
28.7
61.8
56.2
38.6
52.2
44.0
62.2
44.6
26.0
34.5
26.4
31.0
57.6
58.8
49.9
66.1
61.8
30.3
52.2
39.9
62.5
34.3
20.4
21.3
35.5

Median 

age
(years)
2010
23.8
22.9
21.1
21.2
21.0
..
24.9
27.8
20.6
23.8
20.4
28.2
22.1
26.3
18.9
18.3
22.8
25.1
20.5
20.3
19.6
21.5
22.9
19.5
24.6

18.9
22.5
63.0
36.2
28.6
28.6
59.4
34.3
59.2
30.6
26.9
12.6
32.4
42.7
50.5
19.2
53.6
41.7
27.6
13.5
44.1
28.3
35.9
76.3
19.2
42.5
58.9
40.8
51.3
20.3
22.9
38.8
16.8
36.6
30.2

19.9
18.5
19.3
21.7
24.2
16.6
16.6
28.2
19.3
18.2
17.5
20.4
17.4
17.8
18.5
21.4
21.5
19.8
20.3
15.7
19.7
18.9
16.7
21.4
18.7
17.9
17.8
19.7
19.2
16.9
16.6
19.3
18.7
16.3
19.0

Dependency 

ratio
(%)
2011
58.2
57.2
67.1
65.9
68.3
..
53.0
47.8
70.8
52.3
66.6
41.3
62.7
49.8
83.4
85.6
58.1
54.4
73.3
72.5
79.4
60.3
54.3
70.5
50.7

74.7
82.1
77.4
64.7
54.4
95.3
95.1
43.8
78.6
84.9
92.2
71.3
87.1
85.0
86.1
65.8
66.6
73.7
70.3
103.5
74.6
83.0
98.4
63.5
83.6
87.4
84.8
76.7
80.1
96.0
93.9
73.6
79.2
97.6
80.2

GDP 
per 
capita
(PPP $)
2009
3,240
13,384
4,730
6,410
3,842
2,432
10,278
4,199
4,438
2,283
1,972
2,953
2,641
4,494
4,720
3,548
3,644
3,296
1,552
31,779
4,238
2,255
1,915
4,998
5,113

2,547
1,573
1,820
2,609
1,416
805
5,812
..
2,205
1,004
1,362
2,281
2,470
1,817
2,203
1,155
1,151
1,929
1,468
1,217
850
1,183
1,430
2,319
1,136
1,508
1,415
2,210
1,701
794
1,321
..
934
1,185
1,071

ECONOMY

Foreign 
direct 

investment 
net inflows
(% of GDP)

Net official 
development 
assistance 
received
(% of GDP)

Remittance 

inflows
(% of GDP)

2009
7.1
2.1
2.7
5.3
3.5
1.7
1.9
0.9
5.3
4.1
0.3
8.4
7.1
2.2
1.6
1.6
7.7
2.5
6.4
15.7
21.7
5.4
5.4
2.2
2.9

17.9
0.5
3.9
1.5
0.8
..
2.9
..
1.5
6.3
1.9
5.4
0.5
1.6
3.3
0.3
0.6
–1.3
4.0
3.8
1.8
1.7
5.5
9.2
2.3
1.4
5.4
4.9
1.6
1.3
1.3
1.1
0.8
1.2
1.7

2009
8.5
2.5
0.5
3.6
3.3
15.6
0.4
0.2
16.5
7.1
8.3
4.4
13.1
1.0
1.0
4.5
13.1
0.2
6.1
0.5
4.1
7.2
7.7
2.0
9.6

42.9
6.1
15.8
1.7
1.3
9.5
0.4
..
2.9
5.2
13.7
5.3
2.0
8.0
1.0
6.7
..
9.4
6.4
11.4
17.5
9.5
11.1
14.5
18.0
10.3
18.5
4.6
10.6
16.6
45.7 f
14.1
13.4
11.0
17.6

2009
12.5
0.7
2.6
0.1
17.6
6.4
0.3
1.3
1.0
21.7
35.1
7.4
12.5
6.9
10.8
0.1 f
9.4
3.6
0.4
..
0.1
0.6
3.4
3.1
..

0.4
5.7
1.0 f
5.4
11.8
..
0.1 f
..
0.7
0.1
0.1
0.2
4.4
10.6
5.5
23.8
21.2
0.1
26.2
4.7
10.7
2.1
0.3
3.1
1.8
3.6
10.9
5.5
0.8
0.0
..
..
0.9
4.5
5.6

Public 

expenditure 

on 

education
(% of GDP)
2006–2009b

8.1
10.3
2.9
5.9
6.0
12.2
8.5
2.4
4.0
6.8
5.3
7.2
9.5
5.5
7.1
3.9
3.9
4.2
6.9
3.9
3.0
4.1
5.9
6.3
5.5

5.4
4.3
7.1
2.6
3.4
12.3
4.6
2.0
5.6
4.1
5.1
3.1
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.8
6.1
2.5
8.2
8.2
5.9
3.4
4.8
7.0
9.0
4.2
6.0
7.3
5.1
6.2
7.4
..
4.3
5.6
6.1

Total 

expenditure 
on health
(% of GDP)

2009
8.1
10.3
2.9
5.9
6.0
12.2
8.5
2.4
4.0
6.8
5.3
7.2
9.5
5.5
7.1
3.9
3.9
4.2
6.9
3.9
3.0
4.1
5.9
6.3
5.5

5.4
4.3
7.1
2.6
3.4
12.3
4.6
2.0
5.6
4.1
5.1
3.1
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.8
6.1
2.5
8.2
8.2
5.9
3.4
4.8
7.0
9.0
4.2
6.0
7.3
5.1
6.2
7.4
..
4.3
5.6
6.1

population and economy

POPULATION

HDI rank

177 Eritrea
178 Guinea
179 Central African Republic
180 Sierra Leone
181 Burkina Faso
182 Liberia
183 Chad
184 Mozambique
185 Burundi
186 Niger
187 Congo, Democratic Republic of the
OTHER COUNTRIES OR TERRITORIES
Korea, Democratic People’s Rep. of
Marshall Islands
Monaco
Nauru
San Marino
Somalia
Tuvalu

Human Development Index groups

Very high human development
High human development
Medium human development
Low human development

Regions

Arab States
East Asia and the Pacific
Europe and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

Least developed countries
Small island developing states
World

Total

(millions)

2011
5.4
10.2
4.5
6.0
17.0
4.1
11.5
23.9
8.6
16.1
67.8

24.5
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
9.6
0.0

2030
8.4
15.9
6.4
8.5
29.1
6.5
18.4
35.9
11.4
30.8
106.0

26.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
16.4
0.0

1,129.5 1,218.5
972.9 1,082.5
3,545.5 4,087.6
1,259.7 1,857.2

360.7

496.9
1,978.5 2,135.3
491.3
480.5
591.2
696.0
1,728.5 2,141.8
877.6 T 1,353.8 T
851.1 T 1,256.8 T
63.8
53.2
6,974.0 T 8,321.4 T

Average annual 

growth

(%)

1990/1995 2010/2015

0.3
5.5
2.5
–0.4
2.7
–0.3
3.0
3.2
1.7
3.3
3.8

1.6
1.5
1.3
1.7
1.2
–0.2
0.5

0.7
1.1
1.6
2.8

2.4
1.3
0.3
1.7
2.1
2.7 T
2.7 T
1.5
1.5 T

2.9
2.5
2.0
2.1
3.0
2.6
2.6
2.2
1.9
3.5
2.6

0.4
1.6
0.0
0.6
0.6
2.6
0.2

0.5
0.8
1.0
2.2

2.0
0.6
0.2
1.1
1.4
2.4 T
2.2 T
1.1
1.1 T

Urbana
(% of 
total)
2011
22.1
35.9
39.2
38.8
26.5
48.2
28.2
39.2
11.3
17.2
35.9

60.3
72.1
100.0
100.0
94.1
37.9
50.9

78.3
75.7
41.3
33.9

56.7
46.1
64.6
79.8
32.0
37.7 T
29.7 T
52.0
50.8 T

Median 

age
(years)
2010
19.0
18.3
19.4
18.4
17.1
18.2
17.1
17.8
20.2
15.5
16.7

32.9
..
..
..
..
17.5
..

39.3
30.5
28.9
19.8

23.2
32.3
34.9
27.5
24.6
18.6 T
19.7 T
26.6
29.2 T

Dependency 

ratio
(%)
2011
78.9
85.6
78.9
81.4
90.6
86.2
93.1
89.5
68.2
104.9
95.0

47.4
..
..
..
..
91.2
..

49.9
46.7
48.1
77.7

61.9
41.5
43.3
53.0
55.7
83.5 T
76.3 T
59.0
52.2 T

GDP 
per 
capita
(PPP $)
2009
581
1,048
757
808
1,187
396
1,300
885
392
690
319

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

35,768
12,861
5,077
1,671

8,256
6,227
14,244
10,739
3,368
2,181
1,379
5,241
10,715

ECONOMY

Foreign 
direct 

investment 
net inflows
(% of GDP)

Net official 
development 
assistance 
received
(% of GDP)

Remittance 

inflows
(% of GDP)

2009
0.0
1.2
2.1
3.8
2.1
24.9
6.8
9.0
0.0
13.7
9.0

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

1.8
2.5
2.2
2.7

3.2
1.9
3.4
2.1
2.1
3.7
3.2
3.9
2.3

2009
7.8
5.8
11.9
23.0
13.5
78.3
9.2
20.8
41.2
8.9
23.9

..
32.1
..
..
..
..
..

..
0.3
0.5
8.7

1.9
0.4
..
0.4
1.4
9.9
12.0
3.7
2.2

2009
..
1.6
..
2.4
1.2
6.2
..
1.1
2.1
1.7
..

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

0.3
1.2
2.2
5.1

2.7
1.4
1.4
1.5
4.5
2.2
5.2
6.7
0.7

Public 

expenditure 

on 

education
(% of GDP)
2006–2009b

2.2
5.7
4.3
13.1
6.4
13.2
7.0
5.7
13.1
6.1
9.5

..
16.5
3.9
..
7.1
..
9.9

11.9
6.5
4.6
5.0

5.0
4.4
6.4
7.7
4.0
6.4
5.4
5.6
10.2

Total 

expenditure 
on health
(% of GDP)

2009
2.2
5.7
4.3
13.1
6.4
13.2
7.0
5.7
13.1
6.1
9.5

..
16.5
3.9
..
7.1
..
9.9

11.2
6.7
4.5
5.1

5.3
4.3
6.3
7.6
4.1
6.2
5.6
7.0
6.0

table

10

NOTES
a.  Because data are based on national definitions of what constitutes a city or metropolitan area, cross-

country comparison should be made with caution.

b.  Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified.
c.  Includes Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands.
d.  Includes Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Norfolk Island.
e.  Includes Åland Islands.
f.  Refers to an earlier year than that specified.
g.  Includes Agalega, Rodrigues and Saint Brandon.
h.  Includes Taiwan Province of China and excludes Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and Macao 

Special Administrative Region.

DEFINITIONS
Total population: De facto population in a country, area or region as of 1 July.
Average annual population growth: Average annual exponential growth rate for the period indicated.
Urban population: De facto population living in areas classified as urban according to the criteria used 
by each area or country as of 1 July.
Median age: Age that divides the population distribution into two equal parts—that is, 50 percent of 
the population is above that age and 50 percent is below it.
Dependency ratio: Ratio of the sum of the population ages 0–14 and that ages 65 and older to the 
population ages 15–64.

GDP per capita: Gross domestic product (GDP) expressed in purchasing power parity international dollar 
terms, divided by midyear population.
Foreign direct investment net inflows: Sum of equity capital, reinvestment of earnings, other long-term 
capital and short-term capital, expressed as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP).
Net official development assistance received: Disbursements of loans made on concessional terms (net 
of repayments of principal) and grants by official agencies to promote economic development and welfare 
in countries and territories in part I of the Development Assistance Committee list of aid recipients, 
expressed as a percentage of the recipient country’s gross national income (GNI).
Remittance inflows: Earnings and material resources transferred by international migrants or refugees 
to recipients in their country of origin or countries in which the migrant formerly resided, expressed as 
a percentage of the receiving country’s GDP.
Public expenditure on education: Total public expenditure (current and capital) on education, expressed 
as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP).
Total expenditure on health: The sum of public and private health expenditure. It includes the provision 
of health services (preventive and curative), family planning activities, nutrition activities and emergency 
aid designated for health but does not include provision of water and sanitation.

MAIN DATA SOURCES
Columns 1–4, 6 and 7: UNDESA (2011).
Column 5: UNDESA (2010).
Columns 8–13: World Bank (2011a).

STATISTICAL TAbLeS

165

Technical notes 

calculating the human development indices—graphical presentation

Human Development
Index (HDI)

DIMENSIONS

Long and healthy life

Knowledge

A decent standard of living

INDICATORS

Life expectancy at birth

Mean years
of schooling

Expected years
of schooling

GNI per capita (PPP $)

DIMENSION
INDEX

Life expectancy index

Education index

GNI index

Human Development Index (HDI)

Inequality-adjusted
Human Development
Index (IHDI)

DIMENSIONS

Long and healthy life

Knowledge

A decent standard of living

INDICATORS

Life expectancy at birth

Mean years
of schooling

Expected years
of schooling

GNI per capita (PPP $)

DIMENSION
INDEX

INEQUALITY-
ADJUSTED 
INDEX

Life expectancy

Years of schooling

Income/consumption

Inequality-adjusted
life expectancy index

Inequality-adjusted

education index

Inequality-adjusted

income index

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI)

Gender Inequality 
Index (GII)

DIMENSIONS

INDICATORS

Health

Maternal 
mortality

ratio

Adolescent 

fertility
rate

Empowerment

Female and male population

with at least

secondary education

Female and male shares of 

parliamentary seats

Labour market
Female and male 

labour force

participation rates

DIMENSION
INDEX

Female reproductive

health index

Female empowerment

index

Female labour
market index

Male empowerment

index

Male labour
market index

Multidimensional
Poverty Index (MPI)

DIMENSIONS

Health

INDICATORS

Nutrition Child mortality

POVERTY 
MEASURES

Female gender index

Male gender index

Gender Inequality Index (GII)

Standard of living

Cooking fuel

Toilet

Water Electricity Floor Assets

Education

Years

of schooling

Children
enrolled

Intensity
of poverty

Headcount

ratio

Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)

Technical noTes

167

Technical note 1. calculating the human Development index

The Human Development Index (HDI) is a summary measure 
of human development. It measures the average achievements in a 
country in three basic dimensions of human development: a long 
and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent standard of liv-
ing. The HDI is the geometric mean of normalized indices mea-
suring achievements in each dimension. For a full elaboration of 
the method and its rationale, see Klugman, Rodriguez and Choi 
(2011). This technical note describes the steps to create the HDI, 
data sources and the methodology used to express income.

steps to estimate the human Development 
index
There are two steps to calculating the HDI.

Step 1. Creating the dimension indices
Minimum and maximum values (goalposts) are set in order 
to transform the indicators into indices between 0 and 1. The 
maximums are the highest observed values in the time series 
(1980–2011). The minimum values can be appropriately con-
ceived of as subsistence values. The minimum values are set at 
20 years for life expectancy, at 0 years for both education vari-
ables and at $100 for per capita gross national income (GNI). 
The low value for income can be justified by the considerable 
amount of unmeasured subsistence and nonmarket production 
in economies close to the minimum, not captured in the offi-
cial data.

Goalposts for the Human Development Index in this Report
Dimension
Life expectancy

Observed maximum

Minimum

20.0

Mean years of schooling

Expected years of schooling

Combined education index

Per capita income (PPP $)

83.4
(Japan, 2011)
13.1
(Czech Republic, 2005)
18.0
(capped at)
0.978
(New Zealand, 2010)
107,721
(Qatar, 2011)

the maximum. This is equivalent to applying equation 1 directly 
to the geometric mean of the two subcomponents.

Because each dimension index is a proxy for capabilities 
in  the  corresponding  dimension,  the  transformation  func-
tion from income to capabilities is likely to be concave (Anand 
and Sen 2000). Thus, for income the natural logarithm of the 
actual minimum and maximum values is used.

Step 2. Aggregating the subindices to produce the Human 
Development Index
The HDI is the geometric mean of the three dimension indices:
 
(2)

(ILife 1/3 . IEducation 1/3 . IIncome 1/3). 

 

 

 

 

 

Example: Viet Nam
Indicator
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Mean years of schooling (years)
Expected years of schooling (years)
GNI per capita (PPP $)

Note: Values are rounded.

Value
75.2
5.5
10.4
2,805

Life expectancy index =  75.2 – 20
83.4 – 20

 = 0.870

Mean years of schooling index =  5.5 – 0
13.1 – 0

 = 0.478

Expected years of schooling index = 10.4 – 0
18 – 0

 = 0.576

Education index = 

0.478 . 0.576 – 0

0.978 – 0

 = 0.503

Income index =  

ln(2,805) – ln(100)
ln(107,721) – ln(100)  = 0.478

Human Development Index = 3  0.870 . 0.503 . 0.478 = 0.593  

0

0

0

100

Having defined the minimum and maximum values, the sub-
indices are calculated as follows:

Dimension index =

actual value – minimum value

maximum value – minimum value

 

. 

(1)

For education, equation 1 is applied to each of the two subcom-
ponents, then a geometric mean of the resulting indices is created 
and finally, equation 1 is reapplied to the geometric mean of the 
indices using 0 as the minimum and the highest geometric mean 
of the resulting indices for the time period under consideration as 

Data sources
•	 Life expectancy at birth: UNDESA (2011)
•	 Mean  years  of  schooling:  HDRO  updates  (http://hdr.
undp.org/en/statistics/) based on UNESCO data on edu-
cation  attainment  (http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco) 
using the methodology outlined in Barro and Lee (2010a)
•	 Expected  years  of  schooling:  UNESCO  Institute  for  

Statistics (2011)

•	 GNI per capita: World Bank (2011a), IMF (2011), UNSD 

(2011) and UNDESA (2011)

168

Human development report 2011

Methodology used to express income
GNI is traditionally expressed in current terms. To make GNI 
comparable across time, GNI is converted from current to con-
stant terms by taking the value of nominal GNI per capita in 
purchasing power parity (PPP) terms for the base year (2005) 
and building a time series using the growth rate of real GNI 
per capita, as implied by the ratio of current GNI per capita in 
local currency terms to the GDP deflator.

Official PPPs are produced by the International Compari-
son Program (ICP), which periodically collects thousands of 
prices of matched goods and services in many countries. The 
last round of this exercise refers to 2005 and covers 146 coun-
tries. The World Bank produces estimates for years other than 
the ICP benchmark based on inflation relative to the United 
States. Because other international organizations—such as the 
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)—
quote the base year in terms of the ICP benchmark, the HDRO 
does the same.

To obtain the income value for 2011, IMF-projected GDP 
growth rates (based on constant terms) are applied to the most 

recent GNI values. The IMF-projected growth rates are calcu-
lated in local currency terms and constant prices rather than 
in PPP terms. This avoids mixing the effects of the PPP conver-
sion with those of real growth of the economy.

estimating missing values
For a small number of countries that were missing one out of 
four indicators, the HDRO filled the gap by estimating the 
missing  value  using  cross-country  regression  models.  The 
details of the models used are available at http://hdr.undp.org/
en/statistics/understanding/issues/.

In this Report, the PPP conversion rates were estimated 
for  three  countries  (Cuba,  Occupied  Palestinian  Territory 
and Palau), expected years of schooling were estimated for five 
countries (Barbados, Haiti, Montenegro, Singapore and Turk-
menistan) and mean years of schooling were estimated for eight 
countries (Antigua and Barbuda, Eritrea, Grenada, Kiribati, 
St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, 
and Vanuatu). This brought the total number of countries in 
the HDI in 2011 up to 187, from 169 in 2010.

Technical note 2. calculating the inequality-adjusted human Development index

The Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI) 
adjusts the Human Development Index (HDI) for inequality 
in the distribution of each dimension across the population. It 
is based on a distribution-sensitive class of composite indices 
proposed by Foster, Lopez-Calva, and Szekely (2005), which 
draws on the Atkinson (1970) family of inequality measures. 
It is computed as a geometric mean of geometric means, calcu-
lated across the population for each dimension separately (for 
details, see Alkire and Foster 2010).

The IHDI accounts for inequalities in HDI dimensions by 
“discounting” each dimension’s average value according to its 
level of inequality. The IHDI equals the HDI when there is 
no inequality across people but falls further below the HDI 
as inequality rises. In this sense, the IHDI is the actual level 
of human development (taking into account inequality), while 
the HDI can be viewed as an index of the “potential” human 
development that could be achieved if there was no inequality. 
The “loss” in potential human development due to inequality 
is the difference between the HDI and the IHDI and can be 
expressed as a percentage.

Data sources
Since  the  HDI  relies  on  country-level  aggregates  such  as 
national accounts for income, the IHDI must draw on alter-
native sources of data to obtain insights into the distribution. 
The  distributions  have  different  units—life  expectancy  is 

distributed across a hypothetical cohort, while years of school-
ing and income are distributed across individuals.

Inequality in the distribution of HDI dimensions is esti-

mated for:
•	 Life expectancy, using data from abridged life tables pro-
vided by UNDESA (2011). This distribution is grouped in 
age intervals (0–1, 1–5, 5–10, ... , 85+), with the mortality 
rates and average age at death specified for each interval.

•	 Mean years of schooling, using household survey data har-
monized in international databases, including the Luxem-
bourg Income Study, EUROSTAT’s European Union Sur-
vey of Income and Living Conditions, the World Bank’s 
International Income Distribution Database, the United 
Nations  Children’s  Fund’s  Multiple  Indicators  Cluster 
Survey, ICF Macro’s Demographic and Health Survey, the 
World Health Organization’s World Health Survey and 
the United Nations University’s World Income Inequal-
ity Database.

•	 Disposable  household  income  or  consumption  per 
capita using the above listed databases and household 
surveys —or for a few countries, income imputed based 
on an asset index matching methodology using house-
hold survey asset indices (Harttgen and Vollmer 2011).
A  full  account  of  data  sources  used  for  estimating 
inequality  in  2011  is  given  at  http://hdr.undp.org/en/
statistics/ihdi/.

Technical noTes

169

computing the inequality-adjusted human 
Development index
There are three steps to computing the IHDI.

Step 1. Measuring inequality in the dimensions of the 
Human Development Index
The IHDI draws on the Atkinson (1970) family of inequality 
measures and sets the aversion parameter ε equal to 1.1 In this 
case the inequality measure is A = 1 – g/µ, where g is the geo-
metric mean and µ is the arithmetic mean of the distribution. 
This can be written as:

Step 3. Combining the dimension indices to calculate the 
Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index
The IHDI is the geometric mean of the three dimension indi-
ces adjusted for inequality. First, the IHDI that includes the 
unlogged income index (IHDI*) is calculated:

IHDI* =  3  I *Life . I*Education . I *Income =

3   (1– ALife) . ILife . (1– AEducation) . IEducation  . (1– AIncome) . IIncome*

.
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  Ax = 1 –  

n  X1 …Xn

X–

 

The HDI based on unlogged income index (HDI*) is then 

calculated:

(1)

HDI* =  3  ILife . IEducation . IIncome*   
 

.

where {X1 …, Xn} denotes the underlying distribution in the 
dimensions of interest. Ax is obtained for each variable (life 
expectancy, mean years of schooling and disposable income or 
consumption per capita).2

The geometric mean in equation 1 does not allow zero val-
ues. For mean years of schooling one year is added to all valid 
observations  to  compute  the  inequality.  Income  per  capita 
outliers—extremely high incomes as well as negative and zero 
incomes—were dealt with by truncating the top 0.5 percentile 
of the distribution to reduce the influence of extremely high 
incomes and by replacing the negative and zero incomes with 
the minimum value of the bottom 0.5 percentile of the distri-
bution of positive incomes. Sensitivity analysis of the IHDI is 
given in Kovacevic (2010).

Step 2. Adjusting the dimension indices for inequality
The mean achievement in an HDI dimension, X–, is adjusted 
for inequality as follows: 

X– . (1 – Ax) = n  X1 …Xn .

Thus the geometric mean represents the arithmetic mean 

reduced by the inequality in distribution.

The inequality-adjusted dimension indices are obtained 
from the HDI dimension indices, Ix, by multiplying them by 
(1 – Ax), where Ax , defined by equation 1, is the corresponding 
Atkinson measure:

I *x = (1 – Ax) . Ix .

The inequality-adjusted income index, I *Income, is based on 
the unlogged GNI index, IIncome*. This enables the IHDI to 
account for the full effect of income inequality.

The percentage loss to the HDI* due to inequalities in each 

dimension is calculated as:

Loss = 1 – IHDI*
HDI*

  = 1 – 3  (1–ALife) . (1–AEducation) . (1–AIncome) .

Assuming  that  the  percentage  loss  due  to  inequality  in 
income distribution is the same for both average income and 
its logarithm, the IHDI is then calculated as:
IHDI =  IHDI*
HDI*

 . HDI =  3 (1–ALife) . (1–AEducation) . (1–AIncome) . HDI.

notes on methodology and caveats
The IHDI is based on an index that satisfies subgroup con-
sistency. This ensures that improvements or deteriorations 
in the distribution of human development within a certain 
group of society (while human development remains con-
stant in the other groups) will be reflected in changes in the 
overall measure of human development. This index is also 
path independent, which means that the order in which 
data are aggregated across individuals, or groups of indi-
viduals, and across dimensions yields the same result—so 
there is no need to rely on a particular sequence or a single 
data source. This allows estimation for a large number of 
countries.

The main disadvantage is that the IHDI is not associa-
tion sensitive, so it does not capture overlapping inequali-
ties. To make the measure association-sensitive, all the data 
for each individual must be available from a single survey 
source, which is not currently possible for a large number of 
countries.

170

Human development report 2011

Example: Peru

Life expectancy
Mean years of schooling 
Expected years of 
schooling 
Education index
Logarithm of gross 
national income
Gross national income

Indicator

74.0
8.7
12.9

9.03

Dimension 

index
0.852
0.662
0.717

0.704
0.634

Inequality  
measure 

(A1)
0.148

Inequality-adjusted 

index

(1–0.148) ∙ 0.852 = 0.728

Human Development  

Index

Inequality-adjusted Human 

Development Index

Loss 
%

HDI with 
unlogged 
income

3  0.852 . 0.704 . 0.077 = 0.359 3  0.728 . 0.535 . 0.054 = 0.275

1 – 0.275 / 0.359  

= 0.232

HDI

3  0.852 . 0.704 . 0.634 = 0.725 (0.275 / 0.359) . 0.725 = 0.557

0.240

(1–0.240) ∙ 0.704 = 0.535

Note: Values are rounded.

      8,389

0.077

0.300

(1–0.300) ∙ 0.077 = 0.054

Technical note 3. calculating the Gender inequality index 

The  Gender  Inequality  Index  (GII)  reflects    gender-based 
disadvantage  in  three  dimensions—reproductive  health, 
empowerment and the labour market—for as many countries 
as data of reasonable quality allow. The index shows the loss 
in potential human development due to inequality between 
female and male achievements in these dimensions. It var-
ies between 0—when women and men fare equally—and 1, 
where one gender fares as poorly as possible in all measured 
dimensions. 

It is computed using the association-sensitive inequality 
measure suggested by Seth (2009). The index is based on the 
general mean of general means of different orders—the first 
aggregation is by the geometric mean across dimensions; these 
means,  calculated  separately  for  women  and  men,  are  then 
aggregated using a harmonic mean across genders. 

parliamentary seats held by women, attainment at secondary 
and higher education levels, and labour market participation 
rate. Female parliamentary representation of countries report-
ing zero is coded as 0.1 percent because even in countries with-
out female members of the national parliaments, women have 
some political influence.

Because higher maternal mortality suggests poorer maternal 
health, for the maternal mortality ratio the maximum value is 
truncated at 1,000 deaths per 100,000 births and the minimum 
value is truncated at 10. It is assumed that countries where mater-
nal mortality ratios exceed 1,000 do not differ in their inability 
to create conditions and support for maternal health and that 
countries with 1–10 deaths per 100,000 births are performing at 
essentially the same level and that differences are random.

Sensitivity analysis of the GII is given in Gaye et al. (2010).

Data sources
•	 Maternal  mortality  ratio  (MMR):  WHO,  UNICEF, 

UNFPA and World Bank (2010) 

•	 Adolescent fertility rate (AFR): UNDESA (2011) 
•	 Share of parliamentary seats held by each sex (PR): Inter-

parliamentary Union’s Parline database (2011) 

•	 Attainment at secondary and higher education (SE) levels: 
HDRO (2011) updates of Barro and Lee (2010b) estimates 
based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics data on educa-
tion attainment (http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/)  
•	 Labour market participation rate (LFPR): ILO (2011)

computing the Gender inequality index
There are five steps to computing the GII.

Step 1. Treating zeros and extreme values
Because a geometric mean cannot have a zero value, a mini-
mum value must be set for all component indicators. The mini-
mum is set at 0.1 percent for adolescent fertility rate, share of 

Step 2. Aggregating across dimensions within each gender 
group, using geometric means
Aggregating across dimensions for each gender group by the 
geometric mean makes the GII association sensitive (see Seth 
2009).

For women and girls, the aggregation formula is

GF =  3    

10

MMR   

.

1
AFR   

 1/2 . (PRF . SEF) 1/2 . LFPRF  ,

and for men and boys the formula is

GM =  3 1 . (PRM . SEM) 1/2 . LFPRM .

The rescaling by 0.1 of the maternal mortality ratio in the 
aggregation formula for women and girls is needed to account 
for the truncation of the maternal mortality ratio minimum 
at 10. This is a new adjustment introduced in Human Develop-
ment Report 2011.3

Technical noTes

171

Step 3. Aggregating across gender groups, using a 
harmonic mean
The female and male indices are aggregated by the harmonic 
mean to create the equally distributed gender index
–1
 

(GF)–1 + (GM)–1

HARM (GF , GM) = 

 .

2

Using  the  harmonic  mean  of  geometric  means  within 
groups captures the inequality between women and men and 
adjusts for association between dimensions.

Step 4. Calculating the geometric mean of the arithmetic 
means for each indicator
The reference standard for computing inequality is obtained by 
aggregating female and male indices using equal weights (thus 
treating the genders equally) and then aggregating the indices 
across dimensions:

GF, M =  3   Health . Empowerment . LFPR

where  Health =   

10

MMR   

.

1
AFR   

+ 1   /2,

Empowerment = (   PRF . SEF +    PRM . SEM)/2,  and

LFPR = LFPRF + LFPRM

2   

 .

Health should not be interpreted as an average of corre-
sponding female and male indices but as half the distance 
from  the  norms  established  for  the  reproductive  health 
indicators—fewer  maternal  deaths  and  fewer  adolescent 
pregnancies.

Female

Male

F + M

2

Step 5. Calculating the Gender Inequality Index
Comparing the equally distributed gender index to the refer-
ence standard yields the GII,

1 – HARM (GF , GM )
  

––
GF, M   

.

Example: Lesotho
Health

Empowerment

Labour market

Parliamentary 
representation

Attainment at 

secondary 
and higher 
education

Labour market 
participation 

rate

Adolescent 

fertility  

rate 

73.5

na

0.229

0.771

0.243

0.203

0.719

0.787

Maternal 
mortality  

ratio 

530

na

(

10
530   

)

(

1
73.5

)

+ 1
 

 

2 

 = 0.508

0.229 . 0.243  +    0.771 . 0.203

0.719 + 0.787

2

= 0.316

2

= 0.743

na is not applicable.

Using the above formulas, it is straightforward to obtain:

GF    0.134 = 3   

10
.
530   

1
73.5   

      0.229 . 0.243 . 0.719

GM    0.675 = 3   1 .    0.771 . 0.203 . 0.787

GF, M    0.492 = 3  0.508 . 0.316 . 0.743
– –

 
HARM (GF , GM )     0.230= 

 

1
2   

1

0.134

+

1

0.675

–1
 

GII 

1 – (0.230/0.492) = 0.532.

Technical note 4. calculating the Multidimensional Poverty index 

The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) identifies multiple 
deprivations at the individual level in education, health and 
standard of living. It uses micro data from household surveys, 
and—unlike  the  Inequality-adjusted  Human  Development 
Index—all  the  indicators  needed  to  construct  the  measure 
must come from the same survey. More details can be found in 
Alkire and Santos (2010).

Methodology 
Each person is assigned a deprivation score according to his or 
her household’s deprivations in each of the 10 component indi-
cators. The maximum score is 100 percent, with each dimen-
sion equally weighted (thus the maximum score in each dimen-
sion is 33.3 percent). The education and health dimensions 

have two indicators each, so each component is worth 5/3 (or 
16.7 percent). The standard of living dimension has six indica-
tors, so each component is worth 5/9 (or 5.6 percent).

The thresholds are as follows: 

•	 Education: having no household member who has com-
pleted  five  years  of  schooling  and  having  at  least  one 
school-age  child  (up  to  grade  8)  who  is  not  attending 
school. 

•	 Health: having at least one household member who is mal-

nourished and having had one or more children die. 

•	 Standard of living: not having electricity, not having access 
to clean drinking water, not having access to adequate sani-
tation, using “dirty” cooking fuel (dung, wood or charcoal), 
having a home with a dirt floor, and owning no car, truck 

172

Human development report 2011

or similar motorized vehicle while owning at most one of 
these assets: bicycle, motorcycle, radio, refrigerator, tele-
phone or television. 
To identify the multidimensionally poor, the deprivation 
scores for each household are summed to obtain the household 
deprivation, c. A cut-off of 33.3 percent, which is the equivalent 
of one-third of the weighted indicators, is used to distinguish 
between the poor and nonpoor. If c is 33.3 percent or greater, 
that household (and everyone in it) is multidimensionally poor. 
Households with a deprivation score greater than or equal to 
20 percent but less than 33.3 percent are vulnerable to or at 
risk of becoming multidimensionally poor. Households with 
a deprivation score of 50 percent or higher are severely multi-
dimensionally poor.

The MPI value is the product of two measures: the multi-
dimensional headcount ratio and the intensity (or breadth) of 
poverty. 

The headcount ratio, H, is the proportion of the population 

who are multidimensionally poor: 
H =  q
n       

where q is the number of people who are multidimensionally 
poor and n is the total population.

The intensity of poverty, A, reflects the proportion of the 
weighted component indicators in which, on average, poor peo-
ple are deprived. For poor households only, the deprivation scores 
are summed and divided by the total number of poor persons: 

A = 

qc
∑ 1
q

 ,

 

where c is the deprivation score that the poor experience.

Weighted count of deprivations in household 1: 

  1 .   

5
3

+

1 .      

5
9

  = 2.22,

example using hypothetical data

Indicators
Household size
Education
No one has completed five years of schooling
At least one school-age child not enrolled in 
school
Health
At least one member is malnourished
One or more children have died 
Living conditions
No electricity
No access to clean drinking water
No access to adequate sanitation
House has dirt floor
Household uses “dirty” cooking fuel (dung, 
firewood or charcoal)
Household has no car and owns at most one 
of: bicycle, motorcycle, radio, refrigerator, 
telephone or television 
Results
Household deprivation score, c (sum of 
each deprivation multiplied by its weight)
Is the household poor (c > 33.3%)? 

Household
3
2
7
5

1

1

0
1

1
0
1
0

1

1

0

0

1
0

1
1
1
0

1

0

1
4

0

0

0
1

0
0
0
0

1

0

4
4

1

0

0
1

1
0
0
0

1

1

Weights

5/3 or 16.7%

5/3 or 16.7%

5/3 or 16.7%
5/3 or 16.7%

5/9 or 5.6%
5/9 or 5.6%
5/9 or 5.6%
5/9 or 5.6%

5/9 or 5.6%

5/9 or 5.6%

22.2% 72.2% 38.9% 50.0%
Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Note: 1 indicates deprivation in the indicator; 0 indicates nondeprivation.

Headcount ratio (H) = 

7 + 5 + 4
4 + 7 + 5 + 4     = 0.800
(80 percent of people live in poor households)

Intensity of poverty (A) = 
(7.22/10 . 7) + (3.89/10 . 5) + (5.00/10 . 4)

( 7 + 5 + 4 )

  = 0.5625

(the  average  poor  person  is  deprived  in  56  percent  of  the 
weighted indicators). 

which is equal to a deprivation score of 2.22/10 = 0.222, or 
22.2 percent.

MPI = H . A = 0.450

NOTES
1  The inequality aversion parameter affects the degree to which lower achievements are 

emphasized and higher achievements are de-emphasized.

2  Ax is estimated from survey data using the survey weights,

  Âx = 1 – 

w1 … X n
wn
X 1
n wi Xi
∑1

 ,  where   ∑1

nwi  = 1. 

However, for simplicity and without loss of generality, equation 1 is referred to as the 
Atkinson measure.

3  The GII trends calculated at five-year intervals for 1995–2011 using consistent data and 

methodology are available at http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/gii.

Technical noTes

173

Regions

Arab States (20 countries or areas)
Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Occupied Palestinian Territory, Oman, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen

East Asia and the Pacific (24 countries)
Cambodia, China, Fiji, Indonesia, Kiribati, Democratic People’s Rep. of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Marshall 
Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, 
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Viet Nam

Europe and Central Asia1 (30 countries)
Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Republic of Moldova, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, 
Slovenia, Tajikistan, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan

Latin America and the Caribbean (33 countries)
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, 
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, 
Uruguay, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

South Asia (9 countries)
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa (45 countries)
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, 
Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, São Tomé and 
Príncipe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Swaziland, United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Note: Countries included in aggregates for Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States follow UN classifications, which are available at http://www.unohrlls.org/. 
HDRO does not include Bahrain, Barbados or Singapore in the aggregates for Small Island Developing States.
1. The former socialist countries of Europe and Central Asia that have undergone a political and economic transformation since 1989–1991 as well as Cyprus and Turkey.

174

Human development report 2011

statistical references

ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2011. Asian Development 

Emerson, J., D. C. Esty, M. A. Levy, C. H. Kim, V. Mara, A. de 

Outlook 2011: South-South Economic Links. Mandaluyong 
City, Philippines. www.adb.org/documents/books/
ado/2011/ado2011.pdf.

Sherbinin, and T. Srebotnjak. 2010. “2010 Environmental 
Performance Index.” New Haven, CT: Yale Center for 
Environmental Law and Policy. www.epi.yale.edu.

IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and 
Natural Resources). 2010. “IUCN Red List of Threatened 
Species. Version 2010.4.” Geneva. www.iucnredlist.org. 
Accessed 15 March 2011.

Alkire, S., and J. Foster. 2010. “Designing the Inequality-
Adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI).” Human 
Development Research Paper 28. UNDP–HDRO, New York. 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2010/papers/
HDRP_2010_28.pdf.

Alkire, S., J.M. Roche, M.E. Santos, and S. Seth. 2011. 
“Multidimensional Poverty Index: New Results, Time 
Comparisons and Group Disparities.” Human Development 
Research Paper. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

Alkire, S., and M. Santos. 2010. “Acute Multidimensional 

Poverty: A New Index for Developing Countries.” Human 
Development Research Paper 11. UNDP–HDRO, New York. 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2010/papers/
HDRP_2010_11.pdf.

Anand, S., and A. Sen. 2000. “The Income Component 

of the Human Development Index.” Journal of Human 
Development and Capabilities 1 (1): 83–106.

Atkinson, A. 1970. “On the Measurement of Economic 

Inequality.” Journal of Economic Theory 2 (3): 244–63.

Barro, R. J., and J. W. Lee. 2010a. A New Data Set of 

Educational Attainment in the World, 1950–2010. NBER 
Working Paper 15902. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research. www.nber.org/papers/w15902.

———. 2010b. “Barro-Lee Dataset.” Korea University, Seoul. 

www.barrolee.com.

Boden, T. A., G. Marland, and R. J. Andres. 2010. “Global, 

Regional, and National Fossil-Fuel CO2 Emissions.” 
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory, TN. http://cdiac.ornl.gov/trends/emis/
overview_2007.html.

CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters). 

2011. “EM-DAT: The International Disaster Database.” 
Université catholique de Louvain, Belgium. www.emdat.be.

EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and 

Development). 2011. “Regional Economic Prospects in 
EBRD Countries of Operations: May 2011.” London. www.
ebrd.com/downloads/research/REP/rep.pdf.

ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the 

Caribbean). 2011. Preliminary Overview of the Economies 
of Latin America and the Caribbean. Santiago. www.eclac.
org/cgi-bin/getProd.asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/4/41974/
P41974.xml&xsl=.

Eurostat. 2010. “European Union Statistics on Income and 

Klugman, J., F. Rodriguez, and H. J. Choi. 2011. “The 

Living Conditions.” European Commission, Brussels. 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/
microdata/eu_silc.

FAO (Food and Agricultural Organization). 2011. 
“ResourceSTAT.” Rome. http://faostat.fao.org/.

———. Forthcoming. State of Land and Water 2011. Rome.

Foster, J., L. López-Calva, and M. Szekely. 2005. “Measuring 
the Distribution of Human Development: Methodology and 
an Application to Mexico.” Journal of Human Development 
and Capabilities. 6 (1):5–25.

Gallup World Poll. 2011. “Gallup WorldView.” Washington, DC. 

http://worldview.gallup.com. Accessed 15 June 2011.

Gaye, A., J. Klugman, M. Kovacevic, S. Twigg, and E. Zambrano. 

2010. “Measuring Key Disparities in Human Development: 
The Gender Inequality Index.” Human Development Research 
Paper 46. UNDP–HDRO, New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/
reports/global/hdr2010/papers/HDRP_2010_21.pdf.

Global Footprint Network. 2010. “Global Footprint Network.” 
Oakland, CA. www.footprintnetwork.org. Accessed 15 April 
2011.

Harttgen, K., and S. Vollmer. 2011. “Inequality Decomposition 
without Income or Expenditure Data: Using an Asset Index 
to Simulate Household Income.” Human Development 
Research Paper. UNDP–HDRO, New York.

ICF Macro. 2011. “Measure DHS (Demographic and Health 

Survey).” Calverton, MD. www.measuredhs.com.

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2011. World Energy Balances. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and 
IEA, Paris. http://data.iea.org. Accessed 15 June 2011.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2011. Key Indicators 

on the Labour Market, 6th edition. Geneva. http://kilm.ilo.
org/KILMnetBeta/default2.asp. Accessed 15 March 2011.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2011. “World Economic 
Outlook database, April 2011.” Washington, DC. www.imf.
org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2011/01/weodata/index.aspx. 
Accessed 15 April 2011.

IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union). 2011. “Women in National 
Parliaments: World Classification.” Geneva. www.ipu.org/
wmn-e/classif.htm. Accessed 15 March 2011.

HDI 2010: New Controversies, Old Critiques.” Human 
Development Research Paper 1. UNDP–HDRO, New York. 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2011/papers/
HDRP_2011_01.pdf.

Kovacevic, M. 2010. “Measurement of Inequality in Human 

Development—A Review.” Human Development Research 
Paper 35. UNDP–HDRO, New York. http://hdr.undp.org/en/
reports/global/hdr2010/papers/HDRP_2010_35.pdf.

LIS (Luxembourg Income Study). 2009. “Luxembourg Income 

Study Project.” www.lisproject.org/techdoc.htm.

OECD, AfDB, UNECA, and UNDP (Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, African Development 
Bank, United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 
and United Nations Development Programme). 2011. 
African Economic Outlook 2011. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. www.
africaneconomicoutlook.org.

Seth, S. 2009. “Inequality, Interactions, and Human 

Development.” Journal of Human Development and 
Capabilities 10 (3): 375–96.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and 

Social Affairs). 2010. World Urbanization Prospects: The 
2009 Revision. New York. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/
index.htm. Accessed 15 May 2011.

———. 2011. World Population Prospects: The 2010 

Revision. New York. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm. 
Accessed 15 May 2011.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme)–Human 

Development Report Office. 2011. “The Human 
Development Index (HDI).” New York. http://hdr.undp.org/
en/statistics/hdi/.

UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission 

for Asia and the Pacific). 2011. Economic and Social 
Survey of Asia and the Pacific—Sustaining Dynamism 
and Inclusive Development: Connectivity in the Region and 
Productive Capacity in Least Developed Countries. Bangkok. 
www.unescap.org/pdd/publications/survey2011/download/
Econimic-and-Social-Survey-2011.pdf.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and 

Cultural Organization) Institute for Statistics. 2011. 
“UNESCO Institute for Statistics: Data Centre.” http://stats.
uis.unesco.org. Accessed 15 May 2011.

sTaTisTical RefeRences

175

UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social 

Commission for Western Asia). 2011. “Summary of 
the Survey of Economic and Social Developments in the 
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia Region 
2010–2011.” Geneva. www.escwa.un.org/information/
publications/edit/upload/EDGD-11-2.pdf.

Income Inequality Database, Version 2.0c, May 2008. 
Helsinki. www.wider.unu.edu/research/Database/en_GB/
database/.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2000–2010. World Health 

Survey. Geneva. www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/en/.

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2000–2010. 

Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. New York. www.unicef.
org/statistics/index_24302.html.

———. 2009. “Environmental Burden of Disease: Country 
Profiles.” Geneva. www.who.int/quantifying_ehimpacts/
countryprofiles.

———. 2011. The State of the World’s Children. New York. 

www.unicef.org/sowc2011/. Accessed 15 May 2011.

UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2011. National 
Accounts Main Aggregates Database. New York. http://
unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/. Accessed 15 April 2011.

UNU-WIDER (United Nations University, World Institute 

for Development Economics Research). 2008. World 

———. 2010a. World Health Statistics 2010. World Health 

Organization Statistical Information System. Geneva. www.
who.int/whois/whostat/2010/en/index.html. Accessed 
15 April 2011.

———. 2010b. World Malaria Report. Geneva. www.who.int/
malaria/publications/atoz/9789241564106/en/index.html.

———. 2011. “DengueNet.” Geneva. www.who.int/denguenet.

WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA (World Health Organization, United 
Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations Population 
Fund), and World Bank. 2010. Trends in Maternal 
Mortality 1990–2008. Geneva. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2010/9789241500265_eng.pdf.

World Bank. 2010. International Income Distribution Database. 

Washington, DC.

———. 2011a. World Development Indicators database. 

Washington, DC. http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/
world-development-indicators. Accessed 15 May 2011.

———. 2011b. Global Economic Prospects—June 2011. 

Washington, DC. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/
EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTDECPROSPECTS/EXTGBLPROSPECTS 
APRIL/0,,contentMDK:20665990~menuPK:659178~ 
pagePK:2470434~piPK:4977459~theSitePK:659149,00.
html.

176

Human development report 2011

GREATEST

E Q UITY
E Q UITY

S
S

U
U

S
S

T
T

Human capabilities
supported equitably

and sustainably

A
A
I
I
N
N

A
A

B
B
I
I
L
L
I
I
T
T

Y
Y

Sustainable
Sustainable

but not equitable
but not equitable

LEAST

Equitable
Equitable,

but not sustainable
but not sustainable

LEAST

Unsustainable
Unsustainable
and inequitable
and inequitable

This Report explores the integral links between environmental sustainability and equity and shows that these 
are critical to expanding human freedoms for people today and in generations to come. The point of departure 
is that the remarkable progress in human development over recent decades that the Human Development 
Report  has  documented  cannot  continue  without  bold  global  steps  to  reduce  environmental  risks  and 
inequality.  We  identify  pathways  for  people,  communities,  countries  and  the  international  community  to 
promote environmental sustainability and equity in mutually reinforcing ways.

The cover diagram symbolizes how different policies can have different implications for sustainability and 
equity. Whenever available, we should prefer solutions that are good for the environment while also promot-
ing equity and human development. Pursuing sustainability and equity jointly does not require that they be 
mutually reinforcing. In many instances they will not be. Sometimes the most feasible alternative involves 
trade-offs between sustainability and equity and requires explicit and careful consideration. No trade-off is 
isolated  from  a  society’s  structural  and  institutional  conditions,  and  so  we  must  address  the  underlying 
constraints and identify positive synergies between sustainability and equity. This Report is aimed not only at 
ﬁnding positive synergies but also at identifying ways to build them.

Global, Regional and National Human Development reports
Human Development Reports: (cid:31)e annual global Human Development Reports (HDRs) have been published by UNDP 
since 1990 as intellectually independent and empirically grounded analyses of development issues, trends, progress and 
policies. Resources related to the 2011 Report and earlier HDRs are available free of charge at hdr.undp.org, including full 
texts and summaries in major UN languages, summaries of consultations and network discussions, the Human Develop-
ment Research Paper Series and HDR news bulletins and other public information materials. Also available are statistical 
indicators, other data tools, interactive maps, country fact sheets and additional information associated with the HDRs.

Regional Human Development Reports: More than 40 editorially autonomous HDRs with a regional focus have been 
produced in the past two decades with support from UNDP’s regional bureaus. With o(cid:30)en provocative analyses and 
policy advocacy, these reports have examined such critical issues as civil liberties and the empowerment of women in the 
Arab States, corruption in Asia and the Paci(cid:29)c, treatment of the Roma and other minorities in Central Europe and the 
inequitable distribution of wealth in Latin America and the Caribbean.

National Human Development Reports: Since the release of the (cid:29)rst National HDR in 1992, National HDRs have been 
produced  in  140  countries  by  local  editorial  teams  with  UNDP  support.  (cid:31)ese  reports—more  than  650  have  been 
published to date—bring a human development perspective to national policy concerns through locally managed consul-
tations and research. National HDRs o(cid:30)en focus on issues of gender, ethnicity or rural-urban divides to help identify 
inequality, measure progress and detect early warning signs of potential con(cid:28)ict. Because these reports are grounded in 
national needs and perspectives, many have had substantial in(cid:28)uence on national policies, including strategies for achiev-
ing the Millennium Development Goals and other human development priorities.

For more information on National and Regional HDRs, including related training and reference resources, see
hdr.undp.org/en/nhdr/.

1990  Concept and Measurement of Human Development
1991  Financing Human Development
1992  Global Dimensions of Human Development
1993  People’s Participation
1994  New Dimensions of Human Security
1995  Gender and Human Development
1996  Economic Growth and Human Development
1997  Human Development to Eradicate Poverty
1998  Consumption for Human Development
1999  Globalization with a Human Face
2000  Human Rights and Human Development
2001  Making New Technologies Work for Human Development
2002  Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented World
2003  Millennium Development Goals: A Compact among Nations to End Human Poverty
2004  Cultural Liberty in Today’s Diverse World
2005 
2006  Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global Water Crisis

Human Development Reports 1990–2010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2007/2008  Fighting Climate Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World
 
 

International Cooperation at a Crossroads: Aid, Trade and Security in an Unequal World

2009  Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development
2010  (cid:31)e Real Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development

For more information visit:
http://hdr.undp.org

KEY TO COUNTRIES
2011 HDI rank and change in rank from 2010 to 2011

172
70 ࢏ 1
96
32
148
60 ࢏ 1
45 ࢏ 1
86
2
19
91
53
42
146
47
65
18
93 ࢑ –1
167
141 ࢑ –1
108
74
118 ࢑ –1
84 ࢏ 1
33
55 ࢏ 1
181
185
139 ࢏ 2
150 ࢏ 1

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia, Plurinational State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 78 ࢑ –2
France
Gabon
Gambia

6
133
179
183 ࢑ –1
44
101
87 ࢏ 1
163
137
187
69 ࢑ –1
170
46 ࢑ –1
51
31
27
16
165 ࢑ –1
81 ࢑ –1
98 ࢏ 2
83
113 ࢑ –1
105
136 ࢑ –1
177
34
174
100 ࢑ –3
22

20
106
168

Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

75
9

135 ࢏ 1
29
67
131
178
176
117 ࢏ 2
158 ࢏ 1
121 ࢑ –1
13 ࢏ 1
38
14 ࢑ –1
134
124 ࢏ 1
88 ࢑ –1
132
7
17
24
79 ࢑ –1
12
95 ࢑ –1
68 ࢏ 1
143 ࢏ 1
122
15
63 ࢑ –1
126
138 ࢏ 1
43
71 ࢑ –1
160
182 ࢏ 1
64 ࢑ –10
8
40 ࢏ 1
25
151 ࢑ –2
171
61 ࢏ 3
109
175
36
159 ࢑ –1
77
57
116
111
110
54 ࢏ 1
130
184
149 ࢏ 1
120 ࢏ 1
157 ࢑ –1

3
5
129
186
156 ࢏ 1

1

Occupied Palestinian Territory
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania, United Republic of
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1

࢏

114
89
145
49
58 ࢏ 1
153 ࢑ –1
107
80 ࢏ 1
112 ࢏ 1
39
41 ࢑ –1
37
50
66
166
72
82
85 ࢑ –1
99
144 ࢑ –1
56 ࢏
2
155
59
52
180
26
35
21
142
123 ࢏ 1
23
97 ࢏ 1
169
104
140 ࢑ –2
10
11
119 ࢑ –1
127
152 ࢏ 1
103
147
162
90
62 ࢏ 1
94 ࢑ –1
92 ࢏ 3
102
161
76 ࢏ 3
30
28
4
48
115
125 ࢑ –2
73
128
154
164 ࢏ 1
173

NOTE
Arrows indicate upward or downward movement in the country’s ranking over 2010–2011 using consistent data and methodology; a blank indicates no change.

The great development challenge of the 21st century is to safeguard the right of generations today and in the future to 
live healthy and fulﬁlling lives. The 2011 Human Development Report offers important new contributions to the global 
dialogue on this challenge, showing how sustainability is inextricably linked to equity—to questions of fairness and 
social justice and of greater access to a better quality of life. 

Forecasts suggest that continuing failure to reduce the grave environmental risks and deepening inequalities threat-
ens to slow decades of sustained progress by the world’s poor majority—and even to reverse the global convergence 
in human development. Our remarkable progress in human development cannot continue without bold global steps to 
reduce both environmental risks and inequality. This Report identiﬁes pathways for people, local communities, coun-
tries and the international community to promote environmental sustainability and equity in mutually reinforcing ways.

New analysis shows how power imbalances and gender inequalities at the national level are linked to reduced access 
to clean water and improved sanitation, land degradation and illness and death due to air pollution, amplifying the 
effects associated with income disparities. Gender inequalities also interact with environmental outcomes and make 
them  worse.  At  the  global  level  governance  arrangements  often  weaken  the  voices  of  developing  countries  and 
exclude marginalized groups.

But there are alternatives to inequality and unsustainability. Investments that improve equity—for example, in access 
to  renewable  energy,  water  and  sanitation,  and  reproductive  healthcare—could  advance  both  sustainability  and 
human  development.  Stronger  accountability  and  democratic  processes  can  also  improve  outcomes.  Successful 
approaches rely on community management, broadly inclusive institutions and attention to disadvantaged groups. 
Beyond  the  Millennium  Development  Goals,  the  world  needs  a  development  framework  that  reﬂects  equity  and 
sustainability.  This  Report  shows  that  approaches  that  integrate  equity  into  policies  and  programmes  and  that 
empower people to bring about change in the legal and political arenas hold enormous promise. 

The ﬁnancing needed for development are many times greater than current ofﬁcial development assistance. Today’s 
spending on low-carbon energy sources, for example, is less than 2 percent of even the lowest estimate of need. 
Financing ﬂows need to be channeled towards the critical challenges of unsustainability and inequity. While market 
mechanisms and private funding will be vital, they must be supported and leveraged by proactive public investment. 
Closing the ﬁnancing gap requires innovative thinking, which this Report provides.

The Report also advocates reforms to promote equity and voice. We have a collective responsibility towards the least 
privileged among us today and in the future around the world—and a moral imperative to ensure that the present is 
not the enemy of the future. This Report can help us see the ways forward. 

ISBN 978-0-230-36331-1

www.palgrave.com

Human Development
Report 2011
Sustainability and Equity:
A Better Future for All

 

H
D
R
2
0
1
1

 
 

S
u
s
t
a
i

n
a
b

 

i
l
i
t
y
a
n
d
E
q
u

 

i
t
y

:

 

A
B
e
t
t
e
r
 

F
u
t
u
r
e

 
f
o
r
 
A

l
l

KEY TO COUNTRIES
2011 HDI rank and change in rank from 2005 to 2011

172
70 ࢏ 1
96
32
148
60 ࢏ 1
45 ࢏ 1
86
2
19
91
53
42
146
47
65
18
93 ࢑ –1
167
141 ࢑ –1
108
74
118 ࢑ –1
84 ࢏ 1
33
55 ࢏ 1
181
185
139 ࢏ 2
150 ࢏ 1

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia, Plurinational State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 78 ࢑ –2
France
Gabon
Gambia

6
133
179
183 ࢑ –1
44
101
87 ࢏ 1
163
137
187
69 ࢑ –1
170
46 ࢑ –1
51
31
27
16
165 ࢑ –1
81 ࢑ –1
98 ࢏ 2
83
113 ࢑ –1
105
136 ࢑ –1
177
34
174
100 ࢑ –3
22

20
106
168

Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China (SAR)
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway

75
9

135 ࢏ 1
29
67
131
178
176
117 ࢏ 2
158 ࢏ 1
121 ࢑ –1
13 ࢏ 1
38
14 ࢑ –1
134
124 ࢏ 1
88 ࢑ –1
132
7
17
24
79 ࢑ –1
12
95 ࢑ –1
68 ࢏ 1
143 ࢏ 1
122
15
63 ࢑ –1
126
138 ࢏ 1
43
71 ࢑ –1
160
182 ࢏ 1
64 ࢑ –10
8
40 ࢏ 1
25
151 ࢑ –2
171
61 ࢏ 3
109
175
36
159 ࢑ –1
77
57
116
111
110
54 ࢏ 1
130
184
149 ࢏ 1
120 ࢏ 1
157 ࢑ –1

3
5
129
186
156 ࢏ 1

1

Occupied Palestinian Territory
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania, United Republic of
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1

࢏

114
89
145
49
58 ࢏ 1
153 ࢑ –1
107
80 ࢏ 1
112 ࢏ 1
39
41 ࢑ –1
37
50
66
166
72
82
85 ࢑ –1
99
144 ࢑ –1
56 ࢏
2
155
59
52
180
26
35
21
142
123 ࢏ 1
23
97 ࢏ 1
169
104
140 ࢑ –2
10
11
119 ࢑ –1
127
152 ࢏ 1
103
147
162
90
62 ࢏ 1
94 ࢑ –1
92 ࢏ 3
102
161
76 ࢏ 3
30
28
4
48
115
125 ࢑ –2
73
128
154
164 ࢏ 1
173

NOTE
Arrows indicate upward or downward movement in the country’s ranking over 2005–2011 using consistent data and methodology; a blank indicates no change.

The great development challenge of the 21st century is to safeguard the right of generations today and in the future to 
live healthy and fulﬁlling lives. The 2011 Human Development Report offers important new contributions to the global 
dialogue on this challenge, showing how sustainability is inextricably linked to equity—to questions of fairness and 
social justice and of greater access to a better quality of life. 

Forecasts suggest that continuing failure to reduce the grave environmental risks and deepening inequalities threat-
ens to slow decades of sustained progress by the world’s poor majority—and even to reverse the global convergence 
in human development. Our remarkable progress in human development cannot continue without bold global steps to 
reduce both environmental risks and inequality. This Report identiﬁes pathways for people, local communities, coun-
tries and the international community to promote environmental sustainability and equity in mutually reinforcing ways.

New analysis shows how power imbalances and gender inequalities at the national level are linked to reduced access 
to clean water and improved sanitation, land degradation and illness and death due to air pollution, amplifying the 
effects associated with income disparities. Gender inequalities also interact with environmental outcomes and make 
them  worse.  At  the  global  level  governance  arrangements  often  weaken  the  voices  of  developing  countries  and 
exclude marginalized groups.

But there are alternatives to inequality and unsustainability. Investments that improve equity—for example, in access 
to  renewable  energy,  water  and  sanitation,  and  reproductive  healthcare—could  advance  both  sustainability  and 
human  development.  Stronger  accountability  and  democratic  processes  can  also  improve  outcomes.  Successful 
approaches rely on community management, broadly inclusive institutions and attention to disadvantaged groups. 
Beyond  the  Millennium  Development  Goals,  the  world  needs  a  development  framework  that  reﬂects  equity  and 
sustainability.  This  Report  shows  that  approaches  that  integrate  equity  into  policies  and  programmes  and  that 
empower people to bring about change in the legal and political arenas hold enormous promise. 

The ﬁnancing needed for development are many times greater than current ofﬁcial development assistance. Today’s 
spending on low-carbon energy sources, for example, is less than 2 percent of even the lowest estimate of need. 
Financing ﬂows need to be channeled towards the critical challenges of unsustainability and inequity. While market 
mechanisms and private funding will be vital, they must be supported and leveraged by proactive public investment. 
Closing the ﬁnancing gap requires innovative thinking, which this Report provides.

The Report also advocates reforms to promote equity and voice. We have a collective responsibility towards the least 
privileged among us today and in the future around the world—and a moral imperative to ensure that the present is 
not the enemy of the future. This Report can help us see the ways forward. 

ISBN 978-0-230-36331-1

www.palgrave.com

Human Development
Report 2011
Sustainability and Equity:
A Better Future for All

 

H
D
R
2
0
1
1

 
 

S
u
s
t
a
i

n
a
b

 

i
l
i
t
y
a
n
d
E
q
u

 

i
t
y

:

 

A
B
e
t
t
e
r
 

F
u
t
u
r
e

 
f
o
r
 
A

l
l

