 

 

 

 

Investing in Sustainable Cities: 
Challenges and Opportunities 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

International Development Finance Club 

Special Interest Group on Sustainable Urban Development 

October 2014 

 

 

© 2014 International Development Finance Club 

 

 

 

AUTHORS 

Masayo Terakado 

Office for Global Issues and Development Partnership   

Operations Strategy Department   

JICA – Japan International Cooperation Agency 

 

Holly K. Williams 

Institutional Funding 

Vicepresidency of Finance 

CAF – Development Bank of Latin America 

 

 

CONTRIBUTORS 

Agence Française de Développement (AFD) 

Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social (BNDES) 

Caisse de Dépôt et de Gestion (CDG) 

Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) 

Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 

KfW Bankengruppe (KfW) 

Korea Finance Corporation (KoFC) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Investing in Sustainable Cities:   
Challenges and Opportunities   

 

 

Contents                                                                                                                                         

 

 
Preface 

 

 ........................................................................................................................ ii 

Executive Summary .......................................................................................................... iii 

 

Chapter 1.  Why Sustainable Urban Development Matters ........................................... 1 

 

Chapter 2.  Defining sustainable urban development and setting standards ............. 5 

I.  Global public efforts to define the SUD concept ................................... 6 

II. 

The private sector ................................................................................ 7 

 

Chapter 3.  Policy formulation and urban planning ...................................................... 8 

I. 

Holistic SUD policies and strategies ..................................................... 8 

II.  Critical economic, social and environmental challenges .................... 11 

III.  Stakeholder coordination and participation ......................................... 17 

IV.  The role of Development Banks ......................................................... 18 

 

Chapter 4.  Financial Approaches ................................................................................. 21 

 

Chapter 5.  Service delivery and infrastructure management .................................... 25 

 

Chapter 6.  Promoting clean and sustainable technologies ....................................... 27 

 

Chapter 7.  Conclusion and way forward ..................................................................... 29 

 

Appendices  ...................................................................................................................... 31 

 

References 

 ................................................................................................................. 33 

 

 

 

i 

 

Preface                                                                                                                             

 
The International Development Finance Club (IDFC) has brought together 23 national, bilateral and regional 
development banks from Africa, Asia, Europe, and Latin America to pool their global expertise, best practices 

and in-depth local know-how on strategic topics of mutual interest.   

 

By  2050, 67%  of  the  world’s  population  is  expected  to  reside  in  urban areas.  Dynamic  transformations  will 
take  place  in  growing  cities  throughout  Africa,  Asia  and  the  rest  of  the  developing  world.  These  hubs  for 

innovation and output have already delivered substantial economic growth and helped alleviate poverty. For 

this reason, it will be vital to continue fostering high-productivity activities that benefit from agglomeration and 
scale  economies  in  emerging  cities.  At  the  same  time,  managing  the  likely  side  effects  of  urban 

expansion—congestion  and  overcrowding,  inequality,  high  prices  of  land  and  housing,  and  environmental 

degradation  will  also  be  necessary  to  ensure  that  economic  growth  is  sustainable  and  benefits  are  spread 
widely. 

 

In 2013, the IDFC created the Sustainable Urban Development Working Group, in order to help government 

officials,  development  agents  and  other  stakeholders  identify  bottlenecks,  and  propose  policy  solutions  to 

tackle the common challenges of rapid and growing urbanization. This paper, Investing in Sustainable Cities: 
Opportunities and Challenges, was developed by CAF-Development Bank of Latin America and JICA- Japan 

International  Cooperation  Agency,  in  the  hopes  of  promoting  more  comprehensive  dialogue  and 

solution-oriented actions aimed at improving urban planning and policy formulation, management capacities, 
coordination among stakeholders, and development finance mechanisms. 

 

 

ii 

Executive Summary                                         
 

 

 

                                         

 

Cities, home to 67% of the world’s population by 2050 (DESA, 2012), serve as a double-edged sword in the 

context of sustainable development. On one hand, they are important engines of economic growth –producing 

more than 80% of national income today (UNEP, 2012). On the other hand, cities are vulnerable to a number 
of social and environmental perils, particularly climate change related risks and other natural disasters. Some 

one billion people currently live in slums, with limited access to basic services (World Bank, 2013), and this 

number is expected to rise to two billion by 2030 (UN Habitat). Cities account for the vast majority of global 
energy use, natural resource consumption, green gas emissions and solid waste. Despite the challenges, well 

managed urban development could give rise to cities more conducive to economic growth and social inclusion, 

environmentally sustainable and resilient to climate change. 
 

Achieving  sustainable  urban  development  will  require  multidimensional  approaches  across  sectors.  Policy 
formulation  should  be  comprehensive,  able  to  adapt  to  evolving  development  needs,  and  incorporate 

incentives  that  promote  wide-ranging  stakeholder  coordination  and  participation.  Strategies  must  draw  on 

inter-linkages among different and sometimes conflicting demands; co-benefit measures that cater to multiple 
needs  through  single  policy  interventions,  using  minimal  resources,  should  be  emphasized.    Improved 

service delivery and infrastructure optimization  not only  improve community health and safety, but  heighten 

competiveness  and  generate  employment.  More  widespread  use  of  green  technologies  helps  maximize 
synergies  across  development  sectors,  integrating  urban  activities,  increasing  access  to  services  and 

enhancing  productivity.  Such initiatives  will  require  innovative  financing  approaches;  global  need  is  beyond 

the means of government spending capacities and official development assistance. Regulatory and financial 
frameworks must be appropriately designed to attract private sector investors and ensure the continued flow 

of resources to SUD projects. 

 

Responding to these challenges, the international development community has made headway on a variety of 

fronts.  On-going  discussions  at  the  UN  suggest  that  SUD  will  be  an  essential  pillar  of  the  Post  2015 

Development  Agenda.  A  number  of  international  organizations  and  donors  are  working  towards  better 
defining  sustainable  urban  development  and  setting  standards  –initiatives  that  not  only  help  diffuse  the 

concept but also create new markets and business opportunities. In order to accelerate and broaden support 

for SUD, the IDFC collaborates and coordinates with central and local governments, international institutions 
and private sector actors. Building on the Club´s extensive partnership network, members provide technical 

assistance and other tools to guide policy reform, urban strategy formulation and capacity development. They 

also  directly  finance  SUD  projects  all  over  the  world,  from  mass  transit  systems  and  eco-cities  to  violence 
prevention  and  CSR  recycling  programs.  IDFC  members  mobilize  a  wide  range  of  resources  at  both 

international and domestic levels, through the promotion of public-private partnerships, and the advancement 

of  joint  financing  endeavors,  providing  partial  risk  coverage  and  other  cost  reduction  mechanisms  to  help 
attract private capital to SUD projects in developing countries.

 

iii 

Chapter 1.  Why Sustainable Urban Development Matters 

 

 

 

Sustainable  development  will  be  at  the  core  of  the  Post-2015  Development  Agenda.  Having  witnessed 

alarming  environmental  degradation  and  climate  change  threats,  the  Report  of  the  High-Level  Panel  of 
Eminent  Persons  on the  Post-2015  Development  Agenda  (HLP)  urged the  international  community  to take 

decisive actions to modify  consumption and production patterns and to ensure the integration of the social, 

economic  and  environmental  dimensions  of  sustainability  in  pursuit  of  poverty  eradication  and  global 
prosperity. 

Figure 1: System approach towards Sustainable Development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Distribution of the World Urban Population by Major Area, 1950, 2011, and 2050 

(Source:  UNDESA,  2012) 

1 

 

 

 

Achieving  sustainable  development  will  require  multidimensional  approaches  across  sectors.  Among them, 

improving  sustainability  of  urban  development  is  critical  because  urban  cities,  home  to  67%  of  the  world’s 

population  by  2050  (UNDESA,  2012),  serve  as  a  double-edged  sword  in  the  context  of  sustainable 
development. On one hand, cities functions as the main engine of economic growth. Overall, 60% of global 

GDP can be attributed to 600 cities around the world (Richard Dobbs et al., 2011). In OECD countries, only 

2% of their regions, mostly the largest urban areas, generate roughly one-third of all growth (OECD, 2011). In 
India  and  China,  the  five  largest  cities’  economies  are  responsible  for  approximately  15%  of  national  GDP 

(UN Habitat, 2010). In general, there is complex but positive correlation between urbanization and economic 

growth.  Urbanization  is  often  characterized  by  agglomeration  of  production,  which  leads  to  increased 
productivity  and  greater  investment  interest.  Providing  more  employment  opportunities  and  higher  salaries 

brought by competitive labor market and elevated productivity further helps stimulate economies as a whole. 

A recent study by Credit Suisse found that every 5% point increase in urban population pushes up per capita 
economic activity by 10% (Credit Suisse, 2012). 

 

On the other hand, cities face a number of social and environmental challenges, growing in tandem with the 
today’s  unprecedented  pace  of  urbanization.1  Globally,  more  than  one  billion  people  live  in  slums  (World 
Bank, 2013), with limited access to basic social services, economic activities and, without security of tenure, 
many of them live under constant threat of eviction. Cities also contribute to global environmental pressures. 

They account for an estimated 67% of global energy use, and up to 70% of global green gas emissions (IEA, 

2008  and  2010),  mainly  due  to  the  concentration  of  industrial  production,  transportation  and  construction. 
There  are  also  mounting  problems  of  waste  management  control  and  water  and  air  pollution,  posing 

increasing threats to inhabitants’ health and well-being. In more than 65% of the cities in developing countries, 

water  is  not  properly  treated.  Between  30  to  50%  of  the  solid  waste  generated  within  most  cities  is  not 
collected (UN-HABITAT, 2009). All  these challenges are further exacerbated by rapid and unplanned  urban 

expansion  that  tends  to  increase  resource  inefficiencies  (e.g.  energy  and  land  use)  and  costs  for  social 

service delivery.   

 

Urban areas are also increasingly susceptible to natural disasters, mostly because of their common location 

along waterways, as well as population and infrastructure densities. As a UNISDR report suggests, the rate of 
natural disasters in urban areas has increased four-fold since 1975 (UNSDR, 2011), and in many disasters, 

the  poor  and  vulnerable  are  disproportionately  affected.  Furthermore,  according  to the  2011  UN  Report  on 

Urbanization,  of  the  more  than  1.4  billion  people  in  the  world  residing  in  urban  areas  of  at  least  1  million 
inhabitants, 60 per cent, or roughly 890 million people, were living in areas of high risk of exposure to at least 

one natural hazard (UNDESA, 2011). 

 

 

 
                                            
1  For example, it took European countries some 150 years to increase urbanization rates from 10 to 50%. Similar urban 
growth is now happening in some emerging Asian countries in just 55 to 95 years. 
(https://www.kfw-entwicklungsbank.de/PDF/Download-Center/PDF-Dokumente-Development-Research/PP_-Stadtentwic
klung_Qualitatives-Wachstum_EN.pdf) 

 

2 

Figure 3. Climate Change increases disaster risks 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Despite  these  challenges,  well  managed  urban  development  could  give  rise  to  cities  more  conducive  to 

economic  growth  and  social  inclusion,  environmentally  sustainable  and  resilient  to  climate  change,  natural 

disasters and other risks. The Sustainable Development Solutions Network’s Thematic Group on Sustainable 
Cities,  established  to  facilitate  the  discussion  on  the  Post-2015  under  the  UN  framework,  illustrates  the 
numerous  opportunities  available  to  cities  if  sustainable  urban  development 2   is  realized.  Given  the 
concentration  of  economic  activities  in  urban  areas  and  significant  investment  opportunities,  particularly  in 
emerging and developing economies, there is ample opportunity and motivation to reengineer cities in a more 

sustainable  manner.  By  all  accounts,  well-managed  cities  will  use  natural  resources  and  technology  more 

effectively,  which  will  have  a  positive  and  substantial  impact  on  society,  the  economy  and  the  environment 
(Aromar Revi and Cynthia Rosenzweig, 2013). 

 

What  is  required  to  achieve  sustainable  urban  development  varies  from  country  to  country,  but 
comprehensive interventions from up-stream policy and standard setting to down-stream project design and 

implementation are vital. Responding to these challenges, the international community has made headway on 

a  variety  of  fronts.  Defining  sustainable  urban  development  and  setting  standards  is  the  first  step  towards 
widely  diffusing  the  concept.  Standard-setting  is  also  instrumental  in  creating  new  markets.  A  number  of 

international  organizations  and  donors  are  advancing  their  work  in  these  areas  through  research  and 

dialogue. 

 

There  is  also  a  large  funding  gap  in  the  urban  development  sector.  Global  demand  for  infrastructure 
development  is  enormous,  exceeding  some  US$  5  trillion  annually  under  current  growth  projections. 

Furthermore,  an  additional  US$  700  billion  is  required  to  support  the  ambitious  goals  of  the  IEA  to  limit 

average global temperature increases to 2°C above pre-industrial levels (WEF, 2013). This large funding gap 
cannot be met by public spending  alone. Unfortunately, securing long-term private finance for infrastructure 

                                            
2    A standardized definition of ―sustainable urban development‖ has not yet been established at the international level. As 
a  working  definition,  the  IDFC  defines  it  as  urbanization  that  is  underpinned  by  social,  economic  and  environmental 
sustainability.  It  encompasses  the  development  of  basic  shelters  and  infrastructures,  social  service  delivery,  and  the 
promotion of economic activities including productive transformation at the individual firm level, all with due consideration 
to issues such as inclusiveness, security, energy and climate change, among others. See Chapter 2 for how the concept 
emerged and is perceived at the international community.   

 

3 

investment is becoming increasingly difficult due to recent economic downturns. Measures have been taken 

by  various  governments  to  leverage  private finance,  but  scale  and  pace  need  to be  upgraded  significantly. 

Public-sector support in green investments, if increased up to US$ 130 billion and targeted more effectively, 
could  mobilize  private  capital  in  the  range  of  US$  570  billion,  which  would  near  the  US$  700  billion  of 

incremental annual investment required to facilitate greener growth. However, greening the remaining US$ 5 

trillion  investment  requirement  in  the  business-as-usual  growth  projects  will  continue  to  present  a  major 
challenge; comprehensive policy reform and a stronger push toward investment-grade policy initiatives will be 
required to fully address demand (WEF, 2013). 

 

 

 

4 

 

Chapter 2. 

Defining sustainable urban development and setting standards 

 
The concept  of  the  sustainable city  first  emerged and  evolved  as Western  countries  were striving to tackle 
increasing  urban  sprawl  and  environmental  issues  in  the  1970s  .  The  concept,  now  known  as  Sustainable 

Urban Development (SUD), has gained even greater prevalence in recent years, as the world has begun to 

place  increasing  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  controlling  the  effects  of  rapid  urbanization  and  climate 
change.   

 

SUD  is  commonly  understood  as  an  approach  that  stresses  ―sustainability‖  as  its  main  feature,  embracing 

social and economic structures that do not compromise environmental aspects (UN-HABITAT, 2002). SUD is 

underpinned  by  mechanisms  aimed  at  producing  co-benefits  like  (i)  inclusive  economic  growth,  (ii) 
competitive economies, (iii) social fairness and equality, (iv) safe, secure and comfortable environments, and 

(v) environmental friendliness, including conservation of local and global public goods. 

 

 

Figure 4: Three Pillars for SUD (image) 

      Source:  Extracted  from  DESA,  2012  and  modified  by  JICA 

 

A recent study identified more than 200 varieties of SUD definitions across the globe (Keivani, 2010). It will be 
important to establish a clear definition and common standards for SUD if the concept is to be integrated into 
the mainstream. Efforts are already underway to address this issue, but more work remains to be done.     

 

 

 

5 

 

I.  Global public efforts to define the SUD concept 

The  concept  of  SUD  has  been  promoted  at  the  international  level  through  a  multitude  of  forums  and 
conferences, as a part of a global endeavor to help cities cope with emerging development challenges. The 

Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements and the Habitat Agenda, adopted at the Second UN Conference 

on Human Settlements (Habitat II) in Istanbul in 1996, emphasized that urban development should give ―full 
consideration  to  the  needs  and  necessities  of  achieving  economic  growth,  social  development  and 
environmental  protection  (The  Habitat  Agenda,  19963).  UN-HABITAT  has  since  accelerated  its  work  in 
monitoring  urban  conditions  worldwide  and  created  the  Global  Urban  Indicators  Database,  which  contains 
indicators covering 5 functions of cities: shelter, social development and eradication of poverty, environmental 

management,  economic  development  and  governance.  It  now  serves  as  a  global  framework  for  cities  to 

define and monitor their urban issues. More recently, SUD has also been discussed for the Post-Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs), the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Post 2015 Development 

Agenda. In fact, ―make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient‖ was incorporated as Goal 11 of 
the final proposal by The UN Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals in 2014.4  In tandem 
with the official negotiation process, numerous proposals for SUD goals and indicators have been put forward. 

A majority of these proposals consider SUD as a dynamic process and have emphasized the importance of 

integrating  economic,  social  and  environmental  objectives  and  encouraging  measures  to  mainstream 
comprehensive planning and management. 

 

The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has also contributed to constructing 

and  promoting  international  SUD  standards.  Building  on  member  countries’  abundant  experience  and 

knowledge,  the  OECD  has  created  systems  for  reviewing  city  development  policies  and  produced  policy 
papers  for  public  use  (OECD,  2012).  More  recently,  it  established  a  Green  Cities  Programme,  which 

developed  a  set  of  indicators  and  policy  recommendations  on  cities’  environmental  performance.  The 

Programme  provides  insights  into  the  types  of  green  urban  policies  that  are  most  likely  to  facilitate  certain 
desired  economic  results,  for  example, to incentivize  cities  to  promote  SUD.  The  Programme is  now  being 

extended to cities in developing countries to assist them  in establishing their urban green growth strategies 

and relevant indicators.   

 

International organizations have also collaborated with local governments to help establish standards for SUD. 

One example is the Global City Indicators Facility (GCIF) which was originally created by the World Bank and 
is  now  managed  by  the  Canadian  Government.  The  Facility  is  characterized  by  its  focus  on  the  soft 

component of SUD, featuring city services and quality of life factors. Establishing this set of indicators under a 

globally standardized methodology allows for global comparability of city performance -a positive step towards 
laying a foundation for SUD standards and a useful tool for knowledge-sharing. 

 

Work  in the  SUD  field  is  also progressing  at the  regional,  national  and  sub-national  levels.  The  situation  is 

diverse, reflecting complex and distinct histories, political systems and stages of development. One example 

of  evolution  at  the  national  level  is  Malaysia’s  Low  Carbon  Cities  Framework,  which  underpins  the 

                                            
3  http://ww2.unhabitat.org/declarations/habitat_agenda.asp 
See Appendix 1 for Global Urban Indicators proposed by the Agenda 
4 
http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/4518SDGs_FINAL_Proposal%20of%20OWG_19%20July%20a
t%201320hrs.pdf 

 

6 

government’s  target  to  reduce  carbon  emissions  by  40%  by  the  year  2020.  The  framework  intends  to 

mainstream  the  concept  of  low  carbon  cities,  and  help  local  authorities  make  decisions  and  design  action 

plans  for  greener  urbanization.  The  framework  employs  a  monitoring  mechanism  which  contains  clear 
performance criteria and indicators based on the 4 priority aspects of urban development for GHG reduction: 

(i) urban environment, (ii) urban transportation, (iii) urban infrastructure, and (iv) buildings.   

 

 

Japan´s  Comprehensive  Assessment  System  for  Built  Environment  Efficiency  (CASBEE)  is  another 

interesting example. The system was developed to serve as a tool to assess and evaluate the environmental 

performance  of  buildings.  The  tool  has  now  evolved  to contain frameworks  to help cities  pursue  their  SUD 
policies; CASBEE-For Urban Development  helps  evaluate the environmental  performance of  areas beyond 

one specific building, and CASBEE-For Cities provides a framework to evaluate environmental performance 

with full consideration of both social and economic factors. The system is used by a number of Japanese local 
authorities and is being rolled out into the entire Asian region.   

 

II.  The private sector 

The private sector has also acknowledged the importance of standard setting for market development. Some 

international  corporations  are  trying  to  develop  their  own  indicators  to  define  and  monitor  cities’  SUD 
performance  in  order  to  expand  and  strengthen  markets  for  SUD-related  businesses.  On  example  is  the 

International Standards Organization (ISO), which has created Environmental Management Systems (EMS) – 

voluntary  measurement  instruments  that  can  be  utilized  by  public  and  private  sector  managers  to  improve 
environmental performance. The system provides a set of policies and procedures for the supervision, control, 

reduction  and  prevention  of  activities  that  impact  the  environment.  These  kind  of  tools  help  communities 

formulate and implement holistic, cross-sector and area-based approaches to development, and set a solid 
foundation  for  progress  and  sustainability.  The  ISO  is  also  leading  a  discussion  to  establish  international 

standards on sustainable city development through its Technical Committee on Sustainable Development in 

Communities (ISO/TC 268) and subsidiary bodies which discuss city indicators (ISO/TC 268 WG2) and smart 
community infrastructures (ISO/TC 268 SC1)5. The Committee is currently examining requirements, guidance, 
and  supporting  techniques  and  tools  to  help  cities  and  other  stakeholders  realize  SUD.  Notably,  unlike 

conventional ISO standards that intend to promote product standardizations, the ISO/TC 268’s work defines 
the  actual  business  fields  by  specifying  and  standardizing  infrastructure  related  services.  This  essentially 

provides an international guarantee to the scope of the business, thereby contributing to market creation. This 

is indeed a welcoming trend, with the potential to advance SUD through a more market-based approach.   

                                            
5http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards_development/list_of_iso_technical_committees/iso_technical_committee.htm?co
mmid=656906 

 

7 

Chapter 3. 

Policy formulation and urban planning 

 

 

I.  Holistic SUD policies and strategies 

Most cities in developing countries face a variety of administrative, technical, and financial capacity limitations 

that make it difficult to deal with the challenges of rapid urbanization. City managers tend to focus on chronic 
problems  and  the  day-to-day  and  sector-to-sector  issues.  Effective  urban  planning  is  often  hindered  by 

complex  and  entrenched  interests  and  relationships  among  a  diverse  set  of  public  and  private  groups.   

Inefficient  institutional  structures  are  also  commonly  cited  as  an  obstacle  to  implementing  integrated  city 
planning solutions. Separate budgets, timelines and goals often lead to fragmented solutions. 

 

―The  Future  We  Want‖,  produced  by  the  UN  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development  in  2012  in  Rio  de 

Janeiro,  advocates  holistic  approaches  to  sustainable  cities  and  human  settlements.  The  document 

encourages local governments to play a leading role in setting a vision and framework for sustainable  urban 
development  throughout  the  city  life  cycle;  from  planning  out  a  new  city  to  the  revitalization  of  older  cities. 

Comprehensive  policy  formulation  and  planning  is  critical  because,  once  developed,  urban  infrastructure 

locks  in  the  city’s  economic  and  social  patterns,  and  carry  a  prolonged  impact  on  the  city’s  environmental 
performance.  Therefore,  policies  and  strategies  can  ultimately  determine  whether  the  city  can  successfully 

use their resources for effective and sustainable development. Second, as noted earlier, local governments in 

developing  countries  face  a  variety  of  challenges  due  to  rapid  urbanization.  Consequently,  urban 
development strategies need to take into account a variety of social, economic and environmental issues and 

set  clear  priorities  among  them.  Third,  urban  development  involves  a  diverse  set  of  stakeholders  at  many 

different  levels.  A  holistic  SUD  framework  is  expected  to  function  as  a  common  platform  for  these 
stakeholders to identify their respective roles, including financing, and to collaborate amongst each other.   

 

In  the  past  decades,  local  governments  have  often  used  master  planning  as  a  basis  for  city  development. 
While this approach has evolved significantly in developed countries, conventional master planning remains 

dominant in developing counties, making it difficult for their cities to address emerging urbanization issues. In 

its  2009  Global  Report  on  Human  Resettlement,  UNHABITAT  illustrates  a  number  of  improved  forms  of 
master  planning  which  are  underpinned  by  more  bottom-up  features,  participatory  processes  and 

collaboration at the community level. However, it  also  points to the need to intensify measures to deal  with 

major  SUD  challenges  such  as  poverty  and  inequality,  environmental  issues  and  climate  change,  and  to 
establish regulatory and financing systems that can ensure functionality of the plan.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

Figure 5: JICA’s 5 main features of sustainable cities 

 

 

 

The  difficulties  of  making  successful  SUD  policies,  strategies  and  planning  often  lies  in  how  to  bring  in  as 

many perspectives as possible to ensure the framework can address multifaceted problems, how to identify 

priorities among a set of needs that are diverse, sometime conflicting, and even changing over a long period 
of  time,  and  lastly,  how  to  incorporate  mechanisms  to  ensure  their  enforcement.  A  quick  review  on  major 

literature such as the UNHABITAT’s 2009 Global Report on Human Resettlement, reveals that cities today are 

approaching these challenges by the following 

  enriching  the  content  of  SUD  framework  to  integrate  more  proactive  and  incentivizing 
measures toward certain urbanization issues of great importance (e.g. poverty reduction 

or climate change) 

  setting up institutional and regulatory mechanisms to support good planning 

  enhancing  the  process  of  city  planning  through  participatory  and  coordination 

mechanisms.   

 

CAF: Integrated Development in Panama City 

CAF´s ―Ciudades con Futuro‖ (Cities with Future) Program is a high social impact initiative aimed at improving the quality 
of life of urban populations through integrated multi‐sectoral interventions. The program has four major components: 1) 

inclusive  urban  development,  2)  productive  transformation,  3)  environmental  sustainability,  and  4)  institutional 

strengthening  and  public  safety.  The  first  phase  of  the  program  covers  five  major  Latin  American  cities,  including 

Guayaquil, Quito, Panama City, Fortaleza and Lima. 

 

From 1998 to 2012, CAF provided roughly USD 1 billion in funding for critical energy, logistics, transport and water and 

sanitation  projects  in  Panama  City.    Notable  among  these  initiatives  is  the  expansion  of  the  Panama  Canal,  a  project 

aimed  not  only  at  increasing  logistical  capacity  but  also  efficiency,  decreasing  water  use  and  helping  mitigate  climate 

change by reducing global maritime Co2 emissions caused by larger ships required to take alternate longer transit routes.   

CAF  also  served as  the  principal source  of external  financing  (about  32%  of  the  total  cost),  including  USD  1  million in 

grant assistance and USD 600 million in loans for the construction of Panama City´s first metro line. Other international 

financiers  include  the  Compañía  Española  de  Seguros  de  Crédito  a  la  Exportación  (CESCE),  Compagnie  Française 

d'Assurance pour le Commerce Extérieur (COFACE) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which 

issued a guarantee to cover a loan arranged by Citigroup Global Markets. The company responsible for the majority of the 

engineering,  procurement,  and  construction,  Line  One  Consortium  (CLU),  is  a  jointly-owned  enterprise  of  Construtora 

 

9 

Norberto Odebrecht S.A of Brazil and Fomento de Construcciones y Contratas S.A. of Spain. The contract with CLU uses 

a factoring payment scheme in which the contractor utilizes private commercial bank interim financing, with prior approval 

of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) of Panama. The development of these types of new capital structures and 

public-private  financing  arrangements  make  funding  long-term  infrastructure  projects  more  viable  while  also  optimizing 

 

funding costs.   

 

The canal and metro projects will not only reduce vehicle and maritime operating costs and travel times, and decrease 

greenhouse gas emissions, but also have a direct positive impact on the welfare of Panama City residents, by stimulating 
economic growth and increasing access to jobs, services and trade. 
 

Thanks to the progress of collaboration among various stakeholders at the international level, more tools to 

help  cities  overcome  the  difficulties  in  establishing  their  SUD  frameworks  have  become  available.  City 

Development  Strategy  (CDS)  is  one  such  tool  developed  through  international  collaboration  under  the 
CitiesAlliance, which seeks to support cities in strategic planning, with a strong focus on poverty reduction. It 

gives  cities  a  clear  framework  toward  the  development  and  implementation  of  city  strategies,  which  is 

underpinned by a robust assessment and extensive consultation mechanism. The approach not only enable 
cities to successfully develop their SUD frameworks, but also facilitates their implementation by catalyzing the 

process to promote existing sectorial plans and increase their relevance, and to define downstream projects 

in a structured and transparent manner.   

 

 

 

Figure 6:    Typical Phases in a City Development Strategy 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

II.  Critical economic, social and environmental challenges   

In this sections, we take an in-depth look at some of successful SUD approaches. It discusses a few emerging 
good practices where developing countries successfully address specific challenges in city development.   

 

 

Inclusive urbanization   

The  Global  Risks  2014  report  by  the  World  Economic  Forum  highlights  the  persisting  unemployment  and 
severe  income  disparity  as  among  the  top  5  global  risks  of  concern  in  2014.  There  is  an  emerging  global 

consensus that inequality must be addressed to achieve sustainable development, and have therefore been 

integrated  into  the  Post-2015  Development  Agenda.  The  impact  of  urbanization  on  unemployment  and 
economic  inequality  remain  unproven  and  require  further  study.  In  most  cases,  poverty  rates  are  higher  in 

rural areas than urban areas – indeed reaching 60%, by a UNHABITAT study (UNHABITAT, 2010). However, 

recent studies identify a negative relationship between urbanization and income level (Ravallion, M., S. Chen, 
and  P.  Sangraula,  2007).  Although  the  picture  varies  greatly  from  country  to  country  (Ravi  Kanbur  and 

Juzhong Zhuang, 2013), some of the Asian countries have witnessed growth in the income disparity that went 

in  tandem  with  urbanization  and  economic  development.  A  study  by  Ravi  Kanbur  and  Juzhong  Zhuang 
estimates that cities may become home to more than half of the poor by 2020 if urbanization continues at its 
current  pace  and  no  concerted  action  is  taken  (Ravallon,  M.).  This  finding  was  echoed  by  UNHABITAT 
(UNHABITAT, 2010).   

 

                            Figure 7:    Wider Income Gap in Urban Areas 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Based  on  these  findings,  SUD  policies  should  more  rigorously  address  inequality  and  unemployment  by 

providing (i) direct support systems to the poor and vulnerable, (ii) mechanisms to cut the poverty spiral, and 

(iii)  measures  to  redress  widening  income  gaps.  While  tackling  these  issues  often  requires  strong 
coordination  with  and  support  from  national  policies  targeting  the  underlying  socio-economic  causes,  there 

are some specific issues of great importance that local governments must carefully consider within their SUD 

policies.   

 

The first issue is unemployment. In many cities, the influx of unskilled populations to urban areas has resulted 
in higher unemployment and labor market mismatches. Contrary to general expectations, economic growth 

often fails to fully absorb incoming labor populations, as the growth is realized through increased productivity 

 

11 

rather  than  enlarged  labor  forces.  As  witnessed  during  the  Arab  Spring,  youth  unemployment  remains  a 

serious  problem  in  many  countries.  Cities  need  to  tackle  these  issues  with  more  comprehensive  policy 

packages in collaboration with national and other relevant authorities and stakeholders. On the supply side, 
low  levels  of  achievement  in  formal  education  among  poor  urban  youth  continues  to  present  a  major 

constraint  to  employment,  and  should  be  addressed  through  enhanced  education,  vocational  training  and 

information-sharing  systems.  On  the  demand  side,  other  socio-economic  factors  such  as  local  market 
conditions should be tackled through measures to increase the economic competitiveness and  job creation. 

Economic  activities  are  largely  influenced  by  urban  planning,  particularly  infrastructure  development,  so 

authorities  need  to  take  all  these  elements  into  consideration  to  ensure  comprehensive  action  and 
well-coordinated SUD policies.   

 

 

The  second  issue  that  has  a  significant  impact  on  urban  inequality  is  the  informal  employment  sector.  In 
developing countries, the informal sector accounts for more than 50% of non-agricultural employment which is 

mostly produced in urban areas (Ejaz Chani and Ravi Kanbur, 2013). While some literature argues that the 

sector  creates  economic  benefits  by  providing  job  opportunities,  others  point  to  its  strong  association  with 
higher poverty and lower productivity. Locked into the informal sector, people are often excluded from legal 

and social protections and have limited access to social and financial services. This is especially problematic 

in urban areas where family-based welfare systems tend to be weaker, particularly for migrant families; these 
challenges require careful attention by local governments.   

 

                                Figure 8:    Large Informal Sectors Associated with High Poverty Rates 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Slums  are  another  important  issue.  Although  slum  dwellers  are  not  necessarily  a  homogenous  group  with 
respect to their living conditions, many problems associated with slums are widespread; lack of basic services 

such  as  water,  sanitation,  health  and  electricity;  unfavorable  housing  conditions; 

insecurity  and 

overpopulation; insecure tenure’s rights. The majority of slum dwellers have limited access to formal jobs and 
are chronically trapped in social and economic deprivation. Recognizing these issues as a major development 

challenge,  governments  committed  to  improving  the  conditions  of  slum  dwellers  in  the  MDG  7  manifest. 

 

12 

However,  despite  the  progress  made  since  2000,  the  number  of  slum  dwellers  remains  significant, 

constituting  more  than  60%  of  the  African  population  and  25-45%  of  the  Asian  population  in  2012  (United 

 

Nations, 2013).   
 

KfW: Violence Prevention through Urban Upgrading 

Kayelitsha is a y township about 30 km from the city center of Cape Town, with around 800,000 inhabitants. It  has been   

characterized by high crime rates, widespread poverty, unemployment and high HIV rates. In cooperation with KfW, the 

City of Cape Town has implemented the VPUU – Violence Prevention through Urban Upgrading program with the support 

of  the  German  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (BMZ)  between  2005  and  2014.  Further 

support has been received by the government of the Western Cape Province and local NGOs. The goal of the program is 

to improve the perceived and real safety of residents in selected areas of Khayelitsha,  provide victim support and crime 

prevention  services,  access  to  social,  recreational  and  commercial  facilities,  empowerment  of  people  through 

employment and income, conflict resolution, increase capacity and competency of civil society organizations to promote 

violence  prevention  initiatives,  and  mainstreaming  violence  prevention  principals  in  urban  planning  and  project 

implementation mechanisms at municipal and provincial administration levels. 

 

The total cost of the program was EUR 60.3 million, including a EUR 15.5 million grant from KfW, EUR 43 million from 

partner contributions and EUR 1.8 million in financing from third parties. KfW held a particularly important catalytic role, 

increasing  visibility  and  interest  in  participatory  urban  planning  mechanisms  and  acted  as  a  contract  guarantor  for 

continuity.  In  fact,  KfW  currently  only  finances  25%  of  the  overall  program  budget.  KfW  also  helped  coordinate  local 

expertise  and  bought  international  consultants  and  advisors  to  the  project,  as  well  as  incorporated  bank´s  own  best 

practices from other projects to ensure the successful realization of the VPUU program. As a result, local administrations 

have been trained, safety has been improved and more than 20 public buildings have been completed with more being 

yet  under  construction,  such  as  libraries,  youth  centers,  sport  sites  and  others.  The  VPUU  has  proved  to  be  a  great 

success and thus will be transferred as an obligatory planning instrument within other townships in the City of Cape Town 

and in all cities of the Western Cape Province. 

 

As the 2003 UNHABITAT report points out, there has been a significant shift in many governments’ approach 
to  informality  and/  or  slums,  from  negative measures  such as  forced  eviction,  involuntary  resettlement  and 

neglect, to more inclusive and rights-based measures (UNHABITAT, 2003). Recognizing that the conventional 

approaches  to  slums  -which  mainly  focused  on  improvement  of  physical  conditions-  failed  to  address  the 
deep-rooted causes of slum buildup, UNHABITAT encouraged governments to rethink their approaches and 

take more proactive actions to support the livelihoods of slum dwellers. Doing so has required the integration 

of  the  slum  issue  into  broader  SUD  policies,  and  more  active  involvement  of  slum  dwellers  in  the 
decision-making  process.  Use  of  planning  tools  such  as  public  investment  in  trunk  infrastructure  to  direct 

patterns  of  development,  and  guided  land  development  combining  strategic  planning,  land  pooling  or 

readjustment are increasingly recognized as instrumental in effectively responding to the issue of informality 
(UNHABITAT, 2009). Measures to make them an integral and productive part of the entire city development 

are  vital.  As  a  2013 World  Bank  study  points  out,  policies  to move  slum  dwellers  to better  settings  outside 

slums sometimes creates unintended and perverse effects by disconnecting dwellers from job opportunities. 
Some  IDFC  members’  policies  prioritize  situ  rehabilitation  as  a  way  of  informal  settlement/slum  upgrading.   

Policy  measures  taken  by  cities  like  Hanoi  and  Bogota  to  coordinate  land  market  rules  with  urban 

infrastructure development, ensuring connectivity between people and jobs  have proven quite effective and 
can be usefully replicated elsewhere (World Bank and IMF, 2013).   

 

 

13 

BNDES: Supporting CSR 

BNDES  has  provided  SuperVia  a  total  of  R$  14.7  million  to  date  for  priority  projects  related  to  the  train  company’s 

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Program. The bank provides up to 100% of the project value and 240 month loan 

terms for projects aimed at income generation and improving the quality of life of the communities around the SuperVia 

railway network. The Via Limpa (Clean Tracks) Project, for example, aims to clear waste from the railway using clean task 

forces,  the  building  of  eco-points  (specific  locations  for  recycling  containers),  reforestation  of  areas  around  the  tracks, 

environmental  education  programs,  and  the  certification  of  recycling  collectors  in  training  events.  The  program  should 

increase operation safety, enhance service and track maintenance, as well as offer an alternative source of income and 

improve  the  quality  of  life  of  the  population  living  in  the  areas  around  the  track  previously  lacking  regular  garbage 

 

collection. 

 

BNDES also finances the Via Parceira (Partner Track) Project, aimed at increasing the income of the recycling collectors, 

providing  education  events  for  school  students  from  21  communities  surrounding  the  rail  system,  promoting  digital 

inclusion and strengthening the relationship between the company and the  surrounding communities. To achieve these 

goals,  the  program  provides  technical  support  and  management  assistance  to  a  network  of  recycling  collector  co-ops 

formed by 5 institutions located near the rail system. In partnership with Reação Institute, the Via Parceira Project also 

supports the construction of sports centers in the Morro de Alemão group of favelas, so that students can have access to 

a  variety  of  social,  cultural  and  environmental  educational  activities.  The  Creative  Economy  Project  also  supports 

socio-productive  inclusion  and  sustainability  by  fostering  a  niche  market  for  eco-design  products  (from  recyclable 

materials) and a productive center to create them. BNDES funds will also be used to help manage the program, including 
the use of consultants to assist with planning, monitoring and project evaluation. 

 

 

Managing environmental risks   

Cities  both  create  daunting  environmental  problems  and  suffer  their  consequences.  Urban  environmental 
issues such as air, water and soil pollution, and waste management are sweeping the globe as the wave of 

urbanization  spreads.  Emerging  issues  such  as  the  depletion  of  resources,  notably  water,  and  risks 

associated with climate change, such as increased natural disasters, are threaten the future of many cities. In 
fact, as the ―The Future We Want‖ in 2012 warns, the current world’s development pattern is not sustainable. 

The world needs to take immediate action to reverse current trends. Given that infrastructure development not 

only  locks-in the city’s economic and social structure  for decades  to come, but also creates significant and 
lasting  environmental  consequences,  SUD 
forward-thinking 

frameworks  must  carefully  weave-in 

environmental considerations. However, tackling urban environmental issues has proven to be an ambitious 

task for many cities in the past. More often than not, environmental problems are left unattended because the 
associated risks and costs are not necessarily visible or gains are perceived to be smaller than other pressing 

concerns,  like  economic  growth.  In  the  case  of  climate  change,  the  situation  is  more  complex,  as  the 

ownership  of  the  problem  is  not  clear-cut  and  how  to  allocate  the  responsibility  requires  careful  policy 
considerations by the governments. 

 

How can cities effectively address environmental challenges through their SUD policies and strategies? There 
has been a variety of emerging good practices and innovation on this front in the last  few decades. The first 

step is to identify and quantify risks. Research related to the environmental impact of urban development has 

become widely available. The World Bank’s evaluation of rising sea levels effects (World Bank, 2007), and the 
World  Bank,  Asian  Development  Bank  and  JICA’s  collaborative  research  on  climate  risks  in  Asian  coastal 

mega-cities (World Bank, 2010), for example, all provide invaluable insight for developing SUD frameworks.   

 

14 

 

 

The second important step is to take measures that directly address environmental threats. In the past, local 

authorities have taken the lead, often addressing environmental problems prior to national governments by 
introducing regulatory frameworks for pollution control or GHG emission caps. However, the majority of local 

authorities  in  developing  countries  have  limited  resources  and  are  short  of  incentives  to  prioritize 

environmental  issues  over  other  developmental  goals.  To overcome this  obstacle,  some local  governments 
have  started  to  adopt  an  approach  that  emphasizes  the  ―co-benefits‖  produced  by  environmentally-friendly 

policies, looking to realize environmental, social and other developmental objectives through a single policy in 

their  SUD  frameworks  (UN  University-  Institute  of  Advanced  Studies,  2013).  A  study  by  a  UN  University’s 
Institute  of  Advanced  Studies  in  2013  identified  cases  where  the  approach  successfully  improved  regional 
urban  sustainability  while  simultaneously  solving  local  problems.  The  Delhi  Metro  in  India,  for  example, 

lowered  GHG  emissions  while  also  reducing  congestion  and  air  pollution.  Another  example  is  the 
Community-Based  Solid Waste Management  project  in  Yogyakarta, Indonesia,  where  both  solid  waste  and 

GHG  emissions  were  lessened.  Commending  the  approach  as  both  technically  feasible  and  economically 

beneficial,  the  UN  study  proposes  the  ―co-benefits‖  approach  be  replicated  in  other  cities.  The  UN 
recommends  that  short-term  strategies  focus  on  waste  management  -its  urgent  health  and  environmental 

import  and  economic  feasibility  provide  strong  incentives  for  cities.  Medium  to  long-term  strategies  should 

look to the transportation, industry, energy, and building and land use sectors, all of which involve relatively 
complex physical and institutional changes but provide robust benefits in the long run.   

 

AFD : Reconciling climate and social co-benefits in Medellin   

In the early 1990s, the 6,000 violent deaths every year in Medellin, a Colombian city with 2.5 million inhabitants, made it 

one of the most dangerous city in the world. With successive waves of rural-urban migration, slums had spread on the 

heights  of  the  city,  set  in  the  Andes  Mountains,  hindering  access  to  entire  neighborhoods.  Cut  off  from  economic 

opportunities,  public  services  and  local  authorities,  these  neighborhoods  had  become  a  breeding  ground  for  social 

violence and drug trafficking. Since 2004, the Municipality of Medellin has been working to stem this high level of crime by 

seeking to integrate these vulnerable communities via an ambitious integrated urban development policy.   

 

In 2010, AFD awarded a $250M direct loan to the Municipality of Medellin to support the implementation of an appropriate 

public transport network, connecting 30 peripheral neighborhoods in the Ayacucho Valley and surrounding hills to the rest 

of  the  city  through  one  tramway  line  and  two  metrocable  lines.  Such  public  transport  infrastructures  decrease  GHG 

emissions, while significantly improving access to the city center and reducing travel time for 350,000 local residents.   

 

Combined with a pro-active social policy and simultaneous large-scale investment activities in public spaces and social 

facilities,  this  project  has  facilitated  local  economic  development  by  encouraging  the  arrival  of  businesses  and  shops. 

Finally,  insecurity  has  been  significantly  decreased:  since  the  inception  of  the  Municipality’s  pro-active  social  urban 

planning policy, the rate of violent deaths is now six times lower in Medellin.   

 

AFD’s  financial  instruments  to  support  sustainable  urban  development  are  tailored  to  local  institutional  &  regulatory 

contexts and partners’ needs. Direct loans to sub-national governments (without a sovereign guarantee) are a privileged 

instrument  to  support  local  authorities’  priority  urban  infrastructure  programs,  and  have  been  successfully  mobilized  in 

contexts as diverse as Medellin (Colombia), Johannesburg & Cape Town (South Africa), Dakar (Senegal), Ouagadougou 

(Burkina Faso) or Izmir (Turkey).     

 

Many local governments have started eyeing the potential of green growth strategies that pursue economic 

 

15 

growth and social development through urban activities targeting environmental issues. The OECD study in 

2013 on ―Green Growth in Cities‖ reveals that many local leaders have started to recognize the utility of  the 

green growth concept, presenting an opportunity to create jobs and attract investment while  also improving 
local environmental performance and addressing climate change (OECD, 2013). Case studies on four major 

OECD member country  cities– Paris, Chicago, Stockholm and Kita-Kyushu - found that policies to promote 

energy efficiency retrofits  for buildings can boost job-creation,  while  policies to increase transport  efficiency 
can  also  improve  cities’  attractiveness  to  business  firms  and  skilled  laborers.  The  approach  is  now  being 

 

rolled out in many emerging Asian cities.   

 

Cities’ increasing susceptibility to natural disasters is another important risk factor that should be taken into 

account  during  city  planning.  A  UNISDR  report  in  2011  demonstrated  that  natural  disasters  in  urban  areas 

have  increased four-fold since 1975 (UNISDR,  2011), largely  due to their proximity  to  waterways, and high 
population  and  infrastructure  densities.  Over  a  35  year  period,  from  2015  to  2050,  the  number  of  people 

exposed to major natural disasters in large cities is estimated to double to some 1.5 billion (World Bank, 2010) 

and  in  many  disasters,  the  poor  are  disproportionately  affected.  Governments  must  ensure  that  new 
infrastructure  is  not  built  in  a  way  that  increases  exposure  to  natural  disasters;  it  should  be  located  in  less 

vulnerable  areas  and  the  city  must  leave  enough  space  for  evacuation  routes.  If  this  is  not  possible,  new 

infrastructure should have multiple functions, like some schools in Bangladesh which can serve as shelters in 
the event of severe flooding and the highways which protected cities from severe tsunami, functioning like a 

dike during the Great East Japan Earthquake.   

 

Spatial planning and effective land use 

Land  use  is  an  important  element  of  SUD,  serving  as  the  foundation  of  spatial  planning  and  infrastructure 

development.  Integrated  solutions  for  appropriate  natural  resource  and  land  use,  hazard  risk  planning, 
infrastructure development, and urban transport expansion are critical.   

 

First of all, a clear definition of property rights must be established and underpinned by legal and institutional 

frameworks  with  administrative  and  enforcement  mechanisms  such  as  land  registration.    For  example, 

Curitiba, Brazil, has been well-known for its innovative approach to SUD since the 1960s. However, the city 
government is currently striving to address emerging issues such as urban sprawl, squatting and increased 

insecurity  by  implementing  new  urban  planning  measures.  In  order  to  assist  the  city  with  implementation, 

JICA provided technical assistance to help the city adapt a Japanese ―readjustment‖ methodology. Through 
the project, Japanese experts trained local authorities how to hold constructive negotiations with residents by 

explaining  the  prospective  benefits  of  land  submission,  like  improved  public  transport  and  increased  land 

values  due  to  new  infrastructure  development.  As  a  result,  Curitiba  officials  successfully  obtained  part  of 
residents´ lands for public usage, mainly for road and park construction. Curitiba is now drafting its own land 

readjustment law and a pilot project to test out the new methodology on the ground. 

 

Second,  which  areas  should  be  designated  or  (re)developed  for  residential  or  business  and  industrial 

purposes  should  be  in  line  with  the  city’s  overall  vision,  and  require  careful  consideration  of  multifaceted 

perspectives. Strategic spatial planning with careful consideration to infrastructure development is also vital. 
Demographic growth in cities often leads to expansion of urban area, either through merging of several towns 

or through urban sprawl. Urban sprawl, particularly, entails inefficient use of resources and often higher costs 

for  delivering  social  services  (HABITAT,  2009).  Spatial  planning  should  set  out  how  to  control  and  plan 

 

16 

possible  city  expansion  in  a  sequential  manner  and  ensure  that  infrastructure  development  is  properly 

embedded  into  the  city´s  larger  land  use  planning  and  management  scheme  is  of  particular  importance, 

considering that once it’s developed, infrastructure locks in patterns of economic and social activities and their 
environmental impact for decades (World Bank, 2013).   

 

 

Effective  land  use  policies  allow  for  people  and  products  to  be  mobile  and  efficient.  Long-term  land  use 
planning  helps  city  administrators  monitor  and  manage  the  growth  of  slums.  Incorporating  larger  green 

spaces in cities can provide ―green lungs‖ that decrease the heat-island effect and lower the amount of energy 

required for indoor cooling systems.    Food production is also a major issue for urban sustainability, and must 
be taken into consideration at the regional level; growing food in green spaces and backyards increases food 

security and reduces the environmental impact of importing food from distant regions.   

 

City  planners  should  promote  land  valuation  processes  that  are  systematic,  professional,  transparent  and 

widely  accessible.  In  developing  countries,  projects  can  often  be  delayed  because of  land  price  distortions 
and  asymmetric  information  (land  values  may  be  concealed  to  avoid  high  transaction  taxes,  or  help 

developers  acquire  land  at  favorable  rates)  and  this  should  be  addressed  by  establishing  appraised  land 

values that prevent land-related conflict. Density regulations -introduced to limit the quantity of properties that 
can be developed- should be carefully crafted to prevent land price market distortions. Moreover, they are vital 

to striking an efficient balance between the cost and benefit of ―compact‖ cities. Urban sprawl often elevates 

the costs of delivering social services and increases communities’ reliance on private vehicles that contribute 
to GHG emissions, for example. However, there is no one-size-fits-all model for such regulations and many 

cities are exploring how to optimize their regulations to fit to their individual needs. Legal system also has to 

be developed to protect residents’ basic rights. In addition to established legal system, UNHABITAT proposes 
introducing  more  flexible  system  with  easier  access  to  the  public,  such  as  litigation  measures  for  dispute 

resolution and negotiation and more collaborative practices. It also cautions that large-scale developers have 

become  dominant  in  urban  development,  and  recommends  that  local  governments  enhance  their  legal 
systems to ensure more inclusive development (UNHABITAT, 2009).   

 

III.  Stakeholder coordination and participation 

City  planners  are  not  only  mayors,  but  also  community-based  organizations,  subnational,  national  and 

international  policy  makers  and  private  sector  investors,  developers,  and  service  providers.  Unfortunately, 

these actors  tend to  operate  within their  own  spheres.  Urban  areas  encompass  multiple municipalities,  but 
often  lack  mechanisms  to  coordinate  policy  and  planning  across  boundaries  despite  current  efforts  to 

formulate  multiple  networks  and  increased  presence  at  international  discussions.  Furthermore,  local 

governments must be equipped with sufficient authority and human and financial resources to lead the SUD 
planning process. Architects, engineers, landscapers, hydrologists and officials at all government levels will 

have to coordinate their efforts if sustainable long-term urban development is to be achieved. Both up-stream 

policy and standard setting to down-stream project design and implementation are of vital importance, and are 
challenges  that  require  collaborative  approaches.  The  participation  of  a  diverse  set  of  actors,  with  distinct 

perspectives and needs, is critical to ensuring the integrity of urban development. 

 

However  many  developing  countries  do not  have systems  in place for  such inclusive processes,  and  often 
lack  proper  information  disclosure  and  education.  To  ensure  citizens’  views  are  duly  reflected  into  city 

 

17 

planning  and  implementation,  accountability  mechanisms  including  transparent  decision-making  and 

monitoring are essential. Governments need to undertake a variety of measures to ensure meaningful citizen 

participation.  UNHABITAT  emphasizes  the  importance  of  the  following:  (i)  political  systems  that  allow 
proactive  participation  and  genuine  negotiation,  (ii)  legal  basis  for  local  politics  and  planning  to  ensure 

citizens’  voices  are  well  reflected  in  decision-making  processes,  and  (iii)  delegation  of  authority, 

responsibilities and resources to local governments to support participatory planning.   

 

 

The private sector plays important but unique role in city planning as a stakeholder and beneficiary. The role 

as investor has been increasingly recognized as essential in the face of public budgetary constraints as well. 
In addition to PPP projects, there are a number of ways to mobilize private finance through establishment of 

special  funds,  taxation  schemes,  and  CSR  donation  initiates,  and  governments  are  encouraged  to  set  up 
mechanisms to implement such measures.   

 

JICA: Promoting Collaboration for Comprehensive Urban Planning 

Metro Cebu is the second largest metropolitan area in the Philippines, composed of 7 cities and 6 municipalities, and a 

population  expected  to  reach  5  million  by  2050.  Like  other  Asian  mega  cities,  Metro  Cebu  is  experiencing  steady 

socio-economic growth but is increasingly constrained by rapid urbanization and consequent resource and infrastructure 

shortages.In order to meet these challenges, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the City of Yokohama, 

the  City  of  Cebu  and  the  Metro  Cebu  Development  and  Coordinating  Board  (MCDCB)  worked  together  to  formulate a 

long-term  sustainable  urban  development  vision  for  the  city,  forging  a  cross-sectoral  and  transboundary  collaboration 

among  the  national  government,  13  local  governments,  the  private  sector  and  civil  society.  The  ―MEGA  CEBU  Vision 

2050‖ sets out a  strategy  for city  development,  striking a  balance between  comprehensiveness  and  sectorial  priorities. 

Part of the plan´s success can be attributed to widespread stakeholder participation and consultation, supplemented by 

policy  and  technical  inputs  from  JICA  and  the  City  of  Yokohama.  Prioritizing  diversified  views,  a  SWOT  analysis  and 

comparative studies analyzing international good practice benchmarks, provided a robust framework for the MEGA CEBU 

Vision. The result of this approach was a city development plan that incorporates various aspects of urban sustainability, 

including  cultural, economic,  social  and  environmental  aspects.  The  MEGA  CEBU  Vision also sets  out  clear strategies 

and  development  targets.  Currently,  action  plans  and  road  maps  are  being  drafted  to  support  their  implementation, 

assisted by JICA (through technical assistance).   

 

JICA’s successful experience in Metro Cebu also demonstrates the usefulness of knowledge-sharing initiatives between 

cities. The MEGA CEBU Vision setup a mechanism to share best practices among 13 local governments, helping those 

governments increase their expertise and leading them to take positive actions on the ground for the realization of more 
sustainable and comprehensive urban development. 
 

IV.  The role of Development Banks 

Working closely with governments, development finance institutions are making efforts to provide a variety of 

effective  financial  instruments  as  well  as  supporting  policy,  and  institutional  and  capacity  development. 
Multilateral,  regional  and  national  development  finance  institutions  such  as  the  members  of  International 

Development Finance Club (IDFC), together with developing country governments can play an essential role 

in  advancing  the  concept  of  sustainable  urban  development.  According  to  IDFC’s  green  finance  mapping 
report  (Ecofys,  2012),  the  Members’  contribution  in  green  finance  reached  a  total  US$  89  billion  in  2010. 

Development  finance  institutions’  also  have  a  strong  track  record  in  mobilizing  domestic  resources  and 

fostering  new  investments  in  sectors  of  strategic  importance  such  as  clean  energy  and  environmental 
conservation  projects,  as  well  as  general  economic  and  social  development  projects  (World  Bank  2012). 

 

18 

These institutions also often share a close relationship with industrial sector players, and use their access to 

institutional and regulatory decision-makers to promote institutional legal frameworks that strengthen market 

 

investment conditions. 

 

―While 70 percent of high-income countries integrate land use and natural risk management, only about 15 

percent of low-income countries are doing so‖ (World Bank 2012b). Development banks can play an important 
role  in  helping  city  managers  and  other  policy  makers  identify  these  types  of  urbanization  bottlenecks  and 

propose policies and strategies to combat them. They can also expand lending linked to comprehensive and 

multi-sectorial  urban  development  models  with  special  emphasis  on  housing  and  slum  management  and 
urban mobility programs that help build more inclusive cities. 

 

Development  banks  can  also  promote  results-based  urban  planning  strategies  by  supporting  knowledge 

sharing programs, data collection and feasibility studies.    Universities will play a key role in preparing young 

people to deal with new-century and cross-disciplinary challenges --training future architects, engineers and 
city officials. Development banks can nurture partnerships among these universities, politicians, development 

agencies and private financiers to not only sponsor co-learning and capacity building, but to build networks to 

leverage new funding mechanisms. 

   

In order to overcome some of the investment barriers to urban development, IDFC members commonly stress 

the importance of decentralized urban development management, greater local autonomy over financing, and 
the inclusion of customers and community members in the decisions making process to promote more service 

oriented reform and widespread public support for projects. Development banks can also cooperate and help 

support  existing  networks,  such  as  the  Cities  Alliance  or  the  Organization  of  Local  Governments  for 
Sustainability (ICLEI), for example, that assist cities in learning from one another through expert consultation, 

knowledge  sharing,  capacity  building,  access  to  research  and  other  collaborative  aid  mechanisms.  The 

Japanese Government has helped connect key regional players in East Asia, for example, through the East 
Asia Low Carbon Growth Partnership Dialogue -under the East Asian Summit (EAS) framework- and the East 

Asia Knowledge Platform for Low Carbon Growth, a knowledge-sharing hub that brings together researchers, 

national policy makers, local governments and service providers to produce both policy and practical research 
that  can  be  translated  into  implementable  policy  reform.  Urban  learning  cannot  focus  merely  on  historic 

models of northern metropolises; the Global South will be home to the majority of the population growth over 

the next 40 years and greater South-to-South dialogue and collaboration will allow the regions of Africa, Latin 
America  and  Asia  to  learn  from  each  other’s  methods  and  capacity  to  deal  with  the  challenges  of  rapid 

urbanization and growth.   

 

Central  to  sustainable  urban  development  will  be  an  emphasis  on  integrated  planning  in  the  provision  of 

environmental friendly infrastructure, basic services, and other public goods. Development banks should look 
to  support  multi-sectorial  program  approaches  that  treat  urban  areas  as  integrated  systems,  rather  than 

support  individual  interventions  as  single-purpose funding schemes  often fail  to link  project  interventions  to 

larger, city-wide program objectives. Well planned timing of interventions that fit into a greater urban planning 
scheme  will  be  essential,  as  is  reaching  out  to  other  development  and  private  sector  partners  to  secure 

funding. 

 

 

19 

 

CDG: The Eco-city of Zenata   

The  Zenata  Development  Company,  a  subsidiary  of  CDG  Group,  has  undertaken  the  largest  integrated  urban 

development  project  in  Africa  to  date,  aimed  at  making  Zenata  an  attractive,  efficient,  service-based  eco-city  in  Grand 

Casablanca. The initiative is guided by the core principles of sustainable development: soft and public modes of transport, 

optimization of water management, green corridors, low density, and social and functional diversity.       

 

The Zenata Master Plan has divided the city into 14 units of roughly 28,500 people each, designed to reduce travel by 

providing  their  own  infrastructure,  services  and  equipment  for  education,  health,  shopping  and  leisure  activities.  The 

project also builds housing for middle income families and the relocates 7,000 families from onsite slums. A total of 470 

hectares of green space is being developed inside the city, irrigated naturally and leading to the sea; these parks have 

been designed as ―ecological corridors‖ promoting biodiversity and improved ambient temperature control. A multimodal 

station, subway and tramway line will connect the city into the main mobility network of Casablanca. The Zenata urban 

planning approach has three priority goals: the rebalancing and revitalization of the city of Casablanca to the east, the 

creation of jobs and new facilities to achieve a ratio of 130,000 jobs for every 400,000 people, and the creation of a city 

more accessible to the middle classes, where quality of life and the structure of natural and public spaces are a priority. 

 

CDG’s  goal  is  to  make  Zenata  a  model  for  sustainable  urban  development.  CDG  has  mobilized  substantial  French 

expertise -around fifteen top consulting firms- including urban planner Bernard Reichen (winner of France´s Grand Prix for 

Urban Planning in 2005) for the study and design of the project. In April 2013, AFD also signed a financing agreement 

with the Zenata Development Company to help finance the new city. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

20 

Chapter 4. 

Financial Approaches 

 

 

The cost of funding sustainable cities is beyond the means of both government funding capacities and official 

development assistance. Global demand for infrastructure development is enormous, exceeding US$ 5 trillion 

annually under current growth projections. An additional US$ 700 billion is required to support the ambitious 
goals of the International  Energy  Agency (IEA) to limit average global temperature increases to 2°C above 

pre-industrial levels (WEF, 2013).  Ensuring  the continued flow  of finance for sustainable urban  investments 

will  require  new  private  sector  financial  instruments.  Fortunately,  there  is  a  mounting  commitment  at  the 
international level to support and finance sustainable cities. The Nantes EcoCity Summit and the Declaration 

of Mayors and Subnational Leaders on Climate Change was adopted by 50 mayors from 30 countries, and 20 

networks  of  local  governments  in  2013,  affirming  their  commitment  to  scale-up  climate  actions.  The 
declaration  calls  for  enhanced  access  to  finance  for  local  climate  projects,  including  the  development  of 

specific funding windows for local climate action and sustainable urban development. And at the UN Climate 

Summit in September 2014, a network of local governments and international public and private institutions 
launched the ―City Climate Finance Leadership Alliance‖ to accelerate knowledge-sharing and other actions 

to mobilize more financing for low-carbon and resilient urban development. In fact, new funding opportunities 

have  arisen  for  city  managers  in  developing  countries  who  are  working  towards  building  more  energy  and 
resource efficient urban models.    At the same time, new accounting methods are being developed in order to 

estimate the full costs and benefits of policy and investment initiatives, like life-cycle costing.     

 

Public-sector support for green investments, if increased up to US$ 130 billion and targeted more effectively, 
could  mobilize  private  capital  in  the  range  of  US$  570  billion,  which  would  near  the  US$  700  billion  of 

incremental  annual  investment  required  to  facilitate  greener  growth.  However,  there  will  be  another  US$  5 

trillion  required  for  business-as-usual  growth  projects.  Comprehensive  policy  reform  and  a  stronger  push 
toward investment-grade policy initiatives will be required to fully address demand (WEF, 2013). In order to 

finance urban development programs, governments should improve creditworthiness by securing cash flows 

from  user  fees  and  taxes.  Tax  revenue  provides  the  basis  for  capital  expenditure  subsidies  required  for 
investments that may otherwise not be financially or politically viable. Improved creditworthiness will also help 

cities  borrow  money  and  attract  private  investment,  making  financing  easier.  Many  city  governments  in 

developing countries struggle to obtain long-term credit due to limited domestic bond markets. In the absence 
of  well-developed  capital  markets,  financial  intermediaries  and  development  banks  can  play  a  key  role  in 

mobilizing resources for urban development financing.   

 

Mechanisms to leverage land assets through property taxes and sales, betterment levies and impact fees and 

exactions  can  help  governments  raise  new  capital.  Tax  revenue  and  fee  collection  should  be  planned  and 

implemented in a transparent manner and underpinned by good service delivery. ―Fees for service should be 
claimed  by  the enterprises  providing  the service,  and  any  asset sales  should provide  capital  for  continuing 

improvement  of  the  service  in  question.‖  (ADB  Green  Cities,  p312).  Aside  from  robust  tax  collection 

mechanisms,  cities  can  boost  funding  by  charging  users  the  full  cost  of  services  like  water  and  electricity, 
including  environmental  damage,  and  establishing  markets  for  tradable  rights  to  resources  and  pollutant 

permits, among others. City  planners should also look to find  ways to price the  full cost  of individual motor 

vehicle  use,  taking  into  account  congestion,  pollution  and  other  negative  externalities.  Requiring  private 
sector  employers  to  cover  employee  transport  costs,  for  example,  would  likely  push  firms  to  keep  firms  in 

 

21 

higher density areas, increasing the overall efficiency of urban hubs. Ration resource pricing for farmers, for 

instance,  not  only  encourages  water  conservation,  but  also  promotes  recycling  and  the  use  of  alternative 

 

sources like rainwater harvesting.   

 

Ultimately, cities are more accountable for their own development when the funds for are raised locally, rather 

than  at  the  national  level.  When  possible  they  should  look  to  tap  their  own  domestic  and  public  financing 
sources.  Land  asset–based  financing  is  source  of  subnational  finance  for  urban  development  in  many 

countries, as land is often the most valuable asset subnational government balance sheets. Strong institutions 

are required to oversee land management and sales, tax collection and secure property rights. However, local 
governments  can  sometimes  lack  the  financial  independence  to  acquire  land  or  protect  rights-of  way  for 

infrastructure improvement. Land transactions can also be hampered by poor land-valuation systems, and a 

lack  of  transparency  and  credibility  for  land  titles  -dampening  incentives  for  landowners  to  rent  out  their 
property. Furthermore, land development ventures often require high entry costs.   

 

Subnational  governments  like  Mexico,  China  and  Colombia,  among  others,  have  been  able  to  issue  bond 

instruments to raise funds. A well-developed domestic financial market lowers costs and increases long-term 

credit  sustainability.  Strong  securities  and  financial  market  regulatory  regimes  are  required  to  develop 
diversified and well-functioning local markets. However, strong regulatory frameworks need to be in place to 

manage  subnational  debt  sustainability.    Systems  that  regulate  private  capital  markets  and  support  their 

capacity to deploy financial products enhance affordability and access to green finance.   

 

Green  funds,  like  Climate  Investment  Funds  (CIFs),  the  Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF)  and  Clean 

Development Mechanism (CDM) funds are some of the most commonly  utilized sources of climate change 
financing for developing countries. Most development finance institutions  have special funds  and programs 

targeting climate change mitigation and adaptation. They also offer grants and technical assistance in climate 

change project and capacity development. 

 

Development  banks can  provide  governments  borrowing  from commercial  markets  with guarantees  to help 

ensure  lower interest rates, longer maturities  and more flexible debt parameters. Development banks often 
support local finance institutions by extending lines of credit or partial credit guarantees, as well as provide 

equity  capital  and  transaction-cost  recovery  mechanisms  to  help  absorb  some  of  the  cost  of  making  small 

loans.  Initiatives  for  removing  or  lowering  costs  could  also  incorporate  capacity-building  programs  and 
structuring  assistance  to  help  local  finance  institutions  ―bundle‖  their  loans  and  take  them  to  mainstream 

capital markets.   

 

Development  banks  can  also  help  structure  and  promote  policy  incentives  and  disincentives  such  as  fuel 

taxes that include real costs of vehicle use (traffic, pollution) and tax incentives for energy efficient home and 

building technologies, as well as road user and parking charges and limitations in city centers and peak hours. 
Furthermore, development banks can also provide the leverage to tap new markets and private investors, as 

well as help structure pooled initiatives to reduce individual investment costs. One of the primary roles that 

development banks serve is to improve investment climates by guiding PPP policy and institutional framework 
reform, backing PPP pilot projects and structuring financing vehicles that help provide the risk/return profile 

that the private sector expects. 

 

22 

 

 

Many  subnational  governments  have  created  special-purpose  vehicles  (SPVs)  to  undertake  urban 

infrastructure investments, often in partnership with private sector financiers and operators. Transferring risk 

the  private  sector,  through  service  contracts,  management  contracts,  leases,  and  privatization  can  help 
financially constrained cities. However, many of these financial arrangements require a commitment to clear 

and  credible  property  rights,  transparent  procurement  processes,  cost  covering  tariffs  and  sustainable  tax 

revenue regimes. As governments often face political constraints when attempting to charge service users to 
cover  costs,  PPPs  are  a  politically  viable  alternative  and  inject  much  needed  capital  for  infrastructure 

development. Competitive market selection mechanisms and cost-benefit analyses can also improve project 

selection and sustainability. To successfully implement PPPs, city managers in many developing countries will 
have  to  improve  public  sector  capacity,  design  and  implement  comprehensive  legal  and  sector  planning 

frameworks  and  risk  assessment  models,  as  well  as  ensure  transparent  and  competitive  procurement  to 

avoid monopoly service provision. 

 

City services, like trucking, for example, can flourish under competitive markets with free entry to providers 

and  prices  that  reflect  real  demand  and  costs.  However,  other  services,  such  as  bus  transportation  and 
garbage  collection,  may  require  more  nuanced  systems,  such  as  auctions,  where  service  contracts  are 

awarded  to  the  provider  who  offers  the  lowest  price  and  meets  established  performance  standards.  Such 

concession  auctions  have  succeeded  in  reducing  both  costs  and  prices  in  many  cities  (WB,  2013).   
Improvement of services characterized as natural monopolies or public goods, like water and sanitation, will 

require  larger cross-sector policy coordination. Targeted subsidies  and regulated prices may be required in 

certain  service  sectors,  for  both  social  equity  and  environmental  sustainability  purposes,  but  that  means 
governments  will  have  to  set  transparent  and  credible  mechanisms  to  prevent  corruption  and  inefficiency. 

When possible, city governments should promote market competition and avoid artificial monopolies. 

 

Due  to  global  economic  downturns  caused  by  the  2007  global  financial  crisis,  fewer  resources  have  been 
available for urban development initiatives. Even if local banks and other financial intermediaries were able to 

fill the funding gap, development banks play a uniquely ―additional‖ role as financial catalysts, drawing private 

capital into large, long-term projects in countries and sectors where significant development results are likely, 
but  the  market perceives  high  risk.  Development  banks  also  often  offer  below  market  interest  rates,  longer 

terms and flexible repayment schedules. They can also provide risk mitigation through political or partial risk 

insurance or guarantees that attract a wide variety of market players, and provide local funding partners with 
an  improved  level  of  creditor  status.  Development  banks  can  also  deliver  design  and  project  selection 

additionality,  offering  technical  assistance  and  other  tools  for  capacity  building  that  promote  transparency, 

accountability, cost-effective service delivery and program sustainability. 

 

The  lack  of  finance  for  municipalities  in  developing  countries  is  a  crucial  bottleneck  identified  by  all  IDFC 
members. KfW, for example, addresses the problem by providing credit lines and grant funding for community 

infrastructure development via intermediary structures. These Municipal Development Funds provide capacity 

building  and  incentives  for  good  local  governance,  by  providing  clear  and  standardized  criteria  for  project 
design and infrastructure maintenance and operation. Local participation is also encouraged with the use of 

transparent planning  and investment prioritization. KfW also supports  existing commercial bank markets by 

offering  credit  lines  and  technical  assistance  to  enhance  their  outreach  to  municipalities.  In  Serbia,  for 

 

23 

example,  from  2009-2012,  commercial  banks  provided  113  loans  to  74  municipalities,  funding  some  300 

projects. This mechanism was implemented under an existing legal framework for municipal debt (with central 

government guarantees), significant municipal income from taxes and fees, multi-year investment plans and 
the supervision of municipal indebtedness by commercial banks and central governments.   

 

 

AFD, for its part, has long recognized their key role as catalysts for innovative urban development. AFD works 
with local financial institutions to mobilize adequate financing and technical cooperation, especially in smaller, 

secondary towns, where an important part of future urban growth will be concentrated. In Brazil, for instance, 

AFD  extends  financing  to  the  public  state  bank  of  Paraná,  Fomento  Paraná,  to  support  the  upgrading  of 
municipal solid waste facilities throughout the whole state. The  EUR 45 million credit facility is dedicated to 

developing  the  new  regional  solid  waste  plan  and  incentivizing  local  authorities  to  improve  (i)  the  waste 

sorting process and selective collection, with the participation of cooperatives or other forms of association of 
waste pickers, (ii) the waste recycling process, by composting or methanation or other technologies defined 

by Brazilian law, and (iii) the final disposal of waste by closing and rehabilitating inappropriate landfills or using 

sanitary landfills. The program is also directed at helping Paraná state improve its environmental and climate 
change  policy,  and  helps  promote  mitigation  projects  that  have  a  positive  impact  on  greenhouse  gas 

emissions.  As  a  complement  to  the  credit  facility,  a  technical  and  institutional  cooperation  has  been 

established between Brazilian local authorities, urban and environmental Paraná institutions, and French peer 
institutions.   

 

KoFC: Promoting PPPs in Jeju 

As part of its mandate to extend Korea’s infrastructure and promote a balanced regional development, KoFC took part as 

a financial investor in a project to build Aqua Planet Jeju, Asia’s largest aquarium in Korea’s southern island of Jeju. The 

total  cost  of  the  project  was  KRW130.1  billion  (excluding  government  subsidy);  KoFC  contributed  KRW41.2  billion,  or 

32%, via indirect investments through a fund set up for the project. Taking 30 months to complete, the aquarium began 

operating in April 2012, and will be privately operated for the next 30 years before it is transferred to  the Jeju Municipal 

Government.   

 

The  Aqua  Planet  Jeju  project  represents  a  good  case  practice  in  sustainable  urban  development  by  KoFC  on  several 

grounds.  First,  it  represents  Korea’s  first  build-operate-transfer  PPP  project  (based  on  the  Act  on  Public  Private 

Partnership  in  Infrastructure),  drawing  a  substantial  portion  of  private  investments  at  a  time  when  the  country’s 

infrastructure  market  struggled  to  secure  financing  for  large-scale  infrastructure  projects.  Because  it  is  a  BOT,  the 

government  was  free  from  the  burden  of  a  minimum  revenue  guarantee,  which  can  often  erode  a  project’s  long-term 

profitability and sustainability. Capitalizing on the merits of a BOT, the Jeju Municipal Government endeavored to bring the 

project to the island, where the level of urban development had long been inadequate compared to other parts of Korea. 

Although Jeju  is one  of the  most popular  tourist  destinations  in  the country,  it still  lacks  the  necessary  infrastructure  to 

attract  tourists  on  a  continuous  basis.  By  utilizing Jeju´s  unique  and  rich marine  resources,  the aquarium  represents  a 

sustainable source of income that will contribute to the long-term growth of the local economy.   

 

The project has also opened the door to a new industry in Korea, where only a handful of aquariums of scale exist. In fact, 

after seeing that Aqua Planet Jeju had the potential to generate sufficient profits, the private operator of the project went 

on to build two more aquariums in two different cities in Korea, and has plans to expand overseas. These aquariums have 

helped  expand  employment  opportunities  in  surrounding  areas,  and  increased  demand  for  specific  and  rare  job 

segments, such as animal curators, veterinary technicians, conservation biologists, aquarist, and docents.   
 

 

24 

 

Chapter 5. 

Service delivery and infrastructure management 

 

Today, cities are home to more than half of the world’s population, and this proportion is expected to grow to 

two-thirds, or 6 billion people, by 2050 (UN-HABITAT). Twentieth-century cities face numerous challenges to 

building  and maintaining the basic physical  infrastructure needed to ensure the  safety, mobility,  health, and 
progress of these massive populations; sustainable cities require adequate roadways, public transit, railroads, 

seaports,  airports,  water  and  sewage  treatment  systems,  electric  grids,  schools,  and  hospitals.  Ensuring 

better service delivery to communities and citizens is the ultimate goal of sustainable urban development; it 
provides the very tax revenue and fees that can be leveraged to a acquire additional financial support for city 

development and management.   

 

Infrastructure  facilitates  progress  in  all  sectors  and  is  commonly  identified  as  one  of  the  major  drivers  of 

change towards a more green and sustainable economy. In addition to the potential supply-and-demand- side 
impacts of infrastructure optimization on economic growth, the infrastructure services - water systems, solid 

waste  management,  sewer  systems,  power  generating  plants,  roads,  mass  transportation,  electricity 

generation,  and  telecommunications-    also  play  a  significant  role  in  the  distribution  of  income.  Roughly  1 
billion of the world’s population currently reside in slums, and that number is projected to increase to 3 billion 

by 2050 if left unchecked (UN-HABITAT). These massive slum-dwelling populations constitute roughly half of 

city  populations  in  many  developing  countries,  and  lack  access  to  adequate  shelter,  water  and  sanitation 
–essential  to  environmental  sustainability,  social  cohesion,  health  and  human  capital  productivity.  One 

example of an innovative solution to poor service delivery is Curitiba´s garbage collection system. The city´s 

program targets low-income areas, and is designed to clean sites  which are difficult for conventional  waste 
management systems to reach, by encouraging local residents to exchange garbage bags for food and public 

transportation tickets. Thanks to this initiative, more than 31,000 families have collected some 11,000 tons of 

garbage.  This  has  reduced  the  cost  of  the  city’s  solid  waste  management,  created  employment,  and 
contributed to the overall cleanness and wellness of the city.   

 

Many  workers in developing countries commute into cities using collective taxis,  which are slow, expensive 
and contribute to climate change. Roads are often insufficiently designed or maintained to handle the current 

high density traffic that continues to escalate with greater urbanization. Often, workers must transfer several 

times  to  reach  their  destination.  Buses  present  a  similar  challenge.  Improved  service  delivery  and  lower 
capital costs are needed  in most developing cities. Furthermore, the transport sector  represents one of the 

fastest growing sources of GHGs in the world (ADB, 2012) and represents 23% of global fossil fuel emissions. 

To achieve a significant reduction in GHG emissions, it will be important to promote efficient and integrated 
public transport systems that incentivize widespread use and reduce the growth of the auto sector, particularly 

by  private individual users. Regional and  national governments should look to adopt initiatives that support 

transformation  (efficient  distribution  of  populations)  and  generate  strategies 

urban 
non-motorized transport aimed at reducing GHGs like electric vehicles.   

that  promote 

 

―Deficient infrastructure can raise the costs of doing business in urban areas and reduce firm productivity by 

as much as 40 per cent‖ (UNHABITAT, 2012). Many developing countries have industrial clusters that fail to 

provide results due to poor planning, inadequate and environmentally hazardous facilities, but above all, weak 
infrastructure  services  that  fail  to  link  clusters  together  and  to  essential  markets.  Urbanisation  actuality 

 

25 

facilitates agglomeration economies as the rapid and easy exchange of technology and information opens up 

new  opportunities  for  both  labour  and  production.  Cluster  economies  help  create  internationally  connected 

cities,  concentrate  production  efficiently  and  further  facilitate  economic  growth.  As  cities  catalyse 
agglomeration,  they  are  important  engines  of  employment  and  investment,  and  improved  public  service 

 

provision that help contribute to quality of life.   

 

Building  competitive  and  sustainable  cities  require  a  plan  that  identifies  and  mitigates  major  internal  and 

external connection bottlenecks and exorbitant transport costs. City connectivity planning must find a balance 

between expanding the supply of affordable transport options, and reducing negative externalities caused by 
increased  congestion  and  pollution.  Much  of  the  quality  and  sustainability  of  infrastructure  is  also  in  their 

construction and design consideration of externalities; infrastructure should avoid excessive fragmentation of 

wetlands and other strategic ecosystems, and take into account debris and pollution levels. New standards 
and incentives have surfaced encouraging the establishment of more efficient buildings and eco-homes. With 

the increase in urban expansion and the need for new cities and homes, developing countries have a prime 

opportunity to take advantage of new efficient and green construction practices when expanding their building 
stocks.  Smart  city  development  requires  coordination  among  national  and  local  governments,  businesses, 

and residents to deliver intelligent solutions for reducing infrastructure and service costs, while at the same 

time improving quality of life.   

 

The challenge for many developing countries will be to choose between infrastructure expansion to support 
growing economies and the negative impact of accelerated urbanization. In this area, development banks can 

help support governments during the decision making process, and help formulate sustainable long-term city 

planning  strategies.  Policy  makers  should  promote  the  development  of  integrated  eco-efficient  social  and 
physical infrastructure that takes into account future expansion and maintenance plans, improved population 

distributions and land use, and multi-sectorial and systemic interventions that generate widespread positive 

externalities.     

 

 

 

26 

 

Chapter 6. 

Promoting clean and sustainable technologies 

 

Cities consume an estimated 67% of global energy and account for roughly 70% of global greenhouse gas 
emissions (IEA, 2008 and 2010), mainly due to the concentration of industrial production, transportation and 

construction.  Unfortunately,  cities  are  commonly  locked  in  to  antiquated  and  inefficient  technologies  as  a 

result of past capital  investments in facilities that are  yet  to realize returns and the ongoing need to please 
entrenched  and  diverse  stakeholder  groups.  The  productive  sectors  in  many  developing  countries,  for 

example, have access  to abundant  supply  of  water  and  energy  resources,  and  continue  to  use technology 

that  emits  high  levels  of  greenhouse  gases  (GHGs).  It  will  be  of  vital  importance  to  promote  changes  and 
innovation in technology associated to renewable energy. However, there continues to be a lack of awareness 

about green industries, financing instruments or fiscal incentives, as well as limited access and incentives to 

develop  cutting-edge  technology  tools  and  services  in  many  developing  countries.  Ultimately,  building 
sustainable cities will necessitate both improved demand side management—such as smarter buildings and 

better light bulbs—and supply side developments —like more efficient energy production and distribution. 

 

According to the IEA, buildings represent an important source of GHG emissions and account for roughly 40% 
of  primary  energy  consumption  in  most  countries6.  Green  architecture,  including  water  harvesting  and 
sustainable urban drainage, energy-efficiency designs – optimized orientation, use of heat-reflecting and solar 
materials,  green  roofs  and  walls  –  and  decentralized  electricity  generation  are  the  backbone  of 

energy-efficient  building  practices.  There  has  been  a  significant  uptake  in  energy-efficient  engineering  and 

construction technologies in many developed countries, and governments have promoted the sector with tax 
incentives and building codes for retrofitting and new construction. Such initiatives are also starting to take-off 

in developing cities like Bangkok, Delhi and Seoul, among others. ―From 2010 to 2050, worldwide investment 

in buildings will range from $300 billion to $1 trillion per year‖ (UNEP, 2011b). Creating more efficient buildings 
will help ensure the reduction of energy consumption and costs over the long-term. 

 

The promotion of greener transport can improve access to services, help reduce pollution levels  and health 

inequalities for city residents. Expanded green urban areas can also promote social cohesion, as the negative 

environmental externalities of rapid urbanization affects the poor the most. Semi-treated wastewater can used 
to  water  public  parks  and  greenery  and  waterless  urinals  and  toilets  promoted  to  decrease  the  overall 

utilization  of  water.  Promoting  community-based  waste  processing  and  recycling  programs,  and  providing 

storage  facilities  and  markets  for  compost  and  recyclable  materials  can  help  reduce  the  amount  of  waste 
directed to landfills. Emerging cities should look towards circular development models, in which water, waste 

and energy output is recycled, so that sewer water, for example, can be used to cultivate fish and plants, or 

solid  wastes  recycled  to  create  methane  gas.  These  initiatives  not  only  decrease  harmful  environmental 
effects, but enhance city beautification and contribute to social capital through improvements in quality of life. 

Human  and  social  capital  development,  in  turn,  is  essential  to  workforce  productivity,  innovation,  and 

competitiveness.   

 

The renewable energy sector – solar, wind, hydroelectric, geothermal and bio-fuel – continues to attract huge 

investment.  By  2010,  a  total  US$243  billion  had  been  committed  to  this  sector  worldwide;  51  and  this  is 

                                            
6  http://www.iea.org/topics/sustainablebuildings/ 

 

27 

projected to rise to US$630 billion by 2030, in the process creating as many as 20 million jobs. Although much 

of this has concentrated on developed countries, investment in renewable energies is beginning to materialize 

in  the  developing  world  as  well‖  (UN-HABITAT  2012).  The  employment  potential  of  environmental 
sustainability  is  huge,  in  the  production  and  deployment  of  new  technical  systems:  renewable  energies, 

sustainable  urban  transportation,  waste  recycling,  retrofitting  old  buildings,  new  sustainable  buildings  and 

infrastructures, and other environmental services.    Innovative measures like micro-generation of renewable 
energy  through  wind-power  and  solar-power  technologies  as  well  as  combined  heating/cooling  plants  and 

decentralized energy plants are being assessed for urban development strategies. Expanded networking of 

locally generated low-carbon energy will be vital for the sustainability of cities of the future.   

 

 

Information  technology  systems  integrate  urban  development  activities,  increasing  efficiencies  and  cost 

recovery  across  sectors,  and  enabling  improved  service  delivery  and  management.    Using  ICT  as  an 
instrument for integrated urban development not only improves information collection but also provides more 

efficient  services,  reduces  waste and  informs  residents  about  resource consummation  and  how  to  improve 

their quality of life.    One example is smart grid.    It is computerized electric utility grid, which can optimize the 
use  of  power  and  reduce  loss  by  not  only  monitoring  the  energy  coming  in  from  diverse  sources  but  also 

detecting where energy is needed through a two-way communication system that collects data about power 

usage by consumers. ICT expansion can also help centralize city governance and help manage infrastructure 
development as demand increases. E-governance tools, such as the internet and mobile computing improve 

public  sector  information  and  service delivery,  encourage citizen  participation,  and  help make governments 

more accountable and transparent. ICT development also contributes to local competitiveness prosperity by 
making  cities  more  efficient  and  business  friendly,  as  well  as  attracting  green  industries.  Furthermore,  ICT 

promotes  greater  social  inclusiveness,  by  opening  up  channels  for  greater  resident  participation  in  city 

management and public service provision.   

 

―The  greening  of  cities  will  require  some,  or  preferably  all,  of  the  following:  (i)  reduction  of  chemical  and 
physical hazards, (ii) control over environmental impacts on health, (iii) creation of quality environments for all, 

(iv)  minimized  ecological  footprints  outside  the  urban  area,  (v)  ensured  sustainable  consumption,  and  (vi) 

adaptation  to  climate  change  impacts‖  (Satterthwaite,  1997).  Building  green  cities  will  require  overcoming 
disjointed  governance  structures,  affordability  and  consumer  preference  issues  that  decrease  investment 

interest in green technologies. Smart technology helps enable synergies across development sectors. Urban 

growth  boundaries,  land-use  and  density  regulations  and  bonuses,  traffic  and  vehicular  control,  car-fee 
developments, and emission controls, are some examples of regulations and planning mechanisms that can 

help  achieve  greener  cities.  Additionally,  widespread  information  relating  to  environmental  performance  of 

cities can help promote greater policy reform.     

 

 

28 

 

Chapter 7. 

Conclusion and way forward 

 

The world is in the midst of a sweeping population shift from the countryside to  the city. Urban dwellers will 
likely account for some 86 per cent of the population in more developed regions and for 64 per cent of that in 

less developed regions (UNDESA 2012). This transition presents many challenges including slum build-up, 

income  inequality,  increased  consumption  and  solid-waste,  intensified  use  of  natural  resources  and 
greenhouse  gas  emissions,  among  others.  And  these  challenges  are  exacerbated  by  unplanned  city 

expansion  and  urban sprawl.  Consequently,  the choices  that  city  planners  make to manage the  process  of 

rapid  and  increasing  urbanization  will  have  profound  consequences  for  citizens´  well-being  and  economic 
future.  Urban  professionals  must  collaborate  with  architects,  engineers,  landscapers,  transportation 

coordinators and land lawyers, as well as environmentalists and community members to ensure a holistic and 

inclusive approach to city design and management in the Post-2015 era.   

 

Cities  in  developing  countries  face  a  wide  range  of  administrative,  technical,  and  financial  limitations  that 

make  it  difficult  to  deal  with  the  challenges  of  rapid  and  increasing  urbanization.  Inefficient  institutional 
structures and disjointed budgets, timelines and goals have often led to fragmented urban planning solutions. 

With  limited  access  to  finance,  governments  in  many  developing  governments  must  look  to  improve  their 

investment environments through macroeconomic policy and regulatory reform and by securing project cash 
flows. Better service delivery  and infrastructure management  will  help increase public support for user fees 

and tax collection mechanisms. There is an urgent need to  capture more private sector resources; funding 

SUD is beyond the means of public expenditure. More innovative financial products will be required, as well 
as  greater  support  from  development  banks  that  can  mobilize  a  wide  range  of  domestic  and  international 

resources,  provide  the  leverage  to  tap  new  markets  and  private  investors,  not  only  providing  country  risk 

guarantees to help ensure lower interest rates, longer maturities and more flexible debt parameters, but also 
helping structure pooled initiatives that reduce individual investment costs. Development banks can also help 

improve  investment  climates  by  guiding  PPP  policy  and  institutional  framework  reform,  backing  PPP  pilot 

projects and structuring financing vehicles that help provide attractive risk/return profiles for private investors. 
In addition to their financing support, development banks can offer technical assistance for policy, institutional 

and  capacity  development  and  promote  knowledge  sharing  programs  and  networks,  data  collection  and 

feasibility  studies  that  can  help  governments  design  and  apply  comprehensive  and  effective  urban  growth 
strategies.     

 

The importance of Sustainable Urban Development (SUD) has gained substantial momentum in recent years; 

measures  to  mainstream  comprehensive  planning  and  management,  incorporating  economic,  social  and 

environmental factors are now widely promoted in the international development community. Standard setting 
will  continue  to  be  instrumental  in  diffusing  the  concept,  as  well  as  creating  new  markets  for  integrated 

interventions that attract private sector actors. Although many useful city planning tools are available, there is 

no one-size-fits-all approach to accommodate the diverse set of challenges and threats cities face. However, 
the following have been identified as key factors in SUD strategy and policy formulation: 

  ensure  comprehensiveness  and  incorporate  more  proactive  and  incentivizing  measures  for  local 

authorities to tackle high priority issues (e.g. poverty reduction or climate change) 

  promote stakeholder coordination and participation to ensure the integrity of urban development,   

 

29 

 

identify inter-linkages among different and sometimes conflicting needs, maximize synergies between 

them where possible, mitigate unintended consequences of a policy and address problems in a 

 

sequenced manner, 

  encourage ―co-benefit‖ measures that can cater to multiple needs through a single policy intervention 

and utilize fewer resources,   

  effective regulatory and financial frameworks to enhance implementation, and 

  built-in mechanisms to monitor and revise strategies to accommodate changing needs 

 
Urbanization is advantageous in many ways. As cities grow, they increasingly benefit from agglomeration or 

economies of scale that  improve productivity  in many  industry  and service sectors. In fact, delivering basic 

services  such  as  water,  housing  and  education  is  less  costly  in  concentrated  population  centers  than  in 
sparsely  populated  areas  (Richard Dobbs  et  al.,  2011).  Large  cities  also  attract  the  most  talent  and inward 

investment, and are often at the center of a cluster of smaller cities, which creates network effects that spur 

even greater economic growth and productivity. However, leaders must be able to respond to the increasing 
complexity of cities, and provide effective planning and management capable of both mitigating the risks and 

exploiting  benefits  of  urban  growth.  SUD  strategies  should  give  rise  to  cities  more  conducive  to  economic 

growth  and  social  inclusion,  environmentally  sustainable,  and  resilient  to  climate  change,  natural  disasters 
and other risks.   

 

The IDFC will do its part to accelerate and expand support for SUD by scaling-up its collaboration with central 
and local governments, international institutions and private sector actors using its broad partnership network. 

It  will  beef  up  its  efforts  to  endorse  knowledge-sharing  networks,  exchange  best  practices  and  promote 

member experiences and expertise with city planners and urban development agencies. IDFC members will 
also continue provide technical assistance and other diagnostic tools to help city planners improve their urban 

policies and development strategies. For all that, financing SUD will remain one of the most critical challenges 

in developing countries. IDFC members are in a position to use their comparative advantage in the sector to 
help  improve  cities´  access  to  funding.  The  IDFC  will  bolster  its  efforts  to  promote  and  develop  innovative 

mechanisms and financial products to help mobilize resources and draw more private capital to SUD projects 

and initiatives.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30 

 

Appendix 1    The Habitat Agenda: Global Urban Indicators – Selected statistics 

Chapter/ Goals 

1.Shelter 

Indicators 

 

Goal 1 : Promote the right to adequate 
housing 

Goal 2 : Provide security of tenure 

Goal 3 : Provide equal access to credit 

Indicator 1.1: durable structures 
Indicator 1.2: overcrowding 
Indicator 1.3: housing price and rent-to-income 
Indicator 1.4: right to adequate housing 

Indicator 1.5: secure tenure 
Indicator 1.6: authorized housing 
Indicator 1.7: evictions 
Indicator 1.8: housing finance 

Goal 4 : Provide equal access to land 

Indicator 1.9: land price-to-income 

Goal 5 : Provide access to basic services 

Indicator 1.10: access to safe water 
Indicator 1.11: access to improves sanitation 
Indicator 1.12: connection to services 

2. Social development and eradication of poverty 

Goal 6 : Provide equal opportunities for safe 
and healthy life 

Goal 7 : Promote social integration and 
support disadvantaged groups 
Goal 8 : Promote gender equality in human 
settlements development 

Indicator 2.1: under-five mortality 
Indicator 2.2: homicides 
Indicator 2.4: HIV prevalence 
Indicator 2.4: urban violence 
Indicator 2.5: poor households 

Indicator 2.6: literacy rates 
Indicator 2.7: school enrolment 
Indicator 2.8: women councilors 
Indicator 2.9: gender inclusion 

3. Environmental Management 

 

Goal 9 : Promote geographically-balanced 
settlement structures 

Indicator 3.1: urban population growth 
Indicator 3.2: planned settlements 
 

Goal 10 : Manage supply and demand for 
water in an effective manner 

Indicator 3.3: price of water 
Indicator 3.4: water consumption 

Goal 11 : Reduce urban pollution 

Indicator 3.5: wastewater treated 
Indicator 3.6: solid waste disposal 
Indicator 3.7:regular solid waste collection   

Goal 12 : Prevent disasters and rebuild 
settlements 

Indicator 3.8:houses in hazardous locations 
Indicator 3.9: disaster prevention and mitigation instruments 
 

Goal 13 : Promote effective and 
environmentally sound transportation 
systems 

Indicator 3.10: travel time 
Indicator 3.11: transport modes   
 

Goal 14: Support mechanisms to prepare 
and implement local environmental plans 
and local Agenda 21 initiatives 

Indicator 3.12: local environmental plans 
 

4. Economic Development 

 

Goal 15 : Strengthen small and 
micro-enterprises, particularly those 
developed by women 
Goal 16 :Encourage public-private sector 
partnership and stimulate productive 
employment opportunities 

Indicator 4.1: informal employment 
 

Indicator 4.2: city product 
Indicator 4.3: unemployment 

5. Economic Development 

 

Goal 17: Promote decentralization and 
strengthen local authorities 

Goal 18: Encourage and support 
participation and civic engagement 

Indicator 5.1: local government revenue 
Indicator 5.2: decentralization 
Indicator 5.3: voters participation 
Indicator 5.4: civic association 

 

31 

Goal 19: Ensure transparent, accountable 
and efficient governance of towns, cities and 
metropolitan areas 

 

MDG Goal 7, Target 7D 
Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability 

 

Indicator 5.5:citizens participation 

Indicator 5.6: transparency and accountability 

 

 

 

Indicator 7.10: Proportion of urban population living in slums 
 

Source UNHABITAT    http://www.unhabitat.org/content.asp?typeid=19&catid=646&cid=8383 

 

32 

 

References 

 

Annez, P.C., Buckley, R.M., and Spence, M. (2009). Urbanization and Growth. Washington, DC: The World 
Bank 

 

Aromar  Revi  and  Cynthia  Rosenzweig.  (2013),  ―The  Urban  Opportunity:  Enabling  Transformative  and 
Sustainable Development”.   

http://www.post2015hlp.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Revi-Rosenzweig_The-Urban-Opportunity-Enabling
-Transformative-and-Sustainable-Development.pdf 

 

Asian  Development  Bank.  (2012).Urban  Development  Series:  Green  Cities.  Mandaluyong  City:  Asian 
Development Bank. 

 

Chandy, L., Hermias, J., and Kaharas, H. (2010).  External Assistance for Urban Development. Washington, 
DC: The Brookings Institute 

 
Credit Suisse Emerging Market Research Institute. (2012). “Opportunities in an Urbanizing World”. . Zurich. 
Credit Suisse 
http://static.pulso.cl/20121018/1637131.pdf 
 

Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs,  UN,  (2012),  ―World  Urbanization  Prospects,  2011  Revision”. 
United Nations 

http://esa.un.org/unup/pdf/WUP2011_Highlights.pdf 
 

Ecofys, 
http://www.idfc.org/Downloads/IDFC_green_finance_mapping_report__2012_06_14.pdf 

―Mapping  of  Green  Finance  Delivered  by 

(2012). 

IDFC  Members 

in  2011”. 

 
The Economist Intelligence Unit (2012). “The Green City Index: A summary of the Green City Index research 
series”. Munich: Siemens AG 
http://81.47.175.201/ETMS/rankings/2012_European_Green_City_Index_sum_report.pdf 
 
Ejaz Chani and Ravi Kanbur. (2013). “Urbanization and (In)Formalization‖. Washington, DC: The World Bank 
Policy Research Working Paper 6374 
http://www.kanbur.dyson.cornell.edu/papers/UrbanizationAndInformalization.pdf 
 

The  High  Level  Panel  of  Eminent  Persons  on  the  Post-2015  Development  Agenda  (HLP)/  United  Nations 
(2013),  ―A  New  Global  Partnership:  Eradicate  Poverty  and  Transform  Economies  through  Sustainable 
Development”. New York: United nations Publications 

http://www.post2015hlp.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/UN-Report.pdf 

 

 

33 

International Energy Agency (2008), ―World Energy Outlook 2008” Paris: International Energy Agency 

 

http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2008-1994/weo2008.pdf 

 

International Energy Agency (2010), ―World Energy Outlook 2010” Paris: International Energy Agency 

http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weo2010.pdf 

 
JICA. (2013). “Urban Growth for Inclusive and Dynamic Development”. Tokyo: JICA   
http://www.jica.go.jp/english/our_work/thematic_issues/urban/c8h0vm00005znnor-att/overview_01.pdf 
 

Jose  de  Luna-Martinez  and  Carlos  Leonardo  Vicente  (2012)  ―Global  Survey  of  Development  Banks”. 
Washington, DC: World Bank 

http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-5969 

 
Keivani, R. (2010). ―A review of the main challenges to urban sustainability”. Oxford: International Journal of 
Urban Sustainable Development   
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/19463131003704213 
 

KPMG. (2010). Linking Cities to Finance: Overcoming Bottlenecks to Financing StrategicUrban Infrastructure 
Investments. Background paper, Shanghai, China, September 27–28. 

 
OECD. (2013) “Green Growth in Cities, OECD Green Growth Studies”. Paris: OECD Publishing   
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/urban-rural-and-regional-development/green-growth-in-cities_9789264195325-e
n 
 
OECD (2012) “Redefining “urbanization”: A new way to measure metropolitan areas. ”Paris: OECD Publishing   
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/urban-rural-and-regional-development/redefining-urban_9789264174108-en 
 

Peirce, Neil R. et al. (2008). Century of the City. New York: The Rockefeller Foundation. 

 
Ravallion,  M.,  S.  Chen,  and  P.  Sangraula.  (2007)  “The  Urbanization  of  Global  Poverty”,  Research  Digest 
newsletter: Vol1, (No. 4). Washington. DC: World Bank 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPA/Resources/Training-Materials/Urbanization_of_GlobalPoverty.pdf 
 
Ravi Kanbur and Juzhong Zhuang. (2013) “Urbanization and Inequality in Asia”. Asian Development Review. 
Vol. 30, no.1. Metro Manila: Asian Development Bank and Asian Development Bank Institute, 
http://www.kanbur.dyson.cornell.edu/papers/UrbanizationAndInequalityInAsia.pdf 

 

Richard Dobbs, Sven Smit, Jaana Remes, James Manyika, Charles Roxburgh and Alejandra Restrepo (2011), 
―Urban World: Mapping the Economic Power of Cities” . : McKinsey Global Institute 

 

Satterthwaite,  D.  (1997).  Sustainable  cities  or  cities  that  contribute  to  sustainable  development?  Urban 
Studies. 34 (10), 1667–1691. 

 

34 

 

 
Susmita Dasgupta, Benoit Laplante, Craig Meisner, David Wheeler and Jianping Yan (2007). “The Impact of 
Sea  Level  Rise  on  Developing  Countries:  A  Comparative  Analysis”  World  Bank  Policy  Research  Working 
Paper 4135. Washington, DC: World Bank 
http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-4136 
 
S.  Mostafa  Rasoolimanesh  et  al.  (2011),  “Achievement  to  Sustainable  Urban  Development  using  City 
Development Strategies: A Comparison between Cities Alliance and the World Bank definitions”. Journal of 
Sustainable Development Vol.4, No.5. Toronto: Canadian Center of Science and Education 
http://www.ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/jsd/article/viewFile/11340/8798 
 

United Nations (2013), “The Millennium Development Goals Report 2013”. New York: United Nations 

http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/report-2013/mdg-report-2013-english.pdf 

 
United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP).  (2011).  Buildings  –  Investing  in  energy  and  resource 
efficiency. Towards a Green Economy. Bangkok: UNESCAP. 
 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA). (2012). “World Urbanization Prospects 
The 2011 Revision”. New York: UNDESA/ Population Division 
http://esa.un.org/unup/pdf/FINAL-FINAL_REPORT%20WUP2011_Annextables_01Aug2012_Final.pdf 
 
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT). (2002) “Sustainable Urbanisation Achieving 
Agenda 21”. Nairobi: UN-HABITAT 
 
UN-HABITAT(2003). “The  Challenges  of  Slums: Global Report on Human Settlements”. London: Earthscan 
Publications Ltd.   
 
UN-HABITAT  (2009)  “Global  Report  on  Human  Settlement  2009:  Planning  Sustainable  Cities”.  London: 
Earthscan Publications Ltd 
 
UN-HABITAT (2010). “State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011- Cities for All: Bridging the Urban Divide” London: 
Earthscan Publications Ltd 
 
UNHABITAT. (2013). The State of the World’s Cities. New York: Routledge 
 

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR)(2011), ―Global Assessment Report on Disaster 
Risk Reduction”. London: United Nations Publication 

http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/gar/2011/en/home/download.html 
 
UN University- Institute of Advanced Studies. (2013). ―Urban Development with Climate Co-Benefits: Aligning 
Climate,  Environmental  and  Other  Development  Goals  in  Cities”.  Yokohama:  United  Nations  University 
Instituted of Advanced studies 
 
World  Bank  (2010),  “Natural  Hazards,  Unnatural  Disasters;  The  Economics  of  Effective  Prevention”, 
Washington, DC: World Bank   
http://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr.org/files/nhud/files/NHUD-Overview.pdf 
 

The World  Bank.  (2012).  Inclusive  Green  Growth:  The  Pathway  to  Sustainable  Development. Washington, 
DC: The World Bank. 

 

 

35 

 

World Bank. (2013) “Planning, Connecting and Financing Cities - Now”. Washington, DC: World Bank 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSDNET/Resources/Urbanization-Planning-Connecting-Financing-201
3.pdf 
 
World bank, ADB and JICA (2010). “Climate Risks and Adaptation in Asian Coastal Megacities: A Synthesis 
Report”. Washington, DC: World Bank 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EASTASIAPACIFICEXT/Resources/226300-1287600424406/coastal_meg
acities_fullreport.pdf 
 

World  Bank  and  IMF  (2013),  ―Global  Monitoring  Report  2013:  Rural-Urban  Dynamics  and  the  Millennium 
Development Goals”. Washington, DC: World Bank 

http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROSPECTS/Resources/334934-1327948020811/8401693-13557533
54515/8980448-1366123749799/GMR_2013_Full_Report.pdf 

 

World  Economic  Forum.  (2013).  ―The  Green  Investment  Report:  The  ways  and  means  to  unlock  private 
finance  for  green  growth  –  A  report  of  the  Green  Growth  Action  Alliance”.  Geneva:  The  World  Economic 
Forum. 3. 

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GreenInvestment_Report_2013.pdf 

 

 

 

 

 

36 

