EQUITy AND SOCIA

L IN

C

L

U

S
I

O

N

 
E
R
U
T
C
U
R
T
S
A

INFR

B I L I T y

A

A I N

T

S

ENVIRONMENTA L  S U

P
R
O

D

U

C

T

I

V

I

T

y

PROSPERITy

QUALITy OF LI F E

STATE OF WOMEN  
IN CITIES 2012-2013
GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIES

STATE OF WOMEN  
IN CITIES 2012-2013

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIES

Copyright © United Nations Human Settlements Programme 2013

All rights reserved 
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 
P. O. Box 30030, 00100 Nairobi GPO KENYA 
Tel: 254-020-7623120 (Central Office) 
www.unhabitat.org

DISCLAIMER
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in 
this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the 
legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, 
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers of boundaries. 

Views expressed in this publication do not necessarily 
reflect those of the United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme, the United Nations, or its Member States.

Excerpts may be reproduced without authorization, 
on condition that the source is indicated.

HS/015/13E 
iSBN (Series): 978-92-1-133399-2 
iSBN (Volume): 978-92-1-132553-9

ii

Front cover photos

infrastructure : © UN-Habitat
Productivity: © UN-Habitat
Environmental sustainability: © Joselito Derit/UN-Habitat
Equity and social inclusion: © Julius Mwelu/UN-Habitat 
Quality of life: © UN-Habitat
Photos Credits:

Page 2: © World Bank
Page 5: © iRiN 
Page 18: © John Hogg / World Bank
Page 24: © iRiN
Page 26: © iRiN
Page 37: © Veronica Wijaya/UN-Habitat 
Page 45: © iRiN 
Page 59: © Caylee Hong/UN-Habitat 
Page 66: © Shutterstock
Page 68: © Veronica Wijaya/UN-Habitat

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Table of Contents

Acknowledgements 
Foreword 
Introduction 
Key Messages 
Policy Recommendations and Actions 

PART ONE 

CHAPTER 1.1  Conceptualising Gender and the Prosperity of Cities 
What are Prosperous Cities?  
The Gendered Nature of Urban Poverty and Prosperity 
Urban Prosperity, Gender and Empowerment Nexus 
Relationships between women empowerment, prosperity and urbanisation 

CHAPTER 1.2  Regional Variations in Urbanisation, Gender Equality  

and The ‘Prosperity Of Cities’ 

The African Region 
The Asian Region 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 
Challenges of collecting and using sex-disaggregated data on cities 

PART TwO 

CHAPTER 2.1  Gender, Quality Of Life And Prosperity Of Cities 
Attitudes towards women’s quality of life in cities 
Women, gender and housing 
Women, gender and health 
Violence against women and gender-based violence in cities 

CHAPTER 2.2  Gender, Infrastructure and Prosperity of Cities 
Attitudes towards women’s access to infrastructure in cities 
Gender and Basic Services 
Gender and public transport 
Gender and community spaces in cities 

CHAPTER 2.3  Gender, Productivity, Employment and Prosperity of Cities 
Attitudes towards women’s productivity in cities 
Education, vocational training and human capital are key for urban productivity  
Gender, employment and productivity in cities 
Capturing and enhancing women’s productivity and economic empowerment in cities 

CHAPTER 2.4  Gender, Equity-Based Development and Prosperity 
Attitudes towards gender equity in cities 
Gender and formal urban politics 
Gender and informal urban politics 

PART ThREE 

CHAPTER 3.1  Gender Policies, Institutions and Prosperity of Cities 
Gender-sensitive and gender-equitable prosperous cities 
Perceptions of gender policies and institutions in cities 
Gender-sensitive and gender-equitable urban policies  

BIBLIOGRAPhy   

iii

vi
vii
viii
x
xiii

2

5
5
7
7
14

18
18
19
19
21

24

26
26
27
29
32

37
37
40
42
43

45
45
47
49
56

59
59
60
62

66

68
68
69
72

79

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESList of Tables

Table 1.1.1:  Defining a Prosperous City 
Table 1.1.2  Perceptions of elements that contribute to women’s prosperity in cities 
Table 1.2.1  GNI per capita, poverty, urbanisation and gender inequality in developing regions 
Table 1.2.2 

Inequality (Gini coefficient), percent urban slum population, multi- dimensional poverty (MPI) and gender inequality  
– three most urbanised countries in major developing regions 

Table 2.2.1  Ranking of access to different types of urban infrastructure by women 
Table 2.2.2  Ranking of contribution of infrastructure development to women’s lives 
Table 2.3.1  Ranking of factors making the city more productive for women 
Table 2.4.1  Factors limiting ability to achieve greater levels of equity 
Table 3.1.1  Most notable initiative being implemented to make city more gender equitable (per cent) 
Table 3.1.2  Most effective actor in bringing about gender equality (per cent) 

List of Boxes

Types of power that underpin empowerment processes 
The evolution of women’s land rights in Nepal  
The multiple impacts of multidimensional slum upgrading on women in Agra, India 

Box 1.1.1 
Box 2.1.2 
Box 2.1.3 
Box 2.1.4  Women’s concerns about urban security and safety in Cape Town, South Africa 
Domestic violence in Cebu City, the Philippines: the ‘Bantay Banay’ programme 
Box 2.1.5 
Gender dimensions of improved connectivity in cities: the Bogotá experience under Mayor Enrique Peñalosa 
Box 2.2.1 
‘Girl Friendly’ schools initiative in The Gambia 
BOX 2.3.1 
BOX 2.3.2 
Terminological distinctions between unpaid work, carework and unpaid care work 
Strategic Objectives of the ILO’s ‘Decent Work’ Agenda 
BOX 2.3.3 
BOX 2.3.4  Women in Liberia and the ‘Trade at Hand – Business Opportunities for your Cell Phone’ project 
BOX 2.3.5  Women and the ‘green economy’: organising waste pickers in Pune, India 
Instrumentalising gender in a slum upgrading project, Carácas, Venezuela 
BOX 2.4.1 
A gender-sensitive prosperous city 
BOX 3.1.1 
BOX 3.1.2 
The ‘3V’ framework  

6
16
20

21
38
39
46
61
70
71

8
29
31
33
35
43
49
50
51
56
57
63
69
76

iv

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013List of Figures

Figure 1.1.1  Conceptualising women’s empowerment 
Figure 1.1.2  Critical elements in conceptualising gender and the prosperity of cities 
Figure 1.1.3  Gender and urban prosperity nexus 
Figure 1.1.4  Perceptions of relationship between urbanisation and prosperity of women 
Figure 1.2.1  Correlation between SIGI and percentage of the world’s MDP 
Figure 2.1.1  Perceptions of commitment of city policies to promote quality of life of women  
Figure 2.1.2  Perceptions of safety and security for women in cities 
Figure 2.2.1  Commitment of city to promoting infrastructure development to engage women in urban development and productive work 
Figure 2.2.2  Barriers affecting infrastructure underdevelopment on lives of women (per cent answering yes) 
Figure 2.2.3  Most important effects of infrastructure underdevelopment on lives of women  
Figure 2.3.1  Obstacles to generating economic productivity and empowerment of women 
Figure 2.3.2  Female school drop-out due to pregnancy and early marriage, slum and non-slum residence in selected countries (percentage) 
Figure 2.3.3  Equality of access to high quality and affordable educational opportunities  
Figure 2.3.4  Service sector employment shares by gender and region, 1999 - 2009 (percentage) 
Figure 2.3.5  Industrial employment shares by gender and region, 1999 - 2009 (percentage) 
Figure 2.3.6  Segmentation by sex within the informal economy 
Figure 2.4.1  Relationship between economic development and gender equity 
Figure 2.4.2  Proportion of seats in lower or single house of parliament held by women, 2010 (%) 
Figure 3.1.1  Perceptions of whether the city has a gender policy 
Figure 3.1.2  Rating of policies promoting quality of life of women 
Figure 3.1.3  Rating of policies promoting infrastructure for women 
Figure 3.1.4  Rating of policies promoting productivity for women 
Figure 3.1.5  Rating of policies promoting equity for women 

9
10
15
16
22
27
34
38
40
41
46
47
48
52
53
54
60
62
70
73
74
75
77

V

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESAcknowledgements

CORE TEAM:
Director: Oyebanji Oyelaran-Oyeyinka 
Coordinator: Lucia Kiwala 
Principal Authors: Oyebanji Oyelaran-Oyeyinka & Lucia Kiwala 
Design and Layout: Andrew Ondoo & Eugene Papa 
Printer: UNON, Publishing Services Section, Nairobi 
 

iSO 14001:2004-certified

UN-habitat ADVISORy AND TEChNICAL SUPPORT: 
Edlam Yemeru, Ananda Weliwita, Anusuya Bernejee, Modupe 
Adebanjo, Cecilia Andersson, Everngelista Mutandi, Gulelat 
Kebede, Angela Mwai, Mariam Yunusa, Victor Mgendi, 
Andrew Ondoo, Joshua Obayan and Oluyomi Ola-David 
LEAD CONSULTANTS: 
Sylvia Chant: introductory Chapter and Composite Report 
Cathy Mcilwaine: Summary and Composite Reports 
FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION: 
Government of Norway
STATISTICAL CONSULTANTS: 
Kaushalesh Lal and Boladale A. Adebowale 
 

CITy REPORTS FOR POLICy ANALySIS:  
Catherine Adeya: Cities Consolidated Report,  
Kaushalesh Lal and Boladale A. Adebowale: 
Statistical analytical reports. 
CITy COORDINATORS:  
Aasha Ramesh (Bangalore), Maretha de Waal (Johannesburg), 
Carol D. Watson Williams (Kingston), Tabitha Ndegemo 
(Kampala), and Eliane Faerstein (Rio de Janeiro)
OThER CONTRIBUTORS: 
Alice Evans, Belinda Fleischmann, Steve Huxton, Ralph Kinnear, 
Chloë Last, isik Ozurgetem, Jeff Steller, Lindsay Walton, Gwendolyn 
Beetham, Marty Chen, Robin Dunford, Julia Martin, Chris Mogridge, 
Diane Perrons, Romi Savini, and Demetria Tsoutouras; everyone who 
participated in the Expert Group Meeting on ‘Women‘s Economic 
Empowerment: Critical issues for Prosperous Cities’ at Harvard 
University, and Marty Chen for the reproduction of Figure 2.3.6
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT TEAM 
Anne Muchiri, Florence Bunei, Rumana Naquib, Elizabeth 
Kahwae, Margaret Swaleh and Cleopatra Wachania
We are also very grateful to the following for the use of their 
photographs: Taylor Barr, Danielle Da Silva, Andrew Fleming, Michael 
Keith, Pepe Mateos, and Carlosfelipe Pardo, and Romi Savini. 

Vi

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Foreword

Equitable, inclusive and 

prosperous cities need to harness the 
full potential of all citizens – men, 
women, and the youth.  This is 
important as the world grapples with 
the effects of the global economic 
and financial crisis that has resulted 
in food insecurity and widespread 
unemployment among women 
and youth. This report presents the 

findings of a survey on perceptions of policy-makers, decision–
makers, academics, and city dwellers on gender and the prosperity 
of cities. The report is UN-Habitat’s contribution towards 
understanding the plight of women in cities. Following from the 
study, it suggests policy recommendations to enhance gender 
equality, equity and prosperity of women in cities. 

Cities are recognised as engines of economic growth and centres 

of social, political, cultural and technological advancement.  
However, 21st Century cities and towns are divided cities and towns 
characterised by urban poverty amidst richness. This is exacerbated 
by poor practices in urban planning and design, inadequate 
land management and administration, poor physical and social 
infrastructure, and the lack of equitable distribution of resources 
and redistributive policies. 

Women form the majority of the poor, and in some countries 
they form up to 70 per cent of the poor in both rural and urban 
areas. This is indeed a challenge, and the more reason why gender 
and the prosperity of cities need to be addressed by all concerned. 
For women, as well as men, the city’s primary attraction is the 
possibility of economic opportunities which are unavailable to 
them in rural areas. Women migrate from rural to urban areas 
mainly in search of employment, and, in order to escape from 
poverty, gender-based violence, gender discrimination and 
disinheritance.    

Moreover, there is evidence to show that future cities will be 

predominantly occupied by women, especially elderly women of 80 
years and above, and female headed households. Yet cultures, value 
systems and beliefs, and to a large extent development policies and 
programmes are not changing at the same pace as the demographic 
shifts. Gender discrimination is still rife in social, economic, and 
political spheres.      

The UN-Habitat gender study of 2012 shows that, first, 

urbanisation is largely associated with the prosperity of women in 
theory, but in practice few women actually benefit from economic 
growth and prosperity of cities.  This is largely as a result of 
discriminatory practices and, the lack of formal recognition of 
women’s reproductive work, and to some extent, undervaluation of 

productive work, especially in the informal sector, where women 
are the majority. The world-over, women constitute the majority of 
care workers. 

Second, women’s economic empowerment is linked with 

economic productivity. However, lack of education and appropriate 
knowledge as well as skills are the main obstacles to women’s 
prosperity, followed by lack of access to productive resources.  
Other factors include lack of access to land, property and security 
of tenure, lack of access to basic services, especially sanitation, as 
well as security and safety concerns in public spaces. 

Third, the study highlights the promotion of entrepreneurship 
and the need to create productive employment opportunities as 
key policy actions required in order to enhance prosperity for 
women in cities. Fourth, the study affirms the need for increased 
investment in infrastructure development in order to lessen the 
reproductive work and time burdens on women, and to make 
urban planning and design more gender responsive, not only for 
the good of women, but to enhance prosperity for all.  

The time is now ripe for cities and local governments to put in 
place gender equality policies, strategies and programmes which 
promote livelihoods and economic empowerment of women. 
In this regard, partnerships are fundamental to bringing about 
equitable and inclusive cities and ensure women’s prosperity.  
NGOs, civil society, grassroots groups, academics, and all levels of 
government need to work together in promoting gender equality 
and equity in cities, while encouraging the effective participation of 
men and boys in both productive and reproductive work.

UN-Habitat’s work on urban economy and employment 
creation aims to promote strategies and policies which are 
supportive of equitable economic development, creation of decent 
jobs, especially for youth and women, and improvement in 
municipal finance. We shall continue to provide evidence-based 
information on women in cities, and to ensure that our other 
programmes and flagship reports are gender responsive. I would 
like to encourage partnership and collaboration with other UN 
agencies, governments and other actors in our efforts to address 
women in cities, particularly urban poor women in slums and the 
informal economy by drawing on the evidence presented in this 
report.   

Joan Clos 

Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director
United Nations Human Settlements Programme  

(UN-Habitat)

Vii

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESintroduction

In focusing on gender in the prosperity of cities, the State of 

Patterns of urbanisation and urban prosperity vary widely 

across developing regions.  While the most urbanised region is 
Latin America with nearly four-fifths of the population residing 
in urban settlements, Asia, which is only 42 per cent urban, 
contains the largest number of mega-cities.  India and China in 
particular, have also made the greatest strides in reducing the 
proportion of people living in slums.  In Africa, by contrast, just 
under 40 per cent of the population is urban. Although cities 
produce the major share of regional Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP), rates of slum growth are virtually parallel with those for 
urban areas as a whole.

While levels of urbanisation and economic wealth broadly 

correspond positively, as well as display an inverse relationship 
with poverty, the correlation of these variables with quantitative 
indicators of gender equality is much less systematic. This 
undermines the common hypothesis that urbanisation and 
economic growth are good for women and suggests that in 
order for urban prosperity to reach women, more efforts to 
advance gender equality are required.

Women in Cities 2012/13 reflects growing support for two main, 
and quite positive, ideas about urbanisation. First, cities are 
associated with the generation of wealth. Second, urban women 
enjoy greater social, economic and political opportunities and 
freedoms than their rural counterparts.

However, just as prosperity is not an inevitable outcome 

of urbanisation, nor is gender equality. There is considerable 
evidence to suggest that barriers to women’s ‘empowerment’ 
remain widespread in urban environments.   Nonetheless, 
broadening analysis away from the routine focus on women’s 
poverty in cities, to their shares of prosperity offers an 
unexpected advantage insofar as it draws attention to a major 
hiatus between gendered inputs and gendered outcomes in 
urban contexts.  While women in most developing countries 
contribute significantly to the ‘prosperity of cities’ through 
providing essential services, contributing substantially to urban 
housing stock, provisioning economically for households, and 
enhancing the ‘quality of life’ in their homes and communities, 
they are often the last to benefit.  This is evidenced in notable 
gender gaps in labour and employment, ‘decent work’, pay, 
tenure rights, access to, and accumulation of assets, personal 
security and safety, and representation in formal structures of 
urban governance.  

The persistent undervaluation of women’s efforts, and their 
general lack of recompense or reward, constitute a compelling 
moral, economic, political and policy rationale to understand 
how prevailing inequalities between women and men play 
out in cities, and how these might be addressed effectively. 
Moreover, these inequalities have been worsened by the adverse 
impacts of the global financial and economic crises, the food 
and fuel crises, and climate change.  Reaping the benefits of 
urban prosperity should be a right for all women and men, with 
the added spin-off that greater social, economic and political 
equality within cities is good for growth and sustainability.
Women experience different barriers and opportunities 

in cities. It is therefore essential to identify not only the 
experiences of poor women living in cities, but also the young, 
the elderly, the married, the single, the rich, the professional, 
those from different ethnic groups, sexual orientation and 
employment status not to mention spatial location in the 
city, particularly with reference to slum and non-slum areas.1 
Although the focus in this report is on women, reference is 
made to men where relevant reflecting a ‘relational’ approach 
that emphasises the dynamic interactions and negotiations 
around power that underpin women and men’s identities and 
roles.2

Viii

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Woman walking in city. Ghana.  © Arne Hoel/The World BankSCOPE OF ThE REPORT

The theme of State of the World’s Cities 2012/13 is urban 

prosperity, with the present report on State of Women in 
Cities 2012/13 focusing on gender in the prosperity of cities. 
‘Prosperity’ is invariably a positive term, implying “success, 
wealth, thriving conditions, wellbeing or good fortune”.3 
However, it also needs to encompass equity, equality and 
participation and therefore the gendered dimensions of cities. 
The State of Women in Cities 2012/13 builds upon a growing 

body of gender-aware research and advocacy on the part of 
UN-Habitat,4 including calls to make cities ‘smarter’ through 
promoting gender equality and its 2008-2013 Gender Equality 
Action Plan.5 Such initiatives complement broader policy 
agendas for gender-equitable development which have been 
advanced by major organisations within the UN system, 
bilateral institutions, national governments, international and 
national NGOs, and grassroots women’s movements since 
the UN Decade for Women (1975-1985),6 as well as aiming 
to progress the attainment of the Millennium Development 
Goals.7

The report not only draws on a wide range of academic 

research, official documentation and statistical data, but also 
on a UN-Habitat’s survey of five cities namely Bangalore 
(India), Johannesburg (South Africa), Kampala (Uganda), 

Kingston (Jamaica) and Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) with a total 
of 691 policy-makers, non-government officials, business 
people and academics working in the field of urban and gender 
development, as well as informal city dwellers (the former 
constituted 55 per cent across all cities with a high of 83 per 
cent in Kampala and a low of 18 per cent in Kingston).8 It dealt 
with perceptions of issues related to urban prosperity in relation 
to providing all its citizens with ‘quality of life’, ‘productivity’, 
‘infrastructure’ and ‘equity.

The State of Women in Cities 2012/13 comprises three 

parts. Part one – Gender and Urban Trends offers two 
chapters. Chapter 1.1 outlines the conceptual framework 
for understanding the relationships between gender and the 
prosperity of cities. This chapter explores ways of capturing 
women’s energy, dynamism and innovation in cities to create 
multidimensional prosperity. Chapter 1.2 highlights gender 
and regional urban trends. Part two focuses on Gender and 
the Prosperity of Cities, and comprises four chapters. Chapter 
2.1 considers gender and the quality of life in the prosperity 
of cities; Chapter 2.2 addresses the gendered nature of 
infrastructure; Chapter 2.3 deals with gender, productivity 
and employment; and Chapter 2.4 discusses prosperity and 
equity-based gender development. Part three reviews policies 
and institutions. The introduction, key actions, messages, and 
recommendations are presented at the beginning of the report. 

ix

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESCairo, Eygpt.  © ShutterstockKey Messages

1.  Cities of women, of older women, of female-

headed households

With just over half of the world’s current population living 
in cities, nearly all future demographic growth will be urban, 
will occur in developing regions, and will comprise a majority 
female component. Cities of the future will be marked by 
feminised urban sex ratios and pronounced in ‘older’ cohorts 
(>60 years) especially among the ‘older old’ (>80 years).9 There 
will also be growing numbers of households headed by women 
based on patterns since the late 1980s to the end of the first 
decade of the 21st century where the proportion of all urban 
households increased by 9.8 percentage points.
2.  Urbanisation and prosperity of women interlinked 

in theory but not in practice

According to UN-Habitat’s five city survey of 691 decision-

makers, policy-makers and urban dwellers carried out in 
2012, 69 per cent of respondents thought that urbanisation 
and the prosperity of women were related. However, only 7 
per cent felt that women were actually ‘prosperous across all 
types of dimensions’ (in terms of quality of life, productivity, 
infrastructure, and equality), with only 4 per cent of people in 
Rio de Janeiro and Kingston stating this. 
3.  Spatial inequality: two-thirds think that 50 per 

cent of women have no access to secure housing

In the context of the fact that 40 per cent felt that their 

city was ‘not fully committed’ to promoting quality of life for 
women, 64 per cent of people across all cities, except Kampala, 
felt that 50 per cent or more women had no access to secure 
housing. Only 28 per cent in all cities thought that existing 
efforts to attain gender equity in access to housing tenure were 
‘advanced’ or ‘very advanced’. In turn, only 23 per cent noted 
that their city had policies to address the barriers facing women 
in securing land and property tenure. Gender discrimination 
in women’s access to the rental sector must also be taken into 
account, especially as it has been more neglected policy-wise.
4.  Safety and security are a major concern for 

women in cities

Security and safety were major concerns in all cities with one-
third of urban dwellers not feeling safe at all in their city. This 
was especially marked in Johannesburg (42 per cent), Kingston 
(41 per cent) and Rio de Janeiro (41 per cent) all of which are 
cities that have notable problems with urban violence. Just over 
half of women stated that women increasingly had access to safe 
and secure public transport. This was most marked in the case 

x

of Bangalore (60 per cent) with a low of 33 per cent in Rio de 
Janeiro.
5.  women need more equitable access to 

infrastructure, especially sanitation

Although over half (53 per cent) of the survey respondents 

thought that their cities were ‘committed’ in some form to 
promoting infrastructural development to fully engage women 
in urban development and productive work, only 22 per cent 
stated that they were ‘fully committed’ or ‘committed’, with 
a high of 39 per cent in Johannesburg. In turn, only 29.5 per 
cent of respondents felt that infrastructure was adequate, with 
lows of 15 per cent in Rio de Janeiro and 18.5 per cent in 
Kingston. The most problematic area was access to sanitation, 
especially in Bangalore and Rio de Janeiro. 50 per cent stated 
that sanitation and the burden of disease acted as barriers to the 
prosperity of women in cities.
6.  Seventy per cent believe policies enhance 

women’s productivity, especially by promoting 
entrepreneurship

More than two-thirds of survey respondents (68 per cent) 
thought that policies to promote productivity among women 
in cities were ‘good’, ‘very good’ or excellent’. Those in Rio 
de Janeiro were the least positive (51 per cent) while those 
in Johannesburg were the most (84 per cent). Related with 
this, 61 per cent thought that their city was committed 
to the promotion of women’s productivity in some form. 
Entrepreneurship emerged as the most important factor in 
making the city more productive for women, followed by skills 
development. 
7.  Fifty per cent identify lack of gender equity in 
access to education and skills as barriers to 
women’s economic empowerment

Women’s empowerment is thought to be linked with 

economic productivity and lack of education and appropriate 
knowledge and skills were the main obstacles for women in 
attaining this (in 24 per cent of cases) followed by lack of access 
to productive resources. However, almost half of all respondents 
(49 per cent) felt that existing efforts to address gender equity 
in access to education were advanced or very advanced, 
especially in Kingston (82 per cent) and Johannesburg (62 per 
cent). 

10.  women residing in slums require special 

attention 

Although women in slum and non-slum areas of cities 

experience a similar range of challenges in relation to gender 
inequalities, the greater concentration of poverty in slum 
settlements aggravated by overcrowding, insecurity, lack of 
access to security of tenure, water and sanitation, as well as 
lack of access to transport, and sexual and reproductive health 
services, often creates more difficult conditions for women in 
trying to achieve prosperity.
11.  Gender equitable cities reward women and 

generate prosperity; but more dedicated gender 
policies needed in cities

While more than half of respondents (54 per cent) felt that 

there was some form of commitment to the equal participation 
of all women in social, economic, political and cultural spheres, 
only 23.5 per cent thought that their city was ‘committed’ or 
‘fully committed’. Indeed, 61 per cent thought that gender 
disparities in access to different social, economic and political 
opportunities were being reduced. More specifically, only 25 
per cent felt that women had ‘advanced ‘or ‘very advanced’ 
equal access to political representation. A history of class, ethnic 
and racial inequality was identified as the main factor limiting 
achieving greater levels of equity. Less than half of urban 
dwellers stated that their city had a dedicated gender policy (47 
per cent). However, almost half (46 per cent) stated that their 
city had a policy that successfully contributed to gender equity. 
The actual policy or action thought to be most important in 
making the city more gender equitable was increased access to 
employment (19 per cent). 
12.  NGOs, civil society and governments need to 
collaborate in  implementing gender equality 
policies

More than one-third of city dwellers identified NGOs and 
civil society as the most important set of institutions involved 
in the implementation of gender equality policies. In turn, 
government was also identified as important by just under 
one-third. However, almost half (47 per cent) thought that 
resources came from governments, followed some way behind 
by NGOs (20 per cent). Although the NGO and civil society 
sector is very diverse, this also suggests the importance of 
strengthening partnerships between all levels of government, 
especially cities and local authorities, and NGOs, civil society 
and grassroots women’s organisations who are working on 
the ground and building multi-stakeholder alliances and 
partnerships. 

xi

8.  More attention to women in the informal 

economy needed

Only a little over one-third (35 per cent) of city dwellers 
thought that their cities had programmes that addressed the 
needs of women working in the informal economy. In cases 
where programmes existed, almost half (48 per cent) thought 
that these sought to legalise informal activities, while 44 per 
cent aimed to move informal workers into the formal economy, 
with a further 42 per cent feeling that these programmes aimed 
to improve the quality of informal employment.
9.  Sixty-five per cent of women related economic 

growth with gender equity, but still needs urgent 
attention 

Almost two-thirds (65 per cent) of city dwellers in the 
survey felt that economic growth was broadly related with 
gender equity. Almost half (47 per cent) thought that the 
relationship was ‘somewhat positive’ with a further 18 per cent 
suggesting it was ‘highly positive’. Perceptions in Kingston and 
Johannesburg were the most affirmative. 

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESGirl working as gold-panner in Madagascar sifts heavy sand and rocks.  © Guy Oliver/IRIN13.  women experience time poverty due to 

16.  women face more disadvantages in cities than 

inadequate urban services

men 

Women are disadvantaged compared with men in cities in 
terms of equal access to employment and shelter, health and 
education, transport, asset ownership, experiences of urban 
violence, and ability to exercise their rights. These disadvantages 
are especially marked for poor urban women residing in 
informal settlements. Women’s contributions are often ignored, 
especially by city officials, urban planners and development 
practitioners. 
17.  A holistic approach to understanding the 

gendered nature of urban prosperity is required 
to capture women’s contributions 

Conceptualising the gendered nature of urban prosperity 
involves interactions across a range of spheres and processes 
in the city. A holistic approach is needed in order to recognise 
the multidimensional inputs that women invest in generating 
urban prosperity and their juxtaposition with multidimensional 
privations. The gender and urban poverty nexus outlined in 
this report identifies the range of gender disparities that need to 
be reduced in order to generate prosperity and to facilitate the 
economic empowerment of women. 

Urban living exacerbates poverty with negative implications 
for women. The urban poor face specific circumstances which 
can exacerbate poverty such as spending more on food and 
services, especially water, sanitation, housing, energy and 
transport. This affects women disproportionately because they 
undertake unpaid caring and social reproductive activities such 
as childcare, domestic labour, community organising, as well 
as building and consolidating housing and providing basic 
services. 
14.  Urban prosperity is facilitated by women’s unpaid 

reproductive work

Women provide the vast majority of unpaid domestic and 
caring labour, all of which is undervalued and unrecognised. 
However, this work allows the urban economy to function and 
without it prosperity would be difficult to achieve.
15.  women’s growing economic contributions 

underpin urban prosperity

Women make crucially important economic contributions 

to the ‘prosperity of cities’ through their paid work. The 
‘feminisation’ of the global labour force is associated with 
urbanisation, especially with the concentration of women in 
export-manufacturing, services, and niches in the  Information, 
Communication and Technology (ICT) sector. This is often 
associated with declining fertility, increasing education levels 
and rising aspirations for women. 

Endnotes

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Khosla (2009)

Levy (2009); Jarvis et al (2009)

UN-Habitat (2010c, p. 7)

Kiwala (2005); UN-Habitat (2006a, 2007a)

UN-Habitat (2010b)

6  Chant and Mcilwaine (2009, Chapter 8)

7 

8 

UN-Habitat (2008b)

This includes 167 interviewed in total in Bangalore, 100 in Johannesburg, 

148 in Kampala, 136 in Kingston and 140 in Rio de Janeiro.

9 

UNSD (2008:Table, 7, 155-253)

xii

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Policy Recommendations and Actions

There are two key recommendations of this report followed 
by specific policy actions revolving around quality of life and 
infrastructure, productivity and equity in power and rights.
Recommendation 1: Strengthen livelihoods and women’s 
economic empowerment strategies within the planning 
of cities and the delivery of basic services as key pre-
requisites for equitable city prosperity

In doing so, it is important for policy and decision-makers, 

urban planners, and other practitioners within government, 
urban and local authorities and utility companies to ensure 
that elements of urban planning such as mixed land use, 
accessibility, mobility, safety and security, distribution of 
services, community buildings and recreation facilities, and 
social mix are more responsive to specific needs and priorities 
of women and girls, men and boys.  This coupled with 
increased access to education, skills development, employment 
opportunities, physical and financial assets can contribute 
effectively to women’s prosperity in cities. 
Recommendation 2: Formulate gender policies and 
strengthen accountability for gender equality and equity at 
city level

Cities and local authorities are strategically placed to promote 

gender equality and equity by making the services they 
render and city bye-laws sensitive to the different realities of 
women and men in their localities. Cities and local authorities 
without dedicated gender policies are therefore encouraged 
to adopt gender policies, develop gender equality and women 
empowerment programmes with specific targets of achievement 
to facilitate monitoring progress. There is a need to strengthen 
partnerships between cities and local authorities on the one 
hand with gender experts, NGOs and civil society, grassroots 
organisations, academia and national machineries for women 
on the other, in order to facilitate capacity building in gender, 
local governance, gender budgeting and planning and economic 
development and to ensure accountability for gender equality 
and equity at city level. 

POLICy ACTIONS

1) Quality of life and infrastructure    

(i)   Women’s disproportionate contributions to unpaid 
reproductive work to be valorised and supported 

Unpaid reproductive work needs much greater valorisation 

and support to reflect its critical role in ensuring the daily 
regeneration of the labour force and the functioning of 

xiii

urban life. This labour needs to be recognised in itself and on 
grounds that it constrains women’s engagement in the labour 
market and most other urban ‘opportunities’. It also inhibits 
the development of capabilities among younger generations 
of women who may have to pay for the expanded burdens of 
ageing mothers and other female kin. Direct attention to the 
burdens of childcare along with other types of unpaid care 
work typically performed by women can include community-
based care options, work-based nurseries and care homes, state 
parental or carer support transfers, and dedicated private and/or 
public facilities.  
(ii)   Women’s access to, and security in, housing

Pro-female housing rights initiatives should entail 

statutory joint or individual land and property titling, ideally 
accompanied by mechanisms to ensure that women are fully 
represented on committees which decide on land rights in 
communities which observe customary law.  Support for 
paralegal services which assist women in their ability to realise 
their land and shelter entitlements is also crucial. These should 
extend to all women, including particularly marginalised 
constituencies of elderly women, widows, sick and disabled 
women, HIV-positive women, and individuals falling under the 
rubric of LBGT (Lesbian, Bisexual, Gay and Transgender). 
(iii)   Greater public investment in basic services, especially in 

sanitation

The provision of better sanitation facilities together 

with better access to water will improve health and reduce 
women’s reproductive labour and time burdens. At every 
stage in the planning, design, use and management of these 
services concerted efforts should be made to ensure the equal 
participation of women and men. The provision of more 
gender-sensitive or single sex public sanitary facilities will also 
assist in reducing violence against women and the school drop-
out rate of girls in slums and informal settlements.
2) Productivity

(i)  

improved access to gender-sensitive skills development 

Long-term improvements in women’s access to skills 

development to train them for a changing labour market are 
needed, especially in terms of skills that promote leadership and 
entrepreneurship and challenge gender-stereotypes as well as 
those that will allow women to capture the benefits of the new 
digital economy.

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIES(ii)  Promotion of ‘decent work’ and the rights of informal sector 

workers

Mechanisms for supporting small businesses and the 

self-employed are necessary. These include better provision 
for training with a view to enhancing the diversification of 
competitive informal activities, easier access to credit on 
favourable terms, assistance in promoting greater health and 
safety at work, and the reduction and/or phasing of costs of 
business formalisation. 
(iii)   Promotion of gender sensitive urban planning and design

Urban land use regulations restricting home-based 

enterprise establishment should be lifted, and regulations 
on upgrading rather than clearing slums, permitting greater 
access by informal entrepreneurs to public spaces as well as 
to middle-income and elite residential neighbourhoods, need 
to be encouraged in order to allow poor women have greater 
prospects of achieving ‘prosperity’.
(iv)  Women’s unpaid and voluntary labour in slum communities 

and beyond should be paid or indirectly resourced

It is essential to create mechanisms to deal with women’s 
unpaid care work and community voluntary work as part of 
any affirmative action to ensure non-discrimination against 
women. This might entail direct remuneration or payment 
in kind through preferential access to loans or use of other 
resources for free.
3) Equity in power and rights

(i)   Multi-stakeholder planning mechanisms should include 
women’s grassroots organisations as well as local and 
national governments, private sector, NGO and other civil 
society actors

Initiatives such as ‘Local to Local Dialogue’ and ‘peer 

exchanges’ involving shared learning, capacity building, and 
empowerment of women should be extended and scaled 
up. Developing grassroots women as leaders and as active 
participants in local decision-making processes and structures is 
also fundamental.

(ii)   Affirmative action, gender quotas and leadership training 
in order to increase women’s formal and informal political 
participation 

Governments and political parties are encouraged to 

implement existing mandates of achieving 30 per cent or 50 per 
cent participation of women in politics and decision-making. 
Quotas are required to ensure women’s access to formal political 
decision-making. Decentralisation efforts with its shift towards 
community participation can facilitate an increased role of 
women in local governance. 
(iii)   Gender-responsive pro-prosperity measures should not focus 

on anti-poverty programmes 

It is important that gender-sensitive projects should not 

become poverty projects as these usually end up giving women 
more unpaid work.  In order to counter the ‘feminisation of 
responsibility’ or adverse effects of the ‘feminisation of policy’, 
it is vital for poverty reduction programmes to promote the 
greater engagement of men. 

(iv)   Principles of gender rights and justice should be central to 

urban prosperity discourse and planning

This must involve attempts to ensure equality of opportunity 

and outcome through effective monitoring and enforcement, 
and to enjoin (and ensure) male participation at all scales, 
ranging from the household and community, to cities and 
nations as a whole.  Mainstreaming gender effectively at all 
levels of policy dialogue and engagement is required.
(v)   More sex- and space-disaggregated baseline information

Data should be collected at national and city level clearly 
capturing the differences between rural and urban areas, and 
between slum and non-slum parts of the city within urban 
areas. This is essential for gender mainstreaming and for 
developing strategies to ensure that urban prosperity becomes 
more gender equitable.

xiV

Nearly 575 doctors have completed a three year specialization in Family Medicine that did not exist at the start of the reform. 2010. Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
© Olja Latinovic / World Bank

1

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESPart One

Gender, Prosperity 
and Urban Trends

2

3

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESChapter 1.1

Conceptualising Gender 
and the Prosperity of 
Cities

whAT ARE PROSPEROUS CITIES? 

Prosperous cities are predominantly associated with positive 

rates of economic growth and material wealth. This relates 
to the fact that almost three-quarters (70 per cent) of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) across the world is generated in cities 
and that cities are often the economic powerhouses of nations.1 
Yet urbanisation and prosperity do not automatically go hand-
in-hand as economic growth does not always trickle down to 
guarantee equity in terms of well-being, especially in relation 
to access to basic services, employment and housing.2  There is 
extensive evidence that urbanisation has also created widespread 
poverty, inequality, poor living conditions, insecurity and 
violence for many people in cities.3 This is especially the 
case in relation to those residing in slum communities in 
the Global South. Here, slum dwellers occupy homes and 
live in communities which suffer from one or more shelter 
deprivations. These include low quality of building materials, 
overcrowding, access to water and sanitation, or security of 
tenure. While it is not always appropriate to equate officially-

designated slums and poverty,4 poverty tends to be more 
prevalent in slums than non-slum settlements. As of 2010, 
nearly 1 billion urban inhabitants worldwide resided in slum 
housing. Over 90 per cent were concentrated in developing 
regions, ranging from an estimated one-quarter (23.6 per cent) 
of the urban population in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
to around one-third in South eastern Asia (31 per cent) and 
Southern Asia (35 per cent), to nearly two-thirds in sub-
Saharan Africa (61.7 per cent).5

However, it is now generally accepted that the spatial 

concentration and proximity characterising cities remain crucial 
in the generation of economic, social and cultural prosperity.6 
Therefore, a prosperous city needs to foster economic growth 
and material wealth together with the well-being of the people 
who reside there, adopting a multidimensional perspective 
that extends beyond income.7 This suggests that to be truly 
prosperous, cities require equitable access to the necessities for 
building human capabilities and well-being such as services, 
infrastructure, livelihoods, housing and healthcare, alongside 
proper vehicles for civic engagement and multi-stakeholder 
governance.

This access to assets, resources and rights needs to be shared 
among urban dwellers from all backgrounds in equitable ways 
in order to ensure prosperity (See Table 1.1.1). If these various 
elements are achieved, then cities will become ‘engines of 
growth’ as well as generate more gender equitable development 
outcomes.8

5

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESTable 1.1.1:
Defining a Prosperous City

A prosperous city is one that fosters:

Productivity

Contributes to economic growth and development, generates income, provides decent jobs and 
equal opportunities for all by implementing effective economic policies and reforms

Infrastructure development

Provides adequate infrastructure— water, sanitation,  transport, information and communication 
technology in order to improve urban living and enhance productivity, mobility and connectivity

Quality of life

Equity and social inclusion

Environmental sustainability

Source: UN-Habitat (2010c)

Enhances the use of public spaces in order to increase community cohesion, civic identity, and 
guarantees the safety and security of lives and property

Ensures the equitable distribution and redistribution of the benefits of a prosperous city, reduces 
poverty and the incidence of slums, protects the rights of minority and vulnerable groups, enhances 
gender equality, and ensures civic participation in the social, political and cultural spheres

Values the protection of the urban environment and natural assets while ensuring growth, and 
seeking ways to use energy more efficiently, minimize pressure on surrounding land and natural 
resources, minimize environmental losses by generating creative solutions to enhance the quality of 
the environment

Everyone should have rights to the city

Awareness of the negative dimensions of urban growth and 

recognition that prosperity does not automatically reduce 
poverty or inequality has generated new ideas about urban 
management. These acknowledge that prioritising social and 
environmental issues and employment generation is best 
for growth, as proposed in ‘smart growth’ 9 or ‘smart cities’ 
approaches.10 Fostering the links between infrastructure and 
human capital investment in ‘smarter’ more democratic and 
socially just ways is more likely to make cities prosperous, but 
also sustainable.11

As part of this, everyone should have ‘rights’ to the city.12 
This shift towards greater social inclusivity and equality also 
means that a ‘prosperous city’ is a space where women and 
men should enjoy equal rights and opportunities.13 Therefore, 
as more inclusive cities are good for growth, gender equality 
can make cities ‘smarter’ still with gender-aware and fair ‘smart 
growth’ also demanding ‘smart management’.14

This also has wider implications for development processes 

as outlined in the World Bank’s World Development Report 
2012: Gender Equality and Development which notes: ‘Gender 
equality matters … as an instrument for development’.15 This 
‘smart economics’ approach argues that economic growth 
can be positively linked with providing greater opportunities 
for levelling the playing field between women and men.16 As 
such, it is suggested that: ‘The general view is that economic 
development and growth are good for gender equality, 
and conversely, that greater gender equality is good for 

6

development’.17 Although this perspective may ‘instrumentalise’ 
women rather than promote their human rights, the ends may 
arguably justify the means.18

Therefore, while there are often deep pockets of disadvantage 

in urban areas and a widely-noted ‘urbanisation of poverty’, 
shifting attention to the prosperity of cities can highlight the 
considerable potential for poverty reduction.19 Such a focus may 
also help to dispel some misleading stereotypes about ‘Third 
World’ cities and slums.20 However, the multidimensional 
nature of urban prosperity must constantly be kept in mind. 

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013UN-Habitat Pakistan team with gender audit consultant in Islamabad urban poor communities© UN-Habitat/Sylvia ChantThE GENDERED NATURE OF URBAN POVERTy 
AND PROSPERITy

There are four main reasons why it is important to consider 

gender in relation to the prosperity of cities.  First, with just 
over half of the world’s current population living in cities, 
nearly all future demographic growth will be urban and occur 
in developing regions and will comprise a majority female 
component. Cities of the future, especially in the developing 
world will be marked by feminised urban sex ratios and 
pronounced in ‘older’ cohorts (>60 years) and dramatically so 
among the ‘older old’ (>80 years). There will also be growing 
numbers of households headed by women. For example, 
between the late 1980s and end of the first decade of the 21st 
century, female-headed households as a proportion of all urban 
households in Latin America  increased by a mean of 9.8 
percentage points.

Second, there are many specific conditions in cities that 
exacerbate poverty and which have gendered implications. 
The urban poor face specific circumstances which can 
exacerbate and perpetuate poverty. For instance, they spend 
a disproportionate amount on water, accommodation and 
transport and are especially affected by changes in food prices. 
The urban poor also face many practical and health problems 
due to lack of adequate sanitation and services.21 Many of these 
conditions affect women most because they undertake unpaid 
caring and social reproductive activities such as childcare, 
caring for the sick, disabled and elderly, washing, cleaning and 
community organising, as well as building and consolidating 
housing and providing basic services and infrastructure. All 
these activities allow the urban economy to function and 
prosper, even if this labour is seldom recognised or valued.22

Third, women make crucially important economic 

contributions to the ‘prosperity of cities’ through their paid 
work. The ‘feminisation’ of the global labour force tends to be 
associated with urbanisation, with the related concentration 
of women in export-manufacturing, the service sector and 
Information, Communication and Technology (ICT). This can 
have other important implications for women such as declining 
fertility, increasing education levels and rising aspirations. It has 
been suggested that women are key drivers of economic growth 
and that wealth in the hands of women leads to much more 
equitable outcomes in terms of the quality of life of families 
and communities. As such, ‘women are a city’s greatest asset, 
and contribute heavily to sustainable urban development’.23

Fourth, women are invariably disadvantaged compared with 
men in cities in terms of equal access to employment, housing, 
health and education, asset ownership, experiences of urban 
violence, and ability to exercise their rights. These disadvantages 
are especially marked for poor urban women residing in slums 
and informal settlements. In addition, women’s contributions 
are often ignored, especially by city officials, urban planners 
and development practitioners. 

7

Addressing the barriers to women’s participation in cities 

creates a situation where women’s potential is more fully 
realised and households, communities and governments also 
reap rewards. It is imperative that women and men should 
enjoy equal rights and opportunities in cities on moral/
ethical, economic and political grounds. Addressing these 
gender inequalities is also essential in bringing about women’s 
empowerment and especially their economic empowerment. 
This will not only engender women’s well-being but it will 
increase their individual and collective prosperity as well as the 
prosperity of the cities in which they reside.

Ultimately, these processes have contradictory outcomes for 
women, and to a lesser extent men. The key issue is therefore to 
make sure women’s contributions, and especially their non-
remunerated tasks are taken into account in order to ensure 
that urban prosperity can become a reality for all. In turn, this 
has very important implications for women’s empowerment in 
cities.  In order to consider these issues more systematically, the 
report now turns to the conceptual framework that has been 
developed to understand urban prosperity and gender. 

URBAN PROSPERITy, GENDER AND 
EMPOwERMENT NExUS

Conceptualising gendered poverty and empowerment

Despite considerable theoretical advances in understanding 

gendered poverty and a long-standing recognition of the 
need to ‘en-gender’ urban analysis and policy, the field of 
conceptualising gender in relation to urban prosperity is much 
less established.24 This is possibly because women are more 
often the ‘losers’ rather than ‘winners’ in urban environments, 
as they are in societies more generally.  

However, recent analyses of ‘gendered poverty’, and especially 
the ‘feminisation of poverty’, provide an important foundation 
for creating a conceptual framework for the gendered prosperity 
of cities. This has entailed important critiques of the notion 
of a ‘feminisation of poverty, particularly the  argument that 
most of the world’s poor are women and that women’s poverty 
is increasing which is linked with a rise in female headed 
households, especially in cities. Although women household 
heads are often income-poor, this hides other advantages 
for women living on their own. These include being able to 
distribute household resources as they wish and being less likely 
to experience ‘secondary poverty’. The latter occurs when men 
withhold income from household budgets for themselves and 
to the detriment of women and children’s well-being. Thus, 
women heads can control decision-making and live their lives 
freer from personal constraints. 

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESYet while these issues have demonstrated that women’s 

poverty cannot be encapsulated by income alone, this does 
not mean that women do not face multiple challenges when 
heading their own households. Female heads are not only likely 
to continue to have disproportionate responsibility for unpaid 
and care work, which are especially onerous in urban contexts 
characterised by limited access to basic services and difficult 
environmental circumstances, but tend also to have to  engage 
in paid work too.25

By the same token, ‘double burdens’ of labour are 

increasingly affecting all women and has led scholars like 
Sylvia Chant to advance an alternative formulation of the 
‘feminisation of poverty’ under the rubric of a ‘feminisation of 
responsibility and/or obligation’. This stresses the importance 
of labour, time and assets and the fact that privation is not 
associated with female household headship alone.26 In addition, 
examining the relationship between gender and poverty requires 
analysis of labour markets, households and states in a holistic 
way.27

Another important factor in conceptualising gender and the 
prosperity of cities has been work on women’s empowerment 
and especially their economic empowerment.  Although 
the notion of ‘empowerment’ is one of the most contested 
terms used today, it remains very important especially in 
relation to women and gender. Many draw implicitly and 
explicitly on the work of Michel Foucault in their thinking on 
empowerment highlighting it as a process rather than an end 
state. Following this, Rowlands has identified empowerment 
as a way of accessing decision-making as well as changing the 
ways in which people think about themselves in relation to 
three core dimensions: the ‘personal’, ‘close relationships’ and 
the ‘collective’.28  She developed a typology of different types 
of power, all of which interrelate and need to be combined 
(See Box 1.1.1). There can therefore be several pathways to 
empowerment that take time, effort and structural change in 
order to be realised. 

The notion of ‘women’s empowerment’ has been in wide 

circulation in policy discourse  since the Fourth World 
Conference for Women in Beijing in 1995, where the Platform 
for Action was billed as an ‘agenda for women’s empowerment’ 
that focused on shared power and responsibility. It has also been 
operationalised by different international agencies. 

More recently, however, the concept has been criticised on 

grounds that since development agencies have adopted the 
term it has become ‘softer’ and ‘more conciliatory’ and fails 
to address the underlying structural inequalities and pervasive 
discrimination that requires women to be empowered in 
the first place.29 In addition, although many definitions of 
empowerment refer to ‘choice’, many poor women do not have 

Box 1.1.1
Types of power that underpin empowerment processes

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Power over: domination/subordination involving 
threats of violence, fear and intimidation by individual 
or group. May be overt.

Power from within: spiritual strength which is self-
generated. Refers to self confidence, self awareness 
and assertiveness. Changes from within and also about 
challenging power.

Power with: people organising with common purpose 
or understanding to achieve collective goals. Sense of 
communion and solidarity as power.

Power to: gain access to full range of human abilities 
and potential which allows women to have decision-
making authority.

Power as resistance: compliment to power over 
and neither are found alone. Manipulation. Resistance 
takes lots of forms from subtle to overt 

Sources: Rowlands (1996); Chant and Mcilwaine (2009)

the luxury of being able to make choices. It can be difficult to 
impose empowerment through interventions because it entails 
changing gender ideologies which can only be brought about 
by psycho-social and political transformation as well as those 
linked with the material conditions of life (See Figure 1.1.1).30
Women’s economic empowerment is sometimes used instead 
of the more general notion of empowerment.  However, this too 
is inherently multidimensional and multi-scalar. It is essential 
to recognise that women’s economic empowerment extends 
beyond women’s economic position in terms of work, income, 
education and assets to encompass other social and political 
dimensions.32 More specifically, this requires skills and resources 
to compete in markets, fair and equal access to economic 
institutions, and the ability to make and act on decisions and 
control resources and profits in terms of exercising power 
and agency.33 These ideas have also been incorporated into 
definitions of women’s economic empowerment that have been 
outlined by various agencies. These include the International 
Center for Research on Women (ICRW) definition that refers 
to woman’s ability to succeed and advance economically and 
the power to make and act on economic decisions,34 and UN 
Women’s framework which focuses on increasing assets for 
women.35

8

Figure 1.1.1
Conceptualising women’s empowerment31

INDIVIDUAL

Power to

Right to have 

access to 
opportunities

Right to have  
and determine 

choise

Power over

COLLECTIVE

Right to have 
access to  
resources

Women’s 

Empowerment

Power from  

within

Ability to 

influence the 
direction of  
social change

Right to have 
power to control 
their own lives

Power as 
resistance

Conceptualising gender and urban prosperity

It is clear that a ‘holistic’ concept of the prosperity of cities 
is especially appropriate in respect of gender. This is because 
of the importance of recognising the multidimensional 
inputs women invest in generating urban prosperity which is 
juxtaposed with the multidimensional privations they face. 
It can be argued that thinking about gender in relation to 
prosperity arguably provides a sharper focus on the gap between 
women’s inputs to and outcomes from the wealth-generating 
possibilities of cities and the implications of these processes for 
women’s economic empowerment

Conceptualising the gendered nature of urban prosperity 
therefore involves interactions across a range of spheres and 
processes in cities. Sylvia Chant (2011b; 2013) has developed 
a framework for analysing these issues identifying the critical 
elements in conceptualising gender and the prosperity of cities. 
Especially important in the notion of gender disparities are the 
pervasive inequalities that exist between women and men in 
relation to their access to resources, power, opportunities, and 
freedom of movement. These revolve around the following: 
gender and urban demographics, gender divisions of labour in 
the urban economy, gender disparities in human capital; gender 
gaps in physical and financial capital/assets, gender disparities 
in space, mobility and connectivity, and gender disparities in 
power and rights (Figure 1.1.2). 

It is also essential to note that all these issues are interrelated 

in complex ways. In addition, each set of elements relates 
directly to the issue of economic empowerment, and in order 
to be able to understand economic empowerment all these 
need to be considered to varying degrees depending on the 
context. Furthermore, ensuring urban prosperity through 
harnessing women’s potential necessitates consideration of the 
economic empowerment of women at individual and collective 
levels. Prior to presenting the urban prosperity and gendered 
economic empowerment nexus the following is an elaboration 
of the core components outlined in Figure 1.1.2.
Gender and urban demographics

A range of demographic factors play an important part in 

establishing the context for comprehending women’s lives and 
their intersections with prosperity in urban environments. 
Fertility and reproductive rights 

A key process is the relationship between the demographic 

transition and urbanisation of which a key aspect is lower 
fertility levels in cities. The latter is generally regarded as a 
key dimension in women’s empowerment.37 However, despite 
lower Total Fertility Rates (TFRs) in urban as opposed to rural 
areas, access to safe and adequate contraception is uneven 
with the result that fertility is higher among poorer groups 
of the population and in slums than in wealthier urban 
neighbourhoods.  These disparities are rooted in a range of 

9

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 1.1.2
Critical elements in conceptualising gender and the prosperity of cities36

Gender  

Disparities in  
Power and  

Rights

Gender  

Disparities in  
Space, Mobility & 

Connectivity

Gender and urban  

demographics

Gender and  
the Properity  

of Cities

Gender  

Divisions of  
Labour in the  
Urban Economy

Gender  

Disparities in  
human Capital 

Gender  

Gaps in Physical 

and Financial 
Capital/Assets

factors including lack of information on reproductive health, 
unmet needs for family planning and an above-average 
incidence of teenage pregnancy and early marriage in slums. 
Similar patterns exist in various other countries for which data 
are available, and also show that this is often associated with 
early school drop-out among girls, which undoubtedly plays a 
part in perpetuating gender gaps in urban prosperity.

These gaps are also underpinned by social relations in that 
women may be denied rights to use birth control measures 
where paternity is socially important to men. The ability of 
young women in particular to exert control over their fertility 
is affected by disparities between their own age and economic 
status and those of male partners on whom they may rely for 
support. In addition, children are an important economic, 
social, and emotional resource for poor urban residents, as well 
as a means of women legitimising their ‘female’ identities, all of 
which have implications for women’s empowerment.38
Cities of women 

Many cities in the developing world have a predominantly 

or growing population of women. Feminised urban sex 
ratios reflect the cumulative gender-selectivity of rural-urban 
migration, with Latin America standing out as a region in 
which more women than men have moved to towns and cities 
over the past several decades, along with some countries in 
Southeast Asia such as Thailand and Viet Nam.39

Traditionally lower levels of female rural-urban migration 
in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia have been explained 
by factors such as socio-cultural restrictions on independent 
female movement, virilocal marriage (where a married couple 
reside with the husband’s parents), and the encouragement of 
young men to gain experience in the city as a form of masculine 
‘rite of passage’.40 Also important has been the comparative 
lack of employment opportunities for women in towns and 
cities. However, upward trends in female migration in these 
regions also stem from rural women’s cumulative disadvantage 
in land acquisition and inheritance coupled with economic 
deterioration in the countryside.41 Also important have been 
women who are HIV-positive moving to access medical 
treatment in urban areas, as well as to avoid stigmatisation, 
escape domestic violence and a range of other ‘harmful 
traditional practices’ such as Female Genital Cutting (FGC).42
Cities of older women 

In most countries of the developing world, urban sex 

ratios are most pronounced in ‘older’ cohorts (>60 years) and 
dramatically so among the ‘older old’ (>80 years). In sub-
Saharan African and Latin American countries, ‘older old’ 
women outnumber their male counterparts by nearly two 
to one, while in those for East Asia the ratio is nearly 150 to 
100.  Even in India, where the ratio is significantly lower, the 
older old cohort is still distinctly feminised. Given a common 
association between advanced age and poverty, especially 

10

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013among women, this phenomenon effectively undermines urban 
prosperity. See Annex 1 Urban Sex Rations by 10- year age 
cohort – two most urbanised countries in major developing 
regions.  
‘Cities of female-headed households’

In countries with ‘feminised’ urban sex ratios, female-headed 

households are particularly common in towns and cities. In 
Latin America for example, there have been dramatic rises in 
urban female household headship over the past twenty years. 
Between the late 1980s and end of the first decade of the 21st 
century, female-headed households as a proportion of all urban 
households increased by a mean of 9.8 percentage points.  
Paraguay saw the greatest rise with a 17 percentage point 
change, followed by the region’s three most urbanised countries 
(Argentina, Brazil and Chile).   

Despite the general tendency for rising levels of female 

household headship in urban areas to parallel upward trends 
in urbanisation, there is no significant statistical relationship 
between the two. For example, Panama has experienced a 
21 per cent increase in urbanisation in the past two decades, 
but a rise in urban female household headship of only 8 per 
cent, whereas urbanisation in Uruguay has nudged up by a 
mere 3 per cent, compared with a 13 per cent increase in the 
proportion of urban households headed by women.43

The tendency for female headed households to be more 
prevalent in urban than rural areas is not just a function of 
demographics, but of a wide range of economic and social 
factors associated with urban environments. These include 
greater access to employment and independent earnings, 
lessened entanglement in and control by patriarchal kinship 
systems, and higher levels of urban female land and property 
ownership.44
Gendered divisions of labour in the urban economy

The health of urban economies owes as much to the unpaid 
‘reproductive’ labour that fall disproportionately on women’s 
shoulders at household and community levels as to the more 
valued remunerated work where men’s labour is concentrated 
and which is registered in GDP and in the System of National 
Accounts (SNA).45 Although women across developing regions 
are increasingly engaging in paid as well as unpaid activities, 
this has not been matched by an increase in domestic labour 
and unpaid care work among men.46 These inequities add-
up to a female-biased reproduction tax47 which undermines 
women’s productivity gains and their prospects of benefitting 
from and contributing to urban prosperity. In turn, due to 
a combination of gender discrimination and persistent links 
between women and unpaid tasks, women’s labour in the 
marketplace is frequently accorded lower value regardless of the 
work itself.48 In addition, women’s remunerated activities tend 
to be informal rather than formal, and home-based rather than 

extra-domestic. They are also of a smaller, less capitalised scale 
than men’s income-generating ventures and almost always with 
lower remuneration.49  There is also widespread ‘segmentation 
by sex’ within urban labour markets associated with wage gaps 
and other forms of inequality such as uneven access to health 
insurance and pensions which are determined by a combination 
of social and gender norms and market forces.50

Another important consideration in analysing gender 
and urban prosperity from the perspective of labour and 
productivity relates to the inter-generational effects of 
women’s increasing involvement in remunerated work.  Since 
reproductive labour displays a remarkably persistent association 
with women, and given major deficits in non-family forms of 
domestic and unpaid care support, when mothers work, their 
daughters often have to assume greater shares of reproductive 
labour which may provoke absenteeism from, or weaker 
performance, at school or early-drop out, thereby inhibiting 
their own accumulation of human capital.51

Finally, there is a long-standing debate about the extent to 

which paid employment empowers women. On one hand, are 
those who suggest that women are fairly uniformly exploited 
by their incorporation into the labour market.  On the other 
hand, are those who argue that women’s paid employment 
is emancipatory and fairly uniformly positive. The reality is 
somewhere in between and it depends on context, place, type of 
work, life course, and the interplay between working conditions 
and wider social relations. Of critical importance is whether 
work is ‘alienating or fulfilling’, at home or outside home. It is 
the type of work that is significant in terms of empowerment 
rather than labour force involvement in itself, as well as a 
commensurate redistribution of unpaid reproductive labour to 
men at the household level.52

11

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFour-generational female-headed household in a peri-urban slum in Santa Cruz, Costa Rica© UN-Habitat/Sylvia ChantGender disparities in human capital

Gender gaps in physical and financial capital/assets

Education, human capital development and a skilled 

workforce are foundational to urban prosperity. Education, 
vocational training and skills development provide people 
with opportunities to develop their capacities to enhance 
participation in all economic, social, cultural and political 
spheres of urban life. Gender disparities in human capital, are 
critical in terms of women’s participation in labour markets and 
economic growth overall.51

Human capital is also an integral aspect of ‘personhood’, 

affecting women’s general capacities, their self-esteem and their 
ability to exert agency.54 Educated women, on average, delay 
marriage and childbirth, are less vulnerable to HIV/AIDS, 
enjoy more power in their homes and in public arenas, and 
have fewer children who also tend to be healthier and better 
educated.55 Therefore, the accumulation of human capital is 
essential for ensuring women’s empowerment and especially 
their economic empowerment as well as contributing to the 
wider prosperity of cities. 

In terms of Millennium Development Goal 2, while 
improvements in primary school education have been 
substantial in many countries, they have not been sufficient to 
meet the goal of universal primary education by 2015.  There 
are disparities in education between slum and non-slum parts 
of the cities. In Delhi, for instance, which harbours one of 
the largest disparities in urban India, the gap is 19 per cent 
for children aged 6-17 years in general and in Nigeria slum 
dwelling children are up to 35 per cent less likely to attend 
school than their non-slum counterparts. These disparities tend 
to grow up the educational hierarchy. The multiple barriers to 
girls’ education not only affect women and their families but 
also impede the prosperity of all.

12

Gender gaps in what can be viewed as productive assets 
such as land and property constitute another fundamental 
element in analysing unequal shares of urban prosperity. In 
most parts of the world women’s access to these major assets is 
compromised through male-biased inheritance, discriminatory 
titling procedures, female disenfranchisement on death or 
desertion by spouses, or separation and divorce, and male 
control of property even where women possess legal or 
customary entitlements to conjugal or paternal holdings.56

The location and quality of land and housing can have major 

effects on the lives of women given the disproportionate time 
they spend in the home in their roles as primary providers of 
domestic labour and unpaid care work, especially in slums.  
While property is a ‘private’ asset, access to public goods such 
as infrastructure and especially public transportation as well as 
various physical investments in urban environments such as 
street lighting, parks, community centres or meeting places all 
affect women’s safety, productivity and empowerment.

Women’s equitable access to financial assets such as credit, 

savings, insurance, and remittance transfers is crucial not 
only in terms of reducing poverty but also in ensuring their 
economic empowerment and the wider prosperity of cities. 
The arena that has received most attention in relation to such 
assets has been micro-finance referring to banking and financial 
services, usually through small lending programmes which 
target low-income groups and especially women who have 
traditionally been excluded from formal financial systems. 
Drawing on the Grameen Bank experience in Bangladesh, in 
2007 micro-finance organisations across the world had 154.8 
million clients of which 106.6 million were among the poorest 
in the society and among which 83 per cent of the latter were 
women.57 Although this lending to women was initially for 
instrumental reasons in that they were found to be more likely 
to pay back their loans, early research claimed these initiatives 
could empower women. However, evidence from a range of 
different contexts has since shown that micro-finance does 
not automatically empower women but that it depends on 
the context and the other institutional mechanisms in place to 
support women.58 

Despite a huge diversity in the types of micro-finance 

initiatives available in terms of collective and individual lending 
and types of loans, it is widely acknowledged that some form of 
educational and organisational initiatives need to be provided 
alongside the provision of credit if women are to benefit 
significantly. For instance, Pro Mujer which works in several 
Latin American countries including Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, 
Nicaragua and Mexico provides holistic micro-finance 
initiatives that revolve around various types of financial services, 
business and empowerment training that include a focus on 
gender-based violence, communication and leadership skills, as 
well as low-cost health care services.59

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Gambian schoolgirl minding infant © UN-Habitat/Sylvia Chantare located far from people’s dwellings there is evidence from 
Mumbai and Pune that women and girls face risks of violence 
and attacks if they walk alone to use them, especially at night.64 
Therefore, use of space among women is also cross-cut by time. 
In particular, women have much more restricted mobility 
at night linked with their safety and fear of violence. Issues 
of access to and provision of quality and affordable public 
transport are also crucial in determining women’s movement 
within cities.65

It is also critical to note that even in the new ‘digital age’ 

where technology has the potential to diminish the constraints 
posed by physical limitations, women’s connectivity with 
others is commonly hampered by a gendered ‘digital divide’.66 
However, while women’s access to computing skills and 
equipment and to internet access is much more limited than 
men’s, gender gaps are much less marked for more simple 
digital technology such as mobile phones.67 Mobile phones 
may be used by families concerned for the safety of daughters 
working night shifts in India’s urban call centres, for example.68 
Digital connectivity also provides for easing rural-urban 
linkages by introducing changing perceptions of distance 
and permitting more frequent personal contact and resource 
flows between source and destination areas.69  Yet this does 
not necessarily transform gender.  Recognising that migration 
can reinforce, as well as challenge, gender roles and relations,70 
mobile telephony may subject female migrants, who are often 
under intense pressure normatively and pragmatically to remit 
to source areas, to greater monitoring and surveillance, thereby 
making them  less able to resist economic and other demands 
from rural kin. By the same token, the ability to remain in 
touch with family back home may also facilitate greater levels 
of independent female migration, including of mothers with 
young children, which detaches women from some of the 
physical, if not financial and emotional, investments they 
are expected to make in their maternal and other familial 
roles.  What these diverse possibilities mean in terms of the 
potential gains to women from urban prosperity remains largely 
uncharted, but will benefit from dedicated monitoring. 
Gender disparities in power and rights

A final critical component of conceptualising the 

interrelationships between gender and urban prosperity 
relates to gender differences in power and rights. These 
differences exist at all scales – from the personal, through 
household, community and city-wide, and ultimately 
national levels. They are also mediated by informal and 
formal mechanisms. Although there is evidence of increased 
mobilisation and organisation of women at the grassroots, 
not least in relation to the popular uprisings in North Africa 
and the Middle East in 2011 and 2012, there remain major 
gender disparities in the more formal political realms of 

Gender divisions in space, mobility and connectivity

Women are often much more constrained than men in 

terms of their physical access to urban space. This is not only 
on account of the association of reproductive labour with the 
home, but because of strong symbolic dimensions surrounding 
the ‘forbidden’ and ‘permitted’ use of private and public spaces. 
The latter are governed by patriarchal power relations and 
norms of female propriety, which may require certain modes of 
dress, behaviour and limitations on social interaction to render 
women ‘invisible’ or unapproachable.60

Part of this is linked with violence against women in cities. 

Evidence suggests that violence against women by male partners 
tends to be less prevalent in cities than rural areas but violence 
by non-partners tends to be higher in urban areas.61 In cities, 
it has also been shown that living in urban slums can lead 
to a greater incidence of violence against women, especially 
that perpetrated by someone who is not a partner.62 Although 
violence against women is extremely prevalent in the private 
spaces of the home, it is more likely to occur in certain public 
spaces such as at and around toilets, at schools, in drinking 
bars, and in secluded areas such as narrow lanes and open 
fields.63 In terms of sanitary facilities, for example, where toilets 

13

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESPARDO - Ciclovia, BOGOTA. © UN-Habitatcivic engagement and governance.71 Not only are women 
frequently under-represented in formal political structures, 
including trade unions, cooperative and workers’ associations, 
which marginalise their economic roles,72 but where they do 
participate at the grassroots, they are often engaged in struggles 
for basic services.73

The recent shift towards decentralised governance has the 

potential to bring development decisions closer to communities 
and to reach those most marginalised such as particular groups 
of women. However, work undertaken by a range of grassroots 
women’s organisations has shown that for decentralisation 
to be meaningful to these women, their capacities to access 
entitlements and participate effectively in local governance 
must be enhanced. Unless women become active partners with 
cities and local governments, they will continue to remain on 
the margins of governance processes and to be excluded from 
development decisions that impact their communities.74

In the case of Peru, decentralisation has led to increased 

women’s engagement, organised around a series of laws that 
include citizen protection and mandates for participation.  
Women have engaged more in public affair through Local 
Coordinating Councils (LCCs) and in vigilance and 
monitoring committees. Projects such as the Casa de la Mujer 
(Women’s Home) have been central in addressing women’s 
issues like domestic violence and the equitable allocation of 
resources to women.75 An integral aspect of these types of 
projects has been the training and organisation of grassroots 

women as leaders in their communities through ‘local to local 
dialogues’ which not only enhances women’s decision-making 
power but also deepens democracy.76
Conceptualising gender empowerment and urban 
prosperity nexus

Using the framework on gender and urban prosperity as 
the foundation, it is useful to incorporate issues of women’s 
empowerment and especially their economic empowerment 
within the nexus. This highlights not only the range of gender 
disparities that need to be taken into account in order to 
generate prosperity, but also that reducing gender inequalities 
and inequities must be addressed in order to bring about 
women’s empowerment in cities at individual and collective 
levels as well as through a range of formal and informal 
institutions (Figure 1.1.3)

RELATIONShIPS BETwEEN wOMEN  
EMPOwERMENT, PROSPERITy AND  
URBANISATION

Conceptual frameworks such as that outlined in Figure 

1.1.3 are simplifications of reality. However, they can assist in 
identifying the sectors and issues that need to be addressed if 
women are to take advantage of urban prosperity as a way of 
improving their life chances. Yet it is also essential to remember 
that the relationships between urbanisation and prosperity in 
different cities around the world will play out in a wide range of 

14

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Two young women in Cairo’s Tahrir Square play their part in the 2011 Egyptian Revolution© UN-Habitat/Taylor BarrFigure 1.1.3
Gender and urban prosperity nexus77

Gender  

disparities in 
power and  

rights

Formal  
institutions

l

a
u
d

i

v

i

d
n

i

Gender  

disparities  

in space,mobility 
and connectivity

Gender  

and urban  
demographics

Women’s  
empowerment

Gender  

and urban  
prosperity 

nexus

Women’s economic 

empowerment

Gender gaps  
in physical 
and financial  
capital/Assets 

Gender  

divisions of  
labour in the  
urban economy

C
o

l
l

e
c
t
i

v
e

informal  
institutions

Gender  

disparities in 
human capital

diverse ways, and there may be a ‘cut-off’ point when societies 
are more than 70 per cent urbanised.78 In the case of the rapidly 
growing economies of the world, although urban per capita 
GDP is expected to rise by 9 per cent per year in India and 10 
per cent in China and by 2025 China’s cities will generate 20 
per cent of global GDP, evidence remains mixed as to how such 
phenomenal economic growth rates intersect with increases in 
national or urban prosperity.79

In terms of gender, there are some, but no definitive 

systematic links between levels of poverty, per capita GNI, 
urbanisation, equality and/or gender equality across developing 
regions. For example, while the World Economic Forum’s 
Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) correlates with GNI to 
some degree, the relationship appears to be driven primarily 
by Latin America which is marked by pervasive inequality 
that appears to be associated with a pronounced gender gap 
in income. In addition, the Social Institutions and Gender 
Index (SIGI) also exhibit a strong positive correlation with the 
UNDP’s Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI).  As a country 
decreases its share of multi-dimensional poor, the SIGI moves 
closer towards equality.

“Urbanisation helps in improving the prosperity of women 
but it doesn’t mean that rural women cannot have a 
prosperous life; it all depends upon how well policies are 
made and implemented.”

Evidence from the UN-Habitat survey across the five cities 

highlights some of these trends. A largely positive view on 
the relationship between urbanisation and the prosperity of 
women in general emerged, as declared by almost one-third 
of respondents in Johannesburg (31 per cent), one-quarter 
in Rio de Janeiro (24 per cent) and 22 per cent in Kingston. 
In Bangalore and Kampala positive views were held by fewer 
people (10 per cent and 13 per cent respectively). Indeed, in 
Kampala, 11.5 per cent felt that there was a ‘very negative’ 
relationship between urbanisation and women’s prosperity as 
did 10 per cent in Rio de Janeiro (See Figure 1.1.4). In the case 
of Bangalore one respondent makes an important point: 

However, from a slightly different angle, it emerged that 
only a minority of people in the five survey cities felt that 
women were actually perceived to be prosperous across all 
types of dimensions (in terms of quality of life, productivity, 
infrastructure, and equality). While in Kampala, this was a 
high of 14 per cent, only 4 per cent of people in Rio de Janeiro 
and Kingston thought that women were prosperous across 
the board. At the other end of the spectrum, Kampala again 
emerged as an outlier with 22 per cent of people stating that 
women were not prosperous in any dimensions (with 6 per 
cent in Rio de Janeiro, 5 per cent in Bangalore, 2 per cent in 
Johannesburg and no-one in Kingston). Reflecting the largely 
negative camp, a respondent in Bangalore noted: ‘Several 
women and children live deplorable conditions in slums. 
They earn their living begging or running small businesses 
(cigarette shops), health care and other facilities in the cities are 
unimaginably out of their reach’.

15

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 1.1.4
Perceptions of relationship between urbanisation and prosperity of women

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Very Positive

Somewhat Positive

No Relationship

Somewhat Negative

Very Negative

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston
Rio de Janerio

Total

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012 
Note: ‘Positive’ means that higher levels of urbanisation are associated with higher levels of prosperity – as opposed to lower levels of prosperity.

Such interpretations have a lot to do with the view that 
income inequalities between rich and poor women in cities 
were significant. For instance, almost three-quarters of people 
in Kingston felt that inequalities were ‘very large’ (74 per 
cent), followed by 60 per cent in Johannesburg and 48.5 per 
cent in Bangalore. Only in Kampala were they perceived as 
less important (15 per cent noted that they were very large 
while 11.5 per cent stated that they were insignificant). The 
survey also highlighted how people felt that economic growth 
was broadly related with gender equity in all cities except in 

Kampala where two-thirds felt that there was no relationship or 
a negative one. 

Based on combined scores, ‘access to quality education’ 
was identified as the most important element contributing 
to women’s prosperity in cities, followed by ‘meaningful 
employment’ and ‘access to quality of health care’, especially 
in Kingston on all counts. ‘Access to sports and recreational 
facilities’ and ‘quality of city environment’ were perceived as the 
least important, especially in Kampala (See Table 1.1.2).

Table 1.1.2
Perceptions of elements that contribute to women’s prosperity in cities

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Rank

3.75

3.34

2.99

3.32

3.25

3.47

3.08

4.11

3.84

3.24

3.10

3.22

3.14

3.23

3.29

3.21

3.26

3.21

3.40

3.14

3.09

3.24

3.19

3.28

3.10

3.57

3.39

 2

 7

 9

 5

 6

 4

 8

 1

 3

3.41

3.12

3.03

3.46

3.18

3.27

3.26

3.86

3.59

3.09

3.07

3.11

2.99

3.01

2.86

2.95

2.97

2.92

16

Cities à  
Factors

Meaningful employment

Adequate housing

Quality of city environment

Adequate and affordable transportation

Safety and security of life

Access to new technologies

Access to sports and recreational facilities

Access to quality education

Access to quality health care

3.51

3.08

3.07

3.33

3.25

3.51

3.07

3.75

3.50

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012
Note: Responses 1àDoes not contribute to 5à Contributes highly

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013With the exception of Bangalore, most respondents 

considered the lack of productive employment opportunity 
and/or income poverty were the main barriers preventing 
the city becoming more prosperous for women, especially 
in Kingston (53 per cent). This was closely followed by poor 

governance and weak institutions. All these factors as well as 
those identified in Table 1.1.2 relate in different ways to the 
gender empowerment and urban prosperity nexus outlined 
above and they will be discussed and addressed in the various 
chapters to follow.

Endnotes

1.  World Bank (2009a)

2.  Chant and Datu (2011a, b)

3.  UNFPA (2007); also Chen and Ravallion (2007); 

Jones and Corbridge (2008)

4.  Harpham (2009)

5.  UN-Habitat (2010a)

6.  Beall et al (2010)

7.  See also debates on the multidimensionality of 

poverty (Chant, 2007a, 2008; Moser, 2006)

28.  Rowlands (1996); Chant and Mcilwaine (2009) for 

54.  Evans (2011)

a summary

29.  Cornwall (2007)

30.  Kabeer (2008a)

31.  Mcilwaine (2012 compiled from Kabeer et al 

[2011]; Rowlands [1996])

32.  Kabeer et al (2011)

33.  Golla et al (2011)

55.  Grown (2005); Lloyd (2009); Plan international 

(2009) 

56.  Chant (2012a); CPRC (2010);  Deere (2010) Hughes 

and Wickeri (2011); Moser (2010); Varley (2007)

57.  UN-DESA (2009)

58.  Kabeer (2008a); Mayoux (2001)

59.  UN-DESA (2009); also http://promujer.org/

34.  Golla et al. (2011); UN-Habitat (2012)

60.  Fenster (2005); Jarvis et al (2009); Vera-Sanso 

8.  Satterthwaite (2007); UNFPA (2007)

35.  Chant and Mcilwaine (2013)

9.  Dierwechter (2008); Duany et al (2010)

36.  Chant (2011b; 2013a)

10.  Geller (2003)

37.  Dyson (2010); UNFPA (2007)

11.  Freire et al (2003); Fischer and Amekudzi (2011); 

38.  Chant and Touray (2012b)

Rana (2011); UN-Habitat (2009; 2010c)

12.  Lefebvre (1986); Harvey (2008)

13.  UN-Habitat (2010c, p. 7)

39.  Chant (1998); Chant and Mcilwaine (2009, pp. 

86-7)

40.  Tacoli and Mabala (2010)

14.  Tsenkova (2007); UN-Habitat (2010b)

41.  Tacoli (2010)

(2006)

61.  Mcilwaine (2013); Tacoli (2012)

62.  Hindin and Adair (2002)

63.  Tacoli (2012)

64.  Bapat and Agarwal (2003)

65.  Khosla (2009); Kunieda and Gauthier (2007)

66.  Perrons (2004)

67.  Scott et al (2004, p. 1)

42.  Chant (2013b); Chant and Touray (2012a,b) 

68.  Patel (2010)

43.  Chant and Datu (2011b)

69.  de Bruijn (2008); also Donner (2008, p. 24)

44.  Bradshaw (1995); Chant (1997); Momsen (2010)

70.  Chant (1998); Jolly and Reeves (2005)

45.  Perrons (2010); Razavi (2007, p. 4-5)

71.  UN-Habitat (2008b, p. 3); See also Patel and Mitlin 

46.  Chant (2007a); ECLAC (2004)

47.  Palmer (1992)

48.  Perrons (2010); Perrons and Plomien (2010)

(2010)

72.  Chen (2010b)

73.  Beall (2010); Lind (2010); Miraftab (2010)

74.  Huairou Commission (2010a)

75.  Huairou Commission (2010a)

15.  World Bank (2011c, p. 3) 

16.  World Bank and Ellis (2007)

17.  Morrison et al (2010, p. 103)

18.  Chant (2011b, 2012a)

19.  Beall and Fox (2009)

20.  Gilbert (2007; 2009)

21.  Tacoli (2012)

23.  UN-Habitat (2012, p. 2)

24.  See Chant (ed.) (2010); Kabeer (2003) on gendered 

poverty; Castells (1978); Chant (1996, 2007b); 
Jarvis et al (2009); Moser (1985, 1995) on 
gendered urban analysis

25.  Chant (ed.) (2010)

26.  Chant (2007a; 2008)

27.  UNRiSD (2010a)

22.  Chant (2011b; 2013a); Tacoli (2012)

49.  Chant and Pedwell (2008); Chen (2010a); Chen et 

al (2004); Kabeer (2008a, b)

50.  Chen (2010a); Chen et al (2004); Heintz (2010)

76.  Goldenberg (2008)

51.  CPRC (2010); González de la Rocha (1994); Moser 

77.  UN-Habitat (2011)

(1992)

52.  Kabeer (2008a,b); Kabeer et al (2011)

53.  Arbache et al (2010); Klasen (2002); World Bank 

(2011c, p. 210)

78.  UN-Habitat (2010c, p. 5)

79.  Dobbs et al (2011, p. 30)

17

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESChapter 1.2

Regional Variations in 
Urbanisation, Gender 
Equality and The 
‘Prosperity Of Cities’

Factors shaping the links between ‘place’ and ‘prosperity’, 

and specific urban places and prosperity,1 remain difficult 
to generalise, including as they do, migratory flows, natural 
and social factor endowments, historical legacies (and 
anachronisms), and the logic of macro-economic shifts.2,3

ThE AFRICAN REGION

Sub-Saharan Africa is still at a relatively early stage of 

urbanisation, with not quite 40 per cent of its population 
living in towns and cities.4    It is worth noting that only 143 
of the region’s cities are included in the MckInsey Global 
Institute’s ‘Cityscope’ database of just over 2000 cities 
worldwide with populations of 150,000 or more in Western 
Europe and the USA, and 200,000 or more in the rest of the 
world. These cities, many of which are clustered on the west 
coast of the continent, produce 50 per cent of the region’s 
GDP, a figure that is anticipated to rise to 60 per cent by 
2025,5 but they are also beset by a range of challenges. These 
include high levels of poverty, and informal economic activity, 
with the rate of slum growth being more or less on a par with 
the regional urban growth rate of 4per cent p.a.6

18

The African region as a whole has a burgeoning and 

largely underemployed male youth bulge,7 whose common 
‘demonisation’ does little to counter potential threats to stability 
and development,8 nor to draw attention to the fact that levels 
of unemployment among female youth are usually greater 
not only within the region but also elsewhere.9  Management 
and capacity problems for African cities are also compounded 
by rapid expansion.10 However, new growth opportunities 

Out-of-work members of Gambian Voo. © UN-Habitat/Sylvia Chant provided through the spread of telecommunications, coupled 
with better leadership and scale economies has put African 
cities on the verge of productivity growth for the first time.   
Whether or not this is likely to benefit women – or indeed men 
--  is explored later in this chapter.

ThE ASIAN REGION

Although a far smaller proportion of the population in Asia 
is urban, at 42 per cent, 11 the region houses the largest share of 
the world’s mega cities (>10 million inhabitants), with China 
(sometimes dubbed ‘the new “workshop” or “factory” of the 
world’), and India (‘the new “office” of the world’),12 leading a 
distinctive new wave of metropolitan expansion. On the heels 
of an average annual growth rate of 2.4 per cent, for example, 
India’s urban inhabitants numbered 345 million in 2009, 
equating to 30 per cent of the national population.13   China’s 
urban population is much larger than India’s: 586 million 
people in 2009, equating to 44 per cent of the total population 
compared with only 27 per cent ten years earlier, and reflecting 
an average annual urban population growth rate of 3.3 per 
cent.14 

While Asia as a whole has been the most successful 

developing region to date in reducing the proportion of people 
living on less than $1.25 a day, which fell from 60 per cent to 
16 per cent between 1990 and 2005 in Eastern Asia, and from 
39 per cent to 19 per cent in Southeast Asia, it is perhaps no 
surprise, given India’s dominance within Southern Asia, that 
poverty incidence in this sub-region showed a less impressive 
drop -- from 49 per cent to 39 per cent.15  This leads to the 
conclusion that growth and global economic integration need 
to be more carefully managed by the state.16 Also important to 
bear in mind is that Gross National Income (GNI) per capita 
in the region remains substantially lower (less than half) than in 
Latin America and the Caribbean, at $3163 per capita in East 
Asia and the Pacific, and $1107 in South Asia.17  Nonetheless, 
and perhaps serving as a further caution against any automatic 
association between levels of urbanisation and ‘prosperity’ – 
and gender -- East Asia and the Pacific has the highest aggregate 
regional score (0.467) on the UNDP’s recently launched 
Gender inequality Index (GII). (See also below).

LATIN AMERICA AND ThE CARIBBEAN REGION
With an estimated urban population of 79 per cent, Latin 

America not only has the highest share of urban population in 
the world,18 but has also one of the most concentrated patterns 
of economic activity.  Latin America’s top ten cities accounted 
for 35 per cent of GDP in the region in 2007 (as compared 
with 25-30 per cent in the USA and Europe).19   However, 
while Latin American cities grew very rapidly in the past and 
captured decided scale benefits, some analysts argue they are 
running into trouble now for the same reason.20   Among new 

‘diseconomies’ are urban sprawl and hampered mobility.  
Another problem is that the physical expansion of some 
urban centres has engulfed neighbouring towns outside city 
jurisdictions. This has entailed the fragmentation of political 
boundaries, with the spread of management responsibilities 
among multiple bodies leading to uncoordinated planning 
and development.21   As a consequence the rate of population 
growth has already slowed down in some of Latin America’s 
major metropolis, inward migration has fallen, and people have 
begun moving to ‘midsize cities’.22  Considerations regarding 
environmental quality are a further factor in recent inter-urban 
migration in Latin America with evidence suggesting that 
concern about children’s well-being makes women key drivers 
in decisions to move to smaller, less congested, and perceptibly 
less polluted cities.23

Gender Equality, wealth, Poverty and Urbanisation 
Regional Variations

In the meantime, and as indicated by the general data 
presented in Tables 1.2.1 and 1.2.2, there are some, but 
certainly no definitive systematic links between levels of 
poverty, per capita GNI, urbanisation, equality and/or gender 
equality across developing regions.

Table 1.2.1 reveals a strong fit between urbanisation and 

GNI per capita.  We can also see a broad inverse relationship 

19

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESA Palestinian girl attending a UNRWA school side-steps the rubble of a damaged home. © Shabtai Gold/IRINTable 1.2.1

GNI per capita, poverty, urbanisation and gender inequality in developing regions1

Gross National 
income (GNi) per 

capita USD

Proportion of people 

living on less 

than USD 1.25 a 
day (international 
Poverty Line/iPL)

Distribution of 
the world’s Multi-

dimensional Poor (MDP) 

living in developing 

countries2

Level of 

urbanisation

Gender inequality 

index (Gii) 3  

(where 1 indicates 

Global Gender Gap 
index (GGi) 4 (where 
1 indicate equality 

according to 

according to selected 

selected indicators)

indicators)

Social instutions 
and Gender index 
(SiGi) 5 (where 0 
indicates equality 

according to 

selected indicators)

0.0639

0.260

0.0178

0.186

0.203

45%

30%

79%

37%

58%

0.467%

0.739%

0.609%

0.735%

0.699%

-

0.655

0.691

0.645

0.609

Eastern Asia

Southern Asia

Latin America

Sub-Saharan 
Africa

Middle East 
& Northern 
Africa

3,163

1,107

7,007

1,125

3,597

16% (Eastern 

Asia)/19% (South-

eastern Asia)

39%

8%

51%

3% (Northern 
Africa)/6% 
(Western Asia)

15%

51%

3%

28%

2%

Sources: Hausmann et al (2010), OECD (2009), UN (2010a), UNDP (2010), World Bank (2011b). 

Notes:

1.  Different sources define regions differently which makes direct comparisons difficult.  
The World Bank and UNDP include data for South Eastern Asian countries within their 
regional figure for Southern/Eastern Asia.   Also, while UNDP provides data for ‘Arab 
States’, the UN differentiates between Northern African and Western Asian countries.  
See also notes 3 and 4 below.

2.  The UNDP’s Multidimensional Poverty index (MPi), which was introduced in 2010, is 

not calculated for all countries as yet.  Nor are regionally-aggregated scores available, 
only the percentage distribution of the world’s 1.75 billion multi-dimensionally poor 
as shown in the table.   The MPi is a three-dimensional index comprising health (as 
measured by nutrition and child mortality), education (children enrolled and years of 
schooling), and living standards (comprising cooking fuel, toilet, water, electricity, 
floor material and basic assets such as a radio or bicycle).   ‘Multidimensional 
poverty’ is deemed to apply where people are deprived in at least 30% of the ten 
weighted indicators.  The score derived combines the percentage of the population 
who are multi-dimensionally poor with the average number of deprivations they suffer 
from:  the higher the score, the greater the level of multidimensional poverty.

3.  The UNDP’s Gender inequality index (Gii) aggregates inequalities in reproductive 

health (as measured by adolescent fertility and maternal mortality), empowerment 
(share of parliamentary seats and higher education attainment levels) and labour 
market (labour force participation), produces a score between 0 and 1, with 0 
representing the highest level of inequality, and 1 total equality.   NB The regional 
aggregate figure for the Gii in this table is for East Asia and the Pacific.

4.  The World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap index (GGGi) is a composite of 
four ‘pillars’ consisting of 14 variables.  These include economic participation 
and opportunity (as quantified by measuring advancement, remuneration and 
participation gaps, where advancement is composed from the female to male ratio 
among legislators, senior officials and managers and the female to male ratio among 
professional and technical workers)educational attainment (measured by primary, 
secondary and tertiary enrolment ratios and literacy rates), health and survival (sex 
ratio at birth and life expectancies) and political empowerment (female legislators and 
the ratio of female to male ministerial-level positions).  Scores are produced through 
a four step process, ranging from 0 to 1, with 1 representing the highest level of 
equality and 0 the greatest level of inequality.  NB The regional aggregate figure for 
the GGGi is for Asia and the Pacific.

5.  The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Social institutions 

and Gender index is a measure of twelve social institutions variables categorised 
under five main areas: family code (early marriage, polygamy, parental authority and 
inheritance), physical integrity (violence against women and female genital mutilation), 
son preference (calculated from missing women), civil liberties (freedom of movement 
and freedom of press) and ownership rights (women’s access to land, women’s access 
to property other than land and women’s access to credit).  Taken together these 
produce a score between 0 and 1, with 0 representing the highest level of equality, 
and 1 very high inequality.   

between GNI per capita and poverty incidence, despite 
some notable exceptions.  For example, Northern Africa is 
less urbanised and has far lower average income than Latin 
America. Yet North Africa has the poverty incidence of Latin 
America, a region with marked inequality.   Although this 
now appears to be on the decline, thanks largely to substantial 
upturns in social spending in countries such as Brazil and 
Chile,24 as Table 1.2.2 indicates, Brazil, one of Latin America’s 
most urbanised societies, suffers extreme polarisation between 
the rich and the poor.

Similarly, Southern Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa have 

comparable levels of per capita GNI but dissimilar rates of 
poverty incidence.  This would appear to confirm earlier 
observations that economic prosperity does not always trickle 
down to the poor.

When it comes to the interrelationships of gender with these 

variables, results are also mixed.   For example, the UNDP’s 

Gender Inequality Index (GII) does not correspond with any 
other of the selected indicators in Table 1.2.1, although some 
relationships can be found between its composite parts and 
dimensions of economic prosperity or urbanisation.  While the 
World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI) 
does correlate with GNI to some degree, the relationship 
appears to be driven primarily by Latin America which, as 
already alluded to, is marked by pervasive inequality that 
appears to be associated with a pronounced gender gap in 
income.

The Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) exhibits 
more correlations with Table 1.2.1 indicators than the other 
gender inequality measures, showing a particularly strong 
relationship with GNI. As regional wealth increases, there is 
an accompanying increase in gender equality, as measured 
by the SIGI components. This may owe to the fact that 
wealthier countries have, on average, more and stronger social 

20

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Table 1.2.2
Inequality (Gini coefficient),1 percent urban slum population, multi- dimensional poverty (MPI) and gender inequality2 – 
three most urbanised countries in major developing regions

Per cent urban

Per cent urban slum 
population (2007, 

unless noted)

Gini Coefficient

Multidimensional 

Gender inequality 

Poor living in 
country (MPi)

index (Gii) 2  

(where 1 indicates 

Global Gender Gap 
index (GGi)(where 
1 indicate equality 

according to 

according to selected 

selected indicators)

indicators)

Social instutions 
and Gender index 
(SiGi) (where 0 
indicates equality 

according to 

selected indicators)

Latin America & Caribbean

Argentina

Chile

Brazil

South Asia

Pakistan

india

Bangladesh

East Asia 

Malaysia

China

Lao PDR

Sub-Saharan Africa

Gabon

Botswana

Cameroon

92

89

86

37

30

28

71

44

32

86

60

58

23.5

9.0 (2005)

28.0

47.5 (2005)

32.1

70.8 (2005)

-

31.0

79.3 (2005)

38.7(2005)

-

46.6

45.8

22.6

53.9

32.7

36.8

31.0

46.2

41.5

36.7

41.5

61.0

44.6

0.011

-

0.039

0.275

0.296

0.291

-

0.056

0.267

0.161

-

0.299

0.534

0.505

0.631

0.721

0.748

0.734

0.493

0.405

0.650

0.678

0.663

0.763

0.719

0.701

0.666

0.547

0.616

0.689

0.645

0.689

-

-

0.688

0.611

0.0037899

0.0195128

0.0188021

0.283243

0.318112

0.244648

-

0.217856

0.0357687

0.218922

0.0810172

0.216512

Sources: Hausmann et al (2010), OECD (2009), UN (2010a,d), UNDP (2010), World Bank (2011b)

Notes:

1.  The Gini coefficient is a measure of the inequality of income or wealth distribution in 

a country.  The coefficient is calculated from the ratio of two areas on a Lorenz curve.  
A value of 0 indicates total income equality; that is all wealth is distributed equally 
among all members of the population.  A value of 1 represents total inequality. Scores 
may range between 0 and 1. The Gini coefficient has been criticised by some scholars 
who argue that it is not useful when comparing countries of very different population 

 

size.  Furthermore, it says nothing of the absolute wealth of a country; a wealthy 
country and poor country may have the same Gini coefficient but in the poor nation 
many people may not even have access to basic necessities. 

2.  For components of the Gii, GGGi and SiGi please refer to notes in Table 1.2.1

institutions which protect women. The SIGI also exhibits a 
strong positive correlation with UNDP’s Multidimensional 
Poverty Index (MPI).  As a country decreases its share of multi-
dimensional poor, the SIGI moves closer towards equality.  
This relationship becomes even stronger when removing the 
two outlier regions.  Latin America and the Caribbean and 
the Middle East and North Africa, which have the highest and 
lowest inequality respectively, but also the two lowest shares 
of the multidimensional poor (MDP).   Omitting these two 
regions, based on their low population share, significantly 
improves the correlation, as seen in Figure 1.2.1.  

While the indicators discussed serve to highlight that there 

are some connections between gender equality, wealth, poverty 
and urbanisation, these cannot be precisely nor consistently 
specified on the basis of quantitative measures.

ChALLENGES OF COLLECTING AND USING  
SEx-DISAGGREGATED DATA ON CITIES

Potentially complicating factors in respect of assessing the 
wider relationships between gender and urban prosperity in 
relation to national, regional and global statistics concerns  
discrepancies in regional definitions among different 
organisations, as well as deficits in sex-disaggregated data. 
A dearth of comprehensive sex-disaggregated quantitative 
data, especially for poorer countries compromises the reliable 
geographical coverage of aggregate gender indicators such as the 
GGGI and the SIGI.25

The indicators for gender in MDG 3, for example, notably 

the ratio of girls to boys enrolled in primary, secondary 
and tertiary education, women’s share of non-agricultural 
employment, and proportion of seats held by national 
parliaments, exclude crucial elements vital to women’s lives. 

21

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 1.2.1
Correlation1 between SIGI and percentage of the world’s MDP

SIGI versus Percentage of the  

world’s MDP

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

MDP
Linear (MDP)

R2=0.430

0

0.2

0.4

Percentage of the world’s MDP

SIGI versus Percentage of  

the world’s MDP  

[excluding LAC & MENA3]

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

MDP

R2=0.430

0.2

0.4

Percentage of the world’s MDP

y
t
i
l

a
u
q
e
n

e
r
o
c
S

 
I

G

i
 
y
t
l

I

S

a
u
q
e

y
t
i
l

a
u
q
e
n

e
r
o
c
S

a
u
q
e

 
I

G

i
 
y
t
l

I

S

Sources: Chant and Datu (2011a), OECD (2009), UNDP (2010)

Notes:

1.  Correlation should not be confused with causation.  A strong correlation suggests two variables are related, but does not imply that a change in one will automatically induce a 

change in the other.

2.   The R2 value is a measure of the linear correlation of the variables.  A value of 0 indicates no relationship while 1 indicates a perfect linear relationship.

3.  LAC refers to Latin America and the Caribbean, MENA to Middle East and North Africa

These include a quantification of gender-differentiated 
domestic labour and care burdens, as well as registration 
of women’s paid work because of its concentration in the 
informal economy.26 Although major progress in improving 
the quality of sex-disaggregated statistics has been made, 
the lack of gender indicators in all MDGs, and the limited 
nature of MDG 3 targets for women compared with the 
Beijing Platform for Action (BPFA) of 1995 have provoked 
widespread debate and critique.27

In terms of actual data available, it is not only rare for 

data to be sex-disaggregated, but for statistics to be available 
for different groups of women (or men) beyond household 
headship, for example, along lines of age, ethnicity, migrant 
status, sexuality and so on.28 There are also cases where 
relatively little is known about more basic aspects of gender 
and urban prosperity, which are technically amenable to 
measurement, such as gender differences in land and property 
ownership.29 Data are also scarce in terms of comparing 
women and men in relation to urban prosperity in the 
wealthier and poorer parts of cities, which usually correspond 
with ‘non-slum’ and ‘slum’ settlements respectively.30 Even 
less still is known about transient populations in the city, and 
those who live or spend the vast majority of their time ‘on the 
streets’.31

22

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Women returning home with laundry, Mexico. © UN-HabitatThese limitations are evident in the survey cities. For 
example, only a minority (27 per cent) felt that different 
organisations in the city (such as government departments/
institutions, civil society, city authorities, private sector, 
bilateral and multilateral organisations) used sex-disaggregated 
data and evidence in the formulation, design, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of policies/programmes. While over 
one-third perceived this to be the case in Kampala (34.5 per 
cent), only 22 per cent did so in Rio de Janeiro.

On a slightly more positive note, it was felt that 42 per cent 
of city government officials and decision-makers used baseline 
figures of women’s access to and/or usage of secure housing, 
basic infrastructure, quality education, quality health care, and 
social security. In Johannesburg, Rio de Janeiro and Kingston, 
this was around half, with a low of 27 per cent in Kampala. 
Despite these caveats, drawing on the conceptual building 

blocks outlined in the gender empowerment and urban 
prosperity nexus, the following chapter provides key highlights 
regarding gender and the ‘quality of life’ in cities as one of the 
key dimensions of prosperity.

Endnotes

1.  World Bank (2009b)

2.  Storper and Scott (2009)

3.  UN-Habitat (2010c, p. 5)

4.  UN-Habitat (2010)

5.  Dobbs et al (2011, p. 31)

12.  Ghosh (2010, p. 1)

22.  Dobbs et al (2011, p. 13)

13.  World Bank (2011b, p. 167)

23.  izazola (2004); izazola et al (2006)

14.  ibid; See also Yeh et al (2011)

24.  Loyka (2011)

15.  UN (2010a, pp. 6-7)

16.  Ghosh (2010) 

25.  Drechsler and Jütting (2010)

26.  Chant (2006, 2007a); also Buvinic and King (2007)

6.  UNFPA (2007); World Bank (2011b, p. 168)

17.  World Bank (2011b, p. 12; also Table 1.5)

27.  Antrobus (2004); Chant (2007b); Johnsson-Latham 

7.  UN-HABiTAT/UNECA (2008)

8.  Mabala (2011)

9.  Chant (2012a)

18.  Rodgers et al (2011)

19.  Dobbs et al (2011, p. 13)

20.  ibid.

10.  Hughes and Wickeri (2011); Poulsen (2010)

21.  Campesi (2010); Dobbs et al (2011, p. 13); Moser 

11.  UN-Habitat (2010a)

(2009)

(2010); Saith (2006)

28.  Chant (2006)

29.  Chant (2001a, b); Deere and Doss (2006); Morrison 

et al (2010)

30.  Chandrasekhar and Mukhopadhyay (2008)

31.  Jones and Thomas de Benítez (2010)

23

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESPart Two

Gender and the 
Prosperity of Cities

24

25

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESChapter 2.1

Gender, Quality Of Life 
And Prosperity Of Cities

among those living in Rio de Janeiro with 70 per cent stating 
their city was not committed compared with only 22 per cent 
in Kingston and 23 per cent in Johannesburg (See Figure 
2.1.1).

This chapter considers a range of factors that underpin 

‘quality of life’ in cities in relation to gender and urban 
prosperity with a specific focus on housing, health and 
gender-based violence. In relation to the gender empowerment 
and urban prosperity nexus, the chapter highlights gender 
disparities in physical and financial capital and assets as 
well as the gaps in power and rights. It also emphasises that 
there remains considerable scope for reducing these gender 
inequalities and providing women with opportunities to access 
resources and opportunities in relation to their quality of life 
that can lead not only to wider urban prosperity but also to 
women’s empowerment. 

ATTITUDES TOwARDS wOMEN’S QUALITy 
OF LIFE IN CITIES

The survey highlighted how urban residents felt that the 

policies for promoting quality of life in their cities were 
generally adequate although they needed significantly more 
attention. For instance, while one-quarter thought that they 
were ‘very good’ or ‘excellent’, more than one-third (34 per 
cent) felt that they were ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’. The most positive 
were those living in Johannesburg where 45 per cent thought 
they were ‘very good’ or ‘excellent’ with the most negative 
residing in Rio de Janeiro where 56 per cent felt they were ‘very 
poor’ or ‘poor’. This is further reflected in the fact that 40 per 
cent of people felt that their city was ‘not fully committed’ to 
promoting quality of life for women. This was very marked 

26

Woman at hatcliffe extension evictions Zimbabwe. © UN-HabitatFigure 2.1.1
Perceptions of commitment of city policies to promote quality of life of women 

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Fully Committed

Committed

Somewhat Committed

Not Making Enough Efforts

Not Committed

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

wOMEN, GENDER AND hOUSING

women’s rights to land and housing

Housing is widely regarded as an essential human need and 

right, as reflected in its incorporation into the Millennium 
Development Goals, with MDG 7, Target D being to improve 
the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers by 2020. This 
is actually one of the few MDG targets that has been reached 
a decade ahead of schedule, with 220 million people having 
moved out of slum conditions between 2000 and 2010 alone.1 
However, despite the fact that the original benchmark was 
arguably set too low (at only around one-tenth of slum dwellers 
worldwide), progress has been geographically varied. Moreover, 
although the proportion of urban residents living in slums has 
dropped in most developing regions, with China and India at 
the forefront, in absolute terms, the number of slum dwellers 
has continued to rise.2

These trends are especially pertinent to women, not only 

because they often constitute a larger than average share 
of people in slums, but because of strong linkages between 
women and the ‘domestic domain’.3 Housing is a key physical, 
economic and social asset for women. Not only do women 
rear children in their houses, but it is also their main site of 
social network creation and income generation.4 Housing is 
also critical to the identity, dignity and sense of belonging of 
individuals, especially if their rights are upheld by law. Even 
when people start out in precarious shelter, housing can be 
a meaningful pathway out of poverty and in turn, a route to 
prosperity.5

Gender equality in rights to land and housing has been 

established in a number of international treaties and 
conventions, including Article 16 of CEDAW (Convention 
of the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against 
Women).6 Subsequent developments include the reaffirmation 
in 2007 at the UN’s Human Rights Council in New York, of 
‘the human right to adequate housing’ as ‘the right of every 
woman, man, youth and child to gain and sustain a safe and 
secure home and community in which to live in peace and 
dignity’. In 2010, General Recommendation 27 was adopted 
by the CEDAW Committee, emphasising older women’s 
rights to adequate housing and protection against forced 
evictions and homelessness. The importance of housing for 
women also features in UN-Habitat’s Global Campaign for 
Secure Tenure, as well as in the World Urban Campaign.7 Yet 
despite these provisions, gender continues to be a major axis of 
discrimination in land and property ownership. For example, 
UNICEF estimates for a range of Latin American countries 
that women are seldom more than 25 per cent of landowners, 
while the OECD estimates that for 82 countries with a 
population of over 1 million outside the OECD and EU, only 
15 per cent of women own land.8

In the survey, 64 per cent of people across all cities except 

Kampala (which was excluded) felt that more than half of 
all women had no access to secure housing. However, it also 
emerged that 28 per cent in all cities thought that existing 
efforts to attain gender equity in access to housing tenure were 

27

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIES‘advanced’ or ‘very advanced’, especially in Johannesburg (54 
per cent) and Kingston (49 per cent), but with 21 per cent 
stating there was ‘no equity’ in Rio de Janeiro.

The root causes of differential access to secure tenure are 

complex. One factor is uneven discrimination against women 
in inheritance, ranging from situations, as in Swaziland, where 
women have no right to inherit property, to those in which they 
are only legally entitled to lesser shares than men. In addition, 
in some cases, women’s statutory rights are compromised by 
lack of knowledge, plural legal systems, and socio-cultural 
emphasis on the prerogatives of males and their blood relations 
over land and property.9  It is also worth noting that even if 
there appears to be equality in property rights in principle, this 
is far less likely in practice. 

Male bias in inheritance and property acts therefore as major 
obstacle to gender equality and empowerment. Male ownership 
effectively equates with male control over women and there is 
widespread discrimination against women is nearly all aspects of 
housing.10 Given male rights, women commonly face eviction 
and/or homelessness in the event of divorce or desertion. 
The same applies to widows who may be subject to ‘property 
grabbing’ by their in-laws, as has been noted in India in the 
context of women whose spouses have died of HIV/AIDS, a 
phenomenon also widely observed in sub-Saharan Africa.11

Negative outcomes of these processes are especially important 
where women are poor. The only alternatives for widows facing 
destitution through dispossession may be to subject themselves 

28

to various demeaning or self-sacrificial strategies to retain rights 
to property, such as committing to post-conjugal celibacy, 
or entering into forced unions with their spouses’ brothers 
(Levirate marriage).12 Moreover, women may be disenfranchised 
as daughters, regardless of the efforts they have made to support 
parentsand/or brothers economically. In some cases, as noted 
for India, mothers may favour the inheritance of sons over 
daughters given the expectation that the former will provide for 
them in their old age.13 Even where both spouses are alive, and 
women may be legal owners of land or property, their rights 
over sale, transfer, or daily use may be flouted.14

Although women’s long-term prospects of securing property 
are better in urban areas than in the countryside, partly because 
of greater social and economic opportunities and partly because 
more land and property is acquired through the market rather 
than inheritance, women still face widespread discrimination in 
cities. For example, one-third of owner-occupiers were female 
in a UN Gender and Habitat survey in 16 low-income urban 
communities in Ghana, Senegal, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, 
Sri Lanka, Colombia and Costa Rica.15

Rare exceptions include South Africa, where thanks to the 
Department of Housing’s prioritisation of equal or preferred 
access to female household heads under the government subsidy 
programme, such units are no less likely than other households 
to own their home or to live in formal shelter.16  However, 
the UN-Habitat survey has also shown that although men 
and women in Johannesburg are theoretically both eligible for 
housing and land subsidy support, these services are invariably 
registered in the names of men.17

Gender discrimination also obstructs women’s access to 

rental shelter, which has been more neglected policy-wise with 
fewer provisions to protect women as a result.18 In Tanzania, 
for example, in cases where couples in rental accommodation 
divorce, men are more likely to stay behind. In turn, limited 
access by single women is compounded in some cases by 
stigma against HIV/AIDS.19 Women renters may also be 
discriminated against in relation to sexuality, either because of 
issues of propriety of single women without male ‘guardians’ 
as in southern India,20 or in terms of lesbian women finding it 
difficult to rent as in Quito, Ecuador.21

Common explanations for gender disparities in accessing 
shelter as a whole include women’s limited access to stable 
employment and earnings, finance and credit. Even where 
women may be able to access housing, the prospect of property 
taxes may discourage them from claiming title.22 Additional 
factors dissuading women from pursuing title in their own 
right, or even opting for joint spousal registration, include 
deeply entrenched patterns of patriarchy which require 
women to defer to men’s wishes in respect of ownership and 
management of household assets.23 The injustice of these 
gender disparities is further underscored by the fact that women 

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Woman and child resisting eviction from an inner-city slum in Buenos Aires, Argentina. © UN-Habitat/Pepe Mateos frequently make substantial contributions of time, money and 
labour to creating the housing stock in urban areas of the South 
where between 25 per cent and 60 per cent is self-financed and/
or built.24

Given substantial gaps between international human 

rights provisions, government legislation and actual practice, 
various efforts have been made to introduce pro-female 
land and property titling as a means of bolstering women’s 
empowerment (See Boxes 2.1.1 and 2.1.2).  UN-Habitat, for 
example, is the secretariat of a multi-stakeholder Global Land 
Tools Network (GLTN) which aims to ‘promote practical 
approaches – particularly through recognition of a continuum 
of land rights’ to enhance tenure security’.25  Although the 
GLTN does not focus solely on individual land titling for 
women, a range of examples where this, or joint titling, is 
endorsed by formal or customary law (or a combination of the 
two), suggest that strengthening women’s land and property 
rightshas important spin-offs in a number of areas.  

For instance, in Peru regularisation of title for urban 

squatters released time for women, as well as men, to engage 
in activities other than protection of their properties.145 In 

Box 2.1.2
The evolution of women’s land rights in Nepal 

in 2002 Nepal eventually passed the Country Code (11th 
Amendment Act), nearly ten years after demands by gender 
equality advocates in the country, which provided for equal 
inheritance rights for unmarried daughters and sons.  
However, this measure only went part-way since married 
women still stood to lose their natal property rights. 

in 2006, as Nepal emerged from a decade of conflict, 
children were able to claim citizenship through their 
mothers for the first time through the Gender Equality 
Act which also extended divorce rights as well as further 
protecting women against domestic and sexual violence.  
With specific regard to property, married women were 
granted the right to keep inherited property, as well as being 
entitled to use property without the consent of male family 
members.

in 2007, the Ministry of Finance introduced gender-
responsive budgeting which resulted in an increase of 
government spending directly responsive to women’s needs 
from 11 to 17 per cent between 2007 to 2010, as well as 
a 10 per cent tax exemption for land registered in women’s 
names, which aimed to incentivise families to share their 
property with daughters, sisters and wives. As a result, 
households reporting some degree of ownership among 
women more than doubled, from 11 per cent to 35 per cent, 
between 2001 and 2009.

Source: UN Women (2011, pp. 22-3)

Vietnam, a World Bank land titling programme enhanced 
women’s access to loans, and therefore business start-up and 
expansion.26 In Zambia, Habitat for Humanity’s ‘Zambia 
Women Build’ launch resulted in improvements in women’s 
personal safety and security.27

Evidence from the survey highlighted that only 23 per 

cent of those interviewed noted that their city had policies 
to address the barriers facing women in securing land and 
property tenure. As few as 13 per cent of respondents in 
Bangalore stated that policies existed compared to 33 per cent 
in Johannesburg. 

Women’s limited access to land and property in cities can 

massively affect their ability to generate urban prosperity 
insofar as it restricts their possibilities for establishing 
microenterprises.28 Scope for entrepreneurial activities is 
limited by landlords, or by fellow family members or residents 
in cramped overcrowded dwellings or multi-occupancy 
compounds.  Not only may women lack a physical base or 
space appropriate for storing and/or protecting their produce 
or machinery, but poor location and inadequate services and 
infrastructure place further obstacles to urban productivity and 
prospeity.

Despite women’s increased access to informal financial assets 
through a range of micro-finance organisations run by NGOs 
as well as public and commercial banks, they still remain 
excluded from many formal financial services. Indeed, there is 
also evidence that the shift towards greater commercialisation 
of banking for the poor has led to a decline in access among 
women. The primary reasons for this revolve around the 
importance of providing assistance to women beyond lending 
and credit as noted in relation to the Por Mujer organisation’s 
work in Latin America. However, even among women 
entrepreneurs, access to finance remains more limited than for 
men. For example, in South Africa, women comprised only 
5 per cent of clients in the Black Economic Empowerment 
Equity Fund of a major bank after two years of operation.29

wOMEN, GENDER AND hEALTh
An ‘urban penalty’ in health for slum women

There is evidence to suggest that slum populations generally 

fare worse in terms of physical and mental ill-health alike 
than non-slum residents linked with inadequate public 
healthcare and problems of spatial inaccessibility, as well as by 
inability to afford costly private alternatives.30 In turn, most 
developing countries now face a ‘double disease burden’ of 
non-communicable and communicable disease.31 Research 
based on India’s 2005-6 National Family Health Survey 
(NFHS-3) in the context of eight large Indian cities – Chennai, 
Delhi, Hyderabad, Indore, Meerut, Mumbai and Nagpur 
-  revealed that slum dwellers suffer a disproportionate risk of 

29

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIEScommunicable illness such as tuberculosis. The prevalence of 
malnutrition in India and Bangladesh is more than double in 
slums than in non-slum areas, at 54 per cent versus 21 per cent, 
and 51.4 per cent versus 24 per cent respectively (UN-Habitat, 
2010d:1).   In the Democratic Republic of Congo, too, 41 per 
cent of children are malnourished in slums compared with 16 
per cent of their non-slum counterparts.   

Furthermore, slum dwellers also suffer a disproportionate 

vulnerability to health conditions linked with inadequate 
healthcare and diet, such as anaemia.32 There is also evidence 
that behaviourally-related health issues such as smoking are 
more prevalent in slums. For example, in Bangladesh smoking 
cigarettes and ‘bidis’ (hand-rolled cigarettes which have 
higher concentrations of tar and nicotine) is more widespread 
in slums. This has ‘devastating effects’ for people living in 
poverty in terms of diverting income from food expenditure 
and exacerbating the risks of respiratory disease commonly 
associated with overcrowded and poorly-ventilated dwellings.33

Unfavourable health conditions in slums have led to the 

notion of an ‘urban penalty’ in health.34 This suggests that even 
if conditions tend to be better than in rural areas, the ‘urban 
advantage’ in respect of lower mortality rates and nutritional 
status for children in particular disappears once wealth, 
education and other socio-economic indicators are controlled 
for.35 

For women in slums, the urban penalty is arguably greater 
than for men as the risks to physical and mental well-being 
are sharpened by a range of ‘stressors’ attached to their inputs 

to household reproduction in challenging circumstances.36   
For example, the use in cooking of solid fuels such as 
biomass (wood and crop residues), coal and charcoal, are far 
more harmful to individuals through lung and atmosphere 
polluting hydrocarbons, and carcinogens than ‘cleaner’ more 
expensive alternatives such as kerosene, liquid petroleum, 
gas and electricity. This is especially the case in cramped, 
poorly-ventilated spaces, such that indoor air pollution has 
been termed a ‘quiet and neglected killer’ of poor women and 
children.37 In a survey in Accra, Ghana, nearly 30 per cent of 
poor women reported respiratory problems in the two weeks 
prior, which was more than twice the rate among women of 
middling income, and ten times that of wealthy women.38 
Where piped domestic water supplies are not available, severe 
fatigue, strain on joints, and so on, can arise from having to 
carry vessels over long distances, often up- or down-hill on 
rough footpaths, or over ditches and open sewers.   In terms 
of mental health, at a global level, depression has been found 
to disproportionately affect women and the poor.39 Recent 
evidence from Cape Town, South Africa demonstrates a higher 
prevalence of Common Mental Disorders (CMDs) in peri-
urban slums (35 per cent) compared with rural areas (27 per 
cent), and that gender (being female), unemployment and 
substance abuse are the most common correlates.40 In such 
circumstances, basic upgrading of urban slums can have major 
positive effects on women’s general health as in the award-
winning multi-stakeholder Ahmedabad Slum Networking 
Programme in India (See also Box 2.1.3 on Agra).41 Service 
improvements such as electrification and water access are 
not only likely to improve health outcomes in immediate 
ways, but also to alleviate the strains attached to longer-term 
consequences of ill-health. These include coping with the loss 
of household earners, caring for the sick and dying, which 
might be especially marked among female-headed households 
who, in some contexts  experience an above-average gendered 
‘uran penalty’ in health.42

On a final point, the UN-Habitat survey highlighted that 

only 36 per cent of those in the case study cities thought 
that there was ‘advanced’ or ‘very advanced’ gender equity 
in access to health services. However, there were marked 
differences according to the city with 64 per cent of those in 
Johannesburg and 63 per cent of those in Kingston viewing 
access as ‘advanced’. This compared with 19 per cent of people 
in Rio de Janeiro who felt that there was no gender equity in 
access. Related to this, only 45.5 per cent thought that their 
city offered affordable medical services to women. Although 
this rose to 63 per cent in Johannesburg and to 60 per cent 
in Kingston, only 20 per cent of residents in Rio de Janeiro 
determined that such services were available. 

30

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013South Sudan nurses and midwives match in Juba to mark International Day of the Nurse.© Elizabeth Deacon/IRINBox 2.1.3
The multiple impacts of multidimensional slum upgrading on 
women in Agra, India

in the city of Agra, a tourism-based urban economy which 
is home to the internationally-renowned spectacles of the 
Taj Mahal and Agra Fort, an initiative called the Crosscutting 
Agra Programme (CAP), has been working to improve 
sanitation in low-income communities and to enhance 
livelihoods among young women and men in participatory 
and inclusive ways.  CAP is supported by the Agra Municipal 
Corporation (Agra Nagar Nigam) and USAiD, and enlists 
the help of an urban development NGO, CURE (Centre for 
Urban and Regional Excellence) in community mobilisation, 
organisation and planning.

Recognising that women are most affected by poor 
sanitation, their participation was sought in the design, 
location and construction of household and community 
toilets, with women themselves contributing 50% of the 
costs of toilet construction, providing labour, and overseeing 
the building process.  A women’s Toilet Savings Group was 
established to help women to attain the funds necessary for 
personal toilets, with loans also provided from a Community 
Credit Facility (CCF).  in one of the communities covered by 
the project, Yamuna Bridge, critical design inputs proposed 
by women for toilets and bathing areas included ledges for 
soap and hooks for clothes, more open and visible toilets 
for children, and the organisation of washing areas which 
would better build ‘social capital’ and enhance safety and 
security for young women and children.

in line with ‘slum upgrading plus’ principles, CAP has also 
helped women to form enterprise groups that help them 
to benefit from the prosperity generated by Agra’s tourism 
value chain, not only providing space for livelihood activities 
and training in finance management and client engagement, 
but also setting-up an alliance with the private sector for 
the development of tourism-based products. As a result of 
this initiative, women’s daily incomes have grown up to ten-
fold and their livelihoods have become more sustainable, 
with over 100 days of work a year.

The CAP settlements in Agra have not only been better 
‘mainstreamed’ into the city economy, but into the city 
system as a whole, thereby increasing access by residents 
to a range of municipal services.

Source: Khosla (2009:46-7).

Urban health, gender and the Millennium  
Development Goals

Health features explicitly in three of the Millennium 

Development Goals, notably MDG 4 - reduce child mortality, 
MDG 5- improve maternal health, and MDG 6 – combat 
HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. Some progress has 
been made in MDG 4’s objective of reducing by two-thirds 
the under-5 mortality rate between 1990 and 2015, with a 
drop of 28 per cent in developing countries since 1990 and 
an accelerated rate of decline from 2000 onwards. However, 
in many poor countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, 
preventable child mortality remains excessively high.43 This 
disproportionately affects girls, particularly in parts of East 
Asia, South Asia and North Africa where ‘son preference’ 
contributes to a neglect of girls’ health needs, most notably 
where healthcare costs are borne by families themselves.44

The goal of reducing maternal mortality by three-quarters 

between 1990 and 2015 also looks to be unattainable. Despite 
a 34 per cent drop in maternal deaths in developing regions the 
current mean annual rate of decline (2.3 per cent) is far short 
of the 5.5 per cent required.45 Maternal mortality is widely 
regarded as an indicator of women’s status, since although 
most maternal deaths are avoidable with increasing numbers of 
women now receiving antenatal care, this is compromised by 
poverty and early and frequent pregnancies. These frequently 
stem from male control over female sexuality.46 Sub-Saharan 
Africa stands out as the region with the highest maternal 
mortality levels, at 640 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births 
in urban areas (and 870 in rural areas) as against developing 
region averages of 290 and 450 respectively.47

Shortages of trained midwives are partly responsible for the 
fact that many women fail to receive recommended levels of 
care during their pregnancies.48 In Kenya, for example, low 
or delayed take-up of antenatal care in Nairobi slums reduces 
the proportion of deliveries attended by skilled personnel. 
Although antenatal care is free in Kenya, the charging of 
fees for births or complications in hospitals, as well as the 
stigmatisation of mothers without possession of antenatal cards 
act as deterrents to poor women.49 Other critical factors are 
that women in poverty often undertake heavy and physically 
hard workloads, especially in the run-up to childbirth, which 
places them at risk of miscarriage or other complications.  The 
latter is compounded by the fact that intimate partner violence 
often increases when women are pregnant, particularly where 
husbands are jobless or under severe economic pressure (See 
also below).

31

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESBetter progress has been made in MDG 6’s aim to halt and/

or reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS by 2015. HIV infection 
rates seem to have peaked in 1999, and declined significantly 
since 2002, thanks largely to a massive scale-up in Anti-
Retroviral Therapy (ART). However, in absolute terms the 
number of people living with HIV is rising, partly because they 
are living longer with the condition, but also because treatment 
is still short of universal and public information campaigns are 
not always effective.50  As for other diseases comprised under 
MDG 6, tuberculosis (TB) is the second highest cause of death 
after HIV/AIDS, with only marginal improvement witnessed 
in recent years. Although substantial progress has been made in 
tackling malaria, it remains responsible for over 850,000 deaths 
a year, of which 90 per cent occur in Africa.51

Although women comprise just over 50 per cent of HIV-
affected persons worldwide, this figure is nearly 60 per cent 
in sub-Saharan Africa. Young women in urban areas are 
at particular risk, with those aged 15-24 years being up to 
eight times more likely to contract the disease than their 
male counterparts.52 Slums again feature prominently with 
a study in Korogocho, Nairobi, finding that HIV prevalence 
was nearly three times the national average of 6.1 per cent.53  
Young women’s greater vulnerability to HIV infection is partly 
due to their greater physiological vulnerability, but also to 
socio-cultural factors, such as first intercourse with sexually-
experienced older men. This frequently intersects with poverty 
insofar as poor urban women’s and girls’ dependence on cash 
income and limited livelihood opportunities increase the 
possibility of unsafe ‘transactional sex’.54 For example, slum 

dwelling girls face a greater likelihood of early sexual debut 
associated with lack of privacy, insecurity and gender-based 
violence (individual and gang-based). In addition, people 
may already have weak immune systems resulting from poor 
nutrition and other communicable diseases, thus increasing 
their susceptibility to infection and accelerated progression 
from HIV to AIDS.55

VIOLENCE AGAINST wOMEN AND 
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE IN CITIES

Violence against women affects an estimated one in three 
women across the world, which makes women twice as likely 
to suffer acts of violent aggression as their male counterparts.56 
It is generally acknowledged that rates of crime and all types 
of violence are higher in cities than in the countryside. Within 
the broader context of rates of violent crime increasing globally 
from 6 to 8.8 incidents per 100,000 persons between 1990 and 
2000, much of this increase has been in cities.57 As outlined 
in Chapter 1.1, there are a range of issues that make violence 
against women and gender-based violence a critical  issue in 
cities. Somewhat inevitably, urban violence does not only 
affect women and girls, with young men also being  at high 
risk, especially in slums where becoming part of a youth gang 
can be the only viable means of livelihood.58  Membership of 
gangs linked to drugs and street violence is often associated 
with the premature mortality of men.59 However, women are 
the most likely to experience gender-based violence especially 
in poor communities and particularly by non-partners. There 

32

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013A grafitti on Anti-Rape Campaign in Nairobi, Kenya.  © Julius Mwelu/UN-Habitatare range of sites and spaces in cities where violence is more 
likely to occur. These include toilets, at schools, in drinking 
bars, and in secluded areas.60 This is compounded by flimsy 
housing, poor street lighting, inadequate public transport and 
lack of security patrols. Therefore, the lack of infrastructure in 
cities contributes to gender-based violence and makes women 
more vulnerable to break-ins, theft and rape (See Box 2.1.4). In 
addition, the frequent anonymity and social isolation of female 
urban dwellers, may make them more vulnerable to attack from 
strangers, but also to receive limited help when affected by 
intimate artner abuse.61

Box 2.1.4
women’s concerns about urban security and safety in Cape 
Town, South Africa

in April 2011, at the Western Cape Anti-Eviction 
Campaign’s monthly residential meeting in the Symphony 
Way Temporary Relocation Area, informally referred to 
as Blikkiesdorp, or ‘Tin Can Town’ in Afrikaans, residents 
voluntarily gathered to discuss their personal security 
concerns within the community.  Among the routine 
discussions of endemic crime and the regular break-ins, 
which afford residents little to no personal security over 
their possessions, a comment surfaced from Nadia, a 
resident who had years ago been evicted from her home 
closer to Cape Town’s city centre.  Raising her voice above 
the sounds drifting over from the adjacent shacks, Nadia 
expressed in front of her fellow residents, both male and 
female, her deep concern over the lack of municipal repair 
of the streetlights lining the dirt road that leads to the main 
highway.  The non-functioning of the streetlights has posed 
particular problems for women, rendering them vulnerable 
to harassment, theft, physical abuse, and sexual violence.  
in the darkness of morning’s early hours, when many of 
the Area’s women begin their hours-long commute towards 
Cape Town’s City Centre, often involving a protracted walk 
followed by multiple minibus trips, the functioning presence 
of streetlights deters crime and allows for residents’ safe 
passage through an otherwise-unsecured area.  Nadia’s 
complaint illustrates one of the many ways in which 
women’s safety can be compromised by the simple lack 
of municipal service delivery in informal settlements.  Yet, 
women’s safety can also be greatly improved with the 
effective installation and maintenance of streetlights.  The 
installation and maintenance of streetlights in slums and 
other low-income housing areas throughout the Global 
South represent one opportunity to improve the safety and 
well-being of the poor, particularly women, in a way that 
the residents themselves have personally shown to be both 
productive and in demand.   

Source: Fleming (2011)

While young women appear to be particularly prone to 
sexual abuse, including gang rape, frail and elderly women 
may also be vulnerable along with women who ‘transgress’ 
heteronormative boundaries such as those who, in one form or 
another, live ‘independently’.  This includes lone women and 
lone mothers, who are often so insecure about living without 
men that they opt to stay in abusive relationships with ‘real 
or make-do “husbands”’ as noted for slums in Chittagong 
and Dhaka in Bangladesh, Hyderabad in India and Nairobi, 
Kenya.62 Sexuality is another issue, with a reported 90 per cent 
of lesbian women in Quito, Ecuador, having suffered abuse in 
their neighbourhoods on account of ‘lesbophobia’.63

In addition, there are also a series of ‘triggers’ in cities that 
can induce  violence against women which include witnessing 
intimate partner violence as child and child abuse, an absent 
or rejecting father, low educational level and high rates of 
employment among women, youth, HIV status and male 
alcohol and substance abuse.64 Some of these conditions exist 
in the countryside, but are often heightened in cities, especially 
women’s greater labour force participation which appears to 
antagonise some men.

The most well-known example of this is the femicides in 
Mexico and Central America. Although these brutal killings 
are experienced by many poor women in cities, they are 
especially concentrated among maquila factory workers who 
work in export manufacturing factories owned by transnational 
corporations involved in the assembly factories of garments 
and electronics. The reasons for these femicides are rooted in a 
wide range of complex issues but are ultimately an expression 
of extreme gender discrimination. Some have suggested that 
the maquila workers are targeted because they are the preferred 
workers in the factories which can leave men unemployed and 
lead to male resentment against women’s economic and social 
independence.65

In addition, in a study in the Philippines, it has been 

shown that non-partner violence is more widespread in cities 
than rural areas and that the process of urbanisation can lead 
to ‘stress-induced violence’.66 In the case of violence linked 
with alcohol abuse on the part of men and its perpetration 
in drinking places, research has shown that bars, cantinas, 
taverns and shebeens are especially dangerous places for women 
to frequent, or in some instances even to pass by, because of 
the risk from sexual violence. In the case of Guatemala City, 
women living in one poor community reported being afraid 
to go near cantinas because they thought they would be raped 
or men would expose themselves to them or try and ‘touch 
them’.67

Evidence from the survey shows that security and safety 

were major concerns in all the cities. For instance, one third 
of urban dwellers did ‘not feel safe at all’ in their city. This was 
especially marked in Johannesburg (42 per cent), Kingston 

33

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 2.1.2
Perceptions of safety and security for women in cities

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Not safe at all

Relatively safe

Safe

Very safe

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

(41 per cent) and Rio de Janeiro (41 per cent) all of which are 
cities that have notable problems with urban violence. The only 
city where people reported feeling ‘very safe’ in any significant 
number was in Kampala (19 per cent) (Figure 2.1.2). 

The importance of addressing violence in urban contexts 
is widely recognised at city-wide, national and international 
levels. In 2009, the Global Programme on Safe Cities Free 
from Violence against Women was launched by UN-Habitat 
in conjunction with UNIFEM (now subsumed under UN 
Women).68 This followed from UN-Habitat’s Safer Cities 
Programme, which has supported local authorities in 
developing countries to prevent crime and violence through 
city-wide advocacy and training.69 For example, Cebu in 
the Philippines has introduced a host of initiatives to reduce 
violence against women and is the first city in the country 
to introduce a ‘Gender Code’ and in 2004 earned the UN-
Habitat award of ‘Women Friendly City’.

To date a number of countries have established women 

only police stations in a bid to combat violence against 
women, especially to encourage women to report crimes 
perpetuated against them. The first women’s police station 
(DDM - Delegacia da Mulher) was created in São Paulo, Brazil 
in 1985 mainly in response to mass women’s demonstrations 
demanding women’s rights. The legislation creating this police 
station decreed that everyone working there had to be a woman 
with the aim of reducing violence against women and charging 
them with investigating and prosecuting violence against 
women. By the mid-2000s, there were 125 women’s police 
stations in the state of São Paulo, and 339 throughout Brazil, 
with 475 units nationwide by 2010.70 Similar developments 

34

have been noted in Tanzania with the formation of the 
Tanzania Police Female Network (TPFNet) leading to the 
opening of gender desks in police stations, and in South 
Africa.71 The Philippines opened its first women-only police 
stations in Manila in 2008. 

Effective urban planning, design and governance from a 

gender perspective can also enhance urban safety and security 
in cities. This approach has also been referred to as Crime 
Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED) which 
entails using a primarily spatial and design perspective to 
reducing violence.72 These might include public-private 
partnerships, such as the ‘Adopt a Light’ initiative in Nairobi, 
which since 2002, has illuminated key thoroughfares in and 
around the capital’s major slums, generating revenue for the 
scheme through selling advertising space on lampposts.73 
While these types of initiatives focus mainly on risk-reduction, 
they have proved to be successful in reducing the incidence 
of violence although it is also essential to combine these with 
other projects that also address deep-seated gender inequalities.

Women’s organisations in partnership with inter alia 
neighbourhoods, international agencies, cities and local 
authorities, and central governments have also been active in 
promoting innovative approaches to elimination of violence 
against women. Women’s safety audits, for example, have 
been used in several cities with reductions in the incidence of 
violence against women being reported. The Bantay Banay 
Campaign in the Philippines is another example which has 
contributed to a significant reduction in cases of domestic 
vilence. (See Box 2.1.5).

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Gender-based violence compounds a series of other risks 

to life and well-being, such as lack of safe drinking water and 
sanitation, which compromise women’s potential to generate 
as well as enjoy urban prosperity.74 Without adequate attention 
to the need for a gendered approach to urban planning, these 
processes can undermine urban prosperity. 

Indeed, more generally a gendered planning approach is 
required from both a top-down and bottom-up perspective. 
In terms of the former, gender-sensitive professional codes of 
conduct and institutional mechanisms that include women in 
all aspects of the planning process are required and backed-
up by legislation where necessary. At the other end of the 
spectrum, there is considerable scope for urban planners 
to engage much more fully with grassroots organisations, 
and especially those run by and representing women such 
as the Huairou Commission, the Society for the Promotion 
of Resource Area Centres (SPARC) and the Self-Employed 
Women’s Association (SEWA).75

Box 2.1.5
Domestic violence in Cebu City, the Philippines: the ‘Bantay 
Banay’ programme

Located in the Western Visayas, CebuCity forms part of 
Metro Cebu, which is the second largest urban settlement in 
the Philippines after the capital, Metro Manila.  

Cebu is not only renowned as a hub of export industry 
in the country and for its major contributions to national 
prosperity, but also for its record on promoting gender 
equality and empowering women. Here, the locally-based 
NGO Lihok Pilipina launched a flagship programme against 
domestic violence in the early 1990s, known as ‘Bantay 
Banay’, which means ‘Family Watch’ in Cebuano (the 
local language).  The programme aims to make everyone 
responsive to, and responsible for, addressing violence 
against women, by sensitising key stakeholders such as 
women and men in communities, barangay (neighbourhood)
officials, local doctors, health workers, and police officers 
to the need to identify and eliminate gender-based violence.  
This entails becoming familiar with the signs and symptoms 
of domestic violence, and raising levels of reporting.  in 
some neighbourhoods of the city Bantay Banay has been 
so successful that battering by husbands has fallen 
from affecting 60 per cent to 20 per cent of the female 
population.  

Source: Chant (2007a, p. 198)

35

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESEndnotes

1.  UN-Habitat (2010a)

2. 

 Chant (2007b, 2012a)

3. 

 Miraftab (2001); Quisumbing (2010)

4. 

 Moser (2006, 2009)

39.   Patel (2001)

40.   Harpham (2009, p. 112)

41.   AMC (2005); Bhatt (2003); Dutta (2000)

42.   Goebel et al (2010, p. 579)

5. 

 Hughes and Wickeri (2011, p. 814-5); UN-Habitat (2006a); Varley (2007)

43.   UN (2010a, p. 26-7)

6. 

 UN-Habitat (2007a); UN-Habitat (2010b); UNHRC (2009, p. 22)

44.   Hesketh and xing (2006, p. 13271-5)

7. 

 UNiCEF (2007, Figure 3.4); OECD (2012, p. 4)

45.   UN (2010a, p. 30-1)

8. 

 COHRE (2004); CPRC (2010); Hughes and Wickeri (2011)

46.   Graham (2004); Fraser (2005); UNDP (2005, p. 33)

9. 

 UN-Habitat (2008b); See also Hughes and Wickeri (2011, p. 850) 

47.   UN (2010a, p. 32-4, 2010c, p. 1)

10.   Nakray (2010); Rakodi (2010); Sweetman (2008)

48.   Save the Children (2011b, p 16-20)

11.   COHRE (2004, 2008); Nakray (2010); UN-Habitat (2007a, p. 8)

49.   Essendi et al (2010); Ochako et al (2011)

12.   Chant (2007a, pp. 181-3 on The Gambia); Jackson (2003)

50.   UNAiDS (2010, p. 7-8); UN (2010a, p. 45)

13.   Chant (2007b); Varley (2007)

14.   Miraftab (2001)

15.   Goebel et al (2010, p. 578)

16.   Also Moser and Felton (2010) on Ecuador

17.   Gilbert (2003); Kumar (2010); Miraftab (2001)

18.   Hughes and Wickeri (2011)

19.   Vera-Sanso (2006)

20.   Benavides Llerena et al (2007)

51.   UN (2010a, p. 51)

52.   UNAiDS (2010)

53.   Sverdlik (2011, p. 131)

54.   Chant and Evans (2010)

55.   Bähre (2007); Van Donk (2006); UN-Habitat (2010b, p. 18)

56.   UN-Habitat (2008c); 

57.   UN-Habitat (2007b, p. 11)

58.   Jones and Rodgers, eds (2009); Moser and Mcilwaine (2004, 2006)

21.   Benschop (2004); COHRE (2004); Khosla (2009, p. 39)

22.   Hughes and Wickeri (2011, p. 847)

59.   Moser and Mcilwaine (2004)

60.   Mcilwaine (2011); Tacoli, (2012)

23.   Chant (1987, 1996);  D’Cruz and Satterthwaite (2005, p. 9)

61.    Amnesty international (2010); COHRE (2008, p. 24); WHO (2005b)

24.   UN-Habitat (2010b, p. 5)

25.   Morrison et al (2010)

26.   World Bank (2011a)

27.   Habitat for Humanity (2009)

28.   Chant (2007b, 2013a); Valenzuela (2005, p. 1)

29.    UN-DESA (2009, p. 65)

30.   Moser (2011)

31.   Mitra and Rodriguez-Fernandez (2010)

32.   Gupta et al (2009, p. 43 et seq)

33.   Khan et al (2009, pp. 7-8)

34.   Harpham (2009); Satterthwaite (2011)

35.   Sverdlik (2011, p. 141) 

36.   Chant (2007b)

37.   UN-Habitat (2008a)

38.   Sverdlik (2011, p. 129) 

62.   Joshi et al (2011, p. 100)

63.   Benavides Llerena et al (2007)

64.   Morrison, Elsberg and Bott (2007)

65.   Prieto-Carron et al (2007); also Jarvis et al (2009)

66.   Hindin and Adair (2002, p. 1397)

67.   Moser and Mcilwaine (2004, p.134)

68.   UN-Habitat (2010b, p. 13)

69.   UN-Habitat (2008c)

70.   Santos (2004); Mcilwaine (2011)

71.   Hughes and Wickeri (2011, p. 856); UN Women (2011, p. 57)

72.   Mcilwaine (2011); Moser and Mcilwaine (2006)

73.   UN-Habitat (2010b, p. 13)

74.   Agarwal (2011)

75.    Reeves, Parfitt and Archer (2012)

36

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Chapter 2.2

Gender, Infrastructure 
and Prosperity of Cities

This chapter outlines some of the key issues in relation to 
the importance of access to adequate infrastructure in cities 
in terms of enhancing women’s prosperity and economic 
empowerment. This relates directly to the arena of gender 
disparities in physical and financial assets and capital as part of 
the gender and urban prosperity nexus of which infrastructure 
plays an important role. While infrastructure relates to various 
physical aspects of urban environments linked with territorial 
space, fixtures and connections, as in urban mass transport, 
pavements or sidewalks, street lighting, and parks, it also 
deals with community centres or meeting places, nurseries, 
elderly care homes, and sports and recreational facilities. In 
turn, these link closely with aspects of productivity as well as 
spatial mobility and connectivity. While some aspects of urban 
infrastructure were discussed in Chapter 2.1 on quality of life, 
this chapter will focus specifically on water and sanitation, 
public transport and the role of community centres and 
meeting places in cities.

ATTITUDES TOwARDS wOMEN’S ACCESS 
TO INFRASTRUCTURE IN CITIES

The survey revealed that the extent to which urban dwellers 
felt their city was fully committed to promoting infrastructural 
development to fully engage women in urban development 
and productive work was variable. Although over half (53 per 
cent) thought that their cities were committed in some form, 
only 22 per cent stated that they were ‘fully committed’ or 
‘committed’. The highest perceived levels of commitment were 
found in Johannesburg where 39 per cent were ‘committed’ or 
‘fully committed’ together with Kingston (31 per cent) (Figure 
2.2.1).

This general perception that infrastructure resources 

were not really adequate in providing equal support for the 
productive activities of women and men, especially in terms 
of the specific needs of women, was further reflected in the 
survey. For example, only 29.5 per cent of respondents felt 
that infrastructure was ‘adequate’, with lows of 15 per cent in 
Rio de Janeiro and 18.5 per cent in Kingston. More positive 
views were held in Kampala (where 46 per cent thought 
infrastructure was ‘adequate’) and in Johannesburg (50 per 
cent). 

37

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 2.2.1
Commitment of city to promoting infrastructure development to engage women in urban development and productive work

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Fully Committed

Committed

Somewhat Committed

Not enough effort

Not Committed

Don’t know

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

More specifically, the nature of women’s access to particular 

In relation to how much infrastructure development 

types of infrastructure was assessed in the survey cities. 
It emerged that the most problematic area was access to 
sanitation, especially in Bangalore and Rio de Janeiro. Access to 
infrastructure for recreation was also very limited for women, 
again particularly for those in Bangalore and Rio de Janeiro. 
Access to telecommunications was perceived to be the most 
developed, especially in Kingston (Table 2.2.1).

contributes to the quality of various aspects of women’s lives 
in cities, it is instructive that improved access to education and 
health services was thought to be the most important, especially 
in Kingston and Johannesburg. Improved mobility for women 
was also identified as important, especially in Kingston. The 
creation of improved home/work environment was thought 
to be the least significant, presumably because it was such a 
general issue (See Table 2.2.2).

Table 2.2.1

Ranking of access to different types of urban infrastructure by women

Citiesà 
Factors

Transport

Water 

Electricity

Sanitation

Telecommunication infrastructure

infrastructure for recreation

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Rank

3.15

2.60

2.90

2.52

3.38

2.68

3.33

3.48

3.34

3.25

3.34

3.19

2.93

2.97

2.88

2.98

3.11

2.87

3.70

3.92

3.96

3.41

4.02

3.28

2.53

3.09

3.23

2.59

3.18

2.78

3.11

3.16

3.23

2.91

3.40

2.93

  4

  3

  2

  6

  1

  5

Note: Responses 1à least advanced to 5à most advanced 
Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

38

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Table 2.2.2

Ranking of contribution of infrastructure development to women’s lives

Citiesà 
Factors

inclusive economic growth

Reduction of women’s poverty

improved mobility of women

Creation of improved home/work 
environment

improved access to education   
and health for women

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Rank

2.87

2.60

2.99

2.75

3.13

3.18

3.00

3.15

2.92

3.44

2.99

3.07

3.05

2.89

3.05

3.20

2.92

3.35

2.91

3.63

2.48

2.33

2.43

2.31

2.40

2.93

2.77

2.98

2.75

3.11

 3

 4

 2

 5

 1

Note: Responses 1à not contributing to 5à fully contributing 
Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

The most commonly identified infrastructure problems 

acting as barriers to the prosperity of women were sanitation 
and the burden of disease which was cited by 50 per cent or 
more people in Bangalore, Kampala and Rio de Janeiro. This 
was followed by congested roads identified as a barrier by 
45 per cent in Kampala and 40 per cent in Bangalore. The 
least important barrier was interruption of telephone lines, 
cited by only 13 per cent of people, and only by 7 per cent in 
Bangalore, Johannesburg, and Rio de Janeiro and by no-one in 
Kingston (Figure 2.2.2).

39

In most cities, it is clear that the most important effect 
of infrastructure underdevelopment on the lives of women 
is increased cost of living cited by 36 per cent.  This was 
perceived as particularly important in Bangalore and Kingston. 
The second most important issue was poor proximity to 
employment opportunities and markets, identified by 21 per 
cent of people, with those in Rio de Janeiro and Kingston 
especially concerned (See Figure 2.2.3).

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESStatisticians entering data into the database for further processing and analysis,Turkmenistan.© World BankFigure 2.2.2
Barriers affecting infrastructure underdevelopment on lives of women (per cent answering yes)

30

25

20

15

10

5

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
R

 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

0

Lack of productive employment 
Lack of inclusive, 
Lack of access to  
opportunity/income poverty
adequate infrastructure
basic services

Corruption

High costs of doing business  
Poor governance and week 
High levels of crime  
or poor market access
implementing institutions
and safety threats

Lack of political will

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Others

Total

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

GENDER AND BASIC SERVICES

Access to safe drinking water and sanitation were established 

as human rights by the UN Human Rights Council in 2010, 
adding impetus to MDG 7 Target C, which is to ‘reduce by 
half the proportion of the population without sustainable 
access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation by 2015’. 
Yet although access to water is progressing in line with this 
target, it is important to note that this does not cover water for 
bathing, washing and cleaning.1 Improvements in sanitation are 
less encouraging, with major shortfalls in many regions.

While rural areas are particularly deprived, urban slums 
bear a substantial brunt of deficits.2   In countries such as 
Tanzania, for example, improvements in urban sanitation 
are often cancelled out by demographic growth. This means 
that in informal settlements in Morogoro and Dar es Salaam, 
pressure on sanitation facilities forces several households to 
share a single pit latrine, which poses extreme discomfort and 
risks to health, and also presents a major challenge of labour 
and affordability in relation to cleaning.3  In India, in Delhi, 
Meerut, Indore and Nagpur, between one-third and one-half of 
poor households practice open defecation (OD), where bodily 
waste is left exposed, including in uncovered pit latrines.4

Lack of services not only impacts women’s and girls’ 

workloads, but can also seriously compromise their dignity 
and self-respect.   As described graphically by Catarina de 
Albuquerque, UN Independent Expert on the issue of human 
rights obligations related to safe drinking water and sanitation:  

40

‘Sanitation is not just about health, housing, education, work, 
gender equality, and the ability to survive.  Sanitation, more than 
many other human rights issues, evokes the concept of human 
dignity; consider the vulnerability and shame that so many people 
experience every day when, again, they are forced to defecate in 
the open, in a bucket or a plastic bag…  Dignity closely relates to 
self-respect, which is difficult to maintain when being forced to 
squat down in the open, with no respect for privacy, not having the 
opportunity to clean oneself after defecating and facing the constant 
threat of assault in such a vulnerable moment’5. 

The UN-Habitat survey revealed that 38 per cent thought 

that there was ‘advanced’ or ‘very advanced’ gender equity 
in access to water, especially in Kingston (62 per cent). The 
least advanced was in Bangalore where 14 per cent thought 
there was ‘no equity’. Access to sanitation was thought to be 
less equitable with only 33.5 per cent perceiving access to be 
‘advanced’ or ‘very advanced’, although this was as high as 55 
per cent of those in Kingston. The least advanced was thought 
to be in Rio de Janeiro where 14 per cent thought that there 
was ‘no equity’. 

Small-scale qualitative research on service provision and 

women’s time poverty suggests that gender-inequitable time 
burdens resulting from service deficits constrain women’s 
ability to participate in all spheres of urban prosperity.6  Where 
decent services do not exist, or are too expensive, women have 

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Figure 2.2.3
Most important effects of infrastructure underdevelopment on lives of women 

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Vulnerability to natura disasters

High cost of living
instsbility of land/property tenure

Poor proximity of jobs /markets

Reduced investment in capital

increased responsibility in care economy
increased rate of accidents

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Other

to mention well-remunerated ‘decent work’, as well as having 
knock-on effects on human capital formation among younger 
generations of women.

In the survey, 40 per cent of respondents thought that gender 
equity in access to electricity was ‘advanced’ or ‘very advanced’, 
especially the case in Kingston (70 per cent). Those in Kampala 
were the least optimistic in that 10 per cent thought there was 
‘no equity’.

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

to engage in several forms of labour in order to compensate. 
For example, the costs of water may be 8-10 times higher from 
private than public suppliers.7 Where dwellings lack domestic 
mains-supplied water, women have to collect it from public 
standpipes, wells, boreholes, rivers, or storage drums served by 
private tankers.  Even if journeys are short in terms of distance, 
they may take long to perform where traversing inhospitable 
terrain, or queuing at the outlet is involved.  At communal 
sources, women may have to compete with one another and 
with male water vendors creating stress and conflict. There may 
even be personal risk of injury or death, as documented for 
Pune, India, where one girl’s efforts to secure an early place in 
a queue for a water tanker led to her being crushed under its 
wheels.8 The poor quality of water purchased from informal 
operators may raise people’s susceptibility to conditions such as 
diarrhoea.9

Where electricity is not available, time has to be spent 

collecting or buying fuel and making fires to cook and heat 
water and to shop on a daily basis due to lack of refrigeration.  
Where there is no municipal rubbish collection, or people 
cannot afford to pay for private waste contractors, women 
have to dispose of solid waste and in cases where there is no 
domestic sanitation, faecal matter and waste water. This adds 
massively to women’s ‘time poverty’.10 The heavy ‘reproduction 
tax’ (as coined by Ingrid Palme in 1992) exacted by these 
burdens reduces women’s potential for rest and recreation, not 

41

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESWomen role in community development, Myanmar.  © Veronica Wijaya/UN-HabitatGENDER AND PUBLIC TRANSPORT

In many parts of the world access to public space in urban 
areas is gender-differentiated, with women facing particular 
constraints to movement. This can seriously jeopardise women’s 
prospects of sharing in urban prosperity by resulting in lower 
literacy rates through non-attendance at school, and restricted 
labour force participation.11 Social and cultural constraints on 
women’s movements, and the fact that they may be the last in 
households to claim use of any form of vehicle, and gender-
blind transport planning can also be detrimental to the well-
being and prosperity of women in cities.12

The design of public transportation often assumes male 

labour patterns, prioritising travel from peri-urban areas to city 
centres during ‘peak hours’. This neglects women’s engagement 
in domestic, informal, part-time work in peripheral areas, 
non-peak journeys, and heavy household and care burdens that 
require multi-purpose, multi-stop excursions, with obstacles 
compounded for elderly and disabled women.13 In addition, 
women and men who are informally employed and have to 
carry their produce and equipment with them are heavily 
constrained by poor public transport facilities.14

Another major problem regarding women and girl’s use of 

public transport is personal safety and security. Where transport 
connections are situated in isolated or poorly-lit areas, or bus 
and train carriages are heavily overcrowded and/or inadequately 
or ineffectively staffed, women and girls face verbal, sexual 
and physical harassment. This can result in physical harm, 

psychological anxiety and fear of moving around the city.15

In the survey, just over half stated that women increasingly 
had access to safe and secure public transport. This was most 
marked in the case of Bangalore where 60 per cent thought this, 
compared with a low of 33 per cent in Rio de Janeiro. Overall, 
though these perceptions are encouraging in that there appears 
to be some move towards recognising the importance of safe 
public transport for women.

One way of making transport safer is to provide women 
only-buses and/or train carriages. Such initiatives have been 
introduced in cities as diverse as Mexico City, Cairo, Jakarta, 
Japan, New Delhi, Rio de Janeiro and Moscow. However, 
although these can provide an immediate solution to 
harassment and danger experienced by women, they will not 
transform gender relations. It is also important to recognise 
that city streets do not need to be home to traffic, especially 
private motorised vehicles, which are usually owned by men 
and pose threats of injury and contamination.16 Although 
sometimes the introduction of simple low-cost improvements, 
such as pavement-widening or pedestrianisation, can make a 
huge difference to women’s movement around cities, broader 
initiatives, comprising several complementary interventions, 
are required to ensure gender equitable intra-urban mobility. 
Showcase examples include the recent major regenerations that 
have taken place in a range of Colombian cities at the hands 
of powerful and popular mayors such as Enrique Peñalosa in 
Bogotá and Sergio Fajardo in Medellín(See Box 2.2.1).   

42

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Checking progress and quality, Dam under construction in Sri Lanka.© Lakshman Nadaraja/World BankBox 2.2.1

Gender dimensions of improved connectivity in cities: the Bogotá experience under Mayor Enrique Peñalosa

                         One of most important priorities advanced during Bogotá Mayor, 
Enrique Peñalosa’s, time in office (1998-2001) was the ‘de-
marginalisation’ and/or ‘inclusion of low-income and informal 
workers and residents’ in the country’s capital.  Policies were 
pursued to dismantle the barriers preventing poorer citizens 
from accessing the benefits of urban life by ‘equalising’ city 
residents before the state.   Providing services to traditionally 
marginalised groups created stronger social cohesion by ending 
preferential public treatment for the more affluent.   During 
his relatively brief administration Peñalosa extended access to 
water to all Bogotá homes, and implemented radical reforms in 
transport, infrastructure and the use of urban space.  Peñalosa 
sought to maximise popular mobility through prioritising 
walkway and bicycle lane projects over cars, which provided 
healthy, low-cost, non-polluting travel options.  He also actively 
promoted Bogotá’s ‘Sunday Ciclovía’  tradition, a weekly car-free 
event which since the 1970s has closed 120 kilometres of road 
in the city to all but pedestrians and those using non-motorised 
vehicles such as bicycles and roller skates.

When cities are ‘designed for people, not cars’, and spaces are 
opened-up for recreation and socialising through pedestrian- 
and people-friendly projects this can lessen the social inequality 
that comes with a stratified transport system which favours 
richer motorists over poorer mass transit users. The high quality 
TransMilenio bus rapid transit system introduced by Peñalosa 
is now 84 kilometres in length, and offers safe, affordable and 
reliable public transport which is accessible to the residents of 
Bogotá’s slums. Serving an average of 1.7 million passengers 

a day, the system provides universal access to all stations and 
buses in trunk lines which cater to the needs of women, the 
disabled and the elderly. indeed, through TransMilenio, Peñalosa 
addressed a major obstacle to income-earning by poor women 
who previously had to source work within walking distance of 
their homes to avoid paying hefty transport fares. Women who 
can access numerous quality and flexible transportation options 
benefit from such investments because their trips are often for 
multiple purposes, even though an integrated ticketing system 
enabling multiple trips taken by women would improve matters 
further. Gender-sensitive investments which reduce the risks 
and constraints attached to ‘dangerous and unreliable mass 
transit’ can also benefit men.   

Building on the legacy of Antanas Mockus who was very keen to 
recruit women in all processes, and to incorporate more female 
police officers, Peñalosa sought process-related reforms as well.   
Project teams engaged a number of young professional women 
and men, increasing efficiency and avoiding the corruption-
related pitfalls that plague many infrastructure initiatives run 
by seasoned bureaucrats.   Cities that enable women to fulfil 
their potential of playing important roles at all stages of local 
governance, from strategic planning to urban crisis response 
are clearly able to access a greater pool of talent.  Bogotá’s 
transformation demonstrates how improved access to urban 
infrastructure can contribute to increasing gender-inclusive 
prosperity in its widest sense. 

Source: Castro and Echeverri (2011); Kunieda and Gauthier (2007); 
Montezuma (2005)

GENDER AND COMMUNITy SPACES IN 
CITIES

Given that women are often much more constrained than 

men in terms of their physical access to urban space, it is 
important to consider the types of infrastructure required in 
order to ameliorate their burdens beyond improved access 
to public transport. One aspect of this is claiming physical, 
everyday public space as a way of transforming and making 
visible women’s public roles as well as sharing reproductive and 
productive burdens, and providing recreational activities. 

Such public and community spaces for women may not only 
involve parks and playground, but buildings that are created to 
meet a common practical need or concern. However, it is also 
common for new functions and activities to be added over time 
as new needs emerge in the community. One example is that 
of the Mother Centres in Germany which began as a drop-in 

place for mothers to overcome social isolation. Yet they soon 
became places for childcare, food cooperatives and income 
generation activities.17

Another aspect of these spaces is that they often begin by 
serving women’s traditional roles but over time they begin to 
organise and challenge prevailing inequalities. One renowned 
example of these types of spaces is the communal kitchens 
in Lima, Peru. They began as a way of providing food and 
assistance to the poor of slum areas and involved 20-30 
women per kitchen buying foodstuffs, preparing meals either 
focused on the space within a member’s house or by building 
a new space. Over time, they joined with wider cooperative 
movements that challenged government policies. By the late 
1990, 40,000 low-income women gathered in 2,000 sites across 
Lima to feed 200,000 poor people.18

43

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESSometimes communal spaces are started relatively 

spontaneously as part of self-help initiatives, while in some 
cases they are created by an organisation who then invites the 
marginalised to use them. In reality there are many overlaps 
in the types of spaces. In most instances, they aim to improve 
women’s lives in ways that directly or indirectly contribute to 
enhancing their prosperity in cities. One example of this are 
community-based and community-run pharmacy outlets or 
Botika Binhis in poor urban neighbourhoods in Manila, the 
Philippines. While this chapter has highlighted the importance 
of providing infrastructure for women in cities in order to 
generate prosperity, such provision also needs to be combined 
with policies that address gender equity to which the report 
now turns.

Endnotes

1. 

 Joshi et al (2011, p. 102)

2. 

 UN (2010a, p. 61-2)

3. 

 Hughes and Wickeri (2011, p. 892)

4. 

 Kar and Chambers (2008)

10.   Gammage (2010); Khosla (2009); Morrison et al (2010)

11.   Kantor (2002); World Bank (2011c, p. 169) 

12.   Jarvis et al (2009)

13.   Kunieda and Gauthier (2007); UN-Habitat (2009, p. 126)   

5. 

 Extract from a 2009 report cited in Amnesty international (2010, p. 25)

14.   Jarvis et al (2009); Kunieda and Gauthier (2007); Tran and Schlyter (2010)

6. 

 Chant (1984, 2007b)

15.   Fernando and Porter (2002)

7. 

 Chant (2007b, p. 62); also Brown (2010)

16.   Hughes and Wickeri (2011);  Khosla (2009, p. 17)

8. 

 Bapat and Agarwal (2003, p. 86); Thompson et al (2000) on Kenya

17.   Yonder and Tamaki for the Huairou Commission (2010)

9. 

 Sverdlik (2011) on indonesia

18.   Lind (1997, 2002); Yonder and Tamaki for the Huairou Commission (2010)

44

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013PARDO-Competing for space in Pune, India© UN-HabitatChapter 2.3

Gender, Productivity, 
Employment and 
Prosperity of Cities

This chapter focuses primarily on the ‘gender divisions of 
labour in the urban economy’ as well as ‘gender disparities 
in human capital’ that both form key elements of the gender 
empowerment and urban prosperity nexus. It also highlights 
how employment is one of the key dimensions of women’s 
economic empowerment in cities with great potential to 
contribute to urban prosperity. Yet it is also acknowledged that 
women’s economic empowerment extends far beyond unpaid 
and paid employment, even if it remains a very important 
dimension in relation to their economic advancement. 
Employment in particular can be highly exploitative of 
women, and their participation in the urban economy can also 
exacerbate gender inequalities rather than ameliorate them 
as illustrated by the ‘gender disparities in power and rights’ 
aspect of the nexus. It is in the sphere of urban productivity, 
where women’s multiple disadvantages across the spectrum of 
domestic, community and city-wide space, affect their ability to 
study, and to acquire vocational skills and training. By the same 
token, it is also the sphere where enhancing women’s prosperity 
in cities has the most immediate potential.

ATTITUDES TOwARDS wOMEN’S  
PRODUCTIVITy IN CITIES

The survey highlighted that 68 per cent thought that policies 

to promote productivity among women in cities were ‘good’, 
‘very good’ or excellent’. Those in Rio de Janeiro were the least 
positive (51 per cent) while those in Johannesburg were the 
most (84 per cent). Related with this, 61 per cent thought 
that their city was committed to the promotion of women’s 
productivity in some form, although only one-quarter felt 
they were ‘committed’ or ‘fully committed’. Those in Kingston 
and Johannesburg were the most likely to say their city was 
‘committed’, with people in Rio de Janeiro the least likely.

Among the factors identified as important in making the 
city more productive for women, especially in Kingston, Rio 
de Janeiro and Johannesburg, entrepreneurship emerged as 
most significant.  This was followed by skills development to 
enhance human resources,  to better manage organisational 
structures,  and to maximise investments in new technologies.  
The second most important factor was investment in increasing 
physical capital stocks to reduce women’s burden and enhance 
productivity. Strategic development in terms of conducting 
gender responsive city-wide economic analysis, exploring 
diverse development and approaches to diversify growth as 
well as financial development defined as better management 
of revenue sources and expenditure and expanding access to 
capital markets were viewed as the least important, especially in 
Kampala and Johannesburg (See Table 2.3.1).

45

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESTable 2.3.1

Ranking of factors making the city more productive for women

Citiesà
Factors

Competition

innovation

Skills development

investment

Entrepreneurship

Strategic development

Financial management

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Rank

2.93

3.16

3.28

3.10

3.25

3.00

3.07

2.95

2.97

3.14

2.94

3.32

2.88

2.63

3.01

2.84

2.94

2.88

2.90

2.92

3.03

3.21

3.18

3.41

3.24

3.45

2.59

3.09

2.89

3.06

3.24

3.10

3.37

2.96

2.92

3.00

3.04

3.20

3.06

3.25

2.88

2.97

5

4

2

3

1

7

6

Note: Responses 1à Not Effective to 5à Most Effective
Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

Women’s empowerment is undoubtedly linked with economic 

productivity (See below). The survey highlighted that lack of 
education and appropriate knowledge and skills were the main 
set of obstacles for women (identified in 24 per cent of cases) 
followed by lack of access to productive resources. The former 
set of issues was especially identified in the case of Bangalore (30 
per cent) and in Kingston for the latter (27 per cent) (Figure 
2.3.1).

Less than one-third of all respondents (31 per cent) felt that 
existing efforts to attain gender equity in access to employment 
opportunities were ‘advanced’ or ‘very advanced’, especially in 
Kingston (51.5 per cent) and Johannesburg (44 per cent). Those 
in Rio de Janeiro were the least positive with 18 per cent stating 
that efforts were ‘very weak’. 

Figure 2.3.1
Obstacles to generating economic productivity and empowerment of women

Cost of conducting business

Poor access to critical information

Deficient infrastruture

Lack of access to productive resources

Lack of education appropriate knowledge and relevant skills

Weak public institutions

Corruption/Poor governance

Lack of support for home-based work

Violence against women

Other

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
R

 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

46

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Broadly similar patterns emerged in relation to gender equity 

While there have been marked reductions in gender 

in access to education in that almost half of all respondents 
(49 per cent) felt that existing efforts were advanced or 
very advanced, especially in Kingston (82 per cent) and 
Johannesburg (62 per cent). Those in Rio de Janeiro were the 
least positive with 19 per cent stating that efforts were very 
weak.

EDUCATION, VOCATIONAL TRAINING AND hUMAN 
CAPITAL ARE KEy FOR URBAN PRODUCTIVITy 

Education, human capital and a skilled workforce are central 
to generating urban prosperity. Most importantly is that there 
are positive effects in educating women in that those with 
schooling are more likely to marry and have children later, 
have lower fertility levels, and also be healthier which can have 
important effects on their wider empowerment.1

disparities in primary school enrolments, tying in with the 
Millennium Development Goal 2 to achieve universal primary 
education by 2015, these improvements are less notable at 
secondary and tertiary levels. Although women outnumber 
men in tertiary education in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
and Southeast Asia, they remain poorly represented in 
traditionally ‘masculine’ fields of science and engineering.2 
Also important is that completion of education, especially at 
secondary and tertiary levels, is often disproportionately low 
for women. Although urban girls tend to be somewhat more 
advantaged than their rural counterparts, this is not always the 
case in urban slums, where early school drop-out is higher than 
in non-slums parts of the cities in many countries (See Figure 
2.3.2).  In major Indian cities for example, such as Delhi the 
proportion of women with no education or less than five years 

Figure 2.3.2
Female school drop-out due to pregnancy and early marriage, slum and non-slum residence in selected countries (percentage)

Mozambique

Nigeria

South Africa

Uganda

Zambia

Bolivia

Colombia

Dominican Republic

Peru

indonesia 

Kyrgyzstan

Philippines

13

0

10

Source: Adapted from UN-Habitat (2010e: Figure 2.9, 23)

16

14

14

14

27

21

23

18

20

20

16

17

22

24

20

21

20

47

39

39

Non - Slum

Slum

28

29

35

33

32

30

40

50

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESof schooling is 57 per cent in slums, compared with 28 per 
cent in non-slum areas, and in Kolkata the respective levels are 
51 per cent and 28 per cent.3  At the bottom of the hierarchy, 
gender disparities are especially stark with women constituting 
approximately two-thirds of 774 million adult illiterates, a 
proportion which has seen little change in recent decades.4

These patterns of declining access were also observed from 

the UN-Habitat survey in that two-thirds felt that pre-primary 
school education was accessible to both women and men 
equally, especially in Bangalore (84 per cent) but not in Rio 
de Janeiro (41 per cent). The same pattern was identified in 
relation to primary school with 69 per cent stating that it was 
equally accessible, especially in Kingston (86 per cent) and 
Bangalore (85 per cent), but again with only 47 per cent of 
people in Rio de Janeiro thinking such. Although secondary 
schooling was perceived as less equal in terms of accessibility 
overall (62 per cent), 81 per cent and 80 per cent of those 
in Bangalore and Kingston felt this, unlike in Rio de Janeiro 
(37.5 per cent). Access to vocational training was viewed as 
more limited for women with only 58 per cent thinking it was 
equal overall, although this view was held by only 29 per cent 
in Rio de Janeiro. Finally, only 52 per cent felt that access to 
university was equal for women and men, with only 25 per cent 

in Rio de Janeiro stating this (Figure 2.3.3). It was clear that 
restricted access to education for women was a major issue in 
the Brazilian case, while in the Indian study access was viewed 
as much more egalitarian. 

The multiple barriers to girls’ education are also important 
to highlight. Although poor slum-dwelling children may be 
hampered from private study by lack of space, light, peace 
and tranquillity, or basic infrastructure, girls almost invariably 
have to spend more time out of school carrying out domestic 
chores.5 Young women may also be withdrawn from school 
if their parents or guardians do not regard girls’ education 
as important, or because their labour is needed to help with 
household finances.6 One of the respondents from the survey 
in Johannesburg reflected on this: ‘Many women in our society 
lack education and this has infiltrated to the next generation, 
therefore leading to a vicious cycle of poverty’.

Interventions to redress these problems need to be holistic. 
There is evidence that many governments around the world 
have already been implementing innovative projects to address 
gender disparities in educational attainment (Box 2.3.1).

Figure 2.3.3
Equality of access to high quality and affordable educational opportunities 

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

48

Pre-primary

Primary

Secondary

Vocational

University

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013BOX 2.3.1

‘Girl Friendly’ schools initiative in The Gambia

in The Gambia, a ‘Girl Friendly’ schools initiative was 
formally launched in 2001 with the support of UNiCEF. 
This led to establishment of a dedicated Girls’ Education 
Unit (since 2004 the Gender Education Unit) within the 
Department of State for Education and the waiving of 
junior secondary school fees for girls. Related strategies 
have included the training of more female teachers, the 
establishment of school-linked mothers’ clubs, subsidies 
for the purchase of uniforms and educational materials, 
scholarship schemes, and workshops to encourage girls 
to go into traditionally ‘male’ subjects such as science, 
mathematics and technology.  The construction of female-
only toilet blocks has also been instrumental in encouraging 
more parents to let their daughters attend school. 
Nonetheless, only younger generations of Gambians have 
benefited from recent advances in educational provision, 
with less than half (46 per cent) of the population being 
literate at a national level, and the average female literacy 
rate (37 per cent) being far lower than men’s (60 per cent). 
Moreover, girls are disproportionately represented among 
the 15 per cent of Gambian youth educated in ‘madrassa’ 
(traditional islamic) schools, which have been slow in 
incorporating non-traditional, secular, and vocational, 
subjects into their curricula.

Sources: Chant (2013b), Chant and Touray (2012a,b)

Poster compiled by low-income women, Lihok Pilipina NGO, CebuCity, Philippines.
© UN-Habitat/Sylvia Chant

Vocational training and apprenticeships are also deeply 

imbued with gender inequalities in that these tend to be heavily 
sex-segregated. For example, in Ghana and The Gambia, 
young poor urban women tend to enrol in training such as 
hairdressing, beauty therapy, dressmaking and cloth dying, 
rather than more remunerative ‘masculine’ trades such as 
metalwork, plumbing and carpentry, or newer ones such as 
Information Technology (IT).7 Addressing such inequalities 
is now recognised by the International Labour Organisation 
(ILO) who argue that investing in vocational training, which 
is both gender-sensitive, as well as responsive to the demands 
of the labour market, can help facilitate poor women’s (and 
men’s) entry into work.8 This can, in turn, contribute to urban 
prosperity.

Evidence from the survey illustrates that only just over one-

third of cities (34 per cent) were thought to take advantage 
of opportunities to re-skill the work orientation of women in 
order to keep pace with the rapidly changing work environment 
and to facilitate their transition into more productive sectors 
of the economy. Those in Johannesburg were the most likely to 
re-skill women (47 per cent) while people in Rio de Janeiro felt 
most negatively (only 17 per cent).

GENDER, EMPLOyMENT AND PRODUCTIVITy IN 
CITIES

Although education and training are central to creating the 
conditions for the effective use of labour power in cities, the 
most direct contributors to productivity are unpaid and paid 
employment. However, there are marked gendered divisions 
of labour in urban economies with women disproportionately 
concentrated in unpaid reproductive work.
women’s unpaid reproductive and caring work

The health and prosperity of urban economies owes as much 

to the unpaid ‘reproductive’ labour which goes on within 
households and communities as to formally acknowledged 
and valued activities. For this reason, feminist scholars have 
increasingly used the term ‘care economy’ to underline the role 
of ‘reproductive’ activities in producing ‘value’ which include 
‘unpaid work’, care work’, and ‘unpaid care work’ (See Box 
2.3.2).9

The reasons why unpaid work falls disproportionately upon 

women shoulders relate to deep-seated gender divisions of 
labour linked with norms surrounding women’s association 
with childbirth, children and the home.10 Although women 
across developing regions are increasingly engaging in paid 
work, this does not seem to have been matched by an increase 
in domestic labour and unpaid care work on the part of men.11  
This is even the case in countries such as Cuba where legislative 
changes and political campaigns to encourage men to share 
domestic work have been in place for several decades.12 Because 
of gender discrimination and persistent links between women 

49

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESand unpaid tasks, women’s paid labour in the marketplace is 
frequently given lower value regardless of the work itself.13

This means that women are spending more time involved in 
income-generating activities while also continuing to undertake 
the bulk of unpaid domestic labour and care work, the latter 
which was recognised as far back as the 1970s by Manuel 
Castells as vital to the functioning of cities:
women’s employment in the formal economy

Women’s remunerated activities are also integral to urban 

prosperity, even if these tend to be informal rather than 
formal and home-based rather than extra-domestic and with 
much lower remuneration.14 In addition, the importance of 
addressing work in general and gender gaps in particular is 
recognised in one of the three indicators in MDG3, to promote 
gender equality and empower women. Also critical is that in 
2008, a target was also added to MDG 1 to ‘achieve full and 
productive employment and decent work for all, including 
women and young people’ (See Box 2.3.3).  

In relation to formal work that is registered and enumerated, 

women currently represent approximately 40 per cent of the 
global labour force. In many countries, this share is increasing 
rapidly as societies urbanise. For example, in Bangladesh, 
between 1995 and 2000, the labour force participation 
of women aged 20-24 years grew by nearly 250 per cent. 
Although women constitute a greater share of the world’s 

Mumbia, india.  
© Caylee Hong/UN-Habitat

BOX 2.3.2

Terminological distinctions between unpaid work, carework 
and unpaid care work

Although the terms ‘unpaid work’, ‘care work’ and ‘unpaid 
care work’ are often used interchangeably, there are 
important distinctions among them.

Unpaid work: comprises a wide range of activities, 
including unpaid work in family businesses, subsistence 
activities such as the collection of fuel or water, and care 
of persons with family or non-family connections.   While 
the former two are now nominally included in the System of 
National Accounts SNA), the unpaid care of childcare, the 
elderly, sick and so on is not.

Carework: involves direct care of persons, including able-
bodied adults, as well as children, elderly people, and those 
who are sick or disabled, on a paid or unpaid basis.  Paid 
carers include nannies, nurses, child-minders, careworkers 
for senior citizens, and so on, who may work in the public, 
private or not-for-profit sector.  Other people who provide 
care, although this may not be an explicit part of their work 
contract, include domestic workers.   Parents, too, if on paid 
‘parental leave’, are not technically doing ‘unpaid carework’.

Unpaid carework: refers to the work of caring for persons 
with no explicit monetary reward. The vast bulk of unpaid 
carework is undertaken within the household or family 
context, but ‘voluntary’ unpaid carework may also extend to 
the neighbourhood or community level, or for institutions

Source: Adapted from Razavi (2007, Box 1.6)

‘the subordinate role of women … enables the minimal 
maintenance of its (the city’s) housing, transport and public 
facilities ... because women guarantee unpaid transportation 
(movement of people and merchandise), because they repair 
their homes, because they make meals when there are no 
canteens, because they spend more time shopping around, 
because they look after others’ children when there are no 
nurseries and because they offer “free entertainment” to the 
producers when there is a social vacuum and an absence 
of cultural creativity… if women who “do nothing” ever 
stopped to do “only that”, the whole urban structure as we 
know it would become completely incapable of maintaining 
its functions’227

50

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013BOX 2.3.3

Strategic Objectives of the ILO’s ‘Decent work’ Agenda

              1) Employment

This refers to job creation through sound and sustainable 
investment and growth, access to the benefits of the 
global economy, supportive public policies and an enabling 
environment for entrepreneurship.

2) Standards and fundamental principles and rights 
at work 

Following on from the iLO Declaration on Fundamental 
Principles and Rights at Work of 1998, this objective calls 
for the creation of work that does not involve forced labour, 
exploitation, discrimination and denial of association (e.g. 
prohibition on the formation of trade unions).

3) Social protection

This principle is concerned with ensuring that workers 
have formal protection for old age, invalidity, sickness and 
health care, and with creating safe and dignified working 
conditions.

4) Social dialogue

This advocates the opening of channels of communication 
between different stakeholders in the economy, and 
particularly about giving workers in the informal economy 
more of a voice and representation.

Sources: iLO (2001)

agricultural labour force than in its total labour force (43 
per cent versus 40 per cent),15 the expansion of urban-based 
economic sectors has generated new opportunities for female 
income-generation, particularly in commerce and services (See 
Figure 2.3.4). 

Within the service sector, domestic service is especially 
important. This ranges from employing between 4 and 10 
per cent of the workforce of developing economies in which 
between 74 and 94 per cent of workers are women.16

Although sub-Saharan Africa stands out as the only region 

where more than half (59 per cent) of the labour force is 
engaged in agriculture, the proportion was 79 per cent in 1965. 
As of 2009, the shares of the labour force in industry and 
services were 11 per cent and 30 per cent respectively, which is 
considerably lower than in other regions. (See Figure 2.3.5) 17
One key area where women workers have been a preferred 

workforce, and which has been crucial in contributing 
to the prosperity of cities has been in export-processing 
manufacturing employment. This process has been associated 
with the ‘global feminisation of labour’ where, in addition to 

51

more jobs acquiring the characteristics typically associated with 
female jobs insofar as being precarious, under-paid and low-
skilled, women make-up between 70 per cent and 90 per cent 
of workers in multinational electronics and garments factories.18

While there are positive implications for women as a 
preferred labour force in terms of affording them greater 
opportunities to delay marriage and to enjoy  more decision-
making power at the household level, it has been widely 
reported that women have been recruited on account of 
assumptions that stereotype them as docile, cheap and efficient. 
In turn, the working conditions that prevail in many export-
processing factories are extremely detrimental to women’s (and 
men’s) physical and psychological health.19 Therefore, the gains 
for women from their increased productivity are not uniformly 
positive.

Indeed, the increasing ‘feminisation of labour’ associated 
with urbanisation has also been accompanied by a notable  
‘informalisation of labour’ across developing regions, 
particularly since the debt crisis of the 1980s and the neoliberal 
economic reforms which have followed in its wake.  These 
parallel processes have generated considerable discussion as 
to whether ‘informalisation’ and ‘feminisation’ are mutually 
causal, especially given that the ‘feminisation of labour’ not 
only refers to the increased presence of women in the ranks of 
remunerated workers, but also to the fact that increasing shares 
of work in the global economy have come to  be marked by 
attributes normally associated with women’s activities, most 
of which are poorly paid and informal in nature, and lacking 
in social protection and benefits such as maternity leave.20   
Moreover, evidence of the fall-out of the recent global financial 
crisis suggests that this is impacting heavily on the poorest 
workers in the informal economy, who are generally female.21  
There is little doubt that one of the major barriers to women’s 
full participation in the creation of urban prosperity, and in 
its rewards, are the major cleavages to be found in all aspects 
of urban productivity. As such, while it is generally assumed 
that rising levels of engagement in economic activity are ‘good’ 
for women is important to acknowledge that upward trends 
may not entail increases in recognition, rewards and quality of 
work.22

The development of ICT has the potential to provide a 

more level playing field for male and female workers in urban 
economies.  Although women comprise the bulk of workers in 
call centre and teleworking occupations these jobs are usually 
restricted to the educated, English-speaking middle classes. In 
addition, while they provide women with much higher earnings 
than in other jobs as well as greater spatial and temporal 
freedom (in terms of being able to move around the city more 
freely during the day and night), they still face a wider range of 
restrictions. In the case of Indian call centres, women continue 
to be controlled and rarely attain genuine career enhancement.23

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 2.3.4
Service sector employment shares by gender and region, 1999 - 2009 (percentage)

World

37.5

39.1

41.7

43.2

40.7

46.8

66.9

57.2

48.5

43

48.8

55.3
55.2

62.3

63.1

79.3

72.8

85.5

Developed Economies & european Union

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CiS

East Asia

South-East the Pacific

28.3

30.1

26.2

35.3
34.7

36.1
34.8

39.1

37
38

35.4

41.6

57.1

48

51.5

52.1
53.5

46.3

54.8
56.1

57.8

54.2

50.3
50.3

47.9

49.7

48.2

South Asia

25.1

29.6

27.6

33.2

13.9

15.3

Latin America & The Caribbean

72.9

61.6

76.9

Middle East

North Africa

Sub-Saharan Africa

28.8

27.4

30.6
30.4

28.3

0

10

20

33.2
30

40

50

60

70

80

90

1999-both sexes

1999-males

1999-females

2009-both sexes

2009-males

2009-females

Source: Compiled from iLO (2011: Table A10,67)

It is important to remember that some women in developing 

women’s employment in the informal economy

world cities are involved in professional occupations in the 
upper tiers of industry, services and the public sector and that 
these have increased over time. However, the World Economic 
Forum’s Corporate Gender Gap Report which surveyed 600 of 
the world’s largest employers across sixteen different industries 
in twenty major OECD countries noted that women are 
generally clustered in entry- or mid-level positions.24 In turn, 
female representation on the boards of large firms in Europe is 
only 12 per cent, and in the Americas 10 per cent, dropping 
to 7 per cent in Asia and the Pacific, and only 3 per cent in the 
Middle East and Africa.25

Although there are complex linkages between formal and 
informal economies, women throughout the world continue 
to be over-represented in the latter in occupations which are 
unregistered, poorly paid, and lacking social protection.26 
Although it is difficult to measure trends in informal 
employment, the ILO has noted that there have been increases 
in what it calls ‘vulnerable employment’, comprising own-
account and unpaid family workers. This broadly equates to 
informal employment with women being over-represented in 
this type of work.27

52

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Figure 2.3.5
Industrial employment shares by gender and region, 1999 - 2009 (percentage)

World

Developed Economies & european Union

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CiS

East Asia

South-East the Pacific

South Asia

Latin America & The Caribbean

Middle East

North Africa

15.1

15.6

15.9

11.5

20.6

24.3

21.8

26

27.6

36.6

23.4

24.5

24.6

23.8

22.7

33.3

29.9

30.8

27.4

27.8

31.9

17.1

17.1

19.4

18.2

17.8

20.3

17.8

18.9

21.3

15.9

12.8

14.3

15.4

11.2

13.5

13.3

13.5

21.4

22.1

26.1

27.8

21.4

18.8

20.1

20.5

22.2

22.5

16.6

15.3

14.7

27.6

28.7

25.1

Sub-Saharan Africa

8.8

10.9

6.1

10.6

12.8

7.3

1999-both sexes
1999-both sexes

1999-males
1999-males

1999-females
1999-females

2009-both sexes
2009-both sexes

2009-males
2009-males

2009-females
2009-females

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Source: Compiled from iLO (2011: Table A10,67)

On one hand, this has been linked with a shift towards 
outsourcing of manufacturing production from factories 
to small-scale workshops and individuals working in their 
own homes who are usually women. On the other, women 
have been increasingly setting-up their own small-scale 
businesses in street-vending, stalls or shops, and domestic-
based manufacturing units, as well as working in home-based 
commercial enterprises. Many informal workers combine one 
or more activity in their daily struggles for livelihood, and 
women usually have to dovetail informal work with childcare 
and other reproductive tasks. In addition, informal work is 
usually part of wider and more complex livelihood strategies 
that women in particular create. These invariably revolve 
around mobilising various types of assets and resources such 
as human and social capital as well as developing strategies to 
deal with a decline in consumption, such as buying cheaper 
or second hand clothes, and reducing spending on food and 
drink.28

Within the informal economy, gaps between women and 

men are especially marked. This is related with women’s 
restricted use of space linked with moral codes that inhibit 
women’s spatial mobility, as well as their lower levels of human 
capital, limited access to start-up capital, and secondary role 
in ‘family businesses’.29 Women’s informal economic activities 
are commonly based at home, except in cases where they have 
very little option other than to engage in risky jobs such as 
sex work.30 Furthermore, women are often found in the lower 
echelons of the informal economy compared with men (See 
Figure 2.3.6). 

There are also specific constraints associated with slum-

dwelling that can limit women’s ability to develop informal 
income-generating options. These include peripheral locations 
which preclude access to markets, as well as competition among 
women in similar situations who may only have scope to engage 
in a narrow range of basic activities.31 Profits from home-based 
businesses are also compromised by the non-existence or poor 

53

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESA woman works in a call center. Romania.
© Flore de Préneuf / World Bank

and erratic nature of power and water supplies.32  In addition, 
the recent global financial crisis suggests that conditions 
for women working in the informal sector are worsening.33 
However, despite multiple constraints, poor women’s home-
based ventures often provide critical inputs to household 

livelihoods and can develop seeds of urban prosperity at the 
grassroots.

The UN-Habitat survey highlighted that only just over 

one-third (35 per cent) of city dwellers thought that their cities 
had programmes that addressed the needs of women working 
in the informal sector, especially in Kampala (49 per cent) and 
Bangalore (42 per cent), but much less so in Rio de Janeiro 
(19 per cent). In cases where programmes existed, almost half 
(48 per cent) thought that these sought to legalise informal 
activities, while 44 per cent aimed to move informal sector 
workers into the formal economy. In addition, 42 per cent 
felt that these programmes aimed to improve the quality of 
informal sector employment.
New horizons for enhancing women’s productivity in 
cities: ICT and mobile phones

Enhancing women’s productivity involves generating 

activities that allow women to develop skills to enable them to 
exit poorly paid informal employment as well as exploitative 
jobs in export-manufacturing factories and sex work. 

Figure 2.3.6
Segmentation by sex within the informal economy

Poverty  

Risk 

Average
Earning

Low

High

Employers

Informal wage  
workers: ‘Regular’

Own-Account Operators

Informal wage workers: Casual

Industrial Outworkers/homeworkers

Segmentation by Sex

Predominantly men

Men and Women

High

Low

Unpaid Family workers

Predominantly Women

Source: Chen (2010a, Figure 71.1, 468)

54

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013It is the type of work that women undertake that is more 
significant in empowering women rather than labour force 
involvement alone.34  Given the importance of the digital 
revolution to growth and urban prosperity, it is no surprise 
that ICT access features in MDG 8 in relation to increasing 
telephone lines, cellular subscribers and internet users per 
100 population.35 Given low entry and maintenance costs, 
the spread of everyday accessible technologies such as mobile 
phones has been rapid, especially in Africa which now has the 
fastest-growing market worldwide.36

Woman using mobile phone. Honiara, Solomon islands. 
© Alison Ofotalau /World Bank

It is also now recognised that ICT has the potential 

for improving women’s lives by enhancing their access to 
information, but also in improving their productivity. The 
latter is through expanding their skill sets and opening up 
opportunities for wage employment and ‘techno-preneurship’ 
in the fields of e-commerce and computerised small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), as well as allowing for 
‘remote working’.37 Even basic or entry-level technology, such 
as mobile telephony can improve social interaction and act 

55

as a time-saving communication device. Enhanced access to 
information, for example, facilitates prosperity by reducing 
uncertainty and transaction costs, enabling traders to secure 
better deals, lessening their reliance on intermediaries, and 
widening access to a broader range of buyers.38            Evidence 
from Africa reveals that usage is predominantly for financial 
arrangements such as the transfer of money for agricultural 
produce, and for the trade of perishable goods, and for 
increasing the speed and efficiency of rural-urban remittance 
transfers.39

A number of policy initiatives have attempted to improve 

women’s digital literacy and access to information technologies 
in recent years (See Box 2.3.4). Many of these draw on one 
of the most well-known examples of the ‘phone ladies’ of 
Bangladesh who borrow equipment from the Grameen Bank’s 
Village Phone Programme and set-up phone booths. While 
these are based in the countryside, they have also extended to 
cities across the developing world, with important implications 
for women’s economic empowerment and urban prosperity.40

However, it is also important to acknowledge the persistence 

of a gendered ‘digital divide’ particularly in respect of access 
to more sophisticated new technologies such as computer 
hardware, and to the internet. To date women’s employment in 
ICT tends to be confined to low-level routine tasks such as data 
entry rather than more creative and strategic roles in software 
design and management.41 Although some women have been 
able to secure niches in comparatively well-paid work in the 
digital sector, such as in call centre work42 gender gaps continue 
to exist as cautioned by UNRISD:43

Women in general and poor women in particular, are 

less likely than men to gain computer skills. This is partly a 
function of greater illiteracy among women, and to the fact 
that girls may miss out on school-based IT training which 
is not normally taught until secondary and tertiary levels.  
Beyond this, women are less likely to enjoy the mobility, social 
licence and funds necessary to access public internet facilities.44 
In Indonesia, for example, girls aged 15-24 are half as likely 
as boys and young men to use the internet, with parental 
restrictions on girls’ use of public space disfavouring their access 
to internet cafés.45

‘The boom of information technology services and of the off-shoring 
of office work by multinational companies have opened-up career 
opportunities in formal skill-intensive employment for educated, 
English-speaking women from the urban middle classes.  While 
women make up a large share of the workforce in this emerging 
sector, segmentation and discrimination along the lines of 
gender, caste and class are widespread, and women tend to be 
concentrated in low-end occupations’

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESBOX 2.3.4

women in Liberia and the ‘Trade at hand – Business 
Opportunities for your Cell Phone’ project

Liberia’s ‘Trade at Hand’ programme, developed by the 
international Trade Centre (iTC) in collaboration with 
Liberia’s Ministry of Commerce and industry (MCiL) and 
launched in 2009, aims to ‘empower’ women economically 
and to enhance productivity more generally – both of 
which are primary objectives of incumbent President Ellen 
Johnson-Sirleaf’s government –through iCT.   initially linking 
fifty women traders in Monrovia with fifty women farmers 
through a mobile phone software system, the programme 
provides information on products, quantity, prices, location 
and transport via SMS, allows exchanges of offers, and 
matches sale and purchase demands.  in order to include 
illiterate women, the system uses readily recognisable 
symbols.

As a result of the programme, market women save money 
and time, no longer making multiple phone calls to sellers 
as they can view many offers simultaneously, and secure 
competitive prices and high quality goods.  At the same time 
farmers can off-load their produce and thereby minimise 
wastage.   Liberia’s national economic development 
benefits from increased efficiency of food flow into towns, 
for consumption and export, aiding infrastructural and 
economic revival in the aftermath of its 14-year civil war, 
and allowing women to play a critical role.Trade at Handhas 
also been successfully implemented in Senegal, Mali, and 
Burkina Faso.

Recognising Liberia’s high unemployment rate (85 per 
cent) and low iCT development and trade infrastructure, 
programmes such as Trade at Handmay be most successful 
when accompanied by interventions to combat social and 
economic exclusion.

Sources: Gakuru et al (2009); iTC (2009); USDS (2011)

In addition, ICT presents risks as well as opportunities.  
Women, especially adolescent girls, are more vulnerable to 
cyber-abuse such as misguided contact with traffickers and 
perpetrators of sexual assault.46 This relates to the fact that 
‘cyberculture’ is difficult to regulate. Also important is that poor 
urban residents, especially women, are often disadvantaged in 
access to digital technology.  Current aspirations for one laptop 
per child (OLPC) seem out of reach for the poorest nations of 
the world, with even middle-income countries struggling to 
make the requisite investments.47 Even if ICT can improve the 
cost-efficiency of microenterprises, it cannot solve large scale 
urban unemployment. In light of this, other investments in 

56

microenterprise support as well as job creation may be more 
fruitful priorities if gender-equitable urban prosperity is to be 
achieved and sustained.
Enhancing women’s productivity in cities and the 
green economy

Another area with potential benefits for poor women 

relates to the ‘green economy’ in urban areas. This builds on 
what some women already do insofar as they recycle and/or 
elaborate a range of products from discarded waste such as tin 
cans, paper, glassware and clothing.  However, despite clear 
benefits for the environment, the scope for significant increases 
in women’s access to urban prosperity remains limited.  For 
example, female and child waste pickers are more likely than 
their male counterparts to be engaged in the primary picking 
of waste, while men tend to do the sorting and selling.  In turn, 
the introduction of ‘sustainable waste management systems’ in 
various South African cities has often led to restricted access by 
waste pickers to municipal dumps or the ability to bid for solid 
waste management contracts. Waste pickers are also frequently 
squeezed out or penalised when municipal governments 
embark upon public-private partnerships for landfill recycling, 
with women workers being most affected by exclusion from 
collective bargaining agreements (See Box 2.3.5).48

CAPTURING AND ENhANCING wOMEN’S 
PRODUCTIVITy AND ECONOMIC  
EMPOwERMENT IN CITIES

In light of notable gender gaps in ‘decent work deficits’,49 
it is timely that calls for ‘decent work’ - the priority theme 
of the 55th session of Commission on Status of Women 
(CSW) in 2011 - have been reinforced by calls to improve 
women’s access to what the ILO calls ‘decent work’ which 
is sustainable, protected, well-paid and secure (See Box 
2.3.3). In particular, this entails increased female enrolment 
in education, facilitating women’s transition to decent work 
through training and networking, developing public awareness 
campaigns to encourage women’s entry into non-traditional 
sectors, and engaging men, employers and the state to recognise 
and alleviate women’s reproductive work.50 If these issues are 
addressed then the seeds for true empowerment can be firmly 
planted.  

One key area where positive progress has been made has 
been in relation to grassroots women’s organising in cities as 
well as the work of some trade unions and labour associations. 
Evidence from around the world shows that many organisations 
have been successful in enhancing women’s’ productivity as well 
as leading to their economic empowerment. The case of the 
Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA) in India is one of 
the most renowned examples. With SEWA meaning ‘to serve’ 
in most Indian languages, SEWA was recognised as a union 

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013BOX 2.3.5

women and the ‘green economy’: organising waste pickers in Pune, India

india’s National Action Plan for Climate Change (2000) 
and National Environmental Policy (2006) recognise the 
major contribution of wastepickers to carbon reduction and 
environmental protection and also their rights to collect and 
recycle waste. This is massively important to the lives and 
livelihoods of informal urban workers throughout india, including 
several women.

in the city of Pune, for example, women constitute 90 per cent 
of the approximately 9500 waste collectors in the city, who fall 
into three main groups: 1) those who collect waste from public 
bins and the street; 2) those who work in landfill sites, and 3) 
those who work on a door-to-door basis with trolleys buying 
waste that people do not dispose in bins because it is of some 
value, such as paper and empty beer bottles.

Two-thirds of waste workers belong to the Waste Collectors 
Union KKPKP which, in partnership with local authorities, has 
promoted a socially and ecologically innovative model of waste 
recovery.  The new model emerged out of a study conducted in 
2007 on the composition of waste collected from public bins 
by about 90 trucks in Pune and taken to the city’s dumpsites.  
On finding that 90 per cent of this waste was biodegradable, 
the KKPKP proposed dropping all but ten of the 90 trucks, and 

encouraged households to separate their waste at source.  This 
allowed biodegradable waste to be composted in situ, leaving 
the waste workers to collect from their homes only non-
degradable rubbish for the dumps. in addition, a sorting shed 
has been provided by the municipality that allows pickers to sort 
their waste in each other’s company, rather than at home.  

This initiative not only saves money, but has considerable 
environmental, social and gender benefits, such as raising 
women’s incomes and situating them at the centre of ‘green’ 
economic activities.

One woman, Suman, who started her waste collection activities 
at the age of 13, and who began by picking up recyclable 
material from the roadside and public bins, has found union 
membership and the transition to door-to-door collection 
extremely positive for her life and livelihood. She not only works 
fewer hours and collects better quality waste, but also enjoys 
social interaction with her clients.  An additional spin-off of 
KKPKP membership has been that two of her four children 
have received scholarships from the union, with one currently 
studying for a Masters degree in journalism, and another now 
working as manager of the union’s scrap shops.

Sources: Chen (2011), Shekar (2009), Stevens (2009, p. 16)

in 1972 focusing on organising female informal economy 
workers. It has since grown substantially, absorbing more and 
more trades; in 2006, SEWA had a membership in India of 
nearly 1 million spread over nine states. The main goals of the 
organisation are to organise women workers to gain access to 
security in work, food and social protection. However, they 
have worked in a huge range of fields and helped to establish 
other organisations as well as belonging to several other 
umbrella organisations.51

Grassroots women’s organisations have also been influential 

in challenging gender stereotyping of occupations through 
combining training initiatives with job creation and small 
business development. One example of this is the Women’s 
Construction Collective (WCC) of Kingston, Jamaica which 
is a national non-profit organisation that trains and supports 
low-income women in construction employment which is a 
non-traditional sector for women. It provides information, 
training, and services to the construction industry in general, 
and specifically to low-income women (mainly in repair 
and maintenance, carpentry and basic masonry). Its core 
activities are livelihood development and gender equity in 

the field of construction. Together, the aim is to empower 
women economically in a sustainable way that challenges 
gender stereotypes. By 2010, WCC had trained over 500 
women in construction trades, created a space where women 
could meet to discuss the issues they experienced on the job, 
provided technical support to the construction industry and 
promoted women in the industry through membership in the 
Incorporated Masterbuilders Association of Jamaica.52
Finally, it is important to return to a core question 

surrounding women’s productivity and economic 
empowerment.  Is the extent to which rising levels of 
engagement in economic activity ‘good’ for women? It is now 
acknowledged that upward trends may not entail increases in 
recognition, rewards and quality of work. In turn, there has 
been little evidence of men or boys stepping up assistance in 
the domestic sphere. This makes women’s empowerment much 
more difficult to attain, as does the continual lack of well-paid, 
rewarding jobs in cities of the world.54 In addition, economic 
empowerment can only be attainable if women have access to 
many key dimensions of infrastructure in cities, to which the 
next chapter turns.

57

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESEndnotes

1. 

 Grown (2005); Lloyd (2009); Plan international (2009)

28.   iLO (2011, p. 21); UN-DESA (2010, p. 76-80)

2. 

 UN-DESA (2010, p. 43); See also Chant with Craske (2003)

29.   Chant and Mcilwaine (2009, Chapter 6)

3. 

 Gupta et al (2009, Figure 2.11, p. 32)

4. 

 UN-DESA (2010, p.43)

5. 

 Chant and Touray (2012b); Hughes and Wickeri (2011, p. 889)

6. 

 Jones and Chant (2009)

7. 

 Jones and Chant (2009)

8. 

 iLO (2008b)

9. 

  Budlender (2004); Elson (1999); Folbre (1994)

10.   Chant (1996); Razavi (2007)

11.   Chant (2007a); ECLAC (2004)

12.   Pearson (1997)

13.   Perrons (2010); Perrons and Plomien (2010)

30.   Chant and Pedwell (2008); Chen (2010a); Meagher (2010)

31.   See for example, Chant and Mcilwaine (1995)

32.   Standing (1999)

33.    Chant (2007b)

34.   Tacoli (2012)

35.   Kabeer (2008a); Kabeer et al (2011 on Bangladesh)

36.   UN (2010a)

37.   de Bruijn et al (2009)

38.   Buskens and Webb (2009)

39.   Moodley (2005)

40.   Scott et al (2004)

14.    Castells (1978, p. 177-8, cited in Chant, 1984, 2007b)

41.   Aminuzzaman, Baldersheim and Jamil (2003)

15.   Chant and Pedwell (2008); Chen (2010a); Chen et al (2004)

42.   Lugo and Sampson (2008);  Mitter and Rowbotham (eds,1997)

16.   World Bank (2011c, p. 236)

17.   UN Women (2011, p. 35)

18.   iLO (2011: Table A10, p. 67)

19.   Elson and Pearson (1981); Standing (1999)

43.   Patel (2010)

44.   UNRiSD (2010a, p.119)

45.   Khosla (2009, p. 40); Perrons (2004)

46.   Plan international (2010)

20.   Chant and Mcilwaine (1995); Chant and Mcilwaine (2009, Chapter 5)

47.   Plan international (2010)

21.  Chen et al (2004); Kabeer (2008b); iLO (2010c); Moghadam (1995); UN-DESA/

48.   Warschauer and Ames (2010)

UNDAW (2009); UNRiSD (2010a, p. 107).

22.    Floro et al (2010); Horn (2010)

23.   iLO (2010a)

24.   Patel (2010)

25.   Chant (2011b, p. 103)

26.   World Bank (2011c, p. 204)

27.   Chen et al (2004)

49.   Samson (2009)

50.   Kantor (2010; also Chen (2010a)

51.   UNCSW (2011)

52.   Chant and Mcilwaine (2009, pp. 299-300); Chen (2006)

53.   Yonder and Tamaki for Huairou Commission (2010)

54.   Chant (2007a); iLO (2010a), World Bank (2011c, p. 173)

58

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Chapter 2.4

Gender, Equity-Based 
Development and 
Prosperity

Gender equity is central to ensuring the equal distribution of 
the benefits of prosperity in cities. In particular it is essential in 
protecting the rights of women and ensuring that they have full 
access not only to material resources in cities, but also to civic 
participation in social, political and cultural spheres. In terms 
of the gender and urban prosperity nexus, equity is especially 
relevant to the issue of gender disparities in power and rights. 
The focus of this chapter is therefore on addressing some of the 
underlying inequalities in cities as well as on how to ensure that 
women’s rights are recognised in reality through opening up 
channels of formal and informal empowerment.

ATTITUDES TOwARDS GENDER EQUITy IN CITIES
Addressing gender equity is essential in generating economic 

development and promoting prosperity for women. The 
survey showed that there was thought to be a generally positive 
relationship between these in the case study cities in that 47 
per cent thought the relationship was ‘somewhat positive’ 
with a further 18 per cent suggesting it was ‘highly positive’. 
Perceptions in Kingston and Johannesburg were the most 
positive (with 78 per cent in the latter and 77 per cent in the 
former stating there was a positive relationship). Few felt there 
was a negative relationship except in Kampala (See Figure 

2.4.1).

Levels of commitment towards promoting gender equity 

through the equitable distribution and redistribution of 
development benefits were also broadly positive in the cities 
although there was significant room for improvement. While 
more than half (54 per cent) felt that there was some form of 
commitment to the equal participation of all women in social, 
economic, political and cultural spheres, only 23.5 per cent 
thought that their city was ‘committed’ or ‘fully committed’. 
Those living in Johannesburg were the most likely to identify 
commitment towards gender equity (81 per cent identifying 
some form), with those in Rio de Janeiro noting the least 
commitment (25.5 per cent stating there was no commitment 
at all).

Related with this, 61 per cent thought that gender 

disparities in access to different social, economic and political 
opportunities were being reduced. This was especially the case 
in Johannesburg (75 per cent) and Kingston (69 per cent). 
Views were more negative in Kampala where 51 per cent stated 
that they were not being reduced. In terms of access to power 
and decision-making, 36 per cent stated that efforts to attain 
gender equity in terms of opportunity for free expression were 
advanced or very advanced, especially in Kingston (52 per cent) 
and to a lesser extent in Johannesburg (43 per cent). 

Only 25 per cent felt that women had ‘advanced’ or ‘very 
advanced’ equal access to political representation, especially 
in Johannesburg (39 per cent) and Kingston (38 per cent). 
Kampala and Rio de Janeiro were both thought to have the 
least advanced access to representation. Perceptions on access to 
decision-making in general was slightly more positive in that 30 

59

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESper cent felt that women have advance or very advanced equal 
access, especially in Kingston (47 per cent). Again, people in 
Rio de Janeiro were the most likely to state that there was no 
equity in access (26 per cent). 

Attitudes towards the factors that limited the ability to 

achieve greater levels of equity between women and men in 
cities were also elicited.  The most limiting factor identified 
was a history of class inequality which was especially important 
in Rio de Janeiro as well as in Kingston. This was followed 
by a history of ethnic and racial inequality which again was 
particularly noted in Rio de Janeiro and Johannesburg. The 
least limiting factor identified was lack of democracy and the 
related non-representative governing bodies (See Table 2.4.1).

Somewhat worrying is that only 54 per cent of people 

thought that human rights were recognised and promoted 
in their city, especially in Johannesburg (77 per cent). This 
compared with only 37 per cent in Rio de Janeiro. 

GENDER AND FORMAL URBAN POLITICS

Engagement in urban politics and governance is not just 
a fundamental right, but an integral and potentially major 
route to gender equality in urban prosperity. Accordingly, 
the importance of active involvement by women in civic 
participation has been stressed by UN-Habitat, not least 
in its Gender Equality Action Plan.1 Given that the hub of 
national politics and protest is usually urban-based,2 the fact 
that women’s parliamentary representation is one of the three 
main indicators in MDG 3, to ‘promote gender equality and 

Figure 2.4.1
Relationship between economic development and gender equity

empower women’, is a further step in the right direction.  Some 
advances have occurred in women holding seats in national 
parliaments in the past decade, even if under-representation 
remains persistent in developed and developing countries alike.3  
In only 23 countries of the world, for example, do women 
comprise over 30 per cent of the lower or single house of the 
national parliament (See Figure 2.4.2).

At ministerial levels, gender gaps increase dramatically.4 

Taking into account local councillors as well as 
parliamentarians, only 1 in 5 are female in a diverse range of 
contexts.5 Recent research shows that female politicians often 
only last single terms due to unrealistic expectations in respect 
of time commitments (given their disproportionate share of 
domestic responsibilities and unpaid care work). They are also 
expected to enact gender-friendly measures, and they are prone 
to criticism and discrimination.6  

Whether or not this will prove to be the case in the many 

countries in Latin America where female presidents have 
recently been voted in for the first time, only time will tell. 
But what seems better established is that affirmative action 
measures, such as quota systems, are critical to increasing 
female political representation.  In Nepal, for example, a 
new quota seems to have played a major part in bringing 
women’s representation to the Constituent Assembly to an 
unprecedented 33 per cent in the 2008 elections.7 Indeed, by 
2006, nearly 40 countries had introduced gender quotas in 
parliamentary elections.  

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Highly

Somewhat Positive

No Relationship

Somewhat Negative

Very Negative

0

Bangalore

Jonannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

60

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Table 2.4.1

Factors limiting ability to achieve greater levels of equity

Citiesà
Factors

History of gender inequality

History of class inequality

History of racial/ethnic inequality

institutionalised discriminatory practices

ineffective government institutions/policies

Non-representative governing bodies

Lack of education and awareness

Weak civil society

Lack of democracy

Lack of access to just legal systems

Lack of resources to support sound policy

Note: Responses 1àNot limiting to 5à Very limiting 
Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

Rank

3.22

3.11

3.02

3.02

3.34

3.22

3.26

3.27

2.94

3.24

3.22

3.62

3.69

3.89

3.32

3.27

3.20

3.33

2.91

2.70

3.17

3.14

3.10

2.96

3.02

3.07

2.98

2.85

2.99

3.19

3.09

2.92

3.07

2.79

3.91

3.21

3.19

3.35

3.01

3.24

3.32

2.48

2.94

3.69

3.97

4.05

3.98

3.59

3.74

3.48

3.90

3.80

3.08

3.71

3.63

3.32

3.50

3.37

3.22

3.33

3.14

3.33

3.32

2.88

3.19

3.35

5

1

2

6

4

8

4

5

9

7

3

However, according to a grassroots leader from GROOTS 
Peru, ‘Affirmative action does not necessarily change structures 
of power’.8  Such mandates are a step in the right direction, 
but it is equally important to bridge the gap between women 
elected to public office on the one hand and grassroots women’s 
groups, NGOs and gender experts on the other (See below). 

Walter Sisulu Square, Soweto, Johannesburg.
© UN-Habitat/Michael Keith

Another important issue however, is the actual effect of 
women’s formal political participation. For example, India 
has experienced among the highest increases in women’s 
representation in local government across the developing 
world as a result of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
introduced in 1992, which required 30 per cent of seats on 
local councils ‘panchayati raj’ to be occupied by women.9 
This is despite the common claim that women’s enforced and 
perhaps rather arbitrary recruitment into the panchayati raj 
has led to their being proxies for male household members 
(‘parshad patis’).10 Similarly, in South Africa where active 
campaigning has led to the share of female councillors rising 
from 19 per cent to 28 per cent within a five year period,11 
some have argued that this has meant little for poor black 
women especially in terms of cutting child support and other 
welfare provisions.12

However, others have suggested that the presence of women 
in formal decision-making bodies has played a critical role in 
helping to prioritise matters of fundamental importance in 
women’s daily lives, such as basic infrastructure and services.13 
Yet optimism about this trend should be tempered, first 
because it may do little to change women’s association and 
responsibilities for traditionally ‘female’ concerns; second, 
because of the way that ‘female empowerment’ often comes at 
the cost of taking on greater obligations in the unpaid sphere; 
and third because local government entities are often resource-
constrained, and often offer limited bases for power, influence 
and transformation.14

61

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 2.4.2
Proportion of seats in lower or single house of parliament held by women, 2010 (%)

World

Developing Regions

Developed Regions

Latin America & the Caribbean

Eastern Asia

South-Eastern Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Southern Asia

CiS

Western Africa

Northern Africa

Oceania

2.5

24

23

19

18

19.5

19

18

18

15

9

9

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Source: Adapted from UN (2010a, p.25)

Woman casting her vote during 2013 presidential election in Nairobi, Kenya.
© Julius Mwelu/UN-Habitat

These concerns are echoed by others working in the context 

of South Africa as well as further afield.15 For example, in 
Ecuador and Venezuela, under transitions to more left wing 
governments in the past two decades, in which women’s rising 
political participation has featured prominently, the framing of 
women as ‘problem-solvers’ for poverty in their communities 
has served to compensate for weak welfare states.16

GENDER AND INFORMAL URBAN POLITICS

Building on a long legacy of women engaging in collective 

struggle in towns and cities around the world for basic services 
and infrastructure, housing, healthcare, and rights to use 
public urban space for informal economic activity, there is a 
mounting female presence in informal as well as form structures 
of governance.17  In Latin America, for example, there was an 
unprecedented mobilisation of poor urban women in defence 
of household and neighbourhood survival which took place 
during the 1980s era of recession and structural adjustment. 
This was also linked with an increasingly vocal and demanding 
women’s movement more generally which coincided with and 
fuelled a wave of democratisation and decentralisation within 
and beyond the region.18

62

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Coupled with the general spread of ‘rights-based’ and ‘multi-
stakeholder’ agendas in local-level governance, these tendencies 
have been central to opening up new political spaces for 
women.   For example, in Brazil, women have been the majority 
of participants in budgetary assemblies in Porto Alegre, which 
has been a pioneer in inclusive urban governance. However, 
there have also been problems in that women’s engagement 
in movements and programmes around basic services and 
poverty reduction tend to feminise responsibility in ways that 
burden women even more, sideline men further, and neglect 

strategic gender interests in favour of practical gender needs (in 
terms of challenging gender ideologies and power relations).19 
In addition, it has been noted that a gender perspective is 
included on grounds of effectiveness and efficiency of projects. 
For example, in a World Bank-funded slum upgrading project 
in the Venezuelan capital, Carácas, gender did not explicitly 
feature in the original design of the project, but became co-
opted once the initiative got underway, mainly on account of 
women’s cost-saving cntributions (See Box 2.4.1).

Criticisms of a utilitarian approach to gender, even where 

BOX 2.4.1
Instrumentalising gender in a slum upgrading project, Carácas, Venezuela

                The Carácas Slum Upgrading Project (CAMEBA) was launched 
in 2000 as a community driven development (CDD) initiative 
oriented to improving the conditions of selected slum 
neighbourhoods in the Metropolitan Area of Carácas and 
covering around 15 per cent of the overall slum population.   
Gender was not an explicit goal in the project’s design phase 
but an early change of management in FUNDACOMUN, the 
decentralised government agency responsible for funding 
CAMEBA, helped to raise women’s profile.  More specifically, 
women became active participants in community consultations 
and training, as well as playing a major role as ‘neighbour 
inspectors’ (remunerated community representatives responsible 
for supervising construction works), as construction workers 
and as project staff.  The World Bank undertook a review of this 
project as part of a study of ‘good gender practices’ in Latin 
America and the Caribbean.  it determined that the involvement 
of women in CAMEBA had been resoundingly positive on 
account of women’s ‘..commitment to solve community 
problems and their constant presence in slums’, concluding 
‘..women’s gender roles make them central stakeholders 
in improving the physical infrastructure in poor urban 
communities’.

While it is arguably difficult to see how such a project could 
transform gender when it relies heavily on women’s existing 
roles, female participants were offered training workshops which 
covered, inter alia, gender identity, self-esteem, violence and 
children’s rights and citizenship.  Moreover, many women have 
been taken on board as remunerated project staff, which has 
helped to strengthen financial security for themselves and their 
households.   Other alleged benefits for women have been a 
‘heightened sense of empowerment’, a greater ability to solve 
problems and deal with crises, and positive shifts in gender role 
models for girls.  

Source: Chant (2007b, Box 8)

The question of ‘who benefits’ most, however, is pertinent 
here, with evidence that the ‘returns’ of women’s participation 
to the project are not insubstantial. For example, women 
have played an important role in facilitating project staff’s 
interaction with their communities, in attending meetings, in 
improving the quality of civil works, and guaranteeing their 
maintenance.  One important advantage from the project 
perspective is that women’s better use of materials and staff 
time than men generates cost savings.  This has led the World 
Bank to pronounce that ‘Women’s participation in CAMEBA has 
resulted in more efficient and sustainable project operations’ 
(their emphasis), and that ‘the returns of a gender focus in 
CDD projects are extremely high given that investing in the 
participation of women represents no significant additional 
cost to the fixed costs of investing in communities’ (apparently 
some of the workshops for women would have been run for all 
community members anyway).

The World Bank’s overall conclusions and ‘lessons learned’ 
(presented verbatim) were:

•	 Women’s constant presence in the slums makes them 

direct project interlocutors and crucial agents during project 
implementation

•	 Women’s commitment to solving the problems of their 

communities makes them an indispensable ally for projects 
aimed at improving community services

•	

in the case of CAMEBA, women’s engagement in the project 
has translated into better-quality civil works, improved work 
maintenance, smoother project-community relations and 
higher project impact

•	 At the same time, their participation has benefited women, 

their families and communities by means of improving 
households’ well-being and strengthening community 
institutional capacity

63

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESWomen in Buenos Aires, Argentina, made homeless by fire in their slum settlement, demand a response from the municipal authorities.  
© UN-Habitat/Pepe Mateos

‘rights’ and ‘empowerment’ might be professed aims, are found 
in a range of broader initiatives around poverty reduction. 
These may not be specifically urban, but by the very nature 
of rising urban populations affect legions of women in towns 
and cities in developing countries. Harnessing women’s 
‘empowerment’ to poverty reduction tends not only to blur the 
distinctions between poverty and gendered privation but also 
frequently involves using women as a ‘conduit of policy’.20 This 
capitalises on and often ‘re-traditionalises’ women’s altruistic 
and maternal roles.21

This has been the case in the context of Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Policies (PRSPs),22 in microfinance schemes,23 and in 
conditional cash transfer programmes (CCTs),24 and appears to 
do little to effect change in the status quo. Although there may 
be some benefits for some women resulting from pan-national 
anti-poverty interventions, this may not only be dependent 
on the type of group and context, as revealed by contrasting 
outcomes for indigenous women in different parts of Mexico 
from the Oportunidades CCT.25

Regardless of whether women’s civic participation remains 

of a more ‘bottom-up’ than formal nature, it is critical to 
acknowledge that identification with ‘traditional roles’ may be 
deployed by women themselves in convincing others about 
the legitimacy of their concerns.   Demands made by women 
on the state can prove successful, often by ‘harnessing their 
maternal roles to political claims making and advocacy for 
justice and for better conditions and social support for their 
families and communities’.26

To work around these problems, and to en sure that gender 

equality goals remain uppermost, fully-fledged gender-
responsive budgeting (GRB), which can potentially correct 
planning and investment decisions within government 
spending  and help to increase public awareness of, and 
accountability to, gender equality, is undoubtedly part of the 
answer. In urban areas gender-responsive budgeting should 
help to achieve three main aims. First, the balancing of gender 
needs. Second, guarantees of pro-female urban expenditures in 
areas such as water supply, sanitation and infrastructure, and 
third, women-specific urban spending in the arenas of housing, 
markets, public transport and recreational centres.27 However, 
although the introduction of gender budgeting in a number 
of countries has scored some successes, obstacles often include 
fractional amounts of overall budgets, lack of capacity in 
gender-awareness, and lukewarm political will.28

Despite some important benefits for women from formal and 

informal modes of civic participation, if women’s engagement 
is prioritised only in the interests of creating wealth for all, then 
one of the biggest questions is how other benefits come about. 
In the short-term, to entrap women in the largely unpaid and 
fundamentally altruistic work of building better cities arguably 
goes against the grain of transforming gender relations or 
creating a more equal share of urban prosperity among women 
and men.  However, without women’s engagement, especially in 
decision-making positions, there is little likelihood of granting 
gender issues a seat at the political and policy table. This 
engagement is especially important at the grassroots level where 
there have been some very important initiatives in recent years. 

64

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013As part of decentralisation efforts, there has been a shift towards 
community participation and the increased role of women in 
local governance. They have engaged with government and 
others through inclusive partnerships. However, one of the key 
challenges is recognising, legitimising and formally resourcing 
women’s work. In the case of Servicios Educativo El Augustino 
(SEA) in Peru SEA, a precedent through the participatory 
budgeting process has been set by which funding for women’s 
on-going activities has been lobbied for.29

This chapter has highlighted the importance of developing 

mechanisms for change not only in generating urban prosperity 
for women, but also long-term economic empowerment. This 
needs to be done through widening women’s choices and 
opportunities and challenging deep-seated power structures 
which have excluded women from decision-making for so long 
in so many countries. The report now turns to discuss some 
policies and institutions through which this can be achieved. 

Endnotes

1. 

 UN-Habitat (2008b); UN-Habitat (2010b)

16.   Lind (2002)

2. 

 Dyson (2010)

3. 

 UN (2010a, p. 25)

4. 

 UNiFEM (2008, p. 26)

17.   Patel and Mitlin (2004, 2010); Rai (2009)

18.   Chant with Craske (2003, Chapters 2 & 3)

19.   Molyneux (1984, 2001); Moser (1989, 1993)  

5. 

 UN-Habitat (2008b, p. 3); See also Patel and Mitlin (2010)

20.   Jackson (1996); Molyneux (2006)

6. 

 Pedwell and Perrons (2007)

7. 

 UN Women (2011, p. 23)

8. 

 Huairou Commission (2011)

9. 

 Jarvis et al (2009, p. 240-1); Khosla (2009)

10.   Khosla (2009, p. 10)

11.   Beall (2010, p. 634)

12.   Benjamin (2007, p. 198)

13.   Beall (2010); UN Women (2011, p. 23)

14.   Beall (2010, p. 636)

15.   Miraftab (2010)

21.   Chant (2008); Tabbush (2010)

22.   Bradshaw and Linneker (2010)

23.   Maclean (2010); Roy (2010); Sweetman (2010)

24.   Bradshaw (2008)

25.   González de la Rocha (2010)

26.   Razavi (2007, p. 26); See also Chant with Craske (2003, Chapters 2 & 3)

27.   Khosla (2009, p. 30) 

28.    Elson (1998); Elson and Sharp (2010)

29.   Huairou Commission (2010b)

65

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESPart Three

66

Gender, Policies, 
Institutions and  
Prosperity of Cities

67

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESChapter 3.1

Gender Policies, 
Institutions and 
Prosperity of Cities

This final chapter outlines the importance of creating 

gender-sensitive and gender-equitable cities in order to generate 
prosperity for women and for urban areas themselves. It 
then assesses the nature of existing policies and institutional 
mechanisms that contribute to making women more 
prosperous in cities. In addition to a consideration of the 
perceptions of gender policies in the case study cities, the 
chapter outlines some appropriate ways to address ‘quality of 
life and infrastructure’, ‘productivity’ and ‘equity in power and 
rights’ for increasing women’s prosperity in cities, consolidating 
the suggestions made in each individual chapter. As indicated 
in the gender and urban poverty nexus, these ultimately 
aim to make women not only economically empowered and 
prosperous, but also provide them with greater access to social 
and political resources and opportunities as well as the freedom 
to make choices. It is essential that policies address the various 
dimensions simultaneously and in a multi-stakeholder manner. 

GENDER-SENSITIVE AND GENDER-EQUITABLE 
PROSPEROUS CITIES

Gender equitable cities have the potential not only to 

reward women for their multiple efforts, but also to be more 
prosperous (See Box 3.1.1). Gender equity is also based on 
gender sensitivity in that equity cannot be reached without 
recognition that women and men have different and invariably 
unequal experiences in cities. Only by addressing these 
disparities can economic empowerment and prosperity be 
achieved. Therefore, there is a major need to tackle gender 
imbalances in the contributions to, and benefits from, urban 
prosperity. This requires looking at inputs, as well as outcomes, 
in terms of housing, service and infrastructure provision, 
productivity, political participation and decision-making, 
access to and control of productive resources like land, credit 
and technologies at different scales, extending from the home, 
through neighbourhood/community, city and nation.

The instrumental use of women to make cities and urban 
policies more efficient is unlikely to change relational aspects 
of gender.1 It is critical not only to address the ‘practical 
gender needs’ of women in urban environments but ‘strategic 
gender interests’ in terms of addressing deep-seated gender 
ideologies and power relations if a more equal distribution of 
urban prosperity is to come about.2 In addressing the various 

68

BOx 3.1.1
A gender-sensitive prosperous city

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Contributes to poverty reduction by harnessing the 
wealth produced by female and male citizens in 
investments that ensure better living standards and 
quality of life for all

Provides equal opportunities for women and men 
to access decent work and earn a decent income, 
including through labour market legislation, flexible 
approaches to the use of public spaces and amenities, 
adequate and safe transport, and access to digital 
technology

Contains adequate infrastructure and physical 
services (including childcare facilities and other forms 
of care support) that reduce women’s unpaid and 
reproductive labour and carework, ‘time poverty’, and 
exposure to health risks

Provides opportunities for adequate and affordable 
shelter for all and strengthens women’s formal and 
informal rights over property

Promotes women’s and men’s safety from violence at 
household, neighbourhood and city-wide levels

invests in social services such as education, 
healthcare, childcare,  recreational and sports 
facilities that enhance women’s and men’s capacities 
to lead productive and fulfilling lives in economic, 
social and cultural spheres

•	

Promotes the full engagement and representation of 
women in civic participation and urban governance

Source: UN-Habitat (2012)

However, when asked generally about which efforts have 

been most influential in making cities more prosperous 
for women, specific gender inclusive urban planning was 
cited by only 13 per cent. This compared with 26 per cent 
who identified policies and programmes promoting equal 
employment opportunities and 19 per cent who stated 
improved access to basic service provision. Having said this, 
those in Johannesburg and Kampala felt that gender inclusive 
planning was important; in Johannesburg this was second only 
to policies and programmes promoting equal employment 
opportunities and, in Kampala, was the most important type of 
effort.

From a slightly different perspective, almost half (46 per 

cent) stated that their city had a policy that successfully 
contributed to gender equity. While 69.5 per cent felt this 
to be the case in Johannesburg, only 21 per cent stated this 
in Rio de Janeiro. The actual policy or action thought to be 
most important in making the city more gender equitable was 
increased access to employment (19 per cent). However, social 
protection, training for skills development and equal pay and 
value for equal work were all thought to be important. Social 
protection was thought to be especially important in Rio 
de Janeiro, whereas access to employment was identified in 
Johannesburg and training for skills development in Kingston 
(See Table 3.1.1).

Related with this, but in a more concrete manner, only 44 

per cent that their city had or is creating, comprehensive social 
support systems which effectively address the vulnerabilities 
faced disproportionately by women (for example, acting as a 

Educating women on composting, Siddhipur, india.  
© UN-Habitat

components of the gender empowerment and urban poverty 
nexus it is also important to remember that some of these issues 
(for example, selected aspects of urban demographics such as 
migrant selectivity and ageing) are long-term and contextual 
in nature, whereas others are potentially more immediately 
responsive to policy.  

PERCEPTIONS OF GENDER POLICIES AND 
INSTITUTIONS IN CITIES

Existence and nature of gender policies

Almost half of the respondents in the UN-Habitat case study 
cities stated that they had a gender policy (47 per cent). While 
this reflects a lack of awareness of gender issues in cities from a 
policy perspective, this was especially marked in Kingston. In 
contrast, in Johannesburg, many more residents reported that 
there was a gender policy (See Figure 3.1.1). 

69

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESFigure 3.1.1
Perceptions of whether the city has a gender policy

31.85% 

Kingston

42.22% 

Rio de Janeiro

39.52% 

Bangalore

52.03% 

Kampala

80.85% 

Johannesburg

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

single parent/earner, gender-based violence, maternal health 
issues). Again, however, those in Johannesburg were more 
positive (62 per cent) with lows in Rio de Janeiro (33 per cent) 
and Bangalore (36 per cent). In turn, only 38 per cent of urban 
dwellers stated that their city had local initiatives that dealt 
effectively with the reduction of social disparities especially in 
health and education, between women and men in terms of 
access, quality and outcomes. Even in Johannesburg, only 51 
per cent felt that these initiatives existed.

As well as the nature of the policies, it emerged that almost 

two-thirds of urban dwellers (62 per cent) felt that women 
were involved disproportionately in the design, provision, 
management, and monitoring related to the local economy, 
infrastructure, and social services. Women were thought to be 
most involved in Kingston (83 per cent) and in Johannesburg 
(68 per cent) and least involved in Kampala (52 per cent). 
Related with this, two-thirds (66 per cent) thought that 
highly qualified women and men with an awareness of gender 
issues were in influential public sector/private sector positions 

Table 3.1.1

Most notable initiative being implemented to make city more gender equitable (per cent)

Citiesà
Notable policy

Training for skill development

increased access to employment

Social protection

Fiscal incentives

Projects for poor and marginalised 

Equal pay and value 

Others

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

9

11.5

20

18

18

17

7

33

20

3

0

13

31

0

14

0

45

10

24

7

0

17

19

18

11

14

17

3

100

23.5

23.5

16

12

6

18.5

0

17

36

21

6.5

10

9

0

70

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013In terms of funding policies to reduce gender inequalities, 

almost half the resources (47 per cent) came from governments 
across all cities. This is followed some way behind by NGOs 
(20 per cent). Government funding of such policies was 
perceived to be especially high in Johannesburg (83 per 
cent) and Bangalore (60 per cent), while NGO funding was 
important in Kingston and Rio de Janeiro (27 per cent). 
The private sector and donors played much smaller roles 
in providing 12 per cent and 10 per cent respectively. The 
qualitative data also suggested that people felt that funding 
needs to be increased. For example, a respondent from Kampala 
noted: ‘I think that gender equality for women is important; 
in order to be achieved a lot of effort has to be put in gender 

The Oneputa Combined School goes from Grade 1 through to Grade 10. The computer section, 
where students often have to double up in class. 
© John Hogg  World Bank

relevant to policy in relation to economic growth/poverty 
alleviation, labour, social security, health, and education policy. 
Again, this was especially the case in Kingston (80 per cent) 
and thought to be least likely in Kampala (53 per cent).
Implementation of gender policies and the role of 
institutions

Although around half of urban dwellers felt that gender 

policies existed in their cities, slightly more felt that there was 
a broad commitment to implementing them (See also Chapter 
2.4). This was also explored at different scales with awareness 
being highest at the country level (12 per cent stating they 
were ‘most aware’), especially in Johannesburg (24 per cent), 
followed by the city level (8 per cent), again in Johannesburg 
(14 per cent). The level with least awareness was the state with 
only 6 per cent identifying it as the ‘most aware’, especially in 
Kampala (13.5 per cent). In terms of the interrelations between 
these levels, only 41 per cent thought that they worked together 
to promote gender equality, although 65 per cent felt this to 
be the case in Johannesburg and only 31 per cent in Rio de 
Janeiro. However, the qualitative data suggested that people 
felt that it was very important work across these scales as one 
respondent from Johannesburg noted: ‘Growth and progress for 
women is not a farfetched system, it just needs everyone from 
government to city residents to work together for the good and 
improvement of gender equity’. 

NGOs and civil society emerged as the most important 

actors in bringing about gender equality in cities cited by more 
than a third, with particularly important roles in Rio de Janeiro 
and Kingston. Government was also identified as important 
by just under one-third although this was much higher in 
Johannesburg. Trade unions and parliamentarians were seen as 
the least important (See Table 3.1.2). 

Table 3.1.2

Most effective actor in bringing about gender equality (per cent)

Citiesà
Actor

Government/ public institutions

Parliamentarians

Trade unions

NGOs/ civil society

Judges and courts

Professional implementing programmes

Others

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Total

8

15.5

17

25

11.5

11.5

5

30

3

5

44

10

10

4

27

1

5

47

11

11

6

30

7

7

35

9

9

4

100

36

3

3

41

7

6

4

61

12

6

11

2

7

0

71

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESawareness to sensitise the people and also increase in the 
funding for activities of women’.

Confidence in the financial, technical, managerial and 

leadership capacity of institutions to collect information and 
use it in the provision of gender sensitive policies, programmes, 
and services was not high with one-third thinking that they did 
not possess it. This was lowest in Johannesburg (19 per cent) 
and highest in Bangalore. 

It also emerged that 42 per cent of urban dwellers thought 

that there was gender discrimination against women in the 
city in the implementation of public policies, programmes and 
initiatives. This was especially marked in Bangalore, where 50 
per cent felt this was the case, together with Kampala (49 per 
cent). Only in Kingston was discrimination thought to be less 
of a problem (cited by 29 per cent). One of the core reasons 
why initiatives promoting gender equity were not effective was 
lack of political will which was identified in over one-quarter of 
cases overall (26 per cent) and by half in Rio de Janeiro. Lack of 
gender awareness also emerged as important in 20 per cent of 
cases, particularly in Bangalore.

GENDER-SENSITIVE AND GENDER-EQUITABLE 
URBAN POLICIES 

Policies to address women’s unpaid  
reproductive work

While this section addresses the range of possible policies to 
reduce gender inequalities in ‘quality of life and infrastructure’, 
‘productivity’ and ‘equity in power and rights’ for increasing 
women’s prosperity in cities, it is vital at the outset to highlight 
one of the most fundamental issues affecting gender equality, 
namely women’s unpaid reproductive work.3

Unpaid reproductive work needs much greater valorisation 

and support given its critical role in ensuring the daily 
regeneration of the labour force, the functioning of cities, and 
contributions to the urban prosperity. This labour needs to be 
recognised not only in itself but on grounds that it constrains 
women’s participation in paid employment, as well as in 
social, political and cultural realms. In particular, it inhibits 
the development of capabilities among younger generations 
of women who may have to take on burdens of mothers and 
other female kin, and can also seriously disadvantage children 
of both sexes. These responsibilities are likely to be ever more 
burdensome in light of the recent global financial crisis.4  Only 
when all people are recognised as those who need, give and 
receive care can gender equality be achieved.5

Women’s efforts can clearly be supported in a number of 

ways, and benefits may well ensue from a multi-pronged 
approach. Direct attention to the burdens of childcare and 
other types of unpaid care work typically performed by 
women, can include paid community-based options, workplace 

72

© UN-Habitat

nurseries and care homes, state parental or carer support 
transfers, and dedicated private and/or public facilities.  While 
women’s care burdens might be alleviated in part through cash 
transfers,6 the provision of public services for care-related needs 
is more favourable, mainly because it challenges the persistent 
identification of women with reproductive labour and its status 
as a ‘private’ responsibility.  

Where such services exist they should be subsidised and 
affordable, and within easy reach of people’s homes. One 
successful example that has been instituted throughout Latin 
American countries such as Costa Rica and Colombia are 
‘Hogares Comunitarios’ (Community Households) programmes 
which provide subsidised childcare in poor neighbourhoods 
via the training of local women as ‘community mothers’.7  
However, since it is women who are the paid carers of children, 
and mothers who deliver and collect their offspring, this 
type of programme still reinforces women’s primary female 
identification with care.  

An essential part of any multidimensional perspective is the 

valorisation of women’s care roles through the promotion of 
greater public sensitisation to the societal value of care and 
the encouragement of more equal engagement by women and 
men in this unrecognised work.8 One way of doing this is for 
policies to provide incentives for men to share in care work, 
such as through paternity leave, and changes in ‘paid work 
cultures’ including shorter and more flexible working days. This 
might also include a possible requirement that to qualify for use 
of public care facilities men should play a part in delivery and 
collection of care-receivers.  

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013One example that addresses women’s time poverty was 

developed by UNDP who installed hundreds of diesel-run 
generators, known as multi-functional platforms, across 
Burkina Faso, Mali and Senegal to help ease some of the most 
time-consuming chores for women, such as fetching water, 
grinding and milling. The scheme freed up a daily average of 
two to four hours for women in Burkina Faso and contributed 
to increasing the owners’ annual income by an average of 
US$55 in 2009, producing net profits of US$248 per unit.9
Policies to address quality of life and infrastructure

The unpaid work that women perform in their homes and 
neighbourhoods not only relates to care in terms of feeding 
children or attending to sick or elderly individuals, but to a 
more extended range of activities that affect quality of life. 
These include saving household resources by shopping around, 
preparing of nutritious meals on low incomes, conserving 
water and power for environmental as well as financial ends. 
The ability to carry out these tasks is underpinned by access to 
adequate housing, health, education and basic urban services, as 
well as freedom from gender-based violence.

Although most urban dwellers in the case study cities 

thought that there was some policy commitment towards 
addressing women’s quality of life.  It is also instructive that 40 
per cent felt that their city was not making enough effort or 
was not committed at all. In turn, although 62 per cent of city 
residents perceived policies promoting quality of life for women 
as ‘good’, ‘very good’ or ‘excellent’, it is also instructive that 38 

per cent felt they were ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’, especially in Rio 
de Janeiro (58 per cent). Kampala had the highest proportion 
stating that policies were ‘very good’ or ‘excellent’ (33 per cent) 
(See Figure 3.1.2).

Access to and security in housing is one of the fundamentally 

important aspects of improving women’s quality of life in 
cities. While urbanisation offers unprecedented potential to 
do away with deep-seated patriarchal power structures, as 
Hughes and Wickeri comment: ‘… urban growth must be 
managed in a way that ensures women’s full realisation of their 
right to adequate housing’.10 This should extend to all women, 
including the particularly marginalised constituencies of elderly 
women, widows, sick and disabled women, and lesbians.  
Closer compliance with the provisions of CEDAW and 

other relevant international human rights instruments can be 
approached in a plethora of ways, including through state, 
NGO and private sector support of the numerous initiatives 
generated by women themselves in the form of group savings 
and collective land acquisition and building schemes.11 
Partnerships can take the form of gender-responsive housing 
finance, assistance in obtaining tenure security, subsidised 
materials, and training in construction techniques.12

A holistic approach is necessary to increase pro-female 

housing rights initiatives, such as in statutory joint or 
individual titling, or mechanisms to ensure that women are 
fully represented on committees which decide on land rights 
in communities which observe customary law.13 Support 
for paralegal services which assist women in their ability to 

Figure 3.1.2
Rating of policies promoting quality of life of women

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Very Poor

Poor

Good

Very Good

Excellent

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

73

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESrealise their land and shelter entitlements is also crucial. This 
is evidenced in Nigeria where the Women’s Aid Collective 
(WACOL) works to help widows defend their inheritance 
rights.14 Recalling the importance of rental accommodation for 
urban women, interventions to promote their access to, and 
security in, this sector should not be neglected.15

For women in rental and owner- or quasi-owner-occupied 
housing alike, greater media exposure of abuses in respect of 
tenure security, shelter adequacy and personal safety could also 
raise visibility and public accountability. Although, women’s 
lack of knowledge of their rights, and societal awareness of 
when those rights are violated, whether within or outside 
the justice system, are generally more compromised in rural 
than in urban areas, media dissemination and campaigns can 
undoubtedly be effective, and could be strengthened further by 
increasing poor women’s access to ICT.

Another core area affecting women’s quality of life is the need 

to reduce violence against women in cities. Evidence from the 
case study cities highlights that there is an important need to 
address this as 56 per cent stated that there were no policies 
in their city to address issues of security and safety, especially 
in Kingston (68 per cent). UN-Habitat usefully outlines 
a range of policy approaches at the local level in cities that 
address urban crime and violence, all of which are gendered 
in some way.  Some of these types of interventions focus on 
gender-based violence in public spheres while others address 
domestic violence specifically.16 One example reflecting the 
Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED) 
approach from Khayelitsha, Cape Town, South Africa illustrates 
how gender-based violence can be reduced in cities in relation 

to upgrading or changing the urban infrastructure and physical 
fabric of the city in some way. For example, if outside toilets are 
phased out then women are much less likely to put themselves 
in situations of risk. However, it is essential to combine these 
with other projects that also address deep-seated gender 
inequalities otherwise long-term reduction in gender-based 
violence will not be ensured.17

This might also include strengthening formal criminal 

justice systems and policing from a gender perspective. Many 
of the early interventions to reduce gender-based violence in 
general focused on changing legislation, often prompted by 
the campaigning of women’s movements. In the 1980s and 
1990s, legal reforms were instituted in many countries focusing 
criminalisation of perpetrators. However, there remain serious 
problems in terms of implementation. In the case of India, 
for example there have been three decades of lobbying by the 
women’s movement to address domestic violence with many 
legislative changes linked primarily with  Section 498A of 
the Indian Penal Code (Anti-Cruelty Act) and Section 304B 
(Dowry Death Act). However, despite legislation, the number 
of dowry crimes and domestic violence has increased from 
6,208 in 2003 to 8,172 in 2008.314 Other judicial interventions 
have been women’s police stations discussed in Chapter 2.1.

Reflecting similar findings to those for quality of life, 

although 62 per cent of city dwellers felt that policies 
promoting infrastructure were good, very good or excellent, it 
is notable that 38 per cent thought that they were poor or very 
poor, especially in Rio de Janeiro. Again, those in Kampala 
were the most positive with 11 per cent stating that policies 
were excellent (See Figure 3.1.3). 

Figure 3.1.3
Rating of policies promoting infrastructure for women

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Very Poor
Poor
Good
Very Good
Excellent

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

74

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013It is clear that greater public investment in services would 
undoubtedly reduce women’s reproductive labour burdens. 
In turn, the planning, design, use and management of these 
services should ideally involve the participation of women 
and men.18  The same applies to physical infrastructure, with 
sex-disaggregated research being a vital tool for gender-sensitive 
transport planning.19

As discussed above, single-issue interventions in transport, 

or the creation of nominally gender-friendly public spaces 
and amenities, may not benefit women unless complementary 

measures are put in place, such as street lighting.  However, as 
the Khayelitsha example above illustrates, there can be multiple 
benefits from improving women’s access to infrastructure. 
Similarly, training women in, and facilitating their access to, 
virtual spaces and connectivity through digital technology 
is important. However, it is not enough when the physical 
spaces they inhabit remain subject to erratic or unaffordable 
power supplies, where women lack income to purchase the 
necessary equipment, or where social conventions inhibit their 
engagement in the ‘modern’ economy. 

Figure 3.1.4
Rating of policies promoting productivity for women

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

Very Poor

Poor

Good

Very Good

Excellent

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Policies to address productivity

Ensuring women’s rights to adequate housing, services and 
infrastructure, along with education, training and work also 
plays a major part in enhancing women’s access to, and benefits 
from, productivity and to urban prosperity in gender-equitable 
ways. According to the survey, perceptions of policies for 
promoting productivity for women were generally positive with 
68 per cent stating that they were good, very good or excellent, 
especially in Johannesburg (35 per cent) and Kampala (33 per 
cent). Yet, one-third (32.5 per cent) still felt that they were 
poor or very poor, especially in Rio de Janeiro (49 per cent) 
(See Figure 3.1.4).

While various MDG targets have been important in 

enhancing women’s access to education and employment, 
much more needs to be done to cater to the needs of women 

workers, along with increasing numbers of male workers, who 
are likely to remain disproportionately engaged in the informal 
urban economy. Further informalisation is likely as some cities 
de-industrialise or formal manufacturing plants are reduced 
in favour of offloading jobs into the home working sector, 
and public sector employment is scaled down in the interests 
of cost-cutting.  As pointed out in the context of a recent 
workshop on ‘Inclusive Cities’ in New Delhi, since 80 per cent 
of urban workers in India are informally employed, and like 
many other developing nations India’s economy is a ‘hybrid’ of 
‘modern-traditional’ and ‘formal-informal’ activities, economic 
diversity and informal businesses should be promoted rather 
than penalised.317

Urban policies concerning land and land-use are vital here, 
with restrictions on home-based enterprise, widespread slum 
clearance, the gating of middle-income and elite residential 

75

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESneighbourhoods, and constrained access by informal 
entrepreneurs to public spaces often exacting huge tolls on 
women’s ability to avoid poverty, let alone to achieve any form 
of ‘prosperity’.  Aside from recognising the rights of informal 
workers in the city through land channels, and acknowledging 
that there is no single solution given the diversity of such 
work, a variety of mechanisms for supporting small businesses 
and the self-employed, at the same time as promoting ‘decent 
work’, might be considered.  

These include better provision of vocational educational 
and training with a view to enhancing the diversification of 
often competitive informal activities, easier access to loans on 
favourable terms, assistance in promoting greater health and 
safety at work, and the reduction and/or phasing of costs of 
formalisation.20 Encouraging and supporting associations of 
female informal entrepreneurs is also important to strengthen 
their often marginalised position and activities. The power 
of organisation is not only indicated by the huge diversity 
of examples of women workers’ organising across the world 
(See Chapter 2.2), but also features in Chen’s ‘3V’ framework 
for the working poor. Comprising the imperatives of ‘voice’, 
‘visibility’ and ‘validity’, this serves as another potentially 
fruitful step towards greater gender equality in prosperity in 
urban environments (See Box 3.1.2).21

It is essential to remember that access to decent opportunities 

to generate income can have important positive implications 
for women’s economic empowerment. The extensive research 
on the role of micro-enterprises in women’s lives has illustrated 
that, although they do not unequivocally empower women, 
access to loans to establish small businesses can significantly 
improve women’s lives and give them more decision-aking 
power across a range of domains. 

One example here is the Lumanti Support Group for Shelter 
in Kathmandu and Lalitpur in Nepal who established a Micro 
Finance Programme in Slum and Squatter Communities - 
the Pragati Mahila Utthan Savings and Credit Cooperative. 
Their mission is to empower landless squatter women through 
economic self-reliance and income-generating activities in 
order to reduce women’s dependency on moneylenders and to 
increase the number of women working in leadership positions 
within their communities. It was found that the micro-finance 
project led to change oppressive power relations at inter and 
intra household levels as well as greater well-being for children 
and families more widely. It was also discovered that women 
were better leaders than men as well as successful entrepreneurs 
able to overcome impoverishment.22

It is also critical to remember that not all women are 

informally employed and that general questions pertaining to 
productivity need to be tackled.23 In particular, the lower value 
accorded to women’s labour needs to be addressed as well as 
overt and covert discrimination against women in recruitment 

BOX 3.1.2
The ‘3V’ framework 

To ensure that economic policies are (re)oriented towards 
creating more and better employment, the working poor, 
especially women, need to be empowered to hold policy 
makers accountable.   

This requires three enabling conditions:

‘Visibility’ - requires that the working poor, especially 
women, in the informal economy are visible in labour force 
statistics. More countries need to collect statistics on 
informal employment, broadly defined, and countries that 
already do so need to improve the quality of the statistics 
that they collect.   Also, all forms of informal employment 
need to be integrated into economic models of labour 
markets.   Since existing models focus on the supply and 
demand of wage labour, the self-employed tend to be 
excluded.  A second area of neglect pertains to insufficient 
delineation between different types of waged workers.  
A third problem is that the extent of underemployment 
is not taken into account, despite its role in providing a 
more accurate measure of the ‘employment problem’ in 
developing countries than open unemployment. 

‘Voice’ - the working poor, especially women, in the 
informal economy, need a representative – and stronger 
-- voice in the processes and institutions that determine 
economic policies and formulate the ‘rules of the (economic) 
game’.  This requires building and supporting organisations 
of informal workers and extending the coverage of existing 
trade unions, cooperatives, and other worker organisations 
to include informal workers. This also requires making rule-
setting and policymaking institutions more inclusive and 
helping representatives of the working poor gain ‘a seat at 
the (policy) table’.  

‘Validity’ - refers to recognition and validation. The working 
poor, especially women, in the informal economy need 
legal identity and validity as workers and economic agents, 
and also need to be recognised as legitimate targets of 
employment policy. 

Source: Adapted from Chen (2010a)

and promotion. In addition, it is not just poor women who 
have been organising and for whom economic empowerment 
is relevant, nor that organising has focused on the workplace. 
There are many examples whereby professional women have 
organised and/or where interventions have targeted women 
beyond the grassroots. For example, in Mexico, a federal 
programme called Generosidad awards a “Gender Equity Seal” 
to private firms. These are granted through an independent 
evaluation that assesses a company’s achievement of specific 

76

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013standards related to gender equity, including recruitment, 
career advancement, training and reducing sexual harassment. 
By 2006, 117 companies had obtained the Seal.24
Policies to address equity in power and rights

In the case study cities, 63 per cent of city dwellers felt that 

policies promoting equity for women were good, very good 
or excellent, especially in Johannesburg (77 per cent). Again, 
however, 37 per cent   thought that the policies were poor or 
very poor, especially in Rio de Janeiro (60.5 per cent) (See 
Figure 3.1.5). This suggests that there is still much to do (See 
Chapter 2.4). Therefore, gender-equitable prosperous cities 
need to promote women’s and men’s participation in civic 
engagement and urban governance and politics, while avoiding 
the situation whereby high levels of women’s activism at the 
grassroots do not translate into high-profile representation in 
formal municipal or political arenas.

Imperative in efforts to support such engagement should be 

the recognition of state-society synergies in that progressive 
national policy reform rarely happens through social 
mobilisation or state action alone but through collaborative 
efforts of civil society and governments and especially through 
partnerships with grassroots organisations.25 Indeed, it is in 
the NGO sector where many important initiatives have been 
developed.

The Local to Local Dialogue initiative pioneered by the 
Huairou Commission in collaboration with UN-Habitat 
and inspired by organisations such as SPARC (Society for 
the Promotion of Area Resource Centres) and Mahila Matila 

in India, is an approach which  develops ‘locally designed 
strategies whereby grassroots women’s groups initiate and 
engage in on-going dialogue with local authorities, government, 
private sector and others to negotiate a range of issues and 
priorities to influence policies, plans and programmes in ways 
that address women’s priorities’.26 This tool builds collective 
action, capacity building and alliances as well as information. 
For example, in Tanzania, the Mpambano Women’s Group and 
Mshikamano Housing Group in Dar es Salaam, found that 
advancing the Dialogue meant that they had to learn about the 
legislation, regulations and procedures for grievance redress. 
They also had to invest in understanding how the municipal 
structure functioned and where the decision-making powers 
are located.27 Ultimately, they can also empower women to 
have much greater decision-making power both formally and 
informally. This also relates to the importance of peer exchanges 
which is a learning tool that grassroots women’s organisations 
have used for many years to learn from the experiences and 
practices of each other. 

Also critical in bringing about change is to remember 

that change rarely happens overnight. For example, there is 
mounting evidence of the limitations of gender mainstreaming, 
ad hoc workshops and women’s invitations to decision-
making fora – where their participation is often token and 
muted).28 Another long-term imitative is to work through 
existing educational structures wherein younger generations of 
women and men are encouraged to develop interest in, and are 
equipped with the practical tools to engage with, civic issues, 
thereby enhancing participation from the bottom-up.

Figure 3.1.5
Rating of policies promoting equity for women

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
 
f
o

 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

Very Poor

Poor

Good

Very Good

Excellent

Bangalore

Johannesburg

Kampala

Kingston

Rio de Janeiro

Source: UN-Habitat Survey, 2012

77

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESOne well-known example comes from Nicaragua and 

especially the work of Puntos de Encuentro. They developed a 
communication strategy called Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales 
(We are Different, We are Equal) that deals with women’s 
rights and gender equality targeting young people in particular. 
The strategy includes a national television series (SextoSentido, 
or Sixth Sense), a radio talk show for youth and community 
activities that include training workshops for young people 
as well as youth leadership camps. Evaluation of the strategy 
found some positive change in terms of gender attitudes.29
Also part of designing gender-responsive pro-prosperity 

measures is to correct the common dilemma posed for women 
by involving them predominantly or exclusively in anti-poverty 
programmes where they usually end up with more unpaid work 
on their shoulders.30  In order to counter the ‘feminisation 
of responsibility’31 or adverse effects of the ‘feminisation of 
policy’,32 it is vital for poverty reduction programmes to 
promote the greater engagement of men. 

While ‘Smart Economics’ thinking seems to have encroached 
into the urban development agenda, with concepts of ‘smarter 
cities’, it is important to acknowledge that although mobilising 
investments in women can have huge impacts on the generation 
of wealth, there is also a serious danger of instrumentalising 
gender (under the auspices of promoting ‘gender equality’) 
to meet these ends. This misses the vital point of evening-out 
women’s and men’s inputs and rewards in urban environments. 

It is therefore paramount that the principles of gender rights 
and justice remain uppermost in urban prosperity discourse 
and planning.35 At the bottom line this will involve attempts 
to ensure equality of opportunity through effective monitoring 
and enforcement, and to enjoin (and ensure) not only female, 
but male participation in all institutions at all scales from the 
micro to the macro. 

Last but not least, international agencies including UN-

Habitat should ensure that gender in mainstreamed into their 
flagship reports. UN-Habitat, for example, should ensure that 
future editions of the State of the World’s Cities and the Global 
Report on Human Settlements adequately respond to gender 
equality and women’s empowerment so as to raise the visibility 
of gender at all levels of policy dialogue and engagement.  
Given that gender inequalities are still so stark and that 
mainstreaming remains uneven and often limited in its impacts 
in respect of improving the lives of women, dedicated gender-
sensitive reports remain extremely important. More generally, 
only by recognising the intersections of cities with patriarchal 
relations, and eliminating male bias in the institutions which 
give rise to gender inequality, will fairer shares of urban 
prosperity become a right and reality for women in cities 
everywhere. Only then will women living in cities become fully 
empowered individually and collectively across all spheres and 
scales of urban life. 

Endnotes

1. 

 Johnson (2005, p. 57)

2. 

 Molyneux (1985); Moser (1993)

19.   AMC (2005);  ivens (2008); Joshi et al (2011)

20.   Fernando and Porter (2002)

3. 

  Reeves, Parfitt and Archer (2012); UN-DESA (2009)

21.   Chen (2011)

4. 

 Pearson (2010, p. 422)

5. 

 Razavi (2007, p. 26)

6. 

 Razavi (2007, p. 25)

7. 

 Moser and Mcilwaine (2004); Sancho Montero (1995)

8. 

 Chant (2007a); UNCSW (2009)

9. 

 http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/MDG_FS_3_EN.pdf (accessed 30 May 2012)

10.   Hughes and Wickeri (2011, p. 839)

11.   D’Cruz and Satterthwaite (2005)

12.   Chant (1996); Mills (2010); Patel and Mitlin (2010)

13.   Chant (2007b); CPRC (2010); Cooper (2010); Varley (2007)

14.   COHRE (2004, p. 77-8)

15.   Miraftab (2001, p. 156)

16.   UN-Habitat (2007)

17.   Moser and Mcilwaine (2006); Mcilwaine (2011)

18.   Mcilwaine (2011)

22.   Chant and Mcilwaine (2009, Chapter 6 )

23.   Chen (2010a); See also Perrons (2010)

24.   Lumanti Support Group for Shelter (2006); Yonder and Tamaki for the Huairou 

Commission (2011)

25.   Perrons (2010); Perrons and Plomien (2010)

26.   http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/MDG_FS_3_EN.pdf(accessed 30 May 2012)

27.    Gaventa and McGee, eds (2010); Khosla (2009) 

28.   Huairou Commission (2004, p. 12)

29.   Huairou Commission (2004, p. 25)

30.   Goetz and Hassim, eds (2003); Parpart (2009); Cornwall (2007)

31.   WHO (2009)

32.   Concern and Oxfam (2011); Molyneux (2006, 2007)

33.   Chant (2008)

34.   Roy (2009)

35.   Chant (2012b)

78

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013BiBLiOGRAPHY 

A

 Agarwal, Siddarth (2011) ‘The State of Urban Health 
in India: Comparing the Poorest Quartile to the Rest 
of the Urban Population in Selected States and Cities’, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 23:1, 13-28.

Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) (2005) 
Ahmedabad Slum Networking Programme: A Partnership 
Programme of Infrastructure and Social Development in 
Slums of Ahmedabad City. The Dubai International Award 
for Best Practices to Improve the Living Environment 
(DIABP).(Ahmedabad: AMC) (http://www.egovamc.com/
snp/snp.pdf) 

Aminuzzaman, Salahuddin, Baldersheim, Harald and Jamil, 
Ishtiaq (2003) ‘Talking Back? Empowerment and Mobile 
Phones in Rural Bangladesh: a study of the village phone 
scheme of Grameen Bank’, Contemporary South Asia, 
12:3, 327-348.

Amnesty International (2010) Insecurity and Indignity: 
Women’s Experiences in the Slums of Nairobi, Kenya 
(London: Amnesty International). (http://www.amnesty.org/
en/library/asset/AFR32/002/2010/en/12a9d334-0b62-
40e1-ae4a-e5333752d68c/afr320022010en.pdf) 

Antrobus, Peggy (2004) ‘MDGs – The Most Distracting 
Gimmick’, in Women’s International Coalition for Economic 
Justice (WICEJ) (ed.) Seeking Accountability on Women’s 
Human Rights: Women Debate the UN Millennium 
Development Goals (New York: WICEJ), 14-16. 

Arbache, Jorge Saba; Kolev, Alexandre and Filipiak, Ewa 
(2010) Gender Disparities in Africa’s Labor Market 
(WashingtonDC: World Bank).

B

Bähre, Erik (2007) ‘Reluctant Solidarity: Death, Urban 
Poverty and Neighbourly Assistance in South Africa’, 
Ethnography, 8:1, 33-59.

Bapat, Meera and Agarwal, Indu (2003) ‘Our Needs, Our 
Priorities: Women and Men from the Slums in Mumbai and 
Pune Talk About their Needs for Water and Sanitation’, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 15:2, 71-86.

Beall, Jo (2010) ‘Decentralisation, Women’s Rights and 
Poverty: Learning From India and South Africa’, in Sylvia 
Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of Gender and 
Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward 
Elgar), 633-7. 

Beall, Jo and Fox, Sean (2009) Cities and Development 
(London: Routledge). 

Beall, Jo; Guha-Khasnobis, Basudeb and Kanbur, Ravi 
(2010) ‘Beyond the Tipping Point: A Multidisciplinary 
Perspective on Urbanisation and Development’, in Jo 
Beall, Basudeb Guha-Khasnobis and Ravi Kanbur (eds) 
Urbanisation and Development: Multidisciplinary 
Perspectives (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 3-16.

Benavides Llerena; Gina; Sánchez Pinto, Silvana; Chávez 
Nuñez, Gardenia; Solesdipa Toro, Azucena and Sol 
Paredes, María (2007) Diagnóstico de la Situación del 
Derecho de las Mujeres a la Vivienda Adecuada desde 
una Perspectiva de Género en Ecuador (Quito: Comité 
de América Latina y El Caribea para la defensa de los 
Derechos de la Mujer). 

Benjamin, Saranel (2007) ‘The Feminisation of Poverty in 
Post-Apartheid South Africa: A Story Told by the Women of 
Bayview, Chatsworth’, Journal of Developing Societies, 
23, 175-296.

Benschop, Marjolein (2004) Progress Report: On 

Removing Discrimination Against Women in Respect of 
Property and Inheritance Rights (Nairobi: UN-Habitat).                                                                            

Bhatt, Mihir (2003) ‘The Case of Ahmedabad, India’, 
Case Study Report for the UN Global Report on Human 
Settlements 2003, Development Planning Unit, University 
College London, London.

Chant, Sylvia (1996) Gender, Urban Development and 
Housing (New York: UNDP, Publication Series for HABITAT 
II, Volume 2) (www.undp.org) 

Chant, Sylvia (1997) Women-headed Households: 
Diversity and Dynamics in the Developing World 
(Houndmills, Basingstoke: Macmillan).

Bradshaw, Sarah (1995) ‘Female-headed Households in 
Honduras:  Perspectives on Rural-Urban Differences’, Third 
World Planning Review, 17:2, 117-31.

Chant, Sylvia (1998) ‘Households, Gender and Rural-Urban 
Migration: Reflections on Linkages and Considerations for 
Policy’, Environment and Urbanisation, 10:1, 5-21. 

Bradshaw, Sarah (2008) ‘From Structural Adjustment to 
Social Adjustment:  A Gendered Analysis of Conditional 
Cash Transfer Programmes in Mexico and Nicaragua’, 
Global Social Policy, 8:2,188-207.

Bradshaw, Sarah and Linneker, Brian (2010) ‘Poverty 
Alleviation in a Changing Policy and Political Context: The 
Case of PRSPs with Particular Reference to Nicaragua’, in 
Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of Gender 
and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar), 516-21.

Brown, Rebecca (2010) ‘Unequal Burden: Water 
Privatisation and Women’s Human Rights in Tanzania’, 
Gender & Development, 18:1, 59-67.

Budlender, Debbie (2004) Why Should we Care about 
Unpaid Care Work? (New York: UNIFEM).(www.unifem.org) 

Buskens, Ineke and Webb, Anne  (eds) (2009) African 
Women and ICTS: Investigating Technology, Gender and 
Empowerment (London: Zed Books).

Buvinic, Mayra and King, Elizabeth M. (2007) ‘Smart 
Economics: More Needs to be Done to Promote the 
Economic Power of Women’, Finance and Development, 
44:2 (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2007/06/
king.htm) 

C

Campesi, Giuseppe (2010) ‘Policing, Urban Poverty and 
Insecurity in Latin America: The Case of Mexico City and 
Buenos Aires’, Theoretical Criminology, 14, 447-72.

Castells, Manuel (1978) City, Class and Power (London: 
Macmillan).

Castro, Lorenzo and Echeverri, Alejandro (2011) ‘Bogotá 
and Medellín: Architecture and Politics’, Architectural 
Design, 81:3, 96-103.

Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE) (2004) 
Bringing Equality Home: Promoting and Protecting The 
Inheritance Rights of Women: A Survey of Law and 
Practice in Sub-Saharan Africa (Geneva: COHRE)(http://
www.cohre.org/) 

Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE) (2008) 
Women, Slums and Urbanisation: Examining the Causes 
and Consequences (Geneva: COHRE) (http://www.cohre.
org/)

Chandrasekhar, S. and Mukhopadhyay, Abhiroop (2008)  
Poverty, Gender, and Youth. Multiple Dimensions of 
Urban Well-Being: Evidence from India, Working Paper 
No.11 (New York: Population Council) (http://www.
popcouncil.org/pdfs/wp/pgy/011.pdf). 

Chant, Sylvia (1984) ‘Household Labour and Self-Help 
Housing in Querétaro, Mexico’, Boletín de Estudios 
Latinoamericanos y del Caribe, 37, 45-68.

Chant, Sylvia (1987) ‘Domestic Labour, Decision-Making 
and Dwelling Construction: The Experience of Women in 
Querétaro, Mexico’, in Caroline Moser and Linda Peake 
(eds), Women, Human Settlements and Housing (London: 
Tavistock), 33-54.

79

Chant, Sylvia (2006) Re-visiting the ‘Feminisation of 
Poverty’ and the UNDP Gender Indices: What Case for 
a Gendered Poverty Index?  LSE Gender Institute, New 
Working Paper Series, 18. (http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/
GenderInstitute)

Chant, Sylvia (2007a) Gender, Generation and Poverty: 
Exploring the ‘Feminisation of Poverty’ in Africa, Asia 
and Latin America (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar).

Chant, Sylvia (2007b) Gender, Cities and the Millennium 
Development Goals in the Global South, LSE 
Gender Institute, New Series Working Paper, Issue 21, 
London(http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/genderInstitute/pdf/
CHANT per cent20GI.pdf)     

Chant, Sylvia (2008) ‘The “Feminisation of Poverty” and 
the “Feminisation” of Anti-Poverty Programmes: Room 
for Revision?’, Journal of Development Studies, 44:2, 
165-97.

Chant, Sylvia (ed.) (2010) The International Handbook 
of Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy 
(Cheltenham: Edward Elgar).

Chant, Sylvia (2011a) ‘Gender and the City’, LSE Research 
Magazine (Spring), 26-27. (http://www2.lse.ac.uk/
researchAndExpertise/LSEResearchMagazine/home.aspx)

Chant, Sylvia (2011b) Gender and the Prosperity of Cities’.  
Final draft of lead chapter prepared for UN-HABITAT State 
of Women in Cities 2012/13 (Nairobi: UN-HABITAT).   

 Chant, Sylvia (2012a) ‘Gender and Urban Housing in the 
Global South’, in Susan J. Smith, Marja Elsinga, Lorna Fox 
O’Mahoney, Ong Seow Eng, Susan Wachter and Peter Ward 
(eds)  International Encyclopedia of Housing and Home, 
Vol. 2 (Oxford: Elsevier), 255-63.

Chant, Sylvia (2012b) ‘The Disappearing of “Smart 
Economics”? The World Development Report 2012 on 
Gender Equality: Some Concerns about the Preparatory 
Process and the Prospects for Paradigm Change’, Global 
Social Policy, 12:2, 198-218,

Chant, Sylvia (2013a) Cities Through a “Gender Lens”: 
A Golden “Urban Age” for Women in the Global South?, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 25:1.

Chant, Sylvia (2013b) ‘Youth and Employment’, in Gareth 
Jones, Katherine Brickell, Sylvia Chant and Sarah Thomas 
de Benítez Bringing Youth into Development (London: 
Zed Books) 

Chant, Sylvia with Craske, Nikki (2003) Gender in Latin 
America (London: Latin America Bureau). 

Chant, Sylvia and Datu, Kerwin (2011a) ‘Urban Prosperity 
Doesn’t Automatically Mean Gender Equality’, The Global 
Urbanist, September

(http://globalurbanist.com/2011/09/27/urban-prosperity-
doesnt-automatically-mean-gender-equality). 

Chant, Sylvia and Datu, Kerwin (2011b) ‘Women in Cities: 
Prosperity or Poverty? A Need for Multidimensional and 
Multi-Spatial Analysis’. Paper presented at The City in Urban 
Poverty Workshop, University College London, 10-11 
November.  

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESChant, Sylvia and Evans, Alice (2010) ‘Looking for the 
One(s): Young Love and Urban Poverty in The Gambia’, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 22.2, 353-69.

Chant, Sylvia and Gutmann, Matthew (2000) 
Mainstreaming Men into Gender and Development: 
Debates, Reflections and Experiences (Oxford: Oxfam).

Chant, Sylvia and McIlwaine, Cathy (1995) Women of a 
Lesser Cost: Female Labour, Foreign Exchange and 
Philippine Development (London: Zed). 

Chant, Sylvia and McIlwaine, Cathy (2009) Geographies of 
Development in the 21st Century: An Introduction to the 
Global South (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar).

Chant, Sylvia and McIlwaine, Cathy (2013) Gendered Urban 
Prosperity and Women’s Empowerment in 21st Century 
Cities, Camera Blu. Rivista di Studi di Genere, 7 (Le 
Politiche del Presente) (http://www.camerablu.unina.it/
index.php/camerablu/article/view/1367/1472)

Chant, Sylvia and Pedwell, Carolyn (2008) Women, 
Gender and the Informal Economy: An Assessment of 
ILO Research, and Suggested Ways Forward (Geneva: 
International Labour Organisation)

Chant, Sylvia and Touray, Isatou (2012a) ‘Women and 
Gender in The Gambia: Problems, Progress, and Prospects’, 
in Abdoulaye Saine, Ebrima Sall and Ebrima Ceesay (eds) 
State and Society in The Gambia Since Independence, 
1965-2012 (Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press), 
421-74.

Chant, Sylvia and Touray, Isatou (2012b). Gender in 
The Gambia in Restrospect and Prospect. (Kanifing: 
GAMCOTRAP) (http://www.gamcotrap.gm/content/images/
stories/documents/Chant_Touray.pdf) 

Chen, Martha A. (2006) Self-Employed Women: A Profile 
of SEWA’s Membership (Ahmedabad: SEWA). 

Chen, Martha A. (2010a) ‘Informality, Poverty, and Gender: 
Evidence From the Global South’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) 
The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
463-71.

Chen, Martha A. (2010b) ‘Supporting Urban Livelihoods, 
Reducing Urban Poverty’.  WIEGO Website item (http://www.
wiego.org). 

Chen, Martha A. (2011) Urban Employment in India: Trends 
and Trajectories. Powerpoint presentation prepared for 
Workshop on ‘Inclusive Cities in India’, New Delhi,  7-8 
June. (http://www.iihs.co.in/wp-content/themes/education/
resources/Inclusivecities/Day per cent201.3 per cent20- 
per cent20Martha per cent20Chen per cent20- per 
cent20Urban per cent20Employment.pdf ).

Chen, Martha A; Carr, Marilyn and Vanek, Joann (2004) 
Mainstreaming Informal Employment and Gender in 
Poverty Reduction: A Handbook for Policymakers and 
Other Stakeholders (London: Commonwealth Secretariat).  

Chen, Shaohua and Ravallion, Martin (2007) ‘Absolute 
Poverty Measures for the Developing World, 1981-2004’, 
Proceedings-NationalAcademy of Sciences USA, 104, 
16757-62.

Chronic Poverty Research Centre (CPRC) (2010) Stemming 
Girls’ Chronic Poverty (London: ODI) (http://www.
chronicpoverty.org/publications/details/stemming-girls-
chronic-poverty)

Concern Worldwide and Oxfam GB (2011) Walking the 
Talk: Cash Transfers and Gender Dynamics. A Report 
by Concern Worldwide and Oxfam GB (Oxford: Concern 
Worldwide and Oxfam GB). (http://www.cashlearning.org/
files/Walking%20theTalk%20CT&GD_lorez.pdf)

Cooper, Elizabeth (2010) Safeguarding Inheritance: 
Challenges and Opportunities in African Societies 
(London: Chronic Poverty Research Centre, ODI). (http://
www.dfid.gov.uk/r4d/PDF/Outputs/ChronicPoverty_RC/
PB19.pdf

Cornwall, A. (2007) Pathways of women’s empowerment 
(http://www.opendemocracy.net/article/pathways_of_

womens_empowerment)

Corrêa, Sonia (2008) ‘Sexual and Reproductive Rights’, in 
Vandana Desai and Robert Potter (eds) The Companion to 
Development Studies 2nd ed. (London:  Hodder Arnold), 
385-90

D

Davids, Tine and Van Driel, Francien (2010) ‘Globalisation 
and the Need for a “Gender Lens”: A Discussion of 
Dichotomies and Orthodoxies with Particular Reference 
to the “Feminisation of Poverty”’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) 
The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
105-10.

D’Cruz, Celine and Satterthwaite, David (2005) Building 
Homes. Changing Official Approaches: The Work 
of Urban Poor Organisations and their Federations, 
and their Contributions to Meeting the Millennium 
Development Goals in Urban Areas. Poverty Reduction 
in Urban Areas Series, Working Paper 16, International 
Institute for Environment and Development, London  (www.
iied.org)

De Bruijn, Mirjam; Nyamnjoh, Francis and Brinkman, Inge 
(2009) ‘Mobile Communication and New Social Spaces 
in Africa’, in Mirjam De Bruijn; Francis Nyamnjoh and Inge 
Brinkman (eds), Mobile Phones: The New Talking Drums 
of Everyday Africa (Langaa RPCIG: Cameroon), 11- 22. 

Deere, Carmen Diana (2010) ‘Household Wealth and 
Women’s Poverty:  Conceptual and Methodological Issues 
in Assessing Gender Inequality in Asset  Ownership’, in 
Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of Gender 
andPoverty: Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar), 347-52.

Deere, Carmen Diana and Doss, Cheryl (2006) ‘The Gender 
Asset Gap: What do We Know and Why Does it Matter?’, 
Feminist Economics, 12:1, 1-50.

Dierwechter, Yonn (2008) Urban Growth Management and 
Its Discontents: Promises, Practices, and Geopolitics 
in US City-Regions (New York: Palgrave Macmillan and 
Dawson Books).

Dobbs, Richard; Smit, Sven; Remes, Jaana; Manyika, 
James; Roxburgh, Charles and  Restrepo, Alejandra (2011) 
Urban World: Mapping the Economic Power of Cities 
(Seoul/London/New York: McKinsey Global Institute). (http://
www.mckinsey.com/mgi/publications/urban_world/index.
asp)

Donner, Jonathan (2008) ‘Research Approaches to Mobile 
Use in the Developing World: A Review of the Literature’, 
The Information Society, 24:3, 140-59.

Drechsler, Denis and Jütting, Johannes (2010) ‘Why is 
Progress in Gender Equality So Slow? An Introduction to 
the Social Institutions and Gender Index’, in Sylvia Chant 
(ed.) The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
77-83.

Duany, Andres; Speck, Jeff and Lydon, Mike (2010) The 
Smart Growth Manual (New York/ London, McGraw-Hill).

Dutta, Shyam (2000) ‘Partnerships in Urban Development: 
A Review of Ahmedabad’s Experience’, Environment and 
Urbanisation, 12:1, 13-26.

Dyson, Tim (2010) Population and Development: The 
Demographic Transition (London: Zed Books).

E

Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 
(ECLAC) (2004) Roads Towards Gender Equity in Latin 
America and the Caribbean (Santiago de Chile: ECLAC).

80

Elson, Diane (1998) ‘Integrating Gender Issues into National 
Budgetary Policies and Procedures: Some Policy Options’, 
Journal of International Development, 10, 929-41.

Elson, Diane (1999) ‘Labour Markets as Gendered 
Institutions: Equality, Efficiency and Empowerment Issues’, 
World Development, 27:3, 611-27.

Elson, Diane and Pearson, Ruth (1981) “Nimble Fingers 
Make Cheap Workers”: An Analysis of Women’s Employment 
in Third World Export Manufacturing’, Feminist Review, 7, 
87-107.  

Elson, Diane and Sharp, Rhonda (2010) ‘Gender-responsive 
Budgeting and Women’s Poverty’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) 
The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
522-7.

Essendi, Hildah; Mills, Samuel and Fotso, Jean-Christophe 
(2010) ‘Barriers to Formal Emergency Obstetric Care 
Services Utilisation’, Journal of Urban health: Bulletin of 
the New York Academy of Medicine, 88:2, 356-69.

Evans, Alice (2011) ‘“Women Can Do What Men Can Do”: 
Exploring ‘Intentional’ and ‘Immanent’ Routes to Gender 
Equality in Kitwe, Zambia’. PhD thesis in preparation, 
Department of Geography and Environment, London School 
of Economics and Political Science.

F

Fenster, Tovi (2005) ‘The Right to the Gendered City: 
Different Formations of Belonging in Everyday Life’, Journal 
of Gender Studies, 14:3, 217-31.

Fernando, Priyanthi, and Porter, Gina (2002) ‘Bridging the 
Gap between Gender and Transport’, in Priyanthi Fernando 
and Gina Porter (eds) Balancing the Load: Women, 
Gender and Transport (London: Zed Books), 1-14.

Fischer, Jamie Montague and Amekudzi, Adjo (2011) 
‘Quality of Life, Sustainable Civil Infrastructure, and 
Sustainable Development: Strategically Expanding Choice’, 
Journal of Urban Planning and Development,137, 
39-48.

Folbre, Nancy (1994) Who Pays for the Kids? Gender and 
the Structures of Constraint (London: Routledge).

Fleming, Andrew Sanderlin (2011) ‘Making a Place for 
the Rich? Urban Poor Evictions and Gentrification in 
Woodstock, South Africa’. Unpublished dissertation, MSc 
Urbanisation and Development, Department of Geography 
and Environment, LSE, London.

Floro, Maria Sagrario; Tas, Emcet Oktay and Törnqvist, 
Annika (2010) The Impact of the Global Economic Crisis 
on Women’s Wellbeing and Empowerment (Stockholm: 
Sida)

Fraser, Arabella (2005) ‘Approaches to Reducing Maternal 
Mortality: Oxfam and the MDGs’, in Caroline Sweetman (ed.) 
Gender and the Millennium Development Goals (Oxford: 
Oxfam) 36-43.

Freire, Mila;  Polèse, Mario; Echeverría, Pamela, World 
Bank, and INRS-Urbanisation, Culture et Société (2003) 
Connecting Cities with Macroeconomic Concerns  The 
Missing Link. Do Local Public Services Matter? A Case 
Study of Five Cities (WashingtonDC: World Bank).

G

Gakuru, Mucemi; Winters, Kristen and Stepman, Francois 
(2009) Inventory of Innovative Farmer Advisory Services 
using ICTs (Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa). 
(http://www.fara-africa.org/media/uploads/File/NSF2/
RAILS/Innovative_Farmer_Advisory_Systems.pdf).

Gammage, Sarah (2010) ‘Time Pressed and Time 
Poor: Unpaid Household Work in Guatemala’, Feminist 
Economics, 16:3, 79-112.

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Gaventa, John and McGee, Rosemary (eds) (2010) Citizen 
Action and National Policy Reform (London: Zed Books).

the context of HIV and AIDS: An Agenda for Action (New 
York: The Huairou Commission).

Ivens, Saskia (2008) ‘Does Increased Water Access 
Empower Women’, Development, 51:1, 53-7.

Geller, Alyson L. (2003) ‘Smart Growth: A Prescription for 
Livable Cities’, American Journal of Public Health,  93:9, 
1410-15.

Ghosh, Jayati (2010) Poverty Reduction in China and 
India: Policy Implications of Recent Trends.  DESA 
Working Paper No. 92, United Nations Department for 
Economic and Social Affairs, New York. (http://www.un.org/
esa/desa/papers/2010/wp92_2010.pdf)

Heintz, James (2010) ‘Women’s Employment, Economic 
Risk and Poverty’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International 
Handbook of Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, 
Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 434-9.

Hesketh, Therese and Xing, Zhu Wei (2006) ‘Abnormal Sex 
Ratios in Human Populations: Causes and Consequences’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America (PNAS), 103:36, 13271-5. 

Gilbert, Alan (2003) Rental Housing: An Essential Option 
for the Urban Poor in Developing  Countries  (Nairobi: 
UN-Habitat). 

Hindin, M.J. and Adair, L.S. (2002) ‘Who’s at risk? Factors 
associated with intimate partner violence in the Philippines’, 
Social Science & Medicine, 55, 1385–1399.

Gilbert, Alan (2007) ‘The Return of the Slum: Does 
Language Matter?’,International Journal of Urban and 
Regional Research, 31:4, 697-713.

Gilbert, Alan (2009) ‘Extreme Thinking about Slums and 
Slumdwellers: A Critique’, SAIS Review, 29:1, 35-48.

Goebel, Allison; Dodson, Belinda  and Hill, Trevor (2010) 
‘Urban Advantage or Urban Penalty? A Case Study of 
Female-Headed Households in a SouthAfricanCity’, Health 
and Place, 16:3, 573-80.

Goetz, Anne Marie and Hassim, Shireen (eds) (2003) No 
Shortcuts to Power: African Women in Politics and 
Decision-Making (London: Zed Books).

Goldenberg, Dahlia (2008) ‘Grassroots Women’s Leadership 
and ‘Deepening Democracy’: the Huairou Commission’s 
Local to Local Dialogue Replication’, Gender and 
Development, 16:3, 443-456.

Golla, A. M. Malhotra, A. Nanda, P.and Mehra, R. (2011) 
Understanding and Measuring Women’s Economic 
Empowerment: Definition, Framework and Indicators 
(Washington DC: International Centre for Research on 
Women).

González de la Rocha, Mercedes (2010) ‘Gender and 
Ethnicity in the Shaping of Differentiated Outcomes of 
Mexico’s Progresa-Oportunidades Conditional Cash Transfer 
Programme’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International 
Handbook of Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, 
Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 248-53. 

Graham, Wendy (2004) ‘Exploring the Links Between 
Maternal Death and Poverty’, In Focus (UNDP International 
Poverty Centre), 3,6-8 (May) (http://www.undp.org/
povercentre/newsletters/infocus3May04eng.pdf).   

Grown, Caren (2005) ‘Answering the Skeptics: Achieving 
Gender Equality and the Millennium Development Goals’, 
Development, 48:3, 82-6.

Gupta, Suranjana on behalf of the Community Practitioners 
Platform(2011) Catalyzing Community-led Action (New 
York: Huairou Commission).

Gupta, Kamla; Arnold, Fred, and Lhungdim, H. (2009) 
Health and Living Conditions in Eight Indian Cities, 
National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3), India, 2005-6, 
Mumbai/Calverton Maryland: International Institute for 
Population Sciences/ICF Macro (http://www.measuredhs.
com/pubs/pdf/OD58/OD58.pdf). 

h

Habitat for Humanity (2009) ‘Zambia Women Build’, website 
item (Oxford: Habitat for Humanity) (http://www.habitatzam.
org.zm/womens_build.htm) 

Harpham, Trudy (2009) ‘Urban Health in Developing 
Countries: What Do We Know and Where Do We Go?’, 
Health and Place, 15, 107-16.

Harvey, David (2008) ‘The Right to the City’, New Left 
Review, 53, 23-40.

Hayes, Shannon, for the Huairou Commission (2010) 
Valuing and Compensating Caregivers for their 
Contributions to Community Health and Development in 

Horn, Zoe Elena (2010) ‘The Effects of the Global 
Economic Crisis on Women in the Informal Economy: 
Research Findings from WIEGO and the Inclusive Cities 
Partners’, Gender and Development, 18:2, 263-76.

Huairou Commission (2004)Local to Local Dialogue: A 
Grassroots Women’s Perspective on Good Governance 
(Resources on Tools and Methods) (Nairobi: UN-Habitat).

Huairou Commission (2010a) Transforming Development:  
Creating Synergies between Grassroots Women 
and Institutions of Governance (New York: Huairou 
Commission).

Huairou Commission (2010b) Grassroots Women and  
Decentralised Governance Change through Partnership 
(New York: Huairou Commission).

Huairou Commission (2011) Global Summit on Grassroots 
Women’s Leadership and Governance (New York: Huairou 
Commission).

Hughes, Katherine and Wickeri, Elisabeth (2011) ‘A Home 
in the City: Women’s Struggle to Secure Adequate Housing 
in Urban Tanzania’, Fordham International Law Journal, 
34:4, 788-929 (Special Report) (http://law.fordham.edu/
publications/index.ihtml?pubid=300)

I

International Labour Organisation (ILO) (2001) Report of 
the Director General: Reducing the Decent Work Deficit 
– A Global Challenge (Geneva: ILO). (http://www.ilo.org/
public/english/standards/velm/ilc/ilc89/rep-i-a.htm) 

International Labour Organisation (2008b) ‘Skills 
for Improved Productivity, Employment Growth and 
Development’, International Labour Conference, 97th 
Session, Report V, ILO, Geneva. (http://www.ilo.org/public/
libdoc/ilo/2008/108B09_54_engl.pdf)

International Labor Organisation (ILO) (2010a) Women in 
Labour Markets: Measuring Progress and Identifying 
Challenges (Geneva: ILO). (http://www.ilocarib.org.
tt/portal/images/stories/contenido/pdf/Gender/WD-
Women2010_123835.pdf)

International Labour Organisation (ILO) (2010b) Global 
Employment Trends 2010 (Geneva: ILO). (http://www.ilo.
org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_elm/---
trends/documents/publication/wcms_120471.pdf)

International Labour Organisation (ILO) (2010c) Maternity 
at Work: A Review of National legislation Findings 
From the ILO Database of Conditions of Work and 
Employment Laws, 2nd edition (Geneva : ILO). http://www.
ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/@
publ/documents/publication/wcms_124442.pdf

International Labour Organisation (ILO) (2011) Global 
Employment Trends 2011: The Challenge of a Jobs 
Recovery (Geneva: ILO).

International Trade Centre (ITC) and Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry of Liberia (MCIL) (2009) Trade at Hand for 
Liberia’s Market Women: Business Opportunities on Your 
Cell Phone (Geneva: ITC) (http://mmd4d.files.wordpress.
com/2009/04/090305_tah_factsheet.pdf).

81

Izazola, Haydea (2004) ‘Migration To and From Mexico 
City 1995-2000’, Environment and Urbanisation, 16:1, 
211-29.  

Izazola, Haydea; Martínez, Caroline and Marquette, 
Catherine (2006) ‘Environmental Perceptions, Social Class 
and Demographic Change in Mexico City: A Comparative 
Approach’, in Cecilia Tacoli (ed.) Earthscan Reader in 
Rural-Urban Linkages (London: Earthscan), 252-57.

J

Jackson, Cecile (1996) ‘Rescuing Gender from the Poverty 
Trap’, World Development, 24:3, 489-504.

Jackson, Cecile (2003). ‘Gender Analysis of Land: Beyond 
Land Rights for Women?’, Journal of Agrarian Change, 
3:4, 453-80.

Jarvis, Helen, Cloke, Jonathan and Kantor, Paula (2009) 
Cities and GenderCritical Introductions to Urbanism and 
the City (London: Routledge).

Jeanetta, Steve on behalf of the Huairou Commission 
(2007) Peer Exchanges: Sharing the Experiences of 
Women’s Organisations (New York: Huairou Commission). 

Johnson, Robert (2005) ‘Not a Sufficient Condition: 
The Limited Relevance of the Gender MDG to Women’s 
Progress’, in Caroline Sweetman (ed.) Gender and the 
Millennium Development Goals (Oxford: Oxfam), 56-66.

Johnsson-Latham, Gerd (2010) ‘Power, Privilege and 
Gender as Reflected in Poverty Analysis and Development’, 
in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of 
Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy 
(Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 41-6.

Jolly, Susie and Reeves, Hazel (2005) Gender and 
Migration (Bridge IDS: Sussex). (http://www.bridge.ids.
ac.uk/reports/CEP-Mig-OR.pdf)

Jones, Gareth A. and Chant, Sylvia (2009) ‘Globalising 
Initiatives for Gender Equality and Poverty Reduction: 
Exploring “Failure” with Reference to Education and 
Work Among Urban Youth in The Gambia and Ghana’, 
Geoforum,40: 2, 84-96.

Jones, Gareth A. and Corbridge, Stuart (2008) ‘Urban Bias’, 
in Vandana Desai and Robert Potter (eds) The Companion 
to Development Studies, 2nd ed (London: Hodder Arnold), 
243-7.

Jones, Gareth A. and Rodgers, Dennis (eds) (2009) Youth 
Violence in Latin America: Gangs and Juvenile Justice in 
Perspective (New York: Palgrave Macmillan).

Jones, Gareth A. and Thomas de Benítez, Sarah (2010) 
‘Youth, Gender and Work on the Streets of Mexico’, in 
Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of Gender 
and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar), 195-200.

Joshi, Deepa; Fawcett, Ben and Mannan, Fouzia (2011) 
‘Health, Hygiene and Appropriate Sanitation: Experiences 
and Perceptions of the Urban Poor’, Environment and 
Urbanisation, 23:1, 91-112.

K

Kabeer, Naila (2003) Gender Mainstreaming in Poverty 
Eradication and the Millennium Development Goals: A 
Handbook for Policy-makers and Other Stakeholders. 
(London: Commonwealth Secretariat).

Kabeer, Naila (2008a) Paid Work, Women’s Empowerment 
and Gender Justice: Critical Pathways of Social Change, 
Pathways Working Paper 3, Institute of Development 
Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton

Kabeer, Naila (2008b) Mainstreaming Gender in 
Social Protection for the Informal Economy (London: 
Commonwealth Secretariat).  

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESKabeer, Naila; Mahmoud, Simeen and Tasneem, Sakiba 
(2011)  Does Paid Work Provide a Pathway to Women’s 
Empowerment? Empirical Findings from Bangladesh, 
IDS Working Paper Volume 2011, No.375 (University of 
Sussex: Institute of Development Studies).

Kantelberg, Renee (2011) MDG3 Accountability Initiative 
Evaluation Report 2011(New York: Huairou Commission).

Kantor, Paula (2002) ‘Female Mobility in India: 
The Influence of Seclusion Norms on Economic 
Outcomes’, International Development Planning Review, 
24:2, 145-59.

Kantor, Paula (2010) ‘A Gendered Analysis of Decent 
Work Deficits in India’s Informal Economy: Case Study 
Perspectives From Surat’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The 
International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
478-83.

Kar, Kamal and Chambers, Robert (2008) Handbook on 
Community-led Total Sanitation(London/Falmer,Brighton: 
PLAN UK/IDS). (http://www.communityledtotalsanitation.
org/).

Khan, Md Mobarak Hossain; Khan, Aklimunnessa; 
Kraemer, Alexander and Mori, Mitsuru (2009) ‘Prevalence 
and Correlates of Smoking Among Urban Adult Men in 
Bangladesh: Slum Versus Non-slum Comparison’, BMC 
Public Health, 9, 149-62.

Khosla, Rena (2009) Addressing Gender Concerns in 
India’s Urban Renewal Mission (New Delhi: UNDP) (http://
data.undp.org.in/dg/pub/AddressingGenderConcerns.pdf). 

Kiwala, Lucia (2005) ‘Human Settlements – A Concern for 
Women in the Coming Decade’, Habitat Debate, 11:1, 
4-5 (www.unhabitat.org)  

Klasen, Stephan (2002) ‘Low Schooling for Girls, Slower 
Growth for All? Cross-Country Evidence on the Effect of 
Gender Inequality in Education on Economic Development’, 
World Bank Economic Review, 16:3, 345-73.

Kumar, Sunil (2010) ‘Gender, Livelihoods and Rental 
Housing Markets in the Global South: The Urban Poor 
as Landlords and Tenants’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The 
International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
367-72.

Kunieda, Mika and Gauthier, Aimee (2007) Gender and 
Urban Transport: Smart and Affordable(GTZ: Eschborn)
(http://www.itdp.org/documents/7aGenderUT(Sept).pdf), 

L

Lefebvre, Henri (1986) Writings on Cities (Oxford: 
Blackwell).

Levy, Caren (2009) ‘Viewpoint.  Gender Justice in a 
Diversity Appraoch to Development? The Challenges 
for Development Planning’, International Development 
Planning Review, 31:4, i-xi.

Lind, Amy C. (1997) Gender, Development and Urban 
Social Change: Women’s Community Action in Global Cities. 
World Development 28: 9, 1205-1223

Lind, Amy (2002) ‘Making Feminist Sense of Neoliberalism: 
The Institutionalisation of Women’s Struggles for Survival 
in Ecuador and Bolivia’, Journal of Developing Societies, 
18, 228-58.

Lind, Amy (2010) ‘Gender, Neoliberalism and Post-
Neoliberalism: Reassessing the Institutionalisation of 
Women’s Struggle for Survival in Ecuador and Venezuela’, 
in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of 
Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy 
(Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 649-54.

Lloyd, Cynthia B. (2009) ‘The Power of Educating 
Adolescent Girls: A Girls Count Report on Adolescent Girls’ 
(New York: Population Council).

Loyka, Mark (2011) ‘Inequality and Poverty in Latin 
America: Can the Decline Continue?’, Daily Latin News, 
Council on Hemispheric Affairs, Washington DC

(http://www.coha.org/inequality-and-poverty-in-latin-
america-can-the-decline-continue/)

Lugo, Jaire and Sampson, Tony (2008) ‘E-Informality in 
Venezuela: The “Other Path” of Technology’, Bulletin of 
Latin American Research, 27:1, 102-118.  

Lumanti Support Group for Shelter (2006) Shaping Our 
Own Destiny: Experiences of Micro Finance Programme 
in Slum and Squatter Communities in Kathmandu and 
LalitpurCities (New York: Huairou Commission).

M

Mabala, Richard (2011) ‘Youth and “the Hood” – 
Livelihoods and Neighbourhoods’, Environment and 
Urbanisation, 23:1, 157-81.

Maclean, Kate (2010) ‘Capitalising on Women’s Social 
Capital: Gender and Microfinance in Bolivia’, in Sylvia Chant 
(ed.) The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
569-74.

Mayoux, Linda (2001) ‘Tackling the Down Side: Social 
Capital, Women’s Empowerment and Micro-Finance in 
Cameroon,’ Development and Change, 32: 435–464.

McIlwaine, Cathy (2008) ‘Gender- and Age-based Violence’, 
in Vandana Desai and Robert Potter (eds) The Companion 
to Development Studies (London: Arnold) (second 
edition), 445-449.

McIlwaine, Cathy (2012) Overview: Women‘s Economic 
Empowerment: Critical Issues for Prosperous Cities. Paper 
presented at Expert Group Meeting, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Mass.

McIlwaine, Cathy (2013) Urbanisation and gender-based 
violence: exploring the paradoxes in the Global South, 
Environment and Urbanization, 25:1.

McIlwaine, Cathy  and Moser, Caroline O. N.  (2000) 
‘Violence and Social Capital in Urban Poor Communities: 
Perspectives from Colombia and Guatemala’, Journal of 
International Development, 13.7, 965-84.

Meagher, Kate (2010) ‘The Empowerment Trap: Gender, 
Poverty and the Informal Economy in sub-Saharan Africa’, 
in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of 
Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy 
(Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 472-7.

Mills, Sophie (2010) ‘Renegotiating the Household: 
Successfully Leveraging Women’s Access to Housing 
Microfinance in South Africa’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) 
The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
373-8.

Miraftab, Faranak (2001) ‘Risks and Opportunities 
in Gender Gaps to Access Shelter: A Platform for 
Intervention’, International Journal of Politics, Culture 
and Society, 15:1, 143-60.

Miraftab, Farabak (2010) ‘Contradictions in the Gender-
Poverty Nexus:  Reflections on the Privatisation of Social 
Reproduction and Urban Informality in South African 
Townships’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International 
Handbook of Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, 
Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 644-8. 

Mitter, Swasti and Rowbotham, Sheila (eds) (1997) 
Women Encounter Technology: Changing Patterns of 
Employment in the Third World (London: Routledge). 

Mitra, Amal K. and Rodriguez-Fernandez, Gisela (2010) 
‘Latin America and the Caribbean: Assessment of the 
Advances in Public Health for the Achievement of the 
Millennium Development Goals’, International Journal 
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 7:5, 
2238-55.

82

Moghadam, Valentine (1995) ‘Gender Aspects of 
Employment and Unemployment in a Global Perspective’, 
in Mihály Simaj with Valentine Moghadam and Arvo Kuddo 
(eds) Global Employment: An International Investigation 
into the Future of Work (London: Zed), 111-39.  

Molyneux, Maxine (1984) ‘Mobilisation Without 
Emancipation?’, Critical Social Policy, 10,4:7, 59-75.

Molyneux, Maxine (1985) Mobilisation without 
Emancipation? Women’s Interests, the State and Revolution 
in Nicaragua. Feminist Studies, 11: 2, 227-254

Molyneux, Maxine (2001) Women’s Movements in 
International Perspective: Latin America and Beyond 
(Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave).

Molyneux, Maxine (2006) ‘Mothers at the Service of the 
New Poverty Agenda: Progresa/ Oportunidades, Mexico’s 
Conditional Transfer Programme’, Journal of Social Policy 
and Administration, 40:4, 425-49. 

Molyneux, Maxine (2007) Change and Continuity in 
Social Protection in Latin America: Mothers at the 
Service of the State,  Gender and Development Paper 1, 
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, 
Geneva. (www.unrisd.org)

Momsen, Janet (2010) ‘Gender, Households and Poverty 
in the Caribbean: ShadowsOverIslands in the Sun’, in 
Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International Handbook of Gender 
and Poverty: Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar), 129-34.

Montezuma, Ricardo (2005) ‘Facing the Environmental 
Challenge. The Transformation of Bogotá, Colombia, 1995-
2000: Investing in Citizenship and Urban Mobility’, Global 
Urban Development, 1:1, 1-10.

Moodley, Sagren (2005) ‘The Promise of E-Development? 
A Critical Assessment of the State ICT for Poverty 
Reduction Discourse in South Africa’, Perspectives on 
Global Development and Technology 4:1, 1-26.

Morrison, Andrew; Raju, Dhushyanth and Singa, Nistha 
(2010) ‘Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction, and Growth: 
A Copernican Quest’, in Ravi Kanbur and Michael 
Spence (eds) Equity and Growth in a Globalising World 
(Washington DC: World Bank on behalf of the Commission 
on Growth and Development), 103-29.  

Morrison, Andrew, Ellsberg, Mary. and Bott, Sarah, (2007) 
‘Addressing Gender-Based Violence: a critical review of 
interventions’, The World Bank Observer, 22, 1, 25-51

Moser, Caroline O.N. (1985) ‘Women’s Needs in the Urban 
System: Training Strategies in Gender-Aware Planning’, 
in Judith Bruce and Köhn, Marilyn (eds) Learning about 
Women and Urban Services in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (New York: Population Council), 40-61.

Moser, Caroline O.N. (1989) ‘Gender Planning in the Third 
World: Meeting Practical and Strategic Gender Needs’, 
World Development, 17:11, 1799-825. 

Moser, Caroline O.N.(1992) ‘Adjustment from Below: 
Low-income Women, Time and the Triple Role in Guayaquil, 
Ecuador’ in Haleh Afshar and Carolyn Dennis (eds) Women 
and Adjustment Policies in the Third World Houndmills 
(Basingstoke: Macmillan), 87-116.

Moser, Caroline O.N. (1993) Gender Planning and 
Development (London: Routledge).

Moser, Caroline O.N. (2006) Asset-based Approaches 
to Poverty Reduction in a Globalised Context, Global 
Economy and Development Working Paper (WashingtonDC: 
The Brookings Institution).

Moser, Caroline O. N. (2009) Ordinary Families, 
Extraordinary Lives; Assets and Poverty Reduction 
in Guayaquil, 1978-2004 (WashingtonDC: Brookings 
Institution Press).

Moser, Caroline O.N. (2010) ‘Moving Beyond Gender and 
Poverty to Asset Accumulation: Evidence from Low-income 
Households in Guayquil, Ecuador’,in Sylvia Chant (ed.) 
The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
391-8.

Moser, Caroline O.N. (2011) ‘Cancer Note from the Slums’, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 23:1, 119-22.

Moser, Caroline O.N. and Felton, Andrew (2010) ‘The 
Gender Nature of Asset Accumulation in Urban Contexts: 
Longitudinal Results from Guayaquil, Ecuador’, in Jo 
Beall, Basudeb Guha-Khasnobis and Ravi Kanbur (eds) 
Urbanisation and Development: Multidisciplinary 
Perspectives (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 183-201.

Moser, Caroline. O.N. and McIlwaine, Cathy (2004) 
Encounters with Violence in Latin America (London: 
Routledge). 

Moser, Caroline and McIlwaine, Cathy (2006) ‘Latin 
American Urban Violence as a Development Concern: 
Towards a Framework for Violence Reduction’, World 
Development, 34:1, 89-112.

N

Nakray, Keerty (2010) ‘Gender, HIV/AIDS and Carework in 
India: A Need for Gender-sensitive Policy’, in Sylvia Chant 
(ed.) The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
333-8.

O

Ochako, Rhoune; Fotso, Jean-Christophe; Ikamari, 
Lawrence and Khasakhala, Anne (2011) ‘Utilisation of 
Maternal Health Services Among Young Women in Kenya: 
Insights from the Kenya Demographic and Health Survey’, 
BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, 11:1, 1-9. (http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1471-2393/11/1) 

OECD Development Centre (OECD) (2012) 2012 SIGI: 
Social Institutions and Gender Index: Understanding 
the Drivers of Gender Inequality (Paris: OECD/
Dev) http://www.genderindex.org/sites/default/
files/2012SIGIsummaryresults.pdf

P

Palmer, Ingrid (1992) Gender, Equity and Economic 
Efficiency in Adjustment Programmes, in Haleh Afshar and 
Carolyne Dennis (eds) Women and Adjustment Policies 
in the Third World (Houndmills, Basingstoke: Macmillan), 
69-83. 

Parpart, Jane (2009) ‘Fine Words, Failed Policies: Gender 
Mainstreaming in an Insecure and Unequal World’, 
Jacqueline Leckie (ed.) Development in an Insecure 
and Gendered World: The Relevance of the Millennium 
Development Goals (Aldershot: Ashgate), 51-70. 

Patel, Reena (2010) Working the Night Shift: Women in 
India’s Call Center Industry (Stanford: Stanford University 
Press). 

Patel, Sheela and Mitlin, Diana (2004) ‘Grassroots-driven 
Development: The Alliance of SPARC, the National Slum 
Dwellers Federation and Mahila Milan’, in Diana Mitlin and 
David Satterthwaite (eds) Empowering Squatter Citizen 
(London: Earthscan),216-41.

Patel, Sheela and Mitlin, Diana (2010) ‘Gender Issues and 
Shack/Slum Dweller Federations’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) 
The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
379-84. 

Patel, Vikram (2001) ‘Cultural Factors and International 
Epidemiology’, British Medical Bulletin, 57, 33-45.

Pearson, Ruth (1997) ‘Renegotiating the Reproductive 
Bargain: Gender Analysis of Economic Transition in Cuba’, 
Development and Change, 28, 671-705.

Pearson, Ruth (2010) ‘Women’s Work Nimble Fingers, and 
Women’s Mobility in the Global Economy’, in Sylvia Chant 
(ed.) The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
421-6.

Pedwell, Carolyn and Perrons, Diane (2007) The Politics of 
Democratic Governance: Organising for Social Inclusion 
and Gender Equity (London: One World Action).

Perrons, Diane (2004) Globalisation and Social Change: 
People and Places in a Divided World (London: 
Routledge).

Perrons, Diane (2010) ‘Gender, Work and Poverty in High-
income Countries’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International 
Handbook of Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, 
Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 409-14.

Perrons, Diane and Plomien, Ania (2010) Why Socio-
Economic Inequalities Increase? Facts and Policy 
Responses in Europe, EU Report Commissioned by DG 
Research, European Commission, Brussels

Plan International (2009) Because I Am a Girl: The State 
of the World’s Girls 2009. Girls in the Global Economy: 
Adding it All Up (London: Plan International).

Plan International (2010) Because I am a Girl.The State of 
the World’s Girls 2010.Digital and Urban Frontiers: Girls 
in a Changing Landscape (London: Plan International).

Poulsen, Lone (2010) ‘Towards Creating Inclusive Cities: 
Experiences and Challenges in Contemporary African Cities’, 
Urban Forum, 21:1, 21-36.

Prieto-Carrón, Marina, Marilyn Thomson and Mary 
Macdonald (2007) ‘No More Killings! Women Respond to 
Femicides in Central America’, Gender and Development, 
15 (1):25-40.

Q

Quisumbing, Agnes (2010) ‘Gender and Household 
Decision-making in Developing Countries: A Review 
of Evidence’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) The International 
Handbook of Gender and Poverty: Concepts, Research, 
Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 161-6.

R

Rai, Shirin (2009) The Gender Politics of Development 
(New Delhi/London: Zubaan Books/Zed).

Rana, M. (2011) ‘Urbanisation and Sustainability: 
Challenges and Strategies for Sustainable Urban 
Development in Bangladesh’, Environment, Development 
and Sustainability, 13:1, 237-56.

Razavi, Shahra (2007) The Political and Social Economy 
of Care in a Development Context: Conceptual Issues, 
Research Questions and Policy Options (Geneva: 
UNRISD).

Reeves, Dory, Parfitt, Bonnie and Archer, Carol (2012) 
Gender and Urban Planning: Issues and Trends (Nairobi: 
UN-Habitat).

Rodgers, Dennis; Beall, Jo and Kanbur, Ravi (2011) Latin 
American Urban Development into the 21st Century: 
Towards a Renewed Perspective on the City.  Working 
Paper 2011/05 (Helsinki: UNU-WIDER).

Rowlands, Jo (1996) Questioning Empowerment: Working 
with Women in Honduras (Oxford: Oxfam).

Roy, Ananya (2009) The 21st Century Metropolis: New 
Geographies of Theory. Regional Studies 43:6, 819-830

83

Roy, Ananya (2010) Poverty Capital: Microfinance and 
the Making of Development (New York: Routledge). 

S

Saith, Ashwani (2006) ‘From Universal Values to Millennium 
Development Goals: Lost in Translation?’,Development and 
Change, 37:6, 1167-99.

Samson, Melanie (2009) ‘Wasted Citizenship? Reclaimers 
and the Privatised Expansion of the Public Sphere’, Africa 
Development, XXXIV:3-4, 1-25.

Sancho Montero, Silvia María (1995) El Programa Hogares 
Comunitarios en Costa Rica, Sus Primeros Pasos: 
Primera Parte (San José: Instituto Mixto de Ayuda Social, 
Dirección Hogares Comunitarios).

Santos, C.M (2004) En-gendering the Police: Women’s 
Police Stations and Feminism in São Paulo, Latin American 
Research Review, 39:3, 29-55.

Satterthwaite, David (2007) The Transition to a 
Predominantly Urban World and its Underpinnings, 
Human Settlements Discussion Paper Series, Theme: 
Urban Change-4, International Institute for Environment and 
Development, London. (www.iied.org)  

Satterthwaite, David (2011) ‘Why is Urban Health So 
Poor Even in Many Successful Cities?’,Environment and 
Urbanisation, 23:1, 5-11.

Save the Children (2011b) Missing Midwives (London: 
Save the Children Fund)

Scott, Nigel; Batchelor, Simon; Ridley, Jonathon and 
Jorgensen, Britt (2004) ‘The Impact of Mobile Phones 
in Africa’, Commission for Africa, (Reading: Gamos). 
(http://gamos.org.uk/couksite/Projects/Docs/Mobile per 
cent20phones per cent20in per cent20Africa/Full per 
cent20Report.pdf)

Shekar, Nalini (2009) ‘From Waste Pickers to University 
Graduates in One Generation: The Story of the More 
Family’, Inclusive Cities Project website (http://www.
inclusivecities.org/pdfs/IUP_Story_More_Family.pdf). 

Standing, Guy (1999) ‘Global Feminisation Through Flexible 
Labour: A Theme Revisited’, World Development, 27:3,  
533-50

Stevens, Candice (2009) Draft Report. Green Jobs and 
Women Workers: Employment, Equity, Equality (Madrid: 
Sustain Labour [International Labour Federation for 
Sustainable Development]) (http://www.sustainlabour.org/
dmdocuments/en255_2009.pdf) 

Storper, Michael and Scott, Allen J. (2009) ‘Rethinking 
Human Capital, Creativity and Urban Growth’, Journal of 
Economic Geography, 9, 147-67.

Sverdlik, Alice (2011) ‘Ill-health and Poverty: A Literature 
Review on Health in Informal Settlements’, Environment 
and Urbanisation, 23:1, 123-55.

Sweetman, Caroline (2010) ‘A Woman and an Empty House 
are Never Alone for Long: Autonomy, Control, Marriage 
and Microfinance in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’, in Sylvia Chant 
(ed.) The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
575-80. 

T

Tacoli, Cecilia (2010) ‘Internal Mobility, Migration and 
Changing Gender Relations: Case Study Perspectives from 
Mali, Nigeria, Tanzania and Vietnam’, in Sylvia Chant (ed.) 
The International Handbook of Gender and Poverty: 
Concepts, Research, Policy (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar), 
296-300.

Tacoli, Cecilia (2012) Urbanisation, Gender and Urban 
Poverty: Paid Work and Unpaid Care Work in the City 
(London: IIED).

GENDER AND THE PROSPERITY OF CITIESVarley, Ann (2007) ‘Gender and Property Formalisation: 
Conventional and Alternative Approaches’, World 
Development, 35:10, 1739-53.

Vera-Sanso, Penny (2006) ‘Conformity and Contestation: 
Social Heterogeneity in South Indian Settlements’, in 
Geert de Neve and Henrike Donner (eds) The Meaning 
of the Local: Politics of Place in Urban India (London: 
Routledge/Cavendish), 182-205. 

w

Warschauer, Mark and Ames, Morgan (2010) ‘Innovating 
for Development : Can One Laptop Per Child Save the 
World’s Poor?’, Journal of International Affairs,  64:1, 
33-51.

World Bank (2011a) ‘Helping Women Achieve Equal 
Treatment in Obtaining Land Rights: Gender in Land 
Administration and Land Certification Projects’, website item, 
Social Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, 
World Bank, Washington DC.  

World Bank (2011b) World Development Indicators 
(Washington DC: World Bank).

World Bank (2011c) World Development Report 2012: 
Gender Equality and Development (WashingtonDC: World 
Bank).

World Bank (2009a) Systems of Cities: Harnessing 
Urbanisation for Growth and Poverty Alleviation: World 
Bank Urban and Local Government Strategy (Washington 
DC: World Bank). (www.worldbank.org)

World Bank (2009b) World Development Report 2009: 
Reshaping Economic Geography Washington DC: World 
Bank). (www.worldbank.org)

World Bank, and Ellis, Amanda (2007) Gender and 
Economic Growth in Kenya: Unleashing the Power of 
Women (Washington DC: World Bank).

World Health Organisation (WHO) (2005b) Multi-country 
Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence Against 
Women (Geneva: WHO).

World Health Organisation (2009) Women and Health: 
Today’s Evidence, Tomorrow’s Agenda (Geneva: WHO).

y

Yeh, Anthony G.O.; Xu, Jiang and Lio, Kaizhi (2011) 
China’s Post-Reform Urbanisation: Retrospect, Policies 
and Trends, Urbanisation and Emerging Population Issues 
Working Paper 5 (London: International Institute for 
Environment and Development).

Yonder, Ayse and Tamaki, Marnie for the Huairou 
Commission (2010)Our Spaces (New York: Huairou 
Commission).

Tacoli, Cecilia and Mabala, Richard (2010) ‘Exploring 
Mobility and Migration in the Context of Rural-urban 
Linkages: Why Gender and Generation Matter’, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 22:2, 389-95.

Thompson, John; Porras, Ina; Wood, Elisabeth; Tumwine, 
Hames; Mujwahusi, Mark; Katui-Katua, Munguti, and 
Johnstone, Nick (2000) ‘Waiting at the Tap: Changes 
in Urban Water Use in East Africa over Three Decades’, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 12:2, 37-52.

Tran, Hoai Anh and Schlyter, Ann (2010) ‘Gender and 
Class in Urban Transport: The Cases of Xian and Hanoi’, 
Environment and Urbanisation, 22:1, 139-55.

Tsenkova, Sasha  (2007) ‘Urban Futures: Strategic Planning 
in Post-Socialist Europe’, Geojournal Library, 92, 447-72.

U

United Nations (UN) (2010a) Millennium Development 
Goals Report 2010 (New York: UN).

United Nations (UN) (2010c) Millennium Development 
Goals Report 2010: Addendum 1 (New York: UN).

UNAIDS (2010) UNAIDS Report on the Global AIDS 
Epidemic 2010 (Geneva: UNAIDS [Joint United Nations 
Programme on HIV/AIDS]).  

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (2007) State of 
the World’s Children 2007:Gender Equality, The Double 
Dividend (New York: UNICEF).

United Nations Commission on the Status of Women 
(UNCSW) (2009) ‘Report on the Fifty-Third Session (1-13 
March 2009): The Equal Sharing of Responsibilities 
Between Women and Men, Including Caregiving in the 
Context of HIV/AIDS’, Economic and Social Council, United 
Nations, Geneva. (http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/
csw/53sess.htm) 

United Nations Commission on the Status of Women  
(UNCSW) (2011) ‘Report on the Fifty-Fifth Session (22 
February-4 March 2011): Access and Participation of 
Women and Girls in Education, Training and Science and 
Technology, Including for the Promotion of Women’s Equal 
Access to Full Employment and Decent Work’, Economic 
and Social Council, United Nations, Geneva.

United Nations Department for Economic and Social Affairs 
(UN-DESA) (2010) The World’s Women 2010: Trends and 
Statistics (New York: UN).

United Nations Department for Economic and Social Affairs 
(UN-DESA)/United Nations Division for the Advancement 
of Women (UNDAW) (2009) World Survey on the Role of 
Women in Development 2009:  Women’s Control over 
Economic Resources and Access to Financial Resources, 
including Microfinance  (New York: UN-DESA/UNDAW).

United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) 
(2008) Progress of the World’s Women 2008/2009: Who 
Answers to Women? Gender and Accountability (New 
York: UNIFEM)

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (2005) 
En Route to Equality: A Gender Review of National MDG 
Reports 2005 (New York: UNDP). 

United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) 
(2007) State of the World’s Population 2007: Unleashing 
the Potential of Urban Growth (New York: UNFPA). (www.
unfpa.org) 

UN-Habitat (2006a) Women’s Equal Rights to Housing, 
Land and Property in International Law (Nairobi: UN-
HABITAT) (www.unhabitat.org).  

UN-Habitat (2007a) Policy Makers Guide to Women’s 
Land, Property and Housing Rights Across the World 
(Nairobi: UN-Habitat)

UN-Habitat (2007b) Global Report on Human Settlements, 
2007 (Nairobi: UN-Habitat).

UN-Habitat (2008a) The State of the World’s Cities 

2008/2009: Harmonious Cities (London: Earthscan).

UN-Habitat (2008b) Gender Equality for a Better 
Urban Future: An Overview of UN-Habitat’s Gender 
Equality Action Plan (2008-2013) (Nairobi: UN-
Habitat). (http://www.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.
aspx?publicationID=2850) 

UN-Habitat (2008c) Factsheet. Gender and 
Safety and Security in Cities (Nairobi: UN-Habitat)
(http://www.unhabitat.org/downloads/docs/
GenderandSafetyandSecurityinCitiesfactsheet.pdf).

UN-Habitat (2009) Planning Sustainable Cities: Global 
Report on Human Settlements 2009 (London: Earthscan).

UN-Habitat (2010a) State of the World’s Cities 
2010/2011: Bridging the Urban Divide (London: 
Earthscan).

UN-Habitat (2010b) Gender Equality for Smarter 
Cities: Challenges and Progress (Nairobi: UN-
Habitat). (http://www.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.
aspx?publicationID=2887) 

UN-Habitat (2010c) ‘The Prosperity of Cities. Concept Note 
for State of the World’s Cities Report 2012/13’.  Mimeo 
(Nairobi: UN-Habitat). 

UN-Habitat (2011) Global Report on Human Settlements 
2011. Cities and Climate Change: Policy Directions, 
Abridged edition (Nairobi: UN-HABITAT). (www.unhabitat.
org)

UN-Habitat (2012) Concept note for the Expert Group 
Meeting: Women‘s Economic Empowerment: Critical for 
Prosperous Cities (Nairobi: UN-Habitat).

UN-Habitat/UNECA (2008) The State of African Cities 
2008:  A Framework for Addressing Urban Challenges in 
Africa (Nairobi: UN-HABITAT/UNECA).

United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) (2009) 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing 
as a Component of the Right to an Adequate Standard 
of Living, and on the Right to Non-Discrimination in this 
Context, Raquel Rolnik, 4 February 2009, A/HRC/10/7 
(New York: UNHRC) (http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/
docid/49a54f4a2.html).  

United Nations Research Institute for Social Development 
(UNRISD) (2010a) Combating Poverty and Inequality: 
Structural Change, Social Policy and Politics (Geneva: 
UNRISD)

United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) (2008) 
Demographic Yearbook (United Nations: New York)  (http://
unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/products/dyb/dyb2008.
htm)

UN Women (2011) Progress of the World’s Women 
2011-2012: In Pursuit of Gender Justice (New York: UN 
Women).

United States Department of State Women’s Technology 
Delegation to Liberia and Sierra Leone (USDS) (2011) 
‘West Africa’s Tech Revolution for Women and Girls’, The 
Daily Beast, 8 March. http://www.thedailybeast.com/
articles/2011/03/09/west-africas-tech-revolution-for-
women-and-girls.html.

V

Valenzuela, María Elena (2005) Informality and Gender 
in Latin America,  Working Paper No.60 (Geneva: 
International Labour Office, Policy Integration Department). 

Van Donk, Mirjam (2006) ‘“Positive” Urban Futures in Sub-
Saharan Africa: HIV/AIDS and the Need For ABC (A Broader 
Conceptualisation)’, Environment and Urbanisation, 
18:1,155-75.

84

STATE OF WOMEN IN CITIES 2012-2013STATE OF  

WOMEN IN CITIES  

2012-2013

Gender and the Prosperity of Cities

There are two main standpoints that propagate the benefits of urbanisation.  One is that cities are 
associated with opportunities for wealth generation. Concomitant to this is the idea that urban women 

supposedly enjoy greater social, economic, political opportunities and freedoms than their rural counterparts.  

however, the notable gender gaps in labour and employment, decent work, pay, tenure rights, access to 
and accumulation of assets, personal security and safety and representation in formal structures of urban 

governance, show that women are often the last to benefit from the prosperity of cities.

The State of women in Cities 2012/2013 Report focuses on Gender and the Prosperity of Cities. The 

Report examines the gender dimensions of the defining characteristics of a prosperous city- productivity, 
infrastructure development, quality of life, equity and social inclusion and environmental sustainability. It 

provides a conceptual framework for understanding the relationship between gender and prosperity and also 

reviews policies and institutional framework relevant for mainstreaming gender concerns in cities.

From Banglore, India to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, inequity of economic opportunities and of access to social 
infrastructure, such as water and sanitation, secure housing, health facilities inter alia were observed. 

Drawing from the findings of UN-habitat’s survey of five cities, expert opinions and perceptions of informal 

urban dwellers on issues related to urbanisation and prosperity of women, the Report details policy 

recommendations and actionable steps that can improve quality of life and infrastructure, productivity and 

promote equity in power and rights across various country contexts. 

In sum, the Report advocates that a holistic approach to understanding the gendered nature of urban 

prosperity is required to capture women’s contributions. 

hS/015/13E 
ISBN (Series): 978-92-1-133399-2 
ISBN (Volume): 978-92-1-132553-9

United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) 
P O Box 30030, Nairobi, 00100, Kenya 
Tel: +254 20 762 3120 
Fax: +254 20 762 34266/7 (Central office) 
E-Mail : infohabitat@unhabitat.org

www.unhabitat.org/publications

