T h e   W o r l d   H e a l t h   R e p o r t   2 0 1 3

Research for Universal  
Health Coverage  

WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

The world health report 2013: research for universal health coverage.

1.World health - trends. 2.Universal coverage. 3.Health services accessibility. 4.Research. 5.Insurance, Health.  
I.World Health Organization.

 

 

 

(NLM classification: W 84.6)

 

ISBN 978 92 4 156459 5 
ISBN 978 92 4 069081 3 (ePub)
ISBN 978 92 4 069082 0 (Daisy)
ISBN 978 92 4 069083 7 (PDF)
ISSN 1020-3311

Acknowledgements
Under the aegis of Assistant Directors-General Hiroki Nakatani and Marie-Paule Kieny, the following people wrote and produced this report:

Lead authors

Christopher Dye, Ties Boerma, David Evans, Anthony Harries, Christian Lienhardt, Joanne McManus, Tikki Pang, Robert Terry, Rony Zachariah.

WHO staff in Geneva

Caroline Allsopp, Najeeb Al-Shorbaji, John Beard, Douglas Bettcher, Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum, Andrew Cassels, A’Isha Commar, Luis De 
Francisco Serpa, Carlos Dora, Gerald Dziekan, Christy Feig, Fiona Fleck, Haileyesus Getahun, Abdul Ghaffar, Laragh Gollogly, Andre Griekspoor, 
Sophie Guetaneh Aguettant, Metin Gülmezoglu, Ali Hamandi, Asli Kalin, Ghassan Karam, Edward Kelley, Richard Laing, Melanie Lauckner, Knut 
Lönroth, Mary MacLennan, Clarisse Mason, Elizabeth Mason, Mike Mbizvo, Shanti Mendis, Thierry Mertens, Zafar Mirza, Maria Neira, Ulysses 
Panisset, Kimberly Parker, Michaela Pfeiffer, Kent Ranson, Mario Raviglione, John Reeder, Alex Ross, Cathy Roth, Sarah Russell, Ritu Sadana, 
Abha Saxena, Trish Saywell, Thomas Shakespeare, Isobel Sleeman, Johannes Sommerfeld, Marleen Temmerman, Diana Weil, Karin Weyer.

WHO staff in regional and country offices

Naeema Al-Gasseer, Luis Cuervo Amore, Govin Permanand, Manju Rani, Issa Sanou, Gunawan Setiadi, Claudia Stein, Edouard Tursan d’Espaignet, 
Adik Wibowo.

Members of the Scientific Advisory Panel

Andy Haines (chair), Fred Binka, Somsak Chunharas, Maimunah Hamid, Richard Horton, John Lavis, Hassan Mshinda, Pierre Ongolo-Zogo, 
Silvina Ramos, Francisco Songane.

Other individuals who contributed to or reviewed the content

Claire Allen, Thomas Bombelles, David Bramley, Martin Buxton, Anne Candau, Michael Clarke, Sylvia de Haan, David Durrheim, Toker Ergüder, 
Mahmoud Fathalla, Stephen Hanney, Mark Harrington, Sue Hobbs, Carel IJsselmuiden, Nasreen Jessani, Anatole Krattiger, Gina Lagomarsino, 
Guillermo Lemarchand, David Mabey, Dermot Maher, Cristina Ortiz, Adolfo Martinez Palomo, Charlotte Masiello-Riome, Peter Massey, Martin 
Mckee, Opena Merlita, Amanda Milligan, Peter Ndumbe, Thomson Prentice, Bernd Rechel, Jan Ross, Sabine Schott, Peter Small, Hanna Steinbach, 
Sheri Strite, Yot Teerawattananon, Göran Tomson, Ian Viney, Laetitia Voneche, Shaw Voon Wong, Judith Whitworth, Suwit Wibulpolprasert, 
Catherine Wintrich.

© World Health Organization 2013
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO web site (www.who.int) or can be purchased from 
WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: 
bookorders@who.int). 

Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications –whether for sale or for non-commercial distribution– should be addressed 
to WHO Press through the WHO web site (www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the 
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. 
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World 
Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary 
products are distinguished by initial capital letters.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this publication. However, 
the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation 
and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.  

Printed in Luxembourg

“Universal health coverage is the single most powerful concept 
that public health has to offer”  

Dr Margaret Chan, Address to the Sixty-fifth  
World Health Assembly, May 2012

“Another lesson is the importance of long-term investment in 
the research institutions that generate evidence for policy ...” 

Lancet, 2012, 380:1259,  
on the approach to universal health coverage in Mexico

iii

Message from the Director-General

As  we  approach  the  2015  deadline  for  meeting  the  United  Nations  Millennium 
Development  Goals  (MDGs),  it  is  time  to  take  stock  of  the  progress  that  has  been 
made since 2000. It is also time to reflect on how we made progress, and on how we 
could do better.

All  eight  of  the  MDGs  have  conse-
quences  for  health,  but  three  put  health 
at  front  and  centre  –  they  concern 
child  health  (MDG  4),  maternal  health 
(MDG 5), and the control of HIV/AIDS, 
malaria,  tuberculosis  and  other  major 
communicable  diseases  (MDG  6).  To 
highlight just one of these, MDG 4 calls 
for  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  child 
deaths from 12 million in 1990 to fewer 
than  4  million  by  2015.  Although  great 
strides have been taken since the turn of 
the  millennium,  especially  in  reducing 
deaths after the neonatal period, the best 
measurements indicate that nearly 7 mil-
lion children under five years of age died in 2011. From experience in high-income 
countries, we know that almost all of these deaths can be prevented. But how can that 
be done everywhere?

One idea is to make greater use of community-based interventions. But do they 
work? Experiments in the form of randomized controlled trials provide the most per-
suasive evidence for action in public health. By 2010, 18 such trials in Africa, Asia and 
Europe had shown that the participation of outreach workers, lay health workers, com-
munity midwives, community and village health workers, and trained birth attend-
ants collectively reduced neonatal deaths by an average of 24%, stillbirths by 16% and 
perinatal mortality by 20%. Maternal illness was also reduced by a quarter (1). These 

1.  Lassi ZS, Haider BA, Bhutta ZA. Community-based intervention packages for reducing maternal and 

neonatal morbidity and mortality and improving neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews (Online), 2010,11:CD007754. PMID:21069697

iv

trials clearly do not give all the answers – for instance, the benefits of these interven-
tions in reducing maternal mortality, as distinct from morbidity, are still unclear – but 
they are a powerful argument for involving community health workers in the care of 
mothers and newborn children.

These  rigorous  investigations  have  the  potential  to  benefit  millions  around  the 
world. They confront the challenge presented by just one of the MDGs, but they cap-
ture the general spirit of this report – to promote investigations in which creativity is 
harnessed by the highest-quality science in order to deliver affordable, quality health 
services and better health for everyone. More than that, the process of discovery is a 
source of inspiration and motivation, stirring ambitions to defeat the biggest problems 
in public health. This is the purpose of Research for universal health coverage.

This report is for everyone concerned with understanding how to reach the goal 
of universal health coverage – those who fund the necessary research, those who do 
research and who would like to do research, and those who use the evidence from 
research. It shows how research for health in general underpins research for universal 
health coverage in particular.

Understanding how to make progress towards achieving the MDGs is central to 
this report. But its scope is wider. As the 2015 deadline draws closer, we are looking for 
ways to improve all aspects of health, working within and beyond the MDG framework. 
And we are investigating how better health can contribute to the larger goal of human 
development. In this broad context, I invite you to read Research for universal health 
coverage. I invite you to assess the report’s arguments, review its evidence, and help 
support the research that will bring us closer to the goal of universal health coverage.

Dr Margaret Chan  
Director-General 
World Health Organization

v

Contents

Message from the Director-General  

Executive summary 

1. The role of research for universal health coverage 

Developing the concept of universal health coverage 
Investigating financial risk protection 
Investigating the coverage of health services 
Equity and universal health coverage 
Coverage of health services: quality as well as quantity 
Conclusions: research needed for universal health coverage 

2. The growth of research for universal health coverage 

Creativity everywhere 
Research ascending 
Growing unevenly 
The value of health research 
Conclusions: building on the foundations 

3. How research contributes to universal health coverage 

Case-study 1 

Insecticide-treated mosquito nets to reduce childhood mortality 

Case-study 2 

Antiretroviral therapy to prevent sexual transmission of HIV 

Case-study 3 

Zinc supplements to reduce pneumonia and diarrhoea in young children 

iv

xi

5
6
11
15
19
20
21

31
35
35
42
46
47

57
61

 

63

65

vii

Case-study 4 

Telemedicine to improve the quality of paediatric care 

Case-study 5 

New diagnostics for tuberculosis 

Case-study 6 

The “polypill” to reduce deaths from cardiovascular disease 

Case-study 7 

Combination treatment with sodium stibogluconate (SSG) and paromomycin 
compared to SSG monotherapy for visceral leishmaniasis 

Case-study 8 

Task shifting in the scale-up of interventions to improve child survival 

Case-study 9 

Improving access to emergency obstetric care 

Case-study 10 

Conditional cash transfers to improve the use of health services and  
health outcomes 

Case-study 11 

Insurance in the provision of accessible and affordable health services 

Case-study 12 

Affordable health care in ageing populations 

Conclusions: general lessons drawn from specific examples 

4. Building research systems for universal health coverage 

Setting research priorities 
Strengthening research capacity 

A framework for strengthening capacity 
Creating and retaining a skilled research workforce 
Ensuring transparency and accountability in research funding 
Building research institutions and networks 
Defining and implementing norms and standards 

Ethics and ethical review 
Reporting and sharing research data, tools and materials 
Registering clinical trials 
Using evidence to develop policy, practice and products 

viiiviii

67

69

71

73

75

77

79

81

82

84

95
96
98
99
103
105
107
110
110
110
110
113

Translating evidence into policy and practice 
Monitoring and coordinating research, nationally and internationally 
Financing research for universal health coverage 
National and international governance of health research 
Conclusions: building effective research systems 

5. Action on research for universal health coverage 

Research – essential for universal coverage and a source of inspiration  
for public health 
Defining and measuring progress towards universal health coverage 
The path to universal health coverage, and the path to better health 
Research for universal health coverage in every country 
Supporting the people who do research 
Translating research evidence into health policy and practice 
Supporting research for universal health coverage, nationally  
and internationally 
WHO’s role in research for universal health coverage 

Index 

113
116
117
118
118

129

129
131
132
133
134
135

136
137

139

ix

Executive summary

Three key messages from The world health report

 ■ Universal health coverage, with full access to high-quality services for health promotion, 
prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, palliation and financial risk protection, cannot be 
achieved without evidence from research. Research has the power to address a wide 
range of questions about how we can reach universal coverage, providing answers to 
improve human health, well-being and development.

 ■ All nations should be producers of research as well as consumers. The creativity and 

skills of researchers should be used to strengthen investigations not only in academic 
centres but also in public health programmes, close to the supply of and demand for 
health services.

 ■ Research for universal health coverage requires national and international backing. To 

make the best use of limited resources, systems are needed to develop national research 
agendas, to raise funds, to strengthen research capacity, and to make appropriate and 
effective use of research findings.

Why universal health coverage?

In 2005, all WHO Member States made the commitment to achieve universal 
health coverage. The commitment was a collective expression of the belief that 
all  people  should  have  access  to  the  health  services  they  need  without  risk  of 
financial ruin or impoverishment. Working towards universal health coverage is 
a powerful mechanism for achieving better health and well-being, and for pro-
moting human development.

Chapter 1 explains how the resolution adopted by all WHO Member States 
embraces the two facets of universal health coverage: the provision of, and access 
to, high-quality health services; and financial risk protection for people who need 
to use these services. “Health services” in this report mean methods for promo-
tion,  prevention,  treatment,  rehabilitation  and  palliation,  encompassing  health 
care  in  communities,  health  centres  and  hospitals.  The  term  includes  ways  of 
taking action on social and environmental determinants both within and beyond 
the health sector. Financial risk protection is part of the package of measures that 
provides overall social protection.

xi

Research for universal health coverage

Why research?

Scientific  research  has  been  fundamental  to  the  improvement  of  human  health. 
Research is vital in developing the technology, systems and services needed to achieve 
universal health coverage. On the road to universal coverage, taking a methodical 
approach to formulating and answering questions is not a luxury but a necessity.

When  WHO  Member  States  made  the  pledge  to  achieve  universal  coverage 
they took a significant step forward for public health. As described in Chapter 1, 
taking that step effectively launched an agenda for research. In this report, research 
is the set of formal methods that turns promising ideas into practical solutions for 
improving health services, and consequently for improving health. The goal of the 
report is to identify the research questions that open the way to universal health 
coverage and to discuss how these questions can be answered.

Many recent advances have been made in health service coverage and in finan-
cial risk protection as shown, for example, by progress towards the United Nations 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Despite this progress, the gap between 
the present coverage of health services and universal health coverage remains large 
for many conditions of ill-health in many settings. For instance, nearly half of all 
HIV-infected people eligible for antiretroviral therapy were still not receiving it in 
2011, and an estimated 150 million people suffer financial catastrophe each year 
because  they  have  to  pay  cash  out-of-pocket  for  the  health  care  they  need.  The 
focus of this report is on the research needed to provide wider access to essential 
services of this kind, and how to create the environment in which this research can 
be carried out.

What questions need to be answered by research?

Chapter 1 identifies research questions of two kinds. The causes of ill-health differ 
from one setting to another and so too must the necessary health services, includ-
ing mechanisms for financial risk protection. The first group of questions therefore 
asks  how  to  choose  the  health  services  needed  in  each  setting,  how  to  improve 
service coverage and financial protection, and consequently how to protect and 
improve health and well-being.

These questions throw up a wide range of topics for research. Research is needed 
to find out how to improve the coverage of existing interventions and how to select 
and introduce new ones. Research must explore the development and use of both 
“software” (such as schemes for financial protection and simplified approaches to 
treatment) and “hardware” (research and development for commodities and tech-
nology).  And  research  is  needed  to  investigate  ways  of  improving  health  from 
within and outside the health sector.

The most pressing research questions have been identified for many specific 
health  topics,  such  as  maternal  and  child  health,  communicable  diseases,  and 
health systems and services. Although there are notable exceptions, less effort has 

xii

Executive summary

generally been given worldwide to establishing and publicizing national research 
priorities,  to  assessing  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  national  research  pro-
grammes, and to evaluating the health, social and economic benefits of research.
The second group of questions asks how to measure progress towards univer-
sal coverage in each setting for each population, in terms of the services that are 
needed and the indicators and data that measure the coverage of these services. 
The answer to this group of questions is a measure of the gap between the present 
coverage of services and universal coverage. The challenge for research is to fill 
that gap.

Many specific indicators, targets and data sources are already used to measure 
the coverage of specific health interventions. The metrics used to monitor progress 
towards the MDGs track, for example, access to antiretroviral therapy, births attended 
by skilled health personnel, and immunization coverage. However, the measurement 
of other aspects of coverage needs further development; interventions to prevent and 
control noncommunicable diseases, or to track healthy ageing, are two examples.

It is not usually possible to measure the coverage of the hundreds of interven-
tions and services that make up a national health system. However, it is possible to 
choose a subset of services, with their associated indicators, that are representative 
of the overall quantity, quality, equity and financing of services. Then a practical 
definition  of  universal  health  coverage  is  that  all  persons  who  are  eligible  have 
access to the services they need. To choose the essential health services that should 
be monitored, and a set of indicators to track progress towards universal coverage, 
is a research task for health programmes in each country. Out of these investiga-
tions will emerge a common set of indicators that can be used to measure and 
compare progress towards universal health coverage across all countries.

With its focus on research, the goal of this report is not to measure definitively 
the gap between the present coverage of health services and universal coverage but, 
instead, to identify the questions that arise as we move towards universal coverage 
and to discuss how these questions can be answered.

Should all countries have the capacity to do research?

The  results  of  some  research  studies  are  widely  applicable,  but  many  questions 
about universal health coverage require local answers. All countries therefore need 
to  be  producers  of  research  as  well  as  consumers  of  it.  An  abundance  of  data, 
presented in Chapter 2, shows that most low- and middle-income countries now 
have, at least, the foundations on which to build effective national health research 
systems. Some countries have much more than the foundations; they have thriving 
research communities with a growing number of “south–south” as well as “north–
south” international links. By strengthening these systems, countries will be able 
to capitalize more effectively on the supply of ideas, using formal research methods 
to turn them into useful products and strategies for better health.

xiii

Research for universal health coverage

Which kinds of research studies have shown 
how to improve the coverage of health 
services and how to improve health?

The case for investing in research is made, in part, by demonstrating that scientific 
investigations really do produce results that can be translated into accessible and 
affordable health services that provide benefits for health. Chapter 3 presents 12 
examples of studies that show how research can address some of the major ques-
tions about achieving universal health coverage, and can deliver results that have 
influenced, or could influence, policy and health outcomes.

Three  examples  make  the  point.  In  one,  a  systematic  review  of  survey  data 
from 22 African countries showed how the use of insecticide-treated mosquito nets 
was  associated  with  fewer malaria  infections and lower  mortality  in young chil-
dren. This evidence underlines the value of scaling up and maintaining coverage of 
insecticide-treated nets in malaria-endemic areas. In a second set of experimental 
trials in Ethiopia, Kenya, Sudan and Uganda, a combination of the drugs sodium 
stibogluconate and paromomycin was found to be an effective treatment for visceral 
leishmaniasis. Treatment with the drug combination is shorter than with sodium 
stibogluconate alone and is less likely to lead to drug resistance. On the basis of these 
findings, WHO recommended the drug combination as a first-line treatment for vis-
ceral leishmaniasis in East Africa. A third systematic review of evidence from Brazil, 
Colombia, Honduras, Malawi, Mexico and Nicaragua showed how conditional cash 
transfers – cash payments made in return for using health services – encourage the 
use of these services and lead to better health outcomes.

The successes of these investigations, and the others described in Chapter 3, 
should be a stimulus to invest in further research. Not all investigations will find 
that ideas for improving health services are successful, or that the provision of new 
services actually improves health. In mapping the route to universal coverage, the 
negative results of research studies are just as valuable as the positive ones.

Which research methods are used to answer 
questions about universal health coverage?
The examples described in Chapter 3 expose the diversity of questions about uni-
versal health coverage, and also the variety of research methods used to investigate 
them. Methods include quantitative and qualitative evaluations, observational and 
case-control studies, intervention studies, randomized controlled trials, and sys-
tematic reviews and meta-analyses. The report shows the benefits of having evidence 
from multiple sources, explores the link between experimental design and strength 
of inference, and highlights the compromises in study design (better evidence is 
often more costly, but not always) that must be made by all investigators. The survey 

xiv

of research methods reveals the nature of the research cycle, where questions lead 
to answers that lead to yet more questions. The chapter illustrates some of the ways 
in which research is linked with health policy and practice.

Executive summary

What can be done to strengthen national 
health research systems?
Research is likely to be most productive when it is conducted within a supportive 
national research system. Chapter 4 is an introduction to the essential functions 
of national health research systems, namely: to set research priorities, to develop 
research  capacity,  to  define  norms  and  standards  for  research,  and  to  translate 
evidence into practice.

Standard methods have been developed to set research priorities. These meth-
ods should be used more widely by governments to set national priorities across all 
aspects of health and to determine how best to spend limited funds on research.

With regard to strengthening capacity, effective research needs transparent and 
accountable methods for allocating funds, in addition to well-equipped research 
institutions and networks. However, it is the people who do research – with their 
curiosity, imagination, motivation, technical skills, experience and connections – 
that are most critical to the success of the research enterprise.

Codes of practice, which are the cornerstone of any research system, are already 
in use in many countries. The task ahead is to ensure that such codes of practice are 
comprehensive and apply in all countries, and to encourage adherence everywhere.
Achieving universal health coverage depends on research ranging from studies 
of causation to studies of how health systems function. However, because many 
existing cost-effective interventions are not widely used, there is a particular need 
to close the gap between existing knowledge and action. Areas of research that need 
special attention concern the implementation of new and existing technologies, 
health service operations, and the design of effective health systems. To help bridge 
the gap between science and practice, research should be strengthened not only in 
academic centres but also in public health programmes, close to the supply of and 
demand for health services.

How can research for universal health coverage 
be supported nationally and internationally?
In the wake of many previous reports, Chapter 4 presents three mechanisms to 
stimulate and facilitate research for universal health coverage – monitoring, coor-
dination and financing. Provided there is a commitment to share data, national 
and  global  observatories  could  be  established  to  monitor  research  activities. 
Observatories could serve a variety of functions, acting as repositories of data on 

xv

Research for universal health coverage

the process of doing research and presenting and sharing the findings of research 
studies. Such data would help in tracking progress towards universal health cover-
age, country by country.

Monitoring supports the second function, coordination, on various levels – by 
sharing information, by jointly setting research priorities, or by facilitating col-
laboration on research projects.

Regarding the third function, financing, health research is more effective and 
productive if there is a guaranteed, regular income. Sustained financing guarantees 
that research projects are not interrupted or otherwise compromised by a sudden 
lack  of  resources.  Various  mechanisms  for  raising  and  disbursing  additional 
research funds have been proposed and are under discussion. Whatever mecha-
nism is adopted, international donors and national governments should measure 
progress against their own commitments to investing in health research.

How will WHO support research for 
universal health coverage?
Chapter 5  draws  out  the  dominant  themes  of  the  report,  and  proposes  a  set  of 
actions  by  which  the  research  community,  national  governments,  donors,  civil 
society and international organizations, including WHO, can support the research 
that is needed if we are to reach universal health coverage.

Although the debate about universal health coverage has added to the vocabu-
lary of public health in recent years, “to promote and conduct research in the field 
of health” has always been central to WHO’s goal of achieving “the highest attain-
able standard of health”. Chapter 5 briefly explains how WHO plays a role in both 
doing and supporting research through the Organization’s Strategy on Research 
for Health. This report is closely aligned with the aims of the WHO strategy, which 
encourages the highest-quality research in order to deliver the greatest health ben-
efits to the maximum number of people.

xvi

Chapter 1

The role of research for 
universal health coverage

Chapter 1

Key points

Developing the concept of  
universal health coverage

Investigating financial  
risk protection

Investigating the coverage of  
health services

Equity and universal health coverage

Coverage of health services:  
quality as well as quantity

Conclusions: research needed for  
universal health coverage

4

6

11

15

19

20

21

A field worker interviewing a young child near Bala Kot, Pakistan (WHO).

Key points

 ■ The goal of universal health coverage is to ensure that all people obtain the health 
services they need – prevention, promotion, treatment, rehabilitation and palliation 
– without risk of financial ruin or impoverishment, now and in the future.

 ■ Since 2005, when all WHO Member States made the commitment to universal 

health coverage, many advances have been made in the provision of health services 
and in financial risk protection. This is illustrated by progress towards the health-
related Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and in the widespread fall in cash 
payments made for using health services.

 ■ Despite this progress, the coverage of health services and financial risk protection 
currently fall far short of universal coverage. Thus nearly half of all HIV-infected 
people eligible for antiretroviral therapy were still not receiving it in 2011; and an 
estimated 150 million people suffer financial catastrophe each year because they 
have to pay out-of-pocket for health services.

 ■ The conditions causing ill-health, and the financial capacity to protect people from 
ill-health, vary among countries. Consequently, given limited resources, each nation 
must determine its own priorities for improving health, the services that are needed, 
and the appropriate mechanisms for financial risk protection.

 ■ These observations lead to research questions of two kinds. First, and most 

important, are questions about improving health and well-being – questions that 
help us to define the interventions and services that are needed, including financial 
risk protection, discover how to expand the coverage of these services, including the 
reduction of inequities in coverage, and investigate the effects of improved coverage 
on health. The second set of questions is about measurement – of the indicators 
and data needed to monitor service coverage, financial risk protection, and health 
impact. One task for research is to help define a set of common indicators for 
comparing progress towards universal coverage across all countries.

 ■ Neither of these areas of questioning has permanent answers. Through the cycle of 
research – questions yield answers which provoke yet more questions – there will 
always be new opportunities to improve health. Today’s targets for universal health 
coverage will inevitably be superseded in tomorrow’s world of greater expectations.

1

The role of research for  
universal health coverage

The goal of universal health coverage is to ensure that everyone can use the 
health services they need without risk of financial ruin or impoverishment (1). 
As a descendant of the “Health for All” movement (Box 1.1), universal health 
coverage takes a broad view of the services that are needed for good health and 
well-being. These services range from clinical care for individual patients to 
the public services that protect the health of whole populations. They include 
services that come from both within and beyond the health sector. Financial 
risk protection is one element in the package of measures that provides overall 
social protection (7). And protection against severe financial difficulties in the 
event of illness gives the peace of mind that is an integral part of well-being.

To support the goal of universal health coverage is also to express concern for 
equity and for honouring everyone’s right to health (8). These are personal and moral 
choices regarding the kind of society that people wish to live in, taking universal cov-
erage beyond the technicalities of health financing, public health and clinical care.
With a greater understanding of the scope of universal health coverage, many 
national governments now view progress towards that goal as a guiding principle 
for the development of health systems, and for human development generally. It is 
clear that healthier environments mean healthier people (9). Preventive and curative 
services protect health and protect incomes (10, 11). Healthy children are better able 
to learn, and healthy adults are better able to contribute socially and economically.
The path to universal health coverage has been dubbed “the third global 
health transition”, after the demographic and epidemiological transitions (12). 
Universal coverage is now an ambition for all nations at all stages of develop-
ment. The timetable and priorities for action clearly differ between countries, 
but the higher aim of ensuring that all people can use the health services they 
need without risk of financial hardship is the same everywhere.

5

Research for universal health coverage

Box 1.1. 

From “Health for All” to universal health coverage

Universal health coverage is an aspiration that underpins “the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health” 
which, as stated in WHO’s constitution, is “one of the fundamental rights of every human being without distinction of 
race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition” (2). To reach the highest attainable standard of health is 
an objective that has guided health policy nationally and internationally for 65 years, finding voice in WHO’s “Health 
for All” programme which began in the 1970s and was enshrined in the Alma Ata Declaration of 1978.
The Alma Ata Declaration is best known for promoting primary health care as a means to address the main health 
problems in communities, fostering equitable access to promotive, preventive, curative, palliative and rehabilitative 
health services.
The idea that everyone should have access to the health services they need underpinned a resolution of the 2005 
World Health Assembly, which urged Member States “to plan the transition to universal coverage of their citizens 
so as to contribute to meeting the needs of the population for health care and improving its quality, to reducing 
poverty, and to attaining internationally agreed development goals” (3).
The central role of primary care within health systems was reiterated in The world health report 2008 which was 
devoted to that topic (4). The world health report 2010 on health systems financing built on this heritage by proposing 
that health financing systems – which countries of all income levels constantly seek to modify and adapt – should 
be developed with the specific goal of universal health coverage in mind.
The twin goals of ensuring access to health services, plus financial risk protection, were reaffirmed in 2012 by a 
resolution  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  which  promotes  universal  health  coverage,  including  social 
protection and sustainable financing (5). The 2012 resolution goes even further; it highlights the importance of 
universal health coverage in reaching the MDGs, in alleviating poverty and in achieving sustainable development 
(6). It recognizes, as did the “Health for All” movement and the Alma Ata Declaration, that health depends not only 
on having access to medical services and a means of paying for these services, but also on understanding the links 
between social factors, the environment, natural disasters and health.
This brief history sets the scene for this report. The world health report 2013: research for universal health coverage 
addresses questions about prevention and treatment, about how services can be paid for by individuals and govern-
ments, about their impact on the health of populations and the health of individuals, and about how to improve 
health through interventions both within and beyond the health sector. Although the focus of universal health cover-
age is on interventions whose primary objective is to improve health, interventions in other sectors – agriculture, 
education, finance, industry, housing and others – may bring substantial health benefits.

Developing the concept of 
universal health coverage
The  world  health  report  2010  represented  the 
concept  of  universal  health  coverage  in  three 
dimensions: the health services that are needed, 
the number of people that need them, and the 
costs  to  whoever  must  pay  –  users  and  third-
party funders (Fig. 1.1) (1, 13).

The  health  services  include  approaches  to 
prevention, promotion, treatment, rehabilitation 

and  palliative  care,  and  these  services  must  be 
sufficient to meet health needs, both in quantity 
and in quality. Services must also be prepared for 
the unexpected – environmental disasters, chem-
ical or nuclear accidents, pandemics, and so on.

The  need  for  financial  risk  protection  is 
determined  by  the  proportion  of  costs  that 
individuals  must  themselves  cover  by  making 
direct  and  immediate  cash  payments.a  Under 
universal  coverage,  there  would  be  no  out-of-
pocket payments that exceed a given threshold 

a 

Indirect costs, due for example to lost earnings, are not considered to be part of financial risk protection, but are part of the 
larger goal of social protection.

6

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

Fig. 1.1. 

Measuring progress towards 
universal health coverage in three 
dimensions

Direct costs:

proportion of the 
costs covered

Include
other 
services

Services: 

which services 
are covered?

Reduce cost-sharing 
and fees

Extend to 
non-covered

Current pooled 

funds

Population: who is covered?

Source: World Health Organization (1) and Busse, Schreyögg 
& Gericke (13).

of affordability – usually set at zero for the poor-
est  and  most  disadvantaged  people.  The  total 
volume of the large box in Fig. 1.1 is the cost of 
all  services  for  everyone  at  a  particular  point 
in time (1). The volume of the smaller blue box 
shows the health services and costs that are cov-
ered  from  pre-paid,  pooled  funds.  The  goal  of 
universal coverage is for everyone to obtain the 
services they need at a cost that is affordable to 
themselves and to the nation as a whole.

All  governments  should  therefore  decide 
what  health  services  are  needed,  and  how  to 
make sure they are universally available, afford-
able, efficient, and of good quality (14, 15). The 
services that are needed differ from one setting 
to another because the causes of ill-health also 
vary. The balance of services inevitably changes 
over time, as new technologies and procedures 
emerge as a result of research and innovation, 
following the changes in the causes of ill-health. 
In deciding which services to provide, institu-
tions such as the National Institute for Health 
and  Clinical  Excellence  (NICE)  in  England 
and  Wales  and  the  Health  Intervention  and 
Technology  Assessment  Programme  (HITAP) 

in Thailand (Box 1.2) have a vital role in evalu-
ating  whether  interventions  are  effective  and 
affordable.

In every country, there are people who are 
unable  to  pay  directly,  out-of-pocket,  for  the 
services they need, or who may be seriously dis-
advantaged  by  doing  so.  When  people  on  low 
incomes  with  no  financial  risk  protection  fall 
ill they face a dilemma: if a local health service 
exists,  they  can  decide  to  use  the  service  and 
suffer further impoverishment in paying for it, 
or they can decide not to use the service, remain 
ill and risk being unable to work (20). The general 
solution for achieving wide coverage of financial 
risk protection is through various forms of pre-
payment for services. Prepayments allow funds 
to be pooled so that they can be redistributed to 
reduce financial barriers for those who need to 
use services they could not otherwise afford. This 
spreads  the  financial  risks  of  ill-health  across 
whole populations. Prepayment can be derived 
from  taxation,  other  government  charges  or 
health insurance, and usually comes from a mix-
ture of sources (1).

Financial risk protection of this kind is an 
instrument of social protection applied to health 
(7).  It  works  alongside  other  mechanisms  of 
social protection – unemployment and sickness 
benefits, pensions, child support, housing assis-
tance, job-creation schemes, agricultural insur-
ance and so on – many of which have indirect 
consequences for health.

Governments,  especially  in 

low-income 
countries, cannot usually raise sufficient funds 
by  prepayment  to  eliminate  excess  out-of-
pocket expenditures for all the health services 
that people need (1). It is therefore a challenge 
to  decide  how  best  to  support  health  within 
budgetary  limits.  Fig.  1.1  offers  three  options 
for spending: maximize the proportion of the 
population covered by existing services, diver-
sify  health  services  by  offering  more  types  of 
intervention,  or  use  the  money  for  financial 
compensation, thereby reducing cash payments 
for health care.

7

Research for universal health coverage

Box 1.2. 

How Thailand assesses the costs and benefits of health interventions and 
technologies

In 2001 the Government of Thailand introduced universal health coverage financed from general taxation. Economic 
recession underlined the need for rigorous evaluation of health technologies that would be eligible for funding in 
order to prevent costs from escalating. At the time, no organization had the capacity to carry out the volume of health 
technology assessments (HTAs) demanded by the government. Therefore the Health Intervention and Technology 
Assessment Programme (HITAP, www.hitap.net) was set up to assess the costs, effectiveness and cost–effectiveness 
of health technologies – not only medications and medical procedures but also social interventions, public health 
measures and changes to the health system itself (16, 17).
Unlike the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) in England and Wales, which evaluates existing 
interventions only, HITAP does primary research, including observational studies and randomized controlled trials, 
as well as systematic reviews and meta-analyses based on secondary literature analysis. Its output takes the form of 
formal presentations, discussion with technical and policy forums and academic publications.
One example of HITAP’s work is in devising a screening strategy for cervical cancer which is caused by infection with 
the human papillomavirus (HPV) and is a major cause of morbidity and mortality among Thai women. Despite the intro-
duction of Papanicolaou (Pap) screening at every hospital over 40 years ago, only 5% of women were screened. Visual 
inspection of the cervix with the naked eye after application with acetic acid (VIA) was introduced as an alternative in 
2001 because it did not require cytologists. When HITAP’s study began, both VIA and Pap smears were being offered to 
women in parallel and there was pressure from vaccine companies, international health agencies and nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) to introduce the new HPV vaccine (18).
The options considered by HITAP were conventional Pap screening, VIA, vaccination or a combination of Pap screening 
and VIA. Costs were calculated on the basis of estimated levels of participation and included costs to the health-care 
provider, costs for women attending screening and costs for those who were treated for cervical cancer. Potential 
benefits were analysed by using a model that estimated the number of women who would go on to develop cervical 
cancer in each scenario, and the impact on quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) was calculated by using data from a 
cohort of Thai patients.
The study concluded that the most cost-effective strategy was to offer VIA to women every five years between the 
ages of 30 and 45, followed by a Pap smear every five years for women aged between 50 and 60 years. The strategy 
would offer an additional 0.01 QALYs and a total cost saving of 800 Baht, when compared to doing nothing. Universal 
introduction of vaccination for 15-year-old girls without screening would result in a gain of 0.06 QALYs at a cost of 8000 
Baht, and either VIA and Pap screening alone would have costs and benefits somewhere between the two amounts (19).
The approach recommended by HITAP was piloted in several provinces starting in 2009, and this has now been imple-
mented nationally. The actual impact is currently being assessed.
HITAP attributes its success to several factors:
 ■ the strong research environment in Thailand which, for instance, provides staff for HITAP and supports peer 

review of their recommendations;

 ■ collegiate relationships with similar institutions in other countries, such as NICE in England and Wales;
 ■ working with peers (HITAP meets with other Asian HTA institutions, and has formed an association with Japan, 

Malaysia and the Republic of Korea);

 ■ transparency in research methods, so that difficult or unpopular decisions can be understood;
 ■ a code of conduct (HITAP adheres to a strict code of behaviour which, for instance, precludes acceptance of 

gifts or money from pharmaceutical companies);

 ■ political support from government, fostered by opening doors to, and discussing methods with, 

decision-makers;

 ■ popular support, generated by lectures at universities and dissemination of recommendations to the 

general public;

 ■ external review (HITAP commissioned an external review of its methods and work in 2009).

8

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

Fig. 1.2. 

A representation of the results chain for universal health coverage, focusing  
on the outcomes

Inputs and processes

Health (cid:31)nancing
Health workforce

Medicines, health products 

and infrastructure

Information

Governance and legislation

Outputs

Service access and 
readiness, including 

medicines

Service quality and safety

Service utilization

Financial resources pooled

 Crisis readiness

Outcomes
Coverage of 
interventions

Financial risk 
protection

Risk factor mitigation

Impact

Improved health status

Improved (cid:31)nancial 

well-being

Increased responsiveness
Increased health security

Quantity, quality and equity of services

Social determinants

Note: Each of these outcomes depends on inputs, processes and outputs (to the left), and eventually makes an impact on health 
(to the right). Access to financial risk protection can also be considered an output. All measurements must reflect not only the 
quantity of services, but also quality and equity of access (first cross panel). Equity of coverage is influenced by “social determi-
nants” (second cross panel), so it is vital to measure the spectrum from inputs to impact by income, occupation, disability, etc.

Financial  investments  are  made  in  medi-
cines and other commodities, as well as in infra-
structure, in order to generate the services that 
have an impact on health. Fig. 1.2 is one way to 
portray this chain of events. Consider, for exam-
ple,  the  links  between  tobacco  smoking  and 
health.  The  proportion  of  people  who  smoke 
in  a  population  (outcome),  which  represents 
a risk factor for lung, heart and other diseases 
(impact), is affected by various services and poli-
cies  that  prevent  ill-health  and  promote  good 
health (outputs). Among these services and poli-
cies  are  face-to-face  counselling,  anti-smoking 
campaigns,  bans  on  smoking  in  public  places, 
and taxes on tobacco products. The population 
coverage achieved by these interventions, which 
are  often  used  in  combination,  influences  the 
number of smokers in the population (21).

In fact, the problem of tobacco smoking in 
relation to health goes beyond the results chain 
in  Fig.  1.2.  Smoking,  like  many  other  risk  fac-
tors, tends to be more frequent among those who 
have  had  less  formal  education  and  who  have 

lower  incomes.  When  seeking  health  care  for 
smoking-related illnesses, people educated to a 
higher level are typically more aware of the ser-
vices available and more disposed to use them. 
These  “social  determinants”,  which  influence 
prevention and treatment of illness, are a reason 
for  taking  a  broad  view  of  research  for  health; 
they highlight the value of combining investiga-
tions both within and outside the health sector 
with the aim of achieving policies for “heath in 
all sectors” (Box 1.3 and Chapter 2).

Even  with  an  understanding  of  the  deter-
minants  and  consequences  of  service  coverage, 
the balancing of investments in health services is 
more  than  a  technical  matter.  The  allocation  of 
public money to health also has ethical, moral and 
political implications. Public debate, based on evi-
dence from research, is the mechanism for obtain-
ing  consensus  on,  for  instance,  who  should  be 
entitled to health care paid from the public purse, 
under what conditions, and for what range of ser-
vices.  Decisions  on  these  issues,  which  involve  a 
combination  of  ethical  imperatives  and  political 

9

Research for universal health coverage

Box 1.3.  What do universal health coverage and social protection mean for people affected 

by tuberculosis?

Tuberculosis (TB) is a disease of poverty that drives people deeper into poverty (22). In recognition of this fact, TB 
diagnosis and treatment are free of charge for patients in most countries. The cost of TB treatment, provided as a 
public service, is covered by domestic health-care budgets, often supplemented by international grants or loans 
(23). This helps to reduce the financial barriers to accessing and adhering to treatment. However, free public health 
services are often not entirely free, and patients always face other expenses. Payments are made for medical tests, 
medicines, consultation fees and transport, and there are indirect costs of illness due to lost earnings.
For patients, therefore, the total cost of an episode of TB is often large in relation to their income (24). The aver-
age total cost incurred by TB patients in low- and middle-income countries has been estimated at between 20% 
and 40% of annual family income, and the relative cost is higher in the lower socioeconomic groups (25–32). The 
poorest patients become indebted: 40−70% of them according to three studies carried out in Africa and Asia (26, 
28, 29). A large part of the cost of TB treatment is incurred during the diagnostic phase before treatment starts in 
a subsidized TB programme. Costs are especially high for diagnosis and treatment by private doctors, with whom 
many of the very poorest seek care first (28, 29, 33, 34). Financial costs are commonly compounded by adverse social 
consequences – such as rejection by family and friends, divorce, expulsion from school and loss of employment – 
which affect women in particular (35–37).
The research behind these findings has been essential for documenting the obstacles to the use of health services 
and the financial vulnerability of families affected by TB. It has helped to pinpoint where improved services, health 
insurance coverage and social protection can safeguard against the consequences of potentially fatal and financially 
catastrophic illness (38).
To estimate patients’ costs and identify barriers to access, WHO and partners have developed a toolkit which has 
recently been field-tested in surveys in several countries. The results have begun to inform national policy on social 
protection for people with TB (39, 40). Beyond free diagnosis and treatment, a full package of measures for social 
protection requires the following:
 ■ Universal health care, free of cost, or heavily subsidized. People do not enter the health-care system as TB 
patients eligible for free treatment; they typically enter as patients with a respiratory illness. The journey to 
correct diagnosis and the start of treatment often takes weeks or months. Out-of-pocket expenses need to be 
minimized across the health system (23).

 ■ Specific social or financial risk protection schemes, compensating for the adverse financial or social 
effects of TB. For example, these may include travel vouchers, food packages, or cash transfers, as well as 
psychosocial support.

 ■ Legislation to protect workers, ensuring that people with TB are not expelled from employment due to a 
disease that is normally rendered non-infectious after two weeks of correct treatment, and from which most 
patients fully recover.

 ■ Sickness insurance, compensating income loss during illness.
 ■ Instruments to protect human rights, minimizing stigma and discrimination, with special attention to 

gender, ethnicity and protection of the vulnerable groups that are at particularly high risk of TB.

 ■ Whole-of-government approaches to address social determinants of health, and policies based on 

“heath in all sectors”, taking a broad view of the drivers of TB epidemics (Chapter 2). Poverty-reduction strate-
gies and financial safety nets help prevent TB on many levels. Most important for TB prevention are good 
living and working conditions and good nutrition. Basic education supports universal health coverage by 
enabling healthy lifestyle choices and informing health-care decisions.

continues ...

10

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

... continued

None of the above is specific to TB, but TB control programmes are among those affected by the presence or absence 
of health services and mechanisms for social protection. While disease-specific solutions can help partly and tempo-
rarily, universal health coverage, including social protection, is vital for sustained and effective TB control. Disease 
control programmes need to ensure that the patients they serve are eligible for, and actually receive, support from 
the general health services and not only from TB control programmes.
TB has close links with poverty and social vulnerability, and is one of the conditions that can function as a tracer for 
universal coverage. However, national TB control programmes need to add measures of financial risk protection to 
existing indicators of service coverage. Among the measurable indicators are the following:
Outcome
 ■ For coverage of health services: TB diagnosis and treatment coverage (percentage of TB cases receiving 

proper care, and percentage successfully treated; see Fig. 1.5) and equity in coverage.

 ■ For financial risk protection: Access to financial risk protection schemes (percentage of patients using exist-

ing schemes) and equity of access.

Impact
 ■ For financial risk protection: Cost of TB illness to patients (percentage with catastrophic expenditure, data 

from surveys, using the tool to estimate patients’ costs).

 ■ Combined for universal coverage, financial risk protection and addressing social determinants: TB 
incidence, prevalence and death rates (from programme surveillance data, vital registration and population-
based surveys).

possibilities,  place  constraints  on  the  analysis  of 
how  to  maximize  health  impact  for  the  money 
spent.

In  summary,  the  first  challenge  in  moving 
towards universal health coverage is to define the 
services and supporting policies needed in any 
setting, including financial risk protection, the 
population that needs to use these services, and 
the cost. This requires an understanding of the 
causes  of  ill-health,  the  possible  interventions, 
who currently has access to these services and 
who does not, and the extent of financial hard-
ship  incurred  by  paying  out-of-pocket.  Acting 
on  behalf  of  their  populations,  governments 
must  decide  how  to  move  closer  to  universal 
coverage  with  limited  financial  resources.  The 
second challenge is to measure progress towards 
universal  coverage,  using  valid  indicators  and 

appropriate data. The two challenges go together, 
and  research  provides  the  evidence  to  address 
them both.

To  highlight  the  role  of  research,  the  con-
cepts  of  financial  risk  protection  and  health 
service  coverage  are  expanded  below,  and  the 
strengths and weaknesses of methods for track-
ing progress in each area are considered.

Investigating financial 
risk protection
It  is  significant  that,  at  a  time  of  widespread 
economic austerity, even high-income countries 
are  struggling  to  maintain  current  health  ser-
vices and to make sure that everyone can afford 
to  use  them  (41,  42).  The  question  of  how  to 

11

Research for universal health coverage

provide and maintain financial risk protection 
is relevant everywhere.

Access  to  financial  risk  protection  could 
be expressed as the number of people enrolled 
in  some  type  of  insurance  scheme  or  covered 
by a tax-funded health service free at the point 
of use (43). In fact, financial risk protection is 
often  more  accurately  judged  by  the  adverse 
consequences for people who are not protected 
(Box  1.4).  As  an  example,  survey  data  for  92 
countries  (inhabited  by  89%  of  the  world’s 
population) show that the annual incidence of 
catastrophic health expenditure is close to zero 
in countries with well-established social protec-
tion systems, but up to 11% in countries without 
such systems. In 37 of the 92 countries surveyed, 
the  annual  incidence  of  financial  catastrophe 
exceeded 2%, and in 15 it was above 4%.

An indirect measure of (the lack of) finan-
cial risk protection is the ratio of out-of-pocket 
payments  to  total  health  expenditure  (table  in 
Box 1.4; Fig. 1.3). In 63 countries, most of them 
low-income countries where many people need 
financial risk protection, more than 40% of all 
health expenditure took the form of direct out-of-
pocket payments. At the other end of the scale, in 
62 countries less than 20% of health expenditure 
was out-of-pocket. Although the majority of the 
62 are high-income countries, among them are 
Algeria,  Bhutan,  Cuba,  Lesotho  and  Thailand. 
The governments of these countries have shown 
how,  despite  low  average  incomes,  the  poorest 
people  can  be  protected  from  having  to  make 
disastrously large cash payments for health.

These surveys are also being used to track the 
progress being made in financial risk protection 
over time. Between 2005 and 2010 the proportion 
of health spending made through out-of-pocket 
payments fell, on average, in all but one WHO 
region (46). The exception was Africa, where the 
level  remained  stable.  Twenty-three  countries 
across all regions and income levels achieved a 
reduction  of  at  least  25%  in  the  proportion  of 

12

health  spending  made  through  out-of-pocket 
payments.  Nevertheless,  an  estimated  150  mil-
lion  people  suffered  financial  catastrophe  in 
2010, and 100 million people were pushed below 
the poverty line (poverty is defined in Box 1.4) 
because they had to pay out-of-pocket for health 
care (46). 

These conclusions derive from two different 
ways of expressing financial risk protection; one 
uses a direct measure from primary survey data, 
the other uses an indirect measure derived from 
two different sets of surveys. Although the indi-
cators differ, the results are similar. The data sug-
gest, as a rule of thumb, that when out-of-pocket 
payments fall to or below 15–20% of total health 
expenditure, the incidence of financial catastro-
phe will be negligible (47, 48).

While  these  surveys  give  useful  insights 
into financial risk protection, they raise further 
questions about the different ideas that underpin 
financial risk protection, and about the sources of 
data and methods of measurement. For instance, 
should the incidence of catastrophic expenditure 
and  impoverishment  be  given  equal  weight  in 
describing the extent of financial risk protection 
in a country? Is it better to improve financial risk 
protection on average, or to set a minimum level 
of protection for everyone? How does financial 
risk protection reflect the broader goal of social 
protection? What targets or milestones should be 
set for measures of financial risk protection until 
universal coverage is fully achieved? Which con-
ditions  of  ill-health,  perhaps  with  costly  treat-
ments, tend to fall outside national financial risk 
protection  mechanisms  and  therefore  result  in 
financial  impoverishment  for  households?  Do 
any of these measures capture the value associ-
ated  with  peace-of-mind  –  the  assurance  that 
is  conferred  by  accessible,  affordable,  and  reli-
able health services? These are topics for further 
research, and in some cases public debate, on the 
mechanisms of financial risk protection, and on 
the methods of measurement.

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

Box 1.4.  Measuring financial risk protection

The measurement of financial risk protection should ideally capture the number of people enrolled in some kind of 
health insurance scheme and the number of people who are eligible to use – and able to afford – health services 
provided by government, private sector or civil society.

Direct and indirect indicators of financial risk protection

Direct indicators
Incidence of catastrophic health 
expenditure due to out-of-pocket 
payments

Mean positive overshoot of  
catastrophic payments

Incidence of impoverishment due to 
out-of-pocket payments

Poverty gap due to out-of-pocket 
payments
Indirect indicators
Out-of-pocket payments as a share of 
total health expenditure
Government health expenditure as a 
share of GDP

Explanation

The number of people or the proportion of the population at all income levels 
who spend a disproportionate share of their incomes on out-of-pocket pay-
ments each year. Financial catastrophe is defined as out-of-pocket expenditure 
exceeding 40% of household income net of subsistence needs.
Shows the average amount by which households affected by catastrophic 
expenditures pay more than the threshold used to define catastrophic health 
spending.
The number of people or proportion of the population pushed below the pov-
erty line because of out-of-pocket payments. The poverty line is crossed when 
daily income falls below a locally-defined threshold, typically around US$1–2 per 
day. For people who are living near the poverty threshold, even small payments 
push them below the threshold.
The extent to which out-of-pocket health payments worsen a households’ 
pre-existing level of poverty.

There is a high correlation between this indicator and the incidence of financial 
catastrophe.
This recognizes that in all countries the poor need to be covered by financial risk 
protection from general government revenues; they are rarely all covered when 
this proportion is less than 5%.

  

GDP, gross domestic product; US$, United States dollars.

There are, however, some difficulties in determining who is actually financially protected and to what extent, as two 
examples will make clear. First, health insurance as such does not guarantee full financial risk protection. Many forms 
of insurance cover only a minimum set of services, so that those insured are still required to make out-of-pocket 
payments of different types, including informal cash payments (1). Second, government-financed services may be 
inadequate. For instance, they may not be available close to where they are needed, there may be too few health 
workers or no medicines, or the services may be perceived to be unsafe. In India, for example, everyone is eligible 
to use government health services, but direct out-of-pocket payments are still among the highest in the world (44).
By contrast, it is more straightforward, and often more precise, to measure the consequences for people who do 
not have financial risk protection. The table above describes four direct indicators and two indirect indicators of 
protection which can be measured by household expenditure surveys that include spending on health, as illustrated 
in the main text. The techniques used to measure these indicators are well established as a result of investment in 
relevant research, and the survey data are readily available (45). To assess inequalities in financial risk protection, these 
indicators can also be measured for different population groups, and can be stratified by income (or expenditure or 
wealth), place of residence, migrant status and so on.
Annual updates on the data and indicators that measure financial risk protection for all countries are reported in 
WHO’s Global Health Expenditure Database (44).

13

Research for universal health coverage

3
1
0
2

 
,

 

h
t
l
a
e
h
n
o
e
r
u
t
i

 

 

d
n
e
p
x
e
 
l
a
t
o
t
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
a
s
a
h
t
l
a
e
h
n
o
s
e
r
u
t
i

 

 

 

 

 

d
n
e
p
x
e
 
t
e
k
c
o
p
-
f
o
-
t
u
O

 
.

3
1

.

 
.

g
i
F

14

 
.

 

 

3
1
0
2
y
r
a
u
r
b
e
F
a
t
a
d
O
H
W
n
o
d
e
s
a
B

 

 

 

 
:

e
t
o
N

 
 

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

Investigating the coverage 
of health services
The evolution of thinking on universal health cov-
erage has also led to a greater understanding of the 
functions that health systems should serve. These 
functions should be concerned with prevention as 
well as treatment. They should assure: (i) access to 
essential medicines and health products; (ii) moti-
vated and skilled health workers who are accessible to 
the people they serve; (iii) integrated, high-quality, 
patient-centred services at all levels from primary 
to tertiary care; (iv) a combination of priority pro-
grammes for health promotion and disease control, 
including methods for prevention and treatment, 

which are integrated into health systems; (v) infor-
mation systems that produce timely and accurate 
data for decision-making; and (vi) health financ-
ing systems that raise sufficient funds for health, 
provide financial risk protection, and ensure that 
funds are used equitably and efficiently.

In  outlining  the  concept  of  universal  cov-
erage,  Fig.  1.1  depicts  health  services  along  a 
single axis. In reality, there is a diversity of ser-
vices delivered on several levels, depending on 
the nature of the health condition and the type 
of  intervention.  The  elements  of  each  row  in 
Fig. 1.4 are the services that are deemed neces-
sary. Preventive services (e.g. vaccines) and cura-
tive services (e.g. drug treatments) must address 

Fig. 1.4. 

A framework for measuring and monitoring the coverage of health services

Priority health 

conditions

MNCH

HIV/TB/malaria

NCDs and 
risk factors

Injuries

Levels of health system/service delivery

Non-

personal

Community-

based

Primary
 (facility)

Secondary
(hospital)

Tertiary
(hospital)

Indicators of 

service coverage, 

including 
promotion, 

prevention and 

treatment

Health system inputs

Outputs: availability, readiness, quality, utilization

HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; MNCH, maternal, newborn and child health; NCDs, noncommunicable diseases; TB, 
tuberculosis.
Note: “Non-personal” health services are actions applied either to communities or populations – such as mass health educa-
tion, policy development or taxation – or to the nonhuman components of the environment – such as environmental health 
measures. Community-based health services are defined as individual and community health actions delivered in the commu-
nity (e.g. by community health workers) and not through health facilities. They are often considered to be part of the primary 
health care service.

15

Research for universal health coverage

the principal causes of ill-health now and in the 
future (e.g. the causes addressed by MDGs 4–6, 
and  noncommunicable  diseases  in  low-income 
countries). The columns in Fig. 1.4 represent the 
various levels on which services are delivered: in 
the community, to individuals at primary care 
centres  or  at  secondary  or  tertiary  hospitals, 
and to whole populations (nonpersonal) (49). As 
illustrated by its position in Fig. 1.4, a strong pri-
mary care system is central to an effective health 
system  (4).  “Nonpersonal”  services  are  actions 
applied either to communities or to populations; 
broadly,  they  are  educational,  environmental, 
public health and policy measures in a range of 
sectors that influence health.

The MDGs have been a powerful force both 
for  better  health  and  for  measuring  progress 
towards  better  health  with  precisely-defined 
indicators, data collected in standard ways, and 
with internationally-agreed targets (46, 50). As 
an illustration, Fig. 1.5 shows some examples of 
progress towards MDG 6 (i.e. “to combat HIV/
AIDS, malaria and other diseases”). For HIV/
AIDS, “universal access” to antiretroviral ther-
apy is currently defined as treatment of at least 
80% of the eligible population. By 2010, 47% of 
eligible people were receiving treatment. Thus 
the target was missed globally, but national data 
show that it was reached in 10 countries, includ-
ing  some  countries  with  a  high  prevalence  of 
HIV, such as Botswana, Namibia and Rwanda.
MDG  7  is  concerned  with  environmental 
sustainability.  As  a  contribution  to  universal 
coverage, it includes the target to reduce by half, 
between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people 
without access to safe drinking-water and basic 
sanitation.  Notwithstanding  some  methodo-
logical  limitations  in  measurement,  more  than 
two  billion  people  gained  access  to  improved 
drinking-water sources between 1990 and 2010, 
including piped supplies and protected wells. The 
MDG target was met by 2010, although access to 
improved water supplies was generally lower in 
rural areas than in urban ones (50, 55).

16

These  investigations  of  progress  towards 
the MDGs show, for selected interventions, how 
far we are from universal coverage. Ideally, we 
should measure the coverage of all the interven-
tions  that  make  up  health  services,  but  that  is 
not usually possible even in high-income coun-
tries. In Mexico, for example, 472 interventions 
were covered by five separate health protection 
mechanisms  in  2012,  mainly  under  the  health 
insurance programme known as Seguro Popular 
(Chapter  3,  case-study  11)  (43).  It  is  feasible, 
however,  to  take  a  selection  of  interventions 
and indicators, and use them as “tracers” of the 
overall progress towards universal coverage. The 
interventions  selected  should  be  accessible  to 
everyone who is eligible to receive them under 
universal health coverage in any setting.

Whether the tracers actually represent access 
to all health services needs to be evaluated, and 
this is a task for research. Nevertheless, to illus-
trate the idea, Box 1.5 shows how tracers of the 
coverage of maternal and child health services, 
combined  with  measures  of  financial  risk  pro-
tection, give an overview of service coverage in 
the Philippines and Ukraine. The two countries 
are similar with respect to the coverage of health 
services. The differences are in the incidence of 
catastrophic health expenditure and of poverty 
due to out-of-pocket payments.

An important function of this kind of anal-
ysis  is  to  stimulate  national  policy  dialogues 
about why the coverage of certain interventions 
is insufficient. For instance, in the comparison 
in  Box  1.5,  would  the  addition  of  other  inter-
ventions  tell  a  different  story  about  progress 
towards universal coverage? Do the indicators of 
catastrophic expenditure and poverty represent 
aspects  of  financial  risk  protection  that  differ 
between the two countries? And there is always 
the question: “Are the underlying data accurate?”
The coverage of services depends on how those 
services are provided. The inputs can be investi-
gated in addition to, or as a proxy for, direct meas-
ures  of  coverage  (Fig.  1.2).  For  instance,  WHO 

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

Fig. 1.5. 

Towards universal health coverage: examples of the growing coverage of 
interventions for the control of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical 
diseases

ACT, artemisinin-based combination therapies; AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; ART, antiretroviral therapy; HIV, 
human immunodeficiency virus; ITN, insecticide-treated bed nets; PMTCT, prevention of mother-to-child transmission.
Note: Between 2003 and 2008, the denominator for ART coverage was all HIV-infected people with CD4 cell counts of ≤ 200 
cells/μL, but in 2009 and 2010 the denominator was all people with ≤ 350 CD4 cells/μL. Hence the apparent fall in coverage 
between 2008 and 2009. 
For PMTCT with ART, the numerator in 2010 excludes treatment with single-dose nevirapine. 
For malaria, data on household coverage with ITN and on suspected cases tested are for the WHO African Region. Data on ACT 
are for the whole world. 
The interpretation of universal coverage is 100% coverage for all interventions, except for interim targets of ≥ 80% coverage for ART, 
≥ 90% for the percentage of tuberculosis patients cured, and variable coverage targets for neglected tropical diseases (23, 51–53). 
Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Dye et al. (54).

17

Research for universal health coverage

Box 1.5.  Measuring the coverage of health services

It is not usually possible to measure all aspects of service coverage even in high-income countries, but it is feasible 
to define a set of “tracer” conditions, with associated indicators and targets for interventions, to track progress 
towards universal coverage. The choice of tracer conditions and the associated indicators and data, and the work to 
demonstrate that these measures are representative and robust, are topics for further research (56).

Using tracers to track progress towards universal coverage in the Philippines and Ukraine

Philippines 

Incidence of catastrophic health expenditure  

Ukraine

Incidence of catastrophic health expenditure  

100 

80 

60 

40 

20 

0 

DTP3 

immunization 

Births 

attended by 
skilled health 
personnel  

Antenatal care (4 visits) 

DTP3, diphtheria–tetanus–pertussis.

Poverty incidence 

due to 

out-of-pocket 

payments 

Normalized 
poverty gap 

due to

out-of-pocket 
payments  

100 

80 

60 

40 

20 

0 

DTP3 

immunization 

Births 

attended by 
skilled health 
personnel  

Antenatal care (4 visits) 

Poverty incidence 

due to 

out-of-pocket 

payments 

Normalized 
poverty gap 

due to

out-of-pocket 
payments  

As an example, three tracers of the coverage of maternal and child health services, together with three measures of 
financial risk protection, give an overview of service coverage in the Philippines and Ukraine (see figure). The three 
service coverage indicators are: skilled birth attendants during delivery, three-dose diphtheria–tetanus–pertussis 
(DTP3) immunization and four antenatal visits (%). The three indicators of financial risk protection are: incidence 
of financial catastrophe due to direct out-of-pocket payments, incidence of impoverishment due to out-of-pocket 
payments, and the widening of the poverty gap due to out-of-pocket payments. For impoverishment, the worst 
possible outcome was estimated to be 5%, which is higher than measured impoverishment due to out-of-pocket 
payments in any country. In the figure, 100% service coverage and financial risk protection lie at the outer edge 
of the radar diagram, so a fully-filled polygon represents universal coverage. However, financial risk protection is 
measured as the consequences of its absence (Box 1.3), so the percentage scale is reversed for these three indicators.
With respect to the coverage of health services, the Philippines and Ukraine are similar. The differences are in the 
incidence of catastrophic health expenditure (higher in the Philippines) and the incidence of poverty due to out-of-
pocket payments (higher in Ukraine). These observations, based on this particular set of indicators, raise questions 
about how to make further progress towards universal coverage (see main text).
These six tracers could be supplemented with others. For instance, standard indicators of progress exist for HIV/
AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and some noncommunicable conditions (Fig. 1.5) (57). As more indicators are added, the 
polygon in the figure approaches a circle. Ideally, all indicators would be disaggregated by wealth quintile, place of 
residence, disability and gender, and by other important characteristics of population groups.

18

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

Fig. 1.6. 

Availability of selected generic medicines in public and private health facilities during 
the period 2007–2011

)

%

(
 
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
 
s
e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
h
t
i

 

w
 
s
e
i
t
i
l
i
c
a
f
 
h
t
a
e
H

100

80

60

40

20

0

87.1

50.1

21.2

90.7

67.0

22.2

Public sector

8

Private sector

10

Low-income and lower-middle-income countries

96.7

44.4

96.7

71.1

44.4

68.5

51.8

0
Public sector

Private sector

7
Upper-middle-income countries

7

Mean 
 

Maximum 

Minimum

Average in the private sector 

Average in the public sector

Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from United Nations (58).

compiles data from surveys of the availability and 
price of essential medicines (Fig. 1.6) (58). Surveys 
carried out between 2007 and 2011 found that 14 
generic essential medicines were available on aver-
age in 52% of public health facilities and in 69% of 
private health facilities. The averages differed little 
between 
lower-middle-income  countries  and 
upper-middle-income  countries,  and  there  were 
large variations among countries within each cat-
egory.  Among  upper-middle-income  countries, 
the availability of the 14 generic medicines varied 
from zero in the State of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, 
to 97% in the Islamic Republic of Iran.

One advantage of monitoring essential medi-
cines as one way of tracking service coverage is that 

comparable  data  are  increasingly  available,  and 
the quality of these data, collected through regular 
health facility assessments, is also improving. More 
than 130 countries had an essential medicines list 
by 2007, and 81% of the low-income countries had 
updated their lists in the previous five years.

Equity and universal 
health coverage
Systems  for  monitoring  the  coverage  of  services 
should record not only the total number of people 
who have or do not have access, but also some soci-
odemographic details about them. When coverage 

19

Research for universal health coverage

is  truly  universal  everyone  has  access,  but  partial 
coverage may benefit certain groups over others. To 
monitor equity in the supply of, and demand for, 
health services, indicators should be disaggregated 
by income or wealth, sex, age, disability, place of 
residence (e.g. rural/urban, province or district), 
migrant status and ethnic origin (e.g. indigenous 
groups). For instance, gains in access to safe drink-
ing-water have been uneven: 19% of people living 
in rural areas did not have improved water sources 
by 2010, in contrast with only 4% in urban areas 
(50). This analysis shows where to target further 
efforts to improve coverage.

Another example of the uneven distribution 
of  services  –  for  maternal,  newborn  and  child 
health  –  is  portrayed  in  Fig.  1.7.  The  summary 
measure of service coverage includes family plan-
ning, maternal and newborn care, childhood vac-
cination, and treatment of childhood illness. The 
mean  coverage  in  46  low-  and  middle-income 
countries varied by wealth quintile as expected, 
but  there  was  also  great  variation  within  each 
quintile.  To  achieve  universal  health  coverage, 
it is necessary to eliminate the gap between the 
poorest  and  richest  both  within  and  between 
quintiles, and to raise the levels in all quintiles. 
As  a  general  rule,  the  countries  that  make  the 
greatest progress in maternal and child health are 
those that successfully narrow the gap between 
the poorest and richest quintiles (59, 60). This is a 
form of “progressive universalism” in which the 
poorest individuals gain at least as much as the 
richest on the way to universal coverage (61).

Coverage of health services: 
quality as well as quantity
It is not just the quantity of health services pro-
vided that is important, but also the quality of 
them.  Following  a  long  tradition  of  research 
on  the  quality  of  care,  the  Organisation  for 
Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD) has developed measures of quality for 
selected  interventions:  for  cancer  and  mental 

20

Fig. 1.7. 

A summary measure of service 
coverage for maternal and 
child health, in which inequity 
is reflected in the differences 
between wealth quintiles

)

 

%
x
e
d
n

i
 
e
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c
(
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
 
e
c
i
v
r
e
s
 
h
t
l
a
e
H

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

77%

70%

63%

58%

49%

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5

Wealth quintile (Q1 = poorest, Q5 = richest)

Median

Interquartile range

Source: Demographic and Health Surveys or Multiple Indicator 
Cluster Surveys in 46 low- and middle-income countries. 

health, for aspects of prevention and health pro-
motion, and for patient safety and patient experi-
ences (15, 62–64).

Fig. 1.8 illustrates one aspect of the quality 
of care, namely the risk of death in hospital fol-
lowing  ischaemic  stroke.  The  risk  is  measured 
as the proportion of people who die within 30 
days of admission (Fig. 1.8) (65). As with many 
measures of quantity, national statistics on the 
quality of care are often not precisely compara-
ble.  In  this  instance,  case-fatality  rates  should 
ideally  be  based  on  individual  patients,  but 
some national databases do not track patients in 
and out of hospitals, between hospitals or even 
within  the  same  hospital,  because  they  do  not 

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

Fig. 1.8. 

Case-fatality rates following 
ischaemic stroke during the 30 
days after admission to hospitals 
in OECD countries for which there 
are data

EU16 countries
Denmark
Finland
Austria
Italy
Sweden
Germany
Luxembourg
Unweighted average
Netherlands
Czech Republic
Spain
Ireland
Portugal
United Kingdom of
Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
Slovakia
Belgium
Slovenia
Non-EU
Norway
Iceland
Switzerland

0

 
 
 

  4.6

  2.6

  5.8

  6.3

  2.8
  3.1

  3.4

  3.9
  4.0

  7.3

  8.4
  8.0

  8.3

  4.5

  9.6

  8.6

  5.4
  5.7
  5.8

  6.1

  6.1

  6.2

  6.8

  10.3

  11.0

  10.2

  11.1

  12.9

  10.7

  7.1

  8.6

  9.7

  15.3

  15.3

  6.5

  8.0

  8.2

  2.8

  2.8

  4.3

10

5
Rates per 100 patients

15

20

Crude rates
Age and sex standardized rates
95% conﬁdence interval

EU, European Union.
Note: Rates are standardized by age and sex to the entire 
2005 OECD population aged ≥ 45 years.
Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  
Development (65).

use unique patient identifiers. The data in Fig. 1.8 
are therefore based on single hospital admissions 
and are restricted to mortality within the same 
hospital. There are big differences in case-fatality 
rates  between  countries,  but  some  of  the  vari-
ation  might  be  explained  by  local  practices  of 
discharging patients from hospitals, and trans-
ferring patients to other hospitals. To select and 
agree on internationally comparable indicators 
of quality is another task for research.

Conclusions: research needed 
for universal health coverage
When all WHO Member States made a commit-
ment to achieving universal health coverage in 
2005 they took a major step forward for public 
health. Taking that step launched an agenda for 
research. We do not yet know how to ensure that 
everyone has access to all the health services they 
need in all settings, and there are many gaps in 
understanding the links between service cover-
age and health (66, 67). Research is the means of 
filling these gaps.

With  a  focus  on  research,  the  goal  of  this 
report  is  not  to  measure  definitively  the  gap 
between the present coverage of health services 
and universal coverage, but rather to identify the 
questions that arise as we try to achieve universal 
coverage and to discuss how these questions can 
be answered in order to accelerate progress.

In  this  chapter  research  questions  of  two 
kinds  have  been  identified.  The  first  and  most 
important set of questions is about choosing the 
health services needed, improving the coverage 
of those services and of financial risk protection, 
and assessing the way in which greater coverage 
of both leads to better health and well-being. The 
second set of questions concerns measurement 
of  the  indicators  and  data  that  are  needed  to 
monitor coverage, financial risk protection, and 
the benefits for health.

The  health  services  that  are  necessary  and 
the people who need them should be defined with 

21

Research for universal health coverage

respect to the causes of ill-health, the technolo-
gies  and  instruments  for  intervention,  and  the 
cost. The services required vary from one setting 
to another, as does the capacity to pay for them. 
The function of research is to investigate whether 
schemes devised to achieve universal health cov-
erage really succeed in their aims. At present the 
evidence on this issue is mixed. A comparative 
study  of  22  low-  and  middle-income  countries 
found  that  interventions  to  support  universal 
health coverage usually improve access to health 
care. The study also found, less convincingly, that 
such interventions can have a positive effect on 
financial risk protection and, in some instances, 
a positive impact on health (68). Another conclu-
sion of the review was that the effects of inter-
ventions varied according to the context, design 
and  process  of  implementation.  Such  variation 
is illustrated further in Chapter 3 of this report.
The  second  set  of  questions  about  meas-
urement  is  instrumental  to  answering  the  first 
set.  Just  as  the  necessary  health  services  vary 
between settings, so too must the combination 
of indicators for measuring the coverage of ser-
vices. Because it is not possible to measure the 
coverage  of  all  services,  a  set  of  tracer  inter-
ventions  can  be  selected,  with  their  associated 
indicators, to represent the overall quantity and 
quality of health services. The tracer conditions 
could  be  selected  to  exemplify  major  types  of 
diseases or health problems such as acute infec-
tions, chronic infections and noncommunicable 
diseases.  Universal  coverage  is  achieved  when 
each intervention is accessible to all who need it, 
and when it has the intended effects. Although 
every country has its own priorities for improv-
ing health, it would be possible, in principle, to 
choose a set of common indicators for compar-
ing progress towards universal coverage across 
all countries. To define such a set of indicators is 
another task for research.

There  are  already  numerous  indicators  of 
health-service coverage that have been standard-
ized and validated, and they are widely used. The 
techniques  for  measurement  have  been  greatly 

22

enhanced  by  tracking  progress  towards  the 
MDGs,  especially  in  low-  and  middle-income 
countries (50). However, beyond the MDGs there 
is less experience in monitoring prevention and 
control in other areas of health, such as noncom-
municable  diseases,  ageing,  and  rehabilitation 
and palliative care (57). Similarly, while there are 
some standard indicators of the quality of health 
services, of equity of access, and of financial risk 
protection, there is much scope for refining the 
methods of data collection and measurement.

Universal health coverage is seen as a means 
of both improving health and promoting human 
development.  This  puts  research  for  universal 
coverage  in  the  wider  context  of  research  for 
development. Research will play a role not only 
in  meeting  the  MDGs  but  also  in  supporting 
the  post-2015  development  agenda.  For  exam-
ple,  more  research  is  needed  to  improve  the 
resilience  of  health  systems  to  environmental 
threats such as those posed by climate change. 
An additional and complementary challenge to 
that of increasing universal health coverage is to 
develop research that can enhance understand-
ing  of  how  intersectoral  policies  can  improve 
health and advance development.

Because  many  more  questions  can  be 
asked  than  answered,  it  is  vital  to  set  pri-
orities 
investigation.  Research  needs 
researchers with skill and integrity, who are 
funded to work in well-equipped institutions. 
Further,  to  make  sure  that  research  delivers 
results  that  lead  to  improvements  in  health, 
mechanisms are needed to translate evidence 
into action.

for 

These  elements  of  a  successful  research 
system  are  described  more  fully  in  Chapter  4. 
Before  that,  Chapter  2  highlights  some  of  the 
recent  developments  in  research  for  health 
worldwide; these provide the basis on which to 
build better research systems. Chapter 3 shows, 
by  example,  how  research  can  address  a  wide 
range  of  questions  about  universal  health  cov-
erage and how it can provide answers to guide 
health policy and practice.  ■

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

References
1. 
2. 
3. 

The world health report 2010. Health systems financing: the path to universal coverage. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010.
Constitution of the World Health Organization. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.
Resolution WHA58.33. Sustainable health financing, universal coverage and social health insurance. In: Fifty-eighth World 
Health Assembly, Geneva, 16−25 May 2005. Volume 1. Resolutions and decisions. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005 
(Document WHA58/2005/REC/1).
The world health report 2008 − primary health care, now more than ever. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008. 

4. 
5.  United Nations General Assembly Resolution A/RES/67/81. Global health and foreign policy. Sixty-seventh session. Agenda 

6. 

item 123, 2012.
Evans DB, Marten R, Etienne C. Universal health coverage is a development issue. Lancet, 2012,380:864-865.  doi: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61483-4 PMID:22959373

7.  World social security report 2010/11. Providing coverage in times of crisis and beyond. Geneva, International Labour Office, 2010.
Chan M. Address at the Conference of Ministers of Finance and Health. Achieving value for money and accountability for health 
8. 
outcomes, Tunis, 4 July 2012. (http://www.who.int/dg/speeches/2012/tunis_20120704, accessed 7 March 2013). 
9.  Haines A et al. From the Earth Summit to Rio+20: integration of health and sustainable development. Lancet, 

2012,379:2189-2197. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60779-X PMID:22682465

10.  Foster A. Poverty and illness in low-income rural areas. The American Economic Review, 1994,84:216-220.
11.  Bloom DE, Canning D. The health and wealth of nations. Science, 2000,287:1207-1209. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/sci-

ence.287.5456.1207 PMID:10712155

12.  Rodin J, de Ferranti D. Universal health coverage: the third global health transition? Lancet, 2012,380:861-862. doi: http://

dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61340-3 PMID:22959371

13.  Busse R, Schreyögg J, Gericke C. Analysing changes in health financing arrangements in high-income countries. A comprehen-

sive framework approach. Washington, DC, The World Bank, 2007.

14.  Chisholm D, Evans DB. Improving health system efficiency as a means of moving towards universal coverage. Geneva, World 

Health Organization, 2010.
Improving value in health care: measuring quality. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010.
15. 
16.  Tantivess S, Teerawattananon Y, Mills A. Strengthening cost-effectiveness analysis in Thailand through the establishment 
of the health intervention and technology assessment program. PharmacoEconomics, 2009,27:931-945. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.2165/11314710-000000000-00000 PMID:19888793

17.  Hanson K et al. Scaling up health policies and services in low- and middle-income settings. BMC Health Services Research, 

2010,10:Suppl 1:I1. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-10-S1-I1 PMID:20594366

18.  Yothasamut J et al. Scaling up cervical cancer screening in the midst of human papillomavirus vaccination advocacy 

in Thailand. BMC Health Services Research, 2010,10:Suppl 1:S5. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-10-S1-S5 
PMID:20594371

19.  Praditsitthikorn N et al. Economic evaluation of policy options for prevention and control of cervical cancer in Thailand. 

PharmacoEconomics, 2011,29:781-806. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2165/11586560-000000000-00000 PMID:21838332

20.  McIntyre D, et al . What are the economic consequences for households of illness and of paying for health care in low- and 

middle-income country contexts? Social Science & Medicine, 2006,62:858-865. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socsci-
med.2005.07.001 PMID:16099574

21.  WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic, 2011: warning about the dangers of tobacco. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2011.

22.  Lönnroth K et al. Drivers of tuberculosis epidemics: the role of risk factors and social determinants. Social Science & 

Medicine, 2009,68:2240-2246. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.03.041 PMID:19394122

23.  Global tuberculosis report 2012. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (http://www.who.int/tb/publications/global_

report, accessed 24 March 2013).

24.  Barter DM et al. Tuberculosis and poverty: the contribution of patient costs in sub-Saharan Africa – a systematic review. 

BMC Public Health, 2012,12:980. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-980 PMID:23150901

25.  Reaching the poor: challenges for TB programmes in the Western Pacific Region. Manila, World Health Organization, 2004.
26.  Hanson C, Weil D, Floyd K. Tuberculosis in the poverty alleviation agenda. In: Raviglione MC, ed. Tuberculosis a comprehen-

sive, international approach, 3rd ed. New York, NY, CRC Press, 2006.

27.  Kamolratanakul P et al. Economic impact of tuberculosis at the household level. The International Journal of Tuberculosis 

and Lung Disease, 1999,3:596-602. PMID:10423222

23

Research for universal health coverage

28.  Rajeswari R et al. Socio-economic impact of tuberculosis on patients and family in India. The International Journal of 

Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 1999,3:869-877. PMID:10524583

29.  Wyss K, Kilima P, Lorenz N. Costs of tuberculosis for households and health care providers in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. 

Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2001,6:60-68. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-3156.2001.00677.x 
PMID:11251897

30.  Lönnroth K et al. Social franchising of TB care through private GPs in Myanmar: an assessment of treatment results, 
access, equity and financial protection. Health Policy and Planning, 2007,22:156-166. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
heapol/czm007 PMID:17434870

31.  Kemp JR et al. Can Malawi’s poor afford free tuberculosis services? Patient and household costs associated with tuber-
culosis diagnosis in Lilongwe. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2007,85:580-585. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/
BLT.06.033167 PMID:17768515

32.  Pantoja A et al. Economic evaluation of public-private mix for tuberculosis care and control, India. Part I. Socio-

economic profile and costs among tuberculosis patients. The International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 
2009,13:698-704. PMID:19460244

33.  Floyd K et al. Cost and cost-effectiveness of PPM-DOTS for tuberculosis control: evidence from India. Bulletin of the World 

Health Organization, 2006,84:437-445. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.05.024109 PMID:16799727

34.  Uplekar M et al. Tuberculosis patients and practitioners in private clinics in India. The International Journal of Tuberculosis 

and Lung Disease, 1998,2:324-329. PMID:9559404

35.  Porter JDH, Grange JM, eds. Tuberculosis: an interdisciplinary perspective. London, Imperial College Press, 1999.
36.  Long NH. Gender specific epidemiology of tuberculosis in Vietnam. Stockholm, Karolinska Institutet, 2000.
37.  Diwan V, Thorson A, Winkvist A. Gender and tuberculosis. Göteborg, Nordic School of Public Health, 1998.
38.  Ananthakrishnan R et al. Expenditure pattern for TB treatment among patients registered in an urban government 

DOTS program in Chennai City, South India. Tuberculosis Research and Treatment, 2012,2012:747924. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1155/2012/747924 PMID:23213507

39.  Tool to estimate patients’ costs. Geneva, Stop TB Partnership, 2012. (http://www.stoptb.org/wg/dots_expansion/tbandpov-

erty/spotlight.asp, accessed 7 March 2013). 

40.  Mauch V et al. Free TB diagnosis and treatment are not enough - patient cost evidence from three continents. The International 

Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2013,17:381-387. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.12.0368 PMID:23407227

41.  Mladovsky P et al. Health policy responses to the financial crisis in Europe. Copenhagen, World Health Organization on behalf 

of the European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, 2012. 

42.  Scherer P, Devaux M. The challenge of financing health care in the current crisis. An analysis based on the OECD data. Paris, 

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010 (OECD Health Working Papers, No. 49).

43.  Knaul FM et al. The quest for universal health coverage: achieving social protection for all in Mexico. Lancet, 2012,380:1259-

1279. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61068-X PMID:22901864

44.  Global health expenditure database. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (apps.who.int/nha/database/

DataExplorerRegime.aspx, accessed 7 March 2013).

45.  ADePT: STATA software platform for automated economic analysis. Washington, DC, The World Bank, 2012. (web.worldbank.

org, accessed 24 March 2013).

46.  World health statistics 2012. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
47.  Xu K et al. Protecting households from catastrophic health spending. Health Affairs (Project Hope), 2007,26:972-983. doi: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.26.4.972 PMID:17630440

48.  Xu K et al. Exploring the thresholds of health expenditure for protection against financial risk. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2010 (World Health Report [2010] Background Paper, No 19).

49.  Measurement of trends and equity in coverage of health interventions in the context of universal health coverage. Rockefeller 

Foundation Center, Bellagio, September 17–21, 2012. UHC Forward, 2012 (http://uhcforward.org/publications/measurement-
trends-and-equity-coverage-health-interventions-context-universal-health-co, accessed 7 March 2013). 

50.  The Millennium Development Goals report 2012. New York, United Nations, 2012.
51.  Global report. UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic. Geneva, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, 2012.
52.  World malaria report 2012. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
53.  Sustaining the drive to overcome the global impact of neglected tropical diseases. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2013.
54.  Dye C et al. WHO and the future of disease control programmes. Lancet, 2013,381:413-418. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/

S0140-6736(12)61812-1 PMID:23374479

24

Chapter 1  The role of research for universal health coverage

55.  United Nations Secretary General’s Advisory Board on Water and Sanitation. Monitoring and reporting progress of access to 

water & sanitation. An assessment by UNSGAB. New York, United Nations, 2008.

56.  Scheil-Adlung X, Florence B. Beyond legal coverage: assessing the performance of social health protection. International 

Social Security Review, 2011,64:21-38. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-246X.2011.01400.x

57.  Angell SY, Danel I, DeCock KM. Global indicators and targets for noncommunicable diseases. Science, 2012,337:1456-1457. 

doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1228293 PMID:22997310

58.  Millennium Development Goal 8. The global partnership for development: making rhetoric a reality. New York, United Nations, 

2012 (MDG Gap Task Force report 2012).

59.  Victora CG et al. How changes in coverage affect equity in maternal and child health interventions in 35 Countdown 

to 2015 countries: an analysis of national surveys. Lancet, 2012,380:1149-1156. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(12)61427-5 PMID:22999433

60.  Ruhago GM, Ngalesoni FN, Norheim OF. Addressing inequity to achieve the maternal and child health millennium 

development goals: looking beyond averages. BMC Public Health, 2012,12:1119. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-
12-1119 PMID:23270489

61.  Gwatkin DR, Ergo A. Universal health coverage: friend or foe of health equity? Lancet, 2011,377:2160-2161. doi: http://

dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)62058-2 PMID:21084113

62.  Donabedian A. The quality of care. How can it be assessed? Journal of the American Medical Association, 1988,260:1743-

1748. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1988.03410120089033 PMID:3045356

63.  Donabedian A. Evaluating the quality of medical care. The Milbank Quarterly, 2005,83:691-729. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1111/j.1468-0009.2005.00397.x PMID:16279964

64.  Davies H. Measuring and reporting the quality of health care: issues and evidence from the international research literature. 

Edinburgh, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, 2005.

65.  Health at a glance: Europe 2012. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2012. http://dx.doi.

org/10.1787/9789264183896-en 

66.  Moreno-Serra R, Smith PC. Does progress towards universal health coverage improve population health? Lancet, 

2012,380:917-923. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61039-3 PMID:22959388

67.  Acharya A et al. Impact of national health insurance for the poor and the informal sector in low- and middle-income countries: 
a systematic review. London, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University of London, 2012.

68.  Giedion U, Alfonso EA, Díaz Y. The impact of universal coverage schemes in the developing world: a review of the existing 

evidence. Washington, DC, The World Bank, 2013.

25

Chapter 2

The growth of research for 
universal health coverage

Chapter 2

Key points

Creativity everywhere

Research ascending

Growing unevenly

The value of health research

Conclusions: building on the 
foundations

30

35

35

42

46

47

WHO field staff examine a small child at a nutrition centre in Nyala, South Darfur, Sudan (WHO/Christina Banluta).

Key points

 ■ Chapter 1 considered ways of measuring the gap between the present coverage and 
universal coverage of health services. The question of how to fill that gap is a target 
for research in every country. Research for universal health coverage, underpinned 
by research for health, is the body of methods and results used to find new ways of 
providing the health care needed by everyone.

 ■ There are plenty of creative ideas about how to achieve comprehensive health care. 

They come from both within the health sector and beyond it and will flourish 
wherever they are permitted and encouraged to do so.

 ■ Research to stimulate and harness new ideas is growing worldwide. The growth is 
uneven, but most countries now have the foundations on which to build effective 
research programmes.

 ■ Not only is more research being done, it is also being done in more creative ways. 
One example is new thinking to break the mould of traditional research and 
development (R&D), where more products are being created through partnerships 
between universities, governments, international organizations and the private 
sector.

 ■ The results of some research studies are widely applicable, but many questions 

about universal health coverage need local answers. All nations therefore need to be 
producers of research as well as consumers of it.

 ■ In low- and middle-income countries, the principal challenges are to strengthen 

research systems, identify key research questions, and generate the capacity to turn 
research into practical applications.

 ■ Research is in the ascendant, but few countries have objectively assessed the 

strengths and weaknesses of their national research programmes, and few have 
evaluated the health, social and economic benefits that research can bring. All 
nations will benefit from taking a systematic approach to the monitoring and 
evaluation of research investments, practices, outputs and applications.

2

The growth of research for  
universal health coverage

Chapter 1 defined universal health coverage and discussed practical ways to 
measure progress towards this goal. The discussion led to research questions 
of two kinds. The first kind is about improving health: What kinds of health 
systems and services are needed and for whom? How can the necessary health 
services be provided, and at what cost? How should health services adapt to the 
expected shifts in disease burden in the coming years? 

The second kind of question is about measurement: What is the best way to 
measure the coverage of services and financial risk protection in any setting? 
How will we know when we have reached universal coverage?

In the context of this report, scientific research provides the set of tools used 
to stimulate and harness creative solutions to these questions – i.e. research 
gives us the formal techniques that turn promising ideas into practical methods 
for achieving universal health coverage.

This chapter gives an overview of the changing landscape of research. The 
first observation is that creativity, imagination and innovation – which are fun-
damental in any culture of enquiry – are universal. A premise of this report is 
that new ideas will flourish wherever they are encouraged and permitted to do so.
The second observation is that there has been a striking increase in research 
productivity in low- and middle-income countries over the past two decades, 
in  the  wake  of  the  1990  report  of  the  Commission  on  Health  Research  for 
Development among others (1). A greater recognition of the value of research 
for health, society and the economy has added impetus to the upward trend. 
Although the growth is uneven, most countries now have the foundations on 
which to build effective research programmes.

The process of doing research presents questions on several levels: What 
health problem needs to be solved? On the spectrum from disease etiology to 
health policy, what kind of question is being asked about this problem? 

The  sequence  of  research  questions  is  not  linear  but  cyclical:  questions 
lead to answers and then to yet more questions. For instance, which stages of 
investigation in the research cycle will be included – measuring the problem, 
understanding  the  options  to  address  the  problem,  solving  the  problem  by 
comparing the options, implementing the preferred solution, or evaluating the 

31

Research for universal health coverage

Box 2.1. 

Research definitions used in this report

Research is the development of knowledge with the aim of understanding health challenges and mounting an 
improved response to them (2, 3). Research is a vital source, but not the only source, of information that is used to 
develop health policy. Other considerations – cultural values, human rights, social justice and so on – are used to 
weigh the importance of different kinds of evidence in decision-making (4, 5).
Research excludes routine testing and routine analysis of technologies and processes, as would be done for the 
maintenance of health or disease control programmes, and as such is distinct from research to develop new analytical 
techniques. It also excludes the development of teaching materials that do not embody original research.
Basic  research  or fundamental  research  is  experimental  or  theoretical  work  undertaken  primarily  to  acquire 
new  knowledge  about  the  underlying  foundations  of  phenomena  and  observable  facts,  without  any  particular 
application or use in view (6).
Applied research is original investigation undertaken to acquire new knowledge, directed primarily towards a 
specific practical aim or objective (6).
Operational  research  or implementation  research  seeks  knowledge  on  interventions,  strategies  or  tools  so 
as to enhance the quality or coverage of health systems and services (7, 8). The design could be, for example, an 
observational study, a cross-sectional study, a case−control or cohort study, or a randomized controlled trial (Box 2.3).
Translational research, which moves knowledge gained from basic research to its application in the clinic and 
community, is often characterized as “bench-to-bedside” and “bedside-to-community”. The translation is between 
any of several stages: moving basic discovery into a candidate health application; assessing the value of an application 
leading to the development of evidence-based guidelines; moving guidelines into health practice, through delivery, 
dissemination, and diffusion research; or evaluating the health outcomes of public health practice (9). This has also 
been called experimental development research, which is the terminology used in the study described in Fig. 2.3.
Health policy and systems research (HPSR) seeks to understand and improve how societies organize themselves 
in achieving their collective health goals, and how different actors interact in the policy and implementation pro-
cesses to contribute to policy outcomes. HPSR is an interdisciplinary blend of economics, sociology, anthropology, 
political science, public health and epidemiology that together draw a comprehensive picture of how health systems 
respond and adapt to health policies, and how health policies can shape − and be shaped by − health systems and 
the broader determinants of health (10).
Research for health covers a broader range of investigations than health research, reflecting the fact that health 
also  depends  on  actions  taken  outside  the  health  sector  –  in  agriculture,  education,  employment,  fiscal  policy, 
housing, social services, trade, transport and so on. This wider view of research will become increasingly important 
in the transition from the United Nations Millennium Development Goals to a post-2015 sustainable development 
agenda. As pointed out in Box 1.1, research for universal health coverage is also research for development.
Research for universal health coverage, which is a part of all research for health, is the body of questions, methods 
and results used to find new ways of providing the health care that is needed by everyone.
Innovation is a general term referring to the introduction of something new – an idea, a strategy, a method or a 
device. New ideas can be objectively evaluated by the research process.

outcome? Along the gradient from observational 
studies  (typically  weaker  inferences)  to  rand-
omized  controlled  trials  (stronger  inferences), 
what study designs will be used? In parallel to 
the main narrative of this chapter, three accom-
panying boxes define terms, categorize the types 
of problems addressed by research for universal 

health  coverage,  and  describe  activities  in  the 
research cycle (Box 2.1, Box 2.2 and Box 2.3). The 
intention is to provide a way of thinking about 
the research process, and to present a classifica-
tion of research questions and procedures that 
will be used throughout this report.

32

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

Box 2.2. 

Classifying research studies: an example

It is helpful to classify the type of research question under investigation, in addition to identifying activities in the 
research cycle (Box 2.3). One possible classification, devised by the Clinical Research Collaboration in the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and based partly on the WHO International Classification of Diseases, 
covers the spectrum of biomedical and health research, from basic to applied (Box 2.1) and across all areas of health 
and disease. The eight sections below are illustrated with examples of topics included in each; the full classification 
is available at www.hrcsonline.net (11, 12). Some aspects of section 1, such as normal biological development and 
functioning, are considered to be outside the scope of research for universal coverage because they do not directly 
address defined health problems. Section 8 is modified here to distinguish systems (overall structure) and services 
(delivery within a given system), and also goes beyond health research to embrace the broader concept of research 
for health (Box 2.1).
1. Underpinning research (basic or fundamental research)
Normal biological development and functioning; psychological and socioeconomic processes; chemical and physical 
sciences; methodologies and measurements (including disease burden); resources and infrastructure.
2. Etiology (causation)
Biological and endogenous factors; factors relating to the physical environment; psychological, social and economic 
factors; surveillance and distribution; research design and methodologies.
3. Prevention of disease and conditions, and promotion of well-being
Primary prevention interventions to modify behaviours or promote well-being; interventions to alter physical and 
biological environmental risks; nutrition and chemoprevention; vaccines.
4. Detection, screening and diagnosis
Discovery and preclinical testing of markers and technologies; evaluation of markers and diagnostic technologies; 
population screening.
5. Development of treatments and therapeutic interventions
Pharmaceuticals, cellular and gene therapies; medical devices; surgery; radiotherapy; psychological and behavioural 
interventions; physical and complementary treatments.
6. Evaluation of treatments and therapeutic interventions
Pharmaceuticals; cellular and gene therapies; medical devices; surgery; radiotherapy; psychological and behavioural 
interventions; physical and complementary treatments.
7. Management of diseases and conditions
Individual care needs; management and decision-making; resources and infrastructure.
8. Health policy and systems research
Organization and delivery of services; health and welfare economics; policy, ethics and research governance; research 
design and methodologies; resources and infrastructure. The systems and services that benefit health lie both within 
and beyond the health sector (Box 2.1).
There is no general agreement on ways to classify research. Some would emphasize the methods used and types 
of questions addressed within the disciplines of economics, epidemiology, statistics and sociology; others would 
focus on elements of the research cycle in Box 2.3. This particular example is presented because it is also used to 
organize the case studies in Chapter 3.

33

Research for universal health coverage

Box 2.3. 

The research cycle: questions, answers, and more questions

Just as this report defines universal health coverage broadly (Chapter 1), it also takes a comprehensive view of the 
scope of research. This report is concerned with any investigation motivated by the goal of achieving universal 
coverage  –  from  discovery,  through  development,  to  delivery  –  thereby  improving  health.  Investigations  cover 
all five of the steps depicted in the figure: measuring the size of the health problem; understanding its cause(s); 
devising solutions; translating the evidence into policy, practice and products; and evaluating effectiveness after 
implementation. The process of doing research is not linear but cyclical, because each answer brings a new set of 
questions. This research cycle is often called the “cycle of innovation”.

The cycle of research activities, divided into five parts, illustrated here with reference to 
micronutrient malnutrition

Note: Research begins with measuring and understanding the problem, it proceeds to developing solutions, and then 
monitors the success of interventions. Monitoring is the source of new questions, so another cycle begins.
Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Pena-Rosas et al. (13).

continues ...

34

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

... continued

As is made clear in the WHO Strategy on Research for Health, good research needs an enabling environment, which 
includes mechanisms for agreeing on research priorities, for developing research capacity (staff, funding, institu-
tions), for setting standards in research practice, and for translating the results of research into policy (Chapter 4) (2).
The strength of inference that can be made from research studies is dependent partly on the study design, rang-
ing from observational studies (weaker), through cross-sectional, case−control and cohort studies, to randomized 
controlled trials (stronger) (14). To apply the results of a research study in another setting requires causes and effects 
to be linked in the same way; this is not a matter of study design.
The GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) system assesses the quality 
of evidence and the strength of recommendations on the basis of the evidence. It is a transparent and systematic 
mechanism  for  judging  whether  the  results  of  research  are  robust  enough  to  inform  policy  (15,  16).  At  present, 
GRADE is an effective tool for assessing the value of an intervention studied by a clinical trial, but is less well suited 
to judging, for example, how easily an intervention can be implemented in a health system, or its suitability with 
respect to health equity. GRADE has had to be fine-tuned to deal with issues specific to immunization, such as the 
population-level effects of vaccines, and to the use of data from surveillance systems (17). Furthermore, the outputs 
of GRADE need to be presented in a manner that is accessible to policy-makers. Initiatives such as DECIDE (Developing 
and Evaluating Communication strategies to support Informed Decisions and practice based on Evidence, http://
www.decide-collaboration.eu) are helping to do this. The GRADE working group (www.gradeworkinggroup.org) 
offers courses and workshops to make best use of the GRADE system.

Creativity everywhere

There is a fear that many of the world’s contempo-
rary problems – in health and in other domains 
– are too complex to understand and too difficult 
to manage (18). This report takes a more positive 
view. There are undoubtedly many problems that 
are hard to solve en route to universal health cov-
erage – such as improving the efficiency of health 
care through the dense network of connections 
that  make  up  health  services.  Nevertheless, 
wherever we look in the world, we find people 
proposing ingenious solutions to difficult ques-
tions about health care (Box 2.4). Creativity is a 
leitmotif in this report. While creative solutions 
are  to  be  encouraged,  innovations  may  have 
unintended  adverse  consequences  and  for  this 
reason they require rigorous evaluation.

The stories in Box 2.4 are not isolated exam-
ples of applied ingenuity. New ideas are pervasive, 
as revealed in a 10-country survey of R&D car-
ried out for the 2010 African Innovation Outlook. 
The  study  found  that  there  were  new  concepts 

behind  the  development  of  both  products  and 
procedures in private companies of all sizes (23).
Drawing on specific examples (Box 2.4) and 
general surveys, our conclusion is that creativ-
ity  and  imagination  are  ubiquitous  (23).  The 
working  assumption  in  this  report  is  that  new 
ideas will throw up potential solutions to health 
problems, and that innovators will turn some of 
these proposed solutions into practical applica-
tions if they are permitted and encouraged to do 
so. Some of these practical innovations will be 
shown  by  research  to  be  worthy  of  large-scale 
implementation.

In the next section we show that the research 
needed to harness these new ideas is on the rise. 

Research ascending

The landmark 1990 report from the Commission 
on Health Research for Development had a last-
ing impact by showing that less than 10% of global 
research  spending  was  targeted  at  the  diseases 

35

Research for universal health coverage

Box 2.4. 

Problems, ideas, solutions

Innovation in action: mobile phone software developed to monitor fetal movements and 
heartbeats

s
o
n
a
P
/
h
t
i

m
S
-
r
e

l

y
a
r
T

 

i

e
b
b
A

Zeinou Abdelyamin from Algeria has been worried that the widespread use of insecticides and rodenticides leaves 
chemical residues that are harmful to people and domestic animals. In 2012, he won an African Prize for Innovation 
for carrying out research to formulate nonchemical pesticides that leave no trace in the environment (19). 
In the same year, Aaron Tushabe and fellow students at Makerere University, Uganda, wanted to find ways to make 
pregnancy safer for women who do not have easy access to hospitals (20). They invented a portable scanner to detect 
anomalies in gestation, such as ectopic pregnancies and abnormal fetal heart beats (see photograph). Cheaper than 
ultrasound, their hand-held scanner is a funnel-like horn that gives a read-out on the screen of a mobile phone. 
Meanwhile in Tamil Nadu, India, Dr V Mohan has created the “self-expanding diabetes clinic” to provide diagnosis 
and care to people in remote rural areas of India (21). His mobile clinic, housed in a van carrying satellite equip-
ment, visits some of the remotest parts of Tamil Nadu, linking urban doctors to rural patients via community health 
workers. The van has telemedicine technology to carry out diagnostic tests, such as retinal scans, and transmit the 
results within seconds to Chennai, even from areas too remote for Internet connectivity. The wider application of 
these innovations needs to be guided by health technology assessments (22). 
The key point, however, is that examples of creativity and innovation can be found everywhere.

36

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

Box 2.5.  Milestones in research for health

1990 Report of the independent Commission on Health Research for Development (1)
This report exposed the mismatch between investment in health research in developing countries (5% of all funds) 
and the burden of disease in these countries, measured as years of life lost through preventable deaths (93%). The 
mismatch was later characterized by the Global Forum for Health Research as the “10/90 gap” (less than 10% of global 
spending on research devoted to diseases and conditions that account for 90% of the burden of ill-health) (24). The 
report recommended that all countries undertake and support essential national health research; that more financial 
support for research should be obtained through international partnerships; and that an international mechanism 
should be established to monitor progress.
1996 WHO Ad Hoc Committee on Health Research Relating to Future Intervention Options (25)
The committee identified the best value in health research and suggested that investments be made in four main areas: 
childhood infectious diseases, microbial threats, noncommunicable diseases and injuries, and weak health systems.
2001 Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (26)
The commissioners made a case for greater investment in health research globally. They called for the establishment 
of a Global Health Research Fund to support research in areas that primarily affect developing countries, focusing 
on basic scientific research in health and biomedicine.
2004/5 Ministerial Summit on Health Research in Mexico City (2004) and the associated World Health Assembly 
Resolution WHA58.34 (2005)
The Ministerial Summit and the World Health Assembly argued for more resources and more research on health 
systems and health policy to strengthen health systems, supported by the background work of an independent 
task force convened by WHO (27). They drew attention to the science that is needed to improve health systems, 
and urged greater efforts to bridge the gap between scientific potential and health improvement. In parallel, WHO 
launched the World report on knowledge for better health (28).
2008 Global Ministerial Forum on Research for Health in Bamako, Mali
The Forum was convened by WHO and five partners with the theme “Strengthening research for health, develop-
ment and equity”. It placed research and innovation within the wider context of research for development. It led to 
specific recommendations and commitments, culminating in a research plan of action.
2010 and 2012 Global Symposia on Health Systems Research in Montreux and Beijing
These symposia were a response to the heightened interest in health systems research (29). Under the theme of 
“Science to accelerate universal health coverage” the Montreux symposium called for country ownership in develop-
ing the capacity to create stronger health systems. It was proposed that health systems research should become the 
third pole of medical research, complementing biomedical and clinical research. Beijing followed Montreux with the 
theme “Inclusion and innovation towards universal health coverage” (www.hsr-symposium.org).

that  are  responsible  for  more  than  90%  of  the 
global burden of ill-health (Box 2.5). Owing to 
the  success  of  that  report,  the  “10/90  gap”  has 
become  short-hand  for  underinvestment  in 
health research in low-income countries.

More than two decades later, the influential 
1990  report  and  subsequent  events  (Box  2.5) 
have  made  a  contribution  to  the  growth  of 
research  worldwide.  Practically  every  indicator 
of  research  activity  has  been  rising.  Systematic 

evaluations  of  the  burden  of  disease  have  been 
strongly  encouraged  since  the  early  1990s.  The 
reaction, as seen in the scientific literature, has 
been impressive. There has been a proliferation 
of  published  studies  of  disease  burden,  carried 
out at global, regional and national levels (part A 
of  Fig.  2.1)  (31).  Questions  about  the  scale  of  a 
health  problem  are  not  always  about  disease 
burden (Box 2.2 and Box 2.3), but studies of this 
kind reflect the upward trend in recognizing and 

37

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 2.1. 
C002–F002.001

Six measures of the growth in research that would support universal health coverage

A. Evaluating disease burden

B. Setting research priorities

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

300
250
200
150
100
50
0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l

b
u
p
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

C. Investing in solutions

D. Conducting systematic reviews

)
C
I
H
(
 
P
D
G
 
f
o
%

 

 

 
s
a
D
&
R

3

2

1

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

R
&
D
a
s
 

 

 

%
o
f
 
G
D
P
 
(
L
M
I
C
)

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

s
w
e
i
v
e
r

600

400

200

0

Africa

The Americas

Asia

Eastern

Mediterranean

High-income countries: high investment, stable
Low-middle-income countries: low investment,
rising 5%/year

1996Ð2002
2003Ð2008

E. Generating evidence

F. Open access publishing

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l

b
u
P

)
s
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
t
 
0
0
1
C
I
H
(

 

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

0

2000

2002

2008

2004

2006

2010
High-income countries, growth +2%/year
Middle-income countries, growth +9%/year
Low-income countries, growth +4%/year

P
u
b

o
r
 

 

M
I
C
1
0
0
 
t
h
o
u
s
a
n
d
s
)

l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
(
L
I
C
 
t
h
o
u
s
a
n
d
s

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

m

(
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l

b
u
P

2.5
2.0

1.5
1.0
0.5
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Publications
Sources

40

30

20

10

0

S
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
(
t
h
o
u
s
a
n
d
s
)

GDP, gross domestic product; HIC, high-income countries; LIM, low-income countries; LMIC, low- and middle-income coun-
tries; MIC, middle-income countries; OECD, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; R&D, research and 
development.
Sources: A and B: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed; C: OECD; D: Law et al. (30); E: The World Bank; F: www.base-search.net. 

38

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

evaluating health challenges. The improving evi-
dence about major causes of illness and death is 
a basis for setting research priorities, and pub-
lished  prioritization  exercises  in  this  area  have 
increased by a factor of five since 1990 (part B of 
Fig. 2.1) (32). Standard approaches to setting pri-
orities are gaining acceptance worldwide (33, 34).
To  turn  research  priorities  into  research 
studies  requires  funding.  Investment  in  R&D 
has  remained  static  in  relation  to  economic 
output – i.e. gross domestic product (GDP) – in 
high-income countries. But in low- and middle-
income  countries  (mostly  the  latter),  domestic 
investment in R&D has been growing 5% per year 
faster than economic output (part C of Fig. 2.1). 
This strong upward trend, which is most visible 
in  China  and  other  eastern  Asian  countries, 
emphasizes the importance placed on research 
by emerging economies (4). This trend applies to 
R&D generally, but it is likely to benefit health 
too.  In  the  specific  area  of  health  policy  and 
systems  research,  a  2010  survey  of  96  research 
institutions in low-income countries found that 
funding has been steadily increasing, notably to 
institutions in sub-Saharan Africa (35, 36).

The  global  financial  downturn  of  the  late 
2000s slowed the rise in R&D funding for tech-
nologies to control “neglected” diseases, which 
mainly  affect  low-  and  middle-income  coun-
tries. Yet funding was not significantly cut: on 
aggregate, public funding remained more or less 
stable between 2009 and 2011 because decreases 
from philanthropic organizations were offset by 
greater investment from industry (37).

These  flattening  budgets,  set  against  the 
persistently  large  burden  of  communicable  dis-
eases in lower-income countries, have stimulated 
thinking that is beginning to break the mould of 
traditional  R&D.  More  products  are  now  being 
created through partnerships between universi-
ties,  governments,  international  organizations 
and the private sector. In some instances, com-
petition  is  being  replaced  by  collaboration,  and 
explicit links are being made among the different 

organizations  involved  in  discovery,  develop-
ment and deployment of new technologies. The 
Drugs  for  Neglected  Diseases  initiative  (DNDi) 
is working with three pharmaceutical companies 
to  develop  a  new  anthelmintic  drug.  Together, 
Health  Canada,  the  Drugs  Controller  General 
of  India  and  WHO  facilitated  the  registration 
and use of a new meningitis A vaccine for Africa 
(MenAfriVac)  in  a  matter  of  months  (38).  The 
evolving  structure  of  research  partnerships  is 
helping to prepare the ground for a new genera-
tion  of  medical  products  and  services,  such  as 
those  oriented  to  “precision”  or  “personalized” 
medicine.

Not only is more research being done in more 
creative ways, but the process of doing research 
is also becoming more robust. One illustration 
is  the  growth  in  systematic  reviews  (of  health 
systems  evidence  in  part  D  of  Fig.  2.1),  long-
advocated by the Cochrane Collaboration (www.
cochrane.org) (39). In recent years, the growth in 
the number of these reviews has been similar in 
high-income and lower-income countries. There 
are,  however,  large  differences  between  indi-
vidual  lower-income  countries;  comparing  the 
periods 1996–2002 and 2003–2008, the number 
of systematic reviews of health systems increased 
3-fold for Africa and 110-fold for Asia (30).

There are now so many systematic reviews of 
clinical trials that it has become difficult to track 
and assimilate the huge volume of information. 
The surfeit of data has led to a plea to devise more 
efficient ways of keeping up with the evidence (40).
More research is generating more evidence 
to guide policy and practice (part E of Fig. 2.1). 
On the African continent, research productivity, 
measured by publications in 19 countries (domi-
nated by Egypt and South Africa), grew at an aver-
age rate of 5.3% per year between 1990 and 2009, 
but that growth was far quicker during the final 
five years of this period (26% per year). Research 
productivity in Africa, by African scientists, has 
been  stimulated  by  concern  about  HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis  and  malaria,  and  is  linked  to  the 

39

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 2.2. 

The share of internationally co-authored science and engineering articles worldwide, 
by country, 2000 and 2010

Note: The USA and United Kingdom had high but stable levels of co-authorship; researchers based in the USA were co-authors 
of 43% of the total number of internationally co-authored articles in 2010. The share of co-authorships in Brazil and India has 
been low and is growing slowly; in China they have been low but are growing quickly (4).

establishment of national public health training 
institutions (41). A 26-country survey of health 
systems research found that the number of inves-
tigations increased over the past decade, and that 
decisions about health policy were based on evi-
dence in about two thirds of the sampled coun-
tries (Chapter 4) (42). Health policy and systems 
research is beginning to flourish although, in the 
view of some commentators, it is not yet a fully 
coherent enterprise (29, 43).

More research is being published as a result 
of international collaboration. While it is still the 
case that a minority of studies are led by scientists 
from  low-  and  middle-income  countries,  these 
researchers  are  increasingly  working  in  inter-
national partnerships. China is the outstanding 
example: the global share of co-authorships held 
by  Chinese  researchers  increased  from  5%  in 
2000 to 13% in 2010 (Fig. 2.2). Among the seven 
countries  for  which  data  are  shown  in Fig. 2.2 
(Brazil, China, India, Japan, Russian Federation, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland,  United  States  of  America),  China 
enjoyed  the  biggest  increase  in  co-authorships 
in both absolute and relative terms.

As the number of publications grows, more of 
the results are becoming freely available through 
“open  access”  arrangements  that  give  unre-
stricted access via the Internet to peer-reviewed 
journal  articles  (part  F  of  Fig.  2.1)  (44).  In  the 
same spirit, the HINARI Access to Research in 
Health Programme was created in 2001 to pro-
vide wider access to the world’s biomedical lit-
erature, although the scheme requires affiliation 
to a registered institution. HINARI is now one of 
the four programmes comprising Research4Life 
(along with Research in Agriculture, Research in 
the Environment, and Research for Development 
and  Innovation).  By  the  tenth  anniversary  of 
this  programme,  Research4Life  had  provided 
researchers at 6000 institutions in 100 develop-
ing countries with free or low-cost access to 9000 
journals  on  health,  agriculture,  environment 
and technology (45).

The  scope  of  research  for  health  is  widen-
ing  too.  As  the  world  contemplates  the  transi-
tion from the MDGs to a post-2015 development 
agenda,  greater  emphasis  is  being  placed  on 
research  carried  out  in  all  sectors  that  affect 
health (the “health in all sectors” approach) – e.g. 

40

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

Box 2.6. 

Environmental health research, “health in all”, and universal health coverage

Roughly one quarter of the global burden of disease can be attributed to modifiable environmental risk factors (46). 
This is an approximate estimate because our understanding of the links between our environment and health, and 
of how to mitigate the risks to health, is far from complete. Further research therefore needs to cover a wide range 
of investigations from the evaluation of risks associated with environmental exposures, through mechanisms for 
prevention, to ways of incorporating these measures into the delivery of services (Box 2.2). The solutions that reduce 
environmental health risks will come from both within the health sector and beyond it.
Environmental risk factors are physical, chemical and biological hazards that directly affect health, and also fac-
tors  that  exacerbate  unhealthy  behaviours  (e.g.  physical  inactivity).  Environmental  risk  factors  include  unsafe 
drinking-water and poor sanitation and hygiene, which are the sources of infections that cause diarrhoeal diseases. 
According to one global assessment of risk factors for ill-health, unimproved water and poor sanitation have fallen 
in importance in the ranking of risk factors but nevertheless accounted for 0.9% of all years of healthy life lost (i.e. 
disability-adjusted life-years, or DALYs) in 2010 (47). Environmental risk factors include indoor air pollution, largely 
from the use of solid fuels in households, and outdoor air pollution, which facilitate and exacerbate lower respiratory 
infections. Household air pollution was a leading risk factor for ill-health in sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia 
in 2010 (47). Risk factors include injuries arising from hazards in the workplace, from radiation and from industrial 
accidents. They also contribute to the transmission of vector-borne diseases: malaria is associated with policies and 
practices on land use, deforestation, water resource management, settlement siting and house design.
Universal health coverage explicitly includes preventive measures (Chapter 1) where their primary purpose is to 
improve health, and yet the opportunities to prevent ill-health have often been overlooked, both within and outside 
the health sector. The “Health in the Green Economy” project provides numerous examples of research that identify 
environmental  health  benefits  that  come  from  mitigating  climate  change.  These  illustrate  how  policies  whose 
primary objective are not to achieve universal health coverage but rather to confront environmental threats can 
yield major health co-benefits. The health system can play an important role in advocating for such policies, which 
are complementary to effort to promote universal health coverage. Two examples of sectors in which research has 
demonstrated health co-benefits are urban transport and housing:
 ■ Urban transport. More investment in public transport (buses and trains), along with networks for cyclists 

and pedestrians, can lower urban air pollution, encourage physical activity, lessen traffic injuries, and reduce 
the costs of mobility for poor and vulnerable groups (48). Studies of urban commuters in Shanghai and 
Copenhagen, for instance, have shown that cyclists have 30% lower mortality rates, on average, than other 
commuters (49).

 ■ Housing and home energy systems. Better home insulation, plus energy-efficient, smoke-free heating and 

cooking systems and indoor ventilation, can reduce respiratory diseases, including asthma, pneumonia and 
tuberculosis, as well as reducing vulnerability to extremes of heat and cold. Large savings in health costs from 
asthma and other respiratory illness were observed in follow-up studies of home insulation in low-income 
homes in New Zealand. The promise of immediate health gains helped drive large-scale government invest-
ments in home improvements in New Zealand. To these short-term gains must be added the economic value 
of carbon savings that will be realized in future (50).

Economic research can help define where technological development yields the greatest health benefits for the least 
cost, driving a virtuous circle of “healthwise” green investments. For instance, improved stove and fuel technologies 
used in the poorest households in Africa or Latin America are likely to be cheap and effective, but the best available 
technologies have yet to be evaluated. Shifting away from diesel fuel for transport and energy not only reduces 
exposures to harmful carcinogens but also cuts climate-changing black carbon.
Following the Rio +20 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, a dialogue among governments, 
United Nations agencies, and civil society will lead to a new set of development goals (51, 52). This is an opportunity 
to highlight the connections between policies that affect health via different sectors of the economy – not just 
environment and health, but also agriculture, education, finance, social policy and health. Coupled with this is the 
need for appropriate data and indicators (see also Box 1.2). The research underpinning “health in all sectors” is, in 
the broad definition of this report, research for universal health coverage.

41

Research for universal health coverage

agriculture, education, environment and finance 
(Box 2.6) (51).

Finally,  there  is  an  increasingly  energetic 
debate  about  how  to  answer  questions  about 
public health; this is a sign of a healthy research 
environment  (53).  One  area  of  discussion  con-
cerns  the  study  of  health  systems.  Victora  and 
co-workers  have  argued  that  randomized  con-
trolled trials, while essential for measuring the 
efficacy of clinical interventions, are unsuitable 
for  public  health  interventions  in  which  there 
are numerous steps between the possible cause 
under  investigation  and  the  final  effect,  and 
where  one  or  more  of  these  steps  depends  on 
local  circumstances  (54).  By  contrast,  Banerjee 
& Duflo have championed the use of randomized 
controlled  trials  rigorously  to  test  ideas  about 
how to achieve higher coverage of interventions 
that depend on human behaviour (55, 56). The 
discussion points to a fundamental truth about 
randomized controlled trials: a controlled exper-
iment  yields  rigorous  results  under  the  condi-
tions of that experiment. However, whether the 
result applies beyond the experiment depends on 
the nature of the system under investigation. In 
terms of consistency from one setting to another, 
human biochemical pathways, for instance, are 
likely to be more consistent than some human 
behaviours (see also Chapter 3).

None  of  the  rising  indicators  of  research 
activity, in any setting, is a guarantee of inter-
ventions that will help to reach universal health 
coverage. However, universal coverage cannot be 
achieved  without  technology,  systems  and  ser-
vices, and research is the mechanism by which 
the hardware and software are created.

Growing unevenly

Research is on the rise, and the results are deliv-
ering  benefits  for  health  worldwide.  However, 
the process of doing research – setting research 
priorities,  building  capacity,  formulating  and 
adopting standards of practice, and translating 

42

results into policy (Box 2.3) – is certainly not of 
a  uniformly  high  standard.  In  many  settings, 
research  practice  falls  well  short  of  the  global 
ideal. But by defining the achievements, and not 
merely the defects, we shall be in a stronger posi-
tion to exploit the potential that research offers.
Any  survey  of  the  growing  strengths  in 
research  also  exposes  the  residual  weaknesses. 
In view of the environment needed to carry out 
research and the sequence of steps in the research 
cycle, research programmes around the world can 
be strengthened in a number of areas (Box 2.3).

The number and proportion of older people 
are increasing in populations around the world, 
and yet some prominent causes of illness among 
the elderly are poorly defined. In countries in the 
Americas  Region,  for  instance,  there  is  a  huge 
variation in reported death rates from Parkinson 
disease.  This  variation  is  more  likely  to  be 
explained  by  diagnostic  and  reporting  inaccu-
racies  than  by  real  differences  in  death  rates, 
but  the  truth  about  Parkinson  disease  will  be 
determined only by systematic investigation. In 
general, data defining the frequency and health 
consequences of mental and nervous system dis-
orders are poor (57). Much better information is 
needed to determine how many people are at risk 
of these disorders or are eligible for treatment, 
and who they are and where they live (58–60).

The  growth  in  research  effort,  addressing 
many  different  questions  in  a  wide  variety  of 
settings, is bound to be uneven. There are now 
hundreds of published studies that focus on spe-
cific diseases and conditions – across a range of 
communicable  and  noncommunicable  diseases 
and injuries (61). In contrast, there are relatively 
few studies that attempt to set research priorities, 
across all aspects of health, from the perspective 
of  national  governments  (Chapter  4)  (62,  63). 
This is because few appraisals of research needs 
have  been  initiated  by  national  governments, 
even though such appraisals are a vital part of 
planning for universal health coverage.

National  research  portfolios  are  mostly 
they  may  not  be  wholly 

unplanned,  but 

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

Fig. 2.3. 

Private- and public-sector investment in R&D, classified as basic, applied and 
experimental development research, for six African countries ranked in ascending 
order of gross national income (left to right)

R&D, research and development.
Note: For definitions of types of research, see Box 2.1. The four poorest countries focused on applied research. The two wealthi-
est, Nigeria and South Africa, had a more balanced portfolio (35).

unbalanced.  The  2010  African 
Innovation 
Outlook found that four lower-income countries 
focused on applied research, whereas two richer 
ones spread resources more evenly across basic, 
applied  and  experimental  studies  (Fig.  2.3).  A 
more systematic look at research in these coun-
tries might find that the balance is right, or that 
it should change. The point is that some questions 
about universal health coverage have answers that 
are widely applicable (e.g. the efficacy of a drug 
against a defined medical condition), but others 
need local solutions (e.g. how best to deliver the 
drug to all who need it) (64, 65). For this reason, 
all nations need to become producers of research 
as  well  as  consumers  of  it.  Local  expertise  and 
local processes, initiatives and institutions should 
be valued rather than bypassed (64, 66).

Raising  funds  is  one  of  the  challenges  in 
turning research priorities into research studies, 
and the constraints on fundraising come in vari-
ous forms. At the level of national wealth, gross 
national income (GNI) is an empirical measure 
of research potential. The data in Fig. 2.4 show 
how  research  productivity  increases  dispro-
portionately with national wealth. As a rule of 

thumb,  for  every  10-fold  increase  in  GNI  per 
person, the number of scientific publications per 
person increases by a factor of about 50 at best 
(Fig.  2.4,  diagonal  line).  This  disproportionate 
increase also holds for other measures of research 
output such as the number of researchers and the 
number of patents per head of population.

These data also show that while some coun-
tries  exploit  the  empirical  maximum  (lying 
close to the diagonal line in Fig. 2.4), many do 
not (thus falling below the diagonal line) (67). 
Some  of  the  countries  that  fall  below  the  line 
are nations with small populations (< 20 mil-
lion), who may choose not to invest in research, 
but not all underinvestors are small nations. By 
comparing countries, it can be said that there 
is  much  unfulfilled  research  potential,  given 
national  wealth.  Thus  greater  wealth  appears 
to open up the potential for research, but other 
factors are needed to fulfil that potential. While 
those factors need to be understood, it is clear 
that  nations  and  their  governments  have  a 
choice  about  how  much  to  invest  in  research 
and about what research topics should be given 
priority.

43

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 2.4. 

National wealth facilitates, but does not guarantee, national research productivity

PPP, purchasing power parity.
Note: For every 10-fold increase in gross national income (GNI) per person, the number of scientific publications (per person) 
increases by a factor of about 50 at best (actually by 105/3 = 46, diagonal line).
Each point represents a single country. While some countries exploit maximum productivity, lying close to the diagonal line, 
many lie well below it, indicating that there is unfulfilled research potential, given their national wealth. Some of these coun-
tries have smaller populations (< 20 million, blue circles), but not all. The unfulfilled potential for research in one large country 
(Philippines) is indicated by the vertical arrow. 
Source: The World Bank, latest data 2009.

Private companies engaged in R&D in low-
income countries frequently cite lack of funding 
and the shortage of skilled researchers as major 
barriers to innovation (35). The shortage of trained 
researchers  emerges  as  a  general  constraint  in 
R&D, but it is also found in specific areas such as 
health systems research (36). A disincentive for 
private technological research is the domination 
of  R&D  by  a  few  established  enterprises,  with 
apparently few opportunities for newcomers. A 
further impediment in low-income countries is 
poor access to information on technologies and 
markets for the products (35).

There are also disincentives linked to intel-
lectual  property  rights.  The  protection  of  new 
ideas  as  intellectual  property  encourages  the 
development of new medicines and technologies. 

However, the products are sold to people who can 
afford  them,  often  excluding  those  in  greatest 
need. Both free knowledge (as a public good) and 
highly restricted knowledge (limited by its pro-
prietary  nature)  can  be  obstacles  to  improving 
health;  the  former  may  discourage  innovation 
and the latter may limit access to the products 
of innovation. “Market failures” are the enemy 
of universal health coverage, and the facts about 
market failure in different settings present some 
critical questions for research (Box 2.7) (71, 72). 
In  this  context,  WHO  expert  working  groups 
have sought to promote R&D in ways whereby 
market  failures  are  rectified  by  the  production 
of public goods (67, 68, 73). 

The  problem  of  low  investment  in  research 
within low-income countries (Fig. 2.4) is amplified 

44

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

Box 2.7. 

The Global Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health, Innovation and 
Intellectual Property 

Born out of concern among low- and middle-income countries about inequitable access to the products of research, 
the Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, Innovation and Public Health was established to promote innovation 
and access to medicines. The work of the Commission led to the Global Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health, 
Innovation and Intellectual Property (GSPA-PHI), which was approved by the World Health Assembly in 2009 (68).
The GSPA-PHI consists of eight elements that aim to promote innovation, build capacity, improve access and mobilize 
resources. The eight elements are:
1. prioritize research and development needs;
2. promote research and development;
3. build and improve innovative capacity;
4. transfer of technology;
5. apply and manage intellectual property to contribute to innovation and promote public health;
6. improve delivery and access;
7. promote sustainable financing; and
8. establish monitoring and reporting systems.
Work  is  under  way  in  several  areas  related  to  GSPA-PHI,  such  as  the  local  production  of  medical  products  and 
technology transfer (element 4), building capacity in the management and use of intellectual property in favour of 
public health (element 5), reporting on models for sustainable financing and better coordination of research and 
development (element 7) through WHO expert working groups; and the establishment of monitoring and reporting 
systems (element 8), such as research observatories (Chapter 4) (69, 70). 
Effective implementation of the GSPA-PHI depends on the robustness of the national health research system in 
each country. Over time, monitoring and evaluation will reveal whether the GSPA-PHI leads to increased innovation 
and more affordable and equitable access to the benefits and products of research, especially in low- and middle-
income countries.

by a bias against the type of research that would 
benefit  these  countries.  In  total,  more  than 
US$  100  billion  is  spent  globally  on  health 
research each year (71). About half of this is in 
the private sector, mainly in the pharmaceutical 
and biotechnology industries, and the products 
of this research are directed mainly at markets 
in high-income countries (71, 74). Drug develop-
ment is a case in point: only 21 of 1556 (1.3%) 
new  drugs  developed  over  the  30-year  period 
from 1975 to 2004 were for diseases not found 
in high-income countries (75). Despite the per-
sistently  high  burden  of  infection  in  low-  and 
middle-income  countries,  and  the  spread  of 
antibiotic  resistance,  the  development  of  new 
antibiotics lies in the hands of just a few major 

pharmaceutical companies (76). More positively, 
however,  methods  of  preventing  and  treating 
noncommunicable  diseases,  largely  developed 
in  richer  countries,  should  help  to  address  the 
growing  burden  of  these  diseases  in  poorer 
countries.

In  addition,  financial  investment  in  basic 
research and in discovery and development (phar-
maceuticals and biotechnology) dwarfs investment 
in  delivery.  One  survey  of  140  health  research 
funders globally found that most research is directed 
at developing new health technologies rather than 
at making better use of existing ones (77).

For neglected diseases, an imbalance arises 
because  investment  favours  some  infections 
and  diseases  over  others.  Funding  for  R&D  is 

45

Research for universal health coverage

predominantly for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and 
malaria,  with  relatively  little  for  some  other 
major causes of ill-health such as dengue, diar-
rhoeal diseases and helminth infections (37).

With  respect  to  delivering  health  care, 
research  into  health  services  and  systems  gets 
relatively little support and tends to be narrowly 
focused. This is true both in low- and high-income 
countries.  In  the  United  Kingdom  in  2006, 
health services research (included in category 8 
in Box 2.2) received between 0.4% and 1.6% of 
all research funds allocated by four major fund-
ing bodies (78). Although the United Kingdom’s 
National Institute for Health Research is helping 
to boost funding for research on health services 
and systems, these data show that some impor-
tant  funding  agencies  give  this  area  low  prior-
ity. An observation repeatedly made in a variety 
of settings is that too little attention is given to 
translating  existing  knowledge  about  products 
and processes into policy and practice (79–81). 
Furthermore,  the  contribution  of  the  social 
sciences to research in this area, going beyond 
clinical studies and epidemiology, is commonly 
undervalued (2). 

Even  when  research  funds  are  provided  as 
official  development  assistance  to  low-income 
countries, they are not seen as uniformly ben-
eficial. In the opinion of some African research-
ers, external aid undermines efforts to convince 
African governments to spend more money on 
research (82). In the domain of health policy and 
systems research, a drawback of external funding 
is that it tends to focus on operational matters, 
such as how to scale up priority services. On the 
one hand, external donations to carry out opera-
tional and translational research satisfy a press-
ing need. Yet on the other hand, less attention is 
given to deeper, structural questions about the 
functioning of health services – questions that 
ask, for example, how to promote accountability 
in service delivery or how to engage local stake-
holders (2). Observations of this kind highlight a 
particular challenge in funding research, which 
is  to  ensure  that  the  priorities  of  international 

46

donors are aligned with those of national health 
services, in keeping with the Paris Declaration 
on  Aid  Effectiveness  (2005),  the  Accra  Agenda 
for  Action  (2008)  (83),  and  the  wider  goal  of 
effective development as promoted by the Busan 
Global  Partnership  for  Effective  Development 
Cooperation (84).

In  assessing  the  strengths  and  weaknesses 
of  research,  the  virtues  of  tracking  research 
investments, practices and applications quickly 
become clear. Such data are absent or incomplete 
for many countries. To build most effectively on 
existing  foundations,  all  nations  should  take  a 
systematic approach to the mapping, monitoring 
and evaluation of research (85, 86).

The value of health research

Adding  to  the  impetus  to  do  more  research  is 
a  growing  body  of  evidence  on  the  returns  on 
investment,  albeit  mostly  from  high-income 
countries.  Notwithstanding  some  contentious 
methodological  issues  –  such  as  how  to  value 
health  gained,  whether  in  terms  of  increased 
survival  or  improved  quality  of  life  –  there  is 
mounting  quantitative  proof  of  the  benefits  of 
research to health, society and the economy (87).
Exceptional  returns,  a  report  prepared  for 
Funding First in the USA, calculated large gains 
from  reductions  in  mortality,  especially  due  to 
cardiovascular disease (88). Based on a high figure 
for the value of a life, the monetary returns from 
investments in research were valued at US$ 1.5 tril-
lion annually between 1970 and 1990, one third of 
which was attributed to research into new drugs and 
treatment protocols. For research on cardiovascu-
lar disease, the returns on investment were approx-
imately 20 times the annual expenditure. Access 
Economics carried out a similar study in Australia, 
finding  that  every  dollar  invested  in  Australian 
health research and development yielded, on aver-
age, AUS$ 2.17 (approximately US$ 2.27) in health 
benefits. This rate of return was surpassed only in 
the mining and retail sectors (89).

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

The benefits of randomized controlled trials 
of  drug  treatments  and  clinical  procedures, 
funded by the National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke in the USA, have also been 
evaluated  in  monetary  terms  (90).  The  assess-
ment included 28 trials carried out at a total cost 
of US$ 335 million. By valuing a quality-adjusted 
life year (QALY) as the same as gross domestic 
product (GDP) per capita, the projected net ben-
efit to society after 10 years was US$ 15·2 billion, 
indicating a yearly return on investment of 46%.
In  the  United  Kingdom,  a  study  of  car-
diovascular disease and mental health research 
separated the value of the gain to health (QALYs 
valued  at  £25  000,  as  used  in  the  United 
Kingdom’s  National  Health  Service)  from  the 
gain to the economy (GDP), with the latter result-
ing from the wider economic effects of public and 
charitable research spending, including the stim-
ulus to privately-funded research (87). The yearly 
rate of return with respect to the health gain was 
9% for cardiovascular disease research, and 7% for 
mental health research. The yearly rate of return in 
terms of GDP was 30% for all medical research in 
the United Kingdom. Putting these together gave 
a total yearly rate of return of 39% for cardiovas-
cular  disease  and  mental  health  research  in  the 
United Kingdom over a period of 17 years.

Not  all  the  benefits  of  research  can  be,  or 
should be, measured in monetary terms (91). To 
capture the diversity of benefits from research, 
the  Payback  Framework  evaluates  outcomes 
under  five  headings:  knowledge,  benefits  to 
future research and research use, benefits from 
informing  policy  and  product  development, 
health and health sector benefits, and economic 
benefits  (91–96).  This  model  of  assessment  has 
logical  appeal  because,  while  acknowledging 
complexities  and  feedback  loops,  it  tracks  the 
evolution of a research idea from its inception, 
through  the  research  process  into  dissemina-
tion, and on to its impact on health, society and 
the  economy  (92,  97).  It  parallels  the  research 
cycle depicted in Box 2.3.

The Payback Framework has been used in 
Ireland,  for  instance,  to  assess  the  benefits  of 
a  pilot  project  on  the  early  detection  of  psy-
chosis (98). The study described how the early 
intervention services, contributing to the Irish 
mental  health  service,  could  reduce  the  dura-
tion  of  untreated  psychosis,  the  severity  of 
symptoms,  suicidal  behaviour  and  the  rate  of 
relapse  and  subsequent  hospitalization.  The 
study  suggested  that  early  detection  reduces 
the cost of treatment, saves lives, and is highly 
regarded both by those who use the service and 
by their families.

Besides evaluating the returns on research, 
one should also consider the source of the initial 
investment and how it affects access to the prod-
ucts of the research. For instance, public-sector 
research institutions in the USA do more applied 
research  than  has  sometimes  been  thought.  In 
one domain, they contributed to the discovery of 
9–21% of all drugs involved in new-drug applica-
tions that were approved between 1990 and 2007 
(99). Publicly funded research in the USA also 
tends to discover drugs that are expected to have 
disproportionately large clinical effects.

A conspicuous feature of studies that assess 
the economic value of research is that, according 
to one review, none have yet been carried out in 
low- and middle-income countries. A key con-
cern, therefore, is how far such countries can rely 
on medical research carried out elsewhere (91).

Conclusions: building 
on the foundations
Research for universal health coverage is not a 
luxury; rather, it is fundamental to the discov-
ery,  development  and  delivery  of  interventions 
that people need to maintain good health (100). 
If “the best days for public health are ahead of us” 
it will be, in part, because the best days for health 
research also lie ahead (101).

47

Research for universal health coverage

The  1990  report  of  the  Commission  on 
Health  Research  for  Development  has  a  legacy 
(102). The report generated a wide appreciation 
of the shortfall in research investment and of the 
fragility of health research in low- and middle-
income  countries.  More  than  20  years  later,  it 
is  clear  that  research  for  health  is  on  the  rise 
worldwide.  Health  problems  are  better  defined 
than they were two decades ago. There are more 
funds  and  greater  research  capacity  to  address 
key  questions  about  health.  Investigations  are 
increasingly  following  best  practice  in  design, 
ethics  and  the  reporting  of  results.  There  are 
more  research  institutions  and  networks,  and 
there  is  more  national  and  international  col-
laboration, “south to south” as well as “north to 
south”  (103).  The  review  of  the  research  land-
scape in this chapter is not yet a story of research 
potential  fulfilled  but  it  shows  the  strengthen-
ing  foundations  on  which  better  research  pro-
grammes can now be built.

Creativity  and  imagination  are  central  to 
the research enterprise. A premise of this report 
is  that,  wherever  people  have  health  problems, 
new ideas will be proposed to help solve them. 
The constraints are in the means of turning these 
ideas  into  dependable,  practical  applications. 
Even  research  of  the  highest  quality  does  not 
automatically translate into better health if the 
findings are not implemented.

To better understand the task ahead, there 
is a need systematically to assess the strengths 
and weaknesses of research for health, country 
by  country,  worldwide.  When  public  money  is 
being spent on research, there should be mecha-
nisms for debating research priorities, for devel-
oping  the  capacity  to  carry  out  research,  for 
setting standards, and for translating the results 
into policy and practice. In judging the priorities 
for spending, there should be a consensus on the 
balance of activities related to the research cycle: 
measuring the size of the health problem; under-
standing its cause; devising solutions; translating 
the evidence into policy, practice and products; 
and evaluating the effectiveness of interventions 
after implementation. Further, for any problem 
studied  in  any  given  setting,  there  should  be 
discussion on the methods of investigation, the 
significance of the findings, and the inferences to 
be drawn from them.

The  means  of  creating  a  healthy  research 
environment  and  of  judging  its  performance 
are  described  in  greater  detail  in  Chapter  4. 
However,  before  considering  how  to  establish 
effective research programmes, Chapter 3 shows 
how research can address some of the big ques-
tions about universal health coverage in order to 
provide credible answers to inform policy and 
practice.  ■

References
1. 

Commission on Health Research for Development. Health research - essential link to equity in development. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press, 1990.

2.  WHO strategy on research for health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (http://www.who.int/phi/WHO_Strategy_

on_research_for_health.pdf, accessed 23 April 2013).
Research assessment exercise. Guidance on submissions. London, Higher Education Funding Council for England, 2005.

3. 
4.  National Science Board. Science and engineering indicators 2012. Arlington, VA, National Science Foundation, 2012.
5.  Humphreys K, Piot P. Scientific evidence alone is not sufficient basis for health policy. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 

2012,344:e1316. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e1316 PMID:22371864

6.  Glossary of statistical terms. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2012. (stats.oecd.org/glos-

7. 

8. 

sary/search.asp, accessed 14 March 2013).
Zachariah R et al. Is operational research delivering the goods? The journey to success in low-income countries. The Lancet 
Infectious Diseases, 2012,12:415-421. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(11)70309-7 PMID:22326018
Lobb R, Colditz GA. Implementation science and its application to population health. Annual Review of Public Health, 
2013,34:235-251. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031912-114444 PMID:23297655

48

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

Translational research. Seattle, Institute of Translational Health Sciences, 2012 (www.iths.org, accessed 14 March 2013).

9. 
10.  Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research. What is HPSR? Overview (web page). Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2011.

11.  Health research classification system. London, UK Clinical Research Collaboration, 2009.
12.  Health research classification systems: current approaches and future recommendations. Strasbourg, European Science 

Foundation, 2011. 

13.  Pena-Rosas JP et al. Translating research into action: WHO evidence-informed guidelines for safe and effective micronutri-
ent interventions. The Journal of Nutrition, 2012,142:197S-204S. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/jn.111.138834 PMID:22113868

14.  Bonita R, Beaglehole R, Kjellström T. Basic epidemiology, 2nd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.
15.  Guyatt GH et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 

(Clinical Research Ed.), 2008,336:924-926. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.39489.470347.AD PMID:18436948

16.  WHO handbook for guideline development. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
17.  Duclos P et al. Developing evidence-based immunization recommendations and GRADE. Vaccine, 2012,31:12-19. doi: http://

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.02.041 PMID:22391401

18.  Homer-Dixon T. The ingenuity gap. London, Vintage Books, 2001.
19. 

Innovation Prize for Africa. Addis Ababa, United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and the African Innovation 
Foundation, 2011 (www.innovationprizeforafrica.org, accessed 14 March 2013).

20.  Nakkazi E. Students develop software to monitor unborn babies. AllAfrica, 2012. (allafrica.com/stories/201205240064.html, 

accessed 14 March 2013).

21.  Dr. Mohan’s Diabetes Specialities Centre (web site). Chennai, Dr. Mohan’s, 2012. (www.drmohansdiabetes.com, accessed 

14 March 2013).

22.  Priority-setting in health: building institutions for smarter public spending. Washington, DC, Center for Global Development, 2012.
23.  Omachonu VK, Einspruch NG. Innovation in healthcare delivery systems: a conceptual framework. The Innovation Journal: 

The Public Sector Innovation Journal, 2010,15(1).

24.  The 10/90 report on health research 2000. Geneva, Global Forum for Health Research, 2000.
25. 

Investing in health research and development. Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Health Research Relating to Future 
Intervention Options. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1996.

26.  Macroeconomics and health: Investing in health for economic development. Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and 

Health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001.

27.  Task Force on Health Systems Research. Informed choices for attaining the Millennium Development Goals: towards an 
international cooperative agenda for health-systems research. Lancet, 2004,364:997-1003. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(04)17026-8 PMID:15364193

28.  World report on knowledge for better health − strengthening health systems. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004. 
29.  Hafner T, Shiffman J. The emergence of global attention to health systems strengthening. Health Policy and Planning, 

2013,28:41-50. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czs023 PMID:22407017

30.  Law T et al. Climate for evidence-informed health systems: a profile of systematic review production in 41 low- and mid-
dle-income countries, 1996–2008. Journal of Health Services Research & Policy, 2012,17:4-10. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/
jhsrp.2011.010109 PMID:21967823

31.  Murray CJ et al. GBD 2010: a multi-investigator collaboration for global comparative descriptive epidemiology. Lancet, 

2012,380:2055-2058. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)62134-5 PMID:23245598

32.  Youngkong S, Kapiriri L, Baltussen R. Setting priorities for health interventions in developing countries: a review 

of empirical studies. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2009,14:930-939. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
3156.2009.02311.x PMID:19563479

33.  Viergever RF et al. A checklist for health research priority setting: nine common themes of good practice. Health Research 

Policy and Systems, 2010,8:36. PMID:21159163

34.  Rudan I. Global health research priorities: mobilizing the developing world. Public Health, 2012,126:237-240. doi: http://

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2011.12.001 PMID:22325672

35.  AU-NEPAD (African Union – New Partnership for Africa’s Development). African innovation outlook 2010. Pretoria, AU-NEPAD, 2010.
36.  Adam T et al. Trends in health policy and systems research over the past decade: still too little capacity in low-income 

countries. PLoS ONE, 2011,6:e27263. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0027263 PMID:22132094

37.  Neglected disease research and development: a five year review. Sydney, Policy Cures, 2012.
38.  Mundel T. Global health needs to fill the innovation gap. Nature Medicine, 2012,18:1735. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/

nm1212-1735 PMID:23223055

49

Research for universal health coverage

39.  Chalmers I, Hedges LV, Cooper H. A brief history of research synthesis. Evaluation & the Health Professions, 2002,25:12-37. 

doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0163278702025001003 PMID:11868442

40.  Bastian H, Glasziou P, Chalmers I. Seventy-five trials and eleven systematic reviews a day: how will we ever keep up? PLoS 

Medicine, 2010,7:e1000326. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000326 PMID:20877712

41.  Nachega JB et al. Current status and future prospects of epidemiology and public health training and research in the 

WHO African region. International Journal of Epidemiology, 2012,41:1829-1846. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/dys189 
PMID:23283719

42.  Decoster K, Appelmans A, Hill P. A health systems research mapping exercise in 26 low- and middle-income countries: narra-

tives from health systems researchers, policy brokers and policy-makers. (Background paper commissioned by the Alliance for 
Health Policy and Systems Research to develop the WHO Health Systems Research Strategy). Geneva, Alliance for Health 
Policy and Systems Research, World Health Organization, 2012.

43.  Sheikh K et al. Building the field of health policy and systems research: framing the questions. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1001073. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001073 PMID:21857809

44.  Global Open Access Portal. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2012. (http://www.

unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/portals-and-platforms/goap/, accessed 14 March 2012).

45.  Making a difference. Geneva, Research4Life, 2011. 
46.  Prüss-Üstün A, Corvalán C. Preventing disease through healthy environments. Towards an estimate of the environmental 

burden of disease. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.

47.  Lim SS et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk 
factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet, 
2012,380:2224-2260. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61766-8 PMID:23245609

48.  Dora C et al. Urban transport and health. Module 5g. Sustainable transport: a sourcebook for policy-makers in developing 

cities. Eschborn, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit, and Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011.

49.  Health in the green economy: health co-benefits of climate change mitigation – transport sector. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2011.

50.  Health in the green economy: health co-benefits of climate change mitigation – housing sector. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2011.

51.  Sustainable development goals. New York, United Nations, 2013. (sustainabledevelopment.un.org, accessed 14 March 2013).
52.  Haines A et al. From the Earth Summit to Rio+20: integration of health and sustainable development. Lancet, 

2012,379:2189-2197. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60779-X PMID:22682465

53.  Gilbert N. International aid projects come under the microscope. Nature, 2013,493:462-463. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1038/493462a PMID:23344337

54.  Victora CG, Habicht JP, Bryce J. Evidence-based public health: moving beyond randomized trials. American Journal of Public 

Health, 2004,94:400-405. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.94.3.400 PMID:14998803

55.  Banerjee AV, Duflos E. Poor economics. New York, NY, PublicAffairs, 2011.
56.  Duflo E. Rigorous evaluation of human behavior. Science, 2012,336:1398. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1224965 

PMID:22700919

57.  Eaton WW et al. The burden of mental disorders. Epidemiologic Reviews, 2008,30:1-14. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/epirev/

mxn011 PMID:18806255

58.  Yasamy MT et al. Responsible governance for mental health research in low resource countries. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1001126. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001126 PMID:22131909

59.  Tol WA et al. Research priorities for mental health and psychosocial support in humanitarian settings. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1001096. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001096 PMID:21949644

60.  Challenges and priorities for global mental health research in low- and middle-income countries. London, Academy of Medical 

Sciences, 2008.

61.  Pang T, Terry RF. PLoS Medicine editors. WHO/PLoS collection “No health without research”: a call for papers. PLoS 

Medicine, 2011,8:e1001008. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001008

62.  Tomlinson M et al. A review of selected research priority setting processes at national level in low and middle income 
countries: towards fair and legitimate priority setting. Health Research Policy and Systems, 2011,9:19. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1478-4505-9-19 PMID:21575144

63.  Alger J et al. Sistemas nacionales de investigación para la salud en América Latina: una revisión de 14 países [National 

health research systems in Latin America: a 14-country review]. Revista Panamericana de Salud Pública, 2009,26:447-457. 
PMID:20107697

50

Chapter 2  The growth of research for universal health coverage

64.  Victora CG et al. Achieving universal coverage with health interventions. Lancet, 2004,364:1541-1548. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17279-6 PMID:15500901

65.  Knowledge translation on ageing and health: a framework for policy development. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
66.  Planning, monitoring and evaluation framework for capacity strengthening in health research (ESSENCE Good practice docu-

ment series. Document TDR/ESSENCE/11.1). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011.

67.  McKee M, Stuckler D, Basu S. Where there is no health research: what can be done to fill the global gaps in health research? 

PLoS Medicine, 2012,9:e1001209. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001209 PMID:22545025

68.  Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and intellectual property. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2011.

69.  Research and development to meet health needs in developing countries: strengthening global financing and coordination. 

Report of the Consultative Expert Working Group on Research and Development: Financing and Coordination. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2012.

70.  Research and development − coordination and financing. Report of the Expert Working Group. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2010.

71.  Public health, innovation and intellectual property rights: report of the Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, Innovation 

and Public Health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.

72.  Promoting access to medical technologies and innovation: intersections between public health, intellectual property and trade. 

Geneva, World Health Organization, World Intellectual Property Organization and World Trade Organization, 2013.

73.  Røttingen J-A et al. Multi-stakeholder technical meeting on implementation options recommended by the WHO Consultative 

Expert Working Group on Research & Development (CEWG): Financing and Coordination. Nonthaburi and Cambridge, MA, 
International Health Policy Program Thailand and Harvard Global Health Institute, Bellagio, Rockefeller Foundation, 2012. 
74.  Røttingen J-A et al. Mapping of available health research and development data: what’s there, what’s missing, and what 

role is there for a global observatory? Lancet, 2013, May 17. pii:S0140-6736(13)61046-6. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(13)61046-6

75.  Chirac P, Torreele E. Global framework on essential health R&D. Lancet, 2006,367:1560-1561. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/

S0140-6736(06)68672-8 PMID:16698397

76.  Braine T. Race against time to develop new antibiotics. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2011,89:88-89. doi: http://

dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.11.030211 PMID:21346918

77.  Leroy JL. et al. Current priorities in health research funding and lack of impact on the number of child deaths per year. 

American Journal of Public Health, 2007,97:219-223. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2005.083287 PMID:17194855

78.  Rothwell PM. Funding for practice-oriented clinical research. Lancet, 2006,368:262-266. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/

S0140-6736(06)69010-7 PMID:16860680

79.  Zachariah R et al. The 2012 world health report ‘no health without research’: the endpoint needs to go beyond publication 
outputs. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2012,17:1409-1411. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3156.2012.03072.x
80.  Brooks A et al. Implementing new health interventions in developing countries: why do we lose a decade or more? BioMed 

Central Public Health., 2012,12:683. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-683 PMID:22908877

81.  Bennett S, Ssengooba F. Closing the gaps: from science to action in maternal, newborn, and child health in Africa. PLoS 

Medicine, 2010,7:e1000298. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000298 PMID:20613861

82.  Nordling L. African nations vow to support science. Nature, 2010,465:994-995. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/465994a 

PMID:20577179

83.  The Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 

and Development, 2013 (http://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/parisdeclarationandaccraagendaforaction.htm, accessed 
16 March 2013).

84.  Fourth High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness. Busan, Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, 2011. 

(www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/, accessed 14 March 2013).

85.  Oxman AD et al. A framework for mandatory impact evaluation to ensure well informed public policy decisions. Lancet, 

2010,375:427-431. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61251-4 PMID:20113827

86.  Evaluation for development (web page). Ottawa, International Development Research Centre, 2012. (http://www.idrc.ca/

EN/Programs/Evaluation/Pages/default.aspx, accessed 16 March 2013).

87.  Health Economics Research Group, Brunel University. Office of Health Economics, RAND Europe. Medical research. What’s it 

worth? Estimating the economic benefits from medical research in the UK. London, UK Evaluation Forum, 2008.

88.  First Funding. Exceptional returns. The economic value of America’s investment in medical research. New York, NY, Albert & 

Mary Lasker Foundation, 2000.

51

Research for universal health coverage

89.  Exceptional returns: the value of investing in health R&D in Australia II. Canberra, The Australian Society for Medical 

Research, 2008.

90.  Johnston SC et al. Effect of a US National Institutes of Health programme of clinical trials on public health and costs. Lancet, 

2006,367:1319-1327. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68578-4 PMID:16631910

91.  Yazdizadeh B, Majdzadeh R, Salmasian H. Systematic review of methods for evaluating healthcare research economic 

impact. Health Research Policy and Systems, 2010,8:6. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-8-6 PMID:20196839

92.  Donovan C, Hanney S. The ‘Payback Framework’ explained. Research Evaluation, 2011,20:181-183. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3

152/095820211X13118583635756

93.  Wooding S et al. Payback arising from research funding: evaluation of the Arthritis Research Campaign. Rheumatology, 

2005,44:1145-1156. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keh708 PMID:16049052

94.  Hanney S et al. An assessment of the impact of the NHS Health Technology Assessment Programme. Health Technology 

Assessment, 2007,11:iii-iv, ix–xi, 1–180. PMID:18031652

95.  Oortwijn WJ et al. Assessing the impact of health technology assessment in the Netherlands. International Journal of 

Technology Assessment in Health Care, 2008,24:259-269. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0266462308080355 PMID:18601793

96.  Kwan P et al. A systematic evaluation of payback of publicly funded health and health services research in Hong Kong. BMC 

Health Services Research, 2007,7:121. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-7-121 PMID:17662157

97.  Buxton M, Hanney S. How can payback from health services research be assessed? Journal of Health Services Research & 

Policy, 1996,1:35-43. PMID:10180843

98.  Nason E et al. Health research – making an impact. The economic and social benefits of HRB funded research. Dublin, Health 

Research Board, 2008.

99.  Stevens AJ et al. The role of public-sector research in the discovery of drugs and vaccines. The New England Journal of 

Medicine, 2011,364:535-541. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1008268 PMID:21306239

100.  Whitworth JA et al. Strengthening capacity for health research in Africa. Lancet, 2008,372:1590-1593. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61660-8 PMID:18984193

101.  Chan M. Best days for public health are ahead of us, says WHO Director-General. Address to the Sixty-fifth World Health 
Assembly, Geneva, 21 May 2012. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (http://www.who.int/dg/speeches/2012/
wha_20120521, accessed 14 March 2013).

102.  Frenk J, Chen L. Overcoming gaps to advance global health equity: a symposium on new directions for research. Health 

Research Policy and Systems, 2011,9:11. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-9-11 PMID:21342523

103.  Thorsteinsdottir H, ed. South-South collaboration in health biotechnology: growing partnerships amongst developing coun-

tries. New Delhi and Ottawa, Academic Foundation and International Development Research Centre, 2012.

52

Chapter 3

How research contributes to 
universal health coverage

Chapter 3

Key points 

Insecticide-treated mosquito nets to 
reduce childhood mortality 

Antiretroviral therapy to prevent sexual 
transmission of HIV

Zinc supplements to reduce 
pneumonia and diarrhoea in young 
children 

Telemedicine to improve the quality of 
paediatric care

New diagnostics for tuberculosis 

The “polypill” to reduce deaths from 
cardiovascular disease

Combination treatment with 
sodium stibogluconate (SSG) and 
paromomycin compared to SSG 
monotherapy for visceral leishmaniasis

Task shifting in the scale-up of 
interventions to improve child survival 

Improving access to emergency 
obstetric care

Conditional cash transfers to improve 
the use of health services and health 
outcomes

Insurance in the provision of accessible 
and affordable health services 

Affordable health care in ageing 
populations

Conclusions: general lessons drawn 
from specific examples

56 

61

63

65

67

69

71

73

75

77

79

81

82

84

A health worker measures the mid-upper arm circumference of a child at a nutrition centre in Koubigou, Chad.  
The yellow on the armband indicates that the child is malnourished (© UNICEF/NYHQ2011-2139/Esteve).

Key points

 ■ Research illuminates the path to universal health coverage and to better health. This 

chapter illustrates this with 12 case-studies which investigate questions on issues 
ranging from the prevention and control of specific diseases to the functioning of 
health systems.

 ■ Several case-studies show how the path to universal health coverage is linked with 

progress towards the health-related MDGs, which concern maternal and child health 
and the control of major communicable diseases.

 ■ Research for universal health coverage addresses questions on three levels. First, 
what is the nature of the health problem, e.g. is it disease-related or health-system 
related? Second, what specific question is being asked, and where is this question 
placed in the cycle of research from understanding causes to applying solutions? 
Third, what is the most appropriate study design for addressing the question at hand?

 ■ The case-studies illustrate the questions on all three levels. In particular, they 

highlight the range of methods that are commonly used in health research, from 
observational studies to randomized controlled trials.

 ■ These examples also lead to some general conclusions about research for universal 
health coverage. They illustrate the diversity of problems for which research can 
offer solutions, the benefits of having evidence from multiple sources, the nature of 
the research cycle, the relationship between study design and strength of inference, 
the challenge of applying research findings from one setting to another, and the link 
between research, policy and practice.

3

How research contributes to  
universal health coverage

Chapter 2 showed how research for health in general, and for universal health 
coverage in particular, has been increasing around the world, albeit unevenly. 
Turning now to the findings of research, this chapter illustrates, with selected 
case-studies, how research can address a wide range of questions about universal 
health coverage and provide answers that can guide health policy and practice.
In  selecting  and  describing  the  case-studies,  we  recognize  a  hierarchy  of 
investigations on three levels. The first level is about identifying the nature of the 
health problem. The focus might be on a specific disease (such as diabetes, hyper-
tension, tuberculosis or HIV/AIDS), or on the functioning of an element of the 
health system (such as the health workforce, national laboratory network, or fair-
ness of a health insurance scheme). Covering both diseases and health systems, 
this chapter focuses on research that helps to make progress, not only towards 
universal health coverage but also towards achieving the health-related MDGs 
and sustaining these goals thereafter. The research examples include questions 
about child health (MDG 4) and maternal health (MDG 5), and about HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria (MDG 6). The chapter also discusses noncommunicable 
diseases, the functioning of health systems, and financial barriers to health care.
The second level is about defining the research question, classifying it and 
placing it within the cycle of research (Box 2.3). The case-studies in this chapter 
are organized according to the classification proposed by the United Kingdom 
Clinical Research Collaboration, spanning eight categories from “underpin-
ning research” (i.e. basic or fundamental research) to health policy and systems 
research  (Box  2.2)  (1,  2).  The  12  case-studies  listed  in Table  3.1  are  ordered 
according to this scheme. This collection of case-studies falls into categories 
3–8  in  Box  2.2,  because  “underpinning  research”  (category  1)  and  “disease 
etiology”, (category 2) are less directly relevant to universal health coverage 
than the other categories.

The studies in this chapter have been selected to reflect a wide variety of 
situations, approaches and conditions, ranging from the “prevention of dis-
eases and promotion of well-being” to “health policy and systems research”. 
They are placed all around the research cycle described in Chapter 2. The inves-
tigations  were  done  mainly  in  low-and  middle-income  countries,  where  the 

57

Research for universal health coverage

 

e

l

 

a
c
s
 
o
t
 
s
t
r
o
ff
e
d
e
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
e
c
n
e
d
v
e
e
h
T

i

 

-

 

w
o
h
s
 
y
b
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
N
T

 

I
 

i

i

n
a
t
n
a
m
d
n
a
p
u

 

 

 

i

a
m
e
a
t
i
s
a
r
a
p
a

 

i
r
a

l

a
m
n

 

i
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

 

h
t
i

 

w
d
e
t
a

i
c
o
s
s
a
 
s
a
w
 
s
N
T

 

I
 
f
o
e
s
U

 
r
o
f
 
T
R
A

 

 

 
f
o
e
s
u
n
o
 
s
e
n

i
l

 

i

e
d
u
g
d
n
a
y
c
i
l

 

o
p

.

I

V
H

 

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
p
d
n
a
 
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

.
)
4
(
 
g
n
i
t
t
e
s
 
e
f
i
l
-
l

a
e
r
 
a
n

 

i

-
c
e
f
n

i
 

I

V
H

 

 
f
o
d
a
e
r
p
s
 
e
h
t
 
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
o
t
 
T
R
A

 
f
o

 

 

e
s
u
c
i
g
e
t
a
r
t
s
 
e
h
t
 
d
e
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
 
y
d
u
t
s
 
e
h
T

 

i

y
l
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
s
 
n
o
i
t
a

i
t
i
n

i
 

 

T
R
A
y
l
r
a
E

-
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
l

a
u
x
e
s
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
r
 
d
e
c
u
d
e
r

 

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i
 

 

n
e
v
o
r
p
a
 
f
o
 
t
c
e
ff
e
e
h
t
 
g
n

 

i

.

n
e
r
d

l
i

 

h
c
g
n
u
o
y
n

 

i
 
y
t
i
l

a
t
r
o
m
d
n
a

 

 
l

 

l

a
b
o
g
w
e
n
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
d
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 
e
s
a
b

l

 

 

 

i

e
c
n
e
d
v
e
e
h
t
 
d
e
n
e
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s
 
d
n
a
n
o
i
t

 

.

I

V
H

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
s

 

n
a
c
i
r
f

 

A
2
2

s
e

i
r
t
n
u
o
c

 
s
i
s
y
l

a
n
a
-
a
t
e
M

 

l

d
o
h
e
s
u
o
h
 
f
o

)
3
(
 
a
t
a
d
y
e
v
r
u
s

 

 

 

d
n
a
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t

.

y
t
i
l

a
t
r
o
m

 

l

a
i
r
a
a
m
h
g
H

i

 

)
2

.

 

2
x
o
B

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P

 

 

d
n
a
e
s
a
e
s
i
d

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
o
m
o
r
p

 

d
n
a

 
,
s
n
o
i
t

 

i

g
n
e
b
-
l
l

e
w

 

)
3
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

-
i
d
n
o
c

 

a
c
i
r
e
m
A
n
i
t
a
L

 

 

n

i
 
s
e

i
r
t
n
u
o
c

 
,

a

i
s
A

 
,

a
c
i
r
f

A

 

h
t
r
o
N
d
n
a

 

a
c
i
r
e
m
A

 

e
n
N

i

 

y
r
t
n
u
o
c
i
t
l
u
M

 

d
e
z
i
m
o
d
n
a
r

 
l

a

i
r
t
 
d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

)
5
(

 
l

a
u
x
e
s
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
r
 
h
g
H

i

 

I

V
H

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P

 

 

d
n
a
e
s
a
e
s
i
d

.
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
f
n

i

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
o
m
o
r
p

 

 
)
3
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 

i

g
n
e
b
-
l
l

e
w

 

d
n
a

 
,
s
n
o
i
t

-
i
d
n
o
c

 
r
o
f
 
s
t
n
e
m
e
p
p
u
s
 

l

 

 

c
n
i
z
e
s
u
o
t
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
d
n
e
m

 

 

d
n
a
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
d

i

 
,

i

a
n
o
m
u
e
n
p
 
f
o

-

m
o
c
e
r
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
O
H
W
/
F
E
C
N
U

I

 

i

 
s
e
d
o
s
i
p
e
 
t
s
n
a
g
a
d
e
t
c
e
t
o
r
p

 

 

 

i

e
h
t
 
o
t
 
t
h
g
e
w
d
e
d
d
a
e
c
n
e
d
v
e
 
s
i
h
T

i

 

 
s
t
n
e
m
e
p
p
u
s
 

l

 

c
n
i
z
y
l
k
e
e
W

h
s
e
d
a
g
n
a
B

l

 
l

a

i
r
t
 
d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

 

d
e
z
i
m
o
d
n
a
R

)
6
(

 

 

d
n
a
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
d
m
o
r
f

i

 

 

y
t
i
l

 

a
t
r
o
m
d
n
a
y
t
i

 

i

-
d
b
r
o
m
d
o
o
h
d

 

l
i

h
C

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P

 
l

 

a
n
o
i
t
i
d
d
a
e
h
t
 
d
e
w
o
h
s
 
o
s
l

a
 
t
I
 
.

a
e
o
h
r
r
a
d

i

 

o
s
l

 

a
d
n
a

 
,

i

a
d
e
m

 
s
i
t
i
t
o
e
v

 

i
t
a
r
u
p
p
u
s

 
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
f
n

i
 
y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
r

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
e
h
t
 
n

 

i
 

c
n
i
z

 
f
o
 
t
fi
e
n
e
b

 

.
s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
r

 

.
s
h
t
a
e
d
d
e
t
n
e
v
e
r
p

 

 

 

e
b
y
a
m
d
n
a
h
g
h
 
s
i

i

 

 

c
n

 

 

i
z
y
b
d
e
t
n
e
v
e
r
p

.

n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
m
e
l
p
p
u
s

 

 

 

 

i

e
d
v
o
r
p
o
t
 
d
e
s
u
e
b
d
u
o
c
e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
e

l

 

l

e
T

 

l

y
g
o
o
n
h
c
e
t
 
e
n
i
c
i
d
e
m
e

l

e
t
 
f
o
e
s
U

 

a

i
l

a
m
o
S

 

 

-
t
c
i
fl
n
o
c
d
n
a
h
c
a
e
r
-
o
t
-
d
r
a
h
n

 

i
 

e
s
i
t
r
e
p
x
e

 

i

c
i
r
t
a
d
e
a
p
 
f
o
y
t
i
l

 

 

a
u
q
e
h
t
 
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

 

 

e
v
a
h
 
t
o
n
o
d
 
t
a
h
t
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
d
e
t
c
e
ff
a

l

 

.

g
n
i
t
t
e
s
 
l

a
t
i
p
s
o
h
a
n

 

 

i
 

e
r
a
c

 
s
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n
i
t
r
e
p
X
8
9
8

 

 
,

2
1
0
2
 
r
e
b
m
e
t
p
e
S

-
i
s
n
e
s
 

i

c
i
t
s
o
n
g
a
d
 
r
e
h
g
h
d
e
d
v
o
r
p

i

i

 

.
s
e
c
i

v
r
e
s
 
h
t
l

 

a
e
h
o
t
 
s
s
e
c
c
a
 
t
c
e
r
i
d

 

 

 

e
h
t
 
f
o
e
s
u
e
h
t
 
d
e
d
n
e
m
m
o
c
e
r
 

O
H
W

 

d
e
t
a
m
o
t
u
a
-
y
l
l

u
f
 
a

 
,

F
I
R
/
B
T
M
®
t
r
e
p
X

 

 

y
B

 
.

0
1
0
2
n

 

 

i
 
y
a
s
s
a
F
I
R
/
B
T
M
®
t
r
e
p
X

 

 
,

 

y
a
s
s
a
n
o
i
t
a
c
fi

i
l

 

p
m
a
d
i
c
a
c
i

 

e

l
c
u
n

 

n
a
j
i

a
b
r
e
z
A

 
,

u
r
e
P

 
,

i

a
d
n

I

a
c
i
r
f

 

A
h
t
u
o
S

 

y
d
u
t
s
 
t
r
o
h
o
c

 

e
v

i
t
c
e
p
s
o
r
P

 
l

a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
h
h
t
i

 

w

)
7
(
 
s
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

 

a
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

 

y
t
i
d

i
l

a
V

 

c
i
t
s
o
n
g
a
d
w
e
n

i

 

.
.
.
 
s
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

.

g
n
i
c
i
r
p

 
l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
c
n
o
c

 
r
o
f
 
e
b
g

l

i

i
l

e
 
s
e

 

i
r
t
n
u
o
c
5
4
1
e
h
t
 
f
o
3
7
n

 

 

 

i

.

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r
 
n
i
c
i
p
m
a
f
i
r
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
d

 

 
r
o
t
c
e
s
 

c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
h
t
 
n

i
 

 

d
e
r
u
c
o
r
p
n
e
e
b
d
a
h

 

 

 

 

i

d
p
a
r
 
d
n
a
B
T
y
r
a
n
o
m
u
p
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i

l

v

i
t

)
8
(
 
t
s
e
t

 

i

c
i
r
t
a
d
e
a
p
 
f
o
y
t
i
l

 

a
u
Q

 
,

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
D

 

n

 

i
 
r
o
o
p
n
e
t
f
o
 
s
i
 
e
r
a
c

.
s
g
n
i
t
t
e
s
 
t
c
i
fl
n
o
c

 

i

c
i
t
s
o
n
g
a
d
n
o
m
m
o
C

 

l

 
s
i
s
o
u
c
r
e
b
u
t
 
r
o
f
 
s
t
s
e
t

 

d
n
a
e
v

 

i
t
i
s
n
e
s
n

i
 

e
r
a

 

g
u
r
d
 
t
c
e
t
e
d
 
t
o
n
n
a
c

.

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r

 

 
)
4
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 
s
i
s
o
n
g
a
d

i

 
,

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
D

 

 
)
4
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 
s
i
s
o
n
g
a
d

i

-
n
e
e
r
c
s

 

d
n
a
g
n

 

i

-
n
e
e
r
c
s

 

d
n
a
g
n

 

i

 

 

d
n
a
e
s
a
e
s
i
d

-
i
d
n
o
c

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
o
m
o
r
p

 

 
)
3
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 

i

g
n
e
b
-
l
l

e
w

 

d
n
a

 
,
s
n
o
i
t

1

2

3

4

5

 
 
r
o
f
 
s
n
o

i
t
a
c
i
l

p
m

I

e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
h
t
l
a
e
h

 

 
l
a
s
r
e
v
i

n
u

s
g
n

i

d
n
fi
n

 

i
a
M

y
r
t
n
u
o
C

e
p
y
t
 
y
d
u
t
S

 

h
t
l
a
e
h
d
e
fi

 

i
t
n
e
d

I

m
e
l

b
o
r
p

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

 

n
o

i
t
a
c
fi

i
s
s
a
l
c

 

n

i
 
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

-
e
s
a
C

 

y
d
u
t
s

r
e
b
m
u
n

r
e
t
p
a
h
c
s
i
h
t
 
n

 

i
 

 

d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
h
t
l
a
e
h

 

 
l
a
s
r
e
v
i
n
u
 
r
o
f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r
 
f
o
s
e
i
d
u
t
s
-
e
s
a
c
e
h
T

 

 

 
.

.

1
3
e
l

 

b
a
T

58

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

 
 
r
o
f
 
s
n
o

i
t
a
c
i
l

p
m

I

e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
h
t
l
a
e
h

 

 
l
a
s
r
e
v
i

n
u

s
g
n

i

d
n
fi
n

 

i
a
M

y
r
t
n
u
o
C

e
p
y
t
 
y
d
u
t
S

 

h
t
l
a
e
h
d
e
fi

 

i
t
n
e
d

I

m
e
l

b
o
r
p

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

 

n
o

i
t
a
c
fi

i
s
s
a
l
c

 

n

i
 
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

-
e
s
a
C

 

y
d
u
t
s

r
e
b
m
u
n

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
 
.
.
.

 
r
o
f
 
d
n
a

 
,
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
h
t
l

 

i

a
e
h
g
n
n
e
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

 

 

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d
 
r
e
g
n
o

l
 

h
t
i

w

 
r
e
h
t
o
d
n
a
 
I

 

C
M

 

I
 
f
o
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

 

i

 

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d
 
r
e
t
r
o
h
s
 
h
t
i

 

w
e
s
o
h
t
 
o
t

 

 

h
t
a
e
d
d
n
a
y
t
i
d
b
r
o
m

i

 

l

 
r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
c

i

 

-
c
e
ff
e
–
 
s
g
u
r
d
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
n
b
m
o
c
a

i

 

 

 

e
v

i
t
n
e
v
e
r
p
 
r
e
h
t
o
h
t
i

 

 

w
d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i
 

n
e
h
w

l

 
s
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
p
i
t
l
u
m
d
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
y
l

 

e
v

i
t

 

y
h
t
l

 

 

a
e
h
d
n
a
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
e
 
s
a
h
c
u
s
 
s
e

 

i
t
i

v

i
t
c
a

.
s
t
e
d

i

.

l

e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
c

i

 
r
o
f

-
n
e
m
m
o
c
e
r
 

 

O
H
W
a
o
t
 
d
e

 

l
 

i

e
c
n
e
d
v
e
e
h
T

 

 

h
t
i

w

 
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
 
n
o
i
t
a
n
b
m
o
C

i

 
,

i

a
p
o
h
t
E

i

 
r
o
f
 
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
 
n
o
i
t
a
n
b
m
o
c
e
n

i

 

i
l
-
t
s
r
fi
a
 
s
a

 

 

 

 
s
a
w
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d
 
r
e
t
r
o
h
s
 
f
o

 

 

 

 

 

l

d
e
s
u
e
b
d
u
o
c
M
P
d
n
a
G
S
S
 
t
a
h
t
 
n
o
i
t
a
d

 

 
s
a
w

 
,

e
v

 

i
t
c
e
ff
e
 
s
a
w
M
P
d
n
a
G
S
S

 

 

 
,

n
a
d
u
S

 
,

a
y
n
e
K

a
d
n
a
g
U

.

a
c
i
r
f

A
 
t
s
a
E
n

 

i

i
 
s
i
s
a
n
a
m
h
s
i

e

l
 
l

a
r
e
c
s
i

v

.

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
s
e
r
 
g
u
r
d
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
d

l

 

 
f
o
k
s
i
r
 
d
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
h
t
i

 

w
d
e
t
a

i
c
o
s
s
a

 
r
o
f
 
y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s
 
e
v

i
t
c
e
ff
e
n
a
 
s
i
 

 

g
n
i
t
f
i
h
s
 
k
s
a
T

 
s
r
e
k
r
o
w
h
t
l

 

 

a
e
h
m
o
r
f
 
g
n
i
t
f
i
h
s
 
k
s
a
T

 
,

h
s
e
d
a
g
n
a
B

l

 

e
c
u
d
e
r
 
y
a
m

 
l
l
i

 

p
y
l
o
p
e
h
t
 
f
o
e
s
U

 

 

i

i

g
n
n
a
t
n
o
c

 
l
l
i

 

l

p
e
g
n
i
s
 
a
−
 
”
l
l
i

 

p
y
l
o
P
“

i

a
d
n

I

 

d
e
c
a
f
 
s
a
e
r
a
d
e
t
i

 

m

i
l
-
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
r
 
d
n
a
d
e
v
r
e
s

 

-
r
e
d
n
u
n

 

i
 
,
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i
 
l

a
v

i

v
r
u
s
 
d

l
i

h
c

 

e
s
i

m
o
r
p
m
o
c

 

 

i

 
t
o
n
d
d
g
n
n
a
r
t
 
f
o

i

i

.
I

C
M

I
 
r
o
f
 
e
r
a
c

 

 
f
o
y
t
i
l

a
u
q

 
f
o
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
e
R

 
,

a
d
n
a
g
U

 

d
e
t
i
n
U

 
,
l
i
z
a
r
B

 
l

a

i
r
t
 
d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

 

d
e
z
i
m
o
d
n
a
R

)
9
(

 
l

 
r
o
j
a
m
a
 
s
i
 

 

e
s
a
e
s
i
d

 

e
l
b
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c
n
o
n

l

 
r
a
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

 

 

l

a
b
o
g
a
d
n
a
e
s
a
e
s
i
d

 

 

y
r
t
n
u
o
c
i
t
l
u
M

 

d
e
z
i
m
o
d
n
a
r

 
l

a

i
r
t
 
d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

)
0
1
(

 

y
r
t
n
u
o
c
i
t
l
u
M

 
l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

)
1
1
(
 
y
d
u
t
s

i

 
s
i
s
a
n
a
m
h
s
i
e
l
 
l

a
r
e
c
s
i
V

 
t
s
e
g
r
a

l
 

d
n
o
c
e
s
 
e
h
t
 
s
i

 

e
h
t
 
n

i
 
r
e

 

l
l
i
k
c
i
t
i
s
a
r
a
p

 
,

a

i
r
a

l

a
m

 

 
r
e
t
f
a
d
l
r
o
w

 
s
n
o
i
t
p
o
 
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t
 
t
u
b

.

d
e
t
i

m

i
l
 

e
r
a

 

h
t
l

a
e
h
c
i
l

 

b
u
p

.

l

m
e
b
o
r
p

.
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i
 
l

a
v

i

v
r
u
s

 

d

l
i

h
c

 

 
f
o
e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c

 

 
s
t
c
e
ff
a
ff
a
t
s
h
t
l
a
e
h

 

 

d
e
fi

i
l

a
u
q
 
f
o
k
c
a
L

 

 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M

 
l

a
r
u
r
 
n

i
 

 

 

 

i

5
G
D
M
e
v
e
h
c
a
o
t
 
,
s
r
e
h
t
o
g
n
o
m
a

 

 

h
t
i

 

w
d
e
t
a

i
c
o
s
s
a
 
s
a
w
e
r
a
c

 

 

c
i
r
t
e
t
s
b
o

)
2
1
(
 
y
d
u
t
s
 
t
r
o
h
o
c

.

a
c
i
r
f

A
n

 

i
 

y
t
i

 
,

 

y
a
w
e
n
o
 
s
i
 

.
s
e
g
a
t
r
o
h
s
 
ff
a
t
s
 
h
t
i

w

e
r
a
c

 

 

c
i
r
t
e
t
s
b
o
y
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
E

 

 

y
c
n
e
g
r
e
m
e
o
t
 
s
s
e
c
c
a
 
f
o
n
o
i
s
i

 

v
o
r
P

i

a
n
a
z
n
a
T

i

d
n
u
r
u
B

 

e
v

i
t
c
e
p
s
o
r
t
e
R

-
l

a
t
r
o
m

 
l

a
n
r
e
t
a
m
h
g
H

i

 

 

o
t
 
e
v

i
t
n
e
c
n

i
 
l

a

 

 

i
c
n
a
n
fi
a
e
r
a
 
s
e
m
e
h
c
s
 
T
C
C

 
l

a
r
u
r
 
a
n

 

i
 
y
t
i
l

a
t
r
o
m

 
l

a
n
r
e
t
a
m
n

 

i

.
t
c
i
r
t
s
i
d

 

e
c
i

v
r
e
s
 
h
t
l

 

a
e
h
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
s
T
C
C

 
,
l
i
z
a
r
B

.

a
c
i
r
f

A

 

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
l

a

i
t
n
a
t
s
b
u
s
 
d
n
a
d
p
a
r
 
a

i

 

 

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
i
t
u
d
n
a
 
r
o
f
 
d
n
a
m
e
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

 

i

 

d
e
t
a

 

 

i
c
o
s
s
a
e
r
e
w
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
i
t
u

 

 
,

i

a
b
m
o
o
C

l

 

i

-
e
v
e
h
c
a
e
h
t
 
g
n
i
t
a
r
b
e

l

 

e
c
o
c
i
x
e
M
o
t
 
d
e

 

l

 

 
t
e
k
c
o
p
-
f
o
-
t
u
o
d
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
e
m
e
h
c
s

 

n

i
 

e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
h
t
l

 

a
e
h

 
l

i

a
s
r
e
v
n
u
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m

 

-
n
e
p
x
e
c
i
h
p
o
r
t
s
a
t
a
c
d
n
a
 
s
e
s
n
e
p
x
e

 

.
s
s
e
c
c
a
o
t
 
s
r
e

 

i
r
r
a
b

 
l

a

i
c
n
a
n
fi
g
n

 

i

-
t
a
n
m

i

i
l

 

e
 
r
o
g
n
i
c
u
d
e
r
 
y
b
 
s
e
c
i

v
r
e
s
 
h
t
l

a
e
h

.
s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
h
t
l

 

 

a
e
h
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i
 

h
t
i

w

 

e
m
e
h
c
s
 
e
c
n
a
r
u
s
n

i
 

h
t
l

a
e
h

 
l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
 
s
i
h
T

 

e
c
n
a
r
u
s
n

i
 

h
t
l

a
e
h

 
l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
A

 

 
,
s
a
r
u
d
n
o
H

 
,
i

w
a

l

a
M

 
,

o
c
i
x
e
M

a
u
g
a
r
a
c
i
N

o
c
i
x
e
M

 
l

a

i
r
t
 
d
e
z
i
m
o
d
n
a
r

 

c
i
h
p
o
r
t
s
a
t
a
c
d
n
a

 

 
r
e
t
s
u
C

l

 
s
e
s
n
e
p
x
e
 
t
e
k
c
o
p
 
f
o
-
t
u
O

)
4
1
(

 

-
i
d
n
e
p
x
e
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
h

l

 

y
c
i
l

 

o
p
h
t
l

a
e
H

 
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
n
a

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

.
s
e
c
i

v
r
e
s

 

h
t
l

 

a
e
h
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l

 

 
)
8
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

)
3
1
(
 

w
e

i

v
e
r

 

e
c
n
e
u
fl
n

i
 
y
l

e
v

i
t
a
g
e
n

 
s
r
e
i
r
r
a
b

 
l

a
i
c
n
a
n
i
F

 

y
c
i
l

 

o
p
h
t
l

a
e
H

 
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
n
a

 

 

-
i
t
u
d
n
a
o
t
 
s
s
e
c
c
a

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

.
.
.
 
s
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

.

1
1
0
2

 

l

.
s
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
h
 
r
e
r
o
o
p

 
l

 

i

a
s
r
e
v
n
u
g
n
v
e
h
c
a

i

i

i

g
n
h
c
a
e
r
 
s
t
fi
e
n
e
b
h
t
i

 

w

 
,
s
e
r
u
t
i
d

 

o
t
 
s
r
e

 

i
r
r
a
b
e
r
a
 
s
e
r
u
t

 

 
)
8
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

.

e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
h
t
l

 

a
e
h

59

)
2

.

 

2
x
o
B

 
t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
D

l

 

c
i
t
u
e
p
a
r
e
h
t

 

d
n
a
 
s
t
n
e
m

 
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

 

 
)
5
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

-
t
a
e
r
t
 
f
o

 

c
i
t
u
e
p
a
r
e
h
t

 

d
n
a
 
s
t
n
e
m

 
s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

 

 
)
6
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

-
t
a
e
r
t
 
f
o

 

n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v
E

l

 
s
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
f
o

 

d
n
a

 

 
)
7
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 
s
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

 

y
c
i
l

 

o
p
h
t
l

a
e
H

 
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
n
a

 

 
)
8
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

6

7

8

9

0
1

1
1

Research for universal health coverage

 
 
r
o
f
 
s
n
o

i
t
a
c
i
l

p
m

I

e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
h
t
l
a
e
h

 

 
l
a
s
r
e
v
i

n
u

s
g
n

i

d
n
fi
n

 

i
a
M

y
r
t
n
u
o
C

e
p
y
t
 
y
d
u
t
S

 

h
t
l
a
e
h
d
e
fi

 

i
t
n
e
d

I

m
e
l

b
o
r
p

 

e
r
a
f
l

 

 

e
w
d
n
a
e
r
a
c
m
r
e
t
-
g
n
o

 

l
 
,

e
r
a
c
h
t
l

 

a
e
h

 

e
h
t
 

m
o
r
f
 
g
n

i
l
l

 

a
f
 
e
r
a
d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

 

.

 

i

g
n
e
g
a
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p

l

 

o
t
 
t
p
a
d
a
 
t
s
u
m

 
s
e

 

i
r
t
n
u
o
c
n
a
e
p
o
r
u
E
n

 

i

.
s
d
r
a
w
n
o
 
s
0
3
0
2

 

o
t
 
d
e
t
c
e
p
x
e
 
t
o
n
 
s
i
 

 

i

g
n
e
g
a
h
g
u
o
h
t
l
A

 

h
t
l

a
e
h
c
i
l

 

b
u
p
n

 

i
 
s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 

d
e
t
c
e
o
r
P

j

 
f
o
 
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
,
s
t
s
o
c
a
r
t
x
e
e
g
r
a

 

 

l
 
r
u
c
n

i

 

 

 

i

e
r
a
g
n
e
g
a
o
t
 
e
u
d
e
r
u
t
i
d
n
e
p
x
e

 

 
,
c
i
l

b
u
p
e
R

 
,

y
n
a
m
r
e
G

 
,

y
r
a
g
n
u
H

 

h
c
e
z
C

 
,
s
d
n
a

l
r
e
h
t
e
N

 

e
v

i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

 
f
o
 
s
t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

 

h
t
l

a
e
h
c
i
l

 

b
u
p

 

e
r
u
t
i
d
n
e
p
x
e

 

d
e
t
a

i
c
o
s
s
a

 

 

i

a
n
e
v
o
S

l

 
,

i

g
n
e
g
a
h
t
i

 

w

-
e
d
i
c
i
t
c
e
s
n

i
 
,

N
T

I
 
;
s
s
e
n

l
l
i
 

d
o
o
h
d

l
i

h
c

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

 

i
 
,
I

C
M

I
 
;
s
u
r
i

 

v
y
c
n
e

i
c
fi
e
d
o
n
u
m
m

i
 

n
a
m
u
h

 
,

I

V
H

 
;
r
e
f
s
n
a
r
t
 
h
s
a
c

 
l

a
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

 
,

T
C
C

 
;

y
p
a
r
e
h
t
 
l

a
r
i

v
o
r
t
e
r
i
t
n
a

 
,

T
R
A

)
1
(
 
0
6
0
2
–
0
1
0
2

 
,

M
P

 
;

 

 

5
1
0
2
d
n
a
0
9
9
1
n
e
e
w

 

 

t
e
b
%
5
7
y
b
y
t
i
l

 

 

a
t
r
o
m

 
l

 

a
n
r
e
t
a
m
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
–
5

 

 
l

a
o
G
 
t
n
e
m
p
o

l

 

e
v
e
D
m
u
n
n
e

i

l
l
i

M

 
,

 

5
G
D
M

 
;
l

a
o
G
 
t
n
e
m
p
o

l

 

e
v
e
D
m
u
n
n
e

i

l
l
i

M

 
,

G
D
M

 

 
;
t
e
n
d
e
b
d
e
t
a
e
r
t

 

gap between the present coverage of health ser-
vices and universal health coverage is greatest. 
In keeping with the realities of doing research, 
the evidence is of varying quality and has vari-
ably influenced the development or adjustment 
of health policies.

For each type of question, the investigation 
begins with understanding the problem, proceeds 
with the development of a solution, and then eval-
uates the feasibility, cost, effectiveness and cost–
effectiveness of that solution. Evaluation leads to 
further questions, and so another cycle of research 
or evaluation begins (Box 2.3). As the evidence 
improves  through  repeated  cycles  of  research, 
changes to policy advice can be expected too.

The third level is about designing the investi-
gation. The task is to select the most appropriate 
methods for collecting reliable information in the 
most rigorous way, producing evidence that will 
answer the research questions at hand and ulti-
mately  improve  health  coverage,  either  through 
the  implementation  of  new  interventions  or  by 
developing  new  policies.  Study  designs  range 
from  observational  investigations  that  can  have 
important  qualitative  components  (e.g.  among 
targeted groups of patients or health-care work-
ers) to comparisons of interventions in which the 
primary outcomes are determined by quantitative 
methods (Table 3.2) (15). Some complex designs 
mix  qualitative  and  quantitative  elements  (16). 
The choice of design influences the feasibility, cost 
and duration of the study as well as the potential 
reliability (validity) and usefulness. Observational 
studies are sometimes quicker, cheaper and easier 
to conduct than formal experiments but may be 
less conclusive because they are especially prone to 
bias and may ultimately be misleading (Box 2.3), 
so  there  is  a  compromise  in  study  design.  The 
choice of methods may depend on the likelihood 
and  importance  of  obtaining  results  that  could 
eventually influence health policy.

Emerging from the 12 examples that follow 
are some general features of research for univer-
sal  health  coverage.  These  are  identified  at  the 
end of the chapter.

.

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
a
g
r

 

O
h
t
l

 

a
e
H
d
l
r
o
W

 
,

O
H
W

 
;

d
n
u
F
 
s
’
n
e
r
d

l
i

h
C
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
N
d
e
t
i
n
U

 

 
,

F
E
C
N
U

I

l

 
;
s
i
s
o
u
c
r
e
b
u
t
 
,

B
T

 
;

e
t
a
n
o
c
u
g
o
b
i
t
s
 

l

i

m
u
d
o
s
 
,

G
S
S

 
;

e
t
a
f
l
u
s
 
n
i
c
y
m
o
m
o
r
a
p

i

-
n
a
t
s
u
s
n
u
y
l
l

 

a

i
t
n
e
t
o
P

 

n

i
 
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
h
t
l

a
e
h

 

 
f
o
g
n
i
c
n
a
n
fi
e
l
b
a

 

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p

l

i

g
n
e
g
a
h
t
i

 

w
 
s
e

i
r
t
n
u
o
c

 

 
)
8
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

 

n
o

i
t
a
c
fi

i
s
s
a
l
c

 

n

i
 
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
(

-
e
s
a
C

 

y
d
u
t
s

r
e
b
m
u
n

)
2

.

 

2
x
o
B

 

y
c
i
l

 

o
p
h
t
l

a
e
H

 
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
n
a

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

2
1

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
 
.
.
.

60

Systematic reviews of 
experimentsc
Experiments using random 
allocation (RCTs) or 
minimizationd,e
Experiments using other 
allocation methods
Systematic reviews of 
observations w/ or w/o 
experiments
Cohort study (prospective or 
historical retrospective)

Enrollees

Enrollees

Primary studies

Enrollees or populationf

Case-control (retrospective)

Population

Cross-sectionalg

Population

Assign to study group 
using randomization or 
minimization
Assign to study group 
through other methods
Systematic search

Group by presence or 
absence of characteristic such 
as risk factor
Group by outcome of interest

Group assessed at a single 
point in time

Summarize strength of 
evidence
Intervene, measure, follow 
and compare

Intervene, measure, follow 
and compare
Summarize strength of 
evidence

Follow and compare

Compare characterstics (e.g. 
exposure)
Assess prevalence of 
characteristic and association 
with an outcome
Describe treatment and 
outcome
Describe treatment and 
outcome

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

Table 3.2.  Overview of research study designs 

Study typea,b

Studying

Method to organize  

the study

How conclusions  

are derived

Primary studies

Systematic search

Case series

Case report

Patients

Observe and report

Individual patient

Observe and report

RCTs, randomized controlled trials.

a   The choice of study type frequently depends upon the health care question.
b   All studies should be critically appraised for validity (bias and chance) and evaluated for usefulness.
c   Non-systematic reviews and other observations not included in this table .
d   In general, valid experiments (e.g. RCTs) are the most reliable designs for investigating cause and effect in medical and 

public health interventions.

e   “Minimization” is a method of adaptive allocation that aims to minimize imbalances between prognostic variables of 

patients assigned to different treatment groups.

f   A “population” is typically a subset of a larger population.
g   Some of these general study types have different names (e.g. a cross-sectional study may also be called a prevalence study).

Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Stuart ME, Strite SA, Delfini Group LLC (www.delfini.org).

Case-study 1
Insecticide-treated mosquito 
nets to reduce childhood 
mortality: a systematic analysis 
of survey data from 22 sub-
Saharan African countries
The need for research
By killing or repelling mosquitoes, insecticide-
treated  bed  nets  (ITNs,  Fig.  3.1)  protect  the 

individuals sleeping under them from malaria. 
By killing mosquitoes, they should also reduce 
malaria transmission in the community (4).

Randomized  controlled  trials  conducted 
in  sub-Saharan  Africa  in  a  range  of  malaria-
endemic settings have provided robust evidence 
of the efficacy of ITNs in reducing malaria para-
site prevalence and incidence and all-cause child 
mortality (17, 18). Such trials showed that ITNs 
can  reduce  Plasmodium  falciparum  prevalence 
among children younger than five years of age 
by 13% and malaria deaths by 18%. As a result, 

61

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 3.1. 

Household use of insecticide-treated mosquito bed nets

e
v

i
t
a

i
t
i
n

I
 

 

i

R
O
T
N
E
M
e
h
T
/
k
a
b
o
H
h
a
r
a
S

 

widespread  provision  of  ITNs  became  central 
to global efforts to control malaria. In 2005, the 
World Health Assembly set a target of providing 
ITNs to at least 80% of persons at risk of malaria 
by  2010.  Progress  towards  this  goal  has  varied 
among countries, although several countries in 
sub-Saharan Africa scaled up the proportion of 
households that own ITNs from almost zero to 
more than 60% with support from international 
donors  (19).  There  was  a  dramatic  increase  in 
funding for malaria control from US$ 100 mil-
lion in 2003 to US$ 1.5 billion in 2010, most of 
which  was  invested  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  (4). 
Between 2004 and 2010, more than 400 million 
bed nets were delivered (290 million since 2008) 
– sufficient to cover almost 80% of populations 
at risk of malaria in Africa (20).

In  contrast  with  the  findings  of  controlled 
trials, ITNs may be less effective in routine use 
because the insecticidal effect wears off, or nets 
may be used inappropriately or become damaged. 
The impact of ITNs, as used routinely, on malaria 
and childhood mortality is therefore uncertain.

Study design
A meta-analysis of six Malaria Indicator Surveys 
and  one  Demographic  and  Health  Survey  was 
carried out to determine the association between 
household ITN ownership and the prevalence of 
malaria  parasitaemia.  The  reduction  in  child 
mortality was further assessed using data from 
29 Demographic and Health Surveys undertaken 
in 22 countries of sub-Saharan Africa (3).

62

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

Summary of findings
Investigators  pooled  the  results  of  the  individ-
ual  surveys  and  found  a  20%  (95%  confidence 
interval, CI: 3–35%) reduction in prevalence of 
malaria parasitaemia associated with household 
ownership of at least one ITN, as compared with 
no  ITN.  Sleeping  under  an  ITN  the  previous 
night was associated with a 24% (95% CI: 1–42%) 
reduction in the prevalence of malaria parasitae-
mia. Ownership of at least one ITN was associ-
ated  with  a  reduction  in  mortality  in  children 
under five years of age of 23% (95% CI: 13–31%), 
which was consistent with that seen in the rand-
omized controlled trials.

The accuracy of these findings may be affected 
by the observational study design. For instance, it 
is possible that people who owned ITNs shared 
other characteristics that contributed to the reduc-
tion  in  parasitaemia  prevalence  and  childhood 
deaths. Possible confounding factors include the 
use of anti-malarial drugs, better use and recourse 
to health care, and household wealth.

Towards universal health coverage
Despite the caveats, these findings suggest that 
the  beneficial  effects  of  ITNs  demonstrated  in 
clinical  trials  are  also  obtained  in  routine  use. 
As resources for global health become more lim-
ited,  this  evidence  should  reassure  donors  and 
national programmes that the investments made 
so far have been effective in controlling malaria. 
The  efficacy  of  ITNs  is  substantially  reduced 
after 2–3 years due to net damage and the loss of 
insecticidal effects, and there is therefore a need 
to find ways of replacing or re-impregnating nets 
(21). The evidence from this study justifies con-
tinued efforts to scale up ITN coverage in sub-
Saharan  Africa  and  highlights  the  importance 
of maintaining ITN coverage in countries where 
they have already been distributed widely.

Main conclusions
 ■ Under routine use in African households, 

the effectiveness of ITNs in reducing 
malaria parasitaemia and child mortality 

was consistent with that seen in clinical 
trials.

 ■ This evidence supports continued efforts to 
expand and then maintain the coverage of 
ITNs.

Case-study 2
Antiretroviral therapy to 
prevent sexual transmission of 
HIV: a randomized controlled 
trial of serodiscordant 
couples in nine countries
The need for research
By  the  end  of  2011,  more  than  eight  million 
people in low- and middle-income countries were 
estimated to be receiving antiretroviral therapy 
(ART).  On  the  basis  of  current  ART  eligibility 
criteria (all HIV-infected people with ≤ 350 CD4 
cells/uL), these numbers represent a global cov-
erage of 56% compared with 6% in 2003 (22).

Despite  this  achievement,  HIV/AIDS  con-
tinues to impose a major burden on health: an 
estimated 2.5 million people were newly infected 
with  HIV  in  2011  and  1.7  million  people  died 
from  AIDS  (22).  It  is  clear  that  the  HIV/AIDS 
epidemic will not be brought under control with-
out  markedly  reducing  HIV  transmission  and 
the incidence of new infections.

Study design
In nine countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America 
and North America, 1763 couples were enrolled 
in a randomized placebo-controlled trial (HPTN 
052) in which one partner was HIV-positive and 
the other was HIV-negative (i.e. serodiscordant 
couples) (5). HIV-infected persons whose CD4-
lymphocyte  counts  were  between  350  and  550 
cells/uL were assigned to receive ART immedi-
ately (early ART group) or after the CD4 count 
had declined to ≤ 250 cells/uL or after the devel-
opment of an AIDS-related illness (delayed ART 

63

Research for universal health coverage

group).  HIV-uninfected  partners  were  encour-
aged to return for all visits to receive counsel-
ling on risk reduction and the use of condoms, 
for treatment of sexually transmitted infections, 
and  for  management  of  other  medical  condi-
tions.  The  primary  prevention  end  point  was 
HIV transmission in HIV-negative partners.

Summary of findings
A total of 39 HIV transmissions were observed 
(incidence rate 1.2 per 100 person-years; 95% CI: 
0.9–1.7), of which 28 were virologically linked to 
the infected partner (incidence rate 0.9 per 100 
person-years; 95% CI: 0.6–1.3). Of the 28 linked 
HIV  transmissions,  only  one  occurred  in  the 
early ART group and 27 occurred in the late ART 
group, giving a 96% (95% CI: 72–99%) reduction 
in  the  risk  of  HIV  transmission  (hazard  ratio 
0.04; 95% CI: 0.01–0.27, Fig. 3.2). Early ART was 
also  associated  with  a  reduction  in  individual 
HIV-related  clinical  events,  mainly  those  due 
to  extra-pulmonary  tuberculosis  (hazard  ratio 
0.59; 95% CI: 0.40–0.88).

Previous  observational  cohort  studies  had 
suggested that early start of ART had an HIV-
prevention  effect  but  this  was  the  first  rand-
omized  controlled  trial  to  establish  definitive 
proof. The most likely mechanism is sustained 
suppression  of  HIV  in  genital  secretions.  The 
study provides strong support for the early use 
of ART in serodiscordant couples as one com-
ponent of a comprehensive public health strat-
egy  to  reduce  the  spread  of  HIV  that  includes 
behaviour  change,  use  of  condoms,  male  cir-
cumcision, female ART-based microbicides and 
pre-exposure ART prophylaxis.

Towards universal health coverage
The HPTN 052 study was voted “breakthrough 
of the year” in 2011 by the journal Science, gal-
vanizing  efforts  to  end  the  global  HIV/AIDS 
epidemic (23). In April 2012, WHO issued guid-
ance on HIV testing and counselling for couples, 
recommending that HIV serodiscordant couples 
with CD4 counts ≥ 350 cells/uL should be offered 

64

Fig. 3.2. 

HIV transmission linked to 
partners within serodiscordant 
couples, with respect to the 
year since entering the trial, and 
according to whether ART was 
given early or with a delay (inset)

C003–F003.002

y
t
i
l
i

 

b
a
b
o
r
p
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

Delayed

Early
5

0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

5

Years since randomization

ART, antiretroviral therapy; HIV, human immunodeficiency 
virus.
Adapted, by permission of the publisher, from Cohen et al. (5).

ART to reduce HIV transmission to uninfected 
partners (24). WHO also published a program-
matic  update  on  the  use  of  ART  for  treating 
pregnant women and preventing HIV infection 
in infants, including the use of so-called Option 
B+. This option provides ART to HIV-infected 
women,  regardless  of  CD4  count,  as  a  simple 
strategy  to  eliminate  HIV  infection  in  infants 
while  at  the  same  time  protecting  the  health 
of the mother, father and subsequent children. 
Malawi  was  the  first  country  to  propose  such 
an  approach,  and  provided  Option  B+  to  over 
35 000 HIV-infected pregnant women in the first 
12  months  of  implementation  (25).  HPTN  052 
now provides additional, strong scientific justi-
fication for this intervention. In mid-2012 WHO 
released a discussion paper on the strategic use 
of  antiretroviral  drugs  to  help  end  the  HIV 

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

epidemic,  providing  the  rationale  for  develop-
ing new consolidated global ART guidelines in 
2013 which will emphasize the efficacy of ART 
for both treatment and prevention of HIV (26).

A series of questions remain to be answered 
before  this  intervention  can  be  taken  to  scale. 
Among them are whether HIV-infected people 
who  are  asymptomatic  will  be  willing  to  take 
ART for prevention, whether this approach will 
increase  the  risk  of  drug  resistance,  and  how 
health  services  will  cope  with  the  added  costs 
and burden of health care.

 ■

Main conclusions
 ■ The provision of ART early in the course of 
HIV infection reduces sexual transmission 
of the virus between members of serodis-
cordant couples.
Early ART can be used as part of a public 
health strategy to reduce the incidence and 
spread of HIV infection.

 ■ These research findings have indirectly 
strengthened the evidence for other com-
plementary approaches to the prevention 
of HIV infection, including prevention of 
vertical transmission of HIV from moth-
ers to children.

Case-study 3
Zinc supplements to reduce 
pneumonia and diarrhoea in 
young children: a randomized 
controlled trial in an urban, low-
income population in Bangladesh
The need for research
Zinc  is  a  vital  micronutrient  in  humans  for 
protein  synthesis  and  cell  growth.  Zinc  defi-
ciency  is  highly  prevalent  in  low-  and  middle-
income  countries  and  affected  populations  are 
at an increased risk of growth retardation, diar-
rhoeal diseases, respiratory tract infections and 

malaria. Zinc deficiency may be associated with 
around  800  000  excess  global  deaths  annually 
among children under five years of age, includ-
ing  deaths  attributable  to  diarrhoea  (176  000), 
pneumonia (406 000) and malaria (176 000) (27). 
Micronutrient  supplements  (such  as  zinc)  are 
therefore potentially important interventions in 
the context of reaching MDGs 4, 5 and 6.

Several hospital- and community-based ran-
domized trials have shown the beneficial effects 
of zinc supplementation in reducing the number 
of episodes of diarrhoea and pneumonia as well 
as reducing the severity of illness (28, 29). Given 
the benefits of zinc supplementation, the United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and WHO 
issued a statement in 2004 that all children with 
diarrhoea  in  developing  countries  should  be 
treated with zinc (30).

However, several questions remain. Research 
on zinc supplements for the prevention of diar-
rhoea and pneumonia had mostly included chil-
dren older than two years of age, while younger 
children might in fact be more vulnerable to such 
morbidity. What, therefore, would the effect of 
zinc supplementation be in younger children? In 
most of the previous studies, zinc was given on a 
daily basis, and this might be far less acceptable 
or feasible than a once-weekly dose. In addition, 
long-term  intake  of  zinc  could  adversely  affect 
iron and copper metabolism, both of which are 
also  essential  micronutrients.  It  was  felt  that 
answers  to  these  questions  would  help  guide 
international policy on the use of zinc.

Study design
A  randomized  controlled  trial  was  conducted 
among  a  poor  urban  population  in  Dhaka, 
Bangladesh, to determine if a large weekly dose of 
zinc (70 mg) would reduce the frequency of clini-
cal pneumonia, diarrhoea, and other morbidity 
in children younger than two years of age (6). The 
effects of zinc on growth, haemoglobin concen-
trations and serum copper were also measured. 
Children aged from 60 days to 12 months were 
randomly  assigned  zinc  or  placebo  orally  once 

65

Research for universal health coverage

Table 3.3.  Number of diagnoses made in clinics by medical officers in the zinc and placebo 

groups, Dhaka, Bangladesh 

Zinc  

Placebo  

Relative risk  

P-value

(child-years = 427)a

(child-years = 511)a

(95% confidence interval)

Diarrhoea
Upper respiratory infection
Reactive airways disease or 
bronchiolitis
Suppurative otitis media
Pneumonia
Severe pneumonia
Death

1881
4834
232

394
199
18
2

2407
6294
314

572
286
42
14

0.94 (0.88–0.99)
0.92 (0.88–0.97)
0.88 (0.79–0.99)

0.58 (0.41–0.82)
0.83 (0.73–0.95)
0.51 (0.30–0.88)
0.15 (0.03–0.67)

0.030
0.001
0.042

0.002
0.004
0.016
0.013

a  Indicates child-years of follow-up.

Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Brooks et al. (6).

weekly  for  12  months.  Children  were  assessed 
weekly by research staff for the primary outcomes 
of pneumonia and diarrhoea using a standard-
ized  procedure.  Secondary  outcomes  included 
rates of other respiratory tract infections.

Summary of findings
A total of 809 children were assigned zinc and 
812  assigned  placebo.  There  were  significantly 
fewer incidents of pneumonia in the zinc group 
compared  with  the  placebo  group  (199  versus 
286; relative risk, RR: 0.83; 95% CI: 0.73–0.95). 
A significant but modest decrease was observed 
in the incidence of diarrhoea (1881 cases versus 
2407; RR: 0.94; 95% CI: 0.88–0.99). All other ill-
nesses (otitis media, reactive airways disease and 
bronchiolitis) were significantly less frequent in 
the zinc group compared with the placebo group 
(Table  3.3).  There  were  two  deaths  in  the  zinc 
group and 14 in the placebo group. There were 
no pneumonia-related deaths in the zinc group, 
but 10 occurred in the placebo group. The zinc 
group had a small gain in height at 10 months. 
Serum copper and haemoglobin concentrations 
were  not  adversely  affected  after  10  months  of 
zinc supplementation.

Towards universal health coverage
These  findings  showed  that  zinc  supplements 
among  young  children  had  a  substantial 

66

protective effect against episodes of pneumonia 
and suppurative otitis media and, most impor-
tantly, an 85% reduction in mortality owing to 
prevention of pneumonia-related deaths.

These  findings  have  provided  evidence  for 
extending  the  2004  UNICEF/WHO  manage-
ment  recommendations  for  the  use  of  zinc  for 
respiratory disease control (30). There have been 
several other policy implications. Otitis media is 
a common paediatric infection in resource-lim-
ited settings and has important clinical sequelae. 
By reducing the incidence of otitis media, zinc 
could reduce hearing-related disability and treat-
ment costs and thus improve the quality of life.

Weekly dosing in young children is also an 
important step forward in reducing pill counts 
and enhancing the practical aspects of program-
matic  management  of  zinc  supplementation. 
Further  studies  are  now  required  to  assess  the 
optimum  dose  and  length  of  protection  after 
weekly zinc supplementation.

Main conclusions
 ■

Zinc supplementation among children 
under two years of age has a substantial 
protective effect against pneumonia, suppu-
rative otitis media and pneumonia-related 
mortality. Treatment with zinc also has an 
effect (albeit modest) on reducing the fre-
quency of diarrhoea and improving growth.

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

 ■ Once-weekly dosing of zinc was found to 
be feasible and safe. It was associated with 
potential programmatic advantages and no 
measurable negative impact on serum level 
of copper and haemoglobin.

Case-study 4
Telemedicine to improve the quality 
of paediatric care: an operational 
research study in Somalia

The need for research
Somalia has been ravaged by war for over two dec-
ades, and health facilities in the country are suffer-
ing from a serious shortage of specialist doctors. 
Health care is provided by a limited number of 
Somali clinicians who, through the circumstances 
of war, have had little or no opportunity to pursue 
continuing  education,  have  virtually  no  on-site 
supervision by senior clinicians, and lack access 
to medical supplies and equipment. The quality 
of care, particularly for ill children admitted to 
hospital  wards,  is  a  major  concern.  Achieving 
universal health coverage means reaching remote 
locations and conflict-affected populations where 
the challenges of dilapidated infrastructure and 
the shortage of qualified, skilled human resources 
are enormous.

One solution to bridging the gap in expertise 
in such settings is to use information and com-
munications technology in the form of telemedi-
cine (31–34). Telemedicine means “medicine at 
a  distance”  and  the  rationale  for  introducing 
this in Somalia is simple – export the expertise 
(though not the experts) to Somalia (33).

Study design
A prospective observational cohort study assessed 
the  impact  of  the  introduction  of  telemedicine 
on  the  quality  of  paediatric  care.  The  added 
value, as perceived by local clinicians using the 
service, was also assessed using a questionnaire 

(7).  The  study  site  was  the  paediatric  ward  of 
a  district  hospital  (Guri’el  hospital)  serving  a 
population  of  about  327  000  inhabitants.  This 
hospital  housed  the  only  paediatric  inpatient 
facility within a radius of 250 km. The telemedi-
cine involved a “real-time” audiovisual exchange 
of information on paediatric cases between cli-
nicians  in  Somalia  and  a  specialist  paediatri-
cian located in Nairobi, Kenya. The equipment 
included a mobile camera, a microphone device 
and a loudspeaker linked to a computer in the 
paediatric  ward  in  Somalia  and  a  similar  con-
figuration in a consultation room in Kenya. The 
two sites were connected through a broadband 
Internet service (Fig. 3.3). Impact on quality of 
care was assessed by comparing the initial diag-
nosis  and  prescription  (initial  management)  of 
each paediatric case with the final diagnosis and 
treatment (final management) made by the spe-
cialist paediatrician, and by comparing adverse 
hospital outcomes for a period with telemedicine 
(the intervention year, 2011) with outcomes for 
a period without telemedicine (the control year, 
2010). A questionnaire was also used to gather 
the perceptions of clinicians on the added value 
of telemedicine.

Fig. 3.3. 

Consultation room and specialist 
paediatrician in Nairobi, Kenya, 
conducting a telemedicine 
consultation with colleagues in 
Guri’el hospital, Somalia

h
a

i
r
a
h
c
a
Z
y
n
o
R

 

67

of  interest  among  those  using  telemedicine  is 
unlikely  to  explain  this  finding  as  all  children 
with  the  described  conditions  were  systemati-
cally referred for telemedicine according to the 
study protocol and cases were reviewed by the 
same  specialist  physician.  Adverse  outcomes 
(deaths  and  losses  to  follow-up)  on  paediatric 
wards  decreased  by  30%  between  2010  (with-
out telemedicine) and 2011 (with telemedicine) 
(odds ratio 0.70; 95% CI: 0.57– 0.88). All seven 
clinicians involved with telemedicine rated it as 
having high added value in improving the rec-
ognition of risk signs and prescription practices.

Fig. 3.4. 

Decreasing trends in changes to 
initial case management made 
after telemedicine consultations 
with a specialist in Kenya 
(expressed as a percentage of all 
cases), Guri’l hospital, Somalia, 
January–December 2011

Research for universal health coverage

Summary of findings
Of  3920  paediatric  admissions,  346  (9%)  were 
referred to the telemedicine service. In 222 chil-
dren (64% of those referred), a significant change 
was  made  to  initial  case  management  by  the 
specialist paediatrician, and in 88 children (25% 
of  those  referred)  a  life-threatening  condition 
that  had  initially  been  missed  was  diagnosed. 
Telemedicine  in  these  cases  served  as  a  life-
saving intervention (Table 3.4). Over a one-year 
period there was a progressive improvement in 
the capacity of clinicians to manage complicated 
cases,  as  demonstrated  by  a  significant  linear 
decrease in changes to initial case management 
for  meningitis  and  convulsions  (92%  to  29%, 
P  =  0.001),  lower  respiratory  tract  infections 
(75% to 45%, P = 0.02) and complicated malnu-
trition (86% to 40%, P = 0.002) (Fig. 3.4). Loss 

Table 3.4.  Life-threatening conditions that 

were initially missed and that 
telemedicine helped to diagnose, 
Guri’el hospital paediatric ward, 
Somalia, January–December 2011

Life-threatening conditions diagnosed 
through telemedicine
Bacterial meningitis and tuberculous 
meningitis
Pulmonary tuberculosis with severe pleural 
and/or pericardial effusions
Neonatal septicaemia
Septicaemia/septic shock
Congestive cardiac failure
Severe perinatal asphyxia
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Severe septic arthritis
Severe pyelonephritis
Others
TOTAL

No (%)

39 (44)

11 (13)

11 (13)
6 (7)
5 (6)
3 (3)
2 (2)
2 (2)
2 (2)
7 (8)

88 (100%)

Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from 
Zachariah et al. (7).

Adapted, by permission of the publisher, from Zachariah  
et al. (7).

68

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

Towards universal health coverage
Although  this  is  an  observational  rather  than 
an  experimental  study,  the  findings  suggest 
that  telemedicine  can  provide  clinical  exper-
tise to remote and inaccessible areas. However, 
the effectiveness, feasibility and acceptability of 
introducing such technology, and its impact on 
improving access to and quality of care, in simi-
lar and post-conflict settings need to be evalu-
ated, ideally with a more rigorous experimental 
approach (35).

Main conclusions
 ■

 ■

Efforts towards achieving universal health 
coverage must include people who are hard 
to reach and those who are affected by 
conflict.
In Somalia, telemedicine technology 
reduced adverse paediatric ward outcomes 
(deaths and losses to follow-up) by 30% 
between 2010 (without telemedicine) and 
2011 (with telemedicine).

 ■ Telemedicine is a way to bring medical 

expertise to remote health services without 
relocating the experts themselves.

Case-study 5
New diagnostics for tuberculosis: 
a validity assessment of the Xpert® 
MTB/RIF assay in Azerbaijan, 
India, Peru and South Africa 

The need for research
Despite widespread implementation of the WHO 
Stop  TB  Strategy,  TB  remains  a  major  public 
health problem. In 2011, there were an estimated 
8.7  million  new  TB  cases  worldwide,  of  which 
only  5.8  million  (67%)  were  notified.  This  is  a 
measure  of  the  gap  in  service  coverage.  In  the 
same year, there were an estimated 310 000 cases 
of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB), resistant to 
at least isoniazid and rifampicin, among notified 

TB patients with pulmonary TB, of which only 
60 000 cases were diagnosed and put on treat-
ment (36).

A major reason for poor TB case detection 
and enrolment to treatment is the inadequacy of 
diagnostic tools. For decades, the mainstay of TB 
diagnosis  has  been  sputum-smear  microscopy 
for patients with suspected pulmonary TB, fol-
lowed by chest radiography in those with negative 
sputum smears. This process is time-consuming, 
costly for the patient who needs to make multiple 
journeys to the clinic, and diagnostically insen-
sitive. This is especially true for HIV-infected TB 
patients, among whom a significant proportion 
has negative sputum smears and a normal chest 
X-ray  (particularly  those  with  advanced  HIV/
AIDS disease). Furthermore, smear microscopy 
cannot diagnose MDR-TB.

Study design
The most revolutionary diagnostic development 
to  date  for  tuberculosis  is  a  sensitive  and  spe-
cific  nucleic  acid  amplification  test,  the  Xpert® 
MTB/RIF  assay  (Cepheid  Inc.,  Sunnyvale,  CA, 
USA), which uses a common platform to diag-
nose  mycobacterium  tuberculosis  (MTB)  and 
rifampicin  resistance  (RIF)  (Fig.  3.5).  The  car-
tridge-based system requires minimal laboratory 
expertise and fully automated results are avail-
able in less than two hours. The performance of 
Xpert MTB/RIF was assessed in health facilities 
in Azerbaijan, India, Peru and South Africa (8).

Summary of findings
There were 1730 patients with suspected drug-sensi-
tive or multidrug resistant pulmonary tuberculosis, 
each of whom submitted three sputum specimens, 
and 1462 eligible patients were included in the main 
analysis. Using sputum culture as the reference test, 
the Xpert MTB/RIF assay was specific in 604 of 609 
patients without TB (99.2% of negatives detected). 
The overall sensitivity (% of true positives detected) 
for one sputum specimen in patients with smear-
positive tuberculosis was 97.6% (95% CI: 96.2–98.5). 
For  patients  with  smear-negative  culture-positive 

69

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 3.5. 

Xpert® MTB/RIF machine being used in a health facility in South Africa

s
c

i
t
s
o
n
g
a
D
w
e
N
e
v

 

i

 

i
t
a
v
o
n
n

I
 
r
o
f
 

n
o
i
t
a
d
n
u
o
F

TB, sensitivity increased with the number of smears 
tested (Fig. 3.6). The overall sensitivity and speci-
ficity (% of true negatives) for detecting rifampicin 
resistance was 97.6% (95% CI: 94.4–99.0) and 98.1% 
(95% CI: 96.5–98.9) respectively.

Towards universal health coverage
On  the  basis  of  these  and  subsequent  results, 
WHO  recommended  in  December  2010  that 
Xpert  MTB/RIF  should  be  used  as  the  initial 
diagnostic  test  in  persons  suspected  of  having 
HIV-associated  TB  and  in  those  at  risk  of 
MDR-TB (37). It may also be used as a follow-on 
test  to  microscopy,  especially  for  patients  with 
smear-negative specimens (38). As of September 
2012, a total of 898 GeneXpert instruments and 
1 482 550 Xpert MTB/RIF cartridges had been 

procured  in  the  public  sector  in  73  of  the  145 
countries  eligible  for  concessional  pricing  (39). 
Operational  feasibility,  accuracy  and  effective-
ness  were  assessed  and  were  confirmed  at  dis-
trict  and  subdistrict  health  facilities  in  Africa, 
Asia, Europe and South America (40). However, 
further assessment at more peripheral facilities 
is required because the machine’s performance 
in  these  settings  depends  on  operational  fac-
tors  such  as  cost,  temperature,  cartridge  shelf-
life, power supply, maintenance and calibration 
needs. The public health impact of Xpert MTB/
RIF also depends on the link between diagnosis 
and subsequent treatment.

National  TB  control  programmes  need  to 
find  optimal  diagnostic  algorithms  tailored  to 
local  epidemiological  conditions  to  make  the 

70

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

Fig. 3.6. 

Sensitivity of Xpert MTB/RIF 
assay with multiple smears for 
smear-negative, culture-positive 
tuberculosis (commonly seen in 
HIV-positive individuals)

HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
Source: Boehme et al. (8)

best  use  of  Xpert  MTB/RIF.  This  technology 
and related research have the potential to bring 
diagnosis closer to patients. Further operational 
studies  are  under  way  to  investigate  the  cost, 
optimal  location  and  use  of  the  assay  within 
health  systems  and  in  combination  with  other 
diagnostic  tools  (41).  As  investigations  of  the 
performance  of  Xpert  MTB/RIF  have  prolifer-
ated, study design also appears to have improved 
(K  Weyer,  WHO,  personal  communication), 
indicating an instance of technological develop-
ment boosting the quality of research (38).

Main conclusions
 ■ The Xpert MTB/RIF assay is useful for 
rapid detection of TB and rifampicin 
resistance, which is indicative of MDR-TB. 
The test is particularly useful for detecting 
TB in patients with HIV infection, thereby 
allowing the diagnosis of patients earlier in 
the course of their disease.

 ■

 ■

Following WHO recommendations in 
December 2010, approximately 900 Xpert 
MTB/RIF instruments had been procured 
for the public sector in 73 countries by the 
end of September 2012.
Further research is under way to confront 
operational and logistic challenges in 
laboratory and field areas, and to assess 
affordability, epidemiological impact and 
cost–effectiveness.

Case-study 6
The “polypill” to reduce deaths 
from cardiovascular disease: a 
randomized controlled trial in India

The need for research
There is a growing global epidemic of noncom-
municable  diseases  –  primarily  cardiovascular 
diseases,  diabetes,  cancer  and  chronic  respira-
tory  diseases.  These  are  responsible  for  two 
thirds of the 57 million deaths worldwide each 
year, with 80% of deaths occurring in low- and 
middle-income countries. Deaths from noncom-
municable diseases are projected to rise from 36 
million  in  2008  to  52  million  in  2030  (42).  In 
response to this epidemic, WHO Member States 
have agreed on a set of targets to reduce deaths 
caused  by  the  four  main  noncommunicable 
diseases by 25% in people aged 30–70 years by 
2025 (43). WHO has proposed 10 targets to reach 
this  goal.  One  of  these  targets  is  drug  therapy 
to reduce the prevalence of risk factors for heart 
attack and stroke (42).

A  combination  pill  for  the  prevention  of 
cardiovascular  disease  was  first  described  in 
2000, and shortly afterwards the “polypill” was 
presented as a strategy to reduce cardiovascular 
disease (44). The concept is simple. Several dif-
ferent drugs (aspirin, beta blockers, angiotensin-
converting-enzyme  inhibitors  and  statins)  are 
available  generically  and  inexpensively  to  treat 

71

Research for universal health coverage

several  risk  factors  for  cardiovascular  disease, 
particularly ischaemic heart disease. Combining 
several drugs into a single polypill is appealing 
because  of  its  simplicity  and  acceptability,  and 
because one pill is more likely to be taken rou-
tinely than several will be.

Methods
In  2009,  a  phase  II  double-blind  randomized 
trial  was  conducted  on  the  effect  of  a  polypill 
on risk factors in middle-aged persons without 
cardiovascular disease at 50 centres in India. The 
study was designated “The Indian Polycap Study” 
(TIPS) (9). The polypill consisted of a combina-
tion of low doses of a thiazide diuretic, atenolol, 
ramipril, simvastatin and aspirin, and this was 
compared with single agents or combinations of 
single agents. The effect of the medication was 
measured on risk factors, including high blood 
pressure,  elevated  cholesterol  concentrations 
and elevated heart rate. Polypill intake was also 
assessed for feasibility and tolerability.

Summary of findings
A  total  of  2053  individuals  aged  45–80  years 
without cardiovascular disease and with at least 
one risk factor were included in the study. The 
Indian  Polycap  study  reduced  systolic  blood 
pressure  by  7.4  mmHg  (95%  CI:  6.1–8.1),  dias-
tolic  blood  pressure  by  5.6  mm  Hg  (95%  CI: 
4.7–6.4), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
by 0.70 mmol/L (95% CI: 0.62–0.78). The reduc-
tion  in  heart  rate  was  7.0  beats  per  minute  on 
average. These reductions were better or similar 
to those of single drugs or combinations of single 
drugs and tolerability was similar to that of other 
treatments.  Effects  of  the  polypill  at  the  wider 
population level might be affected by adherence. 
Importantly,  a  third  of  the  participants  in  the 
TIPS study had diabetes mellitus, a population 
in which the clustering of risk factors is known 
to be common. Comorbidity offers the potential 
for targeted treatment, if and when a polypill is 
used for primary prevention.

72

Towards universal health coverage
The results of the study showed that each of the 
components of the polypill reduced the risk of 
cardiovascular disease. Several other trials have 
since been carried out to demonstrate the effects 
of  different  polypills  in  reducing  blood  pres-
sure and cholesterol with generally good results, 
although  issues  of  adherence  and  lower-than-
expected benefits were encountered (45).

The current evidence needs to be extended 
by carrying out large phase III trials to investi-
gate the efficacy of the polypill in reducing the 
incidence of cardiovascular disease and stroke, 
and mortality associated with these conditions, 
in  large  groups  of  human  subjects  over  much 
longer  periods  of  time  (46).  Operational  ques-
tions pose a challenge to the translation of exist-
ing evidence into policy. These questions need to 
be answered by clinical and observational stud-
ies which include: (i) the safety profile and what 
to  do  if  one  component  of  the  polypill  is  con-
traindicated or causes a side-effect; (ii) the doses 
of the various components; and (iii) whether a 
pill that might be perceived as a magic solution 
to noncommunicable diseases would lead people 
to  abandon  other  preventive  measures  such  as 
appropriate  diets,  behaviour  change  and  exer-
cise.  Research  is  needed  to  measure  both  the 
potential of such an intervention to reduce the 
global burden of cardiovascular disease and the 
intervention’s public health merit before policy is 
developed on the basis of the TIPS study.

Main conclusions
 ■

Early research shows that the Polycap for-
mulation, a single pill that combines several 
drugs, might be a simple and practical way 
to reduce multiple risk factors and car-
diovascular disease, a major global public 
health problem.

 ■ There is a need for phase III clinical trials 
to evaluate more precisely the efficacy of 
the polypill, and for operational research 
to assess the feasibility of using this treat-
ment in practice.

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

 ■ The effect of the polypill needs to be 

assessed in conjunction with other means 
of reducing the risk of cardiovascular 
disease, such as dietary changes, the pre-
vention of tobacco smoking, and physical 
exercise regimes.

Case-study 7
Combination treatment with 
sodium stibogluconate (SSG) 
and paromomycin compared to 
SSG monotherapy for visceral 
leishmaniasis: a randomized 
controlled trial in Ethiopia, 
Kenya, Sudan and Uganda

The need for research
Human visceral leishmaniasis (VL), also known 
as kala-azar, is a life-threatening parasitic dis-
ease caused by Leishmania donovani and trans-
mitted  by  phlebotomine  sandflies  (Fig.  3.7). 
VL  is  the  second  largest  parasitic  killer  in  the 
world after malaria, with an annual worldwide 
incidence  of  approximately  500  000  cases  (47). 
VL is an important disease in Asia (Bangladesh, 
India, Nepal) and East Africa. In East Africa, the 
incidence rate is 30 000 cases with 4000 deaths 
per year (48). The Leishmania parasite migrates 
to internal organs such as the liver, spleen and 
bone marrow (hence the term “visceral”) and, if 
untreated, will frequently lead to death. Effective 
measures  to  eradicate  the  sandfly  are  lacking, 
death rates are high, and there are few affordable 
and  effective  treatment  options.  This  situation, 
along with the fact that there is limited research 
and  drug  development  for  VL,  means  that  VL 
can be called a “neglected disease”.

Treatment for VL in East Africa is primarily 
limited  to  the  antimonial  sodium  stibogluco-
nate (SSG), which is efficacious but requires four 
weeks of hospitalization and daily intramuscular 

injections and is associated with serious adverse 
events  such  as  cardiotoxicity.  The  drug  is  thus 
difficult to administer and constitutes a burden 
both for the patient and for the health system. 
The parasite is also becoming increasingly resist-
ant to the drug.

The efficacy of an alternative drug, paro-
momycin sulfate (PM), has been demonstrated 
in India (49). There is, however, limited infor-
mation  on  the  efficacy  of  PM  for  VL  in  the 
African  setting  where  response  to  treatment 
may be different. A large observational study 
of  4263  VL  patients  in  South  Sudan  showed 
that a combination of SSG and PM for a shorter 
period of time (17 days) yielded better results 
than SSG alone (50). For registration of PM and 
evaluation of the efficacy of combination treat-
ment with SSG and PM in East Africa, efficacy 
and safety data were required from a phase III 
randomized controlled trial.

Study design
A  multicentre  randomized  controlled  trial 
was  conducted  in  four  East  African  countries 
(Ethiopia, Kenya, Sudan and Uganda) (10). The 
trial  had  three  arms:  (i)  SSG  monotherapy  (a 
dose of 20 mg/kg/day for 30 days) used as the 
reference  arm;  (ii)  PM  monotherapy  (20  mg/
kg/day for 21 days); and (iii) a combination of 
SSG and PM given for a shorter period (SSG 20 
mg/kg/day; PM 15 mg/kg/day for 17 days). The 
aim was to compare the efficacy and safety of 
PM monotherapy and the combination of SSG 
and PM to the reference arm of SSG alone. The 
primary efficacy end point was definitive cure 
defined as parasite clearance from splenic, bone 
marrow  or  lymph  node  aspirates  six  months 
after the end of treatment.

Summary of findings
In  the  comparison  between  PM  monotherapy 
and SSG alone, 205 patients were enrolled in each 
arm with primary efficacy data available for 198 
and 200 patients respectively. In the comparison 
between the SSG/PM combination and the SSG 

73

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 3.7. 

Clinical examination of a 4-year-old girl with visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar),  
in Sudan

 

p
m
u
r
C
/
R
D
T
/
O
H
W

reference, 381 and 386 patients were enrolled in 
each arm respectively with efficacy data available 
for 359 patients per arm.

The  efficacy  of  PM  monotherapy  was  sig-
nificantly  lower  than  the  efficacy  observed  in 
the SSG reference arm (84.3% versus 94.1%, dif-
ference  9.7%;  95%  CI:  3.6–15.7%).  The  efficacy 
of the SSG/PM combination given for a shorter 
duration of 17 days was similar to the efficacy of 
SSG given alone for 30 days (91.4% versus 93.9%, 
difference 2.5%; 95% CI: 1.3–6.3%). There were 
no  apparent  differences  in  the  safety  profile  of 
the three treatment regimens.

Towards universal health coverage
The  reduced  duration  of  treatment  with  the 
combination of SSG and PM compared to SSG 
alone (17 versus 30 days) reduced the treatment 
burden  on  patients  and  health  facilities  and 

lowered  the  associated  costs.  The  cost  of  the 
drugs also favoured the combination treatment 
over SSG monotherapy (US $44 versus US $56). 
The potential risk of parasite resistance to SSG 
was also limited by combination therapy.

The findings supported the introduction of 
SSG/PM  combination  therapy  for  treatment  of 
VL in East Africa. A WHO Expert Committee 
recommended its use as a first-line treatment for 
VL in East Africa.

Main conclusions
 ■ The 17-day shorter duration combination 
treatment with SSG and PM for VL was 
similar in efficacy to the standard 30-day 
SSG treatment and had a good safety profile. 
Changing to this combination therapy 
would therefore reduce the treatment 
burden on patients and health facilities 

74

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

and limit the risk of development of drug 
resistance.

 ■ The findings supported the introduction of 
SSG and PM combination therapy as a first-
line treatment for VL in East Africa.

Case-study 8
Task shifting in the scale-up 
of interventions to improve 
child survival: an observational 
multicountry study in Bangladesh, 
Brazil, Uganda and the United 
Republic of Tanzania

The need for research
WHO estimates that the global health workforce 
has  a  deficit  of  more  than  four  million  persons 
(51).  Countries  with  high  child  mortality  rates 
also tend to have a lack of qualified health work-
ers.  The  Integrated  Management  of  Childhood 
Illness  (IMCI)  is  a  global  strategy  that  has  been 
adopted by more than 100 countries with a view 
to reducing child mortality. IMCI clinical guide-
lines describe how to assess, classify and manage 
children younger than five years of age who have 
common illnesses (52). One of the main barriers to 
expanding IMCI coverage is the lack of qualified 
health  workers.  Task  shifting,  which  is  the  term 
used to describe the process whereby specific tasks 
are moved, where appropriate, to health workers 
with fewer qualifications and a shorter duration of 
pre-service training is seen as an option to address 
shortages of personnel (53).

There is a scarcity of published evaluations 
of the quality of clinical care provided by non-
physician health workers who administer IMCI. 
Such evidence is needed to assess whether task 
shifting can be promoted as a strategy for scal-
ing up IMCI, and for improving child health in 
underserved areas.

Study design
An observational multicountry study was con-
ducted in primary government health facilities 
in  Bangladesh,  Brazil,  Uganda  and  the  United 
Republic  of  Tanzania  (11).  The  clinical  perfor-
mance of health workers with a longer duration 
of pre-service training (such as doctors and clin-
ical officers) was compared with those having a 
shorter  duration  of  training  (all  other  health 
workers  such  as  nurses,  midwives  and  nurse 
assistants providing clinical care). The quality of 
care  was  evaluated  using  standardized  indica-
tors  and  according  to  whether  the  assessment, 
classification and management of sick children 
by IMCI guidelines had been fully carried out. 
Every child was assessed twice, first by the IMCI-
trained  health  worker  who  was  being  assessed 
and second by a supervisor who was blinded to 
the  original  diagnosis  and  treatment  made  by 
the  health  worker.  Although  this  research  has 
been classified as a study of the management of 
diseases and conditions, it is also health policy 
and systems research.

Summary of findings
The  study  included  a  total  of  1262  children 
from 265 government health facilities: 272 chil-
dren  from  Bangladesh,  147  from  Brazil,  231 
from the United Republic of Tanzania, and 612 
from Uganda. In Brazil, 58% of health workers 
with  training  of  long  duration  provided  cor-
rect management, compared with 84% of those 
with  shorter  duration  of  training.  In  Uganda 
the  figures  were  23%  and  33%  respectively 
(Table  3.5).  Similarly,  in  Bangladesh  and  the 
United Republic of Tanzania, the proportions of 
children  managed  correctly  by  both  categories 
of health workers were approximately the same. 
Therefore, there was no evidence from any of the 
four settings that a shorter duration of training 
compromised the quality of child care.

One  important  caveat  is  that  both  catego-
ries  of  health  workers  performed  poorly  (e.g. 
“children  correctly  managed”)  in  Uganda.  The 
reasons for the poor performance are unknown. 

75

Research for universal health coverage

Table 3.5.  Assessment, classification and management of children by IMCI-trained health 

workers, classified by length of pre-service training 

Longer duration of training

Shorter duration of training

Index of assessment of childrena
Bangladesh
Brazil
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania
Children correctly classifiedb
Bangladesh
Brazil
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania
Children correctly managedc
Bangladesh
Brazil
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania

0.73
0.48
0.59
0.94

0.72
0.61
0.45
0.76

0.63
0.58
0.23
0.64

0.72
0.53
0.60
0.88

0.67
0.73
0.39
0.80

0.68
0.84
0.33
0.63

IMCI, integrated management of childhood illness.

a   This index assesses the quality and completeness of the clinical assessment provided to sick children based on 17 standard-

ized items (e.g. check for fever, diarrhoea etc).

b   Classification of diseases based on IMCI Guidelines.
c   Correct management based on IMCI Guidelines.

Adapted, by permission of the publisher,from Huicho et al. (11).

It  should  also  be  noted  that  these  assessments 
were made at the primary care level where fewer 
children have serious illnesses (the proportion of 
hospital referrals ranged from 1% in Brazil to 13% 
in Uganda). Furthermore, health workers with a 
shorter duration of training may be more willing 
to comply with standard clinical guidelines (and 
therefore  be  judged  to  have  managed  children 
correctly)  whereas  those  with  longer  training 
may use a wider variety of different procedures 
and yet obtain equally good outcomes. In addi-
tion, the age of health workers and years of prac-
tice  were  not  taken  into  consideration,  both  of 
which may compensate for duration of training.

Towards universal health coverage
These  findings  suggest  that  IMCI  can  be 
implemented  by  non-physician  health  work-
ers  who  have  had  relatively  short  periods  of 

pre-service  training.  Although  all  cadres  of 
health  workers  apparently  need  additional 
training  in  some  settings,  task  shifting  has 
the potential to expand the capacity of IMCI 
and  other  child  survival  interventions  in 
underserved  areas  faced  with  staff  shortages 
(54–56).  Randomized  trials  have  also  shown 
that  task  shifting  from  doctors  to  other  less 
qualified  health  workers  is  possible  and  can 
be beneficial where health service staff are in 
short supply (57–59).

Main conclusions
 ■ Task shifting from health workers with 

longer duration of training (doctors, clini-
cal officers) to those with shorter duration 
of training (nurses, midwives and nurse 
assistants) did not compromise the quality 
of child care provided as part of IMCI.

76

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

 ■ Task shifting could be used to increase the 
coverage of IMCI and other child survival 
interventions in underserved areas faced 
with staff shortages, although additional 
training may be needed in some settings.

Case-study 9
Improving access to emergency 
obstetric care: an operational 
research study in rural Burundi

The need for research
MDG 5 sets the target of reducing the maternal 
mortality  ratio  (MMR)  by  75%  between  1990 
and 2015. The MMR is an important measure 
of maternal health at the population level and is 
defined as the number of maternal deaths in a 
given time period per 100 000 live births during 
the same time period (60). Although maternal 
mortality decreased in low- and middle-income 
countries  from  440  deaths  per  100  000  live 
births in 1990 to 290 per 100 000 in 2008, this 
34%  reduction  is  well  short  of  the  75%  target 
set for the MDG for 2015, which at the current 
pace would seem unachievable (61). The MMR 
in Burundi is among the highest in the world 
at 800 per 100 000 live births (in comparison, 
Sweden  has  a  ratio  of  two  per  100  000  live 
births) (62).

Although access to an emergency obstetric 
care (EMOC) package is a widely accepted inter-
vention  for  reducing  maternal  deaths,  no  pub-
lished data exist from Africa that quantify the 
population-level impact of improving availabil-
ity and access to such care. Would the provision 
of a centralized EMOC facility, coupled with an 
effective patient referral and transfer system for 
obstetric complications, in a rural district sub-
stantially and rapidly reduce maternal deaths in 
order that the MDG target is achieved?

Study design
A retrospective cohort study estimated the impact 
of establishing a centralized EMOC facility and 
an ambulance transfer system on the reduction 
of maternal mortality in relation to MDG 5 in 
Kabezi  district  of  rural  Burundi  (12).  All  nine 
peripheral health centre maternity units in the 
district were linked to a central EMOC facility 
and an ambulance service via cell phones or high 
frequency radios. On receiving a woman with an 
obstetric  complication,  health  centre  staff  con-
tacted the EMOC facility and an ambulance was 
dispatched (accompanied by a trained midwife) 
to transfer the woman to the EMOC facility. The 
distance from health centres to the EMOC facil-
ity ranged from 1 km to 70 km.

The impact of the intervention was calculated 
by  estimating  how  many  deaths  were  averted 
among  women  with  a  severe  acute  maternal 
morbidity (SAMM) who were transferred to and 
treated at the EMOC facility. This was derived by 
comparing the number of deaths among women 
with SAMM who were beneficiaries of the EMOC 
intervention with the expected number of deaths 
among the same group of women assuming that 
the  EMOC  intervention  had  not  existed  (63). 
SAMM was defined in terms of a specific set of 
conditions,  including  prolonged  or  obstructed 
labour requiring a caesarean section or instru-
mental (vacuum-assisted) delivery, complicated 
abortion (spontaneous or induced), pre-eclamp-
sia/eclampsia,  and  prepartum  or  postpartum 
haemorrhage (Table 3.6). Using the estimate of 
averted  deaths,  the  resulting  theoretical  MMR 
in  Kabezi  was  calculated  and  compared  to  the 
MDG 5 target for Burundi.

Summary of findings
During 2011, 1385 women were transferred to the 
EMOC facility, of whom 765 (55%) had a SAMM 
condition (Table 3.6). The intervention package 
averted an estimated 74% (95% CI: 55–99%) of 
maternal deaths in the district, equivalent to a 

77

Research for universal health coverage

Table 3.6.  Emergency obstetric complications and interventions classified as severe acute 

maternal morbidity (SAMM), Kabezi, Burundi, 2011 

Emergency
Total
Prolonged/obstructed labour requiring caesarean section or instrumental delivery
Complicated abortion (spontaneous or induced)
Prepartum or postpartum haemorrhage
Caesarean section due to excessively elevated uterus or abnormal presentation of the baby requiring 
caesarean section
Dead baby in utero with uterine contractions > 48 hours
Pre-eclampsia
Sepsis
Uterine rupture
Ectopic pregnancy
Malaria
Severe anaemia
Emergency hysterectomy

Adapted, by permission of the publisher, from Tayler-Smith et al. (12).

No (%)
765 (100)
267 (35)
226 (30)
91 (12)
73 (10)

46 (6)
18 (2)
15 (2)
14 (2)
5 (0.7)
4 (0.5)
4 (0.5)
2 (0.3)

Fig. 3.8. 
C003–F003.008

Estimated maternal mortality 
ratio in Kabezi, Burundi

o
i
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m

 
l
a
n
r
e
t
a
M

)
s
h
t
r
i
b
e
v
i
l
 

 

 

0
0
0
0
0
1
 
r
e
p
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
(

1200

1000

800

600

400
200

0

1100

1100

1000

910

800

208

275

1990

1995

2000

2005

2011

2015

Year

At end of 2011
National trends
National MDG 5 target for Burundi in 2015

MDG, Millennium Development Goal. 
Note: maternal mortality ratio was 208.
Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from  
Tayler-Smith et al. (12).

78

district MMR of 208 (95% CI: 8–360) deaths per 
100 000 live births. This MMR was within the 
range of the 2015 MDG 5 target for Burundi (275 
deaths per 100 000 live births) and was achieved 
well before the scheduled 2015 target (Fig. 3.8).

A  potential  limitation  of  the  study  is  that 
women were diagnosed with a SAMM on the basis 
of clinical acumen, and this may have influenced 
the number of SAMM cases. However, standard 
case  definitions  for  SAMM  were  available  and 
clinicians were well trained in their use, and this 
should have limited any error in estimates.

Towards universal health coverage
The  findings  indicate  that  the  provision  of 
EMOC,  combined  with  a  functional  patient 
referral  transfer  system,  can  markedly  reduce 
maternal mortality. This is one way of making 
progress towards universal health coverage, and 
towards MDG 5 in rural Africa. The challenge 
ahead is to ensure that funds and other resources 
are available to scale up and sustain the achieve-
ments to 2015 and beyond. Further research is 

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

needed on cost–effectiveness and how to adapt 
such interventions to different settings.

Main conclusions
 ■ The provision of a facility for EMOC, cou-
pled with a functional ambulance transfer 
system for patients, was associated with a 
rapid and substantial reduction in maternal 
mortality.

 ■ This is one example of improved health care 

– an intervention by which Burundi and 
other countries can make progress towards 
universal health coverage and towards the 
target set for MDG 5.

Case-study 10
Conditional cash transfers to 
improve the use of health services 
and health outcomes: a systematic 
review of evidence from low- 
and middle-income countries
The need for research
Conditional cash transfers (CCTs) provide pay-
ments to households on the condition that they 
comply  with  certain  predetermined  require-
ments in relation to health care or other social 
programmes  (Fig.  3.9).  CCT  programmes  have 
been  justified  on  the  basis  that  providing  sub-
sidies is necessary to encourage the use of and 
access to health services by poor people (64).

CCT  schemes  are  intended  as  a  financial 
incentive for people to adopt healthy behaviours, 
and to increase the demand for and utilization of 
health services by reducing or eliminating finan-
cial barriers to access. What is the evidence that 
such an approach works?

Study design
A systematic review assessed the available evi-
dence  on  effectiveness  of  CCTs  in  improving 
access to care (utilization of health services) and 

health outcomes, particularly for poorer popu-
lations  in  low-  and  middle-income  countries 
(13). Studies from Brazil, Colombia, Honduras, 
Malawi, Mexico and Nicaragua were included.

Summary of findings
In terms of utilization of health services, CCT 
was associated with a 27% increase in individu-
als taking up HIV testing (one study, Malawi), 
an 11–20% increase in children attending health 
centres  in  the  previous  month,  and  23–33% 
more  children  under  four  years  of  age  attend-
ing  preventive  health-care  visits.  In  terms  of 
anthropometric outcomes, positive effects were 
found  on  child  growth,  including  an  increase 
in  height  of  about  1  cm  among  children  up  to 
four years of age and a decrease in the probabil-
ity of being stunted, underweight or chronically 
malnourished. With regard to other health out-
comes, mothers reported a 20–25% decrease in 
the probability of children under three years of 
age being ill in the previous month.

Further  recent  evidence  on  the  effect  of 
CCTs  has  come  from  a  randomized  controlled 
trial in rural Malawi, which assessed the effect 
of cash payments in reducing HIV risk in young 
women (65). Schoolgirls and young women aged 
13–22  years  were  randomly  allocated  monthly 
cash  payments  or  nothing  at  all.  Those  receiv-
ing monthly cash payments were further subdi-
vided  into  two  groups:  those  who  received  the 
payments  conditionally  (on  attending  school 
for 80% of the days that the school was in ses-
sion  during  the  previous  month)  or  uncondi-
tionally  (simply  by  going  to  the  cash  transfer 
points). Households received varied amounts of 
US$ 4–10 and the amount given to the girl varied 
in the range US$ 1–5. Among the 1289 schoolgirls 
enrolled, HIV prevalence 18 months after enrol-
ment  was  1.2%  in  the  cash  transfer  group  and 
3.0% in the control group (odds ratio 0.36; 95% 
CI: 0.14–0.91). The prevalence of herpes simplex 
virus type 2 (HSV-2) was 0.7% in the cash trans-
fer group and 3.0% in the control group (odds 
ratio  0.24;  95%  CI:  0.09–0.65).  There  were  no 

79

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 3.9. 

Identity cards are an integral part of schemes that provide conditional cash transfers 
in health and education programmes

 

l
i
z
a
r
B
P
D
N
U

differences between the conditional and uncon-
ditional cash transfer groups in HIV or HSV-2 
prevalence. These findings show that financially 
empowering schoolgirls might have a beneficial 
effect on their sexual and reproductive health.

In  Brazil,  a  country-wide  ecological  study 
showed  that  increased  coverage  of  the  Bolsa 
Familia programme, a national CCT programme 
transferring  cash  to  poor  households  if  they 
comply  with  conditions  related  to  health  and 
education, was significantly associated with the 
reduction of mortality (whether from all causes 
or  from  poverty-related  causes)  in  children 
under five years of age. The effect of consolidated 
Bolsa Familia coverage was highest on mortal-
ity  resulting  from  malnutrition  and  diarrhoea 

in the under-fives. In addition, the programme 
was shown to increase vaccination coverage and 
prenatal visits by mothers and to reduce hospi-
talization rates in the under-fives (66).

Towards universal health coverage
There is now a substantial body of data show-
ing that CCTs can, under some circumstances, 
have positive effects on nutritional status and 
health by increasing the use of health services 
and by promoting healthy behaviours (13, 67–
69). However, CCT schemes do not necessarily 
work everywhere. Their success depends on a 
variety of factors, such as being able to identify 
participating  individuals  with  unique  person 
identifiers  (Fig.  3.9),  and  on  having  effective 

80

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

and reliable mechanisms to disburse payments. 
There  are  also  limitations  to  the  studies  that 
have  been  carried  out  to  date.  For  instance, 
trials  that  demonstrate  changes  in  short-term 
behaviour  do  not  guarantee  changes  in  long-
term attitudes to health. It is clearly important 
to find the right mix of incentives and regula-
tions that affect both the supply of and demand 
for services so that CCTs can improve the qual-
ity  of  care  in  any  given  setting  (68).  This  is  a 
goal for further research.

Main conclusions
 ■ CCT schemes serve as financial incentives 

 ■

for increasing the demand for and utili-
zation of health services by reducing or 
eliminating financial barriers to access.
Studies from several low- and middle-
income countries show that CCT schemes 
can, in some circumstances, increase health 
service utilization which leads to improved 
health outcomes.

Case-study 11
Insurance in the provision 
of accessible and affordable 
health services: a randomized 
controlled trial in Mexico

The need for research
In  2003,  Mexico  initiated  a  new  set  of  health 
reforms which aimed to provide health coverage 
to  approximately  50  million  people  who  were 
without  any  form  of  financial  protection  for 
health. Before 2003, the right to health care was 
an employment benefit that was restricted to the 
salaried workforce. A large majority of the poor 
population  was  non-salaried  or  unemployed, 
and a significant proportion was at risk of cata-
strophic or impoverishing health expenditure.

The 2003 Mexican health reform legislated 
the  System  of  Social  Protection  in  Health,  of 
which  Seguro  Popular  (People’s  insurance)  was 
the  new  public  insurance  scheme  that  assures 
legislated access to comprehensive health care. In 
the first few years of Seguro Popular, and taking 
advantage of its phased roll-out, it was important 
to assess the impact of the intervention on health 
and financial expenditure (70).

Study design
In a cluster randomized study, 100 pairs of health 
facility catchment areas (“health clusters”) were 
randomly  assigned  to  receive  either  the  inter-
vention or the control. The intervention, Seguro 
Popular,  provided  a  package  of  benefits  that 
included  coverage  for  266  health  interventions 
and 312 medicines, and increased funds to state 
health  ministries  proportional  to  the  number 
of families joining the scheme. There were also 
funds to cover catastrophic health expenditures 
associated with certain diseases. In health clus-
ters receiving the intervention, there was a cam-
paign to persuade every family to enrol in Seguro 
Popular. In the matched control cluster families 
received  the  usual  health  care  which  they  had 
to pay for (14). The main outcomes were details 
of expenditures which were classified as out-of-
pocket expenditures for all health services, while 
catastrophic expenditures were defined as health 
spending  greater  than  30%  of  capacity  to  pay 
(measured in terms of income).

the 

Summary of findings
In 
intervention  clusters,  out-of-pocket 
expenses  and  catastrophic  expenditures  were 
23% lower than in the control clusters. Among 
those  households  within  intervention  clusters 
that signed up to Seguro Popular (44% on average), 
catastrophic expenditures were reduced by 59%. 
Among persons enrolled in the Seguro Popular 
programme, 69% rated the quality of health ser-
vices  as  very  good  or  good,  and  85%  reported 

81

Research for universal health coverage

that  the  programme  benefits  were  explained 
clearly  by  programme  officials.  Surprisingly, 
and contrary to previous observational studies, 
there was no substantial effect of Seguro Popular 
on the quality of care (such as improving access 
to and use of medical facilities or reducing drug 
stock-outs) or on increasing coverage for chronic 
illness. These findings might be explained by the 
short  assessment  period  of  10  months  (71,  72). 
Although these results are encouraging, further 
research  is  needed  to  ascertain  the  long-term 
effects of the programme.

Towards universal health coverage
The  project  design  for  assessing  the  effects  of 
Seguro Popular proved robust and showed that the 
programme did indeed reach the poor. In August 
2012, within 10 years of launching the scheme, 
52 million previously uninsured Mexicans had 
state-protected health care. Taking into account 
coverage  with  a  range  of  insurance  schemes, 
approximately  98%  of  113  million  people  in 
Mexico  had  financial  risk  protection  in  2012, 
and  Mexico  has  celebrated  the  achievement  of 
universal health coverage (70, 73). Nevertheless, 
further experimental research is needed with a 
longer period of follow-up in order to measure 
the effects on access to, and use of, health facili-
ties and health outcomes. This needs to be done 
not only in Mexico but also in other countries 
planning public health policy reforms.

Main conclusions
 ■

In Mexico, implementation of a public 
national health insurance scheme, Seguro 
Popular, led to the country celebrating 
universal health coverage less than 10 years 
after its introduction.
Seguro Popular resulted in a 23% reduction 
in out-of-pocket expenses and catastrophic 
expenditures, with benefits reaching 
poorer households.
Such insurance schemes have the potential 
to contribute to the achievement of univer-
sal health coverage in other countries.

 ■

 ■

82

Case-study 12
Affordable health care in ageing 
populations: forecasting changes 
in public health expenditure 
in five European countries

The need for research
As  the  average  age  of  European  populations 
becomes  older,  a  larger  number  of  people  will 
suffer  from  chronic  disease  and  disability  as  a 
result of cancers, cardiovascular diseases, frac-
tures,  dementia  and  other  conditions.  In  addi-
tion,  a  growing  number  of  people  will  suffer 
from several morbidities at the same time. These 
observations have generated concern that public 
spending  on  health  care  in  ageing  populations 
will become unaffordable.

Study design
Using  published  data  on  forecasts  of  popula-
tion ageing, and on current health expenditure 
by  age,  Rechel  and  co-workers  calculated  the 
expected  annual  changes  in  per  capita  health 
expenditure  associated  with  ageing  over  the 
period  2010–2060  (74).  They  assumed  that 
health expenditure per person in each age group 
would be constant over the 50-year period, and 
that  the  unit  costs  of  health  care  would  also 
remain unchanged. The analysis was carried out 
for five countries of the European Union (EU) 
–  the  Czech  Republic,  Germany,  Hungary,  the 
Netherlands and Slovenia.

Summary of findings
The  projected  increases  in  health  expenditure 
associated with ageing were modest. The annual 
increases  in  per  capita  expenditure,  calculated 
as  means  for  five-year  periods,  were  consistent 
across  the  five  countries.  They  were  never  more 
than 1% of the mean annual expenditure, and they 
declined from the 2030s onwards (Fig. 3.10). In the 
Netherlands, for example, the increase in spending 
per person is expected to peak between 2020 and 

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

Fig. 3.10. 

Projected changes in per capita public health expenditure associated with ageing in 
five European countries, 2010–2060

Note: Points are annual average percentage increases, calculated as five-year means, derived from data on projected popula-
tion ageing and on current patterns of health expenditure by age. 
Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Rechel et al. (74).

2025, resulting in an average yearly growth rate of 
0.9% due to ageing, falling to zero between 2055 
and 2060, when the population of the Netherlands 
is likely to become younger on average.

Towards universal health coverage
The  common  assumption  that  population  ageing 
will drive future health expenditure to unaffordable 
levels is not supported by this analysis. These results 
are in line with some other assessments which have 
found that ageing is not expected to incur substantial 
increases in health-care costs (83). A study carried 
out for the European Commission forecast moder-
ate increases in public-sector health spending due to 
ageing in the EU, growing from 6.7% of GDP in 2007 
to 8.2% in 2060 (84). If, with increases in life expec-
tancy, the proportion of life in good health does not 
change, then public expenditure on health care is 
expected to increase by only 0.7%, to 7.4% of GDP.
Research  on  the  cost  of  dying  shows  that 
the proximity of death is a more important pre-
dictor  of  high  health-care  expenditure  than  is 
ageing  (85,  86).  A  large  proportion  of  lifetime 

expenditure  on  health-care  typically  occurs 
in  the  last  year  of  life,  particularly  in  the  last 
few  weeks  before  death  (87),  and  health-care 
expenditure tends to be lower for those who are 
most elderly (> 80 years). Furthermore, although 
older people are major consumers of health care, 
other  factors  –  notably  technological  develop-
ments – have a greater effect on total health care 
costs (74).

Nevertheless,  the  growing  proportion  of 
older  people  in  European  populations  does 
present  some  challenges  for  health  and  wel-
fare  if,  for  instance,  a  declining  fraction  of 
the population has to bear the rising costs of 
health and social care and pensions. Yet these 
challenges are not insuperable. The measures 
that  can  be  taken  include:  promoting  good 
health throughout life, thereby increasing the 
chance  that  additional  years  of  life  are  spent 
in  good  health;  minimizing  the  severity  of 
chronic  disease  through  early  detection  and 
care;  improving  the  efficiency  of  health  sys-
tems so they are better able to cope with the 

83

Research for universal health coverage

needs of older people; and increasing the par-
ticipation of older people in the labour force 
(74, 88).

Main conclusions
 ■

Between 2010 and 2060, the estimated 
annual increases in health expenditure due 
to ageing are less than 1% and falling in five 
European countries.

 ■ While the number of older people suffering 
chronic diseases and disability is expected 
to grow, the costs of health care become 
substantial only in the last year of life.

 ■ Although ageing is not expected to incur 
large extra costs, systems for health care, 
long-term social care and welfare in 
European countries must adapt to popula-
tion ageing.

Conclusions: general lessons 
drawn from specific examples
The  12  case-studies  presented  in  this  chapter, 
ranging from the control of malaria to the provi-
sion of health insurance, are examples of research 
that  illuminate  the  path  to  universal  health 
coverage. They address a diversity of questions 
about reaching universal coverage. They employ 
a range of research methods – quantitative and 
qualitative evaluations, observational and case−
control  studies,  non-randomized  intervention 
studies,  randomized  controlled  trials,  and  sys-
tematic  reviews  and  meta-analyses.  They  show 
the  potential  benefits  of  having  evidence  from 
multiple sources, and explore the link between 
experimental design and strength of inference. 
They reveal the nature of the research cycle in 
which  questions  lead  to  answers  which  lead  to 
yet more questions. And they show how research 
works at the interface with policy and practice.

Six  features  of  these  case-studies  deserve 
emphasis.  First,  the  most  appropriate  research 
methods – those that find the best compromise 
between cost, time and validity – vary along the 

84

research cycle. In general, randomized controlled 
trials  and  trials  using  a  minimization  method 
for  allocation  give  the  most  robust  answers  to 
questions about the efficacy of an intervention, 
provided they have been assessed to be valid by 
rigorous  critical  appraisal.  However,  judging 
the  effectiveness  of  interventions  during  rou-
tine practice is more difficult because there are 
no experimental controls (75, 76). Nevertheless, 
operational questions relating to staffing needs, 
infrastructure  and  commodity  supply  chains 
can often be answered by a process of “learning 
by doing” – i.e. by practice and repetition, cor-
recting  errors  and  making  improvements  after 
evaluation, usually with minor innovations. This 
appears to be the dominant method of address-
ing health insurance reforms in Africa and Asia, 
but  whether  uncontrolled  interventions  (i.e. 
those not tested by a formal experiment) lead to 
the best outcomes is open to debate (77).

In  the  face  of  health  emergencies,  some 
experimental  designs  carry  the  disadvantage 
of  being  costly,  slow  and  logistically  complex, 
whereas  observational  studies  can  be  done 
quickly and cheaply – yet are potentially at risk 
of giving misleading conclusions. However, there 
are instances in which that risk is worth taking 
and  results  in  positive  outcomes.  In  respond-
ing to the enormous demand for antiretroviral 
therapy  for  HIV/AIDS  in  sub-Saharan  Africa, 
observational  research  on  task  shifting  and  on 
the  decentralization  of  health  services  yielded 
important  data  that  could  inform  policy  and 
practice before evidence became available from 
controlled experiments (78, 79). However, recent 
successful  efforts  to  modify  and  apply  formal 
experimental  designs  (especially  randomized 
designs)  for  use  beyond  clinical  trials  (e.g.  to 
address  problems  of  health  service  access  and 
delivery) suggest that experimental rigour need 
not always be sacrificed for the sake of obtaining 
results rapidly and cheaply (80).

Second, the continuous cycle of asking and 
answering questions implies that the implemen-
tation of research solutions (the best answers at 

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

any given moment) can be effectively monitored. 
However, the current metrics used to judge the 
success  of  new  interventions,  and  the  systems 
for  collecting  the  relevant  data,  are  far  from 
adequate (81).

Third, the goal of this report is to promote 
research that makes the coverage of health inter-
ventions  truly  universal.  Access  to  health  ser-
vices cannot be the privilege of those who live 
in relatively peaceful areas of the world. In 2009 
alone, there were 31 armed conflicts worldwide 
(82).  These  circumstances  demand  imaginative 
methods for the provision of health care. In this 
context, telemedicine is an example of an ena-
bling technology (Case-study 4).

Fourth,  while  some  of  the  case-studies 
in this chapter show how research can influ-
ence  practice,  health  policy  and  action  are 
not  determined  by  evidence  alone  (Box  2.1). 
Some  common  reasons  why  research  find-
ings  are  not  used  include:  the  research  ques-
tion  is  not  relevant  to  the  problems  faced  by 
health workers or policy-makers; the research 

findings,  though  published  in  peer-reviewed 
journals,  are  not  clearly  explained  to  those 
who might use them; and the solutions arising 
from research are too costly or too complex to 
implement (81).

Fifth,  although  the  12  examples  in  this 
chapter  relate  to  a  wide  range  of  conditions  of 
ill-health  and  methods  for  studying  them,  the 
examples  inevitably  leave  some  gaps.  Some  of 
the topics missing from this chapter are no less 
important than those that are covered, such as 
finding ways to prepare for pandemics, to miti-
gate  environmental  hazards,  or  to  assess  the 
health benefits of agriculture (Box 2.6).

Finally, the examples in this chapter point 
to  the  advantages  of  creating  a  structured 
system  for  carrying  out  research  in  low-  and 
middle-income  countries,  and  of  deepening 
the  culture  of  enquiry  in  every  setting  where 
research is carried out. To advance this cause, 
Chapter 4 describes the architecture of systems 
that can effectively carry out research for uni-
versal health coverage.  ■

References
1.  UK Clinical Research Collaboration. Health research classification system. London, Medical Research Council, 2009. (http://

www.hrcsonline.net/, accessed 17 March 2013). 

2.  Health research classification systems − current approaches and future recommendations. Strasbourg, European Science 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Foundation, 2011.
Lim SS et al. Net benefits: a multicountry analysis of observational data examining associations between insecticide-
treated mosquito nets and health outcomes. PLoS Medicine, 2011,8:e1001091. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1001091 PMID:21909249
Eisele TP, Steketee RW. African malaria control programs deliver ITNs and achieve what the clinical trials predicted. PLoS 
Medicine, 2011,8:e1001088. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001088 PMID:21909247
Cohen MS et al. Prevention of HIV-1 infection with early antiretroviral therapy. The New England Journal of Medicine, 
2011,365:493-505. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1105243 PMID:21767103
Brooks WA et al. Effect of weekly zinc supplements on incidence of pneumonia and diarrhoea in children younger than 
2 years in an urban, low-income population in Bangladesh: randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 2005,366:999-1004. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67109-7 PMID:16168782
Zachariah R et al. Practicing medicine without borders: tele-consultations and tele-mentoring for improving paediat-
ric care in a conflict setting in Somalia? Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2012,17:1156-1162. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-3156.2012.03047.x PMID:22845678
Boehme CC et al. Rapid molecular detection of tuberculosis and rifampin resistance. The New England Journal of Medicine, 
2010,363:1005-1015. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0907847 PMID:20825313
Yusuf S et al. Effects of a polypill (Polycap) on risk factors in middle-aged individuals without cardiovascular disease 
(Trends Pharmacol Sci): a phase II, double-blind, randomised trial. Lancet, 2009,373:1341-1351. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60611-5 PMID:19339045

85

Research for universal health coverage

10.  Musa A et al. Sodium stibogluconate (SSG) & paromomycin combination compared to SSG for visceral leishmaniasis in East 

Africa: a randomised controlled trial. PLoS neglected tropical diseases, 2012,6:e1674. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pntd.0001674 PMID:22724029

11.  Huicho L et al. How much does quality of child care vary between health workers with differing durations of training? An obser-

vational multicountry study. Lancet, 2008,372:910-916. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61401-4 PMID:18790314

12.  Tayler-Smith K et al. Achieving the Millennium Development Goal of reducing maternal mortality in rural Africa: an experi-

ence from Burundi. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2013,18:166-174. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/tmi.12022 
PMID:23163431

13.  Lagarde M, Haines A, Palmer N. The impact of conditional cash transfers on health outcomes and use of health services in 

low and middle income countries. Cochrane database of systematic reviews (Online),, 2009,4:CD008137. PMID:19821444

14.  King G et al. Public policy for the poor? A randomised assessment of the Mexican universal health insurance programme. 

Lancet, 2009,373:1447-1454. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60239-7 PMID:19359034

15.  Lienhardt C, Cobelens FG. Operational research for improved tuberculosis control: the scope, the needs and the way 

forward. The International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2011,15:6-13. PMID:21276290

16.  Nachega JB et al. Current status and future prospects of epidemiology and public health training and research in the 

WHO African region. International Journal of Epidemiology, 2012,41:1829-1846. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ije/dys189 
PMID:23283719

17.  Eisele TP, Larsen D, Steketee RW. Protective efficacy of interventions for preventing malaria mortality in children in 

Plasmodium falciparum endemic areas. International Journal of Epidemiology, 2010,39:Suppl 1:i88-i101. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/ije/dyq026 PMID:20348132

18.  Lengeler C. Insecticide-treated bednets and curtains for preventing malaria. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 

(Online), 2000,2CD000363. PMID:10796535

19.  Flaxman AD et al. Rapid scaling up of insecticide-treated bed net coverage in Africa and its relationship with develop-
ment assistance for health: a systematic synthesis of supply, distribution, and household survey data. PLoS Medicine, 
2010,7:e1000328. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000328 PMID:20808957

20.  Malaria funding and resource utilization: the first decade of Roll Back Malaria. Geneva, World Health Organization on behalf 

of the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, 2010.

21.  Eisele TP, Steketee RW. Distribution of insecticide treated nets in rural Africa. BMJ (Clinical research Ed.), 2009,339:b1598. 

doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b1598 PMID:19574313

22.  UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic 2012. Geneva, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, 2012.
23.  Alberts B. Science breakthroughs. Science, 2011,334:1604. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1217831 PMID:22194530
24.  Guidance on couples HIV testing and counselling including antiretroviral therapy for treatment and prevention in serodiscord-

ant couples. Recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.

25.  Schouten EJ et al. Prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and the health-related Millennium Development 

Goals: time for a public health approach. Lancet, 2011,378:282-284. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(10)62303-3 PMID:21763940

26.  Programmatic update. Use of antiretroviral drugs for treating pregnant women and preventing HIV infection in infants. Geneva, 

World Health Organization, 2012.

27.  Caulfield LE, Black RE. Zinc deficiency. In: Ezzati M et al., eds. Comparative quantification of health risks: Global and regional 

burden of disease attribution to selected major risk factors. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004:257–279.

28.  Bhutta ZA et al. Therapeutic effects of oral zinc in acute and persistent diarrhea in children in developing countries: pooled 

analysis of randomized controlled trials. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2000,72:1516-1522. PMID:11101480
29.  Bhutta ZA et al. Prevention of diarrhea and pneumonia by zinc supplementation in children in developing countries: 

pooled analysis of randomized controlled trials. Zinc Investigators’ Collaborative Group. The Journal of Pediatrics, 
1999,135:689-697. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3476(99)70086-7 PMID:10586170

30.  Joint statement. Clinical management of acute diarrhoea. New York, NY, United Nations Children’s Fund and Geneva, World 

Health Organization, 2004.

31.  Sood S et al. What is telemedicine? A collection of 104 peer-reviewed perspectives and theoretical underpinnings. 

Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, 2007,13:573-590. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2006.0073 PMID:17999619
32.  Spooner SA, Gotlieb EM. Telemedicine: pediatric applications. Pediatrics, 2004,113:e639-e643. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1542/peds.113.6.e639 PMID:15173548

33.  Wootton R, Bonnardot L. In what circumstances is telemedicine appropriate in the developing world? JRSM Short Reports, 

2010,1:37. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/shorts.2010.010045 PMID:21103129

86

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

34.  Shiferaw F, Zolfo M. The role of information communication technology (ICT) towards universal health coverage: the 

first steps of a telemedicine project in Ethiopia. Global Health Action, 2012,5:1-8. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/gha.
v5i0.15638 PMID:22479235

35.  Coulborn RM et al. Feasibility of using teleradiology to improve tuberculosis screening and case management in a 
district hospital in Malawi. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2012,90:705-711. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/
BLT.11.099473 PMID:22984316

36.  Global tuberculosis report2012. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
37.  Automated real-time nucleic acid amplification technology for rapid and simultaneous detection of tuberculosis and rifampicin 

resistance: Xpert MTB/RIF system. Policy statement. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011.

38.  Weyer K et al. Rapid molecular TB diagnosis: evidence, policy-making and global implementation of Xpert®MTB/RIF. The 

European Respiratory Journal, 2012, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00157212 PMID:23180585

39.  WHO monitoring of Xpert MTB/RIF roll-out (web site). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (http://who.int/tb/labora-

tory/mtbrifrollout, accessed 17 March 2013).

40.  Boehme CC et al. Feasibility, diagnostic accuracy, and effectiveness of decentralised use of the Xpert MTB/RIF test for 

diagnosis of tuberculosis and multidrug resistance: a multicentre implementation study. Lancet, 2011,377:1495-1505. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60438-8 PMID:21507477

41.  Pantoja A et al. Xpert MTB/RIF for diagnosis of TB and drug-resistant TB: a cost and affordability analysis. The European 

Respiratory Journal, 2012,(Epub ahead of print) doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00147912 PMID:23258774

42.  A comprehensive global monitoring framework, including indicators, and a set of voluntary global targets for the preven-
tion and control of noncommunicable diseases. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (http://www.who.int/nmh/
events/2012/discussion_paper3.pdf, accessed 17 March 2013).

43.  Beaglehole R et al. Measuring progress on NCDs: one goal and five targets. Lancet, 2012,380:1283-1285. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61692-4 PMID:23063272

44.  Wald NJ, Law MR. A strategy to reduce cardiovascular disease by more than 80%. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 2003,326:1419. 

doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.326.7404.1419 PMID:12829553

45.  Rodgers A et al. An international randomised placebo-controlled trial of a four-component combination pill (“polypill”) 
in people with raised cardiovascular risk. PLoS ONE, 2011,6:e19857. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0019857 
PMID:21647425

46.  Thom S et al. Use of a Multidrug Pill In Reducing cardiovascular Events (UMPIRE): rationale and design of a randomised 

controlled trial of a cardiovascular preventive polypill-based strategy in India and Europe. European Journal of Preventive 
Cardiology, 2012, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2047487312463278

47.  Control of the leishmaniases. Report of a meeting of the WHO Expert Committee on the Control of Leishmaniases, 22–26 March 

2010. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 949).

48.  Reithinger R, Brooker S, Kolaczinski JH. Visceral leishmaniasis in eastern Africa — current status. Transactions of the 

Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 2007,101:1169-1170. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trstmh.2007.06.001 
PMID:17632193

49.  Sundar S et al. Injectable paromomycin for Visceral leishmaniasis in India. The New England Journal of Medicine, 

2007,356:2571-2581. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa066536 PMID:17582067

50.  Melaku Y et al. Treatment of kala-azar in southern Sudan using a 17-day regimen of sodium stibogluconate combined with 

paromomycin: a retrospective comparison with 30-day sodium stibogluconate monotherapy. The American Journal of 
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 2007,77:89-94. PMID:17620635

51.  The world health report 2006– working together for health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.
52.  Gove S. Integrated management of childhood illness by outpatient health workers: technical basis and overview. The 

WHO Working Group on Guidelines for Integrated Management of the Sick Child. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 
1997,75:Suppl 17-24. PMID:9529714

53.  Task shifting. Global recommendations and guidelines. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
54.  Lewin S et al. Lay health workers in primary and community health care for maternal and child health and the manage-

ment of infectious diseases. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online), 2010,3CD004015. PMID:20238326

55.  Ellis M et al. Intrapartum-related stillbirths and neonatal deaths in rural Bangladesh: a prospective, community-based 

cohort study. Pediatrics, 2011,127:e1182-e1190. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2010-0842 PMID:21502233

56.  WHO recommendations: optimizing health worker roles to improve access to key maternal and newborn health interventions 

through task shifting. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.

87

Research for universal health coverage

57. 

Jaffar S et al. Rates of virological failure in patients treated in a home-based versus a facility-based HIV-care model in Jinja, 
southeast Uganda: a cluster-randomised equivalence trial. Lancet, 2009,374:2080-2089. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(09)61674-3 PMID:19939445

58.  Fairall L et al. Task shifting of antiretroviral treatment from doctors to primary-care nurses in South Africa (STRETCH): 

a pragmatic, parallel, cluster-randomised trial. Lancet, 2012,380:889-898. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(12)60730-2 PMID:22901955

59.  Mugyenyi P et al. Routine versus clinically driven laboratory monitoring of HIV antiretroviral therapy in Africa (DART): 

a randomised non-inferiority trial. Lancet, 2010,375:123-131. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62067-5 
PMID:20004464

60.  Graham WJ et al. Measuring maternal mortality: an overview of opportunities and options for developing countries. BMC 

Medicine, 2008,6:12. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-6-12 PMID:18503716

61.  Maternal mortality is declining, but more needs to be done. The Millenium Development Goal Report 2010. Addendum 2. 

Goal 5 Improve Maternal Health. New York, NY, United Nations, 2010.

62.  Trends in maternal mortality: 1990–2010. WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and The World Bank estimates. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2012.

63.  Fournier P et al. Improved access to comprehensive emergency obstetric care and its effect on institutional mater-
nal mortality in rural Mali. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2009,87:30-38. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/
BLT.07.047076 PMID:19197402

64.  Oxman AD, Fretheim A. Can paying for results help to achieve the Millennium Development Goals? A critical review of 
selected evaluations of results-based financing. Journal of Evidence-based Medicine, 2009,2:184-195. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1756-5391.2009.01024.x PMID:21349012

65.  Baird SJ et al. Effect of a cash transfer programme for schooling on prevalence of HIV and herpes simplex type 2 in 

Malawi: a cluster randomised trial. Lancet, 2012,379:1320-1329. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61709-1 
PMID:22341825

66.  Rasella D et al. Effect of a conditional cash transfer programme on childhood mortality: a nationwide analysis of 

Brazilian municipalities. Lancet, 2013, May 14. pii:S0140-6736(13)60715-1. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(13)60715-1 PMID:23683599

67.  Ranganathan M, Lagarde M. Promoting healthy behaviours and improving health outcomes in low and middle income 

countries: a review of the impact of conditional cash transfer programmes. Preventive Medicine, 2012,55:Supp l:S95-S105. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2011.11.015 PMID:22178043

68.  Waldman RJ, Mintz ED, Papowitz HE. The cure for cholera - improving access to safe water and sanitation. The New England 

Journal of Medicine, 2013,368:592-594. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1214179 PMID:23301693

69.  Dye C et al. Prospects for tuberculosis elimination. Annual Review of Public Health, 2012 (Epub ahead of print).
70.  Knaul FM et al. The quest for universal health coverage: achieving social protection for all in Mexico. Lancet, 2012,380:1259-

1279. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61068-X PMID:22901864

71.  Gakidou E et al. Assessing the effect of the 2001–06 Mexican health reform: an interim report card. Lancet, 2006,368:1920-

1935. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69568-8 PMID:17126725

72.  Hussey MA, Hughes JP. Design and analysis of stepped wedge cluster randomized trials. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 

2007,28:182-191. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cct.2006.05.007 PMID:16829207

73.  Mexico: celebrating universal health coverage. Lancet, 2012,380:622. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-

6736(12)61342-7 PMID:22901868

74.  Rechel B et al. Ageing in the European Union. Lancet, 2013,381:1312-1322. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-

6736(12)62087-X PMID:23541057

75.  Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don’t we see more translation of health promotion research to practice? 

Rethinking the efficacy-to-effectiveness transition. American Journal of Public Health, 2003,93:1261-1267. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.2105/AJPH.93.8.1261 PMID:12893608

76.  Sussman S et al. Translation in the health professions: converting science into action. Evaluation & the Health Professions, 

2006,29:7-32. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0163278705284441 PMID:16510878

77.  Lagomarsino G et al. Moving towards universal health coverage: health insurance reforms in nine developing countries in 

Africa and Asia. Lancet, 2012,380:933-943. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61147-7 PMID:22959390

78.  Treat, train, retain. The AIDS and health workforce plan. Report on the consultation on AIDS and human resources for health. 

Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.

88

Chapter 3  How research contributes to universal health coverage

79.  Zachariah R et al. Task shifting in HIV/AIDS: opportunities, challenges and proposed actions for sub-Saharan Africa. 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 2009,103:549-558. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
trstmh.2008.09.019 PMID:18992905

80.  Banerjee AV, Duflos E. Poor economics. New York, NY, Public Affairs, 2011.
81.  Zachariah R et al. Is operational research delivering the goods? The journey to success in low-income countries. The Lancet 

Infectious Diseases, 2012,12:415-421. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(11)70309-7 PMID:22326018

82.  Armed conflicts. In: Cañadas FM et al. Alert 2010! Report on conflicts, human rights and peacebuilding. Barcelona, Escola de 
Cultura de Pau/School for a Culture of Peace, 2010. (http://www.humansecuritygateway.com/documents/ECP_Alert2010_
ReportonConflictsHumanRightsandPeacebuilding.pdf, accessed 19 March 2013).

83.  Figueras J, McKee M, eds. Health systems, health, wealth and societal well-being. Assessing the case for investing in health 

systems. Copenhagen, Open University Press, 2011.

84.  2009 Ageing report: economic and budgetary projections for the EU-27 Member States (2008–2060). Luxembourg, Office for 

Official Publications of the European Communities, 2009.

85.  Polder JJ, Barendregt JJ, van Oers H. Health care costs in the last year of life – the Dutch experience. Social Science & 

Medicine, 2006,63:1720-1731. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.04.018 PMID:16781037

86.  Breyer F, Felder S. Life expectancy and health care expenditures: a new calculation for Germany using the costs of 

dying. Health policy (Amsterdam, Netherlands), 2006,75:178-186. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2005.03.011 
PMID:15893848

87.  Kardamanidis K et al. Hospital costs of older people in New South Wales in the last year of life. The Medical Journal of 

Australia, 2007,187:383-386. PMID:17907999

88.  Good health adds life to years. Global brief for World Health Day 2012. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012 (Document 

WHO/DCO/WHD/2012.2).

89

Chapter 4

Building research systems for 
universal health coverage

Chapter 4

Key points

Setting research priorities

Strengthening research capacity

Defining and implementing norms and 
standards

Translating evidence into policy and 
practice

Monitoring and coordinating research, 
nationally and internationally

Financing research for universal health 
coverage

National and international governance 
of health research

Conclusions: building effective 
research systems

94

96

98

110

113

116

117

118

118

Community-led management of onchocerciasis, malaria, tuberculosis and the distribution of vitamin A  
for infants, northern Nigeria (WHO/TDR/Andy Craggs)

Key points

 ■ Health research systems have four essential functions: to set research priorities, 
to develop research capacity, to define norms and standards for research, and to 
translate evidence into practice. These functions support health in general and 
universal health coverage in particular.

 ■ Standard methods have been developed to set research priorities, but the best-
documented examples are those for specific health topics such as malaria and 
tuberculosis control and the reduction of child mortality. All countries should set 
national priorities, across all aspects of health, to determine how best to spend 
limited funds on research.

 ■ Effective research needs transparent and accountable methods for allocating funds, 

and well-equipped research institutions and networks. However, it is the people 
who do research – with their curiosity, imagination, motivation, technical skills, 
experience and connections – who are most critical to the success of the research 
enterprise.

 ■ Codes of practice, which are the cornerstone of any research system, are already in 
use in many countries. The task ahead is to ensure that these are comprehensive and 
applicable in all countries, and to encourage adherence everywhere.

 ■ Achieving universal health coverage depends on research ranging from studies 
of causation to the functioning of health systems. Because many existing, cost-
effective interventions are not widely used, there is a particular need to close the gap 
between existing knowledge and action. To help achieve that goal, research should 
be strengthened not only in academic centres but also in public health programmes, 
close to the supply of and demand for health services.

 ■ Many of the determinants of health and disease lie outside the health system so 

research needs to investigate the impact of policies for “health in all sectors”. 
Research will add to the evidence on how human activities affect health, for example 
through agricultural practices and changes to the natural environment.

 ■ Mechanisms to support research include monitoring (national and international 
observatories), coordination (information-sharing, collaborative research studies) 
and financing (raising and distributing funds to support global and national 
research priorities).

4

Building research systems for  
universal health coverage

The case studies in Chapter 3 show how research can tackle some of the key 
questions about reaching universal health coverage. They show how research 
can produce results to guide policy and practice. The success of these selected 
studies, and of any study that aims to support universal health coverage, depends 
on having an environment that is conducive to doing research of the highest 
quality. The most credible research, reaching the largest number of people and 
producing the greatest benefits for health, will be done where there is an estab-
lished culture of enquiry, a set of procedures for supporting and carrying out 
investigations, and frequent dialogue between researchers and policy-makers.
An effective health research system needs to carry out four functions in 
particular.  It  must  define  research  questions  and  priorities;  raise  funds  and 
develop research staff capacity and infrastructure; establish norms and stand-
ards for research practice; and translate research findings into a form that can 
guide policy. All four of these functions are embraced by the WHO Strategy on 
Research for Health (Box 4.1). Effective research systems allow investigators to 
go all the way round the research cycle: measuring the size of the health prob-
lem; understanding its cause(s); devising solutions; translating the evidence into 
policy, practice and products; and evaluating effectiveness after implementation 
(Box 2.3).

There  are  few  assessments  of  how  well  research  systems  carry  out  their 
essential functions, though one survey of health systems research in 26 countries 
investigated the type of research being done, the capacity for carrying it out, and 
the use of research findings in practice (Box 4.2).

To show how to build research systems that can support universal health 
coverage, this chapter sets out the principles underpinning each of the four 
key functions, and uses examples to show how they work. The chapter then 
identifies  mechanisms  to  support  these  functions,  nationally  and  interna-
tionally,  through  monitoring,  coordination  and  financing.  The  presentation 
is  intended  to  be  an  overview  of  the  research  process,  not  a  comprehensive 
manual. For those who are engaged in building or developing health research 
systems, whether at provincial, national or regional levels, some of the practical 
details can be found in a growing number of operational guides, though these 

95

Research for universal health coverage

Box 4.1.  WHO’s Strategy on Research for Health

In 2010 the Sixty-third World Health Assembly adopted Resolution WHA63.21 concerning a strategy for the manage-
ment and organization of research within WHO. The World Health Assembly resolution was a stimulus to review 
and revitalize the role of research within WHO, improve support to WHO Member States in building health research 
capacity, strengthen advocacy for the importance of research for health, and better communicate WHO’s involve-
ment in research for health (1, 2).
Three criteria underpin the WHO approach to health research:
 ■ Quality – making a commitment to high-quality research that is ethical, expertly reviewed, efficient, effective, 

accessible to all, and carefully monitored and evaluated.

 ■ Impact – giving priority to research and innovation that has the greatest potential to improve global health 

security, accelerate health-related development, redress health inequities and attain the MDGs.

 ■ Inclusiveness – working in partnership with Member States and stakeholders, taking a multisectoral approach 
to research for health, and promoting the participation of communities and civil society in the research process.
The strategy has five goals. The first goal applies to WHO while the others apply more generally to the conduct of 
research (Box 2.1). The goals are:
 ■ organization (reinforcing the research culture across WHO);
 ■ priorities (emphasizing research that addresses the most important health problems);
 ■ capacity (helping to develop and strengthen national health research systems);
 ■ standards (promoting good practice in research, setting norms and standards);
 ■ translation (linking policy, practice and the products of research).
The global strategy is being used to guide regional and national strategies, taking into account the local context, 
public health needs and research priorities.
MDGs, Millennium Development Goals.

are not yet comprehensive (4–9). The examples 
in this chapter, taken together with the body of 
experience  summarized  in  preceding  chapters, 
lead  to  some  specific  recommendations  about 
developing the research environment, especially 
in low- and middle-income countries.

Setting research priorities

Confronted with an unending list of questions 
about  public  health,  researchers  and  policy-
makers  must  together  decide  which  should  be 
given priority for investigation, and thus prior-
ity for spending. What follows is a step-by-step 
guide to setting priorities, highlighting the key 
questions (1).
 ■ Context. What is the exercise about and 

who is it for? What resources are available? 

96

What are the underlying values or prin-
ciples? What are the health, research and 
political environments?

 ■ Approach. Should one of the standard 
approaches be adopted, or do circum-
stances require the development of new 
or adjusted methods? Three standard 
approaches are:
− 3D Combined Approach Matrix 

Research Initiative (CHNRI) approach 
– a systematic algorithm for deciding 
on priorities (13, 14).

(CAM) – the structured collection of 
information (10);

− Essential National Health Research 
(ENHR) – health research priority-
setting for national exercises (11, 12);

− the Child Health and Nutrition 

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Box 4.2. 

A 26-country survey of the status of health systems research

Evaluations of the status of health research are still rare, but one study qualitatively assessed health systems research 
in 26 low- and middle-income countries in Africa, Asia and South America, as illustrated in the figure (3).
C004–F001
Countries surveyed on health systems research 

The following conclusions were drawn:
 ■ Low-income countries carried out less health systems research than middle-income countries, but some 

middle-income countries still had very little research capacity.

 ■ Most African countries have little research capacity, with some exceptions such as Ghana and South Africa. In 

Asia, India lags behind China.

 ■ Research training programmes are limited or nonexistent in most countries.
 ■ Middle-income countries have greater numbers of researchers and a more diverse disciplinary mix than low-

income countries.

 ■ Research in low-income countries tends to be driven by donors, international agencies or international consor-

tia. External funding still plays a big role in many middle-income countries.

 ■ In more than half of the countries surveyed, interest in health systems research has been growing steadily.
 ■ In about two thirds of the countries under evaluation, some evidence-informed decision-making occurs, but 

not for all health policies.

 ■ A small number of countries showed a preference for the use of domestic evidence or locally-adjusted interna-

tional best practices (notably China and Thailand).

97

Research for universal health coverage

Inclusiveness. Who should be involved 
in setting research priorities and why? Is 
there an appropriate balance of expertise 
and interests? Have all relevant parts of the 
health sector and other constituencies been 
included? Different constituencies may have 
their own approaches to setting research 
priorities (e.g. on health technology assess-
ment or on health policy in the United 
Kingdom) (15, 16).
Information. What information should be 
gathered to inform the exercise (e.g. litera-
ture reviews, technical data on the burden 
of disease or on cost–effectiveness, stake-
holder views, impact analyses of previous 
priority-setting exercises)?
Planning. How will established priorities 
be turned into research studies? Who will 
carry out and fund the research?

 ■

 ■

 ■

 ■

 ■ Criteria. What factors should determine 

priorities in any given setting?

 ■ Methods. Should the approach be based on 

consensus or metrics, or both?
Evaluation. How will evaluation of the 
established priorities and the priority-
setting process take place? How frequently 
will such assessments be made?

 ■ Transparency. After the exercise has been 

completed, what documentation will record 
how the process was actually carried out, 
who will prepare it, and how will the find-
ings be made widely known?

These standard methods, which have been 
expressed  in  various  ways,  are  steadily  being 
adopted  and  adapted  around  the  world,  and 
they  are  producing  results  that  are  increas-
ingly transparent and replicable (17). However, 
they have evolved largely from setting research 
priorities  for  selected  health  topics  (Box  4.3). 
So  far,  attempts  to  set  national  priorities  for 
research, across all aspects of health, have not 
usually been well documented, and there is little 

98

information about whether and how the setting 
of priorities has influenced the resources allo-
cated to research. Moreover, there has been little 
emphasis  on  carrying  out  cross-disciplinary 
research, despite agreement  on  its importance 
(42).  The  value  of  cross-disciplinary  research 
has recently been restated by the TB Research 
Movement (27, 43).

The few published national priority-setting 
exercises  that  have  already  been  undertaken, 
such as that in Brazil (Box 4.4), offer lessons for 
those that will follow (44–47). Tomlinson et al. 
systematically  examined  how  research  priori-
ties were set in eight countries, considering the 
methods  used,  documentation  and  legitimacy 
of  the  approach,  stakeholder  involvement,  the 
process of revision and appeals, and leadership 
(47).  They  found  weaknesses  in  several  of  the 
steps  outlined  above:  priorities  were  typically 
framed in broad disease categories rather than 
as specific research questions, engagement with 
stakeholders was weak, the exercises were poorly 
documented, and there were no procedures for 
appealing against the decisions reached. All the 
exercises  were  based  on  internationally-recog-
nized standard methods, but the application of 
these methods was incomplete.

Strengthening 
research capacity
Chapter 2 showed how scientific research capac-
ity  typically  grows  disproportionately  with 
national wealth. In the example given, a 10-fold 
increase in wealth (measured as GNI per capita) 
has  the  potential  to  increase  research  output 
(publications  or  numbers  of  researchers  per 
capita)  by  a  factor  of  50.  However,  the  current 
research productivity of many countries lies well 
below this potential (48). How then can nations 
develop the capacity to exploit the full potential 
of health research?

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Box 4.3. 

Setting priorities for research on selected health topics

The majority of priority-setting exercises in health research have focused on specific topics. They have typically been 
carried out from the perspective of different thematic groups within the research community rather than being 
initiated by national governments. A selection of examples is listed in the table below.

Priority-setting for research on specific topics

Health topic
Preterm births and stillbirths
Birth asphyxia
Childhood pneumonia
Childhood diarrhoea
Child health
Mental health
Mental health and psychosocial support
Tuberculosis
Malaria
Malaria
Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis
Chagas disease, human African trypanosomiasis and 
leishmaniasis
Neglected infectious diseases
Helminth infections

Zoonoses and infections of marginalized human 
populations
Noncommunicable diseases
Human resources for health
Health systems financing
Research and development for a national health service

Equity and health

R&D, research and development.

Focus
Community level (18)
Reducing mortality (19)
Reducing mortality (20)
Reducing mortality (21)
South Africa (22)
Low- and middle-income countries (23)
Humanitarian settings (24)
From R&D to operational research (25–28)
Eradication: drugs (29)
Eradication: health systems and operational research (30)
Middle East and North Africa (31)
Vaccines (32)
Diagnostics, drugs, vaccines, vector control and health 
systems (33)
Latin America and the Caribbean (34)
Epidemiology and interventions against all major human 
helminths (35)
Epidemiology and interventions; research within and 
beyond the health sector (36)
Low- and middle-income countries (37)
Low- and middle-income countries (38)
“Developing” countries (39)
Interface between primary and secondary care in the 
United Kingdom (40)
Social determinants of health (41)

A framework for 
strengthening capacity
The term “capacity” could refer to all elements 
of a research system. But here it means the abili-
ties  of  individuals,  institutions  and  networks, 
nationally and internationally, to undertake and 
disseminate research findings of the highest qual-
ity (7). The general principles have been framed 

by the ESSENCE on Health Research initiative. 
ESSENCE  is  a  collaboration  between  funding 
agencies  that  aims  to  improve  the  impact  of 
investments in institutions and people, and pro-
vide enabling mechanisms to address needs and 
priorities within national strategies on research 
for health. The principles are as follows (5):
 ■

Participation and alignment – a common 
effort of funders and local partners is 

99

Research for universal health coverage

Box 4.4. 

Setting priorities for research in Brazil

Since 2000, the Brazilian government has made health research a national priority (44). Public resources have been 
used for fundamental and translational research (see definitions in Box 2.1), and to build closer links between the 
research  community  and  health  services.  In  2004,  Brazil’s  National  Agenda  of  Priorities  in  Health  Research  was 
established to help reach the health-related MDGs – i.e. to reduce child mortality, to improve maternal health, and 
to combat HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. The fair allocation of research funds has been guided by six objec-
tives, namely: (i) to improve population health, (ii) to overcome inequity and discrimination, (iii) to respect life and 
dignity, (iv) to ensure high ethical standards in research, (v) to respect methodological and philosophical plurality, 
and (vi) to ensure social inclusion, environmental protection and sustainability.
Attempting to satisfy these goals, Brazil’s top 10 investments in health research for the period 2004–2009 are shown 
below.. Most funds were allocated to the “industrial health complex” (biotechnology, equipment and materials, health 
and technology service providers), to clinical research and to communicable diseases. Among the top 10 investments, 
but ranked in lower positions, were women’s health, mental health and health systems research.

Brazil’s top ten investments in health research, 2004–2009

Note: The industrial health complex is described in the text. Health technology assessment includes specific research  
studies, systematic reviews and economic evaluations.
Source: Pacheco Santos et al.(44).
Some 4000 research grants were awarded during this period, and around US$ 545 million were invested in health 
research across the country by 2010. The south-east region (including Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo) carried out 40% 
of all projects and received 60% of funds. The research has helped to improve treatments, prevention and diagnoses, 
to develop new products and services, and to strengthen the patient-oriented health-care system (44). Priorities are 
updated periodically, as in the 2011 report Strategic investigations for the health system, which identifies 151 research 
topics based on Brazil’s national health policy for 2012–2015.
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; MDGs, Millennium Development Goals.

100

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Box 4.5. 

The role of health ministries in developing research capacity: the examples of 
Guinea Bissau and Paraguay

The Guinea Bissau health research system has evolved under the strong influence of international donors and 
technical partners who have provided funds and scientific expertise (51). Research has been carried out chiefly by 
the Bandim Health Project, the National Laboratory for Public Health, the Department of Epidemiology and the 
Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisa (INEP) which is oriented to the social sciences. Research priorities have been 
set largely by expatriate researchers and have focused on understanding and reducing child mortality.
Recognizing the need to set national research priorities, align funding, build local research capacity and link research 
to decision-making, the Ministry of Health established the National Institute of Public Health (INASA) in 2010. INASA’s 
role is to coordinate the management and governance of health research nationally. External technical support is led 
by the West African Health Organisation (WAHO), which works in partnership with the Council on Health Research 
for Development (COHRED) and the International Development Research Centre (IDRC).
The commitment of the Ministry of Health to invest in research has been central to success. The main challenges 
facing Guinea Bissau are the limited number of skilled researchers and dependence on foreign assistance.
Paraguay  has  a  stronger  research  base  than  Guinea  Bissau,  with  more  staff  and  institutions  engaged  in  health 
research.a However, there has been little coordination between research institutions. In 2007, therefore, the Ministry of 
Health formed a new directorate for research and in 2009 set up an inter-institutional committee to create a framework 
for health research. The committee included the Minister of Education and representatives of UNICEF and the Pan 
American Health Organization. Drawing on the experience of other countries, and especially Mexico, the commit-
tee drafted a government policy on research for health and set up the first National Council of Research for Health.
As part of the drive to improve health research, all research institutions in the country are under evaluation. An online 
database of researchers has been created, and only registered researchers are eligible for funding from the Council 
of Science and Technology. The database provides information about the training of researchers, their experience, 
and current research topics. The intention is to manage dedicated funding through a health research trust and to 
allocate these funds transparently on merit.
As in Guinea Bissau, the support of the Minister of Health backed by the President of Paraguay has been a key factor 
in the development of a national health research system.
a  COHRED, personal communication;www.healthresearchweb.org/en/paraguay

needed, with local coordination, in 
line with the Paris Declaration on Aid 
Effectiveness (2005), the Accra Agenda for 
Action (2008), and the broader aim of effec-
tive development (49, 50).

 ■

 ■ Understanding the context – starting with 
an analysis of the local political, social and 
cultural norms and practices.
Building on strengths – local expertise and 
local processes, initiatives and institutions 
should be valued rather than bypassed.
Long-term commitment – there should be 
recognition that it takes time (years) for 
inputs to bring about changes in behaviour 
and performance.

 ■

 ■

Interlinked capacity components on differ-
ent levels – capacity development should 
take into account the links between indi-
vidual, organizational and systemic compo-
nents of health research.

 ■ Continuous learning – this should include 
an accurate analysis of the situation at the 
start of the intervention and should allow 
time to reflect on subsequent action.

 ■ Harmonization − funders, governments 
and other organizations that support the 
same partner in capacity-strengthening 
should harmonize their efforts.

101

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 4.1. 

Examples of efforts to build research capacity, ranging from individual to global 
movements

Supranational health research bodies

National health research systems

Organizational development

Institutional development

Individual training

WHO / TDR

US NIH

Wellcome Trust

National health 
research councils

TDR, Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases; US NIH, United States National Institutes for Health. 
Adapted, by permission of the publisher, from Lansang & Dennis (52).

The decision to build and strengthen research 
capacity, and to allocate the necessary funds, is 
largely political (Box 4.5), but the case for sup-
port must be made with a careful evaluation of 
what it takes to do research effectively. The needs 
include  a  skilled  and  self-confident  workforce 
with  strong  leadership,  adequate  funding  with 
transparent  and  accountable  methods  for  allo-
cating funds, and well equipped research institu-
tions and networks.

One 

framework 

for  capacity-building, 
which  has  the  ingredients  of  many  others,  is 
represented  in  Fig.  4.1  and  Table  4.1  (52–56). 
While  it  is  useful  to  begin  with  structures  of 
this kind, the approach to capacity-building in 

any setting depends on the strategic vision for 
the research and what is needed from research. 
It is sometimes, though not always, convenient 
to think of institutions nested within organiza-
tions. Thus the Task Force on Malaria Research 
Capability Strengthening in Africa is part of the 
Multilateral Initiative on Malaria, which is coor-
dinated by the Special Programme for Research 
and Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR).

Views also differ on the emphasis to be placed 
on, for example, building elite institutions, cre-
ating international networks, boosting transla-
tional research, methods of sharing knowledge 
and  information,  and  rewarding  quality  (57). 
Furthermore, there are interactions between the 

102

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Table 4.1.  A framework to guide capacity-building, highlighting approaches and targets, the 

likelihood of sustainability, and the research focus

Entity targeted

Approach to capacity strengthening

Graduate or  

postgraduate training

Learning  
by doing

Institutional partnerships 

between countries

Centres of 
excellence

Individuala
Institution
Network
National level
Supranational level

Financial investmentb

Research focus
Likelihood of 
sustainabilityc

+++
+++
++
+

++

+
++
++
++
++

+

++
+++
+++
++
+++

+++

+

+++
++
+++
++

+++

Research skills
                         +

Programme, policy, systems development

                                                                              +++

a   Plus (+) signs indicate the entity is targeted + sometimes, ++ often, +++ frequently.
b   Plus (+) signs in this row indicate that the extent of financial investment needed by national health research systems or 

funding agencies is + low, ++ medium, +++ high.

c   Plus signs in this row indicate the likelihood of sustainability of various approaches is + fair, +++ strong.

Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Lansang & Dennis (52).

From 

various components in Table 4.1. For instance, 
graduate  and  postgraduate  training  are  more 
likely to be effective when the host institutions 
are also strong (Table 4.1, column 1, row 2). 
the  outset,  any  programme 

to 
strengthen research capacity must define, moni-
tor  and  evaluate  success  –  an  area  in  which 
knowledge is still sparse (52, 53, 58–60). A simple 
geographical mapping of research activity can be 
illuminating (Fig. 4.2), but a deeper understand-
ing comes from measuring success. One evalu-
ation  examined  which  indicators  of  research 
capacity were most useful in four different set-
tings:  evidence-based  health  care  in  Ghana, 
HIV voluntary counselling and testing services 
in Kenya, poverty as a determinant of access to 
TB  services  in  Malawi,  and  the  promotion  of 
community health in the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (6). The most expedient indicators 
changed as programmes matured. The engage-
ment of stakeholders and planning for scale-up 
were  critical  at  the  outset,  while  innovation, 
financial resources, and the institutionalization 

of  activities  mattered  more  during  the  expan-
sion stage. Funding for core activities and local 
management were vital during the consolidation 
stage.

The following sections look more closely at 
three  elements  of  capacity  that  are  universally 
important:  building  the  research  workforce, 
tracking financial flows, and developing institu-
tions and networks.
Creating and retaining a 
skilled research workforce
The world health report 2006 − working together 
for health highlighted the critical role, and the 
chronic shortage, of health workers, especially 
in  low-income  countries  (62).  Here  the  vital 
contribution  made  by  health  researchers  as 
part  of  the  health  workforce  is  underscored 
(56, 63).

The research carried out in many low- and 
middle-income  countries  is  still  dominated  by 
scientists  from  wealthier  countries  who  bring 

103

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 4.2. 

Geographical distribution of research capacity in Africa

Research output
(Number of articles per city)

31–99
100–249
250–499
500–999
>1000

R&D, research and development.
Note: Mapping of top 40 African cities by research output shows hotspots and coldspots of R&D activity and highlights inequi-
ties in R&D productivity across the continent.
Adapted with the World Health Organization’s map shapefile under the Creative Commons licence (CC BY 3.0, http://crea-
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/) from Nwaka et al. (61).

much-needed expertise and funding. The tran-
sition  towards  a  more  self-reliant  and  skilled 
research workforce in lower-income countries is 
under way, but the process is slow.

International  collaboration  is  part  of  the 
solution so long as some basic principles are fol-
lowed (Box 4.6). Alongside the numerous exam-
ples of “north–south” research collaboration run 
a variety of training schemes for young research-
ers – such as those offered by TDR (www.who.
int/tdr), the Training Programs in Epidemiology 
and  Public  Health  Interventions  Network 

(TEPHINET), www.tephinet.org), the European 
Foundation Initiative for African Research into 
Neglected  Tropical  Diseases  (EFINTD,  www.
ntd-africa.net), Brazil’s Science without Borders 
programme  (www.cienciasemfronteiras.gov.br), 
and the product-orientated operational research 
courses  offered  by  the  International  Union 
against  Tuberculosis  and  Lung  Disease  and 
Médecins  Sans  Frontières  (MSF)  Luxembourg 
(65–67). Even where there are shortages of money 
to  do  the  research  in  Africa,  there  is  an  appe-
tite for career development through mentorship 

104

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Box 4.6. 

Principles of research partnership

Further details of these 11 principles can be found in Guidelines for research in partnership with developing countries 
prepared by the Swiss Commission for Research Partnership with Developing Countries (64). The 11 principles (with 
minor adaptation) are as follows:
1. Decide on research objectives together, including those who will use the results.
2. Build mutual trust, stimulating honest and open research collaboration.
3. Share information and develop networks for coordination.
4. Share responsibility and ownership.
5. Create transparency in financial and other transactions.
6. Monitor and evaluate collaboration, judging performance through regular internal and 1. external evaluations.
7. Disseminate the results through joint publications and other means, with adequate communication to those who 

will finally use them.

8. Apply the results as far as is possible, recognizing the obligation to ensure that results are used to benefit the 

target group.

9. Share the benefits of research profits equitably including any profit, publications and patents.
10. Increase research capacity at individual and institutional levels.
11. Build on the achievements of research – especially new knowledge, sustainable development and research capacity.

programmes, project management courses, pro-
posal-writing workshops and language training, 
and by networking at conferences (65).

Through  these  various  schemes,  scientists 
in  lower-income  countries  are  gaining  a  more 
confident voice. For instance, African research-
ers  have  argued  that  support  for  research  on 
neglected  tropical  diseases  should  not  be  the 
sole  responsibility  of  external  donors.  They 
believe  that  their  own  governments  must  also 
take responsibility for providing infrastructure 
and job opportunities (65, 68).
Ensuring transparency and 
accountability in research funding
Just as research needs money, the development of 
research capacity needs a mechanism for track-
ing how much is spent on what kinds of research. 
The eight areas of research outlined in Box 2.2 
–  ranging  from  fundamental  or  underpinning 
studies  to  investigations  of  health  systems  and 
services  –  offer  one  framework  for  reporting 

the money spent on research in different areas. 
In  the  United  Kingdom,  for  instance,  research 
spending  by  the  Wellcome  Trust  and  Medical 
Research  Council  (MRC)  focuses  on  under-
pinning  and  etiological  research  (Fig.  4.3).  In 
contrast,  research  spending  by  two  national 
health  departments  (England  and  Scotland)  is 
oriented to treatment evaluation, disease man-
agement and health services (69, 70). These are 
different but complementary and point to fund-
ing  gaps  that  need  to  be  filled,  perhaps  from 
other sources. The data in Fig. 4.3 indicate that 
the  Wellcome  Trust,  the  MRC  and  the  health 
departments provide relatively little money for 
research on prevention (group 3) or on detection 
and diagnosis (group 4). This is an argument not 
only for research monitoring but also for greater 
harmonization between funding bodies.

The  virtues  of  having  a  standard  method 
of accounting for research funds are clear – for 
communication,  comparability  and  collabora-
tion  (69).  The  approach  illustrated  in  Fig.  4.3 
is one scheme among a number that have been 

105

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 4.3. 

Contrasting but complementary 
profiles of health research 
spending, United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, 2009–2010

C004–F004.003

A. Medical research organizations

50

i

g
n
d
n
u
f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

40

30

20

10

0

1

2

5

4

3
6
Type of research study

7

8

Wellcome Trust

Medical Research Council

B. National health departments

i

g
n
d
n
u
f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

 

50

40

30

20

10

0

1

2

4

3
6
Type of research study

5

7

8

England

Scotland

Types of research: 1, underpinning; 2, etiology; 3, preven-
tion; 4, detection and diagnosis; 5, treatment development; 
6, treatment evaluation; 7, disease management; 8, health 
systems and services (Box 2.2).
Note: For each of the four organizations, percentages sum to 
100%.
Adapted, by permission of the publisher, from the UK Clinical 
Research Collaboration (69).

106

proposed  (69).  All  take  a  similar  approach  to 
classification – a disease code is combined with 
a description of the research purpose – indicat-
ing  that  there  is  a  common  understanding  of 
what a classification system should include. The 
next step in reconciling different schemes could 
take one of two directions: either agreement to 
adopt the same system, or reliance on computer 
software to translate and map the current variety 
of classification systems to a common standard 
(71). The best approach will be the one that most 
easily achieves the main goal, which is to assure 
transparency  and  accountability  in  research 
funding (70).

The  amount  of  funding  sought  for  research 
should be based on an assessment of what studies are 
needed and how much they cost. Despite the impor-
tance of good accounting in research, the evaluation 
of both need and cost are underdeveloped skills.

Funding  for  TB  operational  research  illus-
trates the challenge of assessing need. The desir-
able  expenditure  (budget)  for  TB  operational 
research has been set at US$ 80 million annually, 
calculated as 1% of the expenditure of national 
TB control programmes (72). Against this arbi-
trary  spending  target,  which  is  far  lower  than 
that for any other area of TB research, the avail-
able funds totalled 76% of assessed need. This is 
a  higher  percentage  than  for  any  other  area  of 
research (Fig. 4.4) (73). The danger here is to con-
clude that the need for operational research has 
largely been satisfied. While the Global Plan to 
Stop TB has successfully highlighted the need to 
invest in R&D for technology, a more objective 
method is needed for calculating the TB opera-
tional research budget, especially in light of the 
widely-held view that too little effort is devoted 
to operational research (28, 74, 75). 

On the question of costing, the calculation of 
direct expenditure is relatively straightforward. 
It refers to the indirect costs that are harder to 
define, including the funds needed to build and 
upgrade infrastructure (76). Research institutions 

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Fig. 4.4. 

Global expenditures and budget 
gap in tuberculosis R&D by 
research category, 2010

R&D, research and development.
Note: Relatively little money is spent on diagnostics and 
operational research; the budget for operational research is 
exceptionally low.
Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Treatment 
Action Group (73).

in  low-  and  middle-income  countries  have  the 
task of persuading external donors to contribute 
to indirect costs, and also to align their research 
priorities in contributing to direct costs. Both of 
these problems were confronted – and solved – by 
the International Centre for Diarrhoeal Diseases 
Research,  Bangladesh  (ICDDR,B)  in  2006  (77). 
Solutions  were  found,  in  part  by  adopting  a 
transparent  approach  to  financial  monitoring 
and evaluation. ICDDR,B explicitly defined and 
measured activities, outputs and outcomes in the 
areas of research, clinical services, teaching, and 
management and operations.

Building research institutions 
and networks
The Global Health Trials network has expressed a 
view of capacity-building that is shared by other 
health research networks (Box 4.7). In the con-
text of research networks, “capacity” is seen as 
the establishment of a community of researchers 
based in lower-income countries who can devise 
and  validate  methods  and  operational  tools 
for improving health, and who share local and 
global solutions to make pragmatic and locally-
led development possible (79). Box 4.8 describes 
the success of a multinational network that suc-
cessfully evaluated the diagnosis and treatment 
of syphilis.

Putting  the  spotlight  on  collaboration 
between 
lower-income  countries  does  not 
mean neglecting the traditional links through 
which  higher-income  countries  continue  to 
provide  funds  and  expertise  to  those  with 
lower incomes and where the emphasis of the 
research studies of each group differs from that 
of the other group but both are complementary. 
For instance, clinical trials in poorer countries 
have  focused  largely  on  communicable  rather 
than  noncommunicable  diseases.  In  contrast, 
researchers in richer countries have enormous 
expertise  in  studying  noncommunicable  dis-
eases. Their expertise will be in demand as the 
need for research on these diseases continues to 
rise worldwide (79).

Defining and implementing 
norms and standards
Codes  of  practice  for  the  responsible  conduct 
of research have been written by many research 
organizations around the world. Among them are 
the United Kingdom’s Medical Research Council 

107

Research for universal health coverage

Box 4.7. 

Developing research networks 

Initiative to Strengthen Health Research Capacity in Africa (ISHReCA)
ISHReCA (ishreca.org) is an African-led initiative whose mission is to build strong foundations for health research in 
Africa (55, 59). ISHReCA aims to expand research capacity in four ways: (i) it provides a platform for African health 
researchers to discuss ways of building sustainable capacity for health research in Africa; (ii) it promotes an African-led 
agenda for health research, negotiating with funders and partners concerning support for, and harmonization of, 
research initiatives; (iii) it advocates for increased commitment to research by national governments and civil society, 
emphasizing the translation of research into policy and practice; and (iv) it seeks novel ways to garner regional and 
international support for health research in Africa.
African Network for Drugs and Diagnostics Innovation (ANDI)
Launched in 2008, ANDI (www.andi-africa.org) is hosted by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa 
(UNECA) in Addis Ababa (61). Backed by the first African-owned and managed innovation fund, ANDI’s mission is to 
“promote and sustain African-led health product innovation to address African public health needs through efficient 
use of local knowledge, assembly of research networks, and building of capacity to support economic development”. 
The vision is to create a sustainable platform for R&D innovation that addresses Africa’s own health needs. To realize 
this vision, ANDI is building capacity that supports pharmaceutical research, development and manufacturing to 
improve access to medicines. Specific activities include the development of a portfolio of high-quality, pan-African 
pharmaceutical R&D innovation projects, project coordination and management, including intellectual property 
management. Vital to ANDI are more than 30 African institutions which are recognized as research centres of excel-
lence and are committed to sharing expertise, knowledge, research equipment and facilities (61, 78). 
Global Health Trials
Global Health Trials (globalhealthtrials.tghn.org) is an online community that shares information on clinical studies 
and experimental trials in global health, providing guidance, tools, resources, training and professional development. 
An e-learning centre offers short courses, seminars and a library.
Pan-African Consortium for the Evaluation of Anti-Tuberculosis Antibiotics (PanACEA)
North–south research collaboration, such as that fostered by the European and Developing Countries Clinical 
Trials  Partnership  (www.edctp.org),  has  existed  for  many  years.  The  EDCTP  14-country  partnership  works  to 
“accelerate the development of new or improved drugs, vaccines, microbicides and diagnostics against HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria, with a focus on phase II and III clinical trials in sub-Saharan Africa”.
An offshoot of EDCTP, PanACEA is a network of 11 linked clinical trial sites in six African countries, supported by 
European research organizations and pharmaceutical companies. The initial aim of the network was to investigate the 
role of moxifloxacin in reducing treatment durations for TB. However, PanACEA has a wider ambition – to establish 
collaboration rather than competition as a driving force in the conduct of high-quality clinical and regulatory trials.
Research for Health Africa (R4HA)
The goal of R4HA (www.cohred.org/r4ha) is to solve common problems through collective action. The NEPAD Agency 
and COHRED, financially supported by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, work with Mozambique, 
Senegal and Tanzania to strengthen the governance of research for health in these countries. Country focused activi-
ties are complemented by cross-country learning and exchange opportunities. At the same time, in 2011, a group 
of 14 West African countries launched a four-year project dedicated to strengthening health research systems. The 
project is financed by Canada’s IDRC and the West African Health Organisation (WAHO), with technical facilitation 
provided by COHRED. An assessment of research for health in this group of West African countries identified Guinea-
Bissau, Liberia, Mali and Sierra Leone as most in need of support. WAHO and COHRED help to build the research 
systems in these countries based on action plans they have defined themselves.
R&D, research and development.

108

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Box 4.8. 

How to prevent and treat syphilis: an operational research network connecting six 
countries

Two million pregnant women are infected with syphilis each year. More than half transmit the infection to newborn children, 
resulting in premature births, stillbirths and underweight babies. Syphilis also augments sexual and mother-to-child transmis-
sion of HIV.
However, syphilis is easily diagnosed and treated, and congenital syphilis is preventable. Point-of-care diagnostic tests and 
treatment with penicillin each cost less than US$ 1. The London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine coordinated a three-year, 
multicountry implementation research project to determine the feasibility and cost–effectiveness of using simple diagnostic 
tests and same-day treatment in prenatal and high-risk populations in low- and middle-income countries (80). More than 150 000 
individuals were screened in six countries. Interventions were introduced through existing services, so there was no need for 
new infrastructure.

Numbers screened and population focus by country

Zambia
> 12 000 screened
Population focus: 
integration into 
PMTCT programmes 
for HIV

China
> 5000 screened
Population focus: 
prenatal and high 
risk

Uganda
> 13 000 screened
Population focus: 
integration into 
PMTCT programmes 
for HIV

Peru
> 17 000 screened
Population focus: 
prenatal

Brazil
> 45 000 screened
Population focus: 
remote and indigenous 
communities

United Republic 
of Tanzania
> 58 000 screened
Population focus: 
prenatal and high risk

Initial preparatory work – including making sure that screening was culturally acceptable – was critical to the success 
of the project. In China, female sex workers were trained to speak to other female sex workers and encourage them 
to take up screening. In a seventh country, Haiti, traditional healers were educated about the signs and symptoms of 
syphilis, which enabled them to refer patients to health clinics.
Ministries of health were consulted about what evidence they would need before considering a change of policy. A baseline 
survey of services and barriers aided the design of specific interventions to overcome obstacles and to measure increase in 
coverage. Health ministries were given regular updates which provided a sense of ownership and facilitated policy change. 
From staffing to equipment, emphasis was placed on establishing systems that could be sustained.
In all participating countries, the study achieved significant increases in coverage of diagnostic testing for syphilis. This 
reduced the prevalence of syphilis and the risk of HIV infection. Some benefits were immediately visible and led to rapid 
policy changes which were, in some instances, implemented even before the research studies were completed.
The research also helped to strengthen health services in some of the participating countries. In Brazil, for instance, it has 
provided a model for the provision of health services to indigenous populations, as well as a template for the introduction 
of new technologies.
PMTCT, Prevention of mother-to-child transmission.

109

Research for universal health coverage

and  Australia’s  National  Health  and  Medical 
Research Council (81, 82). This section outlines 
the  main  responsibilities  that  fall  on  institu-
tions and researchers in carrying out responsible 
research.  Because  these  principles  are  laid  out 
clearly in international guidelines, the task is not 
necessarily to develop the principles further but 
to see that they are applied everywhere.
Ethics and ethical review

The ethical principles that guide the behaviour 
of researchers, overseen by ethical committees, 
are to ensure honesty, objectivity, integrity, jus-
tice,  accountability,  intellectual  property,  pro-
fessional courtesy and fairness, the protection of 
participants in research studies, and good stew-
ardship of research on behalf of others (83–88).
WHO has defined 10 standards that should 
be met in ethical reviews of health research with 
human  participants  (Box  4.9).  These  standards 
are designed to complement existing laws, regu-
lations and practices, and to serve as a basis on 
which  research  ethics  committees  can  develop 
their own specific practices and written proce-
dures.  Among  the  organizations  that  monitor 
compliance  with  ethical  standards  are  inde-
pendent  bodies  such  as  the  United  Kingdom’s 
Research  Integrity  Office  (www.ukrio.org)  and 
the Wemos Foundation (www.wemos.nl).
Reporting and sharing research 
data, tools and materials
The research community is responsible for ensur-
ing the accuracy of methods, integrity of results, 
production and sharing of data, adequacy of peer 
review,  and  protection  of  intellectual  property 
(81, 90, 91).

In the era of open access, an influential body 
of opinion synthesized by the United Kingdom’s 
Royal  Society  holds  that  “intelligent  openness” 
should  become  the  norm  in  scientific  research 
(92).  This  means  openness  of  researchers  with 
other scientists and with the public and media; 

110

greater recognition of the value of data-gathering, 
analysis and communication; common standards 
for sharing information; mandatory publication 
of  data  in  a  reusable  form  to  support  findings; 
and  the  development  of  expertise  and  software 
for  managing  the  enormous  volume  of  digital 
data (93). In this Royal Society review, intelligent 
openness is seen as the key to scientific progress. 
It is the basis for understanding and communi-
cating results that can be exploited for practical 
purposes, including the improvement of health.

Accompanying  this  general  trend  towards 
openness  is  a  proliferation  of  Internet-based 
platforms for sharing information. Among these 
are  the  Health  Research  Web,  Health  Systems 
Evidence, and PDQ-Evidence (Box 4.10). As data 
exchange  becomes  commonplace,  consistent 
database  structures  and  standards  for  report-
ing are needed for efficient communication. The 
principles and practice for sharing genomic data 
are well advanced but those for sharing data on 
innovation,  research  and  development  are  less 
developed (94, 95).
Registering clinical trials

The Declaration of Helsinki (1964–2008) states 
that “every clinical trial must be registered in a 
publicly accessible database before recruitment 
of the first subject”. The registration of clinical 
trials is a scientific, ethical and moral responsi-
bility because decisions about health care must 
be informed by all of the available evidence. From 
a practical standpoint, the International Clinical 
Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) helps research-
ers and funding agencies to avoid unnecessary 
duplication,  to  identify  gaps  in  clinical  trials 
research,  and  to  find  out  about  trials  in  which 
they may have an interest and with which they 
might collaborate (96). In addition, the process 
of registration has the potential to improve the 
quality of clinical trials – e.g. by revealing prob-
lems  in  design  at  an  early  stage.  Although  the 
regulatory,  legal,  ethical  and  funding  require-
ments for the oversight and conduct of clinical 

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Box 4.9. 

Standards for the ethical review of research with human participants 

These standards (which are abbreviated here) are intended as guidance for research ethics committees and for the 
researchers who design and carry out health research studies (88). The task of ethical review involves more than 
standing committees and includes, for example, independent teams of trained external assessors that can investigate 
allegations of research misconduct (89).
1. Responsibility for establishing the research ethics review system
Ethical review must be supported by an adequate legal framework. Research ethics committees must be able to 
provide independent reviews of all health-related research at national, subnational and/or institutional (public or 
private) levels.
2. Composition of research ethics committees
Research  ethics  committees  should  have  multidisciplinary  and  multisectoral  membership,  including  individuals 
with relevant research expertise.
3. Research ethics committee resources
Research  ethics  committees  should  have  adequate  resources  –  staff,  facilities  and  finance  –  to  carry  out  their 
responsibilities.
4. Independence of research ethics committees
The independence of research ethics committee operations must be ensured in order to protect decision-making 
from influence by any individual or entity that sponsors, conducts or hosts the research it reviews.
5. Training the research ethics committee
Training  should  be  provided  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  health-related  research  with  human  participants,  on  the 
application of ethical considerations to different types of research, and on the conduct of research reviews by the 
research ethics committee.
6. Transparency, accountability and quality of the research ethics committee
Mechanisms exist to make the operations of research ethics committees transparent, accountable, consistent and 
of high quality.
7. The ethical basis for decision-making in research ethics committees
The research ethics committee bases its decisions about the research that it reviews on a coherent and consistent 
application of the ethical principles that are articulated in international guidance documents and human rights 
instruments, as well as on any national laws or policies consistent with those principles.
8. Decision-making procedures for research ethics committees
Decisions on research protocols are based on a thorough and inclusive process of discussion and deliberation.
9. Written policies and procedures
Written policies and procedures include specification of the membership of the research ethics committee, commit-
tee governance, review procedures, decision-making, communications, follow-up and monitoring, documentation 
and archiving, training, quality assurance, and procedures for coordination with other research ethics committees.
10. Researchers’ responsibilities
Research is performed only by persons with scientific, clinical or other relevant qualifications appropriate to the 
project, who carry out the research in compliance with the requirements established by the research ethics committee.

111

Research for universal health coverage

Box 4.10. 

Sharing information on current practice in health research: some examples

Health Research Web (www.healthresearchweb.org) provides data, tables and graphs for monitoring and evaluat-
ing research investments at national or institutional level. The platform uses an editable wiki-type format so that 
institutions and agencies can personalize entries to suit their own needs. The information presented includes research 
policies, priorities, projects, capacities and outputs, as illustrated in the following figure.

The Health Research Web 

Governance 
and policies

Information 
resources

Research
priorities

Research 
projects

Health
Research

Web

Key 

institutions

Civil society
organizations

Research

ethics review

Research
(cid:31)nancing

The  number  of  users  of  the  platform  is  growing  at  both  regional  and  country  levels.  In  the  Americas,  the  Pan 
American Health Organization (PAHO) has developed Health Research Web – Americas (www.healthresearchweb.
org/en/americas), which is linked to EVIPNet (Box 4.12) and to hundreds of research ethics committees active in Latin 
America. In Africa, the Tanzanian Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH) uses the platform to issue 
public calls for research proposals. With this platform COSTECH can monitor which studies have been supported, 
see how these respond to national research priorities, check what public resources are allocated to the research, 
and consult the research findings.
Health  Systems  Evidence  (www.healthsystemsevidence.org),  an  initiative  of  the  McMaster  Health  Forum,  is  a 
continuously updated repository of evidence – mainly systematic reviews – about the governance and financing of 
health systems and the delivery of health services.
PDQ-Evidence  (www.pdq-evidence.org),  maintained  by  the  Evidence-Based  Medicine  unit  of  the  Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile (Pontifical Catholic University of Chile), also provides evidence about public health 
and about health systems and services. Information is presented mainly in the form of structured summaries and 
systematic reviews.

112

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

trials  differ  between  countries,  the  ICTRP  is  a 
worldwide  resource  that  can  be  used  for  clini-
cal  trials  wherever  they  are  carried  out.  Since 
2000,  the  number  of  registered  clinical  trials 
has increased markedly, and there are now more 
than 200 000 records on the ICTRP.
Using evidence to develop 
policy, practice and products
Good  practice  dictates  that  any  findings  that 
might have an impact on clinical practice, on the 
development of methods of prevention or treat-
ment, or on public policy should be made available 
to those who wish to use them (81). However, con-
veying information is just one part of the process 
of translating research evidence into health policy 
and practice, as described in the next section.

Translating evidence into 
policy and practice
There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  most  health 
research is devoted to developing new interven-
tions and demonstrating their efficacy in experi-
mental trials, and that far too little effort is given 
to the process of turning evidence from research 
into actions that improve health (97, 98). In the 
context of achieving universal health coverage, 
a  large  number  of  cheap,  efficacious  and  cost-
effective  existing  interventions  remain  inac-
cessible to many who could benefit from them 
(99–101). Some proven interventions are hardly 
used at all; for others, widespread implementa-
tion may take years or decades (Fig. 4.5) (102).

A  variety  of  conceptual  approaches  have 
been  used  to  map  the  path  from  evidence  to 
action  –  the  “triangle  that  moves  the  moun-
tain” and others (103–106). Notwithstanding the 
theory, however, the evidence on how rapidly to 
achieve high coverage of interventions is gener-
ally weak (59, 107). To simplify the problem by 
division, four questions help to understand the 

Fig. 4.5. 

Proportion of 40 low-income 
countries implementing five 
interventions, over periods of 
up to 27 years since regulatory 
approval

The interventions: ACT, artemisin-based combination thera-
pies; Hep B, Hepatitis B vaccine; HiB, haemophilus influenza 
type b vaccine; ITN, insecticide-treated mosquito net; RDT, 
rapid malaria diagnostic test. 
Adapted under the Open Access licence from Brooks et al. 
(102).

reasons why interventions of known efficacy are 
not taken to scale (108).

First,  how  can  the  results  of  research  be 
presented in a form that is comprehensible and 
credible to the population of potential users?

Second, how best can the results, once clearly 
described,  be  actively  disseminated?  In  this 
context, who is the audience and through what 
channels can they be reached? Box 4.11 contains 
a checklist of the pitfalls in dissemination, with 
some guidance on how to avoid them (111). Not 
everyone will agree with all of the remedies. Thus, 
rather than guarding against premature public-
ity, Brooks et al. argue that dissemination, which 
make  take  decades  (Fig.  4.5),  can  be  achieved 
more quickly by anticipating and removing likely 
bottlenecks during the R&D phase (102).

113

Research for universal health coverage

Box 4.11. 

Ten common mistakes in the dissemination of new interventions, and suggestions 
for avoiding them

1. Assuming that evidence matters to potential adopters
Suggestion: Evidence is most important only to a subset of potential adopters, and is often used to reject proposed 
interventions. Therefore, emphasize other variables such as compatibility, cost and simplicity when communicating 
about innovations.
2. Substituting the perceptions of researchers for those of potential adopters
Suggestion: Listen to representatives of the potential adopters to understand their needs and reactions to new 
interventions.
3. Using intervention creators as intervention communicators
Suggestion: Enable access to experts, but rely on communicators who will elicit the attention of potential adopters.
4. Introducing interventions before they are ready
Suggestion: Publicize interventions only after clear results have been obtained.
5. Assuming that information will influence decision-making
Suggestion: Information is necessary, but influence is usually needed too. Therefore pair sources of information with 
sources of social and political influence.
6. Confusing authority with influence
Suggestion: Gather data on who among potential adopters is seen as a source of advice and use them to acceler-
ate dissemination.
7. Allowing those who are first to adopt (innovators) to gain primacy in dissemination efforts
Suggestion: Initial adopters are not always typical or influential. Find out how potential adopters and key users are 
related to each other in order to identify those who are most influential (109).
8. Failing to distinguish between change agents, authority figures, opinion leaders and innovation champions
Suggestion: Single individuals do not usually play multiple roles, so determine what part each person can play in 
the dissemination process.
9. Selecting demonstration sites on criteria of motivation and capacity
Suggestion: The spread of an intervention depends on how initial demonstration sites are seen by others. So, when 
selecting demonstration sites, consider which sites will have a positive influence.
10. Advocating single interventions as the solution to a problem
Suggestion: One intervention is unlikely to fit all circumstances; offering a cluster of evidence-based practices is 
usually more effective (105, 110).
Adapted from Dearing (111).

Third,  by  what  criteria  do  potential  users 
decide to adopt a new intervention? Ideally, the 
decision  formally  to  adopt  will  ultimately  be 
embodied in government policy.

And  fourth,  once  the  decision  to  adopt 
has been taken, how should an intervention be 
implemented  and  evaluated?  In  practice,  there 
is  a  tension  between  preserving  the  interven-
tion in its original form and adapting it to local 

circumstances.  By  and  large,  programmes  can 
be expected to work imperfectly at first and will 
need to be adapted and refined (105).

To  help  answer  these  four  questions  for  a 
variety of interventions in different settings, an 
assortment of networks, tools and instruments 
is available, including EvipNet, SURE, TRAction 
and SUPPORT (Box 4.12). In the context of health 
systems performance, the methods for judging 

114

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

Box 4.12. 

Translating research into policy and practice 

There is an important distinction between evidence used to set policy and evidence used to influence practice. The 
first two examples below focus on policy, the third on practice.
Evidence-Informed Policy Networks (EVIPNet)
The purpose of EVIPNet (www.evipnet.org) is to strengthen health systems by linking the results of scientific research 
to the development of health policy. EVIPNet is a network of teams in more than 20 countries around the world, which 
synthesize research findings, produce policy briefs, and organize policy forums that bring together policy-makers, 
researchers and citizen groups. Recent initiatives have, for example, helped to improve access to ACT for the treatment 
of malaria in Africa and debated the role of primary health care in the management of chronic noncommunicable 
diseases in the Americas (112). As a component of EVIPnet, SURE (Support for the Use of Research Evidence) offers a 
set of guides for preparing and using policy briefs to support health systems development in Africa.
SUPPORT tools for evidence-informed health policy-making
SUPPORT is a collection of articles that describe how to use scientific evidence to inform health policy (113). The 
series shows, among other things, how to make best use of systematic reviews and how in general to use research 
evidence to clarify problems linked to health policy.
The Translating Research into Action (TRAction) project
Recognizing that many health problems in developing countries already have solutions that have not been applied, 
TRAction (www.tractionproject.org) promotes wider use of interventions that are known to be effective, awarding 
grants for translational research in the areas of maternal, newborn and child health. TRAction is part of the Health 
Research Program (HaRP) of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).
ACT, artemisin-based combination therapies.

evidence on the effectiveness of interventions are 
well developed. However, new tools are needed 
to help assess evidence from systematic reviews 
in  terms  of  the  acceptability  of  policy  options 
to stakeholders and the feasibility of implemen-
tation, and in terms of equity. Research is also 
needed on ways to develop, structure and pre-
sent policy options in relation to the functions 
of health systems (114, 115). 

Researchers  and  decision-makers 

typi-
cally  work  in  different  communities,  and  the 
research  described  in  technical  publications 
and  scientific  journals  cannot  easily  be  evalu-
ated  by  most  of  the  people  who  make  most  of 
the decisions (see Box 2.3 on the GRADE system 
for  judging  evidence  for  policy  and  practice) 
(116). The influence of research depends on how 
research  activities  are  positioned  with  respect 
to  the  bodies  that  are  responsible  for  setting 
policy and practice. For maximum effect, health 
research should be embedded as a core function 

in every health system (54). A research depart-
ment  located  within  a  health  ministry  should 
be well positioned to transfer research findings 
to  policy-makers  and  to  help  oversee  national 
research  practice  –  for  instance  by  setting  up 
national databases of research projects approved 
and  completed,  of  scientific  publications  pro-
duced, and of patents awarded.

When  researchers  are  put  in  close  contact 
with policy-makers they will be in a position not 
simply to produce results on demand but also to 
shape  the  research  agenda  (117).  For  instance, 
routine evaluation of public health programmes 
is an important source of questions for research, 
and  yet  few  countries  have  laws  and  policies 
that  require  such  evaluations  to  be  done  (118). 
One weakness of existing schemes for promot-
ing universal health coverage is that they fail to 
involve evaluators from the start (119). Research 
scientists  placed  in  public  health  programmes 
would stimulate monitoring and evaluation.

115

Research for universal health coverage

Monitoring and coordinating 
research, nationally 
and internationally

Mechanisms to stimulate and facilitate research 
for  universal  health  coverage  include  moni-
toring,  coordination  and  financing.  These 
are  closely  related  and  have  repeatedly  been 
proposed  as  ways  of  promoting  and  support-
ing  high-priority  research  (120–122).  Most 
recently, the report of the Consultative Expert 
Working Group on Research and Development: 
Financing  and  Coordination  (CEWG)  made  a 
series of recommendations to support R&D for 
health technology, and the Alliance on Health 
Policy and Systems Research did the same for 
HPSR  (Box  4.13)  (117,  123,  124).  Many  of  the 
ideas  for  promoting  R&D  and  HPSR  apply  to 
all aspects of health research, so these are drawn 
together here.

Where there is a commitment to share data, 
a global observatory, built on national observa-
tories and regional hubs, can in principle do the 

following  in  support  of  research  for  universal 
health coverage:
 ■

compile, analyse and present data on finan-
cial flows for health;
act as a repository of data on research find-
ings and on the efficacy, safety, quality and 
affordability of interventions, including the 
registration of clinical trials;
in collaboration with other organizations 
that currently gather data on science and 
technology indicators (e.g. UNESCO, 
OECD, the Network for Science and 
Technology Indicators – Ibero-American 
and Inter-American, the World Intellectual 
Property Organization), bring together 
information on research publications, 
clinical trials and patents, as envisaged in 
the Global Strategy and Plan of Action on 
Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual 
Property (Box 2.7) (125);
chart progress on research for universal 
health coverage by measuring inputs and 
health impact along the results chain 
(Chapter 1);

 ■

 ■

 ■

Box 4.13.  WHO Strategy on Health Policy and Systems Research

The WHO Strategy on Health Policy and Systems Research (HPSR), launched in November 2012, was shaped by the 
Alliance on Health Policy and Systems Research. The strategy explains how the evolving field of health policy and 
systems  research  (Box 2.1)  responds  to  the  information  needs  of  decision-makers,  health  practitioners  and  civil 
society, all of whom are responsible for the planning and performance of national health systems (117). As the first-
ever global strategy in this area, it represents a milestone in the evolution of HPSR.
The strategy has three aims. First, it seeks to unify the worlds of research and decision-making and connect the 
various research disciplines that generate knowledge on health systems. Second, it contributes to a broader under-
standing of the field by clarifying the scope and role of HPSR and providing insights into the dynamic processes 
through which HPSR evidence is generated and used in decision-making. Third, the strategy is intended to serve 
as an agent for change, advocating close collaboration between researchers and decision-makers as an alternative 
to working in parallel.
The strategy document outlines several actions by which stakeholders can facilitate evidence-informed decision-
making and strengthen health systems. Some of these actions are reflected in the main text of this chapter. These 
mutually complementary options support the embedding of research into decision-making processes and promote 
national and global investment in HPSR. National governments may choose to pursue some or all of these actions 
on the basis of their individual needs and available resources.

116

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

 ■

 ■

generate and promote research standards, 
increase accountability for action, and 
provide technical support;
facilitate collaboration and coordination, 
especially between countries, by sharing 
information from the repository of data.

Whether all these functions can be satisfied 
in  practice  depends  on  the  resources  available 
and  the  will  to  develop  national,  regional  and 
global observatories. These ideas form part of the 
continuing debate about how to promote R&D 
for health in low-income countries (126).

Monitoring provides opportunities to coor-
dinate research activities: information-sharing, 
network-building and collaboration are essen-
tial ingredients of coordination. The advantages 
of  coordination  lie  in  jointly  developing  solu-
tions  to  common  problems,  sometimes  with 
shared resources. However, there are disadvan-
tages too. One dilemma in coordination is how 
to provide opportunities to make research more 
effective – for instance by seeking to be com-
plementary and to avoid duplication – without 
imposing undue constraints on creativity and 
innovation.

At  its  least  complicated,  coordination  is 
facilitated  simply  by  sharing  information.  The 
observatory  Orphanet,  for  example,  is  a  refer-
ence  portal  that  provides  information  on  rare 
diseases and orphan drugs (127). On a different 
level, coordination might entail the joint setting 
of  priorities  for  research  on  a  selected  theme, 
such as interventions to control noncommunica-
ble diseases (37). At a yet higher level of organi-
zation,  there  might  be  joint  research  projects, 
for example to test new tools for prevention or 
treatment at sites in several countries. Examples 
are  the  coordinated  evaluation  of  MenAfriVac 
across west and central Africa, and the diagno-
sis and treatment of syphilis on three continents 
(Box 4.8) (80, 128, 129).

Financing research for 
universal health coverage
Health research is more productive when there 
is  a  guaranteed,  regular  income.  International 
donors and national governments can measure 
their  own  commitments  to  investing  in  health 
research against defined, voluntary benchmarks. 
A series of benchmarks for research funding has 
been proposed, and these may be taken as start-
ing points in setting targets for research fund-
ing (121). Accordingly, the 1990 Commission on 
Health Research for Development suggested that 
each nation should spend at least 2% of national 
health expenditure on “essential national health 
research” (120). A more recent recommendation 
is  that  “developing”  countries  should  commit 
0.05–0.1% of GDP to government-funded health 
research  of  all  kinds  (121).  Higher-income 
countries should commit 0.15–0.2% of GDP to 
government-funded  health  research  (121).  The 
choice of benchmarks is discretionary but should 
be commensurate with achieving, or at least lie 
on a trajectory to, universal health coverage.

National and international 
governance of health research
One may ask whether the health research system 
in any country is effectively governed and man-
aged – i.e. whether all the essential functions are 
carried out to a high standard. Systematic evalu-
ations  of  research  governance  are  valuable  but 
rare. In one of the few examples, eight indicators 
of  governance  and  management  were  used  to 
assess the national health research systems of 10 
countries  in  the  WHO  Eastern  Mediterranean 
Region (Fig. 4.6) (130).

This  evaluation  found  some  examples  of 
good  practice,  but  few  countries  had  a  formal 
national health research system and many of the 

117

Research for universal health coverage

Fig. 4.6. 

Eight aspects of governance and management of the national health research systems 
(NHRS) in 10 countries of the Eastern Mediterranean region 

s
e
t
a
r
i

 

m
E
b
a
r
A
d
e
t
i
n
U

 

n
e
m
e
Y

n
i
a
r
h
a
B

n
a
d
r
o
J

t
i
a
w
u
K

n
o
n
a
b
e
L

n
a
m
O

r
a
t
a
Q

a
i
b
a
r
A

 
i

d
u
a
S

a
i
s
i
n
u
T

Management and governance
National health priorities
Statement of aims for NHRS
Formal NHRS governance structure
Formal NHRS management structure
National health research priorities
National health research policy/plan/strategy
Statement of values for NHRS
Monitoring and evaluation system for NHRS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Source: Kennedy et al. (130).

basic building blocks of an effective system were 
not in place. On the basis of these indicators, it 
was clear that the 10 countries differed greatly 
in  their  research  capabilities  and  that  the  best 
performers  among  them  were  Lebanon,  Oman 
and Tunisia. Similar evaluations have been car-
ried  out  for  Latin  American  countries  and  for 
Pacific island nations (45, 131). The best kind of 
governance  ensures  that  all  key  functions  of  a 
research system are carried out within a regula-
tory framework that is light enough to facilitate 
rather than hinder the research process (132).

Conclusions: building 
effective research systems
The  four  functions  of  an  effective  research 
system  –  setting  priorities,  building  capacity, 
setting standards, and translating evidence into 
practice – are in various stages of development 

118

in nations around the world. Consequently, the 
parts of the system that need most attention vary 
from one country to another. The conclusion of 
this overview therefore highlights one aspect of 
each function that is important for all national 
health research systems.

First, on choosing topics for research, more 
effort is needed to set national health research 
priorities, as distinct from setting priorities for 
selected health topics.

Second, the capacity of any country to carry 
out the necessary research depends on funding, 
institutions  and  networks.  However,  it  is  the 
people who do research – with their curiosity, 
imagination, motivation, technical skills, expe-
rience and connections – who are most critical 
to the success of the research enterprise.

Third, codes of practice, which are the corner-
stone of any research system, are already in use in 
many countries. However, they need to be further 
developed and adapted to new settings and new 

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

circumstances.  An  important  task  ahead  is  to 
ensure adherence to nationally and internation-
ally agreed standards in the conduct of research.
Fourth, although a wide range of fundamen-
tal  and  applied  research  studies  is  essential  in 
order to reach universal health coverage, there is 
a particular need to close the gap between exist-
ing  knowledge  and  action.  To  help  close  this 
gap, research should be strengthened, not only 
in  academic  centres,  but  also  in  public  health 
programmes close to the supply of and demand 
for health services.

Apart  from  considering  how  research  is 
done,  especially  within  countries,  this  chap-
ter  has  also  outlined  methods  for  supporting 
research,  nationally  and  internationally.  The 

support is provided by three mechanisms: moni-
toring, coordination and financing. One way to 
monitor research more effectively is by establish-
ing  linked  national  and  international  research 
observatories. A function of observatories is to 
aid coordination, through information-sharing 
and by facilitating collaborative research studies. 
Observatories  can  also  monitor  financial  flows 
for  research  and  can  help  ensure  that  there  is 
adequate funding to support research on global 
and national priorities.

In view of what has already been achieved in 
research, the next task is to identify what actions 
can be taken to build more effective research sys-
tems. Chapter 5 proposes a set of actions based 
on the main themes of this report.  ■

References
1. 

2. 

Viergever RF et al. A checklist for health research priority setting: nine common themes of good practice. Health Research 
Policy and Systems, 2010,8:36. PMID:21159163.
Terry RF, van der Rijt T. Overview of research activities associated with the World Health Organization: results of a 
survey covering 2006/07. Health Research Policy and Systems, 2010,8:25. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-8-25 
PMID:20815938.

3.  Decoster K, Appelmans A, Hill P. A health systems research mapping exercise in 26 low- and middle-income countries: 

narratives from health systems researchers, policy brokers and policy-makers. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.

4.  UNDP/World Bank/WHO Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR). Research capacity build-

5. 

6. 

7. 
8. 

ing in developing countries. Geneva, World Health Organization and TDR, 2003.
Planning, monitoring and evaluation framework for capacity strengthening in health research. (ESSENCE Good practice 
document series. Document TDR/ESSENCE/11.1). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011.
Bates I et al. Indicators of sustainable capacity building for health research: analysis of four African case studies. Health 
Research Policy and Systems, 2011,9:14. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-9-14 PMID:21443780.
Capacity building in research. London, Department for International Development, 2010.
Fathalla MF, Fathalla MMF. A practical guide for health researchers. Cairo, World Health Organization Regional Office for 
the Eastern Mediterranean, 2004.

9.  Gilson L, ed. Health policy and systems research: a methodological reader. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
10.  Ghaffar A et al. The 3D Combined Approach Matrix: an improved tool for setting priorities in research for health. Geneva, 

Global Forum for Health Research, 2009.

11.  Okello D, Chongtrakul P, COHRED Working Group on Priority Setting. A manual for research priority setting using the ENHR 

strategy. Geneva, Council on Health Research for Development, 2000.

12.  A manual for research priority setting using the essential national health research strategy. Geneva, Council on Health 

Research for Development, 2000.

13.  Rudan I et al. Setting priorities in global child health research investments: universal challenges and conceptual frame-

work. Croatian Medical Journal, 2008,49:307-317. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3325/cmj.2008.3.307 PMID:18581609.

14.  Rudan I et al. Evidence-based priority setting for health care and research: tools to support policy in maternal, neo-

natal, and child health in Africa. PLoS Medicine, 2010,7:e1000308. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000308 
PMID:20644640.

15.  Health technology assessment programme. London, National Institute for Health Research, 2013. (www.hta.ac.uk/fund-

ing/HTAremit.shtml, accessed 20 March 2013).

119

Research for universal health coverage

16.  Policy research programme, best evidence for best policy. London, Department of Health, 2013. (prp.dh.gov.uk, accessed 

20 March 2013).

17.  Youngkong S, Kapiriri L, Baltussen R. Setting priorities for health interventions in developing countries: a review 

of empirical studies. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2009,14:930-939. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
3156.2009.02311.x PMID:19563479.

18.  George A et al. Setting implementation research priorities to reduce preterm births and stillbirths at the community level. 

PLoS Medicine, 2011,8:e1000380. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000380 PMID:21245907.

19.  Lawn JE et al. Setting research priorities to reduce almost one million deaths from birth asphyxia by 2015. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1000389. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000389 PMID:21305038.

20.  Rudan I et al. Setting research priorities to reduce global mortality from childhood pneumonia by 2015. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1001099. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001099 PMID:21980266.

21.  Fontaine O et al. Setting research priorities to reduce global mortality from childhood diarrhoea by 2015. PLoS Medicine, 

2009,6:e41. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000041 PMID:19278292.

22.  Tomlinson M et al. Setting priorities in child health research investments for South Africa. PLoS Medicine, 2007,4:e259. doi: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0040259 PMID:17760497.

23.  Sharan P et al. Mental health research priorities in low- and middle-income countries of Africa, Asia, Latin America 

and the Caribbean. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 2009,195:354-363. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.108.050187 
PMID:19794206.

24.  Tol WA et al. Research priorities for mental health and psychosocial support in humanitarian settings. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1001096. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001096 PMID:21949644.

25.  Nicolau I et al. Research questions and priorities for tuberculosis: a survey of published systematic reviews and meta-

analyses. PLoS ONE, 2012,7:e42479. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0042479 PMID:22848764.

26.  An international roadmap for tuberculosis research: towards a world free of tuberculosis. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2011.

27.  Lienhardt C et al. What research Is needed to stop TB? Introducing the TB research movement. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1001135. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001135 PMID:22140369.

28.  Priorities in operational research to improve tuberculosis care and control. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2011.
29. 

 The malERA Consultative Group on Drugs. A research agenda for malaria eradication: drugs. PLoS Medicine, 
2011,8:e1000402. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000402 PMID:21311580.
 The malERA Consultative Group on Health Systems and Operational Research. A research agenda for malaria eradica-
tion: health systems and operational research. PLoS Medicine, 2011,8:e1000397. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1000397 PMID:21311588.

30. 

31.  McDowell MA et al. Leishmaniasis: Middle East and North Africa research and development priorities. PLoS Neglected 

Tropical Diseases, 2011,5:e1219. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0001219 PMID:21814585.

32.  Costa CH et al. Vaccines for the leishmaniases: proposals for a research agenda. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 

2011,5:e943. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0000943 PMID:21468307.

33.  Research priorities for Chagas disease, human African trypanosomiasis and leishmaniasis. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2012.

34.  Dujardin JC et al. Research priorities for neglected infectious diseases in Latin America and the Caribbean region. PLoS 

Neglected Tropical Diseases, 2010,4:e780. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0000780 PMID:21049009.

35.  Research priorities for helminth infections. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2012.
36.  Research priorities for zoonoses and marginalized infections. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
37.  Prioritized research agenda for prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2012.

38.  Ranson MK et al. Priorities for research into human resources for health in low- and middle-income countries. Bulletin of 

the World Health Organization, 2010,88:435-443. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.09.066290 PMID:20539857.

39.  Ranson K, Law TJ, Bennett S. Establishing health systems financing research priorities in developing countries using 

a participatory methodology. Social Science & Medicine, 2010,70:1933-1942. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socsci-
med.2010.01.051 PMID:20378228.

40.  Jones R, Lamont T, Haines A. Setting priorities for research and development in the NHS: a case study on the inter-

face between primary and secondary care. British Medical Journal, 1995,311:1076-1080. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.311.7012.1076 PMID:7580669.

120

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

41.  Östlin P et al. Priorities for research on equity and health: towards an equity-focused health research agenda. PLoS 

Medicine, 2011,8:e1001115. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001115 PMID:22069378.

42.  The 10/90 report on health research 1999. Geneva, Global Forum for Health Research, 1999.
43.  Sizemore CF, Fauci AS. Transforming biomedical research to develop effective TB vaccines: the next ten years. Tuberculosis 

(Edinburgh, Scotland), 2012,92:Suppl 1S2-S3. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1472-9792(12)70003-3 PMID:22441154.

44.  Pacheco Santos LM et al. Fulfillment of the Brazilian agenda of priorities in health research. Health Research Policy and 

Systems, 2011,9:35. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-9-35 PMID:21884575.

45.  Alger J et al. [National health research systems in Latin America: a 14-country review]. Revista Panamericana de Salud 

46. 

Pública, 2009,26:447-457. PMID:20107697.
Ijsselmuiden C, Ghannem H, Bouzouaia N. Développement du système de recherche en santé: analyse et établissement 
des priorités en Tunisie [Development of health research system: analysis and defining priorities in Tunsia]. La Tunisie 
Medicale, 2009,87:1-2. PMID:19522419.

47.  Tomlinson M et al. A review of selected research priority setting processes at national level in low and middle income 
countries: towards fair and legitimate priority setting. Health Research Policy and Systems, 2011,9:19. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1478-4505-9-19 PMID:21575144.

48.  McKee M, Stuckler D, Basu S. Where there is no health research: what can be done to fill the global gaps in health research? 

PLoS Medicine, 2012,9:e1001209. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001209 PMID:22545025.

49.  The Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 

and Development, 2005.

50.  Fourth High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness. Busan, Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, 2011. 

(www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/, accessed 20 March 2013).

51.  Kok MO et al. The emergence and current performance of a health research system: lessons from Guinea Bissau. Health 

Research Policy and Systems, 2012,10:5. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-10-5 PMID:22321566.

52.  Lansang MA, Dennis R. Building capacity in health research in the developing world. Bulletin of the World Health 

Organization, 2004,82:764-770. PMID:15643798.

53.  Bennett S et al. Building the field of health policy and systems research: an agenda for action. PLoS Medicine, 

2011,8:e1001081. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001081 PMID:21918641.

54.  Hoffman SJ et al. A review of conceptual barriers and opportunities facing health systems research to inform a strategy 

from the World Health Organization. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.

55.  Whitworth JA et al. Strengthening capacity for health research in Africa. Lancet, 2008,372:1590-1593. doi: http://dx.doi.

56. 

org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61660-8 PMID:18984193.
Ijsselmuiden C et al. Africa’s neglected area of human resources for health research – the way forward. South African 
Medical Journal/Suid-Afrikaanse tydskrif vir geneeskunde, 2012, 102:228–233.

57.  How to build science capacity. Nature, 2012,490:331-334. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/490331a PMID:23075964.
58.  Bennett S et al. What must be done to enhance capacity for health systems research? Geneva: World Health 

Organization2010.

59.  Whitworth J, Sewankambo NK, Snewin VA. Improving implementation: building research capacity in maternal, neo-

natal, and child health in Africa. PLoS Medicine, 2010,7:e1000299. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000299 
PMID:20625547.

60.  Meyer AM, Davis M, Mays GP. Defining organizational capacity for public health services and systems research. Journal of 

Public Health Management and Practice, 2012,18:535-544. PMID:23023278.

61.  Nwaka S et al. Developing ANDI: a novel approach to health product R&D in Africa. PLoS Medicine, 2010,7:e1000293. 

PMID:20613865 doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000293 PMID:20613865.

62.  The world health report 2006 − working together for health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.
63. 
64.  Guidelines for research in partnership with developing countries: 11 principles. Bern, Swiss Commission for Research 

Ijsselmuiden C. Human resources for health research. MMS Bulletin, 2007,104:22-27..

Partnership with Developing Countries, (KFPE), 1998.

65.  Kariuki T et al. Research and capacity building for control of neglected tropical diseases: the need for a different approach. 

PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 2011,5:e1020. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0001020 PMID:21655352.

66.  Garcia CR, Parodi AJ, Oliva G. Growing Latin American science. Science, 2012,338:1127. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/sci-

ence.1232223 PMID:23197500.

67.  Harries AD, Zachariah R. Applying DOTS principles for operational research capacity building. Public Health Action, 2012.

121

Research for universal health coverage

68.  Laabes EP et al. How much longer will Africa have to depend on western nations for support of its capacity-building efforts 

for biomedical research? Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2011,16:258-262. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
3156.2010.02709.x PMID:21371216.

69.  UK health research analysis 2009/10. London, UK Clinical Research Collaboration, 2012.
70.  Head MG et al. UK investments in global infectious disease research 1997–2010: a case study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 

2013,13:55-64. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70261-X PMID:23140942.

71.  Terry RF et al. Mapping global health research investments, time for new thinking - a Babel Fish for research data. Health 

Research Policy and Systems, 2012,10:28. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-10-28 PMID:22938160.

72.  The Global Plan to Stop TB 2011–2015. Transforming the fight towards elimination of tuberculosis. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2010.

73.  Tuberculosis Research and Development: 2011 report on tuberculosis research funding trends, 2005–2010. New York, NY, 

Treatment Action Group, 2012.

74.  Zachariah R et al. The 2012 world health report ‘no health without research’: the endpoint needs to go beyond publication 
outputs. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 2012,17:1409-1411. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3156.2012.03072.x.

75.  Lienhardt C, Cobelens FG. Operational research for improved tuberculosis control: the scope, the needs and the way 

forward. The International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2011,15:6-13. PMID:21276290.

76.  Five keys to improving research costing in low- and middle-income countries. (ESSENCE Good practice document series. 

Document TDR/ESSENCE/1.12). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.

77.  Mahmood S et al. Strategies for capacity building for health research in Bangladesh: Role of core funding and a common 
monitoring and evaluation framework. Health Research Policy and Systems, 2011,9:31. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-
4505-9-31 PMID:21798006.

78.  Nwaka S et al. Analysis of pan-African Centres of excellence in health innovation highlights opportunities and challenges 

for local innovation and financing in the continent. BMC International Health and Human Rights, 2012,12:11. doi: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-698X-12-11 PMID:22838941.

79.  Lang TA et al. Clinical research in resource-limited settings: enhancing research capacity and working together to make 
trials less complicated. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 2010,4:e619. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0000619 
PMID:20614013.

80.  Mabey DC et al. Point-of-care tests to strengthen health systems and save newborn lives: the case of syphilis. PLoS 

Medicine, 2012,9:e1001233. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001233 PMID:22719229.

81.  Good research practice: principles and guidelines. London, Medical Research Council, 2012.
82.  Australian Code for the Responsible Conduct of Research. Canberra, National Health and Medical Research Council, 2007.
83.  The ethics of research related to healthcare in developing countries. London, Nuffield Council on Bioethics, 2005.
84.  Singapore Statement on Research Integrity. Singapore, Second World Conference on Research Integrity, 2010.
85.  Operational guidelines for ethics committees that review biomedical research. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2000.
86.  UK Research Integrity Office (web site). Falmer, Sussex Innovation Centre, University of Sussex, 2012. (www.ukrio.org, 

accessed 20 March 2013).

87.  WMA declaration of Helsinki. Ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects. Seoul, World Medical 

Association, 2008.

88.  Standards and operational guidance for ethics review of health-related research with human participants. Geneva, World 

Health Organization, 2011.

89.  Chalmers I, Haines A. Commentary: skilled forensic capacity needed to investigate allegations of research misconduct. 

British Medical Journal, 2011,342:d3977. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d3977.

90.  Chan M et al. Meeting the demand for results and accountability: a call for action on health data from eight global health 

agencies. PLoS Medicine, 2010,7:e1000223. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000223 PMID:20126260.

91.  Walport M, Brest P. Sharing research data to improve public health. Lancet, 2011,377:537-539. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/

S0140-6736(10)62234-9 PMID:21216456.

92.  The Royal Society. Science as an open enterprise: open data for open science. London, The Royal Society, 2012.
93.  Rani M, Buckley BS. Systematic archiving and access to health research data: rationale, current status and way forward. 

Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2012,90:932-939. PMID:23284199.

94.  Leung E et al. Microcolony culture techniques for tuberculosis diagnosis: a systematic review. [i–iii.]. The International 

Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2012,16:16-23. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5588/ijtld.10.0065 PMID:21986554.

95.  Haak LL et al. Standards and infrastructure for innovation and data exchange. Science, 2012,338:196-197. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1126/science.1221840 PMID:23066063.

122

Chapter 4  Building research systems for universal health coverage

96. 

International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (www.who.int/ictrp/
trial_reg/en/index2.html, accessed 20 March 2013).

97.  World report on knowledge for better health − strengthening health systems. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
98.  Green A, Bennett S, eds. Sound choices: enhancing capacity for evidence-informed health policy. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2007.

99.  Jamison DT et al. Disease control priorities in developing countries, 2nd ed. New York, NY, Oxford University Press, 2006.
100.  Duflo E. Rigorous evaluation of human behavior. Science, 2012,336:1398. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1224965 

PMID:22700919.

101.  Cobelens F et al. Research on implementation of interventions in tuberculosis control in low- and middle-income countries: 

a systematic review. PLoS Medicine, 2012,9:e1001358. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001358 PMID:23271959.

102.  Brooks A et al. Implementing new health interventions in developing countries: why do we lose a decade or more? BioMed 

Central Public Health, 2012,12:683. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-683 PMID:22908877.

103.  Wasi P. “Triangle that moves the mountain” and health systems reform movement in Thailand. Human Resources for Health 

Development Journal, 2000,4:106-110..

104.  Lavis JN et al. Assessing country-level efforts to link research to action. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 

2006,84:620-628. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.06.030312 PMID:16917649.

105.  Glasgow RE, Emmons KM. How can we increase translation of research into practice? Types of evidence needed. 

Annual Review of Public Health, 2007,28:413-433. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.28.021406.144145 
PMID:17150029.

106.  Panel on Return on Investment in Health Research. Making an impact: a preferred framework and indicators to measure 

returns on investment in health research. Ottawa, Canadian Academy of Health Sciences, 2009.

107.  Orton L et al. The use of research evidence in public health decision making processes: systematic review. PLoS ONE, 

2011,6:e21704. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021704 PMID:21818262.

108.  Noonan RK, Emshoff G. Translating research to practice: putting “what works” to work. In: DiClemente RJ, Salazar LF, 

Crosby RA, eds. Health behavior theory for public health. Burlington, MA, Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011:309–334.

109.  Kok MO, Schuit AJ. Contribution mapping: a method for mapping the contribution of research to enhance its impact. 

Health Research Policy and Systems, 2012,10:21. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-10-21 PMID:22748169.

110.  Boaz A, Baeza J, Fraser A. Effective implementation of research into practice: an overview of systematic reviews of the 

health literature. BMC Research Notes, 2011,4:212. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1756-0500-4-212 PMID:21696585.

111.  Dearing JW. Applying diffusion of innovation theory to intervention development. Research on Social Work Practice, 

2009,19:503-518. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1049731509335569 PMID:20976022.

112.  Panisset U et al. Implementation research evidence uptake and use for policy-making. Health Research Policy and Systems, 

2012,10:20. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-10-20 PMID:22748142.

113.  Lavis JN et al. SUPPORT Tools for evidence-informed health Policymaking (STP). Health Research Policy and Systems, 

2009,7:Suppl 1:I1. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-7-S1-I1 PMID:20018098.

114.  Lewin S et al. Guidance for evidence-informed policies about health systems: assessing how much confidence to 

place in the research evidence. PLoS Medicine, 2012,9:e1001187. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001187 
PMID:22448147.

115.  Bosch-Capblanch X et al. Guidance for evidence-informed policies about health systems: rationale for and chal-

lenges of guidance development. PLoS Medicine, 2012,9:e1001185. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001185 
PMID:22412356.

116.  Buse K, Mays N, Walt G. Making health policy (Understanding public health), 2nd ed. New York, NY, Open University Press, 2012.
117.  Strategy on health policy and systems research: changing mindsets. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012.
118.  Kebede M et al. Blueprints for informed policy decisions: a review of laws and policies requiring routine evaluation. Oslo, 

Kunnskapssenteret (Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services), 2012.

119.  Giedion U, Alfonso EA, Díaz Y. The impact of universal coverage schemes in the developing world: a review of the existing 

evidence. Washington, DC, The World Bank, 2013.

120.  Commission on Health Research for Development. Health research − essential link to equity in development. Oxford, 

Oxford University Press, 1990.

121.  Research and development to meet health needs in developing countries: strengthening global financing and coordina-

tion. Report of the consultative expert working group on research and development: financing and coordination. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2012.

123

Research for universal health coverage

122.  Research and development coordination and financing. Report of the Expert Working Group. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2010.

123.  Knutsson KE et al. Health policy/systems research, realizing the initiative − a background document to an international consul-

tative meeting at Lejondal, Sweden April 10–12. Lejondal, 1997 (unpublished).

124.  Røttingen J-A et al. Mapping of available health research and development data: what’s there, what’s missing, and what 

role is there for a global observatory? Lancet, 2013, May 17. pii:S0140-6736(13)61046-6.  doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(13)61046-6 PMID:23697824

125.  Global strategy and plan of action on public health, innovation and intellectual property. Geneva, World Health 

Organization, 2011.

126.  Hotez PJ et al. Strengthening mechanisms to prioritize, coordinate, finance, and execute R&D to meet health needs in 

developing countries. Washington, DC, Institute of Medicine, 2013.

127.  Orphanet. The portal for rare diseases and orphan drugs (web site). Paris, Orphanet/INSERM, 2012 (www.orpha.net, 

accessed 20 March 2013).

128.  Sow SO et al. Immunogenicity and safety of a meningococcal A conjugate vaccine in Africans. The New England Journal of 

Medicine, 2011,364:2293-2304. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1003812 PMID:21675889.

129.  Frasch CE, Preziosi MP, LaForce FM. Development of a group A meningococcal conjugate vaccine, MenAfriVac(TM). Human 

Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 2012,8:715-724. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/hv.19619 PMID:22495119.

130.  Kennedy A et al. National health research system mapping in 10 Eastern Mediterranean countries. Eastern Mediterranean 

Health Journal, 2008,14:502-517. PMID:18720615.

131.  National health research systems in Pacific island countries. Manila, World Health Organization Regional Office for the 

Western Pacific, 2009.

132.  A new pathway for the regulation and governance of health research. London, Academy of Medical Sciences, 2011.

124

Chapter 5

Action on research for 
universal health coverage

Chapter 5

Key points

Research – essential for universal 
coverage and a source of inspiration for 
public health

Defining and measuring progress 
towards universal health coverage

The path to universal health coverage, 
and the path to better health

Research for universal health coverage 
in every country

Supporting the people who do 
research

Translating research evidence into 
health policy and practice

Supporting research for universal 
health coverage, nationally and 
internationally

WHO’s role in research for universal 
health coverage

128

129

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

Laboratory work at the National Institute of Epidemiologic Diagnosis and Reference (InDRE)  
Mexico City, Mexico (WHO/PAHO/Harold Ruiz).

Key points

Drawing on previous chapters, Chapter 5 highlights the dominant themes of the report, 
and proposes a set of actions to guide the conduct of research and to support research for 
universal health coverage.
There are a number of important considerations regarding the conduct of research with a 
focus on national health research systems. For instance:
 ■ Research is not merely an essential tool for improving health services; it is also a 

source of inspiration for public health.

 ■ While the research focus of this report is the improvement of access to health 

services and the protection of people at risk, the definition and measurement of 
progress towards universal health coverage are themselves topics for investigation.
 ■ Wider coverage of health services and better financial protection usually lead to 
better health, but research is also needed to link the provision of services most 
effectively with health impact.

 ■ Because local health problems often require local solutions, each country should be a 

producer as well as a consumer of research.

 ■ Among the essential functions of national health research systems, developing 
human capacity is critical. The people who do the research are the foremost asset in 
the research enterprise and should be in the front line of capacity-strengthening.
 ■ The long-observed gap between existing knowledge and health practice remains 
wide. Still greater effort is needed to translate evidence into policy and practice.

Actions to support research nationally and internationally include:
 ■ monitoring (e.g. through the establishment of research observatories);
 ■ coordination (from information-sharing to collaborative research studies);
 ■ financing (to ensure that there are adequate funds to support global and local 

priorities in research).

WHO’s role in carrying out and supporting research is articulated in the Organization’s 
Strategy on Research for Health. The strategy aims to cultivate the highest quality research 
in order to deliver the greatest health benefits to the maximum number of people.

5

Action on research for  
universal health coverage

The goal of this report is not to measure definitively the gap between the present 
coverage of health services and universal coverage, but rather to identify the 
research questions that arise along the way to universal coverage and to discuss 
how these questions can be answered.

Chapter  1  identified  two  kinds  of  questions  about  research  for  univer-
sal health coverage. The first set of questions is about improving health and 
well-being – how to advance towards universal coverage, and how improved 
coverage protects and improves health. The second set of questions is about 
measurement – of the indicators that can be used as measures of the coverage 
of essential health services and financial risk protection in any setting.

In confronting these two sets of questions, the preceding four chapters have 
taken a broad view of research and a broad view of universal health coverage – 
where creativity and imagination are harnessed by the highest-quality science 
to deliver affordable health services and better health protection for everyone.
This  final  chapter  highlights  the  dominant  themes  of  the  report  and 
proposes a set of actions – first, on the conduct of research, with a focus on 
national health research systems and second, to support research nationally 
and internationally (Box 5.1). As part of the narrative, the chapter also outlines 
WHO’s role in supporting these actions, based on the Organization’s Strategy 
on Research for Health (Box 4.1) (1).

Research – essential for universal coverage 
and a source of inspiration for public health
The question “how can we reach universal health coverage?” almost always calls for 
a formal investigation of some kind, whether it be a randomized controlled trial or a 
simple observational study. On the road to universal coverage, taking a methodical 
approach to formulating and answering questions is not a luxury but a necessity; it 
is the source of objective evidence that can inform health policy and practice.

However, research is more than an essential tool; it is also a source of inspi-
ration and motivation in public health. The discoveries made by research stir 

129

Research for universal health coverage

Box 5.1. 

Principal questions and actions on research for universal health coverage

This box identifies the key questions about research for universal health coverage that arise from discussion in the 
main text, together with some important actions that can be taken to help answer the questions.
Questions on research
Improving the coverage of health services:
 ■ How can essential health services and financial risk protection be made accessible to everyone? How do wider 

service coverage and better financial protection – and ultimately universal health coverage – lead to better health?

Measuring the coverage of health services:
 ■ What indicators and data can be used to monitor progress towards universal coverage of essential health 

services and financial risk protection in each setting?

Actions on the conduct of research, mainly within national health research systems
Setting research priorities:
 ■ Set priorities for research, especially at national level, on the basis of evaluations of the major causes of ill-health.
Strengthening research capacity:
 ■ Give priority to recruiting, training and retaining the people who do research; research staff are the foremost 

asset of any research enterprise.

 ■ Provide training not only in research methods but also in the good conduct of research – on accountability, 

ethics, integrity and the stewardship of information on behalf of others.

 ■ Train policy-makers to use the evidence from research, and train researchers to understand the process of 

decision-making and health practitioners.

Setting standards:
 ■ Refine and implement codes of practice to carry out ethical and responsible research in each setting.
 ■ Classify types of research study and research data according to internationally agreed and comparable standards.
Translating research into policy and practice:
 ■ Embed research within policy-making processes in order to facilitate the dialogue between science and 

practice.

 ■ Establish formal procedures for translating evidence into practice.
 ■ Ensure that programmes of continuing professional development, and for improving the quality of care, 

reflect the best available evidence.

 ■ Enhance incentives to carry out research that is relevant to health policy.
 ■ Engage private research companies along with public institutions in the discovery, development and delivery 

of new technologies.

Ensuring participation and public understanding of research:
 ■ Include broad representation from society in the process of research governance.
 ■ Increase public access to policy debates and evaluations both via the media and through public consulta-

tions and meetings.

Actions to support research, nationally and internationally
Monitoring research:
 ■ Develop national and international research observatories to compile and analyse data on the process of 

doing research (funding, priorities, projects, etc.) and on the findings of research – including research aimed at 
achieving universal health coverage.

130

continues ...

Chapter 5  Action on research for universal health coverage

... continued

Coordinating research and sharing information:
 ■ Promote knowledge-sharing, network-building and collaboration, especially within and between countries 

that are beginning to develop research capacity.

Financing research:
 ■ Develop improved mechanisms for raising and disbursing funds for research, either through existing national 

and international bodies or by creating new ones.

 ■ Establish flexible funding mechanisms that permit research across disciplines, both within and beyond the 

health sector.

 ■ Set criteria for investment in health research.
Managing and governing health research:
 ■ Systematically evaluate management and governance in national and international health research systems, 
assessing whether mechanisms exist to carry out the essential functions above (on priorities, capacity, stand-
ards and translation).

 ■ Systematically evaluate public policies and large-scale social programmes that are based on research for 

health, and make the results widely accessible.

ambitions to defeat the greatest public health prob-
lems, as two recent examples show. First, following 
the development of a new high-efficacy menin-
gococcal  A  conjugate  vaccine  (MenAfriVac), 
100  million  people  were  vaccinated  across  the 
African meningitis belt within two years (2, 3). 
Second, the now-famous clinical trial HPTN 052 
– Science magazine’s “breakthrough of the year” 
for 2011 – showed how antiretroviral therapy can 
prevent  almost  all  sexual  transmission  of  HIV 
between  couples,  exciting  further  debate  about 
eliminating HIV/AIDS (4).

None  of  the  rising  indicators  of  research 
activity described in Chapter 2 is, on its own, a 
guarantee of products and strategies that will help 
us reach universal health coverage. Collectively, 
however,  these  upward  trends  signal  the  grow-
ing volume of information and evidence that will 
influence health policy and practice in low- and 
middle-income countries. Most countries around 
the world now have, at least, the foundations on 
which to build effective national health research 
systems. Some have much more than the founda-
tions; they have thriving research communities.

Defining and measuring 
progress towards universal 
health coverage

Because the causes of ill-health and the capac-
ity  for  financial  protection  differ  from  one 
country  to  another,  each  nation  must  deter-
mine its own priority health problems, decide 
what  services  are  needed  to  address  these 
problems,  and  investigate  how  those  services 
can be provided. The services that make up a 
national health system are usually too numer-
ous  to  monitor  comprehensively.  The  practi-
cal alternative is to choose a set of measurable 
coverage indicators to represent, as tracers, the 
overall quantity, quality and equitable delivery 
of the services to be provided, including ways 
to ensure financial protection. This leads to a 
pragmatic interpretation of universal coverage 
in  any  given  setting  so  that  each  representa-
tive  intervention,  whether  a  health  service  or 
a mechanism of financial protection, is acces-
sible to all who are eligible.

131

Research for universal health coverage

By  definition,  universal  coverage  guaran-
tees access to services and financial protection 
for everyone. However, when coverage is partial, 
some people may benefit more than others. For 
this reason, measures of coverage should reveal, 
not simply the average accessibility of services in 
a population, but also the coverage among differ-
ent groups of people classified by income, gender, 
ethnicity, geography and so on. Chapter 1 noted 
that the greatest progress in providing services 
for maternal and child health has been made by 
narrowing the gap between those with the lowest 
and those with the highest incomes (5). This is 
a  form  of  “progressive  universalism”  in  which 
the poorest individuals gain at least as much as 
the richest on the way to universal coverage (6). 
The point about measurement, however, is that 
disaggregated data must be applied to the right 
indicators in order to monitor the implementa-
tion of a chosen policy on equity.

From  these  considerations,  two  kinds  of 
research questions arise. The first group of ques-
tions  deals  with  improving  health.  Given  the 
burden of disease in any setting, what services 
are needed, how can universal coverage of these 
services be achieved, and how does wider cov-
erage  lead  to  better  health?  This  first  group  of 
questions is the principal concern of this report.
The second set of questions is about measure-
ment: what is the practical definition of universal 
health coverage in any setting, and which indica-
tors  and  data  can  be  used  to  measure  progress 
towards that goal? The answers will come partly 
from the large body of existing information on 
specific indicators, but new research will also be 
required. One product of this research will be a 
set of common indicators for comparing progress 
towards universal coverage across all countries.
It will often be possible to satisfy the definition 
of universal coverage with regard to one, several 
or perhaps all monitored health services – immu-
nization against measles, access to antiretroviral 
therapy for people living with HIV infection, a 
particular  type  of  health  insurance,  and  so  on. 

132

But achieving this will inevitably prompt further 
questions about improving health, and the list of 
questions will grow as the changing causes of ill-
health are tracked by new interventions and tech-
nologies. The response to previous successes and 
new challenges is to formulate a more ambitious 
definition of universal coverage – a new research 
agenda  –  and  to  generate  yet  more  evidence  to 
inform health policy and practice. Seeking uni-
versal health coverage is a powerful mechanism 
for continuing to seek better health.

The path to universal 
health coverage, and the 
path to better health

Chapter 3 presented 12 case-studies that showed, 
by  example,  how  research  can  help  to  achieve 
universal health coverage and deliver results that 
actually,  or  potentially,  influence  health  policy 
and health outcomes. There are many such exam-
ples that are not described in this report, but two 
from Chapter 3 that deal with service coverage and 
financing are revisited here. First, randomized con-
trolled trials conducted in Ethiopia, Kenya, Sudan 
and  Uganda  showed  that  sodium  stibogluconate 
(SSG) plus paromomycin (PM) are effective when 
used in combination to treat visceral leishmaniasis. 
The treatment can be shorter than with SSG alone 
and is less likely to generate drug resistance (7). On 
the  basis  of  this  evidence,  WHO  recommended 
that SSG and PM could be used as a first-line treat-
ment  for  visceral  leishmaniasis  in  East  Africa. 
Second,  a  systematic  review  of  evidence  from 
Brazil, Colombia, Honduras, Malawi, Mexico and 
Nicaragua  found  that  conditional  cash  transfers 
(CCTs) were associated with increased use of health 
services and better health outcomes (8). These find-
ings will stimulate further research studies of the 
utility of CCTs in other countries.

As well as linking research to service cover-
age and then to health, the 12 case-studies also 

Chapter 5  Action on research for universal health coverage

yield  some  general  conclusions  about  doing 
research.  Some  of  these  concern  the  scope  of 
research.  The  questions  about  how  to  achieve 
universal  health  coverage  range  from  ques-
tions  about  the  causes  of  ill-health,  through 
methods for prevention and treatment, to ques-
tions about the performance of health services. 
Research  must  find  out  how  to  improve  the 
coverage  of  current  interventions  and  how  to 
introduce new ones. Research must explore the 
development and use of both “software” (such 
as  schemes  for  service  provision)  and  “hard-
ware” (R&D for commodities and technology). 
And  research  is  needed  to  investigate  ways  of 
improving health from within and outside the 
health sector.

The  case-studies  also  illustrate  research 
methods,  processes  and  outcomes.  In  general, 
successful  research  stimulates,  and  is  stimu-
lated by, a cycle of enquiry in which questions 
lead to answers that lead to yet more questions. 
The design of a research study is usually a com-
promise because the most robust evidence and 
the  strongest  inferences  typically  come  from 
the most costly and lengthy studies (e.g. rand-
omized  controlled  trials).  The  choice  of  design 
also  depends  on  the  need  to  generalize  from 
one  setting  to  another;  results  are  more  likely 
to  be  widely  applicable  when  there  are  fewer 
and  less  variable  processes  linking  causes  and 
effects. Thus clinical trials tend to be favoured, 
for instance, to assess the efficacy of drugs and 
vaccines (governed by physiological factors), but 
observational  studies  are  often  used  to  resolve 
operational  questions  about  how  drugs  and 
vaccines  are  best  delivered  by  health  services 
(influenced  by  local  systems  and  behaviours). 
The unavoidable question facing every research 
study  is  “How  much  time  and  money  can  we 
afford to spend on the investigation?”

While  this  report  has  focused  on  research 
directed  at  achieving  universal  health  cover-
age,  it  has  also  highlighted  the  co-benefits  for 
health of research done in other sectors, such as 

agriculture, education, environment and trans-
port  (Box  2.6).  The  report  has  not  discussed 
research  that  will  show  how  to  make  health 
systems more resilient to environmental threats 
such  as  extreme  climate  events,  or  research 
into  how  health  systems  can  reduce  their  own 
greenhouse gas emissions. These are important 
subjects for research, but ancillary to the main 
theme of research for universal health coverage.

Research for universal health 
coverage in every country
As was made clear in Chapter 3, the results of 
some research studies are widely applicable but 
many of the steps towards universal health cov-
erage will be made by finding local answers to 
local questions. For this reason, all nations need 
to be producers as well as consumers of research.
To become productive in research requires 
a  functional  national  research  system.  Such  a 
system must have the capacity to set priorities; 
to  recruit  staff  and  build  research  institutions; 
to  adapt,  adopt  and  maintain  research  stand-
ards; to use research to influence health policy 
and practice; and to monitor and report on the 
processes, the outputs, the outcomes and impact.
The  priorities  for  research  in  each  setting 
should  be  determined  by  the  dominant  health 
problems.  Although  curiosity-driven  investi-
gations  have  an  essential  place  in  the  research 
landscape, this report places high value on stud-
ies that address major health concerns and which 
respond  to  present  and  future  gaps  in  service 
coverage and financial risk protection. Standard 
methods have been devised to set research priori-
ties, but the best-documented examples are those 
for  specific  health  topics  (Chapter  4).  National 
exercises to set research priorities are less promi-
nent, though some countries – notably Brazil – 
have taken a strong lead. To address the research 
priorities,  once  they  have  been  chosen,  inves-
tigations  are  needed  throughout  the  research 

133

Research for universal health coverage

cycle: measuring the size of the health problem; 
understanding  its  cause(s);  devising  solutions; 
translating  the  evidence  into  policy,  practice 
and products; and evaluating effectiveness after 
implementation.

The  process  of  setting  priorities  should  be 
inclusive,  transparent,  systematic,  and  linked 
to  research  funding.  Those  with  a  stake  in 
the  research  process  are  diverse;  they  include 
decision-makers,  implementers,  civil  society, 
funding  agencies,  pharmaceutical  companies, 
product development partnerships, and research-
ers themselves. The roles of national and inter-
national research funding agencies – who have 
substantial  leverage  –  include  promoting  high 
standards  of  objectivity,  rigour  and  account-
ability, ensuring that the findings of results are 
made easily accessible, and demanding research 
accountability (namely that the funds available 
for research are used effectively).

Research  for  health  has  always  been  an 
international  venture.  The  new  trend  is  that 
long-established  “north–south”  links  are  being 
supplemented  by  “south–south”  collaboration. 
The expertise of high-income countries will con-
tinue to be important because, for example, the 
burden of noncommunicable diseases, up to now 
largely a concern of the rich world, is growing 
in low-income countries. High-income countries 
also have a pool of trained researchers from low- 
and middle-income countries who, with the right 
incentives, may be encouraged to return home.

In a highly-connected world, the distinction 
between different kinds of international linkages 
is  becoming  less  relevant.  Connections  of  all 
sorts are needed to enhance peer-to-peer learn-
ing, to foster joint research endeavours, and to 
share  resources.  For  nations  that  are  emerging 
as forces in research, initiating a multinational 
collaboration, rather than simply joining as an 
invited  participant,  is  a  statement  of  growing 
research confidence.

Networking needs effective communication 
across the research community. Communication 

134

is  easier  in  a  common  research  language, 
which would require a uniform and systematic 
approach  to  the  classification,  collection  and 
collation of data. Among systems for classifying 
types of research activity, a leading contender is 
the Health Research Classification System pro-
posed by the European Science Foundation (9). 
Its purpose is to transmit the facts and findings 
of health research in a standard way to sponsors, 
governments and the public; to identify gaps and 
opportunities for research, which are vital in set-
ting  research  priorities;  to  carry  out  compara-
ble  analyses  of  the  quality  and  productivity  of 
research output; to identify instances of research 
collaboration; and to streamline peer review and 
scientific recruitment.

Supporting the people 
who do research
Effective  research  requires  transparent  and 
accountable  methods  for  allocating  funds,  and 
well-equipped  research  institutions  and  net-
works. However, it is the people who do research 
who are most critical to the success of the research 
enterprise.  Consequently,  the  process  of  build-
ing research capacity should be spearheaded by 
staff recruitment and training, with mechanisms 
to retain the best researchers.

Research  training  is  not  only  about  learn-
ing scientific methods and techniques; it is also 
about the proper conduct of research. Codes of 
research ethics have been written to uphold hon-
esty, objectivity, integrity, justice, accountability, 
intellectual property, professional courtesy and 
fairness,  and  good  stewardship  of  research  on 
behalf of others. The essential codes of practice 
are already in use in many countries. Although 
internationally agreed standards will often need 
to  be  updated  and  adjusted  to  local  circum-
stances,  an  important  future  task  is  to  imple-
ment the current standards in routine research 
practice everywhere.

Chapter 5  Action on research for universal health coverage

Translating research evidence 
into health policy and practice
The  important  questions  about  health  service 
coverage, and about health, need credible answers 
that are intelligible to those who can use them – 
i.e. decision-makers in various roles. When the 
findings  of  research  are  turned  into  policy  and 
practice, a new set of questions arises for research.
Although a wide range of fundamental and 
applied  research  studies  is  essential  to  reach 
universal  health  coverage,  the  gap  between 
existing  knowledge  and  action  is  persistently 
large and is being closed only very slowly (10). 
Implementation  and  operational  research,  and 
health  policy  and  systems  research  –  bringing 
scientists  and  decision-makers  together  –  are 
conspicuous areas of neglect.

To accelerate the process, research should be 
strengthened  not  only  in  academic  centres  but 
also in public health programmes that are close 
to the supply of, and demand for, health services. 
The greater the contact between researchers and 
policy-makers,  the  greater  will  be  the  mutual 
understanding. A variety of methods can be used 
to  train  decision-makers  to  use  evidence  from 
research, and to train researchers to understand 
the process of decision-making. The use of data 
(especially the large volume of data that are col-
lected routinely), evidence and information can 
be illustrated in training courses to make clear 
the benefits of using evidence and the pitfalls of 
not doing so. Researchers may be employed in 
positions where they can help to frame policy-
related questions which lend themselves to spe-
cific research studies, and to challenge decisions 
made about policy. Staff rotations between health 
ministries  and  research  institutions  are  an  aid 
to communication, and research staff employed 
explicitly to carry out knowledge translation will 
help to bridge the gap.

The  application  of  research  findings  is 
more  likely  if  there  are  formal  procedures  for 
translating evidence into practice. Mechanisms 
include the development of protocols for policy 

formulation,  planning  and 
implementation 
that  explicitly  refer  to  research  evidence,  and 
they include harnessing the skills of academics 
both in policy formulation and implementation. 
Publication  is  not  the  only,  or  even  the  best, 
measure of research productivity, but there are 
too  few  formal  publications  of  routine  opera-
tional research.

Translational research could be boosted with 
stronger incentives for the research community. 
To  encourage  a  shared  responsibility  among 
researchers for reaching universal coverage, per-
formance measures could be adjusted within aca-
demic and research institutions. Incentives should 
make reference, not only to publications in high-
impact scientific and medical journals, but also to 
measures of influence on policy and practice.

In  making  the  link  between  research  and 
policy, private for-profit research companies (in 
areas  such  as  biotechnology,  pharmaceuticals, 
etc.)  are  just  as  important  as  public  research 
organizations.  A  growing  number  of  health 
products  are  being  created  through  partner-
ships  between  the  public  and  private  sectors, 
making  explicit  links  between  various  organi-
zations involved in the discovery, development 
and delivery of new technologies. In this respect, 
Chapter 2 described the role of DNDi in coordi-
nating the development of anthelmintic drugs by 
several pharmaceutical companies.

To fully exploit the results of research, sci-
entists  and  decision-makers  of  all  kinds  need 
public support. It has been pointed out that civil 
society has a role in setting research priorities, 
but  public  engagement  in  research  should  be 
wider in scope. Members of the public, who are 
the source of government funds for research, are 
entitled to share in all aspects of the investiga-
tive process; their continued backing depends on 
being able to listen to, understand, believe in and 
make use of the results. Public engagement via 
the media, policy debates and open evaluations, 
works towards these ends. Making data publicly 
accessible  (e.g.  via  the  observatories  described 
below) increases transparency and fosters greater 

135

Research for universal health coverage

public trust when evidence is used to make deci-
sions that affect access to health care.

Just as a single research project does not nec-
essarily generate a useful health product, a useful 
product  does  not  necessarily  influence  health 
policy. This is because research is only one of the 
determinants of policy. Furthermore, the factors 
that influence health policy are not necessarily 
the same as those that help turn policy into prac-
tice  (11,  12).  In  addition  to  scientific  evidence, 
other considerations are cultural values, human 
rights, equity and social justice, and competing 
demands  for  public  spending  (13,  14).  Because 
policy and practice are subject to various influ-
ences,  and  are  decided  in  the  face  of  multiple 
competing  interests,  robust  and  unbiased  evi-
dence ought to be valued by decision-makers.

Supporting research for 
universal health coverage, 
nationally and internationally

Chapter  4  discussed  three  mechanisms  that 
support research for universal health coverage: 
monitoring, coordination and financing. Given 
the  commitment  to  share  data,  a  global  obser-
vatory,  linked  to  national  observatories,  could 
serve  several  functions  in  supporting  research 
for universal health coverage more generally. A 
network of observatories could compile, analyse 
and  present  data  on  financial  flows  for  health 
research,  whether  for  technological  develop-
ment (traditional R&D) or for the improvement 
of  health  systems  and  services,  and  could  link 
financing  to  research  needs.  Such  a  network 
could  chart  progress  on  research  for  universal 
health  coverage  by  measuring  each  of  the  ele-
ments of the results chain, from inputs and pro-
cesses, through outputs and outcomes, to health 
impact (Chapter 1). In practice, the number of 
tasks that could be carried out by observatories 
depends on the resources available and the will 
to develop them.

136

Monitoring  by  observatories,  or  a  similar 
mechanism, also provides opportunities to coordi-
nate research activities. Guidance on coordination 
could be provided by an international body, such 
as a reconstituted WHO Advisory Committee on 
Health Research (the first such advisory commit-
tee was established in 1956). Whichever body is 
responsible, it must represent the views of all con-
cerned  –  researchers,  funding  agencies,  private 
companies, and civil society and their representa-
tive governments in the countries concerned.

With  regard  to  financing,  international 
donors and national governments should meas-
ure  their  commitments  to  investing  in  health 
research against defined criteria. Chapter 4 listed 
some of the proposals that have been made – for 
instance,  that  “developing”  countries  should 
commit  0.05–0.1%  of  GDP  to  government-
funded  health  research  of  all  kinds  (15).  Some 
form of assessment is needed to judge whether 
investments  are  commensurate  with  achieving 
universal health coverage.

Once criteria have been chosen, mechanisms 
are  needed  for  raising  and  disbursing  funds, 
nationally  and  internationally.  An  improved 
system of financing might be newly created, or 
could  be  developed  by  existing  organizations. 
Several international bodies – such as TDR, the 
GAVI Alliance, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria and UNITAID – have 
the potential to manage research funds and dis-
tribute  them  for  research  in  low-  and  middle-
income countries. 

Whatever  funding  mechanism  is  chosen, 
it  should  actively  encourage  research  across 
disciplines, both within and beyond the health 
sector.  As  we  have  argued  throughout  this 
report,  research  for  universal  health  coverage 
recognizes that health, and particularly preven-
tion, depends on actions taken outside the health 
sector – in agriculture, education, employment, 
fiscal  policy,  social  services,  trade  and  so  on. 
A  comprehensive  health  policy  must  consider 
“heath in all sectors” of governance, and research 
must cover all these sectors too.

Chapter 5  Action on research for universal health coverage

This  will  become  still  clearer  when,  from 
2015 onwards, the world adopts a new develop-
ment agenda to succeed the MDGs. In the post-
2015 era, health must play a clearly articulated 
role in social, economic and human development 
(16). To generate evidence in support of sustain-
able development, funding must be available to 
underpin  research  for  health  across  a  range  of 
disciplines. National and international commit-
tees that advise on health research must prepare 
for this new challenge.

WHO’s role in research for 
universal health coverage
This report began with the observation that uni-
versal  health  coverage  underpins  “the  attain-
ment by all peoples of the highest possible level 
of health”, which is a pillar of WHO’s constitu-
tion and a guiding force in all the Organization’s 
work. Throughout the report we have explained 
why  research  is  vital  for  achieving  universal 
health  coverage,  and  consequently  for  improv-
ing the health of all people around the world.

The WHO Strategy on Research for Health 
(Box  4.1)  is  a  mechanism  to  support  health 
research  whereby  WHO  works  alongside  gov-
ernments, funding agencies, partnerships, non-
governmental  and  civil  society  organizations, 

philanthropists  and  commercial 
investors, 
among others. Simply put, the goal of the WHO 
strategy 
is  to  cultivate  the  highest-quality 
research that delivers the greatest health benefits 
to the maximum number of people. In keeping 
with the essential functions needed to carry out 
research (Chapter 4 and above), WHO’s role is 
to advance research that addresses the dominant 
health  needs  of  its  Member  States,  to  support 
national  health  research  systems,  to  set  norms 
and standards for the proper conduct of research, 
and to accelerate the translation of research find-
ings into health policy and practice.

As  the  principal  international  agency  for 
health, WHO has a key role in promoting and 
conducting research for universal health cover-
age.  In  terms  of  monitoring,  a  global  research 
observatory  needs  wide  representation,  should 
be able to develop and apply appropriate stand-
ards, and should garner the necessary interna-
tional support. In terms of coordination, WHO 
hosts  numerous  research  advisory  commit-
tees with wide representation. And in terms of 
financing, TDR and UNITAID, both hosted by 
WHO,  are  potential  mechanisms  for  disburs-
ing  research  funds.  As  these  possibilities  are 
explored further, WHO is working to reinforce 
core functions. One of these is to ensure that the 
Organization’s  own  guidelines  reflect  the  best 
available evidence from research.

References
1.  WHO strategy on research for health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2012. (http://www.who.int/phi/WHO_Strategy_

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

on_research_for_health.pdf, accessed 23 April 2013).
Sow SO et al. Immunogenicity and safety of a meningococcal A conjugate vaccine in Africans. The New England Journal of 
Medicine, 2011,364:2293-2304. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1003812 PMID:21675889
Frasch CE, Preziosi MP, LaForce FM. Development of a group A meningococcal conjugate vaccine, MenAfriVac(TM). Human 
Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 2012,8:715-724. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/hv.19619 PMID:22495119
Cohen MS et al. Prevention of HIV-1 infection with early antiretroviral therapy. The New England Journal of Medicine, 
2011,365:493-505. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1105243 PMID:21767103
Victora CG et al. How changes in coverage affect equity in maternal and child health interventions in 35 Countdown 
to 2015 countries: an analysis of national surveys. Lancet, 2012,380:1149-1156. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(12)61427-5 PMID:22999433

6.  Gwatkin DR, Ergo A. Universal health coverage: friend or foe of health equity? Lancet, 2011,377:2160-2161. doi: http://

dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)62058-2 PMID:21084113

137

Research for universal health coverage

7.  Musa A et al. Sodium stibogluconate (SSG) & paromomycin combination compared to SSG for visceral leishmaniasis in East 

Africa: a randomised controlled trial. PLoS neglected tropical diseases, 2012,6:e1674. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pntd.0001674 PMID:22724029
Lagarde M, Haines A, Palmer N. The impact of conditional cash transfers on health outcomes and use of health services in 
low and middle income countries. Cochrane database of systematic reviews (Online), 2009,4:CD008137. PMID:19821444
9.  Health research classification systems: current approaches and future recommendations. Strasbourg, European Science 

8. 

Foundation, 2011.

10.  World report on knowledge for better health − strengthening health systems. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
11.  Grol R, Grimshaw J. From best evidence to best practice: effective implementation of change in patients’ care. Lancet, 

2003,362:1225-1230. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14546-1 PMID:14568747

12.  Bosch-Capblanch X et al. Guidance for evidence-informed policies about health systems: rationale for and challenges of 

guidance development. PLoS Medicine, 2012,9:e1001185. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001185 PMID:22412356

13.  National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. Science and engineering indicators 2012. Arlington, VA, National 

Science Foundation, 2012.

14.  Humphreys K, Piot P. Scientific evidence alone is not sufficient basis for health policy. BMJ (Clinical research ed), 

2012,344:e1316. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e1316 PMID:22371864

15.  Research and development to meet health needs in developing countries: strengthening global financing and coordination. 

Report of the Consultative Expert Working Group on Research and Development: Financing and Coordination. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2012.

16.  Sustainable development goals. New York, NY, United Nations, 2013. (sustainabledevelopment.un.org, accessed 20 March 2013).

138

Index

Note: Pages suffixed by b, f, or t refer to boxes, figures or tables respectively.

“10/90” gap  37, 37b

[A]
access to health care

antiretroviral therapy (ART)  16
barriers, tuberculosis  10b
emergency obstetric care  77–79, 78f, 78t
research see research
universal  85 (see also universal health coverage)

access to research  40, 110, 112b

Health Research Web  112b
Health Systems Evidence  112b
HINARI Access to Research in Health Programme  40
“intelligent openness”  110
PDQ-Evidence  112b
United Kingdom  110

accountability, research funding  105–107
activity mapping, research  103, 104f
African countries

African Network for Drugs and Diagnostics Innovation 

(ANDI)  108b

Guinea Bissau health ministry, role  101b
health ministries, role of  101b
Initiative to Strengthen Health Research Capacity in Africa 

(ISHReCA)  108b

MenAfriVac  39
Pan-African Consortium for the Evaluation of Anti-

Tuberculosis Antibiotics (PanACEA)  108b

R&D (research and development) investment  42–43, 43f
research  105

funding  46

health research systems  97b
productivity  39–40
research case studies

conditional cash transfers (CCT)  79–81, 80f
emergency obstetric care (EMOC)  77–79, 78f, 78t
malaria prevention and childhood mortality  61–63, 

62f

visceral leishmaniasis (VL)  73–75, 74f

Research for Health Africa (R4HA)  108b

African Network for Drugs and Diagnostics Innovation 

(ANDI)  108b

ageing population, expenditure in Europe, research case 

study  82–84, 83f

AIDS (see also HIV)

coverage of interventions  16, 17f
Alma Ata Declaration  6b
antiretroviral therapy (ART)
HPTN 052 study  63–65, 64f
research case study  63–65, 64f
“universal access”  16
applied research  32b
Australia, return on investment  46
availability of generic medicines  16, 19, 19f

[B]
 Bangladesh

International Centre for Diarrhoea Diseases Research, 

Bangladesh (ICDDR, B)  107
research case study  65–67, 66t

barriers to access, tuberculosis and  10b
basic research  32b, 33b
Brazil

Bolsa Familia programme  80
conditional cash transfers (CCT) (research case study)  80
priority, national research  98, 100b

[C]
capacity (research)  98–107
activity, mapping  103, 104f
building  99–103, 102f, 103t, 118, 130b

institutions  102

definition  99, 107
ESSENCE  99, 101
framework  99–102
funding see funding (research)
Global Health Trials network  107, 108b
gross national income (GNI)  43, 44f, 98
institutions and networks see institutions and networks 

(research)

139139

Research for universal health coverage

workforce  103–105, 130b, 134

international collaboration  104, 105b
low-income countries  103–105
middle-income countries  103–105
recruitment and training  134
The World Health Report 2006  103

cardiovascular disease

“polypill”  71–73
research  46

case study  71–73

return on investment  47

case-fatality rates  20–21, 20f

variability  21

case studies (of research)  57–85

affordable health care for ageing population (Europe)  

82–84, 83f

cardiovascular disease, mortality reduction with “polypill”  

71–73

conditional cash transfers (CCT)  79–81, 80f
design  60
diarrhoea/pneumonia prevention by zinc supplements 

(young children)  65–67, 66t

emergency obstetric care, access  77–79, 78f, 78t
HIV prevention by antiretroviral therapy  63–65, 64f
The Indian Polycap Study (TIPS)  71–73
insurance provision in Mexico  81–82
malaria prevention (mosquito nets) and childhood 

mortality  61–63, 62f

overview of examples  57, 58t, 59t, 60, 60t
Seguro Popular  81–82
task shifting to improve child survival  75–77, 76t
telemedicine to improve paediatric care  67–69, 67f, 68f, 

68t

tuberculosis diagnostics  69–71, 70f, 71f
visceral leishmaniasis treatment  73–75, 74f

cervical cancer  8b
child health

equity of service coverage  20, 20f
HPTN 052 study  63–65, 64f
Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI)  75
research case studies

diarrhoea and pneumonia prevention  65–67, 66t
malaria prevention (mosquito nets)  61–63, 62f
task shifting to improve survival  75–77, 76t
telemedicine  67–69, 67f, 68f, 68t

child mortality, research case studies  61–63, 62f, 65, 66, 

75–77, 76t, 80

China, research, international collaboration  40, 40f
classification of research studies  33b, 57, 58t, 59t, 60, 

60t (see also case studies (of research))
basic or fundamental research  33b
detection, screening and diagnosis  33b, 58t
disease code  106
etiology (causation)  33b

140

funding according to see funding (research)
health policy and systems research  33b, 59t, 60t
Health Research Classification System (HRCS)  33b, 58t, 59t, 

60t, 134

management of diseases and conditions  33b, 59t
prevention of diseases and conditions  33b, 58t
promotion of well-being  33b, 58t
treatment and intervention development  33b, 59t
treatment and intervention evaluation  33b, 59t
United Kingdom Clinical Research Collaboration  57

clinical practice see health care practice
clinical trials  133 (see also randomized controlled trials 

(RCTs))
registering  110, 113

Cochrane Collaboration  39
codes of practice  118–119, 130b, 134

clinical trials, registering  110, 113
ethics and ethical review see ethics and ethical review
policy, practice and products  113

cohort study, retrospective  77–79, 78f, 78t
collaboration, research see international research 

collaboration

Commission on Health Research for Development (1990 

Report)  37, 37b, 48

conditional cash transfers (CCT)  79–81, 80, 80f
confounding factors, research  63
coordinating research  131b, 137 (see also observatories)
coverage (health services/care)  7f, 15–19

measurement  15–16, 15f, 18b, 22, 130b

MDGs see Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)

quality of health care see quality of health care
research, role of  130b
universal see universal health coverage

creativity, in research  31, 35, 36b, 48
cross-disciplinary research  98

[D]
Declaration of Helsinki (1964-2008), clinical trials, 

registering  110, 113

definitions, research  32b
design (research)  61t, 84, 133

double-blind  72
examples see case studies (of research)
experimental design  84
meta-analysis  62–63
observational studies see observational studies
placebo trials  63
randomized controlled trials (RCTs)  42
retrospective cohort study  77–79, 78f, 78t
translational research see translating evidence into policy 

and practice

detection, research studies  33b
diagnosis, research studies  33b

diarrhoea

International Centre for Diarrhoea Diseases Research, 

Bangladesh (ICDDR, B)  107
research case study  65–67, 66t

disease code  106
dissemination (research)  113, 114b

delays in  113, 113f
mistakes  113, 113f

drug development  45
Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative (DNDi)  39

[E]
economic research, environmental health research and  

41b

emergency obstetric care, case study  77–79, 78f, 78t
environmental health research  40, 41b, 42

economic research and  41b
environmental risk factors  41b

housing and home energy systems  41b
urban transport  41b

equity  5, 19–20, 20f (see also low-income countries)

maternal and child health  20, 20f
“progressive universalism”  20

ESSENCE on Health Research Initiative  99

principles  99, 101

ethics and ethical review  110, 130b

clinical trials, registering  110, 113
Declaration of Helsinki (1964-2008)  110, 113
establishing a system  111b
ethics committees  111b
policy and procedures  111b
researchers’ responsibilities  111b
standards (WHO)  110, 111b

Europe, ageing population, research case study  82–84, 

83f

European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials 

Partnership (EDCTP)  108b

Evidence-Informed Policy Networks (EVIPNet)  115b
Exceptional returns (USA)  46
expenditure (health care)  7

Europe, ageing population  82–84, 83f
GDP and see gross domestic product (GDP)
research funding as a proportion  117
taxation  7, 8b

experimental design  84
experimental development research  32b, 43f
external donors, funding (research)  106–107

[F]
fetal health  36b

equity of service coverage  20, 20f

Index

financial investments in health care  9, 9f
financial risk protection  11–12, 13b, 14f

definition  6–7, 12, 13b
low income population  7
measurement  21–22
measuring

direct measures  12, 13b
indirect measures  12, 13b
limitations  13b

mechanisms  12
out-of-pocket payments  12, 13b, 14f
prepayments  7

fundamental research  32b, 33b
funding (research)  39, 45, 47, 117, 131b

accountability  105–107
benchmarks  117
capacity development  105–107
classification of studies  105, 106f
costing  106–107
Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative (DNDi)  39
financial investments  45
gross domestic product (GDP)  117
International Centre for Diarrhoea Diseases Research, 

Bangladesh (ICDDR, B)  107

mechanism  136
MenAfriVac  39
national health expenditure  117
R&D see R&D (research and development)
sources  134, 136

external donors  46, 106–107
international donors  46

transparency  105–107
tuberculosis (TB)  106, 107f
United Kingdom  105, 106f

Medical Research Council (MRC)  105, 106f
Wellcome Trust  105, 106f

[G]
generic medicines, availability  16, 19, 19f
Global Health Trials network  107, 108b
Global Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health, 

Innovation and Intellectual Property (GSPA-PHI)  45b

governance (health research)  117–118, 118f
GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 

Development and Evaluation)  35b, 115

gross domestic product (GDP)  47

research funding  117

gross national income (GNI)  43, 44f, 98
GSPA-PHI (Global Strategy and Plan of Action on Public 

Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property)  45b

Guinea Bissau, health ministries, role of  101b

141

Research for universal health coverage

[H]
harmonization, ESSENCE on Health Research Initiative  

101

health care (see also health services)

access to  85
delivery, research on  46
expenditure see expenditure (health care)
financial investments  9, 9f
priority health problems  131
systems, functions  15

health care practice (see also programmes (health))

development  113
GRADE system  35b, 115
translating evidence into see translating evidence into 

policy and practice

The Translating Research into Action (TRAction) project  

115b

“health in all sectors”  41b (see also universal health 

coverage)

Health Intervention and Technology Assessment 

Programme (HITAP)  7, 8b
cervical cancer  8b
key factors of success  8b
role  8b

health ministries, role of

Guinea Bissau  101b
Paraguay  101b
health policy  85

determinants  136
Evidence-Informed Policy Networks (EVIPNet)  115b
formation  113, 135
GRADE system  35b, 115
implications from research  57–89 (see also case studies)
SUPPORT tools for evidence-informed health policy-

making  115b

translating evidence see translating evidence into policy 

and practice

Health Policy and Systems Research (HPSR)  32b

observatories  116–117
research studies  33b
WHO Strategy  116b
health research  32b (see also research)
classification system  134
definition  32b

Health Research Classification System (HRCS)  134
health research systems  95

African countries  97b
assessment of  95, 97b
functions  95, 118

capacity building see capacity (research)
codes of practice see codes of practice
priorities see priorities for research
translation into practice see translating evidence into 

policy and practice

142

WHO Strategy of Research for Health see World Health 

Organization (WHO)

governance and management  117–118, 118f, 131b
low-income countries  97b
middle-income countries  97b
national systems (NHRS)  117–118, 118f, 133
observatories  116–117, 119

Health Research Web  112b
health services  5, 6, 15–16, 15f (see also health care)

access to  85
MDGs see Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
primary care role  6b
requirements  21–22
tracers to track progress to universal coverage  16, 18b

Health Systems Evidence  112b
HINARI Access to Research in Health Programme  40
HIV

conditional cash transfers (CCT), research case study  

79–81, 80f

coverage of interventions  16, 17f
HPTN 052 study  63–65, 64f
prevention, research case study  63–65, 64f
“universal access” to antiretroviral therapy (ART)  16
housing and home energy systems, environmental 

health research  41b

HPTN 052 study  63–65, 64f, 131

[I]
implementation (policy, practice, interventions)

dissemination of research evidence see dissemination 

(research)

translation of evidence see translating evidence into policy 

and practice

implementation research  32b
The Indian Polycap Study (TIPS)  71–73
infant health, equity of service coverage  20, 20f
Initiative to Strengthen Health Research Capacity in 

Africa (ISHReCA)  108b

innovation  32b

in research  31, 32b, 35, 36b

constraints  48

institutions and networks (research)  107

African Network for Drugs and Diagnostics Innovation 

(ANDI)  108b

building  107
communication  134
European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials 

Partnership (EDCTP)  108b

Global Health Trials network  107, 108b
Initiative to Strengthen Health Research Capacity in Africa 

(ISHReCA)  108b

malaria  102
National Institute for Health Research (UK)  46

Pan-African Consortium for the Evaluation of Anti-

Tuberculosis Antibiotics (PanACEA)  108b

Research for Health Africa (R4HA)  108b
syphilis, operational research network  109b

insurance provision, Mexico, research case study  81–82
Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI)  75
intellectual property rights  44
“intelligent openness”  110
International Centre for Diarrhoea Diseases Research, 

Bangladesh (ICDDR, B)  107

International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP)  

110, 113

international research collaboration  40, 40f, 104, 134

China  40, 40f
multicountry research  75–77, 76t, 109b, 117
principles  105b

interventions

adopters  114, 114b
evaluation  114
research

implications from  57–89 (see also case studies (of 

research))

studies  33b
translating evidence see translating evidence into 

policy and practice
investments, financial  9, 9f

return on see return on investment
Ireland, Payback Framework  47
ischemic stroke, case-fatality rates  20–21, 21f

[K]
kala-azar see visceral leishmaniasis (VL)

[L]
legal considerations, intellectual property rights  44
low-income countries  7 (see also African countries; 

equity)
intervention implementation  113, 113f
“progressive universalism”  20
R&D (research and development)  39, 117
research  31, 105

collaboration  107
health research systems  97b
researchers  103–104
systematic reviews  39
underinvestment  36–37, 37b

zinc deficiency  65–67, 66t

[M]
malaria

coverage of interventions  16, 17f
funding for control  62, 62f
research case study  61–63, 62f
research institution  102

Index

malnutrition, micronutrient, research cycle  34b
management (diseases and conditions), research studies  

33b

management (health research)  117–118, 131b
“market failures”  44
maternal health

equity of service coverage  20, 20f
HPTN 052 study  63–65, 64f
improving maternal health (MDG5)  77–79, 78f, 78t
research case study  77–79, 78f, 78t
severe acute maternal morbidity (SAMM)  77–79, 78t

maternal mortality ratio (MMR)  77–79, 78f
Medical Research Council  105, 106f
MenAfriVac (meningitis A vaccine)  39, 131

joint priorities for research  117

mental health, return on investment  47
meta-analysis  62–63
Mexico, insurance provision, research case study  81–82
micronutrient malnutrition, research cycle  34b
middle-income countries

R&D (research and development)  39
research  31

health research systems  97b
researchers  103–104
zinc deficiency  65–67, 66t

Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  16

environmental sustainability (MDG 7)  16
HIV/AIDS (MDG 6)  16, 17f
improving maternal health (MDG 5)  77–79, 78f, 78t
post 2015 era  137
WHO Strategy of Research for Health  96b

monitoring, research  130b
multicountry research  75–77, 76t, 109b, 117
multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB)  69 (see also 

tuberculosis (TB))

[N]
national health research systems (NHRS)  117–118, 118f, 

133

National Institute for Health Research (UK)  46
neglected diseases

Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative (DNDi)  39
R&D (research and development)  39
research  45–46
tropical diseases, coverage of interventions  16, 17f
visceral leishmaniasis (VL) research case study  73–75, 74f

networks (research) see institutions and networks 

(research)

[O]
observational studies  60, 133

limitations  63
research case study  67–69

143

Research for universal health coverage

observatories  116–117, 119, 130b, 136

coordinating research  131b
WHO and  137

obstetric care, research case study  77–79, 78f, 78t
operational research  32b
out-of-pocket payments  12, 13b, 14f

[P]
Pan-African Consortium for the Evaluation of Anti-

Tuberculosis Antibiotics (PanACEA)  108b

Paraguay, health ministries, role  101b
partnership (research) (see also international research 

collaboration)
principles  105b

Payback Framework  47

Ireland  47

PDQ-Evidence  112b
Philippines, tracers to track progress to universal 

coverage  16, 18b

placebo trials  63, 65–66
pneumonia, research case study  65–67, 66t
policy see health policy
“polypill”  71–73
prepayments  7
primary care, role in health systems  6b
priorities for research  22, 42–43, 48, 96–98, 99b, 130b, 

133–134
approach  96
context  96
criteria  98
evaluation  98
inclusiveness  98
information  98
joint  109b, 117

MenAfriVac  117
syphilis  109b

methods  98
national  98

Brazil  98, 100b

planning  98
priority health problems  131, 134
transparency  98

priority health problems  131, 134
product development  113
productivity (research) see research, productivity
programmes (health) (see also health care practice)

Bolsa Familia programme  80
Health Intervention and Technology Assessment 

Programme (HITAP)  7, 8b

HINARI Access to Research in Health Programme  40
translating evidence see translating evidence into policy 

and practice

tuberculosis control  11b

144

“progressive universalism”  20, 132
public engagement (research)  130b, 135–136
public health research  42

[Q]
quality-adjusted life year (QALY)  47
quality of health care  20–21, 21f

case-fatality rates see case-fatality rates

questions, research see research, questions

[R]
randomized controlled trials (RCTs)  42, 84
research case study  61–63, 62f, 65–67, 66t
return on investment  47

R&D (research and development)

investment  38f, 39

African countries  42–43, 43f

low-income countries  39, 117
middle-income countries  39
neglected diseases  39
private investors  44
tuberculosis (TB)  106, 107f

research

access to see access to research
activity mapping  103, 104f
capacity, research see capacity (research)
classification of studies see classification of research studies
codes of practice see codes of practice
confounding factors  63
coordination  131b, 137 (see also observatories)
creativity, imagination and innovation  31
cross-disciplinary  98
cycle  34b, 35b
definitions  32b
design see design (research)
dissemination see dissemination (research)
economic  41b
environmental health see environmental health research
ethics and ethical review see ethics and ethical review
future directions  133
governance (health research)  117–118, 118f
growth  31–48

measures of  37, 38f, 39

for health, definition  32b
on health care delivery  46
“health in all sectors”  41b
health research system see health research system
implementation see translating evidence into policy and 

practice

implications for universal health coverage  57–89 (see also 

case studies (of research))

institutions see institutions and networks (research)
international collaboration see international research 

collaboration

low-income countries see low-income countries
middle-income countries see middle-income countries
monitoring  130b (see also observatories)
multicountry research  75–77, 76t, 109b, 117
neglected diseases  45–46
networks see institutions and networks (research)
partnership see international research collaboration
partnership principles  105b
presentation of research evidence  113
priorities see priorities for research
productivity

African countries  39–40
national wealth and  43, 44f

public health  42
questions  31–32, 57 (see also priorities for research)

improving health  132
measurement of universal health coverage  132

randomized trials see randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
R&D see R&D (research and development)
role in universal health coverage  5–22, 129
standards see codes of practice
systematic reviews see systematic reviews
translating evidence into practice see translating evidence 

into policy and practice

underinvestment  36–37, 37b
United Kingdom Clinical Research Collaboration  57
value of  46–47

Payback Framework  47
return on investment see return on investment

research for health, definition  32b
Research for Health Africa (R4HA)  108b
research for universal health coverage  32b
researchers  103–105

capacity building see capacity (research)
implementation, role in  135
responsibilities  111b

retrospective cohort study  77–79, 78f, 78t
return on investment  46–47

Australia  46
cardiovascular disease  46
cardiovascular disease (UK)  47
Exceptional returns (USA)  46
gross domestic product (GDP)  47
mental health (UK)  47
quality-adjusted life year (QALY)  47
randomized control trials (RCTs)  47

Royal Society (UK)  110

[S]
screening

research studies on  33b
syphilis  109b

Seguro Popular  81–82

Index

severe acute maternal morbidity (SAMM)  77–79, 78t
smoking  9
social determinants, prevention/treatment of illness  9, 

10b

social protection  7

tuberculosis (TB)  10b

staff see researchers
standards see codes of practice
SUPPORT tools for evidence-informed health policy-

making  115b

syphilis

operational research network  109b
screening  109b

systematic reviews  39, 115
Cochrane Collaboration  39
low-income countries  39

[T]
task shifting  75–77, 76t
taxation  7, 8b
telemedicine, research case study  67–69, 67f, 68f, 68t
Thailand, Health Intervention and Technology 

Assessment Programme (HITAP)  7, 8b

“third global health transition”  5
tobacco smoking  9
tracers (universal coverage progress)  16, 18b, 22
translating evidence into policy and practice  113, 115b, 

130b, 135
adaptation to local services  114
delay in  113, 113f
GRADE system  35b, 115
policy  57–89

Evidence-Informed Policy Networks (EVIPNet)  115b
SUPPORT tools for evidence-informed health policy-

making  115b

presentation of research evidence  113
researchers, role of  135
The Translating Research into Action (TRAction) project  

115b

translational research see translational research
universal health coverage  57–89

The Translating Research into Action (TRAction) project  

115b

translational research  32b, 130b

incentives  135
transparency
priorities for research  98
research funding  105–107

treatment, research studies  33b
tuberculosis (TB)  10b

barriers to access  10b
control programmes  11b

145

right to health  5
“third global health transition”  5
tracers to track progress  16, 18b

urban transport, environmental health research  41b

[V]
vaccine, MenAfriVac  39
visceral leishmaniasis (VL)  132
research case study  73–75, 74f

[W]
Wellcome Trust (UK), research funding  105, 106f
workforce (research) see researchers
World Health Organization (WHO)

ethical standards  110, 111b
observatories  137 (see also observatories)
research coordination  137
role of  137
Strategy of Research for Health  95, 96b, 137

goals  96b
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  96b

Strategy on health policy and systems research (HPSR)  

116b

The World Health Report 2006  103

[X]
Xpert MTB/RIF assay  69–71, 70f, 71f

[Z]
zinc supplements, research case study  65–67, 66t

Research for universal health coverage

coverage of interventions  16, 17f
funding for research  106, 107f
measurable indicators  11b
multidrug-resistant (MDR-TB)  69
research case study  69–71, 70f, 71f
social protection  10b
treatment expenditure  10b
Xpert MTB/RIF assay  69–71, 70f, 71f

[U]
Ukraine, tracers to track progress to universal coverage  

16, 18b

United Kingdom, research in

access to research  110
cardiovascular disease  47
Clinical Research Collaboration  57
funding  105, 106f

Medical Research Council  105, 106f
Wellcome Trust  105, 106f

on health services and systems  46
“intelligent openness”  110
mental health research  47
National Institute for Health Research  46
return on investment  47
Royal Society  110

United Kingdom Clinical Research Collaboration  57
United Nations General Assembly, 2012 resolution  6b
“universal access”, antiretroviral therapy (ART)  16
universal health coverage  85

aim of  5
availability of generic medicines  16, 19, 19f
concept  6–11, 132
coverage see coverage
dimensions  7f

financial risk protection see financial risk protection
health services see health services

environmental health  40, 41b, 42
equity see equity
funding for research  117
“Health for All”  5, 6b
health services see health services
implications of research  57–89 (see also case studies)
improved health and  132–133
measuring progress  131–132
observatories  116–117
post 2015 era  137
priority health problems  131
“progressive universalism”  20, 132
research  117 (see also research)
growth see research, growth
role of  5–22, 129

146

